PUBLISHER'S WORD
================

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. There is no god but
Allah, the One. Peace and blessings be with Muhammad, the Messenger of
Allah and his pure and sinless Ahlul-Bait.

In the twentieth century, and particularly in the last quarter of it, we
have witnessed many revolutions resulting in drastic changes in the
geographical, political and sociological faces of the world. Most of
these changes, if not all, have affected large groups of Muslims in one
way or the other.

World events move quickly and man forgets the lessons of the past. But
history is connected by a series of circumstances and continues to
repeat itself. Thus, the past affects the present and the present, no
less, affects the future. The human conflicts we are witnessing in the
world today are merely a reflection of the conflicts of the past. The
essence of these conflicts are based on right and wrong, good and evil,
truth and falsehood.

We often find the unjust ideologies, regimes and methods of ideology
threatening the security of the people and destroying man with the
pressure of their interests and enmity. We often find this to be in
effect in this land, in Europe, Asia, America and Africa. When we search
history we find that what we are suffering today is a continuation of
the stories of injustice of long ago and that the oppressors of the
world today are the successors of the oppressors of yesterday If we
contemplate these and the many other events that are affecting the
Muslim world today, we will find that there is a strong parallelism to
the subject of our book.

This is a pief account of the life of Imam Hussein bin Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.), the second grandson of the Holy Prophet and the third divinely
chosen caliph from the Ahlul-Bait (a.s.).

He was the leader of a movement that was very unlike his illustrious
predecessors. Although the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) engaged in war for the
sake of Allah, it was at a time when Islam was struggling to establish
itself as a divine religion. Later, during the Imamate of Ali bin Abi
Tal ib (a.s.), again he was driven to war to protect Islam from the
deviators. At the time of the Imamate of Hassan bin Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.) his followers had lost much of their power and force and because
the bloodshed of war would cause further division in the ummah, Imam
Hassan (a.s.) opted for a peace treaty with the enemy in order to
protect the religion.

Imam Hussein's (a.s.) approach to Imamate was unique and extraordinary
in that he took a position of opposition to the so-called caliph of the
ummah. At first his opposition resembled that of his father, quiet
seclusion and disassociation during the caliphate of Mu'awiyah who had
not only assassinated Imam Hassan (a.s.) in order to override the terms
of the treaty, but further poke all its limits in assigning the
caliphate to his son Yazid as an inheritance. Later, when Yazid became
caliph the pressure on Imam Hussein (a.s.) to give his pledge to this
wayward and deviated ruler pought about the open opposition and refusal
of Imam Hussein (a.s.) to comply.

The repercussions of his position pought about the horrendous event of
the massacre at Karbala' in central Iraq. Unlike his grandfather and
father (a.s.), Imam Hussein (a.s.) was not confronting non-Muslims. The
killers of Imam Hussein (a.s.), his cousins, his sons, his pothers, his
friends and

followers, were the same ones who would join him for prayer and stand
behind him as he led it! Yet, we see that even this did not deter these
same people from carrying out the most atrocious orders to cut off his
head and trample his body, leaving it unburied on the desert sands.

Many books have been written about the revolution of Imam Hussein (a.s.)
any many misunderstand his position. It was not one of war. He was not
marching to Kufa to organise an army to turn upon the ruler of the time.
He was invited to come to lead them in their matters and to do his
sacred duty. But he was not al lowed to do so. The political
implications of his refusal to give his pledge to Yazid would have
weakened the illegitimate leader's position and that was something that
Yazid was not prepared to accept. He wanted all power and authority and
he accepted no opposition. Thus, the tragedy of Karbala' was not about
war, it was about greed and oppression. It was about truth and
falsehood, right and wrong, belief and disbelief. The condition of the
Muslim world today is so parallel with that time of fourteen centuries
ago that one is confirmed to believe that history does repeat itself.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) a revolutionary, a leader, a saint, a pure and pight
soul, a human being concerned about his fellow man. The Muslim world has
been taken over by kings and presidents and prime ministers with no
legitimate right and who desecrate Islamic law every day. Islam had
become a source of wealth and power and is in a state of constant
turmoil and confusion so that Muslims are being killed by Kuffar and
Muslims alike! This was the condition of the ummah during the time of
Imam Hussein (a.s.).

He saw the religion established by his grandfather, the Holy Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.), defended by his father and pother (a.s.), and now his
personal responsibility, being abused and practically discarded for
power, wealth and glory. He saw the rule of Muslims in the hands of
unbelievers. He saw hypocrisy and oppression and he rebelled. Not unlike
what is happening in the Muslim world where the rulers, some in the name
of Allah, and some not, have sold out their people and their religion
for some of the same reasons. The Muslims of these countries, now and in
the past, have made stands against these illegitimate rulers. Why have
they not succeeded to take their right to rule as Allah had ordained?

Superficially we can answer this question by saying the now patent
phrase, "Muslims are disunited." At a closer look we will find it is
because those rulers, of the past and present, have succeeded to
innovate Islam to the point that Muslims have no identity or
self-esteem. A sad reminder of the warnings of our Prophet and his
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), when they repeatedly commanded us to adhere to them.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) was one of those reminders. He rose up against an
illegitimate ruler who was innovating the faith and misguiding the
Muslims. This ruler played on the dissentigration of unity that began at
the moment of the death of Muhammad (s.a.w.). Imam Hussein (a.s.) took
his stand so that we could understand our position. It was a stand or
fall situation. He could not win the battle, but he won the revolution.
On the fields of Karbala', a

bleak desert plain in central Iraq, he stood and fought and was martyred
for the sake of re-establishing what had been forgotten.

This book is about a revolutionary. A righteous man. A religious
authority. An Imam of the Muslim ummah. He was killed! By whom? By
others Muslims in a struggle for power and rule of the Islamic state.
Who was there to help him? Precious few. Why did he take a stand that
meant certain death for him and his family and followers? For Allah and
Islam. What was he trying to do? Teach us that fighting unto death is
more honorable than submitting to injustice. Why have we not grasped the
true essence of his message? This final question remains unanswered.

Around the world on the 9th and 10th of Moharram, you will find Muslims
of all creeds crying their eyes out for Imam Hussein (a.s.), and then
going home to their comfortable beds to have a restful night's sleep
while their pothers and sisters starve to death and suffer oppression
and aggression in various countries. What a bunch of rubbish! Is that
what Imam Hussein (a.s.) sacrificed his pure and blessed blood for? A
few tears once a year? Allah perserves us from the ignorant!

We pray to Allah, with all our soul, that upon reading this pief account
of the life of Imam Hussein (a.s.), the third rightful caliph of the
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) that the reader will be encouraged to research more
deeply into his life and message. Scores of books are available in many
languages. A study of his stand may help us to take a more righteous
position in our own lives.

An understanding of what Imam Hussein (a.s.) was trying to instill in
the soul of the ummah may wake us up before it is too late, if it's not
too late already. We suppose the best way to capsulize his message is in
his own words:

*"It is better to die fighting for truth, than to live under an
oppressive ruler."*

"Of the believers are the men who are true to what they covenanted with
Allah; of them is he who has fulfilled his vow and of them is he who
awaits (its fulfilment); and they have not changed in the least," Holy
Qur'an (33:23)

If we can honestly include ourselves among any of those mentioned in the
above verse, our tears for Imam Hussein (a.s.) may have real content.

With Allah comes success.


