ENDNOTES
========

[^1]: Al-Tapasi, I'lam al-Wara bi A'lam al-Huda (Acquainting the People
to the Leaders of Guidance), p. 217.

[^2]: Ashi'a min Hayat al-lmam al-Hassan bin Ali (a.s.) (Glimpses of the
Life of Imam Hassan bin Ali (a.s.), (Tehran: Al-Balagh Foundation).

[^3]: Sahih Muslim (The Authentic Book of Tradtions Compiled by Muslim)
Merits of the Companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.), Sahih al-Tirmidhi,
vol. 2, Musnad Ibn Hanbal, Mustadrak al-Sahihain (The Book Which
Collects the Traditions Left Out by the Two Authentic Books of
Tradition), Majma' al-Bayan (Collector of Eloquence), etc.

[^4]: Fadha'il al-Khmasah min al-Sihah al-Sittah (Merits of the Five in
the Six Authentic Books of Traditions), vol. 1, p.244. It refers to the
great books which confirm this narrative. Among them are: Tafsir
al-Zamakhsahri (Qur'anic Exgesis by al-Zamakhshari), Sahih Muslim,
Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, Al-Durr al-Manthoor (The Scattered Pearls), by
al-Suyooti, al-Fakhr al-Razi, and al-Tirmidhi.

[^5]: Fadha'il al-Khamsah, vol. 1, p. 259, quoted from Hilyat al-Awliya'
(Ornament of the Saints), vol. 3, p.201, and from al-Durral-Manthoor, by
al-Suyooti, Usd al-Ghabah (Lions of the Jungle), Mustadrak al-Sahihain,
Tafsir Ibn Japir al-Tabari (Qur'anic Exegesis by al-Tabari with
differences in words and narratives.

[^6]: Fadha'il al-Khamsah, vol. 3, pp. 263.

7 I'lam al-Wara (Merits of the Two Grandsons of the Prophet (s.a.w.)),
al-Tapasi, p. [^219]:

[^8]: Al-Fusool al-Muhimmah (The Important Chapters), Ibn al-Sabbagh
al-Maliki.

[^9]: Tathkirat al-Khawas (Admonishing the Prominent People), The
Prophet of Allah's love for Hassan and Hussein (a.s.).

[^10]: Ashi'a min Hayat al-Imam al-Hassan bin Ali (a.s.), Al-Balagh
Foundation,

[^11]: Al-Majalis al-Saniyyah (pight Memorial Services), Sayyid Muhsin
al-Amin.

[^12]: Kashf al-Gummah fi Ma'rifat al-A'immah (Removing the Grief by
Knowing the Imams), Scholar al-Arabali, vol. 2, p.274.

[^13]: Manaqib Aal Abi-Talib (Virtues of the Family of Abu-Talib
(a.s.)), His Good Traits, Ibn Shahrashoob.

[^14]: Al-Majalis al-Saniyyah, vol. 1, Fourth Majalis, and Tadhkirat
al-Khawas, Ibn al-Jawzi, p. 245.

[^15]: Ahlul-Bait, Imam's Modesty and Asceticism, Abu Alam.

[^16]: Manaqib aal Abi Talib, His Good Traits.

[^17]: Kash al-Gummah, vol. 2, p. 141.

[^18]: Ahlul-Bait, His Knowledge and Eloquence, Abu Alam.

[^19]: Tuhaf al-Uqool (Treasures of Minds), Ibn Shu'bah al-Harrani, 5th
ed., p. 174, Chapter of "What was Narrated about Hussein (a.s.).

[^20]: Ibid., p.175.

[^21]: His address before the battalion of al-Hurr bin Yazid al-Riyahi,
Al-Watha'iq al-Rasmiyyah li-Thawrat al-Imam al-Hussein (a.s.) (The
Official Documents of Imam Hussein's Revolution) Abdul-Karim al-Qazwini,
vol. 1.

[^22]: Al-Watha'iq al-Rasmiyyah, and Hadith Karbala' (Story of
Karbala'), Abdul-Razzaq al-Muqarram, p. 134.

[^23]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 2. Reported in different ways in slightly
different words, al-Tirmidhi and Abu-Dawood.

[^24]: Yanabi' al-Mawaddah (Spring of Love), Shaikh al-Qandoozi, 77th
Part, vol. 3.

[^25]: Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, reported on the authority of al-Hamwini,
Muwaffaq bin Ahmad al-Khawarizmi, and Saleem bin Qais al-Hilali.

[^26]: Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, Shaikh al-Qandoozi. Accounts about the
Twelve Imams with their full names, vol. 3.

[^27]: lbn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah (Explanation of the "Peaks
of Eloquence"), vol. 16, p. 15, 1959 ed., Ihya' al-Kutaun al-Arabiyyah
Publishing House.

[^28]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 86.

[^29]: Ibid., vol. 11, p.45.

[^30]: Ibid.

[^31]: Ibid., p.43.

[^32]: Thawrat al-Hussein (Revolution of Hussein), Revival and
Exploitation of Tribal Bigotry, Muhamamd Mahdi Shams al-Deen, p. 61,
(Beirut: Al-Andalus Publishing House).

[^33]: Al-Sifr al-Qayyim li al-Imam al-Hussein (a.s.) (The Invaluable
Book of Imam Hussein (a.s.)), Abdullah al-Alaili, and Ma'a al-Hussein fi
Nahdhatih (With Hussein in His Uprsing), Asad Haidar.

[^34]: Abdullah al-Alaili, Al-Imam al-Hussein, and al-Mas'oodi Murooj,
al-Dhahab (Tracts of Gold), Life of Yazid.

[^35]: Al-Hurr bin Yazid al-Riyahi subsequently deserted the forces of
Yazid and was among the first martyrs of the battle of Karbala'.

[^36]: Murooj al-Dhahab, Al-Mas'oodi.

[^37]: Maqtal al-Hussein (The Story of the Martyrdom Of Imam Hussein
(a.s.)), Sayyid al-Moosawi al-Muqarram, p. 194.

[^38]: Al-Fusool al-Muhimmah (The Important Chapters), Account of His
Journey to Iraq, lbn al-Sabbagh, and Maqtal al-Hussein, al-Muqarram, p.
142.

[^39]: Al-Irshad (Guidance), Narratives about Hussein bin Ali (a.s.),
Shaikh al-Mufid, p. 183.

[^40]: Maqtal al-Hussein, Abdul-Razzaq al-Muqarram, p. 147 41.
Al-Watha'iq al-Rasmiyyah li-Thawrat al-Hussein, Abdul-Karim alQazwini,
p. 36. Quoted from Maqtal al-Khawarizimi.

[^42]: Al-Fusool al-Muhimmih, Ibn al-Sabbagh al-Maliki.

[^43]: Al-Irshad, Account of Hussein's Journey to the City of Medina, p.
184.

[^44]: Ma'a al-Hussein fi Nahdhatihi, In Kufa, Asad Haidar.

[^45]: Al-Watha'iq al-Rasmiyyah, Abdul-Karimm al-Qazwini. Quoted from
al-Tabari.

[^46]: Ibid.

[^47]: Al-Irshad and Ma'a al-Hussein fi Nahdhatih. Reported in slightly
different words.

[^48]: Al-Irshad. An account about Muslim bin Aqeel, p. 188.

[^49]: Maqtal al-Hussein, p. 177.

[^50]: Ibid., Uprising of Muslim, p. 179.

[^51]: Ibid., p. 180.

[^52]: Maqtal al-Hussein (a.s.), p. 193.

[^53]: Ibid., p.197.

[^54]: Ibid., p. 195.

[^55]: Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh (The Complete Accounts of History), Ibn al
Athir, p. 39.

[^56]: Ibid.

[^57]: Ibid., p.40.

[^58]: Ibid., p. 43.

[^59]: Al-Irshad, p.226.

[^60]: Maqtal al-Hussein (a.s.), Sayyid Ibn Tawoos, pp. 32-33.

[^61]: Al-Irshad, p. 223.

[^62]: Maqtal al-Hussein (a.s.), p. 223.

[^63]: Maqtal al-Hussein (a.s.), p. 195. Quoted from Bihar al-Anwar
(Seas of Lights), vol. 10, p. 184.

[^64]: Al-Majalis al-Saniyyah, vol. 1, p. 130.

[^65]: Ibid., p. 131.

[^66]: Ibid., p. 146.

67 Extracts from the address of Zainab in Damascus. It is reported in
full in al-Ihtijaj (Protests with Citation of Evidence).


