INTRODUCTION
============

Praise be to Allah, and blessings and peace be upon our master and
leader, Muhammad, and his pure household and the righteous among his
companions.

As centuries pass by, the uprising of Imam Hussein (a.s.), the grandson
of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), shines more powerfully, as a medal on the
pow of history. It becomes firmly fixed in the conscience of the Muslim
ummah, and is more understandable in the view of the historians and
researchers.

Similarly, the free faithful get more determined to follow in it's
footsteps, and hold firmly to it's noble goals so as to destroy the
oppression of the tyrants, and root up the governments of the agents of
the east and west all over our great Muslim world.

As in the far past, all efforts made by the sympathizers, and the
spiteful alike, to thwart Imam Hussein's determination to begin his
blessed and tremendous uprising, which awakened the ummah and pulled
down the thrones of the Ummayyad, had failed. Now all the hectic and
poisonous plots being made to deflect the revolution from its right
path, or obliterate its landmarks, or extinguish its blazing flame, will
also certainly fail. There is no way these efforts could succeed,
whether they center on distorting the image of the uprising, inventing
stories and myths around it, or emptying it of its Islamic meaning and
depicting Imam Hussein (a.s.) as a 'rejecting leftist', or an 'ambitious
adventurer', or an 'avenger', or a 'mutinist', or employing any other
means of diversion, cover-up and distortion.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) rose up. He continued his uprising and stuck to it
until its last stages. He sacrificed all that he had, and offered the
most dear men and pure souls to Allah for one goal. It was to defuse a
'bomb' which Mu'awiyah expertly timed and planted. That was Mu'awiyah,
the son of Hind, the 'Eater of Kidneys'. The 'bomb' was planted to blast
off the principle of 'Islamic legitimacy' at the bands of his son Yazid,
to root out that principle after being gradually pushed off the stage.
This being achieved, it would be an easy task to violate all Allah's
bounds and laws, the first of which are the qualifications the Muslim
leader should possess to answer the office of leadership, and the last
of which is the cancelling of Islamic ritual s and ethics.

It is no wonder, then, that the orientalists, including the Jews and
Christians, praise the Ummayyad rule, particularly Yazid, as the
strongest leader in the history of Islam!

Al-Balagh Foundation hopes, as it presents to its dear readers 'Rays of
Light from the Life of Imam Hussein (a.s.)', the third Imam of the
household of the Prophet (s.a.w.), and his second grandson, who, along
with his pother, Imam Hasan (a.s.), are the masters of the youths of
paradise, that it can spread sweet wafts of the fragrance of the family
of the Prophet (s.a.w.), and reach the masses of our Muslim ummah with
the momentum of a principled uprising, the match of which history never
witnessed.

We beseech Allah, the Most High, to aid and grant success to all the
culturally aware vanguards, who reject their corrupt status quo, and
believe in their promising Islamic future. He is the best of helpers.


