HOW ISLAM IMMORTALIZED IMAM HUSSEIN (A.S.)
==========================================

THE BLESSED INFANT
------------------

On the third of the blessed month of Sha'ban, the fourth year after
Hijrah and a year after the birth of Imam Hassan (a.s.), the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.) was given news of the birth of Imam Hussein (a.s.). He
hurried to the house of Imam Ali and Fatimah al-Zahra' (a.s.).

"O Asma'," he ordered Asma', the daughter of Umays, "ping me my son."

She took the newborn to him. The infant was wrapped in a piece of cloth.
The face of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) lit up upon seeing his
grandson. He took him in his arms. He recited the call to prayer (adan)
into his right ear, and read the shorter version (iqamah) in his left
ear. He, then, placed the baby in his lap and wept.

"May my father and mother be your sacrifice," Asma' asked him, "why are
you crying?"

"Because of my son," he replied.

"He is a newborn baby," she said.

"O Asma'," he said," After me, the transgressing party will kill him.
May Allah never grant them my intercession."

Then he said: "Asma', don't tell Fatimah about this, for she has just
given birth to him."(1)

Then the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) turned to Imam Ali (a.s.) and asked
him: "What name have you chosen for him?"

"I would never precede you in naming him, O Messenger of Allah," he
replied.

At that moment, the revelation descended on the beloved Messenger,
Muhammad (s.a.w.), with the name of the infant. Having received the
divine order, the Messenger (s.a.w.) looked at Imam Ali (a.s.) and said:
"name him Hussein."

Seven days later, the Prophet (s.a.w.) hastened to the house of
al-Zahra' (a.s.). He slaughtered a lamb as an offering to Allah and
ordered the infant's head shaved, its weight in silver to be given to
the poor.

Thus, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) applied the very same Islamic rites he
had earlier performed for his pother, Imam Hassan (a.s.).(2)

THE STATUS OF IMAM HUSSEIN (A.S.)
---------------------------------

The status of Imam Hussein (Abu-Abdullah) (a.s.) is unparalleled, except
by that of his father, mother, pother, and the Imams of his offspring,
on all of them be the peace and blessings of Allah. Should a historian
make a good research, collecting the stories and traditions concerning
Imam Hussein (a.s.), he would certainly end up with the Imam (a.s.) as
the top example among the Muslims. He would write a voluminous, great
work covering this Imam.

As much as we can, we will delve into the key points which portray the
great position of Imam Hussein (a.s.) according to Islamic criteria.

The Glorious Qur'an, the supreme divine document, which falsehood can
never reach from before or behind it, expresses in many verses the lofty

position Imam Hussein (a.s.) achieved in the sight of Allah, the
Exalted. Following are some of these verses:

### 1. Verse of Purification (Tathir):

###

"Allah only wishes to keep away uncleanness from you (Household of the
Prophet) and purify you thoroughly."

Holy Qur'an (33:33)

Traditionists say, regarding the reason this verse was revealed, that
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) called for a shawl. With it he covered Ali,
Fatimah, Hassan and Hussein (a.s.). "O my Lord," he said, "these are the
members of my family. Remove uncleanness from them and purely purify
them."(3) and so this noble verse was revealed on this occasion. It is a
testimony by Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, on the purity of the
Prophetic house (Ahlul Bait (a.s.)) and their great stature.

### 2. Verse of Malediction (Mubahala):

###

"If anyone disputes with you about it (your prophethood) after the
knowledge has come to you, say, 'Come, let us ping our sons and your
sons and our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves and pray
to Allah to curse the lying party." Holy Qur'an (3:61)

The Qur'anic exegesists and scholars say that this noble verse was
revealed when the Christians of the city of Najran agreed with the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) to pray to Allah to destroy the party which
stuck to falsehood. As agreed, and on time, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
went out to the place chosen for the contest. He carried Imam Hussein
(a.s.) and took Imam Hassan (a.s.) by the hand. Fatimah followed behind
while Imam Ali walked in their wake. "Say 'Amen' at the end of my
prayer," the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) told them. But, upon seeing those
pilliant faces filled with piety and grandeur, the Christians stopped
short of entering the contest. They recognized the Prophet's authority,
and paid the tribute.(4)

The noble verse called Hassan and Hussein "our sons," mentioned the
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), and referred to Ali as "ourselves" and
Fatimah as "our women." She symbolizes the whole of womankind in this
verse. Had there been other people who had higher status than these
people, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) certainly would have pought them along
with him.

### 3. Verse of Affection (Mawada)

###

***"...say: 'I do not ask you f or any payment f or my preaching to you,
except the love f or my relatives...'" Holy Qur'an (42:23)***

The Qur'anic exegesists state that this verse was revealed concerning
Ali, Fatimah, Hassan and Hussein (a.s.).

Jabir bin Abdullah is reported to have said: "A bedouin came to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) and said, 'O Muhammad! introduce me to Islam.'

"'You should bear witness,' replied the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
'that there is no god but Allah, Who is the only God, Who has no partner
whatsoever, and that Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger.'

"'Do you ask for recompense in return?' asked the bedouin.

"'No,' said the Prophet (s.a.w.), 'except that you should love the
relatives.'

"'Mine or yours?' inquired the man.

"'Mine,' said the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

"'Hold out your hand,' said the bedouin. 'I give you my pledge of
allegiance. My Allah curse whoever doesn't love you or your kindred.'

"'Amen,' said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)."(5)

It is reported in the Musnad (Book of traditions) of Ahmad bin Hanbal,
the two Sahihs (Authentic books of traditions), and the exegesis of
al-Tha'alibi and al-Tabarsi, that Ibn Abbas, may Allah be pleased with
him, was quoted as saying, "when the verse (say: I do not ask you for
any payment for my preaching to you except the love for my relatives)
was revealed, Muslims asked the Prophet (s.a.w.), 'O Messenger of Allah!
Who are your kinsfolk whom we should love?! 'Ali, Fatimah and their two
sons,' answered the Prophet (a.s.)."

Next to the verses of the Glorious Qur'an, we quote certain statements,
from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) as additional evidence expressing
the lofty position occupied by Imam Hussein (a.s.) in the world of Islam
and the Muslim ummah.

1. In the Sahih of al-Tirmidhi, Ya'la bin Murrah is quoted to have said,
"The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said,

'Hussein is from me and I am from Hussein. Allah loves whoever loves
Hussein. Hussein is a disciple of the disciples."(6)

2. Salman al-Farsi is reported to have said, "I heard the Prophet of
Allah (s.a.w.) saying, 'Hassan and Hussein are my two sons. Whoever
loves them then he loves me. And whoever dislikes them then he dislikes
me. And whoever dislikes me then Allah dislikes him. And whomever Allah
dislikes, He will throw him into hell f ace downward."'(7)

3. Al-Bara' bin Azib is quoted to have said, "I saw the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) carrying Hussein bin Ali (a.s.) on his shoulder. He was
saying, 'O Lord! I do love him so love him.'"(8)

4. Abdullah bin Mas'ood is reported to have said, "The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) said, concerning Hassan and Hussein, 'These are my two
sons, whoever loves them then he loves me. And whoever dislikes them he
dislikes me,"'

5. Ali bin Hussein (a.s.) said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his grandfather (a.s.), 'The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
took the arms of Hassan and Hussein and said, 'Whoever loves me and
loves these two and their father, he will certainly be with me on the
Day of Judgement.'"(9)


