ASPECTS OF HIS CHARACTER
========================

In our latest booklet(10) we referred to the fact that the characters of
both Imams Hassan and Hussein (a.s.) have many traits in common. Both of
them received their initial stage of training before shouldering the
heavy task of propagating and defending the da'wah. Both of them had one
and the same education, indoctrination, and spiritual and ideological
teachings, under the supervision of their grandfather (s.a.w.), their
father and their mother (a.s.).

As a result, the aspects of their characters fused together personifying
the message of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, in thought, action and
conduct.

In our booklet on Imam Hassan (a.s.), we cited some examples which put
his character into perspective. Here, we do the same regarding Imam
Hussein (a.s.).

1. His Relationship With Allah
------------------------------

We can better understand the depth of Imam Hussein's (a.s.) relationship
with Allah, the Most High, if we don't lose sight of the fact that the
Prophet (s.a.w.) himself taught him the ideology of Islam and pought him
up spiritually as he had done with his father, Imam Ali, his mother,
al-Zahra', and his pother, Imam Hassan (a.s.). By so doing, his path was
defined and his character was formed.

One day he was asked, "How great is your fear of your Lord?"

"No one would be secure on the Day of Judgement except those who feared
Allah in this life," he replied.(11)

His face would turn pale, and he would tremble at the time of doing his
ablution. He was asked about this and answered,

"Whoever stands in the presence of the Almighty Allah is not to blame if
his color turns pale and his limbs shake."

On the night before the tenth of the month of Muharram, Imam Hussein
(a.s.) asked the Ummayyad army to delay the battle till the following
morning. He said, "This night we want to offer our prayers to our Lord,
and we want to ask His forgiveness. He knows that I love to offer my
prayer to Him, recite His Book, and pray much asking f or His
forgiveness."

During the most critical and horrifying hours of the last day of his
earthly life, he realized that it was midday and he had to perform his
prayer. The battle of Karbala' was in full swing. He asked the enemies
to stop fighting so as to let him and his followers offer their prayer.
No better testimony than this can reflect the depth and strength of his
relationship with Allah and his love for Him.

He used to recite this supplication, "O Lord! Grant me the desire for
the other world, till I realize that it is a real thing in my heart,
through my apathy to this world. O Lord! Grant me perception with regard
to the other world so much that I will seek the divine reward with acute
longing, and flee from the bad deeds out of fearing You, O Lord...".(12)

We Will address this plea more elaborately when we cover the uprising of
Imam Hussein (a.s.) and his heroic, and matchless sacrifice for the sake
of Allah, the Most High.

2. His Relationship With People
-------------------------------

A look at the ethical side of Imam Hussein's (a.s.) character would be
enough to shed light on the vividness of his relations with the ummah,
for he was the most perfect and exemplary leader during his time. We
don't mean that Imam Hussein (a.s.) was different from the other Imams
in this respect. The nature of the relationship between the Imam and the
ummah is actually outlined by the Divine Message. Imams represent it, as
personified in their daily life.

Following are some examples of that great, high and pilliant
relationship.

### A. His Humbleness

###

Once Imam Hussein (a.s.) passed by poor men eating crumbs of pead on a
mat. He greeted them and they invited him to their meal. He sat among
them and said: "If your food were not alms, I would have eaten with you.
Come home with me," he asked them. There, he fed them, clothed them and
provided them with money.(13)

One could easily detect the depth of his humbleness through examination
of this vivid testimony, particularly when we take into consideration
that Imam Hussein (a.s.) was the political and ideological figure who
was appointed as the legitimate leader of the Muslims by Allah, through
His Messenger (s.a.w.).

As for his social position, he was so matchless and unique, that Ibn
Abbas, the revered companion of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), used to hold
the stirrup of his horse when he would mount it. Ibn Abbas was older
than Imam Hussein (a.s.), but he did this out of his respect for
him.(14)

It is because of his glorious social status that the people would
dismount from their horses and camels, on the way to Mecca to perform
their pilgrimage, as long as he would travel on foot.

Another example reflecting his humble nature is that of his acceptance
of an invitation to having food with the poor. He encountered a number
of poor men. Having had their food they hastened to ask him to share
with them. He dismounted from, his horse saying, "Surely, Allah doesn't
like the haughty." He partook of their food and said: "I have accepted
your invitation. Won't you accept mine?"

"Certainly, we Will," said they. He took them to his house and said to
al-Rabab, his wife, "ping us what you have been storing."(15)

He did care for the people. He would always help them, even though, for
the most part, they wouldn't recognize his legitimate right. Shu'aib bin
Abdul-Rahman is reported to have said: "On the way of al-Taf (battle of
Karbala', wherein he was martyred) a mark was seen on the back of
Hussein bin Ali (a.s.). Imam Zain al-Abideen (a.s.) (his eldest son, and
the son who survived the battle) was asked about it. 'It is the trace,'
he replied, 'of the bag, which he puts on his back (carrying food) to
the house of the widows, orphans and the poor."(16)

This fact attests to his remarkable humbleness, his care for the ummah,
his awareness and deep feeling of his responsibility toward the people.

### B. His Forgiveness of the Wrongdoers

###

This is another one of his key attributes. Once a young servant of his
did something which deserved punishment. When Imam Hussein (a.s.) wanted
to punish him, the servant said:

"Who curb their anger." "Let him go", said the Imam.

"And those who forgive their fellow-man," added the servant.

"I forgive you," said the Imam.

"And Allah loves the charitable, sir," said the servant.

"I set you free, for the sake of Allah," said the Imam. "Henceforth I am
going to give you the double of what I have been giving you."(17)

These are only pief instances of the ethical side of the character of
Imam Hussein (a.s.).

3. Aspects of His Thought
-------------------------

We deem it suitable to mention some of his activities in the field of
Islamic thought. These texts testify to his great intellectual capacity,
polished by the divine message and set on the right track by Allah, the
Almighty.

Nafi' bin al-Azraq, the head of the Azraqis who were among the Khawarij
(those who mutinied against Imam Ali (a.s.) after the Battle of
Siffeen), once asked him to describe his Lord Whom he worshipped.

"O Nafi'!," Imam Hussein (a.s.) started, "Whoever uses symbolism in
religious matters will always remain in confusion, deviated as he
stumbles off the right path, sticking to deviation wherever he goes,
straying off the right course, and saying bad, and worthless things. O
son of al-Azraq! I can describe my Lord with the very words He used to
describe Himself: Never recognized by the five senses. Never compared to
man.

Very close but not to the point of being touched. Very far but not so
far that He can't be detected. He is One and can't be partitioned. Known
by His signs. Described by His attributes. There is no god but He, the
Great, the Exalted."

At that point Ibn al-Azraq wept and said: "What beautiful words are
yours."(18)

On his way to Karbala', he assessed the general situation, pointing to
the great deviation the ummah had been drawn into, and talked about his
determination to win martyrdom, in the following words:

"Life has certainly changed disguises and its good has gone forever.
This has continued till the remaining good in it amounts to the thin
sediment at the bottom of a drinking untensil. Life is a mean food, a
pasture covered with bad grass. Do you not see that the truth is not
followed and falsehood not discouraged? The faithful must certainly
desire to meet his Lord righteously. I do not deem death other than
felicity and life among the unjust other than suffering and boredom.
People are certainly enthralled with life. Faith is only something
licked by them. They take good care of it as long as it secures their
living. But once put to the tests of tribulation, religious men should
be rarely found amongst them."(19)

With his sharp awareness, he defines the different levels of the
relationship with Allah. He says:

"Some people serve Allah desiring (His rewards). It is the worship of
merchants. Some people serve Allah out of fear. It is the worship of
slaves.

And some people serve Allah out of gratitude. This is the worship of the
free. It is the best kind of worship."(20)

He addressed the people, prior to the battle of Karbala', defining the
characteristics of the Ummayyad rule, and analyzing the political and
administrative situation from an Islamic point of view He said:

"...O people! the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) had said: 'Whoever witnesses
an unjust ruler considering the prohibitions of Allah as permissible,
peaking the covenant of Allah, opposing the practices of the Prophet of
Allah (s.a.w.), treating His servant sinfully and cruelly, and had seen
all these misdeeds but did not oppose him bywords or actions, Allah
surely will punish him as He wills.'

"Certainly these people have come to staunchly obey Satan, and given up
obeying the Compassionate. They showed mischief, stopped acting in
accordance with Islamic laws, took Muslims' property to themselves, made
the haram designated by Allah, halal, and turned His halal to haram. I
am more entitled than anyone else (to make the change). Your letters
arrived, and your envoys came to me carrying your pledge of allegiance
that you will not hand me over to my enemy, nor will you f ail me.
Should you stick to your pledge of allegiance, you have surely made the
right decision. I am Hussein bin Ali, and the son of Fatimah, the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.). I am, myself, with you, and
my family is with yours. You find a good example in me. But, however, if
you will not hold onto your pledge of allegiance, peak your convenant,
and throw off my pledge of allegiance, then, by Allah, it is not the
first time you do it. You did it with my father, and you have done it
with my pother, and my cousin Muslim bin Aqeel. He is certainly gullible
who is deceived by you. You are missing your luck and losing your lot.
He who peaks his oath, peaks it at his own peril. Allah will certainly
compensate me if you leave me."(21)

These are only scattered small examples of his great thought which
occupies the center of original, serene Islam. Should the dear reader
tend to know more about Imam Hussein (a.s.), he can refer to the books
which dealt with his life. He will find out himself how deep and great
were Imam Hussein's (a.s.) thought and faith.(22)


