IMAM HUSSEIN'S ROLE IN REVIVING ISLAM: PROLOGUE
===============================================

Imam Hussein's role in Islamic life started very early. While still a
young man, he contributed effectively to the rising movement of Islam.
Eminent was his role during the Imamate of his father, the Commander of
the Faithful (a.s.). Side by side with his father, pother, and the loyal
men around his father, he took part in the major battles of his father:
al-Jamal, Siffin and al-Nahrawan.

During the Imamate of his pother, Hassan (a.s.), he lived as his loyal,
obedient soldier. They shared the same views and acted in unison. He
experienced, with his pother, the events, including the signing of the
peace document with Mu'awiyah. Afterwards, he went to Medina along with
his pother and the members of the house of the Prophet (s.a.w.). There,
they did their best to carry out their mission of keeping the Divine
Message away from the current of mounting deviation. As we have
explained in our study of the life of Imam Hassan (a.s.), their
religious task centered around ethical and ideological teachings,
straightening up people's conduct, and pointing out their religious
responsibility to them.

In the wake of Imam Hassan' s (a.s.) departure to his Exalted Lord, Imam
Hussein's (a.s.) role entered a new phase due to the complications which
sprung up in the midst of the ummah. Since the role of any Imam from the
house of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) is defined by the nature of the
social, ideological and political developments in his time, Imam Hussein
(a.s.) blazed a new trail in defining the progress of the Islamic
movement which he led after taking the office of the legitimate Imam, in
harmony with the Divine Will which was expressed in the statements and
words of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) in this respect.

Jabir bin Sumrah is reported to have said: "I went with my father to see
the Prophet (s.a.w.). I heard him saying: 'Life will not come to an end
before twelve caliphs have appeared.' Jabir went on to say: "I could not
figure out what he said afterwards, and so I asked my father: "What has
he said?"

"He (s.a.w.) said," my father replied, 'All of them are from the
Quraish.'"(23)

Ababah bin Rab'i bin Jabir is reported to have said: "The Prophet of
Allah (s.a.w.) said: 'I am the master of the prophets, who will come
after me are twelve, the first one of whom is Ali and the last one is
al-Mahdi, who will revolt against injustice.'"(24)

Salman (may Allah be pleased with him) said: "I went to see the Prophet
(s.a.w.). I saw Hussein on his lap. The Prophet was kissing him on the
cheeks and mouth. I heard him saying: 'You are a master, the son of a
master, and the pother of a master. You are an Imam, the son of an Imam
and the pother of an Imam. You are the Proof of Allah, the son of a
Proof of Allah, and the pother of a Proof of Allah, and the father of
nine Proof s of Allah, the ninth one of them is al-Mahdi, the one who
will revolt against injustice.'"(25)

There are a plethora of statements and traditions reported from the
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) in which he states, implicitly and explicitly,
that his successors are twelve caliphs.(26)

Imamate took a new turn during Imam Hussein's (a.s.) term. That is what
we Will explain, Insha'llah, in the following pages.

POST-PEACE TREATY EVENTS
------------------------

Mu'awiyah entered the city of Kufa after signing the peace treaty with
Imam Hassan (a.s.). His army encircled it. He addressed the Kufans in
these words: "O people of Kufa! Do you think that I have fought you for
the sake of prayer, poor-rate and hajj (pilgrimage), whilst I know you
offer your prayers, give the poor-rate and perform hajj? Nay, I fought
you so as to be your ruler and seize control of your lives. Allah
granted any property plundered or any blood shed in this sedition is
irretrievable. Any promise I have given is trampled under these two feet
of mine..."(27)

This address of Mu'awiyah amounted to a public revocation of the treaty
which was conducted with Imam Hassan (a.s.) as expressed in these words:
"Any promise I have given is trampled under these two feet of mine." Not
a few days had passed after the signing of the peace document, when
Mu'awiyah began implementing a new plan, totally in contrast to the
terms of the peace document. The following goals figure in his notorious
plan:

1. Unleashing a wave of terror, and embarking on elimination of all
opposition forces, particularly the followers of Imam Ali (a.s.). They
were bunted down, and every means of oppression and terror was employed
to silence every free voice. No better testimony to the danger of this
savage and horrifying policy than the following text, which carries the
orders of Mu'awiyah to one of his military officers:

" ...And kill any one you come across who does not hold the same views
you hold, and attack every town you pass by. And plunder property as
plundering property is tantamount to killing, and it is more hurting to
the heart..."(28)

If the deviant Ummayyad plot, expressed clearly in this text, is
devilish, it was first implemented during the life of Imam Ali (a.s.);
it took on more dangerous proportions after the signing of the peace
document with Imam Hassan (a.s.). More innocent blood was shed, and
opponents, who came from different schools of thought, at the head of
which were the followers of Imam Ali (a.s.) and the Ahlul Bait (a.s.),
were put to the sword.

Mu'awiyah wrote to his governors in all provinces: "See to it that
whoever is proven, by irrefutable evidence, to love Ali and his
household, his name is erased from the public register and his pay and
food allotment are dropped."(29)

In another letter, he wrote: "Whomever you accuse of being loyal to
these people, severely punish him and tear down his house."(30)

In short and expressive words Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) depicts this
bloody tragedy. He says: "...Our followers were killed in every city.
Hands and legs were cut off at the slightest suspicion. Whoever was
reported to love us or had any contact with us would either be
imprisoned or robbed of his property or his house destroyed. Oppression
increased in volume and became unduly harsh, till the time of Ubaidullah
bin Ziyad, the murderer of Hussein (a.s.)."(31)

At the head of the victims of that horrible carnage was a group of pious
companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.) including Hijr bin Uday and his

followers, Rasheed al-Hajari, Amru bin al-Humq al-Khuza'i, Awfa bin Hisn
and many others. Books such as al-Tabari, al-Kamil and Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah collected countless stories about Mu'awiyah's hatred for the
followers of Ahlul Bait (a.s.).

2. Dispersing money for the sake of buying-out men, and weakening their
Islamic character, and helping the deviant policy of Mu'awiyah to
fulfill its devilish objectives. In reality, two kinds of men were
bought out:

A. A number of preachers and traditionists whose role was outrageous in
working in favor of Mu'awiyah. They forged traditions and narratives and
falsely attributed them to the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) in order to
depricate Imam Ali (a.s.) and all the members of his family.

B. Leading social men who might act against the Ummayyad rule. It was a
policy practised by Mu'awiyah and the other rulers of the Ummayyad
dynasty. This policy became an adopted line of action throughout the
Ummayyad rule. No better testimony to this policy than Mu'awiyah's
sending 1,000 Dirhams to Malik bin Hubairah al-Sakoon. The latter was
enraged to hear of the murder of the great companions of the Prophet
(s.a.w.), Hijr bin Uday, and his followers (may Allah be pleased with
them). Mu'awiyah sent him the money. Al-Sakooni, upon receiving it, gave
up any intention of rising against oppression and corruption.

3. War of starvation. It was the most effective weapon used by the
Ummayyads. The Muslim ummah felt humiliated and unable to challenge the
rulers.

As this policy was based on fighting the opposition forces with their
daily pead and depriving them of the means to earn their living,
Mu'awiyah employed the most horrendous way to besiege the followers of
Ahlul Bait (a.s.) in particular. His recorded directive, which he sent
to his governors in this respect said: "...See to it that whoever is
proven, by irrefutable evidence, to love Ali and his household, his name
is erased from the public register, and his pay and food allotment are
dropped."

One can see for himself the repercussions of this inhuman policy,
adopted by the Ummayyad house to corrupt people and numb their
conscience. It was not a temporary line of action. Mu'awiyah made it a
consistent policy throughout the twenty years of his rule (41-60 A.H.).

4. peaking the bonds holding the Muslim ummah as one entity by stirring
up the nationalist, tribal and regional spirit among the different
groups. Thus, plunging the Muslims into infighting at the expense of
their real opposition to the oppressive rule of the Ummayyads. Mutual
spite and hatred between the Arab tribes were awakened and soon
differences and violence began to surface. The tribes of Qays and Mudhar
fought each other. The people of Yemen and those of Medina jumped at
each other's throats. And so was the case among the tribes of Iraq! In
the same way sectarianism was revived between the Arabs and non-Arab
Muslims who came to be historically known as al-Mawali. This policy of
ignorance was expressively reflected in the poetry of many poets like
Miskeen al-Darimi, al-Farazdaq, Jareer, al-Akktal and others.(32)

5. Assassination of Imam Hassan bin Ali (a.s.) as he was the legitimate
symbol of original Islam.

6. Crowning Yazid as the new king after his father, Mu'awiyah. Such a
move was taken in a severe atmosphere of oppression, and in line with
the stick-and-carrot policy, which ran counter to the peace treaty which
appointed Imam Hassan (a.s.) as the next caliph after the death of
Mu'awiyah. If Imam Hassan (a.s.) himself was already dead at the time of
Mu'awiyah's death, the document said that Imam Hussein (a.s.) would be
the next caliph.

And so Mu'awiyah completed his plot of revoking every term of the treaty
he concluded with Imam Hassan (a.s.). Mu'awiyah, thus, went another step
in tresspassing the Islamic concept of rule, by adopting the hereditary
rule, which implies dictatorship, as a system of rulership in the Muslim
world. Islamic principles and the Muslim ummah were exposed to the most
violent tragedy in their history. The ummah's movement swerved off the
right track it was supposed to tread.

Deviation took a clear shape shortly after the death of Mu'awiyah and
the ascension of Yazid to the office of caliphate. Such was the desire
of Mu'awiyah who nurtured and kept it alive till it was completely
realized.

The mandate given to Yazid to lead the Muslim ummah, plan its future,
and define its course of action meant, in reality, the liquidation of
the Islamic existence. It was an actual regression from it shrouded in
another attire.

Yazid, as history testifies, was overwhelmed by deviation in his
thought, practices and feelings. Unbiased researchers would admit that
Yazid could not find the chance to consciously open to Islam and its
high objectives which models man as an individual and a member in a
society in a way that keeps him totally away from the pillars of
ignorance. It is the best model of man any ideology can produce.

When Yazid got rid of the atmosphere of good education furnished by
Islam for its followers, it is no wonder that our history pims over with
stories about Yazid's daily practices which were immersed in deviation,
under the noses of the majority of the Muslims in Syria. He plunged
himself into debauchery, loose entertainment, alcohol-drinking,
womanizing and singing...He was so careless and morally loose that he
used to put gold bangles on his dogs!(33)

And so the ummah stood at the threshold of a new stage of its history.
Ahead of it, there were two choices:

Either to develop a strong rejection of the type of life being imposed
on it, whatever the price; or accept the de facto life, wherein it had
to give up its Message, the source of its greatness and symbol of its
pride among other nations.

Then, which choice did the ummah prefer?


