WIND OF THE UPRISING
====================

Shortly after the death of Mu'awiyah, his son, Yazid, took over. He
ordered his governors to take the pledge of allegiance to him from the
people. He focused on Imam Hussein (a.s.), in particular, due to the
Ummayyad conviction that he was the unshakable resisting force among the
opposition. Once they subjugated him, all dams before them would
collapse. The opposition, minus Imam Hussein (a.s.), would be easily
subdued.

Instantly Yazid wrote to the governor of the city of Medina, al-Walid
bin Utbah, to take the pledge of allegiance from the people, in general,
and from Imam Hussein (a.s.), in particular. The governor wasted no time
in carrying out the orders of his superior. He sent one of his retainers
for Imam Hussein (a.s.) late in the night. Imam Hussein (a.s.) realized
what the governor was up to. He got himself ready. Escorted by thirty
men from his family and followers, he went to the house of the governor.
He told them that if he called them they had to peak into the house.

As soon as they were seated, the governor asked Imam Hussein (a.s.), to
give his pledge of allegiance. Imam Hussein (a.s.) suggested the matter
be delayed to a more suitable time. It would better if it was with the
people of Medina. He said: "...The likes of me do not give their pledge
of allegiance secretly. When you call the people to give their pledge,
call us with them. So it will be one call."(38)

Imam Hussein (a.s.) wanted the delay to prepare himself for the
inevitable conflict. He would not like to raise the anger of the local
authorities prematurely. But Marwan bin al-Hakam, who was also present,
urged the governor to forcibly take the pledge of allegiance from Imam
Hussein (a.s.). Should he refuse to yield, Marwan went on, the governor
had to kill him. Otherwise, the matter would get out of al-Walid and his
master's hands. But Imam Hussein (a.s.) acted decisively and
determinedly. He was tough with Marwan and warned him. A violent
skirmish between the two parties ensued. The companions of Imam Hussein
(a.s.) poke into the house and returned him to his house.(39)

That was the starting point of the rejection of the policy of treachery
and oppression. Imam Hussein (a.s.) made up him mind to shoulder his
responsibility, to challenge the oppressors, as he was the legitimate
Imam of the ummah, and the righteous leader entrusted with the faith.

He went to the tomb of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), his grandfather
and offered prayer beside it. Then he raised his hands in prayer:

"O Allah! This is the grave of your Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), and I am
the son of the daughter of your Prophet. You know what I am going
through. O Allah! I love good and detest evil. I beseech You, O! The
Lord of glory and honor, and adjure You by this grave and its contents,
to choose for me whatever pleases You and Your."(40)

And so Imam Hussein (a.s.) made a covenant with Allah that he would
defend the faith no matter how high the price was, as long as that would
please Allah.

In the prayer he said beside the tomb of the Prophet (s.a.w.), Imam
Hussein (a.s.) presents himself as a soldier, whose self was totally
molted at

the threshold of the faith. He could not separate his self from the
faith. His life would only express itself through the faith.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) hastened to gather the members of his family and the
loyal among his companions. He told them about his decision to move to
Mecca, the sanctuary of Allah.

The objectors increased in number. They pressed him to change his course
for fear of being killed. Still others called him to yield. They were
helpless and thought he would kill himself in vain.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) was too determined to back down. He announced the
first communique of his uprising in the form of a will he wrote to his
pother, Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyyah:

"...and I am not taking up arms in order to make merry, or be ecstatic
over what I possess. I am ready to fight for the sole goal of seeking
reform of the ummah of my grandfather, the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.). I
want to enjoin good and forbid evil and guide the affairs of the people
as my grandfather, and my father, Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), were doing.
Whoever justly accepts my call, Allah is the Source and Sustainer of
justice, but whoever turns my offer down, I will opt for patience, till
Allah judges between me and these people, and He is the best of
judges."(41)

His first official communique of his uprising pointed to the scope of
deviation which had set in, when en joining good vanished and forbidding
evil ceased. In the same manner, the statement covered the key goals and
motives of the uprising in so few words.

The caravan of Imam Hussein (a.s.) marched towards Mecca. The name of
Allah was on his tongue, and his heart was filled with love of Allah.
Upon entering Mecca, he recited the glorious verse:

***"And when he turned his face towards Madyan, he said: Maybe my Lord
will guide me in the right path." Holy Qur'an (28:22)***

He stayed at the house of al-Abdul-Muttalib. Throngs of the faithful
gathered to welcome him.(42)

Imam Hussein (a.s.) monitored the reactions of the Muslims throughout
the Islamic provinces towards the ascension of Yazid to the office of
caliphate. Kufa, the capital of Iraq, was witnessing a revolutionary
movement and a remarkable political shake-up. After long periods of
terror and suppression the opposition forces stirred seeing it the
golden chance to free themselves from the yoke of the tyrants. At the
head of these revolutionaries were the followers of the Ahlul-Bait
(a.s.). They held an emergency meeting to discuss the mounting tension
in Kufa and the responsibility they should take vis-a-vis the change in
the government, after Yazid bin Mu'awiyah had taken the affairs of the
ummah into his own hands. Sulaiman bin Sird al-Khuza'i, at whose house
the meeting was held, delivered a speech. He informed the gathering of
Imam Hussein' s (a.s.) announcement of his opposition to Yazid and that
he rejected him as a legitimate caliph. He told them that Imam Hussein
(a.s.) was in Mecca, and since they were his followers and helpers they
had to do something. If they were able to support and back him, sparing
no effort in doing that, they had to inform him of their position. But
were they unable to live up to their

principles, it would be most incorrect to write to him and then fail him
when the best comes to the worst.

The Shi'ites who were present at the meeting declared their full support
to the Imam. They would defend him by any means available. "We fight his
enemy, and kill ourselves defending him,"(43) they vowed.

After reaching a consensus on this point, the leading men of Kufa wrote
a letter in which they declared their total and final rejection of the
Ummayyad rule and that they knew no substitute for Imam Hussein (a.s.).
Then letters poured in from Kufa carrying the urgent call of the Kufans
for Imam Hussein (a.s.) to join them, to take office as the caliphate
and Imam of the Muslims. The wave of support for Imam Hussein (a.s.) was
so massive that a list of the tribes waiting for his arrival, totalling
100,000 fighters, was prepared.(44)

After studying these letters, Imam Hussein (a.s.) concluded that it was
necessary to send an envoy to Kufa authorized to take the pledge of
allegiance from the people of Iraq, on his behalf, and campaign for the
sake of rallying the people around Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), represented at the
time by Imam Hussein (a.s.).

Imam Hussein chose his cousin, Muslim bin Aqeel, for this mission. The
man was known for his piety, courage, and high qualifications in thought
and leadership. He would be able to steer the wave of enthusiasm for the
interest of the faith.

With him, Imam Hussein (a.s.) dispatched a special letter to the people
there, and particularly their chiefs. He explained the qualifications of
his envoy, and the nature of his mission. He was to closely examine the
situation and describe precisely what was going on there.

Following is the full text of the letter:

"In the Name of Allah, the Beneficient, the Merciful...

From Hussein bin Ali,

To the leaders of the believers and the Muslims.

Hani and Sa'id have pought me your letters; they are the last two of
your messengers who have come to me. I have understood everything which
you have described and mentioned.

The essential statement of the majority of you is: 'We have no Imam.
Therefore come; through you, may Allah unite us under truth and
guidance'. I am sending you my pother, Muslim bin Aqeel, who is my
cousin and trustworthy representative from my house. I ordered him to
write to me about your conditions, affairs and views. If he writes to me
that the opinion of your leaders and of the men of wisdom and merit
among you is united in the same way as the messengers who have come to
me have described, and as I have read in your letters, I will come to
you at once, Allah willing. By my life, what is the Imam except one who
professes the religion of truth, and one who dedicates himself to the
essence of Allah, and Salam."(45)

Kufa welcomed Muslim as any loyal and dutiful following would. The
pledge of allegiance was taken for Imam Hussein (a.s.). Ibn Aqeel, by
now, was convinced that the change was on behalf of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.)
and the Message of Allah, the Exalted. It was by no means something
common and could not be ignored. It was a truth, tangible and
subjective. They should

quickly deal with the situation before something happens and spoils the
situation.

And so Muslim, may Allah be pleased with him, saw it fit to dispatch an
account to Imam Hussein (a.s.) about the direction of the de facto
situation. In his account he called him to come to Kufa. He wrote:

"Certainly, the man sent by a caravan in a desert to explore the way
ahead of it will never lie to those who had sent him. All the people of
Kufa are with you. Eighteen thousand of them have given their pledge of
allegiance to me. So make haste and come to us as soon as you read this
letter of mine. And peace and the blessings of Allah be on you."(46)

In the meantime, Imam Hussein (a.s.) thought it would be wise to contact
the chiefs of Basra and discuss with them his decision to oppose
deviation and in justice. He wrote to them. Yazid bin Mas'ood sent a
letter in which people spoke volumes for the loyalty of the tribes of
Tamim and Bani-Sa'd to AhlulBait (a.s.). Quite painfully and
regrettably, his letter arrived too late.

Al-Nahshali's troops were late to arrive. The man was so shocked at the
news of the martyrdom of Imam Hussein (a.s.) that he died. He had missed
the opportunity to help the grandson of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.).


