AN ROUTE TO IRAQ
================

The Ummayyads were extremely worried at the news of the success of
Hussein (a.s.) in Mecca. He had won over nearly the whole city. Fearing
the spread of the opposition movement, Yazid dispatched an army from
Syria. He appointed Umar bin Sa'id bin al-Aas as its commander-in-chief
and ordered him to kill Imam Hussein (a.s.) whenever he found him and at
whatever price.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) had got the word that the Ummayyad army was on its
way to Mecca. Given the Ummayyads disrespect of the Sacred House of
Allah, he had decided to leave the city. It was impossible for him to
allow the sacredness of the city to be violated because of him. In
advance, he knew of his inevitable fate in Iraq. He expressed it in the
speech be delivered in Mecca before he left. He said:

"Praise be to Allah. What Allah desires is certainly done. There is no
power but in Allah. Blessings of Allah be on His Messenger. Death had
been decreed on man, as the neckless encircles a girl's neck. How great
is my desire to see my predecessors. It is as strong as Ya'qoob's
(Jacob) desire to see (his son) Yusuf (Joseph).

"It is better for me to face my death. It is as if I am seeing now my
members being torn to pieces by the wolves of the desert, in a place
between Nawawees and Karbala. They will fill their empty stomachs and
their hungry bellies. There is no escape from a day decreed by the
divine pen..."(51)

Lots of people could see Imam Hussein (a.s.) leaving, for fear of being
killed within the holy precincts of the Ka'ba. While he expressed his
final decision to leave, he was assuring them that he would be killed.
When Ibn Abbas pleaded with him to change his mind, he said:

"...By Allah, they will not leave me till they tear the very heart from
the depths of my chest. When they do that, Allah will give power to
someone over them who will humiliate them. They will be more humiliated
than even a woman's menstrual cloth."(52)

And to his pother Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyyah, he said:

"After you left me, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) came to me and said,
'O Hussein! Go out (to fight). Allah certainly willed to see you being
killed."(53)

And to Abdullah bin Umar, he said:

"...By Allah, even if I go into hiding in a hole of an insect, they will
flush me out, till they do with me what they wanted. They would abuse me
the way the Jews desecrated the sabbath."(54)

Certain as he was of his own death, Imam Hussein (a.s.) marched on. But
he was sure that the faith would be revived after his death and there
was no defender of the faith next to him. It is because of these
considerations that he went on to achieve the real, historical victory.
Only with shedding his blood and sacrificing his soul would Islam be
immortalized.

En route to Iraq he would ask the travellers he met about Iraq and the
current situation there. The only reply was: "The people were with the
Ummayyad, but their hearts were with him!"

He knew and understood that duplicity on the part of the people. Terror
was ruling. Anyone there was being torn apart by two faces: His belief
in the faith and the right of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) to steer the ship of
Muslims' lives on the one hand, and fear from the Ummayyad authorities,
the terrorism of the rulers, and the love of life and a comfortable,
easy living on the other.


