ROLE OF WOMEN IN THE UPRISING
=============================

It is a historically foregone conclusion that Imam Hussein (a.s.) was
fully aware of the fact that his opposition to the Ummayyad policy and
the strong stance he took against it would only lead to his martyrdom in
the way of Allah, awhether he remained in the city of Medina, Mecca or
any other city. But he wanted his martyrdom to have an impact on the
life of the ummah as wide and great as the personal reward, comfort and
eternal pleasure of Allah which he won. That is why he planned to foil
all attempts of assassination against him, hatched by the Ummayyad
rulers. That kind of death has no reverberations, or at least its
consequences are quite limited. No turmoil would follow it as big as
desired, nor would there be a furor that would be potential in the life
of the ummah.

Thus, the key elements that would promote a historical shock in the body
of the ummah, that would leave its marks on the present and future of
the ummah, had to be ripened. Imam Hussein (a.s.) began preparing
himself and his followers for a real battle between his camp, the camp
of the faith, and the camp of falsehood led by the Ummayyad house. He
called on the men to join the revolutionary forces. He spared neither
tribes, nor the Arab neighborhoods which he passed by on his way to
Iraq, without calling them to aid him and join his forces. Historically
and horizontally, the outcry would be sharper. This fact made him to
ping his womenfolk and children, though he was totally convinced that he
would not survive the battle.

Imam Hussein (a.s.) had a conviction, to the point of certainty, that
his women and those of his supporters would be taken captives and would
be humiliated at the hands of the regime's stooges. But he also knew
that this outrageous abuse would not be publically approved of. It would
serve as a good and effective element in disclosing the nature of the
Ummayyad policy and leave it, undisguised, before the masses. Shedding
off the layers of humiliation and passivity, the Muslim conscience would
be thrown into the center of the big challenge.

The women, on the other hand, played no less effective roles. In
captivity they talked to the people, laid the facts bare before them,
and unveiled the schemes and plots of the Ummayyad policy, both in Kufa
and Syria. Through the speeches, discussions and tirades on the part of
the women, Imam Hussein (a.s.) drove home his message. The reader will
not remain in doubt as to why Imam Hussein (a.s.) pought with him his
women to Karbala'.

Based on these considerations, we ascertain, without the slightest
doubt, that the participation of the women in the Husseini revolution
was planned and pondered over beforehand.

Hence, Imam Hussein's (a.s.) reply to his pother, Muhammad bin
al-Hanafiyyah, who asked him why he was taking the women with him prior
to his departure from Mecca, "Certainly, Allah desires to see them
captive."(62)

We deem it of great use to quote texts from the addresses delivered by
Zainab, the Great Lady, and the other virtuous women from the house of
Imam Hussein (a.s.).

Zainab, the noble woman from the tribe of Bani-Hashim, the daughter of
Fatima al-Zahra' and Imam Ali (a.s.), the sister of Imam Hussein (a.s.),

stood among the Kufans, assuming her responsibility as the spokeswomen
for her pother' s revolution, addressed them in these words:

"Praise be to Allah and divine blessings be sent on my grandfather,
Muhammad, and his good and exemplary descendents. O People of Kufa! Do
you shed tears? May your tears never dry up, and your loud lamentations
never cease. You are like the woman that unravels to bits the thread
which she has formerly spun. Your faith is nothing but deceit and
betrayal. Are there any among you but the immodest, disgraced, proud,
spiteful, idolator, enemy, and reviler? There are among you those who
are as guileful plants growing in filth, or the silver on a grave.

"Certainly evil is that which your souls have sent before for you. Allah
is displeased with you and in punishment shall you abide. Are you crying
and wailing? Indeed, by Allah. Do cry endlessly and laugh but little,
for your deed was so horrendously disgraceful that you will never be
able to atone for it. How can you wash away the crime of murdering the
scion of the Seal of the Prophets, the essence of the message, the lord
of the youth in paradise, the refuge of your nobles, the refuge to whom
you resorted during affliction, the pight divine proof of yours, and
your master who spoke for you.

"What an awful sin you did commit! Away with you, there will be no
forgiveness for you. Certainly, your efforts failed, your hands suffered
loss, and your bargain was pought to naught. You have made yourselves
deserving of the wrath of Allah. Abasement and humiliation have been
pought down upon you.

'Woe to you! Do you know how you tore the liver of the Prophet of Allah?
Whom of his womenfolk you exposed? What blood of his you shed? What
honor of his you defamed?

"Your deed is most certainly so dangerously ugly and foul, that it
filled the earth and sky with its putridness. Are you surprised that it
rained blood? Certainly, the punishment of the Hereafter is infinitely
more abasing, and you shall not be helped. Do not make light of the
delay of punishment in that it is not hastened by the fear of missing
the taking of revenge. Most surely Allah is watching..."(63)

Zainab, the Great Lady, alerted the people of Kufa of their crime and
punishment and of their responsibilities. The situation was critically
dangerous, she told them, after their murdering of Imam Hussein (a.s.).
A massive wave of anger went through the masses against the Ummayyad
policy and its decision-makers.

Then, it was the turn of Fatima, daughter of Imam Hussein (a.s.), to
talk to the Kufans. She said:

"...O people of Kufa! O you who are cunning, treacherous, and arrogantly
proud. We are the household who are being put to the test (of guiding
you to the right path), and put you to the test (of following us). He
made our trial good. He imparted His knowledge and sagacity to us. We
are certainly the store of His knowledge, the utensil of His sagacity
and wisdom, and the divine proof on earth for His servants. Allah
honored us with His honor and preferred us over lots of the people He
created, by means of His Prophet (s.a.w.). But you charged us with
falsehood, and disbelief. You viewed it

permissible to fight us, and considered our property as loot, as if we
were of Turkish extraction or from the city of Kabul, as you had killed
our grandfather not so long ago. Your swords are still dripping with our
blood, Ahlul-Bait, due to a deep-rooted rancor. Your eyes delighted, and
your hearts rejoiced at our death. You were certainly audacious towards
Allah. You plotted, but Allah is the best of plotters. So, do not let
yourselves induce you to exalt in the blood of us which you shed, and
the money of us which you plundered, for the horrible misfortune and
great calamities that have befallen us are ordained before Allah pings
them into being. That is easy for Allah; so that you may not grieve for
the good things you miss, or be overjoyed at what you gain, Allah does
not love the haughty and vainglorious...

"Woe to you! Wait for the imprecation and chastisement. It is as if I
were witnessing the vengence descending on you repeatedly from Heaven.
Allah will exterminate you by what your hands had won and make some of
you taste severe punishment at the hands of others. Then you will
eternally abide in the painful chastisement on the Day of Judgement.
That is because you have wronged us terribly. May Allah curse the
oppressors."(64)

In Damascus, the role of the women took a clearer shape. Many
discussions, hectic arguments and speeches were made. The women were on
the offensive. They assailed the tyrants with sharp words. Yazid bin
Mu'awiyah was particulary attacked. Let us take, for example, in the
presence of Yazid. It is a pightly unique example of pioneering jihad
with words:

"Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. Blessings be sent on the
Messenger of Allah and all his household. Truthful, indeed, are the
words of Allah:

"The evil was the end of those who did evil, because they rejected the
sings of Allah and used to mock them." Holy Qur'an (30:10)

"Do you think, Yazid, that since you have literally imprisoned us,
having us being driven forward as if we were bondsmaids, we are
humiliated in the sight of Allah and you are honored in His eyes and
that is because of your great status you enjoy in Allah's eyes? And so
you put on airs, and looked happily and joyfully proud. That is because
you have the world at your feet, your affairs arranged and sorted out,
and you have our right to rulership unjustly taken on your behalf. Wait!
Wait! Have you lost sight to what Allah had said:

"And let not those who disbelieve think that Our granting them respites
is better for their souls; We grant them respite only that they may add
to their sins; and they shall have a disgraceful punishment." Holy
Qur'an (3:178)

"Is it fair, son of the people, whom the Prophet (s.a.w.) had set free,
to protect your women and bondsmaids, and to drive the daughters of the
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) as captives, after you have unveiled them and
exposed their faces? Is it fair that the enemies should drive their
mounts from one country to another, while being stared at by the people
of the houses which line the roads, and those who live wandering from
one place to another, their faces scrutinized by the near and the
far-off, the base and the noble, with no one of their protectors to
defend them, and no man of

theirs to guard them? But how could those who threw up the livers of
pure men, and who grew up feeding on the blood of the martyrs, guard
themselves against evil....?"(65)

"It is enough for you to have Allah as a Judge, the Prophet of Allah a
foe and Gapiel a helper of the Prophet. The one who appointed you, (a
caliph) [she refers to his father Mu'awiyah] and helped you to seize
control over the Muslims, will surely know what a bad substitute the
wrongdoers had. Who is worse, and more deviant, you or your father? I am
surely belittling you. I do not see that scolding you is something
awfully discouraging. I certainly know whom I am addressing. It is you
who has left Muslim's eyes tearful, and their chests heated, whenever
they remember Imam Hussein."(66)

"Plan your plots, and do you best, for, by Allah, who had honored us
with the revelation, the Book, the prophethood, and preference over
other people, you will never attain our status, nor will you reach our
end, nor will you erase our end, nor will you erase our remempance. The
disgrace you pought upon yourself will never be washed off. Are not your
views but hollow and worthless? Are not your days but numbered? Will not
your party be but scattered men on the day when the caller will call
out, 'May Allah curse the aggressive oppressor..."(67)

These are only a few fragments of the tempestuous statements made by
Zainab and her sisters in the way of jihad. We have made a mention of it
to ascertain that the women played a highly effective media role in
explaining the objectives of the uprising, disclosing the plight of
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) and their right to manage the affairs of the people.
The women succeeded in uncovering the deviated policy adopted by the
Ummayyad house to steer the life of the people as they wished, mislead
the ummah, and deceive the weak-willed people among the ummah.

RESULTS OF THE UPRISING
-----------------------

Elsewhere, we have explained that Imam Hussein's (a.s.) uprising aimed,
first and foremost, at creating an environment suitable for the making
of an anti-Ummayyad wave which would finally wash the Ummayyad entity
away and put the ummah back on the track of guidance.

The final result came as the Imam had planned and hoped for. In no time,
Imam Hussein (a.s.) along with his followers were made martyrs by the
masses. The Ummayyads lost their raison d'être. Naked as they stood
before the ummah, they were discovered as holding beliefs contradictory
to Islam, and to the vital interest of the ummah. Even those who took
part in the tragedy of Taf on behalf of the Ummayyads had undergone a
drastic wild change under the swipes of their conscience and new found
inner reawakening.

As a result, the Muslim society witnessed a violent shake up, expressed
in a series of popular uprisings, including the Tawwabeen (penitents)
uprising in Iraq, and that of al-Mukhtar al-Thaqafi, who totally
liquidated the clique which was responsible for murdering Imam Hussein
(a.s.) and his companions.

If these uprisings could not put an end to the Ummayyad rule, they
practically served as marks of the change which the ummah had undergone.

Anti-deviation opposition was on the rise, and the ummah, as a whole,
was taking a different stance; one against the Ummayyad aggressive
policy.

The Abbasid movement made good use of the rising anti-Ummayyad passion
among the people and called for the support of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.). That
set the scene for the Abbasids to eventually liquidate the Ummayyad
entity. They, however, were also avid enemies of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) and
were responsible for the martyrdom of thousands of their Shi'a.

In conclusion, we can say that Imam Hussein's uprising had practically
foiled the Ummayyad policy to derail the Islamic march and plunge the
ummah, once more, into the darkness of ignorance. The uprising did that
by reviving the spirit of jihad in the ummah and adopting the choice of
rejection, perseverance, and challenge towards the current of
aberration.

Peace be on the dozens of martyrs, Abu-Abdullah Hussein (a.s.), the
grandson of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.). We make a covenant with him
to follow in his footsteps on the path of sacred jihad.

And we promise to be loyal to him, and to ready ourselves to sacrifice
ourselves in defending the great message of Islam.

And praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.


