The Word "Wali"
===============

Wila’, walayah, wilayah, wali,mawla. The real, original meaning of all
of these words comes from the root-word “waliya" (waw-lam ya). This
root-word is among those which appear with the greatest frequency in the
Qur'an, being used in various forms: it appears in the Qur’an in 124
places in the noun form, and in 112 places in the verb form.

The original meaning of this root-word, according to the famous Qur'anic
lexicon *Mufradatu 'l-Qu'ran*, is “the being situated of something
besides something else, in the sense that there is no separation between
them", that is to say that if two things are so contiguous one with the
other that there is nothing between them, the root-word "waliya" is
used.

As a result of this, the word has come to be used in the sense of
nearness and affinity, usually to mean a special or spiritual affinity.
And again, for the same reason, it has been used with the meaning of
"intimacy", "friendship", "being in charge", "being in control", and
with other meanings of the same variety. In all of these, there exists a
kind of personal contact and contiguity.

For this root-word and its derivatives many meanings are mentioned. For
example, 27 meanings are given for the word mawla. However, it is
obvious that this word was not created with 27 meanings and that in
other instances it is used with the sanction of this meaning. The
subsequent different meanings, or, to put it more exactly, the numerous
instances of usage, should be derived from their syntactical and
situational contexts.

The derivatives of this root word have been used in application to both
material, bodily things, and abstract and mental matters, but they were
unquestionably used originally in a physical sense, and then, by
appropriate comparison with what is visualized, or by abstraction of the
perceived meaning from its material and tangible associations, they also
came to be used with abstract meanings.

For man's attention to the things he perceives either from the point of
view of a single individual during his own life time, or from the point
of view of a human collectivity during the period of its historical life
predates his meditation on intellectual ideas.

After sensory signification and meaning, man moves on little by little
to an abstract signification and meaning, and he then naturally uses the
same words which he employed with the objects of nature and thus
recruits them into his service. In a similar way, scientists do not
invent special words for their particular sciences, but rather they use
words which have a current meaning in the ordinary language giving these
words a particular meaning and signification which differ from the
common meaning and signification.

The *Mufradatu 'l-Qur'an* says in connection with the word
“*walayah/wilayah*", looking at it from the point of view of the
instances of its application.

"*Wilayah'* has the meaning of \`assistance', but *walayah* has the
meaning of \`being in charge' and \`the person in authority in a certain
matter'; it is also said that the meaning of both is the same, and that
it is this \`being in charge and having authority' ". Then it mentions
instances of the use of these words.

Two Kinds Of " Wila' "
----------------------

In the Holy Qur'an, the words wila’, muwalat, and tawalli are used many
times. In this great, heavenly book, certain matters are set out under
these headings, and, on the whole, it can be seen from contemplation of
this purified text that from the vantage point of Islam there are two
kinds of wila': negative and positive.

That is to say that on the one hand Muslims are ordered not to accept
one kind of wila' and to leave it alone, while, on the other hand, they
are shown another kind of wila' which they are to cultivate diligently.

"Wila", affirmative and Islamic, is in turn of two kinds: general wila’,
and special wila’. This special wila’ is also of several different
kinds. These are: a wila' of love, a wila' of Imamate, a wila' of social
leadership, and a wila' of universal disposal. Here briefly, we shall
discuss each one of these.

### 1. Negative " Wila' "

The Qur'an strongly warns Muslims against accepting fellowship with, and
protection from, non-Muslims: not that it takes a bad view of love for
other human beings, or supports hatred by Muslims against non-Muslims in
all circumstances, or is against kindness towards them. The Qur’an
explicitly says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَنْهَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ لَمْ يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ فِي
الدِّينِ وَلَمْ يُخْرِجُوكُمْ مِنْ دِيَارِكُمْ أَنْ تَبَرُّوهُمْ
وَتُقْسِطُوا إِلَيْهِمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah does not forbid you respecting those who have not made war
against you on account of (your) religion, and have not driven you forth
from your homes, that you show them kindness and deal with them justly;
surely Allah loves the doers of justice. (60:8)”***

Islam does not say that acts of friendship and works of good must be
done exclusively for Muslims, and that in no way should generosity be
extended from you towards others. How could a religion whose Prophet is,
according to the Qur'an, ***“a mercy for the worlds" (21:107)*** be like
that?

The matter is, however, that Muslims must not be inattentive towards
their enemy, some of whom secretly harbor duplicity towards them. The
pretension of friendship by the enemy towards Muslims should not deceive
them, and it must not cause them to take the enemy for a friend and to
trust him.

The Muslim must always be aware that he is a member of Islamic society,
that he is a part of this whole; and his being part of this whole, a
member of one body, necessitates, whether you like it or not, conditions
and limits. The non-Muslim is a member of another body.

The relationship of a member of the body of Islam with members of
non-Islamic bodies must be of such a kind that, at the very least, it
does not compromise his membership of the Islamic body; in other words,
it must not damage the unity and independence of that body. Thus, like
it or not, the relation of a Muslim with a non-Muslim cannot be equal
with, or, even sometimes, closer than the relation of a Muslim with a
Muslim.

The friendly and sincere relationship of Muslims with one another must
be within the limit that membership of one body and participation in one
whole requires. Wila’ of the negative sort in Islam expresses the fact
that a Muslim should always realize in an encounter with a non-Muslim
that he is encountering a member of an alien body, and the meaning of
saying that there must not be wila' with non- Muslims, is that the
relationship between Muslims and non-Muslims must be within the limit of
the relationship between Muslims themselves, which means that a Muslim
should not accept membership of a non-Muslim body; or, put in other
words, his membership of the Islamic body should not be ignored.

Thus, there is no inconsistency in a Muslim being benevolent and kind
towards a non- Muslim and at the same time not accepting his wila'
(allegiance with him), that is to say that the Muslim must not count him
a member of the body of which he himself is a member, and should behave
towards him as an outsider.

In the same way, there is no inconsistency between wila' in the negative
sense and the fundamental of humanitarianism and compassion for mankind.
The essential condition of humanitarianism is that man should be
concerned with the fate, well-being and true happiness of all men.

It is for this very reason that every Muslim is concerned that all human
beings should become Muslims and be led to the right path. However, as
long as this blessing is not obtained, those others who have been
blessed must not be sacrificed for those who have not been blessed, and
permit boundaries to collapse and every kind of action and reaction to
take place.

Imagine that a certain group of men are afflicted with a certain
illness. Humanitarianism requires that we come to their rescue, and as
long as rescue is not forthcoming to them, it requires that we be
benevolent towards them.

However, humanitarianism does not demand that we impose no restrictions
between these people whose illness, it so happens, is contagious, and
individuals who are healthy or have been cured. Thus, it is that Islam,
on the one hand, counts generosity and kindness towards non- Muslims as
permissible, but, on the other hand, does not permit that a Muslim
should accept the protection (wila') of a non-Muslim.

Islam is the religion of humanitarianism; Islam even loves the one who
associates others with Allah (mushrik), not from the point of view that
he is a mushrik, but from the point of view that he is a created being,
one of God's creatures, and Islam is concerned for the reason that he
has fallen into the way of ruin and confusion, and the way of liberation
and bliss has been made narrow. For if it did not love him, Islam would
be indifferent to his shirk and misery.

In Islam there is love and hatred, but a love and hatred which is
reasonable and logical, not sentimental, for no good reason, and without
any standard of comparison. A friendship or enmity which arises solely
from the feelings has no logic; it is sentimental, blind and deaf, and
it dominates the human heart, it tugs in any direction it wishes. But
rational love and hatred arise from a kind of understanding, and in fact
result from affection for the fate of other people, and this is an
instance of genuine affection.

Here is an example: A father and a mother have two sorts of affection
towards their child; one is reasonable and logical, the other
sentimental. Reasonable affection sometimes causes the parents in all
seriousness to subject their own child to suffering, and they consider
all the reasons for causing him pain.

Let us say they put their child in the hands of a surgeon. The parents,
in such a case, fall to weeping, they feel greatly afflicted and tears
pour from their eyes; but they want the doctor to start the operation as
soon as possible. They ask him to remove the troublesome part. The
weeping is the result of sentimental emotions, but their demand is the
result of reasonable emotion.

If those parents had taken heed of their present grief, and if their
sentimental emotions had taken precedence over their rational emotions
and they had not allowed one of their child's limbs to be cut, they
would in fact have been consenting to his death.

But with the logic of the intellect and the verdict of the affections
about the fate of their child, they put aside their feelings and submit
the child to pain and torment.

Every rational man may occasionally, in order to cure his own pain, put
himself in the hands of a surgeon who may, for example, remove his
finger. In his heart, he does not want to suffer the pain of having his
finger cut off, and, of course, he will be extraordinarily unhappy to
lose it.

However, he will endure this pain in a rational way, and, following the
verdict of his mind, will submit to the loss of the part; clearly it is
logic and his intellect which leads him forward and brings the request
to his tongue, otherwise his feelings would have caused him to reverse
his verdict.

In the case of a corrupt, unreformed society in which unbelief and
ignorance rule, Islam, on the one hand, gives the command to jihad so
that the corruption may be uprooted;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّىٰ لَا تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Kill them, so that calamity is no longer” (2:193).***

On the other hand, it orders vigilance and avoidance, so that people do
not reveal what is in their hearts to them (the unbelievers), so that
the community and mankind remains healthy; and this is not in the least
incompatible with humanitarianism.

The nature of man is a thief; appropriating and seizing things are human
characteristics, and how many times has unawareness of the thoughts and
deliberations of others been inscribed on men's tombstones. The Qur’an
exhorts us

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ
أَوْلِيَاءَ تُلْقُونَ إِلَيْهِمْ بِالْمَوَدَّةِ وَقَدْ كَفَرُوا بِمَا
جَاءَكُمْ مِنَ الْحَقِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! do not take My enemy and your enemy for friends:
would you offer them love while they deny what has come to you of the
truth (60:1)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ يَثْقَفُوكُمْ يَكُونُوا لَكُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَيَبْسُطُوا إِلَيْكُمْ
أَيْدِيَهُمْ وَأَلْسِنَتَهُمْ بِالسُّوءِ وَوَدُّوا لَوْ تَكْفُرُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** “If they find you, they will be your enemies, and will stretch forth
towards you their hands and their tongues with evil, and they ardently
desire that you may disbelieve” (60:2)***

Here the Qur'an considers the secret of vigilance towards, and avoidance
of, the outsider; it is that the latter wishes others to enter into his
faith and religion. What a great danger there is, then, for his
companion in his show of friendship and his camaraderie.

It is here that the Qur'an affirms the original source of the danger.
When these people befriend, it is not merely friendship and
acquaintance, for they expend great effort to reach their goal and try
hard in all ways.

All that we have discussed affirms that the relationship between a
Muslim and a non-Muslim must be a prudent one, that a Muslim must not
remain inattentive to danger, that he must not forget that he is a
member of a society of tawhid, and that the non-Muslim is a member of
another body and another social group.

But none of these things necessitates that the Muslim should completely
cut off relations with the non-Muslim, that he should not foster any
social, economic or even sometimes political relations. Of course, all
this is conditional on their totally coinciding with the interest of the
Islamic society.

### 2. Wila', In A Positive Sense, With A General Meaning.

Islam wishes Muslims to live as a single, independent form, to always
have order, inter- communication and sociality, every individual aware
of himself as being a member of one body which is Islamic society
itself, so that this Islamic society becomes strong and powerful, in the
way that the Qur'an wants the society of Muslims to be superior to other
societies.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَهِنُوا وَلَا تَحْزَنُوا وَأَنْتُمُ الْأَعْلَوْنَ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ
مُؤْمِنِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** ***  
***“And be not infirm, and be not grieving, and you shall have the upper
hand if you are believers.” (3:139)***

Faith is the supreme support, but what does faith do? Faith is the
support, the force and the pillar of the character, the maintainer of
the independence and the motor of the movement of Islamic society.

Elsewhere the Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَلَا تَنَازَعُوا فَتَفْشَلُوا
وَتَذْهَبَ رِيحُكُمْ ۖ وَاصْبِرُوا ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** “And obey Allah and His Messenger and do not quarrel for then you
will be weak in hearts and your power will depart, and be patient;
surely Allah is with the patient” (8:46)***

Quarrelling and disputation destroy the being and character of Islamic
society. Faith is the foundation of the friendship, love and fraternity
wila' of the believers.

The Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتُ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ
يَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the believers, the men and the women, are friends (wali) one to
the other; they bid to good and forbid evil” (9:71).***

Believers are close to each other, and the cause of their being close to
each other is that they are the protectors, friends and helpers of each
other; they are concerned for each other’s future; in fact, they
cultivate concern in their own future in which they form one unity, and
therefore they "bid to good " and dissuade each other from evil and
wickedness.

These two activities - bidding to good and forbidding evil - result from
the friendship of faith, and so together these two are situated
immediately after the explanation of the wila' of faith.

A feeling for the future of individuals springs from affection for them
in themselves. A father who has affection for his children naturally
feels concern for their future. But perhaps he has no feelings towards
other people's children in themselves. Therefore, he will have no
affection towards them in themselves until he has also a concern for
their future, and their doing good awakens in him a positive feeling,
and their doing bad a negative feeling.

Bidding to good is a consequence of this positive feeling, and
forbidding evil is a consequence of the negative feeling, and, until
love and friendship exist, these feelings do not bring joy to a man's
heart.

If a man is without affection for individuals, he is indifferent when
faced with their actions and behavior, but when he is concerned, his
loves and friendships will not leave him in peace. Thus, in the noble
aayah (verse) bidding to good and forbidding evil are connected in a
particular way to the question of wila'.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتُ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ
يَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the believers, the men and the women, are friends (wali) one to
the other; they bid to good and forbid evil” (9:71).***

Afterwards, under the subject of the fruits of bidding to good and
forbidding evil, two subjects are mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They perform prayer, and pay zakat (9:71).”***

Prayer is an example of the relationship of the created with the
Creator. And zakat is an example of the benefit of relations between
Muslims themselves, who support each other as a result of being
compassionate and merciful within Islam. And afterwards, it branches out
from this

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ سَيَرْحَمُهُمُ اللَّهُ ۗ وَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“These, Allah will show mercy to them. (9:71).***  
 ***And these it is who shall be successful (9:88)”***

It is then that various Divine mercies and joys come down on this
society, and thus they become the people who deserve to be called free.

Later we shall give some explanations of this ayah, showing that it, and
some other aayah (verses) which mention wila' in its ordinary
affirmative sense, are not only witnesses to love and friendship, but
that they affirm a kind of obligation and responsibility for Muslims, as
far as the virtue of the relationship of Muslims with each other is
concerned.

The Prophet (May Allah bless and grant him and his family peace) said in
a famous and established hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ فِي تَوَادِّهِمْ
وَتَرَاحُمِهِمْ وَتَعَاطُفِهِمْ كمَثَلُ الْجَسَدِ إِذَا اشْتَكَى
بَعْضُ تَدَاعَى لَهُ سَائِرُ الْجَسَدِ بِالسَّهَرِ وَالْحُمَّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Believers, in loving one another and being merciful towards each
other, are like the body that, when a part of it complains, the other
parts rally to it by fever and sleeplessness.”*

The noble Qur'an says, regarding the Prophet and those who follow him
and have received Islamic education

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَمَّدٌ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ ۚ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ أَشِدَّاءُ عَلَى
الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاءُ بَيْنَهُمْ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and those with him are firm of
heart against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves;
(48:29)”***

In this aayah, allusion is made to wila' in the negative sense and wila'
in the positive sense. Just as we said earlier that the aayah of the
Qur'an draws our attention towards the fact that the enemies of Islam,
in every age, try to substitute negative wila’ for positive wila', and
vice versa; or in other words, they direct all their efforts to the end
that relations between Muslims and non-Muslims should be cordial, and
that relations between Muslims themselves, for various reasons, through
all the disputes of the sects, should be hostile.

In our own time, a great number of actions have been carried out by
outsiders, enormous budgets deployed, and regretfully they have
introduced elements who have no other work than to transform wila' in
the negative Islamic sense into a wila' in an affirmative sense, and
affirmative Islamic wila’ into a negative wila'. This is the greatest
blow which these wicked people have dealt against the Prophet.

Today, if we should weep over one disaster from among those assailing
Islam, and if we should shed tears over one tragedy from among those
befalling Islam, it is this disaster and this tragedy. Amiru'l-mu'minin,
\`Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَا عَجَباً وَاللهِ يُمِيتُ الْقَلْبَ وَيَجْلِبُ الْهَمَّ مِن
اجْتِمَاعِ هؤُلاَءِ الْقَوْمِ عَلَى بَاطِلِهِمْ، وَتَفَرُّقِكُمْ عَن
حَقِّكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“How strange it is! By Allah, it mortifies the heart and draws forth
grief that these people agreed about their falsehood and you disagree
about your truth*.” (Nahju 'l-balaghah)

O Allah, protect and guard Islam and the Muslims from the evil of these
evil-doers through the truth of Muhammad and his Pure Household!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّـهُمَّ اِنّا نَشْكُو اِلَيْكَ فَقْدَ نَبِيِّنا صَلَواتُكَ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،وَغَيْبَةَ وَلِيِّنا، وَكَثْرَةَ عَدُوِّنا وَقِلَّةَ
عَدَدِنا وَشِدّةَ الْفِتَنِ بِنا وَتَظاهُرَ الزَّمانِ عَلَيْنا فَصَلِّ
عَلى مُحَمَّد وَآلِهِ وَاَعِنّا عَلى ذلِكَ بِفَتْح مِنْكَ تُعَجِّلُهُ
وَبِضُرٍّ تَكْشِفُهُ وَنَصْر تُعِزُّهُ وَسُلْطانِ حَقٍّ تُظْهِرُهُ
وَرَحْمَة مِنْكَ تَجَلِّلُناها وَعافِيَة مِنْكَ تُلْبِسُناها
بِرَحْمَتِكَ يا اَرْحَمَ الرّاحِمينَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah, we complain to You over the loss of our Prophet - Your
blessings on him and his family and on the absence of our wali, the
abundance of our enemy and the paucity of our number, over the strain of
afflictions on us and time's turning against us. So, bless Muhammad and
his family, and help us in this by a victory which You will hasten, and
a help which You will strengthen, and an authority of truth which You
will manifest, and a compassion You will envelop us in, and a well-being
You will clothe us in.”*


