From Human Servility To Divine Sovereignty
==========================================

Is it an offensive thing to say, from human servility to Divine
Lordliness? Is it not possible for the slave to leave the boundary of
his servility and take two steps within the Divine boundary?

In the words of Mahmud Shabistari:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سيه روئى ز ممكن در دو عالم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جدا هرگز نشد والله اعلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Non-being is not divorced from the contingent*

*In the two worlds: Allah is All-wise”.*[^1]

True, but the meaning of \`Lordliness' is godliness, not God. Every
person who has power is the \`Lord' over those things which are under
his influence and in his possession. \`Abdu '1- Muttalib said to Abrahah
who had arrived with the intention of destroying the Ka'bah: "I am the
lord (owner) of the camels (to claim which I have come to you), but the
House has itself a Lord (to defend it ) [^2]

We found the above expression from following a famous hadith which is
found in Misbahu 'sh-shari\`ah. In that hadith it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العُبُودِيَّةُ جَوْهَرَةٌ كُنْهُهَا الرٌّبُوبِيَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Servility is a jewel whose center is Sovereignty,"*

Which means: Indeed, being the slave of Allah and travelling on the path
of nearness to al- Haqq is a jewel whose center is lordship, that is,
power and strength.

Man always was, and still is, seeking to find a way to have mastery over
him and the world.

For the present we are not interested in the matter of which way to take
for this purpose, nor in what leads to success or failure in that way.
But among these ways there is one way which has a marvelous condition,
in this sense that man, alone, takes this way, without having the
formerly mentioned aim, that is his aim is not to gain power and control
over the world; but rather his aim is at the opposite extreme to this
aim, that is his aim is self-abasement, humility, self-annihilation and
non-being, this amazing way is the way of servility.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن کس که تو را شناخت جان را چه کند؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فرزند و عیال و خانمان را چه کند؟ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دیوانه کنی هر دو جهانش بخشی 
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دیوانه تو هر دو جهان را چه کند؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“What can that person who has known you do with his soul?*

*What can he do with his children, his family, his home?*

*You make him delirious and You give him the two worlds,*

*What can someone who is delirious for*

*You do with both the worlds?”*

Stations And Stages
-------------------

Sovereignty, lordship, and wilayah, in other words, perfection and
power, which are allotted to mankind as a result of servility, sincerity
and true worship, have stations and stages.

The first stage is the giving of inspiration and the giving of control
to man over his own soul. In other words, the smallest sign of the
acceptance of man's deeds by Allah is that first of all he earns a
penetrating insight, he becomes radiant and clear-sighted. The Qur'an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تَتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ فُرْقَانًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you are careful of (your duty to) Allah, He will grant you a
distinction” (8:29)***

It also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways.”(29:69)***

Secondly, man conquers and subdues his own soul and physical forces;
man's will-power becomes powerful over his bodily and animal desires; he
becomes the master of his own existence; he acquires merited control
within the limits of his own existence. The Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الصَّلَاةَ تَنْهَىٰ عَنِ الْفَحْشَاءِ وَالْمُنْكَر
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil.” (29:45)***

About fasting, it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الصِّيَامُ كَمَا كُتِبَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Fasting is prescribed for you, as it was prescribed for those before
you, so that you may guard (against evil). (2:183)***

And about both forms of worship, it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اسْتَعِينُوا بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلَاةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“*** ***O you who believe! Seek assistance through patience and
prayer.”(2:153)***

In this stage of servility, that which be- come man's lot is that
through a kind of insight man's bodily passions and tendencies are
conquered. In other words, the first effect of servility is sovereignty
and wilayah over the carnal soul.

The second state is control and wilayah over various thinking processes,
that is, control over the imagination.

The faculty of the imagination is one of our most astonishing powers. By
virtue of this faculty, our mind can at any instant turn its attention
from one subject to another, and, so to speak, take the form of an
association of ideas or a chain of mental phenomena. This faculty is not
under our control, rather we are surprisingly under its control, and so
whatever we may want, it is impossible for us to fix our minds on one
determined subject so that our attention does not turn to something
else.

Without control, the faculty of the imagination pushes us in this
direction, then in that. For example, however much we want to have
presence of mind in prayer, that is to say, however much we want to keep
this student present at the top of the class of prayer, we cannot. All
at once, we understand that the prayer has reached its end, and that the
student was absent during the whole period.

The Prophet makes an elegant comparison in this matter. He compares the
heart - the heart of someone who is overcome by his imaginative powers
to a feather which is hanging from a tree in a desert, and which every
breath of wind blows to and fro. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ الْقَلْبِ, مَثَلِ رِيشَةٍ في الْفَلاةِ تَعَلَّقَتْ فِي أَصْلِ
شَجَرَةٍ تُقَلِّبُهَا الرِّيحُ ظَهْرًا لِبَطْنٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The heart is like a feather in the middle of an open desert, hanging
from a tree and blown to and fro by the wind.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گفت پيغمبر كه دل همچون پرى است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
در بيابانى اسير صرصرى است‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
باد پر را هر طرف راند گزاف
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گه چپ و گه راست با صد اختلاف‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
در حديث ديگر آن دل را چنان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كآب جوشان ز آتش اندر غازقان‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر زمان دل را دگر رايى بود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن نه از وى بلكه از جايى بود
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet said that the heart is like a feather in the desert, a
captive of a violent blast. The wind drives the feather recklessly in
every direction:

*“Now left, now right, with a hundred diversities.*

*In another tradition (the Prophet said)*

*Deem this heart to be as the water boiling in a cauldron from the f
ire.*

*At every time the heart has a different resolution.*

*That (resolution) is not from it, but from some place.”*[^3]

The other tradition that Rumi indicates in these verses is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَلْبُ ابْنِ آدَمَ أَشَدُّ انْقِلَابًا مِنْ الْقِدْرِ إِذَا
اجْتَمَعَتْ غَلْيًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Surely, the heart of man is in more upheaval than a pot when it is
completely on the boil.”*

But is man condemned compulsorily and necessarily to be doomed forever
to his thinking, and is this mysterious power, which, like a sparrow, is
always flying from branch to branch, to be an absolute ruler over his
existence? Or does this condemnation in the face of the imaginative
faculty stem from rawness and immaturity? Those who become whole, the
people of wilayah, are they powerful enough to subjugate this force?

The second alternative is correct; one of the duties of man is to gain
mastery over the capriciousness of his imagination. If not, this power
of Shaytan (Satan) will give a quality of chance to Allah and to
travelling this way to nearness, and will cancel and ruin all the power
and ability in man's being.

How great was Rumi who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جان همه روزه لگدكوب از خيال
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وز زيان و سود و از خوف زوال
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نى صفا مى ماندش نى لطف و فر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نى به سوى آسمان راه سفر
  </p>
</blockquote>

“All day long, from the buffets of fantasy, and from loss and gain and
from fear of decline.

There remains to the soul neither joy, nor grace and glory,

Nor way of journeying to heaven.” [^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گفت پيغمبر كه عيناى تنام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا ينام القلب عن رب الانام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چشم تو بيدار و دل رفته به خواب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چشم من خفته دلم در فتح باب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هم نشينت من نى ام سايه من است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
برتر از انديشه ها پايه من است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زان كه من ز انديشه ها بگذشته ام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خارج از انديشه پويان گشته ام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حاكم انديشه ام محكوم نى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ز آنكه بنّا حاكم آمد بر بنى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جمله خلقان سخره انديشه اند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زين سبب خسته دل و غم پيشه اند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من چو مرغ اوجم انديشه مگس
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كى بود بر من مگس را دسترس
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چون ملايم گيرد از سفلى صفات
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
برپرم هم چون طيور الصافات
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Prophet said: "My eyes sleep,*

*But my heart is not asleep to the Lord of created beings.*

 *Your eyes are awake and your heart is sunk in slumber,*

*My eyes are asleep, but my heart is at the*

*opening of the door.*

*'Tis not I that am seated beside you, 'tis my shadow,*

*My station is higher than thoughts. Because I have passed beyond
thoughts,*

*I have become a swift traveler outside of thought.*

*I am the ruler of thought, not ruled by it, because the builder is
ruler over the building.*

*All creatures are subject to thought;*

*For that reason they are sore in heart and practiced in sorrow.*

*I am as a bird of the zenith, thought is a gnat; how should a gnat have
power over me?*

*When weariness at the qualities of the low seizes me,*

*I soar up like birds which spread their pinions.”* [^5]

Let us look at a man like \`Ali (a. s.) or Zaynu '1-\`Abidin (a.s.) who
were so absorbed in Divine reality during their prayer that, for
instance, when they took an arrow out of \`Ali's foot, he did not come
back from his state of total concentration, and did not notice what had
happened or the young child or Zaynu '1-\`Abidin (a.s.) who, when the
latter was in a state of complete absorption in worship, fell down from
a height and broke his hand.

The cries of the children and the women of the house made quite a
disturbance, and in the end the bone setter arrived and set the child's
hand. When Zaynu 'l-\`Abidin had finished his prayer, that is to say
when he had returned from his heavenly journey, his eyes fell on the
child's hand, and, astonished, he asked what had happened that it was
bandaged up. We can see how these cries and the uproar could not bring
the Imam out of his concentration in Divine reality.

Yet let us look at this degree of man. Among their followers, we have
seen a number in our life that had such peace of mind and concentration
of spirit in the time of prayer that they were assuredly unaware of
anything apart from Allah. Our great and respected teacher, the late
Hajj Mirza \`Ali Agha Shirazi Isfahani [^6], was a man of this degree.

In order to win this victory, there is nothing like worship, whose
foundation is concentration on Allah. Self-discipline can be counted
among other ways, and, at the most, self- mortification and
self-mutilation fall a little into this category, but Islam secures this
result from the way of worship without having recourse to these
unacceptable practices.

Fixing the attention of the heart towards Allah, and meditatin, that
which is directed towards the Lord of Lords and the Creator and Disposer
of all things, prepares the basis of gatheredness of thought and
concentration of the mind.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زلف آشفته او باعث جمعيت ماست 
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چون چنين است پس آشفته ترش بايد كرد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“His disheveled lock (of hair) is the cause of us gathering.*

*Since it is this way, then he must make it more disheveled.”*

It would be a pity not to mention here something which can help us from
the Shaykh of the philosophers of Islam (Ibn Sina), the prodigy of his
time, who, by the grace of the teachings of Islam, took philosophical
thought to places where his Greek, Iranian, and Indian predecessors had
never reached.

In the ninth section of his al-Isharat,[^7] after a description of
ordinary worship which is done only for reward and has little value,
this great man proceeds to worship in its relationship with \`irfan
(gnosis).

He says: "Worship as seen by the people of gnosis is the training of
aspirations and faculties, the imagination and thought, which, as a
result of repetition and habituation of appearance in the presence of
Allah (al-Haqq), continually draws them away from attention to problems
of nature and matter, towards the perception of Malakut. And, in the
end, these faculties submit to the secret of the heart and to the innate
instinct of man to seek Allah, and become obedient to Him so that
whenever he wills that he should engage himself in union with Allah
(al-Haqq), these powers do not do any- thing in way of opposition, and
do not start a conflict between two desires, a stronger one and a weaker
one, and the hidden, inner secret occupies itself with illumination
without their interference."

The third station is that the spirit, in its stages of strength, power,
sovereignty and wilayah, reaches a stage in which, in a great deal of
things, it becomes able to do without the body, so that the body is one
hundred percent subservient to the spirit.

The spirit and the body are in need, one of the other; the life-force of
the body is the spirit, the spirit is the preserver of the form of the
body; removing the regulating attachment of the spirit from the body
necessitates the corruption and ruin of the body. On the other hand, the
spirit, in its activities, is in need of the services of the body;
without the use of the limbs and organs and the instruments of the body
it would be impossible to do any work. The spirit's not needing the
body, in so far as in some of its activities it is not in need of the
services of the body, appears sometimes for a few moments and sometimes
repeatedly, and sometimes permanent! This is what is known as \`divorce
from the body'.

Suhrawardi, the famous Hakim Ishragi, said”

"We do not recognize a hakim (a theosophist) as a hakim unless he can
practice divorce from the body."

Mir Damad says: "We do not recognize a hakim as a hakim unless divorce
from the body has become his possession, and every time he wills it, it
happens."

As these enquirers after truth have expressed it, divorce from the body
is not evidence of great perfection. It is possible that those who still
have not crossed over from the world of mithal (the world of form) and
have not set foot in the hidden world of contemplation may have reached
this station.

The fourth station is that his body, in every respect, comes under the
control and will of the individual, in such a way that in the realm of
his body the individual originates extraordinary actions. This subject
gives scope for much discussion.

Al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, may peace be upon him, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما ضَعُفَ بَدَنٌ عَمّا قَوِيَتْ عَلَيْــهِ النِيَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Nobody is weak in that about which his decision is firm." i.e. with
strong determination, any weakness and feebleness can be overcome.”*

The fifth station, which is the highest station, is that even the
external world comes under the control of man's will as well as becomes
obedient to man. The miracles and wonders of the prophets and the walis
of Allah are in this category.

The problem of miracles and wonders is itself a matter of discussion
which must be treated separately by way of explanation. Piety in any of
the revealed religions is a pre-requisite for the acceptance of and
faith in supernatural phenomena and miracles.

For instance, no-one can be a Muslim and believe and have faith in the
Qur'an, but deny miracles and supernatural events. From the point of
view of Islamic meta-physic, the difficulty concerning a miracle is a
difficulty which must be solved; of course, investigating this problem
requires the discussion of many preliminaries.

Here we shall discuss this matter from the point of view of wilayah-
tasarruf and naturally there are some people opposed to what we say who
have faith and believe in the Qur'an and admit that miracles take place.
What we have to say to those people is directed towards showing that a
miracle is part of the manifestations of wilayah-tasarruf and creative
wilayah.

Leaving aside the Qur'an, which, in addition to being a miracle, is the
word of Allah not the word of the Prophet, and has an exceptional
position among all miracles, the occurrence of miracles is due to a kind
of power and will which was given to its bearer from Allah so that he
can, through the permission and command of Allah, bring about changes in
creation: he causes a rod to appear as a serpent, he gives sight to a
blind man, he causes the dead to live, he is aware of what is concealed.

This power and awareness were given to him only as a result of his
following the way of becoming and closeness to the Centre of Being and
wilayah-tasarruf is nothing else but this.

Some people imagine that in the existence of a miracle the individuality
and the will of the miracle-doer do not interfere in any way;  
 He is only the cinema screen; the Essence of Oneness, directly and
without intermediary, brings it into existence. For some event reaches
the boundary of the supernatural, it is beyond the power of man at
whatever level it may be. So wherever a miracle takes place, man has not
brought about any change in creation, for it is the Essence of Oneness
itself which directly, and without the intermediary of the will of man,
has brought about a change in the universe.

This view is mistaken. Apart from the fact that it denies the
sublimeness of the Purest and Unique Being, that physical fact, without
intermediary and outside the order of things, should emanate from Him,
this concept is against what is explicitly stated in the Qur'an. The
Qur'an, in the perfection of its unambiguity, acknowledges its prophets
as the bringers of \`ay at ' (which also means miracles as well as
signs), but of course with the leave and permission of the Unique Being.

It is clear that the permission of the Unique Being is not of the same
kind as human permission which is produced by words or by indication of
social or ethical restrictions. The permission of the Lord is this
granting of a kind of perfection which is the source of such an effect
and if Allah had not willed it. He would take this perfection from him.

In the blessed surah al-Mu'min, it is written

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِرَسُولٍ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ بِآيَةٍ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And it was not meet for a messenger that he should bring a sign
except with Allah's permission” (40:78)***

In this ayah it is made known that the bringers of the ayah were
prophets, but by the leave of the Lord. Specifically, the words \`leave
of Allah' were added so that it should not be fancied that anyone
himself has independence vis-a-vis the Being of Truth, and that all
should know that \`there is no might and no power except with Allah'.

Any common \`might or power', from the least to the most, the small to
the great, depends on the Holiest Unique Being; every existent, in every
stage, is a channel for the Divine Will and Decree and is one of His
manifestations. The prophets, in every work, and among them their
miracles, are channels, and they are those who fill their pens from the
eternal spring of the Unseen.

In the blessed surah an-Naml, the story of Suleiman and the Queen of
Saba' (Sheba) is told. Suleiman summoned the Queen of Saba', and the
Queen set out to present herself to Suleiman. Suleiman wanted from those
present in the assembly that her throne should be brought before him
before she herself came. Some volunteered, and Suleiman became happy at
their way of work, until:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الَّذِي عِنْدَهُ عِلْمٌ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ أَنَا آتِيكَ بِهِ قَبْلَ
أَنْ يَرْتَدَّ إِلَيْكَ طَرْفُكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“One who had the knowledge of the Book said: I will bring it to you
in the twinkling of an eye” (27:40)***

The meaning of the Qur'an is that the one who knew said, "I am the one
who can bring it in this short space of time'. Therefore he attributed
the \`might and the power' to himself, and, moreover, it says that "he
who possessed knowledge of the Book said . . .'; pointing to the fact
that he did this extraordinary feat by virtue of a kind of knowledge,
and that kind of knowledge is a kind of science which till now has not
been recorded in any human book, it is a knowledge which can only be
obtained from the Guarded Tablet, that is, from nearness to the Essence
of Truth.

Again, the Qur'an explicitly states, while talking about the same
prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَخَّرْنَا لَهُ الرِّيحَ تَجْرِي بِأَمْرِهِ رُخَاءً حَيْثُ
أَصَابَ وَالشَّيَاطِينَ كُلَّ بَنَّاءٍ وَغَوَّاصٍ وَآخَرِينَ
مُقَرَّنِينَ فِي الْأَصْفَادِ هَٰذَا عَطَاؤُنَا فَامْنُنْ أَوْ
أَمْسِكْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So, we subjected to him the wind that ran at his commandment,
softly, wherever he might light on, and the Satans, every builder and
diver and others also, coupled in fetters: "This is our gift; bestow or
with- hold without reckoning" (38: 36 -39).***

In an ayah which was revealed concerning Prophet \`Isa - May peace be
upon him - the Messiah, mention is made of the meanings of the Qur'an in
this matter; we excuse ourselves and refrain from extending the matter
through mentioning them.

The point is that according to the Qur'an, wilayah-tasarruf in the
universe cannot be denied. But if someone wants to, he may investigate
this subject merely according to the standards of science and
philosophy. Of course there are other stories, but these are beyond our
present objective.

In the last point which we made at the beginning of this discussion, we
explained that all these stations were the result of nearness to the
Lord, and nearness to the Truth is a fact and a reality, not a
figurative explanation, or one depending on perspective.

In the famous and remarkable al Hadithu l-qudsi, which both the Shi\`ahs
and the Sunnis relate, this reality is explained in a very beautiful
manner. Al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) narrated from the Holy Prophet.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: مَا تَقَرَّبَ إِلَيَّ عَبْدٌ بِشَىْ أَحبَّ
إليَّ مِمّا افْتَرْضَتُ عَلَيْهِ, وَ إنَّهٌ لَيَتَقَرَّبٌ إِلَيَّ
بِالنَّوَافِلِةِ حَتَّى أٌحِبَّهُ، فَإِذَا أَحْبَبْتُهُ كُنْتُ
سَمْعَهُ الَّذِي يَسْمَعُ بِهِ، وَبَصَرَهُ الَّذِي يُبْصِرُ بِهِ،وَ
لِسانَهُ الَّذي يَنْطِقُ بِهِ, وَيَدَهُ الَّتِي يَبْطِشُ بِهَا، َإِنْ
دَعاني أَجَبْتُهُ, وَ إنْ سَأَلَنِي أَعْطِيَنَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah says: *“No slave has become near to Me by anything more pleasing
to Me than what I have made obligatory on him; and surely he can
approach Me through works of supererogation more than what is obligatory
on him, until I love him. Then when I love him, I will be his ear
through which he hears, his eye through which he sees, his tongue
through which he speaks, his hand with which he strikes. If he calls, I
will reply to him; if he asks from Me, I will give to him”.* [^8]

In this hadith the essence of the matter is set down: worship causes
approach, and approach causes belovedness near to Allah; that is to say,
by worship man becomes near to Allah, and as a result of this nearness
he becomes worthy of special favor, and as a result of that favor his
ears and eyes and hands and tongue become, as it were, Divine. By Divine
nearness he hears, and sees, and speaks and strikes; his supplication is
accepted and his request is granted.

The fact is that the spirit of Shi\`ism, which distinguishes it from
other schools of Islam, and gives it a special Islamic insight for its
followers, is the special view of this school concerning Man. On the one
hand, it acknowledges that man's powers are truly wonderful, as was
pointed out before, and it makes it known that the world of man is never
without the being of the Perfect Man in whom the potentialities of man
are actualized; and on the other hand, according to the insight of this
group, servility is the sole means of arriving at the stations of men,
and travelling the way of servility in a perfect and complete manner is
not possible except with spiritual favor and with the leader of the
caravan, the Perfect Man, who is the wali and hujjah (Proof) of Allah.

For this reason, the walis of this school have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بنَيَ الإسلامُ عَلَي‌ خَمْسٍ: عَلَي‌ الصَّلَاةِ وَالزَّكُوةِ
وَالصَّومِ والحَجَ وَالوِلَايَةِ. وَ لَم‌ يُناد بِشَي‌ءٍ كَما نُودِيَ
بِالوَلايَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Islam is founded on five things: On salat, on zakat, on sawm
(fasting), on hajj, and on wilayah: and we were not called for anything
as we were called to wilayah”.*[^9]

[^1]: Sa'du'd-Din, Mahmud Shabistari, (d.720/1320) author of Goshen-e
raz from which the present verse is taken.

[^2]: See A. Guillaume: Ibn Hisham's Lif e of Muhammad (1955), pp. 24 -
25.

[^3]: Mathnawi, bk. III, 1. 1641-1644 Rumi. (trans. R. E. Nicholson)

[^4]: ibid.bk. i, 1. 411-414.

[^5]: ibid.

[^6]: One of the great teachers of recent times. He was a faqih of the
rank of mujtahid, a theosophist, a, gnostic, a tabib (traditional
doctor) and a writer of excellence. In some subjects, for example, tibb
(traditional medicine), he was of the highest rank. He was, over and
above this, a pious man, a lover of Allah, the Prophet and his family -
the blessings of Allah and His peace be upon them.

[^7]: Kitabu '1-isharat wa 't-tanbihat.

[^8]: al-Kafi, vol. i, p.352.

[^9]: Wasa 'ilu 'sh-Shi\`ah, vol.I, p.4.


