a Glance At the Authors Biography
=================================

***Written by Allama Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq as-Sadr  
 The previous head of the Legal Jafari Cassation counsel***

The Islamic world today highly appreciates the personality of the late
great mujtahid[1] Sayyid Abdul Husayn Sharafuddeen, who has made himself
as an entail for the sake of the public Islamic benefit.

This beloved personality, with its greatness and fame, has filled the
sights and hearings when the life has been flourished with the useful
existence of this great man.

The time has folded this bright page but its fragrance is still
spreading with its abundant knowledge, great effects, benevolent works
and august services for the sake of Allah, the religion and the nation.

This great man strove and endeavored as possible as he could along his
life inviting the Muslims to unite, to agree with each other and to
avoid the bad sectarianism through his eloquent speeches, crowded
meetings and valuable eternal books.

The first work of him was before half a century. It was his book
Al-Fusool al-Muhimma fee Taleef al-Umma, which he had written in 1327
A.H.

He thought of the solidarity of the umma, in a time when no one thought
of it except a very few learned persons of that age. He

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mujtahid is a person accepted in Shiism as an authority on the
interpretation of Islamic law.

discussed then in his al-Fusool al-Muhimma the obstacles that acted as
stumbling blocks in the way of the unity of the umma. He uncovered those
obstacles in a clear eloquence and decisive proofs, which did not let
any way to suspicion and doubt.

Al-Fusool al-Muhimma was a book of clear scientific facts, which the
imam of the knowledge and eloquence had formed in his bright Alawite
literary style in order to unite the umma under the banner of monotheism
and solidarity. Those discussions were accurate in thinking and eloquent
in expressing that they were as something new for the Islamic studies
before that date.

Those studies, in their noble Islamic aim, are to be in every house to
guide the straying, to lead the confused and to direct people to the way
of Ahlul Bayt,[1] whom Allah has purified from uncleanness and who have
been the equivalents of the Book and the leaders of the umma to the
truth and to the straight path.

Two years after his book had been published, Sayyid Sharafuddeen
traveled to Egypt to invite for the Islamic unity through his speeches
and moving sayings. His hopes had been refreshed by the Egyptians
discussions and the Azharite murajaat,[2] which had happened between him
and the allama of Egypt Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri, the head of al-Azhar
University. Those friendly meetings had solved many problems and
questions.

They both had exchanged their passions to each other and each of them
had found in his friend abundant knowledge, magnanimity and
determination to invite for unity that had to be among the fair ulama.
As a result of those discussions and reviews was the book of al-Murajaat
by Sayyid Sharafuddeen that had spread allover the Islamic world in
several editions.

A very fine saying was said by Sayyid Sharafuddeen in the beginning of
his book al-Murajaat about these meetings. He said: How well it is when
the ulama meet with pure spirits, pleasing sayings and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahlul Bayt: the Prophets progeny (s).  
 **[2]** Al-Azhar is a centre of Islamic and Arabic learning centered on
the mosque of that name in Cairo, Egypt. Murajaat means reviews.

prophetic morals! Whenever an aalim[1] is in this neat garment, he will
be in goodness and blessing and people will be in safe and mercy. No one
of people will refrain from telling such an aalim of his real opinion or
what there is inside him.

Such was the aalim and imam of Egypt and such were our meetings, which
we thanked infinitely.

I complained to him my passion and he complained to me the same thing.
It was a lucky hour that inspired to us to think of something, by which
Allah might reunite the umma. Among what we had agreed upon was that the
two sects; the Shia and the Sunni were Muslims believing in pure Islam.
They are equal in what the Prophet (s) has brought and there is no
difference between them concerning a basic origin of the religion that
may spoil their belief in pure Islam and there is no dispute between
them except for the differences between the mujtahids concerning some
verdicts due to their different points of views in interpreting those
verdicts out of the Quran, the Sunna, the consensus and the fourth
evidence (reason) and all these differences do not lead to separation
(between the Muslims) nor to serious disputes. There is no any reason
for this dispute, whose sparks have scattered since the existence of
these two names; Sunni and Shia.

In such a high Islamic spirit our master Sayyid Sharafuddeen acted
throughout his life, whose long years did not add to him save
determination and insistence on this path.

It was for this continuous Islamic jihad that we found the different
Islamic sects had agreed on loving and appreciating him and on looking
at him with admiration and respect.

And now his name is gratified by every tongue and his eternal books are
in every house and are read by all people, who compete to have them and
to present them to anyone looking forward to the high Islamic culture.

Libraries and presses here and there make reading these books easy and
offer them to the readers in the best way that fits their

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Aalim is the singular form of ulama. Aalim is a jurisprudent or
a scholar.

importance. May Allah make the all succeed in the way of goodness and
righteousness.

Here we show in summary the biography of this great man, whose life has
been filled with glory, lessons and examples, so that to make this
bright page as lessons teaching the umma jihad, unity, sincerity,
cordiality and devoutness for the sake of the general Islamic welfare,
to which Sayyid Sharafuddeen has devoted his long life. We pray Allah to
help us in serving Him and achieving His rights.

What we mention here is a drop from an ocean of what we have known about
this man. May Allah benefit His people with this mans knowledge and pen
and make the umma walk in his guidance and act according to his sayings,
maxims and instructions.

### His birth and upbringing

Sayyid Sharafuddeen was born in Kadhimiyya[1] in 1290 A.H. from Alawite
parents. His father was the great allama Sayyid Yousuf Sharafuddeen and
his mother was Az-Zahra the daughter of ayatollah Sayyid Al-Hadi As-Sadr
the father of the great religious authority Sayyid al-Hasan as-Sadr (may
Allah have mercy upon them all).

The lineage of Sayyid Sharafuddeen[2] from his two parents reaches to
Imam Musa al-Kadhim[3] (s). Muhammad al-Awwal (the first) is the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In Iraq.  
 **[2]** He is Sayyid Sharafuddeen bin (the son of) Sayyid Yousuf bin
Sayyid Jawad bin Sayyid Issmaeel bin Muhammad the grandfather of the two
families aal (the family of) as-Sadr and aal Sharafuddeen bin Sayyid
Ibraheem (surnamed as Sharafuddeen) bin Sayyid Zaynul Aabideen bin
Sayyid Ali Nooruddeen bin Sayyid Nooruddeen Ali bin Sayyid Izzuddeen
al-Husayn bin Sayyid Muhammad bin Sayyid al-Husayn bin Sayyid Ali bin
Sayyid Muhammad bin Sayyid Tajuddeen (known as Abul Hasan) bin Sayyid
Muhammad (surnamed as Shamsuddeen) bin Sayyid Abdullah (surnamed as
Jalaluddeen) bin Sayyid Ahmad bin Sayyid Hamza bin Sayyid Sadullah bin
Sayyid Hamza bin Abul Saadat Muhammad bin Abu Abdullah (the chief of the
chiefs of the Talibites in Baghdad) bin Abul Harth Muhammad bin Abul
Hasan Ali (known as Ibnul Daylamiyya) bin Abu Tahir bin al-Husayn
al-Qatiy bin Musa Abu Sibha bin Ibraheem al-Murtadha bin Imam al-Kadhim
bin Imam as-Sadiq bin Imam al-Baqir bin Imam Zaynul Aabideen (as-Sajjad)
bin Imam Abu Abdullah al-Husayn bin Imam Ali bin Abu Talib (peace be
upon them all).  
 **[3]** He is the Seventh imam of the Shia.

son of the great mujtahid Sayyid Ibraheem (surnamed as Sharafuddeen),
who is the common grandfather of the two families; aal[1] as-Sadr and
aal Sharafuddeen. These two families were together in Baghdad known at
that time as aal al-Husayn al-Qatiy, from which was the family of the
two great scholars Sharif al-Murtadha and Sharif ar-Radhiy.

In his honorable grandfather Sayyid al-Hadis house, Sayyid Sharafuddeen
was born under the care of his grandfather. He was beloved and preferred
by his grandfather and by the all.

His uncle (my father) Sayyid Muhammad al-Husayn as-Sadr[2] was his mate
and friend. They learned together because they were near in age, aim and
thinking.

Beside them (in the school of the house) was his (Sayyid Sharafuddeens)
youngest aunt[3] participating them their learning, studying and
discussing. Sayyid Sharafuddeen often mention that with too much pride.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Aal means the family of.  
 **[2]** He was born in Kadhimiyya in 1288 A.H. and died in it in 1330
A.H.  
 **[3]** She (may Allah have mercy upon her) was an example of virtue,
intelligence, good memory, quick-witted, honesty and piety. She composed
poetry in standard and colloquial Arabic. She was interested in holding
meeting of consolation in Ashura (the tenth day of Muharram when Imam
al-Husayn had been martyred) and the anniversaries of the deaths of the
infallible imams in her house. The reciters (women) used to recite her
poetry, which she composed for those occasions, in those meetings. Women
often referred to her about the legal questions. On every event, she
quoted for the women the fatwa of her brother Imam al-Hasan as-Sadr,
whom she followed in her taqlid.  
She was buried in the private graveyard of aal as-Sadr beside her father
and relatives tombs. Her death caused wide sorrow in Baghdad and
Kadhimiyya and for Sayyid Sharafuddeen, who was in Aamila in Lebanon. He
held a meeting of consolation there and many famous personalities of the
country had attended the meeting, at the head of whom was the great
mujtahid Sheikh Abdul Husayn aal Sadiq, who had recited his wonderful
poem, in which he had mentioned the dead womans brother Imam al-Hasan
as-Sadr. He recited:  
An imam but if no No was there  
We could say he was a prophet getting wisdom from the Best of the wise

### His study

In the eighth year of his old his father Yousuf returned to Aamila[1]
after he had finished his studies and got a certificate of absolute
ijtihad[2] from the ulama of Iraq. His mother wished to stay near her
family (in Iraq) to educate her only son (Sayyid Sharafuddeen) and to
prepare for him the suitable sphere beside his grandfather and his uncle
but his father did not agree to this wish because of his great love to
him (to his son). He promised her that he himself would educate him and
then he would send him back to Iraq in the proper time. She accepted
this condition.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen kept to his father and learned from him what he
needed of sciences of the Arabic language, logic, eloquence, Fiqh and
Usool.[3] His name shone among his fellow boys and his superiority was
known while he was too young yet.

When Sayyid Sharafuddeen became seventeen years old, his father married
him to his uncles daughter (the mother of allama Sayyid Muhammad Ali[4])
and then sent him to Iraq to complete his studies.

In a few years Sayyid Sharafuddeen became very well-known in ijtihad and
in accuracy and firmness of evidencing in arguments and deliberations.
He became famous in deciding lessons of Fiqh and Usool profoundly,
quick-wittedly and quick-derivationally. He solved difficult questions
in a shortest way leading to the intended aim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In Lebanon.  
 **[2]** In Islamic law, the independent or original interpretation of
problems not precisely covered by the Quran, Hadith (traditions
concerning the Prophet's life and utterances), and scholarly consensus;
therefore the mujtahids (qualified jurists) had the right to give their
personal judgments on the problems, after trying their best in
researching, depending on firm evidences and proofs derived from the
legal sources of the Shariah.  
 **[3]** Fiqh: jurisprudence, Usool: basic principles of religion.  
 **[4]** He was one of the prominent scholars. He was born in Najaf (in
Iraq) in 1318 A.H. and died in Mountain Aamil (in Lebanon) after a long
disease. He wrote an important book called Sheikhul Abtah about the
biography of Abu Talib (Imam Alis father) and the evidences that proved
his faith and high position in Islam. It was one of the profoundest
Islamic studies showing the great intelligence of its author and his
high culture and wide knowledge. The book was published in Baghdad when
the author was still in Iraq

He wrote many researches on fiqh while he was in holy Najaf in a style
like the style of the book Madarikul Ahkam fee Sharh Sharaiul Islam,
which had been written by his uncle Sayyid Muhammad bin Ali bin
al-Husayn,[1] who was known of his great knowledge, his high ability in
deriving verdicts and discussing the problems of fiqh in a scientific
way showing his accuracy and discernment in dealing with difficult
problems and vague matters. Sayyid Sharafuddeen had learned from other
than the ulama of Iraq such as Aakhund Mulla Muhammad Kadhim
al-Khurasani, Sheikh ash-Shareea al-Isfahani, Sayyid Kadhim al-Yazdi and
the two great authorities Sayyid Issmaeel as-Sadr[2] and his uncle
Sayyid Hasan as-Sadr and their likes of the ulama and leaders of the
umma.

He asked his grandfather ayatollah Sayyid al-Hadi[3] too much questions
about everything. Sayyid Sharafuddeen said in his book Bughyatur
Raghibeen about his grandfather: as for the sciences of Arabic language,
he was unequalled especially in meanings and rhetoric. I always made use
of his knowledge about what I could not understand from the problems of
(al-Mutawwal) by at-Taftazani. He guided me to them with the light of
his eloquence and the brightness of his evidences and then those
problems became to me as bright as the sun. How often I referred to him
about the difficult matters in logic and sciences of the Arabic language
and he pleased me and droved my doubts away. He, though lofty and old,
came to argue with

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Muhammad, the author of Madarikul Ahkam, died in 1206
A.H. when he was eighty-eight years old. He was the brother of our
grandfather Sayyid Nooruddeen Ali from his father and our grandfather
was the brother of Sheikh Hasan, the author of al-Maalim, from his
mother.  
 **[2]** Sayyid Issmaeel as-Sadr died in 1338 A.H. Sayyid Hasan as-Sadr
was born in Kadhimiyya in 1272 A.H. and died in 1354 A.H. Each of them
was a general imam and authority for the Shia allover the Islamic
world.  
 **[3]** He was born in 1235 A.H. and died in 1316. He was buried in his
private graveyard in the yard of the holy shrine of Imam Kadhim (s) in
Kadhimiyya-Baghdad. His biography had been mentioned in al-Bughya in
details and also had been mentioned in Takmilatul Amal written by his
son Imam al-Hasan as-Sadr. Alam ash-Shia and Takmilatul Amal is a book
including biographies of thousands of the Shia ulama of the different
ages. This book shows the greatness of the Shia and their high position
in knowledge and the eternity of their ulama in history. It is one of
the best books of biographies.

me pleasantly, went on debating with me delightfully and forced me to
argue with him. I swear by his high morals and his sacredness that I
have never asked him about a problem or a question, unless I found the
answer ready with him without needing to refer to any book as if he has
prepared before and got ready to the answer.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen studied and researched too much and asked too much
about the difficult problems whenever he met a great jurisprudent. It
showed his care, accuracy and his love to debate and to get use.

When arguing about a subject, he did not like to dispute, to refute or
to criticize uselessly but he offered a matter in order to get benefit
and to make other get benefit without priding before the others or
trying to hurt the feelings of the others when a dispute flared-up.

He was known as abundant in knowledge and firm in evidence. He seldom
participated in an argument, unless he was the winner. This had made a
prestige for him among all people and a sanctum inside the hearts
whenever scientific arguments flared-up.

Whenever he participated in arguments, he respected the others and
listened to them carefully and he never made anyone feel that he was
proud before him due to his knowledge or position but he treated him as
an opponent to a rival even there was a great difference between them in
all criteria.

When he became twenty-three years old, he became one of the notable
mujtahids. He became well-known in the scientific milieu in a way that
seldom a jurisprudent got such a position in these few years of old.

His infinite ijtihad was one of the agreed-upon facts among all of his
fellows and those, who had been acquainted with him.

At his age there was no one in holy Najaf from the personalities of
Aamila that had equaled him in his virtue, fame and being loved and
respected by all people.

His learning was not limited in Najaf, but he often moved between Najaf,
Kadhimiyya, Samarra and Kerbala[1] and met with the ulama,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Najaf, Kadhimiyya, Samarra and Kerbala are religious centers in
Iraq.

mujtahids and brilliant students of those centers. This made his name be
mentioned in every scientific forum or any meeting of literature.

Before he left Najaf, he had sent for his brother the great allama
Sayyid Shareef in order to take care of him and to instruct him before
going back to Aamila. He loved him very much besides that he set great
hopes on him because he had found that he was brilliant and too eager to
learn more and more.

Sayyid Shareef did not disappoint his brother. He got ready seriously to
study and learn. Only a few years passed when the Sayyid began to feel
his favors and high position in his emigrant abode.

He went back to Aamila and his absolute ijtihad was confessed by the
great mujtahids.

Besides his abundant knowledge, he was a poet from the first class. His
poetry was delicate, clear, firm, accurate in meaning, eloquent in
wording and wonderful in style.

Sayyid Shareef went back to his father and brother and the all gathered
together. The scientific debates were held again between the father and
his two sons as if they were between brothers and friends. They
reactivated with their debates their old times when once they were in
their scientific place of emigration.

Dispute and disagreement about scientific matters might arise between
them but their faces always appeared smiling and their hearts were full
of indulgence. Some tears might fall down from the fathers eyes out of
happiness and the two sons wiped them and bowed to kiss the fathers
hands. The father seemed happy and contented. He began invoking Allah to
benefit the umma with them and with their knowledge.

But alas! This happiness did not last long. Sayyid Sharafuddeen lost his
father and soon after a short time he was afflicted by the loss of his
brother Sayyid Shareef. This great loss took away his patience and
endurance though he was a mountain that could not be shaken by violent
storms.

He often recited his brothers emotional poetry and tears fell down.

He became distressed with pains and greifs but he turned to Allah
thanking Him in any case and resorting to His power. Glory Be to Him.

### His return to Mountain Aamil

Sayyid Yousuf Sharafuddeen contacted with the ulama of Iraq, in whom he
had trusted, asking them about his son to know their opinion about his
knowledge and piety. They replied certifying his sons abundant
knowledge, high morals, wide information and unequalled piety that
pleased the fathers heart, delighted his eyes and comforted his
conscience.

The clear answers of the ulama which certified the absolute ijtihad of
the son made the father ask the son to come back to his country because
of the urgent need for his ijtihad, knowledge, teaching and reforming.

The son had not save to obey his fathers order although he was eager to
stay longer or in fact forever in Iraq, the country of his uncles and
cousins and the place of his birth, growing up and studying.

He returned to the country and the day of his return was a witnessed day
in the history of Aamila. He was received by the ulama, the leaders and
the public until the boundaries of the Mountain from the highway of
Sham.[1] The people of the villages of Aamila came from everywhere until
the city of Soor became overcrowded with the welcomers and the groups
that had come to receive Sayyid Sharafuddeen acclaiming with la ilaha
illallah and allahu akbar[2] as if they were like the first Muslims when
they had received the Prophet (s) when he arrived at Mecca.

*The moon shone to us from Thaniyyatul Wada*

*Thanking (Allah) became due as long as a caller would*

*invite for Allah*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nowadays Damascus. But then, Sham encompassed the present Syria,
Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine.  
 **[2]** There is no God but Allah and Allah is great.

The coming of Sayyid Sharafuddeen to Soor was a cause for people to hold
meetings and an incentive for Sayyid Sharafuddeen to visit his brothers
of the great ulama, who recalled-by the return of the Sayyid- their
previous days of learning and studying, and so they got ready again to
debate and discuss the accurate useful matters.

Those debates showed his great scientific ability, which appeared via
his correct opinions through the discussions and exchange of views.

People took a clear and live impression about the scientific personality
of Sayyid Sharafuddeen and so his name was mentioned by every tongue.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen found some freedom near his father. The father
sometimes went to Shahh00r and sometimes he was seen in Soor. The
atmosphere of the meeting was a scientific atmosphere. They discussed
the necessary matters together because people were in need to know how
to deal with such matters.

At the first when returning to his country Sayyid Sharafuddeen stopped
establishing legal verdicts (fatwa) and he just tried to end the
disputes of people peacefully regarding the position of his father, who
was so cautious in establishing verdicts although he was one of the
great mujtahids. People were obliged to go to Shaqra to ask about their
affairs the great religious authority at that time Sayyid Ali
al-Ameen,[1] who wrote to Sayyid Yousuf telling him that his son was
just and absolute mujtahid and that he had not found his equal among the
ulama of Aamila. Then people began to go to Sayyid Sharafuddeen for
their affairs regarding his high position. His father himself asked
disputers to go to his son whenever it was necessary.

In a few years his name spread everywhere and his fame filled the
country and he became a great authority in issuing fatwas and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Ali al-Ameen had gone to great mujtahid and highest
authority at that time Sayyid Muhammad Hasan ash-Shirazi to get
permission (in ijtihad) but Sayyid ash-Shirazi referred him to his
disciple, who was entrusted with such tasks, ayatollah Sayyid Hasan
as-Sadr. After some deliberations he was permitted to be as absolute
mujtahid. The permission was offered to al-Mirza, who signed it. Sayyid
al-Ameen was the only one among the ulama of Aamila, who had got
certificate, which paved the way to him to have the absolute scientific
and public leadership in Aamila after his return to it from Iraq.

answering different problems.

### His travel to Egypt

Sayyid Sharafuddeen had traveled to Egypt twice. The first time was in
1329 A.H. and the second was in 1920 AD. after issuing his fatwa of
jihad against the French and being sentenced to death by them.

In the first time he went to visit Egypt with his uncle (my father)
Sayyid Muhammad Husayn as-Sadr. My uncle had told us about this visit
when mentioning the biography of his uncle in his book Bughyatul
Raghibeen. He said: In 1329 A.H. he liked to tour. He began his tours
with visiting the Kaaba to offer the hajj and to be honored by visiting
good Medina. He was too eager to offer hajj and to visit the sacred
places. Then he refreshed the old times and humored his loving fellows,
who celebrated his being among them in an unequalled way. This made my
mother so happy and glad that she found in him the delight of her eyes
and the joy of her heart.

Then after sometime he sailed from Beirut to Egypt. I was with him to
prepare all his affairs. Our travel got great results that served the
religion and the belief of the Shia. It might be the best travel with
best results and benefits.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen had mentioned what had happened between him and the
great professor Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri, the jurisprudent of Egypt and
the sheikh of al-Azhar at that time.

As a result of those deliberations the book al-Murajaat was written by
Sayyid Sharafuddeen. It spread in seven editions throughout the Islamic
world. It was one of the best works known in the present age in the
field of the Islamic studies through its abundant knowledge, profundity
of research, clarity of intention, firmness of style and eloquence of
thinking and expressing.

The second time he resorted to Egypt after he had been sentenced to
death by French authorities, that found his existence in Lebanon
dangerous to their benefits and as an obstacle in the way of their
imperial efforts and aims.

The ulama, the men of letters and the Islamic learned groups, who had
known about him since before, welcomed him so warmly in

Egypt.

He invited for Islamic unity and mutual understanding between all the
sects. It was he, who had said his eternal word about the two sects; the
Shia and the Sunni: Politics has separated them, so let politics gather
them. Allama Sayyid Rasheed Redha had recorded this word in his magazine
(al-Manar) at that time regarding highly this Islamic spirit of Sayyid
Sharafuddeen.

### His national jihad

The jihad of Sayyid Sharafuddeen at the time of the Ottomans was limited
to religious jihad because the government in Lebanon was a Muslim
government offering religious rituals as they had been established by
Islam. But when the French came, they occupied the country, spread
corruption, annulled the Islamic laws and controlled people against
their own will where no one could be remain silent before such a status.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen began warning people of that oppression and
injustice and began holding meeting with those, whom he had trusted and
felt their support and national magnanimity inciting to what honorable
situations the nation was in need of.

No doubt that the spiritual class was the first to volunteer to
undertake this duty where it had the public and absolute religious
leadership.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen thought to begin with the ulama first, deliberating
about a consolidated plan that should be regarded by the all. He invited
them to a congress held in Wadi al-Hajeer. The ulama and leaders of the
country had attended the congress. Sayyid Sharafuddeen issued a fatwa of
announcing jihad. The all supported his fatwa and then they went back to
their towns preparing their firm plans against the French as possible as
the circumstances allowed to.

People began to come to Sayyid Sharafuddeens house signing protest notes
confirming their objection to the French rule and requesting full
independence.

The French knew about the matter. They sent Ibnul Hallaj, who was a
Christian from Soor, to break into Sayyid Sharafuddeens house, to

assassinate him and to take whatever documents asking for independence
he would find.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen knew that, so he gave all the documents he had to
his mother. Ibnul Hallaj did not find anything he looked for. When he
tried to attack Sayyid Sharafuddeen, Sayyid Sharafuddeen knocked him
down to the ground so he went back disappointed and shameful.

People heard of breaking into Sayyid Sharafuddeens house. They gathered
from all the villages of Aamila until the city of Soor became
overcrowded with them. Sayyid Sharafuddeen thanked them for their high
sentiment and national spirit. He asked them to go back to where they
had come from. They came back waiting for his obeyed order.

When the crowd separated and the French knew the intents of Sayyid
Sharafuddeen, they sent a great army toward the village of Shahhor,
where Sayyid Sharafuddeen had gone to. They burned his house there.
Before that, they had occupied his house in Soor and plundered his big
library, which had the most valuable printed and manuscript books
especially his own manuscripts that had been written by himself, which
we referred to previously.

When the army entered Shahhor, Sayyid Sharafuddeen was there but he
hastened to leave putting his aba over his turban and Allah blinded the
army not to see him. He reached a cave[1] near the river and hid in it
all the day and when he knew that the army had left he returned to
Shahhor under the darkness. He spent the night there and then he left
towards Sham disguisedly and he reached there peacefully. King Faysal
the First welcomed his guest warmly and honored him in a good way.

***  
  ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It is said that this is the same cave, in which one of Sayyid
Sharafuddeens grandfathers has hidden when fleeing from al-Hazair, the
famous tyrant, and Allah has saved him from the injustice of the
arrogant when he has set out towards Iraq resorting to his infallible
grandfathers.

### In Damascus

When Sayyid Sharafuddeen settled down in Damascus, he sent for his
family and relatives, who joined him soon. The name of Sayyid
Sharafuddeen became so famous and known until he became one of the
leaders of intellect and thinking. He made speeches in many occasions
that raised his position among all classes of people. These speeches
showed his great knowledge and apposite thinking.

His house in as-Salihiyya quarter in his country was always open for
people. People of different classes always went to him.

People of Salihiyya found in this man benevolence and kindness as if he
was their kind father, who carried out their affairs.

He found them in need for money and knowledge so he aided the poor and
taught the children in a school established in a simple house to educate
the rising generation.

What drew the attentions was the visits of the high officials to him in
his hose where no one of them had ever visited any of the ulama before
him.

Yousuf al-Adhma (the martyr of Maysaloon) often visited Sayyid
Sharafuddeen and admired him and admired his situations too much.

After the French had occupied Sham, Sayyid Sharafuddeen was obliged to
leave to Palestine and then to Egypt after he had sent his family and
relatives to Mountain Aamil spreading here and there.

### In Egypt

Sayyid Sharafuddeen arrived at Egypt disguising in ordinary Arabic
uniform with a kaffieh and a headband like the usual uniform of the
people in Iraq.

He attended one of the celebrations that was crowded with people. He was
still in his formal Arabic uniform when he ascended the minbar and said:

If I do not stop where the army of death crowds,

then let my feet not take me to the way of highness!

People began clapofping so loudly. He felt that they thought it was him,
who had said this verse. He followed up saying:

May Allah have mercy upon the poet of Ahlul Bayt, Sayyid Haydar al-Hilli
when saying:

If I do not stop where the army of death crowds,

then let my feet not take me to the way of highness!

Then clapping rose again louder than before. Admiration increased from
everywhere. He began his speech with his orotund voice and his prophetic
manners and Alawite utterance. He pleased the crowds with his high
eloquence and bright evidences. He controlled words and meanings however
he liked.

This led people to ask and to insist on asking about the great
personality of this man, whom they felt his great virtue even though he
had disguised behind a kaffieh and a headband.

Whispers and inquiries increased until one of them announced that he
(Sayyid Sharafuddeen) was the man of knowledge, patriotism and devotion.
He was the brave hero. He was the fighter, who had fought against the
imperialists. He was the son of Haydar al-Karrar.[1] He was Sayyid Abdul
Husayn Sharafuddeen.

Among the attendants of the celebration there was the famous writer Mey
Ziyada. Sayyid Sharafuddeens playing with his ring on his finger during
making his speech drew her attention. She said: I do not know whether
the ring is more obedient to his finger or eloquence is more obedient to
his tongue!

### In Palestine

Sayyid Sharafuddeen thought to be nearer to his country, so he left
Egypt at the end of 1338 A.H. to a village in Palestine called Alma
lying near the boundaries of Mountain Aamil and it was under the rule of
the British.

His house there was as his house in Soor. It was always visited by
people. It was the abode of guests and the destination of needy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It was one of Imam Ali's surnames.

people. Meetings were held in it besides deliberations on knowledge,
literature, politics and different affairs.

It was a strange chance that Sayyid Sharafuddeen was in Alma fleeing
from the rule of the French while Sayyid Muhammad as-Sadr was in Lebanon
fleeing from the rule of the British and both of these two leaders had
fought against the imperialists and had been sentenced to death.

Sayyid Muhammad as-Sadr found that the nearness of Alma to Mountain
Aamil would give him a good opportunity to meet with Sayyid Sharafuddeen
at the boundaries of Palestine. He sent his messenger and companion in
jihad Mawlood Mukhlis[1] to Sayyid Sharafuddeen informing him of Sayyid
Muhammad as-Sadrs wish to visit him but Sayyid Sharafuddeen did not
prefer this meeting for fear of the British and he put off this visit
until a suitable time when the circumstances would permit that. You will
see the details of this event later on inshallah.

### His return to his country (Mountain Aamil)

Sayyid as-Sadr chose to live in Lebanon when he had been sentenced to
death. The French knew his high position among the leaders and the
public and knew the high position of his father Sayyid al-Hasan as-Sadr
and his great religious authority, to which the Shia allover the Islamic
world referred to. All that made them respect and regard Sayyid
(Muhammad) as-Sadr so highly.

Sayyid Muhammad as-Sadr seized the opportunity and asked them (the
French) to pardon Sayyid Sharafuddeen and to let him come back to his
country, which was awaiting for him impatiently. Sayyid as-Sadr
succeeded in his task.

Here we quote the saying of Sayyid Sharafuddeen in his book Bughyatur
Raghibeen when talking about the history of that period. He said under
the title of (as-Sadr in Damascus): When he found

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mawlood Basha came to Alma wearing ordinary Arabic cloths
pretending as if he was a merchant of sheep. He went to Sayyid
Sharafuddeens house as a guest. No one of the people of the village felt
anything about this guest because they had accustomed to see guests from
different classes in the house of Sayyid Sharafuddeen.

that he could not stand longer against the power of the British, Sayyid
as-Sadr retreated from his lair with some ulama and leaders of intellect
in Iraq and began roving in the deserts with no provisions save the
provision of a faithful soul and a firm determination. Days and nights
passed with these men following after the guides of sons of deserts.

When he reached Sham, he had in Damascus a house, which became as a
house of a generous leader, who came and went high respectedly. Between
the celebration of the patriots and the welcome of the French, he kept
on his peaceful jihad and his leadership turned into an intellectual
front, via which he wrote bills and sent telegrams to the League of
Nations and to everyone having anything to do with the Iraqi case, which
had to be settled in the bets way. During that time he had visited
Mountain Aamil, which had been still looking forward to meet him and so
eager to see him. The people crowded around him getting from his
guidance and celebrating to welcome and glorify him. Wonderful
celebrations were held in Sayda (Sidon), Soor, Nabatiyya, Bint Jubayl
and Shahhor. Speechers and poets did well in praising him and showing
his virtues and aspects of his rising. We then were like him. He had
fled from Iraq and we had fled from Lebanon for the sake of Allah. He
wished to meet with us when we were in Palestine but the caution for my
self from the French and for him from the British prevented me from
meeting him. He met the French leaders, who respected him, and
interceded for me with them and so I could return to my country. The
High Commissioner General Gorou regarded him too much. We returned to
Lebanon after he had returned to Iraq.

Thus Sayyid Sharafuddeen had recorded that period, which had preceded
his return to his country with faithfulness and fidelity. It was not
strange to the high morals of that great man.

The returns of the two Sayyids to their countries were celebrated by
their peoples splendidly as if they were unequalled events.

Poets competed to show their feelings in live poetry, which was of the
best poetry of the present age.

A group of great men of literature, who had not participated in any
celebration of literature before, participated in those celebrations,

which were full of eternal Arabic literature, just because of their
sentiments agitated with sincerity and allegiance that made them
announce their sentiments before the public. That was because of the
great patriotic sacrifices of these two men that had glorified the fame
of their countries in the world of history.

Poetry in the two countries was the same in the aim and feelings towards
these two leaders. Poets often congratulated with their poems the great
religious authority Sayyid Hasan as-Sadr, who was the father of Sayyid
Muhammad as-Sadr and the uncle of Sayyid Sharafuddeen.

When Sayyid Sharafuddeen returned to his country after his jihad, he
became the absolute leader for people in their affairs of life and
religion as one of the poets had said:

Leadership came to him submissively

It did not fit save him and he did not fit save it.

### His delving in traditions

The ulama were interested in studying the prophetic traditions
throughout all the ages. They distinguished the true ones from the
fabricated ones. They knew the reliable and the unreliable narrators as
well with no difference in that between the Shia and the Sunni but the
Shia added to the traditions of the Prophet (s) the traditions narrated
from Ahlul Bayt (s) because they were from their grandfathers
traditions. In fact Ahlul Bayt (s) were as copies of their grandfather
Muhammad (s).

Sayyid Sharafuddeen was not limited to the traditions of his imams and
their narrators only but also he studied thoroughly the traditions
mentioned by our Sunni brothers. Whoever referred to any of his books or
works would find this fact clearly.

The ones from among our Sunni brothers, whom he depended on in
mentioning traditions, were too many. He mentioned them in his thesis
Thabtul Athbat fee Silsilatur Riwat.

I think that what he has written to confirm the principles of his
doctrine is nonesuch and unequalled in our present age.

The last of what he had written was his book an-Nass wel-Ijtihad, which
if you read, you will feel that when he has written it, he was at the
top of intellect and at the utmost skill of expression and description.
He delved so deeply into research and argument until he made one feel
that his ideas, expressions and patience in researching and inquiring
had not known any meaning of weakness or being aged. This is the aspect
of the exalted intellectual ulama of the progeny of Ahlul Bayt (s),
whose bodies become old whereas their minds still supply the life with
power and activity throughout the ages.

### His letters

His letters were distinguished by eloquence, honest aims and variety of
subjects such as knowledge, literature, guidance, sociology,
jurisprudence, history, sermons and maxims.

Sometimes he sent to his sons in their institute in Holy Najaf[1]
letters full of paternal and educational guidance and all what a student
of religious studies needed of sermons, maxims and instructions to light
his way and sometimes he sent letters to his followers in their
countries of emigration, in which he sent to them paternal
recommendations to unite on one aim and to be like a compact structure.
His scientific institute (Jafari College) was the seed of these liberal
emigrants.

Sometimes he sent letters to the kings, leaders, politicians and
officials. He advised them as a responsible alim who had to advise the
officials to act with justice among the people, to help wronged people
and to take lessons from the past and from the experiences of the
others.

His letter to King Husayn after losing his rule was one of the most
eloquent letters that had ever been written by the Arabs. It was a long
letter having a historical record of what Ahlul Bayt (s) had faced

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In Holy Najaf there were Sayyid Sharafuddeens sons; the great
allama Sayyid Muhammad Ali and his two brothers the genius poet Sayyid
Muhammad Redha and the famous writer of the Arabs Sayyid Sadruddeen and
their cousin allama Sayyid Nooruddeen Sharafuddeen, who was the prime
chancellor of the High Legal Jafari court of appeal in Beirut.

of ordeals and disasters.

The reply of King Husayn was full of sentiments and appreciations. He
began his letter with the following verse of one of the poets:

If the notables of my tribe were pleased with me,

The mean would still be displeased.

Many of his letters were spread here and there. Some of their copies
were collected by his cousin and secretary Sayyid Ali Sharafuddeen, who
was trusted and reliable in saving his letters and valuable works. We
hope that he may permit to publish them so that the Arabic library may
be enriched with bright Alawite literature.

### His prose

His prose was too eloquent and bright and firm in style and each part
confirmed the other that no writer whatever ability of eloquence he had
could not omit even a word of it or replace it by another one because
Sayyid Sharafuddeen thought and thought before he began to express his
thoughts. He chose the best after he thought best.

He tried a sentence by his sharp sense before he dictated it to his
clerk. His expressions always had a sense of good poetry.

His prose has a special nature that a reader will know whose prose it is
before he sees the name of the writer.

His eloquence was clear in all what he had written and his style
transmigrated into his accurate scientific meanings to make them
brighter and more glamorous. We know no one in our present time that may
be compared with him in eloquence, accuracy of meanings and clearance of
intent in all what he has written whether scientific or Islamic
subjects.

### His speeches

His speeches were distinguished by firm expression, accurate description
and bright style. He always improvised his speeches and this did not
prevent him from concentrating on his concept and showing his meanings
in high eloquence.

His speeches were too far from affectation and mannerism. So were

his books, works, lectures and daily talks.

Thus was his ordinary life. His pure soul wished goodness to all people
whether friend or enemy, near or far. His big heart was full of love and
sympathy toward everyone. He was a great example in his Alawite morals
and his pure manners throughout his eternal life.

This high Alawite soul had its great effects on his sayings and doings.
He rushed into actions to a degree that his likes were rare and rushed
into his speeches like a flood until it had been said that no one
equalled him among his likes.

Once I traveled to Lebanon in 1350 A.H. and I saw him making a speech in
the big Mosque every afternoon of the first ten days of Muharram. The
title of his speeches of every day was (Aal[1] Muhammad and who aal
Muhammad is). Every day he talked about an hour showing people the
greatness of Ahlul Bayt (s) in the Book, the Sunna and among people. He
specified the tenth day for Imam Husayn (s). The meeting was in the
morning in the house of one of the notables of Soor, who was a close
relative of Sayyid Sharafuddeen. He talked about the rising of Imam
Husayn (s), its reasons, aims and great results in supporting Islam and
confirming the religion. He ended his speech with the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (s). He mixed his speech with crying and made people cry bitterly
until they were about to lose their consciousness.

His speech lasted for three continuous hours. If that subject (aal
Muhammad) was recorded and published, it would be a great book
collecting the virtues of Ahlul Bayt (s) and their biographies that
every Muslim had to know.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen had great speeches in Beirut, Damascus, Palestine
and Egypt that could not be forgotten. The journalists had recorded many
of them at that time. Some of them were published in the newspapers.
They were available with his secretary, who had added them to the
letters we mentioned previously.

***  
  ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Aal means the family or the progeny of.

### His criticizing poetry

He was too sensitive, accurate in criticizing and understanding poetry
and he had memorized too many verses of good poetry. Whenever he talked
about a subject he evidenced his subject with chosen verses of poetry to
confirm his opinion.

Once he noticed my astonishment about his acute memory of many subjects
of literature that might slip away because of his old age and his many
public affairs. He said to me: This is from the age of youth but now I
memorize something and after some hours I forget it.

He had a good faculty to compose good poetry. He practiced this during
his youth but then he gave it up to the scientific subjects, to which he
devoted his mind and pen. He permitted no one to narrate any poetry of
his.

It was said that he had a good poem, in which he had elegized the great
allama Skeikh Musa Sharara. It affected people too much. Sayyid
Sharafuddeen was then in the first stage of his youth.

His sense in recognizing poetic meters was so sharp that he did not
mistake any of the meters even they were too near and this was due to
his acute sensitivity and not his knowing of metrics. I noticed that
from him many times.

### His generosity

He was a high example of generosity of morals and hand (giving). His
morals were morals of a generous Alawite man. He respected the old,
pitied the young, sympathized with the poor and pardoned badly doers.

As for his liberality, he was an example of that throughout his life,
which was full of great acts. This aspect was clear in him. It was
well-known by his relatives and friends since he had been a student in
Holy Najaf, the capital of knowledge and religion. The examples on this
matter were many but we mentioned here just a few of them:

1. Once he saw one of the students of the Hawza[1] of Najaf in ragged
clothes that did not fit a student of religious studies, who had to have
a special dignity. He was in the yard of the shrine of Imam Ali (s).
Sayyid Sharafuddeen put off his own cloths and offered them to that
student and came back home wrapped in his aba. He was then in the first
month of his marriage.

2. One day he entered the house and found that his family had served
good food for an occasion. He took all the food to his neighbor
preferring his neighbor to himself. Those, who were familiar with him,
said that his mother accepted that from him delightfully and always
prayed Allah to make him succeed.

3. When he was in Najaf his expenditure came to him from his father and
from his grandfather ayatollah Sayyid al-Hadi as-Sadr. It was more than
his need and so he always spent the further amount on some of his
study-mates.

4. Sheikh Imran Hadeeda an-Najafi said that once he had been in Mecca in
the year when Sayyid Sharafuddeen had gone to offer the hajj.[2] He
complained to Sayyid Sharafuddeen that he was in need of a jubba. Sayyid
Sharafuddeen pointed to his own jubba hanged on the wall and said to
him: Take it with all what it has. There were ten Ottoman liras in its
pocket.

5. Sheikh Imran said too: Sayyid Sharafuddeen had a big tent, in which
he used to held religious ceremonies. Many hajjis of ulama and high
classes used to attend his meetings. Some merchants of Muscat saw how
much money Sayyid Sharafuddeen had spent. They offered to him one
hundred Ottoman liras, which Sayyid

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hawza is a theological college, where students can specialize in
Islamic law, philosophy, theology, and logic.  
 **[2]** It was in 1340 A.H. He went by sea to offer the hajj. With him
there were a great number of people from his country Aamila. He led
those people crowded in al-Masjid al-Haram in offering the prayer. He
might be the first Shia imam who could lead the great masses of people
in Mecca in offering the prayer. This made him as a famous religious
authority, about whom people began to talk here and there. King Husayn
welcomed him warmly and they both washed the Kaaba. He met with him many
times. In honor of him, King Husayn invited famous ulama and leaders
from different countries in a big invitation.

Sharafuddeen spread at once among the needy and for the public affairs.
The next day they offered to him another hundred liras and said to him
that they were not of the legal rights and they were as a gift and they
insisted on him to spend them on his own affairs. He accepted the liras
from them and spent them on the affairs of the meeting itself, which was
as a forum that hajjis came to from everywhere.

### His dignity

All his life showed that he had a high dignity and a great personality.

I remember two events showing clearly this deep-rooted aspect in his
high Alawite soul.

1. Sayyid Sharafuddeen was in Damascus during the reign of King Faysal
the First when he had been exiled from his country and had been
sentenced to death by the French. Among those, who had been included by
this sentence was the leader of Mountain Aamil Kamil Beg al-Asad, the
sincere patriot.

Because he (the leader of Mountain Aamil) was away from his country, he
became in financial straits. He became obliged to send his messenger to
Bint Jubayl to borrow from one of the rich people three hundred Ottoman
liras in order to pay for some of his needs. The rich man sent to him
thirty liras and apologized for not sending the rest. The leader became
very angry and sent the money back with the messenger at once.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen heard of this matter. He went to visit the leader
and offered to him three hundred liras. He refused to accept them
because he knew that Sayyid Sharafuddeen was also in a financial strait.
Sayyid Sharafuddeen told him that he had enough money at that time. The
leader accepted the amount and thanked him.

When the two leaders returned to their countries and the situation
returned normal, Kamil Beg al-Asad visited Sayyid Sharafuddeen in his
house and with him there was the amount of money. He offered it to
Sayyid Sharafuddeen gratefully but Sayyid Sharafuddeen refused to take
it and told him that they were one self that could not be divided and
they had spent the money on their united selves. The

leader returned to his country after he had become certain that Sayyid
Sharafuddeen would never accept the amount.

The leader Kamil Beg al-Asad visited Sayyid Sharafuddeen again having
with him a document of entailment showing that he had entailed a
property to Sayyid Sharafuddeens elder son Sayyid Muhammad Ali
Sharafuddeen, who was then in Holy Najaf. Kamil al-Asad thought that
matter had been concluded firmly and could not be revoked because an
entail could not be changed or recanted. Sayyid Sharafuddeen smiled and
said: An entail does not become compulsive except by its conditions and
among these conditions are delivering and receiving. Neither delivering
by you nor receiving by my son have taken place and so this entailment
is not compulsive. And thus the leader came back for the second time
after he had become certain that Sayyid Sharafuddeen was serious.

The second event was that one day Sayyid Sharafuddeen with a delegation
of some ulama went to visit King Faysal the First in Damascus. When the
visit finished and he wanted to go back to Mountain Aamil, the king sent
to him with al-Jabiry an amount of five thousand Ottoman liras as a
gift. Sayyid Sharafuddeen accepted the gift gratefully and then he gave
it back to al-Jabiry to be offered to the Arabic army in Syria as a gift
from him. Then he said: I wish I was a dirham to put myself in the
bursary of the Arabic army to defend Islam and the Arabs.

Professor al-Jabiry often mentioned this event when he mentioned Sayyid
Sharafuddeen with honor and glorification. He narrated this event in
every occasion.

These two events showed Sayyid Sharafuddeens liberality and highness of
soul at the same time.

His life always gave lessons of knowledge, morals, sincerity and
generosity of manners and nature to the umma.

### His assist to people of knowledge and pen

He cared too much for the people of study and talented writers and poets
and he helped them as possible as he could. In fact many times he
burdened himself with more than he could to help them. I

remember that I have seen him, during one of my visits to Mountain
Aamil, taking much care of an occasion of the coming back of one of the
ulama of Mountain Aamil, who had finished his studies and was coming
back to his country to begin his task in teaching and guiding people. I
saw him (Sayyid Sharafuddeen) visiting a village after a village that
neighbored the village of that coming back jurisprudent.

He made speeches before the people of those villages informing them of
the high position of an alim and inciting them to take much care of him
and to prepare all suitable circumstances for him to step toward a good
future.

His encouraging authors and poets, in whom he found the ability to serve
the welfare of people, was a famous matter that all people talked about
in every occasion.

Once it happened that a famous learned poet had composed a divan, in
which he had praised Ahlul Bayt (s), and offered a copy to Sayyid
Sharafuddeen, who accepted it from him gratefully and offered to the
poet an amount of money that befitted his own position and the poets
position. When the poet wanted to pay the costs of publishing his book,
the publisher said to him that Sayyid Sharafuddeen had paid all the
amount and that the poet had not had to pay anything.

### His works

Sayyid Sharafuddeen in his works reminds us of the age of Alamul Huda
Sayyid al-Murtadha. Their aims met together and their intents were the
same. They both had the same aspect of insight, accurate thinking, firm
evidence, right opinion, getting to conclusion in a shortest way, deep
research, bright style, fidelity in quoting and avoiding all what was
far from the scientific facts.

He also looked like him in the high religious authority and he was near
to him even in age.

It was no wonder because they were from one lineage and one dynasty.
They belonged to the same grandfather Musa Abu Sibha, who was one of
Imam Musa al-Kadhims grandsons.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen followed the same way that had been followed by the
teachers son and the first teacher Sheikh al-Mufeed, his

disciple Sayyid al-Murtadha and the graduate of their school, the chief
of the sect (the Shia) Sheikh at-Toossi (may Allah have mercy upon
them).

This holy scientific trinity had offered to the religion of Islam and to
the doctrine of the Shia great services, which history had perpetuated
inside the souls of the generation throughout the ages.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen absorbed the souls of all these men inside his
Alawite soul so he was from them and they were from him and then all
these men together formed this flowing flood of knowledge that came out
via this Alawite eloquent tongue and this firm pen that had formed these
immortal books in eloquent expression, accurate depiction, deep meaning,
clear aim and wonderful style, with which this pen had acted as it liked
and as the truth and fact liked. It was this that had led people to
regard and appreciate this man during his life and to keep his mention
alive after his death.

He will remain alive and immortal in the peoples minds throughout the
ages as long as his works are recited and his books are read and
published.

Here are the titles of his immortal works:

1.         **Al-Murajaat**: it is a sign and a miracle with its high
eloquence, irrefutable evidences and honorable aim. It has been
published twice during the lifetime of Sayyid Sharafuddeen and six times
after his death. It has been translated into Persian, English and Urdu.

2.        **Al-Fusool al-Muhimma fee Taleef al-Umma**: it is a loud cry
in the way of uniting the umma. It has been published twice in Sayda
(Sidon-Lebanon) and twice in Najaf (Iraq).

3.        **The Answers of Musa Jarullah:** it is as answers on twenty
questions offered by Musa Jarullah to the ulama of the Shia in the
Islamic countries. These answers show his abundant knowledge and great
information that suffice everyone looking for the truth. It has been
published in Sayda in 1355 A.H./1936 AD. And another time in Sayda too
in 1373/1953.

4.        **Al-Kalima al-Gharra fee Tafdheel az-Zahra:** It has been
published in Sayda attached with the second edition Al-Fusool
al-Muhimma. It shows the high position of Lady Fatima az-Zahra[1] (s)
and why she has been preferred to the all women of the world with
irrefutable evidences.

5.        **Al-Majalis al-Fakhira fee Maatim al-Itra at-Tahira:** it has
been published in Sayda and Najaf. It shows the facts of the revolution
of Imam Husayn (s) and the favors of this revolution on Islam and the
Muslims. Also it has sayings quoted from great foreign personalities,
who have discovered the greatness of Islam via Imam Husayn (s) in his
eternal revolution against the arrogants and injustice.

6.        **Abu Hurayra:** It has been published in Sayda and then in
Najaf twice. It is a new gate for understanding the prophetic traditions
and interpreting them in the right way. He followed, in this way, the
virtuous Egyptian allama Abu Riyya in his nonesuch book Sheikhul
Madheera. How this umma is in need to approach to the truth and to be
away from bad fanaticism!

7.        **An-Nass wel Ijtihad** (this book): it is one of the
profoundest Islamic studies in the present age. It has been published
for the first time by the Society of Muntada an-Nashr in Najaf during
the life of the author. Sayyid Sadruddeen Sharafuddeen (the authors son)
has published the second edition in Beirut with additions added by his
father after leaving to the better world. It has been published by Darul
Nahj Publications.

8.        **Falsafatul Meethaq wel Wilaya:** published twice in Sayda.
Although it is small in size, it is great in meaning and subject.

9.        **Masail Fiqhiyya** (juristic questions): juristic subjects
with profound research and accurate concepts showing the magnanimity and
the abundant knowledge of the author. It has been published during the
authors life in Sayda and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Prophets daughter (s).

then in Egypt, Beirut and Kerbala.

10.     **Hawla ar-Ruya:** a religious thesis discussing the matter of
the impossibility of seeing Allah in a scientific way and by convincing
evidences. It has been published in Sayda in 1370 A.H.

11.      **Ila al-Majma al-Ilmi** (to the scientific convention): In
this book he refutes the fabrications ascribed to the Shia and sends
advices to the scientific convention inciting it towards agreement and
to avoid disagreement and separation. It has been published in Sayda in
1369 A.H.

12.      **Bughyatur Raghibeen** (manuscript): includes biographies of
the famous personalities of the family of as-Sadr and Sharafuddeen with
biographies of their teachers and students besides photos from those
ages. It is one of the good books that is considered to be at the head
of the books of biographies.

13.      **Thabtul Athbat fee Silsilatur Riwat:** In this book he talks
about his teachers and the great ulama of the Islamic sects in a
wonderful style. It has been published in Sayda twice.

14.     **Zaynab al-Kubra** (great Zaynab): a good thesis, in which he
has talked about the high position of Lady Zaynab (Imam Alis daughter)
(s) and her eternal situations in Islam. It was a speech he had made in
the holy shrine of Lady Zaynab (s). It had been recorded and then
published in Sayda.

### His lost works

Sayyid Sharafuddeen had written many books other than these mentioned
above, which would have enriched the Arabic library with great
knowledge, but the storm of France willed to blow them away during the
events of the twentieths. The French burned them as they had burned the
house before them. Whenever Sayyid Sharafuddeen remembered them, his
soul was about to leave his body because of regretting.

In order to immortalize those books, we mention them here:

1.       **Sharh at-Tabsira:** in jurisprudence and in three volumes
about purity, judgment, witnesses and inheritance.

2.       **Taleeqa ala al-Istis~hab:** from the theses of Sheikh
al-Ansari in Usool, one volume.

3.       A thesis about the will of a sick man (who is about to die).

4.      **Sabeel al-Mumineen:** about imamate, three volumes. Sayyid
Sharafuddeen told me once that this book was the best of what he had
ever written at that time.

5.       **An-Nusoos al-Jaleela:** about imamate too. It had forty
traditions agreed upon by all the Muslims and forty traditions from the
sources of the Shia.

6.       **Tanzeel al-Aayat al-Bahira:** about imamate, one volume
depending on one hundred verses from the Holy Quran revealed about the
imams according to the Sunni Sihah of traditions.

7.       **Tuhfatul Muhaditheen feema kharaja feehi as-Sunna minal
Mudhaafeen:** a unique book that no book had ever been written like it.

8.       **Tuhfatul Ass~hab fee Hukm Ahlil Kitab.**

9.       **Ath-Thareea fir-Radd ala al-Badeea:** Badeea of an-Nabhani.

10.    **Al-Majalis al-Fakhira:** four volumes; the first about the life
of the Prophet (s), the second about the life of Imam Ali, az-Zahra and
Imam Hasan (peace be upon them), the third one about Imam Husayn (s) and
the fourth about the other nine imams (s).

11.    **The writers of the Shia in the first age of Islam:** some of
its chapters have been published in al-Irfan Magazine.

12.    **Bughyatul Faiz fee Naql al-Janaiz:** most of it has been
published in al-Irfan Magazine. It refuted those, who thought of the
prohibition of transferring dead bodies (from a tomb to another).

13.    **Sir Bughyatus Sail an Lathm al-Anamil:** including

eighty traditions from the Sunni and the Shia.

14.    **Zakatul Akhlaq:** some of its chapters have been published in
al-Irfan Magazine.

15.    **Al-Fawaid wel Faraid**.

16.    **A comment on Sahih of al-Bukhari.**

17.    **A comment on Sahih of Muslim:** these two books show clearly
the abundant knowledge of Sayyid Sharafuddeen about the traditions and
his great ability in refuting and concluding.

18.    **Al-Asaleeb al-Badeea fee Rijhan Maatim ash-Shia:** depending on
rational and traditional evidences that prove the permissibility of
practicing the obsequies by the Shia on their occasions.

These are the books that have had different Islamic studies in
jurisprudence, traditions, biographies and distinguishing the narrators
of the prophetic traditions. The French have burned these books out of
their grudge against them and against Sayyid Sharafuddeen, who has
fought them with his heart, tongue and hand.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen regretted bitterly whenever he remembered his burnt
books and often said: The sorrow when losing a son may disappear but the
sorrow of losing the product of intellect remains and continues until
the last moment of ones life.

But Sayyid Sharafuddeen has recompensed this great loss with what he has
written of great immortal books that will remain as long as there is
life on the earth.

### His projects and heritage

When Sayyid Sharafuddeen came to live in Soor, the Shia had no even one
mosque to gather them and to offer their obligations in it. He possessed
a house and entailed it as a (Husayniyya) mosque, in which he led the
Shia in offering the prayers, taught the believers religious lessons and
principles and met with them to settle their problems.

After that he established a mosque, which was one of the stateliest

and most perfect and beautiful mosques. It had two big domes, a high
minaret and a wide yard in front of a wonderful hall connected with the
gates of the mosque. In the middle of the mosque there were two pillars
from Phoenician ruins.

Every year on the twelfth of Rabeeul Awwal[1] Sayyid Sharafuddeen
celebrated the blessed anniversary of the Prophets birth in this mosque
and people gathered from everywhere of Mountain Aamil. When Sayyid
Sharafuddeen finished his eloquent speech and scholars and poets
finished their words and poems, the crowds went towards the house of
Sayyid Sharafuddeen to have lunch, which consisted of various and
delicious kinds of food due to his Hashemite and Alawite generosity.

Every year he stressed on the brotherly connections and relationships
between the two great sects; the Shia and the Sunni.

Choosing the twelfth of Rabeeul Awwal[2] as the day of the Prophets
birth was a clear evidence showing his truthful Islamic spirit that he
always invited to.

When finishing the celebration, he used to go to the mosque of his Sunni
brothers to congratulate them and to participate them in the general Eid
of the Muslims. In their turn they thanked him for his prophetic morals
and paternal kindness towards all the people of Soor that he always did
and with no differentiating between a sect or another.

The horizon of his thinking was so wide and his magnanimity was so great
that he undertook all that might raise the society and did not object to
the religion. He expressed his opinion through his wonderful saying
Guidance does not spread except from where deviation has spread;
therefore he determined to fight deviation by himself to spread guidance
among people. He determined to walk in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It is the third month in the Islamic calendar.  
 **[2]** Some Shia ulama thought that the birth of the Prophet (s) was
on the twelfth of Rabeeul Awwal whereas most of them believed that the
birth was on the seventeenth of the same month. Sayyid Sharafuddeen
preferred the first opinion, which most of the Sunni ulama believed in.
Sayyid Sharafuddeen celebrated on this day in order to unite between the
different sects of the Muslims.

the way in order to make the Muslims safe from the barriers and
obstacles that might block their way or puzzle their true Islamic
culture. He established schools for them to learn the contemporary
culture, with which the present age has armed, the culture that had to
be mixed with the Islamic culture in order to be real Muslims as Islam
willed for them.

He thought, in order to pave this way, to do the following:

**First:** He established a school called the Jafari[1] School to
educate the new generation. It was a primary school consisting of
fifteen classrooms besides the halls and yards. It was built on the roof
of six big stores, which were to be the source of revenue to run the
affairs of the school in the future.

**Second:** He established a club and called it Imam as-Sadiq Club for
religious celebrations and cultural lectures.

**Third:** He added to the school and the club a mosque in the first
floor and made it especially for the school and its pupils to offer
their daily obligations in it. By this he ensured for the rising
generation a primary culture based on religion and science. Undoubtedly
if the base of a child was good, it would have a great effect on fixing
beliefs and religion in the future.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen (may Allah have mercy upon him) thought that those
pupils had to keep on studying in the secondary stage so that their
bases would be firm and fixed that no effects could change their beliefs
in the university. But what was the way for that whereas the matter
needed a great assistance from Allah and supports from the people, who
had to carry out this task and undertake its burdens, because the
governments would not carry out such special projects although they were
public educational projects?

Then who would do that?

No one came to his mind save his followers in the African countries of
emigrations, who were as sons for him and he was for them as a father
and a higher religious authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Referring to the Shia and the name Jafari is derived from the
Name of Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (s), the founder of the Shiite school.

He sent to them his two sons Sayyid Sadruddeen and Sayyid Jafar. Each of
these two sons was as an example of his father. Sayyid Sadruddeen made
speeches with the knowledge and eloquence of his father and Sayyid Jafar
came to them with the morals, politeness and kindness of his father. The
two seas mixed and the place of emigration took out pearls and corals
and then the edifice arose and it was the eternal Jafari College.

Sayyid Sadruddeen when making speeches, his voice reminded the people of
his fathers voice when talking with wisdom, knowledge and high
politeness. He captivated the hearts and returned to the attendants the
days of Sayyid Sharafuddeen, which had still been as a blaze on the
front of time. People thanked this blessing with their tongues and
hands. The delegation came back to Sayyid Sharafuddeen successfully with
two hundred and fifty thousand Lebanese Liras that had formed that great
edifice with its three floors and each floor with two wings, the first
of which was sixty-eight meters long and the second was forty-one meters
whereas both were ten meters wide. In the middle of the building there
was a big tower having a big clock. In front of the building there was a
yard of ten thousand square meters connected with the old school. There
was a fence that made the buildings of the college as one unit that
might be called as the town of knowledge in Soor.

This Jafari College has become one of the best schools in Lebanon in the
field of knowledge, culture and high morals. This was the hope of Sayyid
Jafar, who ran its affairs in the past and supervises it nowadays.

The Jafari College does not get fees from the poor but it gets fees just
from the rich in order to carry out its duties towards the needy and
their affairs.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen had established this school just to educate the
rising generation of the rich and the poor equally.

Because of his too much care for the needy, Sayyid Sharafuddeen had
established the Society of Charity to help the poor and to look after
them and to carry out the procedures of burying their deads and because
of this there was no beggar or needy in Soor.

### His visiting the sacred places

In 1355 A.H. Sayyid Sharafuddeen visited the sacred places in Iraq and
visited his uncles and relatives of Aal[1] as-Sadr. A group of ulama,
ministers, lords, deputies and chiefs had received him until the bridge
of Fallouja. At the head was the chief of Iraq Sayyid Muhammad Baqir
as-Sadr, who was the chief of the House of Lords at that time.

At honor of Sayyid Sharafuddeen, Sayyid Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr[2]
invited the ulama, ministers, lords, deputies and famous personalities
to three invitations.

The house was crowded with ulama, leaders and ordinary people every day.

The learned Muslim class seized the opportunity of the availability of
Sayyid Sharafuddeen in Iraq and began to put forth different religious
questions and whatever ununderstandable traditions narrated from the
infallible imams (s) and he answered every question in clear eloquence
and irrefutable evidences.

I still remember that splendid meeting, in which many questions about
conflicting traditions that each of them contradicted the other were put
before him. Sayyid as-Sadr asked Sayyid Sharafuddeen permission to
answer the questions. He began to answer the questions one after the
other explaining with clear eloquence and bright evidences and removing
the clouds of that contradiction from those traditions that drew all the
attentions towards him and made all the believers regard him highly and
admire his accuracy, quick-wittedness and firm evidencing.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen confirmed the answers of Sayyid as-Sadr showing his
admiration and high regards.

The attendants admired Sayyid as-Sadr very much for they thought

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Aal means the family of.  
 **[2]** He was born in Kadhimiyya in 1300 A.H. and died in 1375. He was
buried in the graveyard of Aal as-Sadr beside the tomb of his father
ayatollah Sayyid Hasan as-Sadr, the patriot leader, who was well-known
of his bright situations towards his country and people. He was really a
religion in politics and good politics in religion.

that he had been interested in politics totally and turned away from the
religious subjects although they knew about his excellent scientific
degree he had got when studying in Holy Najaf during his youth.

When the meeting ended, the people left and Sayyid Sharafuddeen became
alone with us, he said: If a tradition has two meanings; a primary
meaning that comes to peoples minds and a secondary meaning that dose
not come to mind except after long pondering, the second meaning will be
as the first meaning in the mind of Sayyid as-Sadr.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen visited the shrines of the infallible imams in
Kadhimiyya, Samarra, Kerbala and Najaf. People received and welcomed him
in all these sacred placed in a splendid way that befitted his high
position.

Before receiving him in Holy Najaf, the capital of knowledge and
religion, his book al-Murajaat in its first edition had reached there.
It occupied the highest position inside the selves of the ulama and
scholars of Najaf. The all were waiting for the author of al-Murajaat
impatiently.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen became the guest of his aunts son, the great
religious authority ayatollah Sheikh Muhammad Redha Aal Yaseen, whose
house was full of the people of knowledge and virtue. The scientific
talks prevailed over the meeting and Sayyid Sharafuddeen had witnessed
rounds that showed his great rank in branches and basic principles
(Usool) of religion. The ulama of Najaf said then: The good ability of
Sayyid Sharafuddeen in scientific evidencing, mentioning traditions and
accuracy of conclusions make us feel that as if he is still among us and
has not left the hawza.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen recalled his memories in Najaf and Najaf began anew
talking about his favors during his youth, about his virtues during his
old age and his lofty services throughout the ages of his life.

The members of Literature League seized the opportunity of the existence
of Sayyid Sharafuddeen in Najaf during the occasion of Eid al-Ghadeer
and held a big celebration on this occasion, to which they

invited him besides the ulama and notables of Najaf. The poets recited
poems talking about the Eid and about the virtues and favors of Sayyid
Sharafuddeen. The poem of Professor al-Habboobi was the best in its high
literature and abundant feelings among the other poems, which were full
of tender feelings and sentiments.

After visiting Iraq, Sayyid Sharafuddeen kept on his travel towards Iran
to be honored by visiting the shrine of Imam ar-Redha (s) and the shrine
of Fatima al-Massooma (s) in Qom. He was the guest oh his aunts son
ayatollah Sayyid Sadruddeen as-Sadr, who had emigrated from Iraq to Qom
in order to run the Hawza there.

Many scientific meetings were held between Sayyid Sharafuddeen and the
ulama of Qom, who regarded him highly and admired his great knowledge
and his clear Arabic eloquence.

In every city in Iran he passed by, he was received and welcomed
splendidly due to his high position among the faithful Iranian people.

### Najaf was in need of him

The great religious authority ayatollah Sayyid Abul Hasan al-Isfahani
before his death had traveled to Lebanon for recreation. He settled down
in Baalbak.[1] The ulama and scholars of Lebanon competed to visit him.
At the head was Sayyid Sharafuddeen. He was pleased very much to meet
with him. Sayyid Abul Hasan found it a good opportunity to talk with
Sayyid Sharafuddeen about the matter that Najaf was in need of him to be
there and showed the utmost readiness to arrange his affairs and the
affairs of everyone, who would be with him in a way that would befit his
rank and position. Sayyid Sharafuddeen thanked him for his generous
sentiment and apologized with convincing excuses that prevented him from
leaving his country.

Those, who were close to ayatollah Abul Hasan, said that he often said
in the last week of his life: Najaf is in need of Sayyid Sharafuddeen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A city in Lebanon.

We understand from his previous request and mentioning the name of
Sayyid Sharafuddeen in the last days of his life that Sayyid
Sharafuddeen have had all what a religious authority has to have of
great knowledge, firm evidences and wide comprehension of everything
about traditions, narrators and Islamic jurisprudence that may not be
easy except to very few of the ulama especially that Sayyid Sharafuddeen
has clear eloquence, fluency in his speeches and a great ability of
composition, which are necessary for a religious authority in the
present age.

It was no wonder that Sayyid Sharafuddeen got all this regard from
Sayyid Abul Hasan because a virtue would not be known except by its
people and who was worthier than Sayyid Abul Hasan of virtues and of
appreciating them?

### His death and burial

The man of that big heart that beat with life and was full of knowledge
and faith became silent after passing eighty-seven years of old, which
had been spent in continuous jihad for the sake of Allah in spreading
the pure sharia, making the umma familiar with the two weighty things;
the Book of Allah and pure progeny of the Prophet (s), guiding people
towards their purity and welfare and leading them on the right path as
Allah and His Messenger had ordered.

He wanted, some years before his death, to go back to Iraq, the place of
his birth, of his growing up, of his study and the nation of his family
and relatives to renew the age he had spent near them and to recall
those happy days he had lived with them and to be, at the last moment of
his life, beside the sanctum of his grandfather, the guardian (Imam Ali
(s)), whom he hoped to be buried in his pure soil and to be joined with
him in his sanctum!

Became silent that voice, which sounded with the truth and spread the
mention of Allah. Calmed down those eyes, which stayed up to achieve
justice and to look after the general Islamic welfare.

Went out that burning torch inside that genius mind, which kept on
thinking of anything that might bring goodness to the umma.

Sloped those hands that stood against the untruth and stretched with

goodness to fulfill the needs of the needy. Stopped that continuous
movement of that pure body, which was a source of goodness and mercy all
the time.

He left to the better world on Monday, the thirtieth of December, 1975
AD. / the eighth of Jumada ath-Thaniyya,[1] 1377 A.H.

When the news of his death was announced, the people of the villages of
Mountain Aamil gathered in Beirut to farewell their great religious
leader. Beirut, with all its ulama, scholars, chiefs, politicians and
the rest of people, went out. At the head were the ulama and the rulers.

The honored coffin was put in a special airplane to Baghdad. The crowds
of the Muslims were waiting for him. Baghdad and Kadhimiyya escorted him
and then we went on towards Kerbala. Every village on our way took its
share of escorting.

Kerbala did the best in carrying funeral rites in a way that befitted
the high position of the deceased man. When the coffin reached Najaf
before the sunset, Najaf went out with all its people; ulama, scholars,
poets, notables and all classes of people. It was a memorable day that
Najaf had never seen its like before. All that was because of the high
position of the man inside the selves of all the classes of people due
to his valuable works, his nonesuch scientific fame and his great favors
on Islam and the Muslims.

The funerals were distinguished with quality and quantity in comparison
with the other deceased ulama, who had been escorted before this man,
although among them were some ulama, who had resided in Najaf and had
the general authority of taqlid.[2]

He was buried in one of the rooms in the holy shrine of Imam Ali (s) on
Wednesday, the first of January, 1958/ the tenth of Jumada ath-Thaniyya,
1377 A.H. with crying and moaning.

The crowds of people cried and sighed bitterly over the great loss of
this great man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The sixth months in the Islamic calendar.  
 **[2]** Taqlid: accepting and following the opinions of a mujtahid or a
religious authority concerning the religious affairs.

Najaf expressed its deep sorrow on the fortieth day of the great loss by
holding two solemn celebrations by the two societies; Muntada an-Nashr
and the Literature League. The poets and scholars praised the deceased
man and his valuable works. In the first of their speeches they
mentioned the sayings of the great ulama and religious authorities about
the deceased man. Obsequies were held in Iraq, Lebanon and the rest of
the Islamic countries continuously until the fortieth day after his
death.

We pray Allah to have mercy upon this great deceased man and make the
umma take advantage of his works and make us patient before this great
loss. (The contentment of Allah is our contentment; Ahlul Bayt. We
became patient before His affliction and He will reward us with the
reward of the patient).

 

***7-1-1964 AD. / 1383 A.H.  
 Kadhimiyya-Baghdad  
 Muhammad Sadiq as-Sadr*<span style="font-size: 13pt"></span>**
