(Part 5)
========

#### Part 5

his companions: Do not answer him![1] Abu Sufyan said: O Umar, I adjure
you by Allah, have we killed Muhammad? Umar said: By Allah, no, you have
not. He is hearing your speech.[2]

Umar preferred his opinion in answering Abu Sufyan to the order of the
Prophet (s) when forbidding them from answering Abu Sufyan.

52. Spying although prohibited
------------------------------

Allah has said: **O you, who believe, avoid most of suspicion, for
surely suspicion in some cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of
you backbite others. Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead
brother? But you abhor it; and be careful of (your duty to) Allah,
surely Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy), Merciful.** Qur'an, 49:12

The Prophet (s) has said: Avoid suspicion! Suspicion is the falsest
speech. Do not spy on each other, do not hate each other, do not envy
each other and do not desist each other. Be brothers

But Umar, during his rule, found that spying brought benefits and
goodness to the state. He patrolled at night and spied at day. One
night, while he was patrolling in Medina, he heard a man singing in his
house. He climbed the wall of the mans house. He found that there was a
woman with him and a bottle of wine. He said to the man: O enemy of
Allah, have you thought that Allah protects you while you are disobeying
Him? The man said: O Ameerul Momineen, do not hasten! If I have
committed one sin, you have committed three sins; Allah has said: **(do
not spy)** but you have spied, and He has said: **(and go into the
houses by their doors)** but you have climbed the wall and He has said:
**(when you enter houses, greet each other)** but you have not greeted
us. Umar said: Would you do me good if I forgive you? The man said: Yes,
I would. Then Umar

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibn Jareers Tareekh, Ibnul Atheers Tareekh, Ibn Sads Tabaqat,
al-Halabis Seera, ad-Dahlanis Seera, al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh by Abul Fida
and all the books of history that have recorded the events of the battle
of Uhud.  
 **[2]** As if the Prophet (s) was not safe from Abu Sufyan and his men
to attack him if they knew that he was still alive; therefore he ordered
his companions not to answer Abu Sufyan and as if Umar, when answering
Abu Sufyan, was not afraid and did not think that the caution of the
Prophet (s) was justifiable!

forgave him and went out.[1]

As-Sadiy said: One night Umar went out with Abdullah bin Massood. He saw
a light of fire. He (with ibn Massood) followed the light until he
entered the house. There was a lamp inside the house. He came in and
left Abdullah bin Massood in the courtyard. There was an old man
drinking wine and there was a songstress singing for him. Suddenly Umar
attacked the old man saying to him: I have never seen a scene uglier
that a scene of an old man waiting for his end! The old man raised his
head and said: In fact, your doing is uglier than what you have seen
from me; you have spied whereas Allah has prohibited spying and you have
entered the house with no permission. Umar said: You are right. Then he
went out biting his garment, crying and saying: May Umars mother lose
him!The old man avoided to attend the meetings of Umar for some time.
One day while Umar was sitting in his meeting, the old man came hiding
himself not to be seen by Umar and he sat at the end of the meeting.
Umar saw him and asked some of his companions to bring him. The old man
thought that Umar would scold him. Umar said to him: Come near to me!
Umar still asked him to be nearer until he seated him beside him. Umar
said to the man: Bring your ear near to me! He said to him: I swear by
Him, Who has sent Muhammad with the truth, that I have not told any one
of people about what I have seen from you even ibn Massood, who was with
me[2]

Ash-Shibi said: Once Umar missed one of his companions. He said to ibn
Ouff: Let us go to the house of so-and-so. They went there and found
that the door of his house was open while he was sitting and his wife
was pouring something into a cup and giving it to him to drink. Umar
said to Ibn Ouff: It is this thing that has kept him away from us! Ibn
Ouff said: How do you know what there is in the cup? Umar said: Do you
fear that this may be spying? Ibn Ouff said: Yes, it is spying. Umar
said: Then how do we repent of this? Ibn Ouff said: Do not make him know
that you have seen what he has

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Makarim al-Akhlaq by al-Kharaity, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p.167,
Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.96, Ihyaul Uloom by al-Ghazali, p.137.  
 **[2]** Al-Qat wes-Sariqa (cut and theft) by Abu al-Sheikh, Kanzol
Ummal, vol.2 p. 141.

done!!...[1]

Al-Musawwir bin Makhrama narrated from Abdurrahman bin Ouff that one
night he (Abdurrahman) and Umar were patrolling in Medina. While they
were walking, a lamp was lit in one of the houses. They went towards the
house and found the door closed. There were some people inside the house
making loud noises. Umar took Abdurrahmans hand and said to him: This is
the house of Rabeea bin Umayya. They are drinking wine now. What do you
think to do? Abdurrahman said: I think that we have done what Allah has
prohibited; we have spied. Then Umar went away and left them alone.[2]

Tawoos said: One night Umar went out patrolling. He passed by a house,
in which there were some people drinking wine. He shouted at them (from
outside): Are you committing sins? Some of them said to him: Allah has
forbidden you from doing this! He went back and left them alone.[3]

Abu Qulaba said: Umar narrated that Abu Mihjan ath-Thaqafi drank wine in
his house with his friends. One day Umar broke into Abu Mihjans house.
Abu Mihjan said to him: O Ameerul Momineen, this is not permissible to
you. Allah has forbidden you from spying. Umar asked Zayd bin Thabit and
Abdurrahman bin al-Arqam and they said to him: He is right, O Ameerul
Momineen. Umar went out and let him alone.[4]

He, who followed the traditions about Umars spying, will find clearly
that spying has been a part of his policy. As if he thought that legal
penalties would be annulled when the ruler committed mistakes; therefore
he did not punish any one of those sinful people. Yet he did not harm
any one of them. We do not know how he was satisfied to finish his
spying in this way without any effect on those

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 tradition no.3694.  
 **[2]** Narrated by Abdurrazaq, Abd bin Hameed and al-Kharaity in
Makarim al-Akhlaq, Kanzol Ummal, vol.2 tradition no.3693, Mustadrak of
al-Hakim, vol.4 p.377, Talkhees of ath-Thahabi.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p.141.  
 **[4]** Ibid.

sins! He encouraged the sinners to commit more sins when they saw this
leniency of their imam!!

53. Legislating a limit to womens dowries
-----------------------------------------

The dowry of a woman must be from among what a Muslim man has possessed;
such as material properties, religious things or some kinds of services.
Deciding that belongs to the spouses themselves whether it is much or
little on condition that it has not to be too little that it may have no
value such as a grain of wheat for example. It is desirable that it has
not to be more than the expense of a year which is about five hundred
dirhams.[1]

Once Umar decided to prohibit the excessiveness in womens dowries in
order to make marriages easy to keep the youths away from adultery and
sins. One day he made a speech on this matter. He said through his
speech: If I am informed that a dowry of a woman exceeds the dowries of
the wives of the messenger of Allah, I will get that back from her. A
woman got up and said to him: Allah has not left that to you to decide
on it. Allah has said: **And if you wish to have (one) wife in place of
another and you have given one of them a heap of gold, then take not
from it anything; would you take it by slandering (her) and (doing her)
manifest wrong. And how can you take it when one of you has already gone
in to the other and they have made with you a firm covenant.** Qur'an,
4:20-21 He changed his mind and gave up his decision saying: Do you not
wonder at an imam, who has mistaken, and at a woman, who has been right?
She vied with your imam and defeated him.[2]

In another tradition Umar said: Every one is more aware than Umar. You
hear me saying like this and you do not deny that of me until a woman,
who is not more aware than your women, refute me.[3]

In another tradition it has been said: A woman got up and said: O ibn
al-Khattab, Allah gives us and you deprive us of (our rights) and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** According to the value of that time.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.96 and mentioned by other
historians and scholars of Hadith.  
 **[3]** Az-Zamakhshari in his Kashshaf when interpreting the mentioned
verse.

she recited the mentioned above verse. Umar said: All the people are
more aware than Umar. Then he gave up his decision.[1]

The defenders of Umar justified this event as evidence on his fairness
and confession! And how many such cases he had with men and women
showing his fairness and confession whenever he admired a saying or a
doing!

As it has happened to him with the Prophet (s) when he had been asked
about some things he disliked. Al-Bukhari mentioned that Abu Musa
al-Ashary had said: One day the Prophet (s) had been asked about some
things he disliked for they did not concern reasonable people nor were
they among the matters that the prophets had been sent to explain. When
his companions asked him many such questions, he became angry for they
insisted on silly things which had no use to them. Then he said to them:
Ask me as if he found that they became ashamed or shy because they made
him angry and so he wanted to ease them and to show them his
mercifulness by saying to them ask me. Abdullah bin Huthafa asked him: O
messenger of Allah, who is my father? The Prophet (s) replied: Your
father is Huthafa. Another one, who was Sad bin Salim, asked him: O
messenger of Allah, who is my father? The Prophet (s) said: Your father
is Salim the mawla of Abu Shayba. They asked the Prophet (s) such
questions because people had suspected their lineage. When Umar saw that
the Prophet (s) was very angry, he said: O messenger of Allah, we repent
of whatever makes you angry.

Umar became pleased when the Prophet (s) approved that Abdullah was the
son of Huthafa and Sad was the son of Salim as their mothers had
claimed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tafseer al-Kabeer by ar-Razi, vol.3 p.175. Ar-Razi had a
stumble in his speech when talking about this verse. He said: I think
that the verse has no evidence showing that exceeding in dowries is
permissibleto the last of his crooked speech, in which he wanted to
refute the woman in order to defend Umar but he complicated the
situation unknowingly. Refer to Tareekh Umar bin al-Khattab by Abul
Faraj al-Jawzy, p.150. it has a tradition narrated by Abdullah bin Musab
and another one narrated by ibn al-Ajda showing the speech of Umar, in
which he has decided to prohibit the exceeding dowries and the
refutation of the woman which has led Umar to give up his decision after
confessing that the woman was right.

Al-Bukhari also mentioned in his Sahih that Abdullah bin Huthafa had
asked the Prophet (s) who his father was and the Prophet (s) had said to
him that his father was Huthafa.

Muslim mentioned in his Sahih: Abdullah bin Huthafa was ascribed to
other than his real father. When his mother heard about his question to
the Prophet (s) about his real father, she said to him: I have never
seen a son more undutiful than you! Have you believed that your mother
has committed what the women of the pre-Islamic age had been used to
commit so that you expose her before people?

When Umar heard the answer of the Prophet (s) to Abdullah, he knelt down
before the Prophet (s) and said admiring the answer of the Prophet (s)
that approved the claim of Abdullahs mother: We have been satisfied with
Allah as god, Islam as a religion and Muhammad as a prophet.[1] Umar
said that joyfully because the Prophet (s) had covered many mothers, who
had committed adultery in the pre-Islamic time; nevertheless believing
in Islam cancelled (forgave) the sins committed before.

54. Changing legal penalties
----------------------------

Once the slaves of al-Hatib bin Baltaa had participated in stealing a
camel of a man from the tribe of Merina. They were brought before Umar
and they confessed that they had done that. Umar ordered Katheer bin
as-Salt to cut their hands. When they were taken to be punished, Umar
brought them back and sent for their masters son Abdurrahman bin Hatib
and said to him: I swear by Allah, unless you have employed them and
left them hungry, I would have cut their hands. By Allah, since I have
not done so, I will impose a fine on you that will make you suffer
much[2]

Umar, when not punishing the stealing slaves, might think that they were
obliged, because of hunger, to steal the camel to satisfy their hunger
and so they might be among those whom the Quranic verse had talked
about: **But he who is driven by necessity, neither craving**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bukhari's Sahih, vol. 1 p.19.  
 **[2]** Alam al-Muwaqqieen, p.32, Fajr al-Islam by Ahmad Ameen, p.287,
al-Isaba by ibn Hajar, vol.2 biography of Abdurrahman bin Hatib.

**nor transgressing, it is no sin for him.** Qur'an, 2:173

But they confessed the theft and they did not claim that necessity had
driven them to do that. And if they had claimed that, then the ruler
would have to ask them for what must prove their claim, but Umar did not
do save pitying them and being severe to Abdurrahman bin Hatib. We do
not know how Umar has known that the masters left their slaves hungry
that they were obliged to steal!

55. Taking non-legislated ransom
--------------------------------

Once some people of Yemen came to Abu Kharash al-Huthali, the companion
and the poet, as guests during the season of hajj. He took his water
skin and went in the night to bring them some water. On his way back, he
was stung by a snake before reaching his guests. He hastened to them,
gave them the water and said to them: Cook your sheep and eat it! He did
not tell them what had happened to him. When the morning came, Abu
Khurash was dead. They buried him before they left.

When the news reached Umar, he became very angry and said: Had it not
been for a sunna (rite), I would have ordered that no Yemenite would be
received at all and I would have written to all the countries about
that. Then he wrote to his emir on Yemen ordering him to arrest the men,
who had been the guests of Abu Khurash al-Huthali, to take ransom from
them for Abu Khurash and to punish them with severe punishment for their
doing!!![1]

56. Penalty of adultery
-----------------------

Ibn Sad mentioned in his Tabaqat[2] that once Burayd had come to Umar
and scattered his quiver. A piece of paper appeared from the quiver.
Umar took it and read it. It had some verses of poetry.

He said to his companions: Send for Jada from the tribe of Sulaym. When
Jada came, Umar whipped him one hundred whips after tying him and he
forbade him from visiting any woman, whose husband was absent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isteeab by ibn Abdul Birr, Hayat al-Hauwan by ad-Dimyari,
chap. of snake.  
 **[2]** Vol.3 p.205.

There was no evidence on punishing this man due to these verses of
poetry, which no one knew who had composed. They just instigated the
caliph against Juda by claiming that he had committed sins against young
girls from the tribes of Sad bin Bakr, Sulaym, Juhayna and Ghifar by
tying them and trying to violate their honors. This was all what had
been ascribed to Juda in these verses of poetry. Even if it was proved
to be true, it would not be enough to punish the man with that legal
penalty. Yes, it required him to be scolded and censured. What the
caliph did might be of this kind but what difference was between what he
had done with this man and what he had done with al-Mugheera bin Shuba
that you will see soon inshallah.

57. Canceling the penalty of al-Mugheera
----------------------------------------

Al-Mugheera bin Shuba had committed adultery with some married women
such as Umm Jameel bint Amr from the tribe of Qayss and this event was
one of the most famous events in the history of the Arabs. It was in the
seventeenth year of hijra. All the historians, who had recorded the
events of that year, had mentioned this event in their books. Abu
Bakra,[1] who was one of pious companions of the Prophet (s) and one of
the keepers of the prophetic traditions, Nafi bin al-Harith, who was
also one of the Prophets companions, and Shibl bin Mabad had witnessed
against al-Mugheera in this case. The witness of these three men was
clear and certain that they had seen al-Mugheera doing his sin with
their eyes but when the fourth witness, Ziyad bin Sumayya, came to
witness, the caliph made him understand that he intended not to disgrace
al-Mugheera and then he asked him about what he had seen. He (the fourth
witness) said: I heard fast breathing and I saw him sleeping on her
abdomen. Umar asked him: Did you see him inserting his () into her ()
and taking it out like a stick in a kohl jar? He said: No, but I saw him
lifting her legs and I saw his testicles swaying between her thighs. I
saw strong motivation and heard loud breathing. Umar asked: Did you see
him inserting his () and taking it out like a stick in a kohl jar? He
said: No, I did not. Umar said: Allah is great! O

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** not Abu Bakr.

Mugheera, get up and beat them! He executed legal penalties against the
three witnesses.

Here are the details of this event as Judge Ahmad ibn Khillikan has
mentioned in his book Wafiyyat al-Ayan. He said: As for the matter of
al-Mugheera bin Shuba and the witness against himUmar had appointed
al-Mugheera bin Shuba as the emir of Basra. He often left Darul Imara
(the rulers office) at midday and Abu Bakra often met him and asked him:
Where is the emir going?! He said: To do something. Abu Bakra said: The
emir is visited and he does not visit! He often went to a woman called
Umm Jameel bint Amr, whose husband was al-Hajjaj bin Utayk bin al-Harith
bin Wahab al-Jashmiwhile Abu Bakra and his brothers Nafi, Ziyad and
Shibl bin Mabad, the sons of Symayya, were in their room and Umm Jameel
bint Amr was in the opposite room, the wind opened the door of Umm
Jameels room and they saw al-Mugheera and the woman in a state of making
love. Abu Bakra said: It is an ordeal that you are afflicted with! Look!
They looked until they became certain of what al-Mugheera and the woman
had done. Abu Bakra sat out waiting until al-Mugheera came out. He said
to him: Since you do so, then you have to retire from the emirate!
Al-Mugheera went to lead the people in offering Dhuhr Prayer and Abu
Bakra went there too. Abu Bakra said to al-Mugheera: By Allah, you do
not lead us in the prayer after you have done your sin! The people said:
Let him lead us in the prayer for he is the emir and you write to the
caliph Umar about that. They wrote to Umar and he ordered them all;
al-Mugheera and the witnesses to come to him. When they came, Umar sat
in his meeting and sent for the witnesses and al-Mugheera. Abu Bakra
advanced and Umar asked him: Did you see him between her thighs? Abu
Bakra said: Yes, by Allah, as if I saw clefts of smallpox on her thighs!
Al-Mugheera said to him: You were very accurate in your look! Abu Bakra
said: Yes, I wanted to be certain of what Allah would disgrace you with.
Umar said to Abu Bakra: No, until you witness that you have seen him
inserting his () in her () like a stick in a kohl jar. Abu Bakra said:
Yes, I witness of that. Umar said: O Mugheera, a quarter of you has
gone! Then Umar called for Nafi and asked him: What do you witness of?
He said: I witness of what Abu Bakra has witnessed of. Umar said: No,
until you

witness that you have seen him doing with her as a stick in a kohl jar.
He said: Yes, until he reached the top. Umar (may Allah be pleased with
him) said to al-Mugheera: Your half has gone! Then Umar called for the
third witness and asked him: What do you witness of? He said: Like the
witness of my two companions. Umar said to al-Mugheera: Three thirds of
you have gone! Then Umar wrote to Ziyad who was absent. When Ziyad came,
Umar held his meeting in the mosque. The heads of the Muhajireen and the
Ansar attended the meeting. When Umar saw Ziyad coming, he said: Come to
me! I see a man that Allah will not disgrace a man of the Muhajireen via
his tongue! Then Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) raised his head
towards him and said: What do you have with you, O you droppings of
bustards? It was said that al-Mugheera had got up to Ziyad and Ziyad
said: No cache for a perfume after a bride! Al-Mugheera said to him: O
Ziyad, remember Allah and remember the Day of Resurrection. Allah, His
Book, His messenger and Ameerul Momineen have spared my blood except if
you say what you have not seen. Let not a bad scene lead you to say what
you have not seen. By Allah, if you were between my abdomen and her
abdomen, you could not see my () going into her (). Ziyads eyes began
shedding tears and his face became reddish. He said: O Ameerul Momineen,
I have not seen exactly what the others have seen but I saw a state of
making love and I heard fast breathing and I saw him sleeping on her
abdomen. Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) asked him: Did you see him
inserting it as a stick in a kohl jar? He said: No, I did not. It was
said that Ziyad had said: I saw him lifting her legs and saw his
testicles swaying between her thighs then I saw strong motivation and I
heard loud breathing. Umar said: Did you see him inserting it like a
stick in a kohl jar? He said: No. Umar said: Allah is great! O Mugheera,
get up and beat them! Al-Mugheera whipped Abu Bakra eighty whips and
then he whipped the rest. Umar admired the saying of Ziyad and so he
cancelled the legal penalty of al-Mugheera. Abu Bakra said after he had
been whipped: I wtness that al-Mugheera has done so and so. Umar
intended to whip him again but Ali bin Abu Talib said to him: If you
whip him, then you have to stone your friend (al-Mugheera). Umar left
Abu Bakra alone and asked him to repent. Abu Bakra said: You ask me to
repent just to accept my witness. Umar said: Yes.

 Abu Bakra said: I will never witness between two persons as long as I
live. When the witnesses were whipped, al-Mugheera said: Praise be to
Allah Who has disgraced you. Umar said: Allah disgraced a place, in
which they saw you.

Umar bin Shayba mentioned in his book Akhbar al-Basra (the news of
Basra) that when Abu Bakra had been whipped, his mother slaughtered a
sheep and put its skin on Abu Bakras back because, as it was said, that
he had been whipped too severely. Abdurrahman bin Abu Bakra said that
his father, Abu Bakra, had taken an oath that he would never talk with
Ziyad as long as he lived. When Abu Bakra was about to die, he
recommended that no one would offer the prayer (after his death) for him
except Abu Barza al-Aslami, whom the Prophet (s) had associated as a
brother with Abu Bakra. When Ziyad heard of that, he left to Kuffa. As
for al-Mugheera bin Shuba, he was grateful to Ziyad and he did not
forget his favor.

Once Umm Jameel came to Umar bin al-Khattab during the season of hajj
while al-Mugheera was present. Umar asked al-Mugheera: O Mugheera, do
you know this woman? He said: Yes, she is Umm Kulthoom bint Ali. Umar
said to him: Do you confuse me? By Allah, I do not think that Abu Bakra
has told a lie when he witnessed against you and I found that you were
afraid that I would stone you with stones from the heaven!

Sheikh Abu Isshaq ash-Shirazi said in his book al-Muhaththib: and three
men witnessed against al-Mugheera; Abu Bakra, Nafi and Shibl bin
MabadZiyad said: I saw buttocks rising and two legs as if they were two
ears of a donkey and I heard loud breathing but I did know what there
was behind them. And then Umar whipped the three witnesses and he did
not punish al-Mugheera. The jurisprudents discussed the saying of Ali
(may Allah be pleased with him) to Umar if you whip him, you have to
stone your friend. Abu Nasr bin as-Sabbagh said: He wanted to say to
Umar that if this saying was as another witness then the number of
witnesses would be completed (four witnesses) otherwise you have whipped
him for his first witness) and Allah is more aware!

This is the end of Ibn Khillikans saying about this tragedy and its
concerns. Refer to Wafiyyat al-Ayan, vol.2, biography of Yazeed bin

Ziyad al-Himyari.

Al-Hakim mentioned this event in his Mustadrak, vol.3 p.448, biography
of al-Mugheera. Ath-Thahabi mentioned it in his Talkhees al-Mustadrak
and all the historians, who have mentioned the biographies of
al-Mugheera, Abu Bakra, Nafi and Shibl bin Mabad and the historians, who
have recorded the events of the seventeenth year of hijra, mentioned the
details of this event.

58. His severity to Jabala bin al-Abham
---------------------------------------

Once a delegation of five hundred knights from Akk and Jafna came on
their trotting Arab horses wearing garments brocaded with gold and
silver and at the head of them was Jabala, who had put on his head his
crown on which was the earring of his grandmother Maria. They all became
Muslims and the Muslims became too delighted and pleased with them and
with their followers who would join them. Jabala and his companions
attended the season of hajj with the caliph since their first year of
being Muslims. While Jabala was circumambulating the Kaaba, a man from
Fazara trod on his loincloth and untied it. Jabala slapped the man. The
man resorted to Umar. Umar ordered Jabala either to let the man slap him
or to content the man. Umar was too strict in his order until Jabala
became desperate. When the night came, Jabala and his companions left
towards Constantinople and they all became Christians unwillingly. They
found favor with Hercules and got honor and magnificence above what they
wished.[1] In spite of all that, Jabala often cried regretting what he
had missed of the religion of Islam. He had composed the following
verses of poetry:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">The honorables became Christians because
of a slap,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">There would be no harm if you were a
little patient!</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">I was encircled with obstinacy and
zeal,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">And I sold the sound eye for
one-eyedness.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Would that my mother had not begotten
me!</span>*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Iqd al-Fareed by ibn Abd Rabbih al-Andalusi, vol.1 p.187,
Arabic Lessons for secondary schools, vol.1 p.62 edition of al-Kashshaf
Press, Beirut, quoted from al-Aghani by Abul Faraj al-Isfahani.

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Would that I had gone back to the people
that Umar said!</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Would that I grazed cattle in a
desert!</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Or I was a captive in Rabeea or
Mudhar!</span>*

I said: would that the caliph had not driven this Arab emir and his
people away even if he would have tried every means to content that man
of Fazara whether the emir would know or would not know! It was too far
that Umar would do such a thing!

Umar wanted to break the pride of Jabala from the first occasion! And
this was his wont with every noble and honorable one! This is well known
by the men of understanding who have studied his conducts.

You have seen above his severity to Khalid whereas he was from his
relatives.

How difference there was between his two days; his day with his friend
al-Mugheera when he cancelled his due punishment for adultery and his
day with Khalid when he insisted on stoning him and if Abu Bakr was not
there Khalid would have been stoned. The strength and vanity of Khalid
led Umar to be too severe to him. The same was with Jabala; the pride
and nobility of him led Umar to be very severe to him too unlike
al-Mugheera, who was more obedient to Umar than his shadow and who was
meaner than his shoes in spite of his cunning and tricking; therefore
Umar kept him despite his lewdness.

The policy of Umar required terrifying the citizens by being severe to
the honorable and proud people like Jabala and Khalid. He might have
terrified the citizens by punishing his close relatives as he had done
to his son Abu Shahma and Umm Farwa, Abu Bakrs sister and he might have
done that with those who had no benefit to him whether in politics or
other things as he had done to Jada as-Salami, Dhabee at-Tameemi, Nasr
bin Hajjaj, his cousin Abu Thuayb, the poor Abu Hurayra and their likes.

He kept to austerity in his food, abode and sumpter. He was patient
towards desires and he refrained from pleasures. He was satisfied with
subsistence. He spread the booties among the umma openhandedly without
preferring himself or his family to the others.

He enriched the treasury. He was too strict in punishing his
officialsand many things like that which helped him to drive the umma
with his stick, to shut up the tongues and to bridle the mouths. No one
of his officials had escaped his punishment save Moawiya despite the
differences between them. He had never punished Moawiya nor had he
blamed him for anything. He had left him free doing whatever he liked.
He said to him: I neither order you nor I forbid you. He, who knew Umar,
would know that he had preferred Moawiya for something in his mind!

59. His severity to Abu Hurayra
-------------------------------

Umar had appointed Abu Hurayra as the wali of Bahrain in the year
twenty-one of hijra. In the year twenty-three he deposed him and
appointed Othman bin Abul Aass ath-Thaqafi instead of him. The caliph
not only deposed Abu Hurayra but also he saved from him ten thousand
dinars for the treasury, alleging that he had stolen them, which they
were of the Muslims. It was a famous case. Ibn Abd Rabbih al-Maliki
mentioned (in his book al-Iqd al-Fareed, in the first pages of vol. 1)
that the caliph Umar had sent for Abu Hurayra and said to him: You know
well that I had appointed you as the wali of Bahrain and you were
barefooted and now it came to my ears that you have bought horses for
one thousand and six hundred dinars. Abu Hurayra said: We had some
horses that bore and gifts that cumulated. The caliph said: I counted
your livelihood and income and I found that it is over than yours and
you have to return it. Abu Hurayra said: You cannot do that. Umar said:
Yes, I can and I will beat you on the back. Then Umar got up and beat
him with his stick[1] until he wounded him and said to him: Pay the
money back. Abu Hurayra said: Exempt me for the sake of Allah. Umar
said: That would be if it was halal (permissible) and that you paid it
back obediently. Have you come from the farthest lap of Bahrain with
peoples taxes to be in your pocket, neither for Allah nor for the
Muslims? Umayma[2] has begotten you just to graze donkeys.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A dry bunch of dates he was used to hold in his hand.  
 **[2]** Umayma was Abu Hurayras mother. This word of the caliph was
among the worst words of abuse.

Ibn Abd Rabbih mentioned that Abu Hurayra had said: When Umar deposed me
in Bahrain, he said to me: O enemy of Allah and enemy of His Quran, did
you steal the wealth of the Muslims? Abu Hurayra said: I am not an enemy
of Allah or His book, but I am an enemy of your enemies. I did not steal
the wealth of the Muslims. Umar said: Then how did you get ten thousand
dinars? He said: We had some horses that bore, gifts that cumulated and
shares that multiplied. Umar took the money from me but when I offered
the Fajr (dawn) prayer, I asked Allah to forgive him. This tradition was
also mentioned by Ibn Abul-Hadeed in his book Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, vol.
3,[1] and was mentioned by Ibn Sad in his book at-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Abu
Hurayas biography)[2] narrated by Muhammad bin Seereen that Abu Hurayra
had said: Umar said to me: O enemy of Allah and enemy of his Quran, did
you steal the wealth of the Muslimsetc. Ibn Hajar mentioned this
tradition in his book al-Issaba but he modified it and changed the truth
in a way dissented from all the others in order to purify the fame of
Abu Hurayra. But he forgot that he defamed the man, who beaten Abu
Hurayra on the back, taken his money and deposed him.

60. His severity to Sad bin Abu Waqqas
--------------------------------------

Umar had appointed Sad bin Abu Waqqas as the emir of Kufa and then he
had been informed that Sad concealed himself in his palace from people.
Umar sent for Muhammad bin Maslama and said to him: Go to Sad in Kufa
and burn down his palace over him and do not do anything until you come
back to me! Muhammad went to Kufa and set fire to the palace in order to
surprise Sad. Sad came out saying: What is this? Muhammad said: This is
the determination of the caliph. He left it until it was burnt down and
then he left to Medina.

61. His severity to Khalid bin al-Waleed
----------------------------------------

When Khalid was the emir of Qinnisreen (by Umar), al-Ashath bin Qayss
asked him for some gift. Khalid gifted him with ten thousand

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** p.104, edition of Egypt.  
 **[2]** Vol.4, p.p.90.

(dirhams or dinars). Umar knew about that where nothing of Khalids deeds
was unknown by Umar. Umar sent for the mailman and he wrote with him to
Abu Ubayda, his emir on Hims (in Syria): Make Khalid stand on one leg,
tie the other with his turban and put his cap off in public before the
officials of the state and notable people until he tells you where from
he has gifted al-Ashath. If it is from his own money, this will be
wasting and Allah does not like the wasters and if it is from the wealth
of the umma, this will be treason and Allah does not like the traitors.
Depose him in any case and join his job to yours. Abu Ubayda wrote to
Khalid and Khalid came to him. Then he gathered the people and he sat on
the minbar in the great mosque. The mailman got up and asked Khalid
where he had gifted al-Ashath from. Khalid did not answer while Abu
Ubayda was silent saying nothing. Bilal al-Habashi got up and said:
Ameerul Mo'mineen (Umar) has ordered of so and so He took off Khalids
turban and cap, made him stand up and tied his leg with his turban and
then he asked him: Wherefrom have you gifted al-Ashath? Is it from your
money or from the money of the umma? He said: From my money. He set
Khalid free and put the cap and the turban on his head again with his
hands saying: We obey our guardians, glorify them and serve them. Khalid
remained confused. He did not know whether he had been deposed or not
because Abu Ubayda did not tell him of that for he respeted him and
glorified him. When Khailds coming to Umar delayed, he gussed what had
happened so he wrote to Khalid: You are deposed. Withdraw from the
emirate! After that Umar had not entrusted Khalid with any position
until he died.

62. Beating and exiling Dhabee
------------------------------

One day a man came to Umar and said to him: O Ameerul Mo'mineen, Dhabee
at-Tameemi met us and he began asking us about the interpretation of
some verses of the Qur'an and he said to me: O Allah, enable me to
overcome him (Umar)! One day while Umar was sitting during a banquet he
had made for people, Dabee came wearing good cloths and a turban. He sat
eating with people. When he finished eating, he asked Umar: O Ameerul
Mo'mineen, what is the meaning of this saying of Allah **Weth-thariyat
tharwa, wel-hamilat waqra-I swear by the wind that scatters far and
wide, then**

**those clouds bearing the load (of minute things in space).** Qur'an,
51:1-2 Umar said to him: Woe unto you! It is you! Umar got up, uncovered
his arms and began whipping the man until his turban fell down. He had
two plaits of hair. Umar said: I swear by Him, in Whose hand Umars soul
is, that if I have seen you with a shaven head, I would have beheaded
you. Then he ordered the man to be imprisoned in a house. Every day he
took him out to whip him one hundred whips. When he became well, Umar
took him out to whip him another hundred whips. Then he carried him on a
camel and sent him to Basra and wrote to his official there Abu Musa
ordering him to forbid people from mixing with him. He ordered Abu Musa
to make a speech for people telling them that Dabee wanted to obtain
knowledge but he went astray. After that Dhabee became mean among people
until he died whereas he had been the chief of his people before.[1]

63. Exiling Nasr bin Hajjaj
---------------------------

Abdullah bin Burayd said: One night while Umar was patrolling, he
arrived at a house, inside which there was a woman singing for other
women:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Is there a way to get some wine to
drink,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">or to be with Nasr bin Hajjaj?</span>*

Umar said: As long as she lives, she will not get that! In the morning
he sent for Nasr bin Hajjaj.[2] Umar looked at him and found him very
handsome. He ordered him to collect his hair. He did and when his
forehead appeared he became more handsome. Umar asked him to put on a
turban. He put on a turban and then his plentiful hair appeared from
under the turban and he seemed more handsome. Umar asked him to cut his
hair. He cut his hair and he seemed too handsome. Then Umar said to him:
O bin Hajjaj, you have charmed the women of Medina. Do not neighbor me
in a town I live in! Then Umar exiled him to Basra. After spending some
days in Basra, Nasr sent a letter to Umar having some verses of poetry,
in which he had showed his innocence and asked Umar to let him go

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.122.  
 **[2]** He was Nasr bin Hajjaj bin Alabit al-Bahzi as-Salami.

back to his house.

Umar said: Certainly not, as long as I am the ruler! When Umar was
killed, Nasr rode his sumpter and joined his family in Medina.

64. Exceeding the legal penalty with his son
--------------------------------------------

Once Umars son Abdurrahman, surnamed as Abu Shahma, drank wine in Egypt
when Amr bin al-Aass was the wali there. The wali Amr bin al-Aass
ordered Abu Shahmas hair to be cut and then he was whipped according to
the legal penalty at the presence of his brother Abdullah bin Umar. When
Umar was informed of that, he wrote to Amr bin al-Aass to send him Abu
Shahma in aba and on a camel without a saddle. He stressed on that and
ordered him with severe words. Amr bin al-Aass sent Abu Shahma in the
condition as Umar had ordered and wrote to Umar that he had punished Abu
Shahma with the legal penalty; cutting his hair and whipping him in the
courtyard and he swore by Allah that it was the place, in which the
legal penalties were executed on the Muslims and (ahlul thimma) the
Christians and the Jews. He sent the book with Abdullah bin Umar (Umars
son). Abdullah bin Umar brought the book and his brother Abdurrahman and
came to his father in Medina while Abdurrahman was putting on an aba and
was unable to walk because he was ill and tired of sitting on the bare
back of the camel all the way from Egypt to Medina. Umar became too
severe with his son. He said to him: O Abdurrahman, have you done this
and that? Then he cried: Bring me the whips! Abdurrahman bin Ouff
interceded with Umar saying to him: O Ameerul Mo'mineen, he has been
punished with the legal penalty and his brother Abdullah has witnessed
that. But Umar paid no attention to him rather he rebuked him. Umar
began whipping his son Abdurrahman (Abu Shahma), who was shouting at his
father: I am ill and you are going to kill me! Umar did never pity him
and gave a deaf ear to his sons crying until he finished the number of
the legal whips. After that he imprisoned him and a month later
Abdurrahman died.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This was one of the famous events in the history of Umar. It has
been mentioned by the most of the historians. Refer to Sharh Nahjol
Balagha, vol. 3 p. 123. Ibn Abul Hadeed mentioned in the same volume of
his book that Umar had whipped one of his

If Amr bin al-Aass was trusted in the affairs of the Muslims (the legal
penalties) and he was reliable near Umar, then he told Umar that he had
punished Abu Shahma at the presence of his brother Abdullah, who was the
most trusted one to his father from among the family of al-Khattab;
hence Umar had no any evidence to punish his son again and if Amr bin
al-Aass was not trustworthy and he was not truthful in his swear, then
how had Umar appointed him as the wali of Egypt to execute the verdicts
and penalties of Allah and how had he entrusted him with the bloods ,
honors and properties of the people?

According to the Shariah a sick person is not to be punished before
recovering health and the punished one (with legal penalty) is not to be
imprisoned especially if he is ill or that imprisonment may harm him but
Umar was fond of preferring his own opinions to the legal verdicts.

65. Cutting the tree of al-Hudaybiya
------------------------------------

It was the tree, under which the Prophet (s) had been paid homage by his
companions to die for him. It was called the homage of ar-Radhwan. Among
the results of this homage was the great conquest of Mecca. Some of the
Muslims often offered prayers under this tree to get blessing and to
thank Allah for the great victory they got after the homage under this
tree.

When Umar knew that they offered prayers under this tree, he ordered the
tree to be cut. He said: Since this day if any one returns to offer
prayer near this tree, I will kill him with the sword as an apostate is
killed.[1]

Glory be to Allah! Praise be to Allah! Allah is great!!! How wonder!
Yesterday the Prophet (s) ordered him to kill Thul Khuwaisira, the head
of the hypocrites, and he refrained from killing him respecting his
prayer and today he draws his sword to kill the believers who offer
prayers under this tree; the tree of ar-Radhwan!!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

sons for drinking wine until he died. All the historians, who have
talked about Abu Shahma, mentioned this case such as ibn Abdul Birr in
his Isteeab, ad-Dimyari in Hayat al-Haywan and ibn al-Jawzi in his book
Tareekh Umar, chap.77.  
 **[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.59.

Woe! Who has made the bloods of the faithful prayers so cheap to him?
This was the seed that grew and fruited in Najd (where the Satan would
appear).

How many seeds like this Umar had such as his saying to the Black Rock
(of the Kaaba): You are just a rock; neither benefit nor harm. Unless I
have seen the Prophet (s) kissing you, I would have never kissed you.

This word became as a principle due to which many ignorants prohibited
kissing the holy Qur'an and glorifying the shrine of the Prophet (s) and
the other sacred shrines. They lost by doing that many virtues as Allah
has said: **and whoever respects the sacred ordinances of Allah, it is
better for him with his Lord. Qur'an, 22:30 and and whoever respects the
signs of Allah, this surely is (the outcome) of the piety of hearts.**
Qur'an, 22:32 and they did not love Allah sincerely as one of the poets
has said:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">It is not the love of the country that
has filled my heart,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">but it is the love of who has dwelled in
the country.</span>*

66. Umm Hani complains against him to the Prophet(s)
----------------------------------------------------

At-Tabarani mentioned in al-Kabeer a tradition narrated by Abdurrahman
bin Abu Rafi that Umm Hani bint Abu Talib had said to the Prophet (s): O
messenger of Allah, Umar bin al-Khattab met me and said to me: Muhammad
will not avail you of anything. The Prophet (s) became angry. He made a
speech saying to the people: Why do some ones pretend that my
intercession will not benefit my family? My intercession will avail Ham
and Hakam.[1]

The Prophet (s) became angry in another occasion when a son of his aunt
Safiyya died and he consoled her. When she went out, a man[2] met her
and said to her: Your kinship with Muhammad will not avail you of
anything. She began crying until the Prophet (s) heard her voice and
hurried to her. She told him of what happened. He became angry and asked
Bilal to announce the azan. The Prophet (s)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ham and Hakam were two tribes of Yemen, which had no any kinship
with Quraysh, the Prophets tribe.  
 **[2]** He was Umar bin al-Khattab undoubtedly.

got up to make a speech. He praised Allah and then he said: Why do some
people pretend that my kinship does not avail (my relatives)? Every
kinship and means will be severed on the Day of Resurrection except my
kinship and means. My kinship is connected in this life and in the
afterlife.[1]

67. The day of consultation (an-Najwa)
--------------------------------------

On that day all the people had missed goodness save Imam Ali (s). He was
the winner of that goodness with no partner; neither Abu Bakr nor Umar
nor any of the human beings. Here is the Quranic verse of that day and
let you ponder on it and do not be among those whom Allah has meant when
saying: **Do they not then reflect on the Quran? Nay, on the hearts
there are locks.** Qur'an, 47:24

**This is the verse: O you who believe! when you consult the Messenger,
then offer something in charity before your consultation; that is better
for you and purer.** Qur'an, 58:12. No one had ever acted according to
this verse except Imam Ali (s). This has been confirmed by the consensus
of the umma. Az-Zamakhshari in al-Kashshaf, at-Tabari in at-Tafseer
al-Kabeer, ath-Thalabi in at-Tafseer al-Adheem, ar-Razi in Mafateeh
al-Ghayb and the other interpreters have said that in their books when
interpreting this verse.

Al-Hakim mentioned in his Mustadrak[2] that Imam Ali (s) had said: There
is a verse in the Book of Allah that no one has acted according to
before me and no one will act according to after me. It is the verse of
(an-Najwa) consultation. I had a dinar and I sold it for ten dirhams.
Whenever I consulted the Prophet (s) I offered a dirham before my
consultation and then the verse was annulled by this one: **Do you fear
that you will not (be able to) give in charity before your consultation?
So when you do not do it and Allah has turned to you (mercifully), then
keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey Allah and His Messenger;
and Allah is Aware of what you do.** Qur'an,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Thakhair al-Uqba by Muhibuddeen at-Tabari.  
 **[2]** Vol.2 p.842.

58:13[1]

This scolding included Umar and the rest of the companions except Imam
Ali (s) because he had never (feared that he would not be able to give
alms in charity) nor had he opposed the order so that he would need to
repent.

Ar-Razi here arose as one who **(cannot arise except as one, whom the
Satan has prostrated by (his) touch, does rise).** He said: This verse
distresses the hearts of the poor and makes them sad because they cannot
pay charities, it embarrasses the rich because it imposes on them heavy
duty and it causes the Muslims to criticize each other. Acting according
to this verse causes separation and gloominess and giving up acting
according to it causes cordiality. What causes cordiality is worthier of
being followed than what causes separation and gloominess How odd his
raving was! It contradicted the saying of Allah **(that is better for
you and purer)** and His saying **(So when you do not do it and Allah
has turned to you (mercifully), then keep up prayer).** Refer to this
raving in his tafseer Mafateeh al-Ghayb, vol.8 p.168.

Would that he had said: Zakat and hajj distress the hearts of the poor
and bring them sorrow because the poor cannot do them and they (zakat
and hajj) embarrass the rich because they impose on them heavy duty;
therefore carrying them out causes separation and gloominess and giving
up carrying them out causes cordiality and friendliness and whatever
causes cordiality and friendliness is worthier of being followed than
what causes separation and gloominess; therefore according to the
analogy of this (imam) giving up the zakat and the hajj is worthier. In
fact his analogy requires giving up all the religions in order not to
lead to separation and disagreements. We resort to Allah to save us from
the torpor of mind and the raving of tongue. There is no power save in
Allah, the Mighty, the High!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Hakim after mentioning this tradition in his Mustadrak said:
It is a true tradition according to the conditions of the two sheikhs;
al-Bukhari and Muslim but they have not mentioned it. The same has been
said by ath-Thahabi after mentioning it in his Talkhees al-Mustadrak.

68. His indulgence to Moawiya
-----------------------------

Umar let Moawiya, who had been appointed by Umar as the wali of Sham,
free to the full to do whatever he liked, to behave as his deviate mind
led him, to rule however he wished. He lived at ease indifferent to
anything other than what he chose to himself unlike what Umar had
admired of his emirs. Once Umar saw Moawiya in Sham surrounded with
splendor like that of Kasra (the emperor of Persia) and wearing highly
brocaded cloths that the nature of Umar disliked and hated but he did
not say to him then except: I neither order you nor I forbid you. He
gave him permission and option to do whatever he liked and so he ravaged
left and right and there was no one daring to stand against his vanity
and corruption. One of the fruits of this seed that Umar had grown in
Moawiya was his transgression against Imam Ali (s) in Siffeen and after
that was what he did against Imam Hasan (s) in Sabaat.

Since then the Umayyads had seized the wealth of Allah, enslaved His
people and taken the religion of Allah as a means to achieve their greed
and tendencies. We are Allahs and to Him we shall return and those who
do wrong will come to know by what a (great) reverse they will be
overturned!

69. His illegal order
---------------------

He often ordered of some things against the Sharia and then he gave up
after being reminded.

**First:** Muhammad bin Mukhallad al-Attar mentioned in his Fawaid:[1]
Once Umar has ordered a pregnant women to be stoned. Maath bin Jabal
denied that and said to Umar: If you have an evidence against her, you
have no evidence against the one in her abdomen. Umar annulled his
judgment and said: Women have become unable to beget one like Maath.
Were it not for Maath, Umar would perish.

**Second:** al-Hakim mentioned in his Mustadrak[2] that ibn Abbas had
said: Once a mad pregnant woman was brought to Umar and he

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isaba by ibn Hajar, biography of Maath bin Jabal.  
 **[2]** Vol.4 p.389.

decided to stone her. Ali said to him: Have you not known that
obligations are not imposed on three ones; a mad one until he becomes
sane, a child until he becomes adult and a sleeping one until he awakes?
Then Umar set the woman free.

This woman was different from that woman. That one, about whom Maath
reminded the caliph, was not mad and the caliph could stone her but
after giving birth to her child and then the caliph would have to ensure
the nursing of the child after stoning his mother but as for the second
woman, Umar could not stone her at all because she was mad.

The judge of the judges Abdul Jabbar in his book al-Mughni had a long
speech about stoning a pregnant woman and this was a point of argument
between him and Sharif al-Murtadha in his book ash-Shafi. Ibn Abul
Hadeed mentioned the arguments of both of them in Sharh Nahjol Balagha,
vol. 3 p.150-152.

**Third:** Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad[1] that Abu Dhabyan
al-Janbi had said: One day a woman, who had committed adultery, was
brought to Umar, who ordered her to be stoned. Ali took the woman away
from Umars men and prevented them from stoning her. They went back to
Umar telling him that Ali bin Abu Talib had prevented them from carrying
out the order of the caliph Umar. Umar said: He (Ali) did not do that
unless he knew something! He sent for Ali. Ali came to Umar, who was
somehow angry. He said to Ali: Why did you prevent these men from
executing my order? Ali said: Have you not heard the Prophet (s) saying:
Three ones are free from being considered as sinful; a sleeping one
until he awakes, a child until he becomes adult and a mad one until he
becomes sane? He said: Yes, I have. Ali said: This woman is mad. The
adulterer might have committed the sin with her while she was mad. Umar
said: I do not know! Ali said: I also do not know! Umar set the woman
free and he did not stone her.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** vol.1 p.154-.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.4 p.389, Talkees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi. Al-Bukahri has summarized the tradition in his Sahih, vol.4
p.117 saying: Ali said to Umar: Have you not known that three ones are
free from being considered as sinful;

**Fourth:** Ibn al-Qayyim mentioned in his book at-Turuq al-Hakamiyya
fee as-Siyasa ash-Shariyya (the wise ways in legal politics) that once a
woman had been brought to Umar and she confessed that she had committed
adultery. Umar ordered the woman to be stoned. Ali asked him to delay
his order a little that she might have an excuse which might save her
from the punishment. He asked the woman: What has led you to commit
adultery? She said: There was a herdsman with me (in the pasture) who
had water and milk among his camels but I had not. I became thirsty and
I asked him for some water or milk. He refused to give me unless I would
(give him my self). I refused to submit to him for three times but when
I became too thirsty and I thought that I was about to die, I submitted
to him and he gave me some water. Ali said: Allah is great! **but
whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring nor exceeding the limit,
then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.** Qur'an, 16:115

Al-Bayhaqi mentioned in his Sunan that Abu Abdurrahman as-Sulami had
said: Once a woman had become too thirsty. She passed by a shepherd and
asked him for some water but he refused to give her unless she would let
him make love with her. She submitted to him. Umar consult the people
about stoning her. Ali said: She was obliged to do that and I think that
she is to be set free. Umar set her free.[1]

**Fifth:** Ibn al-Qayyim said:[2] Another woman was brought to Umar and
she confessed and confirmed that she had committed adultery. Ali was
present then. He said: She talks as if she has not known that it
(adultery) is impermissible. He did not punish her.

Ibn al-Qayyim added: This is accurate insight.

**Sixth:** Ahmad Ameen said in his book Fajr al-Islam:[3] A case was
offered to Umar that a man had been killed by his fathers wife and her
lover. Umar hesitated to kill two persons for one. Ali said to him:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

a mad one until he becomes sane, a child until he becomes adult and a
sleeping one until he awakes.  
 **[1]** At-Turuq al-Hakamiyya fee as-Siyasa ash-Shariyya by ibn
al-Qayyim, p.53.  
 **[2]** Ibid. p.55.  
 **[3]** p.285, quoted from the book Alam al-Muwaqqieen.

If a group of people participate in a theft, will you cut the hands of
all of them? Umar said: Yes, I will. Ali said: It is the same here. He
did as Ali said to him and he wrote to his official: Kill them both! If
all the people of Sanaa participated in killing him, I would kill them
all.

**Seventh:** Ibn Abul Hadeed said: Once Umar sent for a woman to ask her
about something. She was pregnant and because of fearing him, she
miscarried of her fetus. He asked the great companions to give him a
fatwa about this matter. They said to him: You are not to be blamed
because you are discipliner. Ali said to him: If they wanted to
compliment you, they have cheated you and if this was their opinion
after trying their best, they have mistaken. You have to free a
(believing) slave (as a penance). Umar and the companions referred to
Alis opinion.[1]

**Eighth:** Umar was confused what to do to a man from the first
Muhajireen, who had fought in the battle of Badr. He was Qudama bin
Madhoon. One day he was brought to Umar after drinking wine. Umar
decided to whip him. He said to Umar: Why will you whip me? The Book of
Allah is between me and you. Umar said: Where is it in the Book of Allah
that I should not whip you? He said: Allah says in His Book: **On those
who believe and do good there is no blame for what they eat, when they
are careful (of their duty) and believe and do good deeds, then they are
careful (of their duty) and believe, then they are careful (of their
duty) and do good (to others), and Allah loves those who do good (to
others).** Qur'an, 5:93 I am from among (those who believe and do good).
I have attended with the Prophet (s) in Badr, al-Hudaybiya, al-Khandaq
and other events. Umar did not know how to reply. He said to his
companions: Let any of you reply to him! Ibn Abbas said: These verses
have been revealed as an excuse for the deceased Muslims and as a
reminder to the remaining believers because Allah says: **O ye who
believe! Intoxicants and gambling, (dedication of) stones, and
(divination by) arrows, are an abomination of Satan's handwork: eschew
such (abomination), that ye may prosper.** Qur'an, 5:90 Then he recited
the other verse among which was **they are careful (of their duty) and**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.1 p.58.

**believe and do good deeds, then they are careful (of their duty) and
believe, then they are careful (of their duty) and do good.** He added:
Allah has prohibited drinking wine, then would he, who drank wine after
it has been prohibited, be pious and God-fearing? Umar said: You are
right. Then what do you see? Ali gave a fatwa to whip Qudama eighty
whips. The penalty of a winer has become such since that day.[1]

**Ninth:** Ibn al-Qayyim mentioned in his book at-Turuq al-Hakamiyya,
p.27 a case of a woman, who had loved a young man from the Ansar but
when he did not respond to her, she played a trick. She took an egg and
poured its albumen on her dress and between her thighs and then she came
to Umar crying. She said to him: This (young) man has raped me and
disgraced me among my family and this is the sign of what he has
committed with me. Umar asked some women and they said that there was
some sperm on her cloths and body. Then Umar wanted to punish the young
man, who was crying for help and saying: O Ameerul Mo'mineen, make sure
of the matter! By Allah, I have not committed any sin. I have never
intended to do anything to her. She tried to seduce me to yield to her
but I refused. Ali was present. Umar asked him: O Abul Hasan, what do
you think about them? Ali looked at the womans cloth and he asked for
boiling water. He poured the hot water over the dress and the white
became solid. He took it, smelt it and tasted it and he found that it
had the taste of egg. He scolded the woman and she confessed the truth.

**Tenth:** Ibn al-Qayyim in his book at-Turuq al-Hakamiyya[2] mentioned
that two men from Quraysh had paid one hundred dinars to a woman as
deposit and they said to her: Do not give back the money to any one of
us if the other is not with him. After a year one of them came and said
to the woman: My friend died and I want the money. She refused to give
him the money and said: You both have said to me not to give the money
to any of you if the other was with him. I will not give it to you. He
asked her relatives and neighbors to intercede with her until she agreed
to repay him the money. After

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.4 p.376, Talkhees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi.  
 **[2]** P.30-.

another year the second man came to her and asked her to give him the
money back. She said to him: Your friend has come to me and he pretended
that you had died and I gave him the money. They went to Umar to judge
on their case. Umar wanted to judge against the woman. She asked him to
send them to Ali bin Abu Talib to judge on their case. Umar sent them to
Ali, who perceived that the two men had deceived the woman. He said to
the man: Have you not asked the woman not to repay the money to any of
you unless the other one would be with him? The man said: Yes, we have.
Then Ali said to him: Go and bring your friend and then the woman will
give you the money; otherwise you have no right to ask her for anything.

**Eleventh:** Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad[1] a tradition
narrated by ibn Abbas that once Umar had been confused about the doubt
in prayer (being uncertain how many rakas one has offered). He asked his
servant: O boy, have you heard from the Prophet (s) or any of his
companions if one became uncertain in his prayer, what he should do?
After a moment Abdurrahman bin Ouff came and asked Umar: What is the
matter with you? Umar said: I asked this boy if he had heard from the
Prophet (s) or any of his companions if one doubted in his prayer what
he should do. Abdurrahman said: I have heard the Prophet (s) saying: If
one of you becomes uncertain in his prayer Refer to this tradition; it
has a fatwa from Abdurrahman which is opposite to what has been narrated
from the Prophet (s) by the Shia.

The cases like these ones were many! They showed that Umar soon
submitted to the truth in such matters since he recognized it and he
submitted to whoever reminded him if he ignored; nevertheless he was too
severe when determining his policies without paying any attention to
anyone. He was too severe to his officials; whether to their bodies or
their properties. He often confiscated some of their monies to the
treasury and he often dealt with them with his stick severely! He might
burn down their houses over them as he had done to his emir of Kufa, Sad
bin Abu Waqqass when he ordered to burn down his palace. Once again he
beat Sad with his stick when Sad competed with people to reach him. Once
again he (Umar) saw some

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** vol.1 p.190.

people following Ubayy bin Kab in the street and then he raised his
stick to hit Ubbay. Ubbay said to him: O Ameerul Mo'mineen, fear Allah!
Umar said to him: O ibn Kab, what are these crowds behind you? Have you
not known that it is conceit to the followed one and meanness to the
followers?

The darrah[1] of Umar was a whip of torment, which the great companions
feared, until it was said that it was more frightening than the sword of
al-Hajjaj.[2]

He had beaten Umm Farwa bint Abu Quhafa severely with his darrah when
her brother Abu Bakr died and she with other women, at the head of whom
was Aaisha, began crying for him. He did pay no attention to her
position that she was the aunt of Aaisha and the sister of Abu Bakr.
Hisham bin al-Waleed pulled her in a mean way to the street. Umar wanted
to frighten the other women, who soon ran away here and there. How
harshly he often behaved to achieve his policy without having any pity
towards anyone and without fearing any end!

He had said to Imam Ali (s) and his companions, who had refused to pay
homage to Abu Bakr, when they were in the house of Fatima (s): I swear
by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, either you come out to pay homage or I
shall burn down the house over you. The daughter of the Prophet (s) went
out crying and shouting. When she saw what Umar and his men had done to
Imam Ali (s) and az-Zubayr, she said: How soon you have attacked the
family of the messenger of Allah![3]

And many many of such political situations which were as Imam Ali (s)
had said when talking about entrusting Umar with the caliphate by Abu
Bakr: he made it (the caliphate) in a harsh land, which was full of
stumbles and which could not be avoided. A man in it was like a rider of
a reluctant camel, if he tightened its noseband, he would tear its nose
and if he loosened its noseband, it would insert him into difficulties.
People were afflicted with confusion, fickleness and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Darrah is a dry bunch of dates (after losing its fruits).  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.60. Al-Hajjaj was a tyrant emir
of the Umayyad state.  
 **[3]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.134.

objection[1]

70. Inventing the Shura
-----------------------

When Umar was about to die, he invented the Shura to choose the caliph
after him. He appointed a committee of six persons pretending that Ali,
the Prophets brother and guardian, was one of them;

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Ali, who was the best of the human beings
after the Prophet,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">who was the very self of the Prophet
(s).</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Muhammad and Ali were the two eyes of the
world;</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">one was the right and the other was the
left.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Muhammad was the city of knowledge and
Ali was its gate</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">and whoever wanted to come to the
city,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">had to enter it from its gate.</span>*

O my Lord! What was the Shura invented for?! Had he (Ali) been compared
with the first one (Abu Bakr) so that he would be compared with these
ones and their likes?! Certainly not! But a man (Sad) listened to his
rage and the other (Abdurrahman) sided with his kin (Othman) for this
and that.[2]

This Shura had many bad consequences and evil results that had caused
great harm to Islam. Umar had in this Shura contradictories that he
would have better not done!

When he (Umar) was stabbed[3] and he became desperate of remaining
alive, he was asked: Would that you have appointed the caliph after you!
He said: If Abu Ubayda was alive, I would appoint him a caliph because
he was the trustee of this umma[4] and if Salim, the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1.  
 **[2]** Referring to horrible event that Imam Ali (s) disliked to
mention openly.  
 **[3]** On Wednesday, four days before the end of Thul Hijja, 23 A.H.
and he died three days after that and then he was buried on Sunday.  
 **[4]** If Abu Ubayda was the trustee of this umma, then Imam Ali (s)
was worthier of the umma than itself as they had known well. Umar
himself had congratulated him of that on the day of al-Ghadeer.

mawla of Huthayfa was alive, I would appointed him a caliph because he
was too sincere in his love to Allah.[1] His son Abdullah was mentioned
to him but he refused to appoint him as the caliph. The companions went
out and then they came back to him saying: O Ameerul Mo'mineen, Would
that you have determined a decree! He said: I have decided, after my
first saying, to entrust your affair with a man, who is the best among
you to lead you to the truth meaning Ali (s). They said to him: What
prevents you from that then? he said: I cannot bear it (the caliphate)
alive and a dead. Then he said: You are to keep to these ones; Ali,
Othman, Abdurrahman, Sad, az-Zubayr and Talha. They should consult to
choose one from among them. If they choose that one as the caliph, then
they have to support and assist him. Then he sent for those six men and
said to them: When I die, Suhayb should lead the people in offering the
prayer. You have to deliberate for three days and when the fourth day
comes you must have an emir from among you.

Then he ordered Abu Talha al-Ansari to select fifty men from the Ansar
with their weapons to supervise these six men until they should choose
one from among them within three days after Umars death. He ordered
Suhayb to lead the prayers during that time. He ordered the six men to
be inside a house under the supervision of Abu Talha with his sword and
his armed men. He said to Abu Talha: When five men agreed on one opinion
and the sixth one objected to them, you should split his head with your
sword and when four of them agreed and two refused, you should behead
them both and if each three of them had an opinion, the caliph should be
from the group of Abdurrahman and then you should kill those three if
they would refuse to submit but if the three days elapsed while they
have not agreed on one yet, you should kill all the six[2] and let the
matter

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** I do not think that he has forgotten his coming back with the
banner after the coming back of his friend (Abu Bakr) from Khaybar
defeated and sorrowful and I do not think that he has forgotten the good
news of the Prophet (s) to Imam Ali (s), who has obtained the great
victory, nor has he forgotten the saying of the Prophet (s) on that day:
By Allah, I will give the banner tomorrow to a man, whom Allah will
grant victory. He loves Allah and His messenger and Allah and His
messenger love him.  
 **[2]** Umars slighting the bloods of these men might encourage the
killers of Othman to slight his blood and might encourage the Kharijites
to slight the bloods of Imam Ali (s) and his companions on the days of
al-Jamal, al-Basra, an-Nahrawan and Siffeen

of the caliphate to the Muslims to elect whoever they liked. This is the
summary of the covenant of the Shura.[1]

If Umar was unwilling to undertake the caliphate as he pretended, then
why did he insert himself in what he had fled from and arrange in the
worst and most harmful and dangerous way?! He chose six men out of the
whole umma and described them with what prevented them from being chosen
as caliphs that we have not mentioned here![2] Then he arranged the
matter in a way that it would lead to choose Othman as the caliph in any
way and without a bit of doubt![3] Which bearing (that Umar pretended to
refrain from) was more than this?! What was the difference between
appointing Othman openly and limiting the matter in a way that would
lead to him alone and would kill the rejecters?

Would he have appointed Othman or any one else and not put the slave
Suhayb over their heads with Abu Talha and his men with their drawn
swords to kill them (Ali and the others) if they opposed that critical
plan which Umar had planned to them!

If he had entrusted the caliphate to anyone he liked, the umma would not
have seen him slight their (these six mens) bloods and be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

when fighting him and killing him later on and encouraged Yazeed to
slight the blood of the master of the martyrs Imam Husayn (s) in Kerbala
for Umar was the example especially for those people with no doubt!  
 **[1]** Umars covenant of Shura in this way as we have summarized is
proved by the recurrent traditions that have been mentioned by all the
historians and scholars of Hadith. Refer to al-Kamil by ibn al-Atheer,
vol.3, the events of the year 23 of hijra, Tareekh al-Umam wel Mulook by
by ibn Jareer, the events of 23 A.H., Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.62
and the rest of the books of history.  
 **[2]** To see how Umar has described them, refer to Sharh Nahjol
Balagha, vol.1 p.72 and you will find wonders!  
 **[3]** Therefore Imam Ali (s) said: It (the caliphate) gone away from
us. His uncle al-Abbas said-as in al-Kamil by ibn al-Atheer and Tareekh
al-Umam wel Mulook by ibn Jareer: how did you know? Imam Ali (s) said:
Othman has been compared to methey are with the majority; if two men
will choose a man and the other two men will choose a man, then they
will be with the group of Abdurrahman and Sad will never object to his
uncle Abdurrahman at all and Abdurrahman is the kin of Othman; they will
never disagree at all. Even if the other two are with me, they will not
avail me.

indifferent to shedding their bloods[1] nor would have the umma seen him
despise them by preferring the slave Suhayb to them in offering the
prayer of his (Umars) funerals and the five daily prayers.

As if he was not satisfied with despising and disgracing them when he
said: If Abu Ubayda was alive, I would appoint him a caliph and if Salim
was alive, I would appoint him a caliph preferring them to these six
men, among whom was the Prophets brother, guardian and heir, Aaron of
the umma, the judge, the gate of the house of wisdom, the gate of the
city of knowledge and the one who had had the knowledge of the Book;
Imam Ali (s).

As for Salim, he was neither from Quraysh nor was he an Arab. He was a
foreigner from Istakhr or Karmad. He was a slave owned by Abu Huthayfa
bin Utbas wife, whose name was Thubayta bint Yaar bin Zayd bin Ubayd bin
Zayd al-Ansari al-Ousi.[2] The umma had agreed unanimously due to the
legal verdicts that imamate would not be permissible for one like
Salim,[3] then how did Umar say: If Salim was alive, I would appoint him
a caliph?[4]

This Shura had caused competition and sedition between these six men
that led to separation and disagreement among the Muslims for each one
of these six men found himself as well-qualified for the caliphate and
equal to the others whereas before the Shura (of Umar) they did not
think in this way. In fact Abdurrahman was a follower of Othman, Sad was
a follower of Abdurrahman and az-Zubayr was one of Imam Alis followers,
who had supported him on the day of the Saqeefa. It was him (az-Zubayr)
who had drawn his sword[5] defending

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In spite of that Allah has strongly prohibited shedding bloods
in the clear verses of the Qur'an and it has been prohibited by the
prophetic traditions and by the consensus of the umma.  
 **[2]** Al-Isteeab by ibn Abdul Birr, biography of Salim.  
 **[3]** Many scholars have declared the consensus on this matter such
as an-Nawawi in his book Sharh Sahih Muslim, chap. of Imamate.  
 **[4]** They justified that by saying that Umar had said that as an
ijtihad by him due to his own opinion. Among those who have mentioned
this excuse was ibn Abdul Birr in his book al-Isteeab. Refer to that to
see that they were indifferent to the legal verdicts and the clear texts
of Allah and His messenger.  
 **[5]** Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhari mentioned in his book
Kitab as-Saqeefa a long tradition which also has been mentioned by ibn
Abul Hadeed in Sharh Nahjol

Imam Ali (s) and it was him who was among the few ones who had escorted
Fatima (s) to her tomb and offered the prayer for her where she had been
buried under the darkness of night[1] according to the will of Fatima
(s) herself and it was him who had said during the reign of Umar: By
Allah, if Umar dies, I will pay homage to Ali[2] but the Shura made him
look forward to the caliphate and so he parted with Ali (s) as the
others did. He went to fight against Imam Ali (s) in the battle of
al-Jamal (the camel). Abdurrahman bin Ouff himself regretted his doing
when he had preferred Othman to himself in the matter of the caliphate
and then he parted with him and tried his best to depose him from the
caliphate but he did not succeed. And people knew well what Talha and
az-Zubayr had done to incite people against Othman and then Aaisha
joined them assisting Talha and hoping that the caliphate might come
back to Taym.[3] She often said: Kill Nathal (meaning Othman) for he has
disbelieved![4]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Balagha, vol. 2, saying: Umar with a gang, among whom were Usayd bin
Khudhayr and Salama bin Aslam, went to the house of Fatima (s). Umar
said to them (to Ali and the companions who were with Ali inside the
house): Come out to pay homage. They refused to do that and az-Zubayr
came out to them with his sword. Umar said: Arrest the dog! Salama bin
Aslam jumped to him (to az-Zubayr) and took the sword from his hand and
threw it against the wall  
 **[1]** Imam Ali (s) had lead his few companions in offering the prayer
of funerals for Fatima (s) and Abu Bakr had not been allowed (or even
informed) to offer the prayer for her. Refer to Sahih of al-Bukhari,
vol.2 p.39 and Sahih of Muslim, vol.2 p.72.  
 **[2]** Once Umar said from above the minbar in a long speech he made:
I have been informed that someone of you has said: by Allah, if Umar
dies, I will pay homage to so-and-so. Let no one be deceived to say such
a thing. By Allah, the homage of Abu Bakr was a slipbut Allah has saved
(the umma) from its evil Refer to Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.4 p.119.
Al-Qastalani said in his book Irshad as-Sari when explaining this
tradition that az-Zubayr bin al-Awwam often said: If Umar dies, I will
pay homage to Ali. The homage of Abu Bakr was a slip but it was
accomplished. This saying reached Umar, who became very angry and then
he made that speech. Such was what all the scholars, who had explained
Sahih of al-Bukhari, mentioned in their books.  
 **[3]** Taym was the tribe of Abu Bakr, the father of Aaisha.  
 **[4]** All the historians have mentioned that she had incited people
against Othman. One of her coevals blamed her by reciting the following
verses of poetry:  
 The outset is from you and the vicissitudes of time is from you,  
 Storm is from you and rain is from you.  

These ones and their followers activated their opposition against Othman
until they encouraged the people of Medina and the other countries to
revolt against him and then to kill him. When Othman was killed and the
people paid homage to Imam Ali (s) to be the caliph, Talha and az-Zubayr
were the first ones who had paid the homage but their position in the
Shura raised their greediness to the caliphate and made them break their
homage to Imam Ali (s) and then to wage a war against him. They (Talha
and az-Zubayr) revolted against Imam Ali (s) and Aasha joined them
hoping that Talha might be the caliph. Bloods were shed in Basra (the
battle of al-Jama), Siffeen and an-Nahrawan, fatal seditions spread here
and there and bloody wars were waged; all those horrible events were the
consequences of Umars Shura, which made opponents to Imam Ali (s)
competing with him in his right and fighting him to extort this right
from him. Moreover, it was this Shura that had incited Moawiya to
stretch his neck towards the caliphate.[1] Then Moawiya and each one of
the men of the Shura became impassable obstacle in the way of Imam Ali
(s), who had intended to show the truth and to restore what had been
corrupted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You have ordered the emir to be killed,  
 And said to us that he has disbelieved!  
 Refer to al-Kamil by ibn al-Atheer, vol.3 p.8.  
 **[1]** Abu Othman mentioned in the book of as-Sufyaniyya as I Sharh
Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.62 that Mamar bin Sulayman at-Tameemi narrated
from his father from Saeed bin al-Musayyab that ibn Abbas had said: I
have heard Umar saying to the men of the Shura: If you cooperate,
support each other and become loyal to each other, you will eat (obtain)
it (the caliphate), you and your progeny but if you envy each other,
disagree with each other and hate each other, then Moawiya bin Abu
Sufyan is to be the caliph over you. Moawiya was the emir of Sham,
appointed by Umar, at that time. It is clear that this word has
nominated Moawiya and encouraged him to ask for the caliphate with all
his power and as possible as he could use deceit and trick. When the
fate of the caliphate after Umar became in Othmans hand, it meant that
it would become in Moawiyas hand after Othman; therefore Umar had
arranged the Shura in a way that it would consequently drive the
caliphate to Othman as we have said. In short, Othman, before facing his
fate, he had made five persons compete with Imam Ali (s) and fight him
to extort his legal right. Othman was not satisfied with this until he
incited Moawiya to stretch his neck towards the caliphate as it has been
clear to the men of understaning.

The Shura of Umar had incited the umm against Othman[1] and planted
seeds that took roots and grew after the killing of Othman that was an
opportunity seized by the people who had fought Imam Ali (s) in
al-Jamal, Siffeen and an-Nahrawan.

How odd and wonderful the order of Umar was! He ordered the six men,
whom he had nominated for the Shura so that one of them should be
elected as the caliph after him, to be killed if they would not achieve
his order before the end of the third day after his death!!!

Woe! Could we believe that it was permissible for him (Umar) to kill
these six men or any one of them just because of delaying carrying out
his order after the third day of his death?!

But indeed he had ordered to kill them while he was comfortable and
tranquil with that. He had ordered Abu Talha al-Ansari and his men with
this order and stressed on them and on Suhayb to execute it.

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">The Muslims saw and heard,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">But none denied or felt pain!</span>*

This was the utmost persistence of Umar. He went on his exaggeration to
the farthest point! He knew well the position of these

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** On the day of the Shura, Umar had said to Othman: As if I see
that Quraysh has entrusted you with this matter (the caliphate) and then
you will make bani Umayya (the Umayyads) and bani Maeet over the necks
of people and will preferred them to the others with the wealth and then
a group of the Arabs will come to you to slaughter you in your bed. By
Allah, if they do, you will do, and if you do, they will do. Then Umar
grasped the forelock of Othman and said: When that occurs, remember my
saying. It will take place. Ibn Abul Hadeed said in Sharh Nahjol
Balagha, vol. 1 p.22 after mentioning this tradition: Our Sheikh Abu
Othman has mentioned this tradition in his book as-Sufyaniyya and it has
been mentioned by others when talking about the insight of Umar. This
confirms our saying that Umar has intended, out of the caliphate of
Othman, to pave the way for Moawiya because he knew that Othman would be
killed and then the way would be opened for Moawiya to reach the
caliphate. In fact the very caliphate of Othman would take Moawiya to
the throne!  
 *The outset is from you and the vicissitudes of time is from you,  
 Storm is from you and rain is from you.  
 You have ordered the emir to be killed,  
 And said to us that he has disbelieved!*

six men more than any other one of the companions and he witnessed then
that the Prophet (s) died while he had been pleased with them.

Among the six there was one, who was the brother of the Prophet (s) and
who was to the Prophet (s) as Aaron was to Moses but he was not a
prophet. He was the vizier and the guardian of the Prophet (s). He was
the father of the two grandsons of the Prophet (s). He was the hero of
Badr, Uhud and Hunayn and he was the one who had the knowledge of the
Book.

Umar had better avoid exposing this great man and the rest of the six to
this danger and to this meanness and disgrace! He could entrust the
matter with no one and he would let the Muslims choose whomsoever they
liked and then he would be truthful in his saying: I cannot bear it
alive and dead.

Or he could appoint Othman as the caliph openly as Abu Bakr had
appointed him (Umar) before and so he would be frank in what he had
intended to do with no deceit or trickery for he had arranged the matter
of the Shura in a way that it must lead to the caliphate of Othman
definitely. Umar had not preferred Abdurrahman to the other five ones,
unless he knew that this would affect the matter and he knew that Sad
would not object to Abdurrahman at all.

People knew this trick of Umar even if he thought that he had blinded
the matter and said: I do not bear it alive and dead.

What did the Muslims think if the Prophet (s) heard Umar ordering Abu
Talha by saying to him: When five men agreed on one opinion and the
sixth one objected to them, you should split his head with your sword
and when four of them agreed and two refused, you should behead them
both and if each three of them had an opinion, the caliph should be from
the group of Abdurrahman and then you should kill those three if they
would refuse to submit but if the three days elapsed while they have not
agreed on one yet, you should kill all the six? O Muslims, be liberal in
your opinions and say what you think! We are Allahs and to Him we shall
return!
