Chapter Four Aaisha and Her Interpretations
===========================================

73. The prayer of Aaisha in travel
----------------------------------

Allah has legislated shortening the four rakas prayers in travel through
His holy Book and via His messenger through the sacred Sunna. The umma
has agreed on this unanimously with no disagreement save that of Othman
and Aaisha, who have offered full prayers in travel.

This was despite the saying of Aaisha herself First the prayer has been
legislated as two rakas and then the prayer in travel has been fixed (as
two rakas) whereas the prayer in residence has become full (four
rakas).[1]

74. The marriage of Asma with the Prophet
-----------------------------------------

Hamza bin Abu Usayd as-Saidy narrated that his father, who was one of
the Prophets companions of Badr, had said: The messenger of Allah (s)
got married to Asma bint an-Numan al-Jowniyya and he sent me to bring
her. Hafsa[2] said to Aaisha: You dye her hair (with henna) and I will
comb it. They did so and then one of them said to Asma: The Prophet (s)
likes his wife, when coming in to him (for the first time), to say to
him: I seek the protection of Allah from you!! When she came in to the
Prophet (s) and he closed the door and loosened the curtain, he
stretched his hand towards her. She said to him: I seek the protection
of Allah from you. The Prophet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.258.  
 **[2]** The Prophets wife. She was Umars daughter.

(s) hid his face with his sleeves and said: I have sought the protection
of Allah three times. Then he went out to Abu Usayd and said to him: O
Abu Usayd, take her back to her family and give her two dresses. And so
the Prophet (s) divorced her. After that Asma often said: Call me the
unhappy one! Ibn Umar said from Hisham bin Muhammad that Zuhayr bin
Moawiya al-Jufi had said: She died of sadness.[1]

75. Fabrications against the Prophets wife
------------------------------------------

Lies had been fabricated against Ibraheem, the Prophets son, and his
mother Maria, the Prophets wife.

After that the Prophet (s) came to Aaisha carrying his son Ibraheem, who
looked like his father, and asked her about the reason behind that
fabrication. She said: It was jealousy that led me, as with many women,
to say that I have not found him looking like his father. She wanted to
confirm the lies of the fabricators by her saying but Allah has shown
the innocence of Ibraheem and his mother by virtue of Imam Ali (s).[2]

76. The day of Maghafeer[3]
---------------------------

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his Sahih[4] that Aaisha had said: The messenger
of Allah (s) often drank honey with Zaynab bint Jahsh (his wife) and
stayed with her. One day I and Hafsa[5] plotted that when the Prophet
(s) came to any of us, we would say to him: Have you eaten maghafeer?
One of them said to him so and he said: No, but I drank honey with
Zaynab bint Jahsh. I will never do that again but you tell no one of
that!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It has been mentioned by al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, vol.4 p.37,
by ibn Sad in his Tabaqat of ibn Sad, vol.8 p.104, by ibn Jareer and
others.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.4 p.39, Talkhees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi. Refer to them to see the wonders!!  
 **[3]** Maghafeer: a viscous secretion of a certain tree. It has bad
smell.  
 **[4]** Vol.3 p.136.  
 **[5]** Aaisha and Hafsa were also the Prophets wives.

77. Aaisha and Hafsa were ordered to repent
-------------------------------------------

Allah revealed to the Prophet (s): (If ye two turn in repentance to Him)
concerning his two wives; Aaisha and Hafsa and this did mean that they
disobeyed the orders of Allah because repentance would not be required
except from guilty ones. After that Allah said: (your hearts are indeed
so inclined) meaning that their hearts had inclined to other than the
obligations and duties they had to submit to.

78. Backing up against the Prophet (s)
--------------------------------------

Allah has said: **and if you back up each other against him, then surely
Allah it is Who is his Guardian, and Gabriel and -the believers that do
good, and the angels after that are the aiders. Maybe, his Lord, if he
divorce you, will give him in your place wives better than you,
submissive, faithful, obedient, penitent, adorers, fasters, widows and
virgins.** Qur'an, 66:4-5

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his Sahih[1] that Ubayd bin Hunayn had heard ibn
Abbas saying: I spent one year intending to ask Umar bin al-Khattab
about a verse of the Qur'an but I could not ask him respecting his
position until he went to offer the hajj and I went with him. While we
were coming back, he went behind some trees to relieve himself. I waited
until he finished his need and then I walked with him. I asked him: O
Ameerul Mo'mineen, who were the two that had backed up against the
Prophet (s) from among his wives? Umar said: They were Hafsa and Aaisha
The tradition is long. You may refer to it and ponder on the Quranic
verse to see how much the Prophet (s) has suffered from these two wives
and how much Imam Ali (s), after the Prophet (s), has suffered from
them.

79. The great example
---------------------

Allah has said: **Allah sets forth an example to those who disbelieve
the wife of Nuh and the wife of Lut: they were both under two of Our
righteous servants, but they acted treacherously towards them so they
availed them naught against Allah, and it was said: Enter both the fire
with those who enter. And Allah sets forth an example to those who
believe the wife of Firon (Pharaoh) when she said: My Lord,**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.3 p.136, 137.

**build for me a house with Thee in the garden and deliver me from Firon
and his doing, and deliver me from the unjust people.** Qur'an, 66:10-11
Such Allah has set forth an example to them (Aaisha and Hafsa) to warn
them of what they had done and to make them know that just being a wife
of a prophet or a tyrant would not benefit or harm. What would benefit
or harm was ones doing.

80. Engagement of Shiraf
------------------------

When the Prophet (s) wanted to engage Shiraf, the sister of Dahiyya
al-Kalbi, he sent Aaisha to see her. When Aaisha came back, the Prophet
(s) asked her: What did you see (how was the girl)? Aaisha said: There
is no use. The Prophet (s) said: In fact, there is a use! You have seen
a mole that made you shiver! She said: O messenger of Allah, no secret
can be hidden from you. No one can hide anything from you.[1]

81. She quarreled with the Prophet (s)
--------------------------------------

Aaisha said: Once I quarreled with the Prophet (s) before (my father)
Abu Bakr. I said to him: O messenger of Allah, be just! Abu Bakr slapped
me on my cheek and said: Do you say to the messenger of Allah be just?
My nose began bleeding.[2]

82. Being impolite to the Prophet (s)
-------------------------------------

One day she became impolite to the Prophet (s). From among what she had
said to him on that day was her saying: you who pretend that you are the
messenger of Allah!!![3]

83. Criticizing Othman and ordering to be killed
------------------------------------------------

All the historians have mentioned that Aaisha often criticized Othman,
faulted him and asked people to kill him. The traditions talking about
this matter were true and recurrent and were

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6 p.294, Tabaqat of ibn Sad, vol.8 p.115.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, p.116, Ihyaul Quloob by al-Ghazali, vol.2 p.35,
Mukashafatul Quloob by al-Ghazali, p.238.  
 **[3]** Ihyaul Quloob by al-Ghazali, vol.2 p.35, Mukashafatul Quloob by
al-Ghazali, p.238.

mentioned by all the scholars of Hadith.

Ibn Abul Hadeed said in his book Sharh Nahjol Balagha:[1] All the
historians have mentioned that Aaisha had great grudge against Othman.
One day she took out one of the Prophets dresses and spread it in her
house. She said to whoever came in to her: This is the dress of the
messenger of Allah. Before it ragged out, Othman had ragged the Sunna of
the Prophet (s). The historians said that the first one, who had called
Othman as Nathal,[2] was Aaisha. She often said: Kill Nathal! May Allah
kill Nathal! Al-Madaini mentioned in his book al-Jamal: When Othman was
killed, Aaisha was in Mecca. When she was informed of that, she thought,
with no doubt, that Talha was behind this matter. She said: Away with
Nathal! When Othman was killed, Talha took the keys of the treasury and
he took the camels of Othman which were in his house but when he failed
(to be the caliph) he gave them to Imam Ali (s). Abu Makhnaf said in his
book: When Aaisha knew that Othman was killed while she was in Mecca,
she hastened (towards Medina) saying: Ah you, the one of the finger! How
great of you! They found that Talha was the qualified one for it (the
caliphate).

Qayss bin Abu Hazim narrated that he had gone to offer the hajj with
Aaisha in the year when Othman had been killed. He heard her saying in
the way: Ah, the one of the finger! When she mentioned Othman, she often
said: Away with him! When she heard that Othman had been killed, she
said: Away with him! His guilt has killed him. Allah has punished him
for his deeds. O people of Quraysh, let the murder of Othman not
distress you. The worthiest one of this matter (the caliphate) is the
one of the finger (Talha). But when the news came saying that the people
had paid homage to Ali (s) as the caliph, she said: Woe to them! The
matter (caliphate) will never come back to Taym[3] at all.

Soon you will see her sayings and doings about the killing of Othman and
the homage of Imam Ali (s) which have bolted the ears and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** vol.2 p.77.  
 **[2]** Nathal was the surname of Othman near his mother.  
 **[3]** Taym was the tribe of Abu Bakr.

opposed the Shariah with its clear texts of the Book and the Sunna and
opposed all the evidences whether rational or traditional!

84. Some of her traditions about the Prophet (s)
------------------------------------------------

Aaisha often narrated from the Prophet (s) (ascribed to him) traditions
that could not be true at any way.

Al-Bukhari and others mentioned in their Sihah that she had said: The
first thing that was revealed to the Prophet (s) at the beginning of his
prophethood was good visions. Every vision he had seen in his sleep
became real like the light of morning. Then privacy was made beloved to
him. He always became alone in the cave of Hira. The angel came to him
with the revelation. The Prophet (s) said: I said: I can not read. He
took me to him and pressed me until I became too tired and then he let
me free and said to me: Read! I said: I can not read. He took me and
pressed me for the second time until I became too tired. Then he let me
free and said: **(Read in the name of your Lord Who created. He created
man from a clot. Read and your Lord is Most Honorable).** Aaisha said:
The Prophet (s) went back with these words while his heart was
shivering. He came to Khadeeja bint Khuwaylid (his wife) and said: Wrap
me! Wrap me! She wrapped him. He said to Khadeeja after telling her what
had happened: I feared for myself. Khadeeja said: No, Allah will never
disgrace you at all. You are too kind to your relatives; you assist the
tired, help the needy, entertain the guests and support the oppressed.
Aaisha added: Khadeeja went with him to her cousin Waraqa bin Nawfal,
who had been a Christian. He had written many chapters of the Bible in
Hebrew. He was an old man and he was blind. Khadeeja said to him: O
cousin, listen to your nephew![1] The Prophet (s) told him of what he
had seen. Waraqa said: This is the law that Allah has revealed to Moses.
I wish I was young! I wish I was alive when your people would drive you
away! The Prophet (s) said: Will they drive me away?[2]

This tradition showed that the Prophet (s)-Allah forbid-was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Prophet (s) was not the nephew of Waraqa bin Nawfal but the
Arabs often used such addressing.  
 **[2]** Irshad as-Sari fee Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.171.

suspicious of his prophethood after it had determined and suspicious of
the angel after he had come to him and of the Qur'an after it had been
revealed to him. The tradition showed that the Prophet (s) was so
frightened that he was in need of his wife to encourage him and to quiet
his heart and that he was in need of Waraqa, the blind Christian to
strengthen his heart and to tell him about his future where his people
would drive him away. All that was impossible!

We pondered on the saying that the angel took the Prophet (s) and
pressed him twice until he became too tired and exhausted and his heart
began shivering with fright and we find that it does not fit Allah the
Almighty nor His angels or His messengers especially the last of His
messengers. It has never been mentioned that such a thing had ever
happened to any one of the prophets at all. Some of the scholars have
discussed such things when explaining this tradition mentioned in Sahih
of al-Bukhari.[1]

We pondered on the dialogue that had occurred between the angel and the
Prophet (s)-according to this stupid tradition-and we found that the
Prophet (s) had not understood the intention of the angel when asking
him: Read! where the Prophet (s) had said: I cannot read. The angel had
intended the Prophet (s) to repeat after him what he would recite but
the Prophet (s) had understood that he had had to read while he had not
known reading. As if the Prophet (s) had thought-Allah forbid- that the
angel of Allah had asked him to do what he had not been able to do. All
of that was impossible and it was just fabrication. Was it possible for
a prophet not to understand what the angel said to him? Was it fit for
the angel to be unqualified to carry out the revelation of Allah? Allah,
His angels and His prophets are far above such raving!

The tradition was null due to its content and was null due to its series
of narrators. It was a mursal tradition. The event had taken place some
years before Aaisha was born. She was born four years before the advent
of the Prophets mission at least. Where had she been at the advent of
the revelation and where had she been when the angel had come down to
the Prophet (s) in the cave of Hira?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1, vol.3 when interpreting the sura of
Iqra (Read), Sahih of Muslim, Sahih of at-Tarmithi and Sahih of
an-Nassaiy when interpreting this sura.

You may say: she could ascribe the tradition to the Prophet (s) if she
had heard it from some one who had been there at the beginning of the
revelation.

We say: she could do that but then the tradition would not be as an
evidence nor would it be considered as a true tradition. It would be
mursal. The narrators had to be known and their reliability had to be
proved because the hypocrites were too many at the time of the Prophet
(s) and among them were some whom Aaisha had not known. In fact the
Prophet (s) himself had not recognized some of the hypocrites. Allah has
said: **And from among those who are round about you of the dwellers of
the desert there are hypocrites, and from among the people of Medina
(also); they are stubborn in hypocrisy; you do not know them; We know
them.** Qur'an, 9:101

The holy Qur'an has confirmed that there were many hypocrites at the
time of the Prophet (s). Our Sunni brothers agree with us on this matter
but they say that all the companions after the Prophet (s) were fair and
just! As if the existence of the Prophet (s) among them required the
hypocrisy of those hypocrites and when the Prophet (s) left to the
better world and the revelation stopped, those hypocrites became sincere
and fair Muslims, who all in all became within a day and a night fair,
just, reliable and loyal mujtahids, who could not be blamed for whatever
they did even if they contradicted the divine texts and annulled their
verdicts!

This tradition was just one from among many such mursal traditions of
Aaisha.

85. Her rising against Imam Ali (s)
-----------------------------------

She had waged a war against Imam Ali (s) revenging Othman, whom she
often criticized and incited people to rise against him. She often
abused Othman and said bad things about him.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Here are many holy texts that Aaisha has contradicted in her
dealing with Imam Ali (s) and Othman. The traditions that Aaisha has
contradicted might be more than all the traditions the three caliphs
have contradicted. It suffices you, as an example, to refer to her
tradition, we have mentioned previously in this book, First the prayer
has been legislated as two rakas and then the prayer in travel has been
fixed (as two

Allah has said in the Qur'an concerning His orders to the wives of the
Prophet (s): **And stay in your houses and do not display your finery
like the displaying of the ignorance of yore; and keep up prayer, and
pay the poor-rate, and obey Allah and His Messenger.** Qur'an, 33:33 But
Aaisha rose against Imam Ali (s) after he had been paid homage by all
the Muslims as the caliph and the first ones, who had paid him homage,
were Talha and az-Zubayr, who, with Aa'isha, had formed that great army
against Imam Ali (s).

She went out of her house, which Allah had ordered her to stay in. She
went out riding on a camel and leading three thousands of the rabbles,
among whom, unfortunately, were Talha and az-Zubayr who had broken their
homage to Imam Ali (s). She led her army through mountains and valleys
and she covered deserts and plains until she arrived at Basra, whose
wali was Othman bin Hunayf al-Ansari who had been appointed by Imam Ali
(s). Bloods were shed, honors were violated and many horrible disasters
had taken place. The historians had called this event as the minor event
(battle) of al-Jamal (the camel). It had taken place at the last of
Rabee ath-Thani[1] in the year thirty-six A.H. before Imam Ali (s) and
his army reached Basra.

When Imam Ali (s) came to Basra, Aa'isha with her followers got ready to
defend Basra against him. Imam Ali (s) refrained from fighting and
invited her to peace with great and convincing speech but she insisted
on the war and she began fighting. Then Imam Ali (s) could not do but to
follow the saying of Allah **And if two parties of the believers
quarrel, make peace between them; but if one of them acts wrongfully
towards the other, fight that which acts wrongfully until it returns to
Allah's command.** Qur'an, 49:9

Imam Ali (s) scored victory after great jihad, in which the believers
had proved themselves brave. This battle was called the major battle of
al-Jamal. It was on the tenth of Jumada al-Aakhira,[2] thirty-six A.H.
These two events were successive like the battles of Siffeen and
an-Nahrawan and like Badr, Uhud and al-Ahzab. These two events

------------------------------------------------------------------------

rakas) whereas the prayer in residence has become full (four rakas). She
herself had narrated this tradition and then she did the opposite.  
 **[1]** It is the fourth month of the Islamic calendar.  
 **[2]** The sixth month in the Islamic calendar.

have been detailed by the historians, who have recorded the events of
the year thirty-six of hijra.[1] They have also been mentioned by the
historians, who have biographied the lives of Imam Ali (s) and Aa'isha
and the lives of the companions who were with both of Imam Ali (s) and
Aa'isha.[2]

### About this tragedy

The historians said-as ibn Abul Hadeed mentioned in Sharh Nahjol
Balagha-[3] that Aa'isha had disliked Othman too much that once she had
took out one of the Prophets dresses and spread it in her house and she
said to whoever came to her: This is the dress of the messenger of
Allah. It has not been ragged yet while Othman has ragged his (the
Prophets) Sunna. The historians mentioned that the first one who had
called Othman as Nathal, was Aa'isha. She often said: Kill Nathal! May
Allah kill Nathal! Kill Nathal for he has disbelieved!

Talha and az-Zubayr were extremely incited people against Othman.
Al-Madainy said in his book al-Jamal: When Othman was killed, Aaisha was
in Mecca. When she was informed of that, she thought, with no doubt,
that Talha was behind this matter. She said: Away with Nathal! Oh, the
one of the finger! Oh, Abu Shibl! Oh, cousin! As if I look at his finger
while he is paid homage (to be the caliph).

When Othman was killed, Talha took the keys of the treasury and he took
the camels of Othman which were in his house but when he failed (to be
the caliph) he gave them to Ali bin Abu Talib (s).

At-Tabari[4] mentioned that Asad bin Abdullah had narrated from some
scholars that: When Aa'isha arrived at Sarf on her way from Mecca, she
met the slave of ibn Umm Kalam, who had been the slave of ibn Umm
Salama. She asked him: What is there? He said: They

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hisham bin Muhammad al-Kalbi in his book al-Jamal, at-Tabari in
Tareekh al-Umam wel Mulook, ibn al-Atheer in al-Kamil, al-Madaini in
al-Jamal and others. To see more details, refer Sharh Nahjol Balagha,
vol. 2 p.77-82, p.496-.  
 **[2]** Ibn Abdul Birr in al-Isteeab, ibn al-Atheer in Usdol Ghaba, ibn
Hajar in al-Isaba, ibn Sad in his Tabaqat and others.  
 **[3]** Vol.2 p.77.  
 **[4]** in his book Tareekh al-Umam wel-Mulook, vol.3 p.476.

have killed Othman and remained for eight days without a caliph. She
asked: What did they do then? He said: The people of Medina undertook
the matter and they came to the best of ends. They agreed unanimously on
Ali bin Abu Talib. She said: O my God! Let the heaven cover over the
earth if this matter comes to your man! Take me back! Take me back! She
went back to Mecca saying: By Allah, Othman has been killed unjustly. By
Allah, I will revenge his blood. Ibn Umm Kilab said to her: You often
said: Kill Nathal! He has disbelieved. She said: They made him repent
and then they killed him. I said and they said and my last saying is
from my first one.

When she arrived at Mecca, she stopped at the gate of the mosque and
then she went to the Rock (of the Kaaba). People crowded around her. She
said: O people, Othman has been killed unjustly. By Allah, I will
revenge his blood. She caused a great sedition just to revenge on Imam
Ali (s), the Prophets brother. Imam Ali (s) was neither the killer of
Othman nor had he incited people to kill him nor was he content with the
murder of Othman.

Ibn al-Atheer mentioned in al-Kamil[1] that Aa'isha had said: The
rabbles of the countries, the mobs of the villages and the slavers of
Medina have gathered together against this man and killed him unjustly.
They denied his appointing young men in the high positions of the state
whereas the ones before him have appointed young men like them and they
opposed him that he had taken his relatives as his close companions. He
repented and gave up what they had denied. When they did not find any
excuse against him, they attacked him and shed the inviolable blood in
the inviolable country and in the inviolable month and they seized the
prohibited property. By Allah, a finger of Othman is better than
thousands of thousands like them. By Allah, if the thing, for which they
have attacked him, was guilt, he would be purified of it as gold
purified of its refuse or as a dress purified of its dirt. They washed
him as a dress washed with water. Abdullah bin Aamir al-Hadhrami, who
was the emir of Mecca appointed by Othman, said: I am the first one who
will revenge (Othman). The Umayyads, who had fled from Medina to Mecca
after Othman had been killed, followed him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** vol.4 p.103.

### Umm Salamas situation toward this sedition

The historians mentioned as in Sharh Nahjol Balagha[1] that Aa'isha had
come to Umm Salama[2] cheating her to rise to revenge Othman. She said
to Umm Salama: O daughter of Abu Umayya, you are the first emigrant from
among the Prophets wives and you are the eldest one among them. The
Prophet (s) distributed our rights in your house and Gabriel more often
came down (to the Prophet (s)) in your house. Umm Salama said to her:
You have something behind this saying! Aa'isha said: People asked Othman
to repent and when he repented they killed him while he was fasting in
the inviolable month. I have intended to go to Basra. With me there are
az-Zubayr and Talha. Please come with us that Allah may fix this matter
by us. Umm Salama said: A little time ago you incited people against
Othman and said bad things about him. You did not call him except with
Nathal. You have known well the position of Ali near the messenger of
Allah! Aa'isha said: Yes! Umm Salama said: Do you remember when once the
Prophet (s) and we have been in travel and when we arrived at Qadeed,
the Prophet (s) became alone with Ali and when they took a long time
together, you wanted to attack them and I forbade you from doing that
but you disobeyed me and attacked them. A little later you came back
crying. I asked you what the matter was with you and you said to me: I
came to them while they were communing with each other. I said to Ali: I
have only one day with the messenger of Allah from every nine days. O
ibn Abu Talib, will you not let me be with him in my day? The messenger
of Allah (s) turned to me angrily and said: Go back! By Allah, no one
hates him (Ali) unless he will be out of faith. Then you came back with
regret and anger. Aa'isha said: Yes, I remember. Umm Salama said: I
remind you of something else; one day you and I were with the messenger
of Allah (s) when he said to us: Which of you will be the woman of the
hairy camel when the dogs of al-Hawab[3] will bark at her and she will
be deviated from the right path? We said: We resort to Allah and His
messenger not to do so!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** vol.2 p.77-.  
 **[2]** She was the Prophets wife.  
 **[3]** A place between Hijaz and Basra.

He patted on your back and said: Beware O you Humayra (Aa'isha)! Do not
be that woman! Umm Salama said: I have warned you of that! Aa'isha said:
I remember that. Umm Salama said: Do you remember when you and I were
with the messenger of Allah (s) in a travel when Ali undertook mending
the shoes of the Prophet (s) and washing his cloths? When the shoe of
the Prophet (s) was torn, Ali took it and sat under a tree to mend it.
Your father (Abu Bakr) and Umar came and we came into our tent. They
came in to the Prophet (s) and began talking with him until they said to
him: O messenger of Allah, we do not know how long you will be with us.
Would you please tell us who will be the caliph after you so that we
will resort to him? He said to them: I know well his place but if I tell
you who he is, you will divert from him as the Israelites have diverted
from Aaron. They kept silent and went out. Then we came to the messenger
of Allah. You said to him and you were the most daring one among us
before the Prophet (s): O messenger of Allah, whom you will appoint as
the caliph after you? He said: He is the mender of the shoe. We looked
and we saw Ali there. I said: O messenger of Allah, I do not see save
Ali. He said: It is him. Aa'isha said: Yes, I remember. Umm Salama said
to her: Then how will you rise against him after all that? Aa'isha said:
I just want to achieve reform for people.

Abu Muhammad Abdullah bin Muslim bin Qutayba mentioned in his book
Ghareeb al-Hadeeth that Umm Salama had come to Aa'isha again after that
and forbidden her from rising against Ali with severe words. Umm Salama
said to Aa'isha from among a long speech: The pillar of Islam will not
be straightened by women if it inclines and will not be patched by them
if it splits. Women should lower their gaze and protect their honor.
What should you say if the Prophet (s) saw you in some of these deserts
moving from a place to another? By Allah, if I do what you will do and
then it will be said to me enter into Paradise I will be ashamed to meet
Muhammad after exceeding the limits he has determined for me[1] to the
end of her speech which Aa'isha had not listened to.

Then Umm Salama wrote a book from Mecca to Imam Ali (s). She

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.79.

said in the book: Talha, az-Zubayr and their deviate followers have
intended to rise with Aa'isha and Abdullah bin Aamir against you
claiming that Othman had been killed unjustly. Allah will do away with
them with His might and power. If Allah has not ordered us (the Prophets
wives) to keep to our houses besides that you will not be pleased with
our going out, I will join you to invite for support to you. But I am
sending you my son Umar bin Abu Salama, who is as dear to me as my soul,
to fight with you. O Ameerul Mo'mineen, take care of him. When Umar came
to Ali (s), he honored him. Umar bin Abu Salama remained with Imam Ali
(s) until he participated in all his battles.

### The situation of Hafsa

Aa'isha sent for Hafsa and the other wives of the Prophet (s) asking
them[1] to rise with her to Basra. No one of them responded to her
except Hafsa (Umars daughter) but her brother Abdullah bin Umar came to
her and insisted on her to give up going with Aa'isha and then she
submitted to her brother after she had got ready to leave.[2]

### The situation of Malik bin al-Ashtar

Malik wrote from Medina to Aa'isha, who was in Mecca, saying to her: You
are the wife of the messenger of Allah (s). He has ordered you to keep
to your house. If you do, it will be better for you but if you refuse
save to take your stick, throw away your veil and show people your
hairs, I will fight you until I will take you back to your house; the
place which Allah has chosen to you.

### General leadership in this sedition

The general leadership in this sedition was in the hand of Aa'isha. She
gave orders, managed the armies, appointed emirs, deposed whomever she
liked,[3] sent her messengers with her books to the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Then they were busy offering the minor hajj as Aa'isha, Talha
and az-Zubayr themselves were.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.80.  
 **[3]** Ash-Shibi narrated from Muslim bin Abu Bakra that his father-as
in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.81-had said: When Talha and az-Zubayr
came to Basra, I girt myself with the sword intending to support them. I
came to Aa'isha. I found her

Muslims inciting them against Ameerul Mo'mineen (Ali) and inviting them
to support her. Some people submitted to her and other people of
understanding denied her invitation. The Umayyads had tried their best
and spent their monies to assist this sedition. They had joined Aa'isha
from everywhere. Marwan bin al-Hakam was among the army of Aa'isha but
sometimes he threw his arrows against the army of Aa'isha and sometimes
he threw his arrows against the army of Ali (s) saying: Which of them I
hit, it will be success! It was said that *he* had killed Talha.

### Aa'isha rises from Mecca to Basra

When Aa'isha had determined to march towards Basra, she gathered the
Umayyads and their followers to consult with them upon the matter. Some
of them said: We go to fight Ali. Aa'isha and some others said: We
cannot stand against the people of Medina. Some of them said: Let us go
to Sham. Aa'isha and some others said: Moawiya suffices in Sham. We move
towards Basra and Kufa. Talha has followers in Kufa and az-Zubayer has
followers in Basra. They agreed on that.

Abdullah bin Aamir offered much money and many camels and Yala bin
Umayya offered four hundred thousand (dirhams or dinars) and gave
sumpters to seventy men of the army. He gave Aa'isha a camel called
Askar, which was great and strong. When she saw it, she admired it. The
cameleer began talking to Aa'isha about the strength and tolerance of
the camel and he often called it, through his speech, Askar. When
Aa'isha heard this name, she sighed and said: Take it back. I do not
need it. She remembered that the Prophet (s) had mentioned to her this
name and forbidden her to ride on it. Then people looked for another
camel but they did not find any one looking like this camel. They
changed its covers and said to her: We found to you another one which is
greater and stronger than that one. She became calm and became pleased
with the camel.[1] She did not leave Mecca until she got all the
possible support of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

commanding and forbidding. She was the commander there. Then I
remembered a tradition that I had heard from the messenger of Allah (s)
People, who are led by a woman, will never succeed. I left them and came
back.  
 **[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.80.

Umayyads.

### The well of al-Hawab

Issam bin Qudama narrated from Akrima that ibn Abbas had said: One day
the messenger of Allah had said to his wives, who were all with him:
Which of you will be the woman of the hairy camel at whom the dogs of
al-Hawab will bark? Many people will be killed at her right and her
left; all of them will be in Hell and she will escape death after she
will have plotted.[1]

The historians have mentioned: When Aa'isha (and her army) arrived at
al-Hawab, in which there was a well of bani Aamir bin Sasaa, the dogs
began barking at them until the camels ran away. One of Aa'ishas
companions said: How many the dogs of al-Hawab are and how much their
barking is! Aa'isha held the reign of her camel and said: They are the
dogs of al-Hawab!!! Get me back! Get me back! I have heard the messenger
of Allah saying She mentioned the tradition.

Someone said to her: Wait a little! May Allah have mercy upon you. We
have passed al-Hawab.[2] She kept on her way until she arrived at Hafr
Abu Musa near Basra.

### The situation of Abul Aswad ad-DuAli

When Aa'isha and her army arrived at Hafr Abu Musa, Othman bin Hunays,
the wali of Imam Ali (s) on Basra at that time, sent Abul Aswad ad-Duali
to Aa'isha and her people to see what they had come for. He came to
Aa'isha and asked her about her intention. She said: I have come to
revenge Othmans blood. He said to her: No one of the killers of Othman
is in Basra. She said: You are right but they are with Ali bin Abu Talib
in Medina and I have come to Basra to arouse its people to fight against
Ali. Is it possible to revenge you on the whip of Othman and it is not
possible to revenge Othman on your

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.497.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.80. The Prophet (s) had warned
Aa'isha of riding this camel, passing by al-Hawab and the barking of the
dogs in a true tradition that had been mentioned by all the Muslims. It
was one of the signs of the prophethood of the Prophet (s) and the signs
of Islam. It has been well known by the Muslims since that time until
nowadays.

swords? He said to her: What is your business with the whip and the
sword? You are the captive of the messenger of Allah. He has ordered you
to keep to your house and to recite the Book of Allah. Women have
neither to fight nor have they to revenge bloods. Ameerul Mo'mineen
(Ali) is worthier of Othman than you and closer in kinship to him than
you. They both are the sons of Abd Manaf.[1] She said: I will not give
up until I do what I have come to do. O Abul Aswad, do you think that
there is one who may fight me? He said: By Allah, we will fight you
violently.

Then Abul Aswad came to az-Zubayr and said to him: O Abu Abdullah,
people have known well that on the day when Abu Bakr was paid homage,
you raised your sword and said: No one is worthier of this matter (the
caliphate) than Ali bin Abu Talib. What difference is between your
situation now and yours then! Az-Zubayr mentioned the blood of Othman
and said: You and your friend (Ali) are responsible of Othmans blood as
we have been informed. Then Abul Aswad came to Talha and he found him
insisting on his error and insisting on the war and sedition. Abul Aswad
came to Othman bin Hunayf and said to him: It is the war. Get ready for
it!

### Aa'isha and ibn Souhan

Aa'isha wrote, while she was in Basra, to Zayd bin Souhan al-Abdi: From
Aa'isha, the mother of the believers, the daughter of Abu Bakr and the
wife of the messenger of Allah, to her loyal son Zayd bin Souhan; stay
at home and discourage people from joining Ali bin Abu Talib. Let me
hear good news about you because you are the most reliable one among my
people to me.

He replied: From Zayd bin Souhan to Aa'isha bint Abu Bakr; Allah has
ordered you with something and has ordered us with something. He has
ordered you to stay at your house and He has ordered us to fight (for
the sake of Him). Your book has reached me ordering me to do unlike what
Allah has ordered me. If I obey you, I will do what Allah has ordered
you to do whereas you have done what Allah has ordered me to do. I do
not obey your order and I have no reply to your book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abd Manaf was the Prophets grandfather.

### Jariya bin Qudama and Aa'isha

At-Tabari mentioned[1] that al-Qassim bin Muhammad bin Abu Bakr had
said: Jariya bin Qudama as-Sadi came to Aa'isha and said to her: O Ummul
Momineen,[2] By Allah, killing Othman is lesser evil than your leaving
your house on this cursed camel to be liable to weapons. Allah has given
you a shelter and sanctity but you have torn your shelter and lost your
sanctity. He, who has encouraged you to fight, has led you to be killed.
If you have come to us obediently, go back to your house and if you have
come unwillingly, ask people to help you.

### A young man from Bani Sad

A young man from bani Sad scolded Talha and az-Zubayr for waging the
war. He said to them through a poem:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">You have protected your women
there,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">but you have led your mother
(Aa'isha),</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">I swear that this is not fair.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">She has been ordered to keep to her
house,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">But she has come out covering the
deserts,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">And letting her sons fight for
her</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">with arrows, spears and swords.</span>*

### A young boy from Juhayna

One day a young boy from the tribe of Juhayna came to Muhammad bin Talha
and asked him: Tell me about the killers of Othman! Muhammad bin Talha
said: The blood of Othman is divided into three thirds; a third is on
the woman of the camel (Aa'isha), a third is on the man of the red camel
(Talha) and a third is on Ali bin Abu Talib. The young boy of Juhayna
laughed and joined Ali (s).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In his Tareekh, vol.6 p.482 also the story of the young man with
Talha and az-Zubayr and the dialogue between al-Juhayni and Muhammad bin
Talha.  
 **[2]** Ummul Momineen (mother of the believers) was the title of the
wives of the Prophet (s).

### Al-Ahnaf bin Qayss and Aa'isha

Al-Bayhaqi mentioned[1] that al-Hasan al-Basri had said: On the day of
al-Jamal, al-Ahnaf bin Qayss said to Aa'isha: O Ummul Momineen, has the
messenger of Allah entrusted you with this matter? She said: By Allah,
no, he has not. He asked her: Have you found it in the Book of Allah?
She said: We recite (the Qur'an) as you recite. He said to her: Have you
seen the messenger of Allah asking for the help of his wives when the
Muslims were few while the polytheists were too many? She said: No, by
Allah, I have not. Al-Ahnaf said: Then what is our guilt?

In another tradition al-Ahnaf said to her: O Ummul Momineen, I will be
severe to you in my requests so do not be angry with me. She said: Ask
and I will listen to you. He said: Have you had a covenant from the
messenger of Allah about your rising? She said: No, I have not. He said
to her: Have you had a covenant from him showing that you are
infallible? She said: No, I have not. He said: Allah has determined
Medina to be your abode but you have chosen Basra and He has ordered you
to keep to the house of His prophet (s) but you have resided in the
house of one of bani Dhubba. O Ummul Momineen, please tell me; have you
come for war or peace? She replied painfully: For peace. He said to her:
By Allah if you have come and there is nothing between the people except
beating with shoes and throwing with stones, they will not come to peace
at the hands of you so how will it be while the swords are on their
shoulders? He embarrassed her and then she said: To Allah I complain of
the disobedience of my children.

### Abdullah bin Hakeem and Talha

Abdullah bin Hakeem at-Tameemi came to Talha and said to him: O Abu
Muhammad, is this not your book to us? Talha said: Yes, it is. Abdullah
said: A little ago you have written to us inviting us to depose Othman
and to kill him and after you have killed him you came to us revenging
his blood! I swear that this is not your belief. You just want this
worldly life (the rule). Wait! Wait! Why have you agreed to pay homage
to Ali? You have paid homage to him willingly

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** in his book al-Mahasin wel Masawi, vol.1 p.35.

and contentedly and then you broke your homage and came to involve us in
your sedition. He said: Ali invited me to pay homage to him after the
people had paid homage to him.[1] I knew that if I did not accept his
offer (to pay homage), I would not be safe and then he would incite his
companions against me.

### A wise man advising the people of Basra

When Aa'isha and her army had arrived at Mirbad,[2] a wise man from bani
Jashm made a speech to the people of Basra, who had crowded there. He
said: This people have come to you. They are afraid whereas they have
come from the place, in which birds and beasts feel safe. If they have
come to you revenging the blood of Othman, let them know that the
killers of Othman are other than us. O people, obey me and force them to
go back to where they have come from. If you do not do, you will not be
safe from a fierce war and dark sedition. Some people of Basra, whose
tendency was with Aa'isha and her followers, threw the man with
stones.[3]

### The speech of Aa'isha to the people of Basra

Aa'isha came on her camel Askar and called loudly: O people, do not
speak and keep silent! The people kept silent. She said: O people,
Ameerul Mo'mineen Othman had changed many things of the Sunna but he
purified that with repentance. He was killed unjustly after having
repented. They denied his beating with the whip, appointing the young
men as emirs and keeping the pasture of (al-Ghamam) for himself only.[4]
They killed him while he was in the cloths of the hajj in the inviolable
month and in the inviolable country. They slaughtered him like a camel.
The people of Quraysh threw their aim with their arrows and wounded
their mouths with their hands. They did not get by killing him anything
nor did they achieve their aim. By Allah, they will meet great disasters
that will shake standing ones and will make the sitting ones stand up.
Allah will let tyrants overcome them with no mercy pouring on them great
torment. O

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This perfidious liar was the first one who had paid homage to
Imam Ali (s).  
 **[2]** A place in Basra.  
 **[3]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.498.  
 **[4]** The pastures that were watered by the rain must be common among
all the people.

people, Othman had not committed a sin that permitted shedding his
blood. They rinsed him as rinsing a dirty dress and then they killed him
after his repentance and after being free from his guilt. They paid
homage to Ali bin Abu Talib unjustly without consulting with the public.
Do you think that I revenge you on the whip and the tongue of Othman and
I do not revenge Othman on your swords? Othman has been killed unjustly
and you are to revenge him on his killers. When you catch them, you are
to kill them and then you are to let the matter of the caliphate among
the group that Ameerul Mo'mineen Umar bin al-Khattab has chosen. Do not
let those, who have participated in killing Othman, be among the group
of the Shura.

The people got excited and they disagreed. Some of them said: Ummul
Momineen is right. Some others said: She has no right to intervene in
such matters. She is a woman that has to stay at home. Noises and
nonsense became loud until the people began beating each other with
shoes and throwing each other with stones and then they became two
parties; one party with Othman bin Hunayf and the other with Aa'isha and
her companions.[1]

### Getting ready to fight

The two parties got ready to fight each other. Othman bin Hunayf invited
Aa'isha by the name of Allah and Islam and he reminded Talha and
az-Zubayr of their homage to Imam Ali (s). They said: We revenge the
blood of Othman. He said to them: It is not your matter! Where are his
children? Where are his cousins, who are worthier of him than you? No!
But you have envied Ali because all the people have agreed on him
whereas you have looked forward to this matter (the caliphate) and you
have prepared to get it. Was there anyone severer to Othman than you?
They abused him and his mother obscenely. Then he said to az-Zubayr: It
was Safiyya[2] and her position to the Prophet (s) that had taken you
near the shadow. He said to Talha: I know well what to do to you. Then
he said: O Allah, I have advised them! Then people began fighting each
other

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.499.  
 **[2]** She was the Prophets aunt.

violently and then they separated and made peace among them on certain
conditions that had been detailed by the historians. They put off the
matter until Imam Ali (s) would arrive at Basra. The two parties made
Allah the witness on the covenant of peace they had written and they
took strong oath to keep to the covenant. The book of the treaty was
signed by the two parties.

Aa'isha, Talha and az-Zubayr decided to write to the tribes to attract
the Arabs and especially the notables and the chiefs in a way that the
emir Othman bin Hunayf and his companions would not know. When the
people of al-Jamal (Aa'isha and her followers) had prepared their
affairs, they marched in a dark, rainy and stormy night wearing armors
under their cloths to conceal their intention. They arrived at the
mosque at the time of Fajr prayer. Othman bin Hunayf had come to the
mosque before them. Othman advanced to lead the people in offering the
prayer but the companions of Talha and az-Zubayr prevented him and let
az-Zubayr advance to lead the prayers. The policemen and the guards of
the treasury came and took az-Zubayr out and advanced Othman to lead the
prayers then the companions of az-Zubayr could put Othman aside to
advance az-Zubayr. They still did so until the sun was about to rise.
The people in the mosque shouted at them: Do you not fear Allah, O you
the companions of Muhammad? The sun shone and az-Zubayr succeeded to
lead the prayers.

When az-Zubayr finished the prayer, he ordered his armed companions to
capture Othman bin Hunayf. They beat him too severely until he was about
to die. They plucked out his beard, moustache, eyebrows, eyelashes and
every hair in his head and face. They arrested the policemen and the
guards of the treasury, who were seventy faithful men of the followers
of Ali (s). They took them with Othman bin Hunayf to Aa'isha, who said
to Abban bin Othman (the son of the killed caliph): Go to him (Othman
bin Hunayf) and behead him because the Ansar have killed your father.
Othman bin Hunayf called out: O Aa'isha, Talha, Zubayr! My brother Sahl
is the emir of Ali on Medina. I swear by Allah that if I am killed, he
will let his sword slaughter your families and tribes without leaving
anyone. They gave up killing him but Aa'isha ordered az-Zubayr to kill
the policemen and the guards. She said to him: I was told about what

they had done to you. Az-Zubayr slaughtered them as if he slaughtered
sheep. His son Abdullah undertook killing them. They were seventy men.
Some guards remained guarding the treasury and said: We do not hand it
over to you until Ameerul Mo'mineen (Ali) comes. Az-Zubayer with his
soldiers went to them at night. He killed some of them and captured
fifty men of them and then he killed the captives. This was the first
treason in Islam and the policemen and guards, who were killed, were the
first Muslims who were killed after being captured. They were one
hundred and twenty men and it was said-as in Sharh Nahjol Balagha-[1]
that they were four hundred men.

After that they drove Othman bin Hunayf away and he joined Imam Ali (s).
When he saw Imam Ali (s), he cried and said: When I left you, I was an
old man. Now I come back to you with neither beard nor hair. Imam Ali
(s) said: We are Allahs and to Him we shall return! He said that three
times.

Imam Ali (s) has suffered a great pang in this tragedy. He often
complained his pain and sadness to Allah when saying from above the
minbar: O Allah, I resort to You to be my supporter against the people
of Quraysh and their followers. They have killed my kin, belittled my
high position and agreed on fighting me for something which is minethere
is something of the truth that one has to take and something one has to
leave. Then he mentioned the people of al-Jamal (the camel) and said:
they come out dragging the sanctity of the messenger of Allah (his wife
Aa'isha) as a bondmaid dragged when being bought. They brought her
(Aa'isha) towards Basra whereas they (Talha and az-Zubayr) had kept
their women in their houses. They brought the preserved woman of the
messenger of Allah out to themselves and to their army, which every one
of its men had paid homage to me willingly and obediently. They came to
my officer and the keepers of the treasury of the Muslim and other
people in it (Basra). They killed some of them after being captives and
killed others treacherously

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.2 p.501.

### The situation of Hakeem bin Jabala

When Hakeem bin Jabala knew about what the followers of Aa'isha had done
to Othman bin Hunayf, the keepers of the treasury and other people of
Basra, he rose with three hundred men from the tribe of Abdul Qayss,
which he was the chief of. The army of Aa'isha put her on a camel and
came to meet Hakeem and his men. That day was called the minor (event of
the) camel whereas the day of Aa'isha against Imam Ali (s) was called
the major (event of the) camel. The two parties fought each other with
the swords. Hakeem and his men had proved themselves brave in this
fight. A man from the army of Aa'isha attacked Hakeem. He struck Hakeem
and cut his leg. The man himself fell down of his horse. Hakeem knelt,
took his cut leg and threw the man with it then he moved to him and
killed him by strangling him. Hakeem was one of the famous Arab heroes
and one of the brave Muslims who had believed in Ahlul Bayt (s). His son
al-Ashraf, three of his brothers and all his three hundred companions
were killed with him in this fight. When Aa'isha, Talha and az-Zubayr
overcame Basra after killing Hakeem and his men and after driving Othman
bin Hunayf away, Talha and az-Zubayr disagreed on the prayer; each one
of them wanted to lead the people in offering the prayers because each
one of them thought that if he offered the prayer behind the other, it
would mean that he submitted to him and accepted him as the leader.
Aa'isha intervened and reconciled Talha with az-Zubayr. She made
Abdullah bin az-Zubayr lead people one day and Muhammad bin Talha the
other day. When they entered the treasury in Basra and found the great
monies in it, az-Zubayr became too delighted and he recited: **Allah has
promised you many gains that ye shall acquire, and He has given you
these beforehand.** Qur'an, 48:20 and then he said: We are worthier of
this wealth than the people of Basra.

### Imam Ali arrives at Basra

After that Imam Ali (s) with his army arrived at Basra. Aa'isha and her
army marched towards him to prevent him from entering Basra. Imam Ali
(s) refrained from fighting them. He tried as possible as he could to
avoid the war and to remove the enmity between the two parties. He
wanted to end the matter in peace in a way that would

please Allah and His messenger.

Ibn Jareer at-Tabari said[1]: On that day Ali sent for az-Zubayr and
reminded him of a word that the Prophet (s) had said Your aunts son will
fight you unjustly. Az-Zubayr said: I will never fight you. He left and
came back to his son Abdullah. He said to him: I have no will in this
war. His son said to him: When you have come, you have had a will but
when you saw the banners of Ali bin Abu Talib and knew that death would
be under them, you became coward. His son made him too angry until he
began shouting. He said to his son: I have taken an oath that I would
never fight him. His son said: Expiate (breaking) your oath by setting
your slave Sarjas free. He set his slave free and joined the warriors.

At-Tabari added: Ali said to az-Zubayr: Do you revenge Othmans blood on
me whereas you have killed him? May Allah punish the one of us (me and
you), who has been severer to Othman, with what he hates.[2]

Then Ali sent for Talha and said to him: O Talha, you have brought the
wife of the messenger of Allah to fight by her and you have hidden your
wife in your house. Have you not paid homage to me? Talha said: I have
paid homage to you unwillingly. Talha insisted on the war.

Ali went back to his companions and said to them: Which of you will show
them this Qur'an[3] with what it has in it? If his hand is cut, he
should hold it by the other hand and if the other hand is cut, he should
catch it with his teeth. A young man said: I will do. Imam Ali (s) asked
all his companions to do that but no one of them accepted it save that
young man. Imam Ali (s) said to the young man: Put forth this Qur'an and
say to them: it is between us and you from its beginning to its end. For
the sake of Allah spare our bloods and your bloods! When the young man
came towards the army of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In his book Tareekh al-Mulook wel Umam, vol.3 p.519.  
 **[2]** Tareekh al-Umam wel-Mulook, vol.3 p.520. Allah had responded to
Imam Ali (s) when Amr bin Jurmooz killed az-Zubayr on that very day.  
 **[3]** We would like to refer to that Amr bin al-Aass had made the
trick of using the copies of the Qur'an in the battle of Siffeen after
this event but he had used it wrongly due to his evil tendency.

Aa'isha carrying the Qur'an in his hand, they attacked him and cut his
hands. He took the Qur'an with his teeth until he was killed. Then Imam
Ali (s) said to his companions: You are permitted to fight. Attack them!

The woman of the camel came to the battle and her head was agitating
with arrogance and disdain. She became more daring than a lion. She
aroused enthusiasm in her army pushing them towards death for the sake
of her camel. She turned left and said: Who are the people on my left?
Sabra bin Shayman replied: We are your children; bani Azd. She said: O
aal[1] Ghssan, keep your brave fighting today as we have heard your poet
saying:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">The people of Ghassan fought bravely with
their swords.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">So did Kab, Ouss and Shabeeb.</span>*

The people of Azd took the dung of the camel, smelt it and said: It is
the dung of our mothers camel. Its smell is like the smell of musk.

She turned right and said: Who are the people on my right? They said: We
are from the tribe of Bakr bin Wail. She said: About you the poet has
said:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">They came to us with their weapons and
glory,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">as if they were Bakr bin Wail.</span>*

She came near a battalion and asked: Where are you from? they said: We
are bani Najiya. She said: How excellent! Qurashi[2] swords! As if she
set fire of zeal inside them. The bearers of the banners devoted
themselves to her camel. They recited:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">O mother, the wife of the
Prophet,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">the wife of the blessed and guided
one,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">we are bani Dhubba.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">We do not flee even if we see our skulls
falling down,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">from which red blood flows.</span>*

She still aroused their enthusiasm until her camel was killed after
forty men had been killed under its reign. It was the defeat by the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Aal means family of.  
 **[2]** From Quraysh.

will of Allah! If Imam Ali (s) himself did not protect her, she would
face what could not be even imagined as a result of this dark sedition
she had caused and the separation and disagreement among the Muslims she
had brought about which would last until the Day of Resurrection. All
the events that took place later on were by consequence of this
sedition; Siffeen, an-Nahrawan, the tragedy of Kerbalaeven the disaster
of Palestine in our present age.

The brother of the Prophet (s) and the father of the two grandsons of
the Prophet (s) himself kept close to the camel, by whose death the
sedition was put out. As the camel fell down with its howdah, in which
Aa'isha was, Imam Ali (s) hastened towards it to protect the wife of the
Prophet (s). He ordered Muhammad bin Abu Bakr, Aa'ishas brother, and
some faithful women to accompany Aa'isha back to Medina. Imam Ali (s)
gifted his warriors with what made them pleased and he set free the
captives of his bitter enemies. He surrounded Aa'isha with respect and
regard due to his high morals, exalted virtues and deep wisdom.

This event has been called the event of the major camel. It has taken
place on Thursday, the Tenth of Jumada al-Aakhira in thirty-six A.H.

Thirteen thousands of the children of Aa'isha, among whom were az-Zubayr
and Talha unfortunately, were killed and about one thousand of Imam Alis
followers were martyred.

Aa'isha was one of the most aware people of that Ali (s) was the
brother, the guardian and the heir of the Prophet (s) and that he loved
Allah and His messenger and Allah and His messenger loved him and that
he was to the Prophet (s) as was Aaron to Moses except for prophethood.
She had heard the Prophet (s) saying: O Allah, be a supporter of whoever
supports him (Ali) and an enemy of whoever opposes him, and help whoever
helps him and betray whoever betrays him. May Allah have mercy upon Ali.
O Allah, turn the truth with him wherever he turns.

She had witnessed the farewell hajj with the Prophet (s) and she had
seen him on the day of the great hajj declaring the virtues of Ali (s)
and ordering his umma one time to keep to the two weighty things; the
Book of Allah and the Prophets progeny and another time to follow his
guardian Ali (s) warning his umma of deviation if

it would not submit to the Book of Allah and Ahlul Bayt (s) together.

On the day of al-Ghadeer she had seen the Prophet (s) ascending the
minbar to declare his covenant to Ali (s) and to entrust him with
leadership of the umma after him before the sight and the hearing of the
thousands of Muslims who had come back after offering the last hajj with
the Prophet (s).

She had seen the Prophet (s) looking at Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn and saying to them: I am war against whoever fights you and
peace to whoever makes peace with you.[1]

She had seen the Prophet (s) covering Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn with his garment and saying: I am war against whoever fights
them and peace to whoever makes peace with them and enemy to whoever
opposes them.[2] Besides many other true traditions like these ones that
Aa'isha had known well for she had been said to be as the bag of
traditions. A poet said about her:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">She has memorized forty thousand
traditions,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">But she has forgotten a verse of the holy
Book.</span>*

It sufficed her that her father Abu Bakr had said: One day I saw the
messenger of Allah pitching a tent[3] and then he leant on an Arabic bow
while Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn were inside the tent. The
messenger of Allah (s) said: O people, I am peace to whoever makes peace
with the people of the tent, war against whoever fights them and a
supporter to whoever supports them. Those, who loves them, are lucky and
of pure births and those, who hates them, are unlucky and of bad
births.[4]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Musnad of Ahmad, vol2 p.442, Mustadrak of al-Hakim, at-Tafseer
al-Kabeer by at-Tabarani. At-Tarmithi has mentioned this tradition from
Zayd bin Arqam as in al-Isaba by ibn Hajar, biography of Fatima (s).  
 **[2]** As-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa by ibn Hajar chap.11. He added that the
Prophet (s) had said: The war against Ali is a war against me and the
peace with Ali is peace with me.  
 **[3]** This tent might be the garment, with which the Prophet (s) had
covered Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn when Allah had revealed to
him: (Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying), 33:33.  
 **[4]** Abqariyat Muhammad by Professor Abbas Mahmood al-Aqqad.

Had Ummul Momineen Aa'isha, when rising against Imam Ali (s), intended
to fight for the sake of Allah, His messenger and the afterlife? Had she
been one of the loyal believers seeking after the reward that Allah had
promised the wives of the Prophet (s) of when saying: **O Prophet! say
to your wives: If you desire this world's life and if you desire Allah
and His Messenger and the latter abode, then surely Allah has prepared
for the doers of good among you a mighty reward?** Qur'an, 33:28-29

Had she thought that there was leniency between Allah and her permitting
her to do what Allah had prohibited all the human beings from doing? She
committed against Imam Ali (s) a great crime as if she had been safe
from the threat of Allah when saying: **O wives of the prophet! whoever
of you commits an open indecency, the punishment shall be increased to
her doubly; and this is easy to Allah.** Qur'an, 33:30

Had she found her rising against Imam Ali (s) as worshipping Allah and
being obedient to Him and to His messenger and doing good as Allah had
said: **And whoever of you is obedient to Allah and His Messenger and
does good, We will give to her her reward doubly, and We have prepared
for her an honorable sustenance.** Qur'an, 33:31

Had she considered the house of ibn Dhabba as her house, which Allah had
ordered her to stay in? Had she found her leading the armies as a
pavilion that Talha and az-Zubayr had erected for her to protect her
from (the bedizenment of the time of ignorance) or to make her free to
obbey Allah and His messenger and to offer prayers and to pay zakat?

Had she found, after doing all that, that she had carried out the order
of Allah when saying: **And stay in your houses. Bedizen not yourselves
with the bedizenment of the Time of Ignorance; and keep up prayer, and
pay the poor-rate, and obey Allah and His Messenger?** Qur'an, 33:33

What would she or her followers say about the saying of Allah when
addressing her and her friend (Hafsa) in this verse: **If you both
turn**

**to Allah, then indeed your hearts are already inclined (to this);[1]
and if you back up each other against him, then surely Allah it is Who
is his Guardian, and Gabriel and the believers that do good, and the
angels after that are the aiders.[2] Maybe, his Lord, if he divorces
you, will give him in your place wives better than you, submissive,
faithful, obedient, penitent, adorers, fasters, widows and virgins?**
Qur'an, 66:4-5

It was enough as an evidence against them both the great example that
Allah had mentioned in the sura of Tahreem when saying: **Allah sets
forth an example to those who disbelieve the wife of Noah and the wife
of Lot: they were both under two of Our righteous servants, but they
acted treacherously towards them so they availed them naught against
Allah, and it was said: Enter both the fire with those who enter. And
Allah sets forth an example to those who believe the wife of Firon
(Pharaoh) when she said: My Lord! build for me a house with Thee in the
garden and deliver me from Firon and his doing, and deliver me from the
unjust people.**

How great the verses of the poet of Ahlul Bayt (s) were when saying:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">O Aa'isha, what could we say about your
war,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">when you have followed the way of
dangers?</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Sufficed you not the tradition of the
house</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Mentioned by al-Bukhari?[3]</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">It has been said that you (Aa'isha) have
repented</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">And Ali has been wronged!</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Then why did you prostrate yourself to
thank Allah</span>*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This verse confirms that they (Aa'isha and Hafsa) have committed
guilt and that they must repent.  
 **[2]** This is the aim behind all these preparations to defend the
Prophet (s) against his two wives (Aa'isha and Hafsa) that if all the
inhabitants of the earth have backed up each other against the Prophet
(s), Allah would have not prepared more than this to defeat them.  
 **[3]** Al-Bukhari has mentioned in his Sahih, vol.2 p.125 when talking
about the houses of the Prophets wives that Abdullah had said: Once the
Prophet (s) pointed at the house of Aa'isha and said: Here is the
sedition! Here is the sedition where the (horn of) Satan will appear!
Muslim said in his Sahih, vol.2 p.403 that once the Prophet (s) had gone
out of Aa'ishas house saying: The head of disbelief comes out from here
where the (horn of) Satan will appear.

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">When he (Ali) was killed?[1]</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Why did you ride the mule on the day of
al-Hasan</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">to light the fire of
seditions?[2]</span>*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** When Aa'isha was told that Imam Ali (s) had been killed, she
prostrated herself to thank Allah and when she raised her head, she
recited: She dropped her stick and settled after roving,  
 as a traveler when being delighted after coming back from travel.  
 Then she asked who had killed him. It was said to her that it was a man
from (the tribe of) Murad. She said something bad about Imam Ali (s).
Zaynab bint Umm Salama denied that and said to Aa'isha: O Aa'isha, do
you say such a thing about Ali? Aa'isha said: I have forgotten. Whenever
I forget, you are to remind me.  
 **[2]** Imam Hasan (s) had warned the Hashemites before his death of a
sedition that the Umayyads would cause if the Hashemites wanted to bury
him beside the tomb of his grandfather, the Prophet (s). He asked his
brother Imam Husayn (s) to avoid dangers (of that sedition) if they
would take place and to bury him in al-Baqee graveyard beside the tomb
of his grandmother Fatima bint Asad (Imam Alis mother). He made him
swear that he should not shed even a drop of blood for him.  
 When Imam Hasan (s) died, the Hashemites wanted to take his body to
(the tomb of) the Prophet (s) (to do the last visit) or they wanted to
bury him beside the tomb of the Prophet (s) if they felt that no
sedition would happen but the Umayyads got ready with their arms to wage
a war. At the head of them were Marwan bin al-Hakam and Saeed bin
al-Aass. Marwan was calling: Perhaps a battle is better than ease! Is
Ameerul Mo'mineen (Othman) buried outside Medina whereas al-Hasan is
buried with the messenger of Allah? They brought Aa'isha on a mule. She
prevented the Hashemites from entering her house (the Prophets house)
where the Prophet (s) had been buried.  
 Abul Faraj al-Isfahane mentioned in his book Maqatil at-Talibiyeen that
Ali bin Tahir bin Zayd had said: When they (the Hashemites) wanted to
bury al-Hasan, Aa'isha rode on a mule and asked for the help of the
Umayyads, Marwan and their followers. One of the poets said: one day on
a mule and one day on a camel  
 Al-Massoodi, the historian, mentioned that Aa'isha had ridden on a gray
mule in her second occasion against Ahlul Bayt (s) and that her nephew
al-Qassim bin Muhammad bin Abu Bakr had come to her saying: O aunt, we
have not washed our heads from the day (the battle) of the red camel
yet. Do want people to say the day of the gray mule?  
 One of the poets has said:  
 You have ridden on a camel and then on a mule.  
 If you live longer, you will ride on an elephant.  
 You have a ninth out of the eighth (of the Prophets inheritance)  
 but you have seized the all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here we want to discuss the matter of the Prophets house, in which
Aa'isha had lived, whether it was her pure possession or not that she
had the right to allow whoever she liked to enter into it and to prevent
whoever she liked from entering it. An owner has the right to deal with
his ownership as he likes. Had the Prophet (s) sold his house or donated
it to Aa'isha? Certainly not! No one has ever said that. Yes, the
Prophet (s) had given her one of the rooms to live in as he had given
his other wives a room to each of them. A husband has to house his wife
in his house as one of her rights on her husband. Housing a wife is one
of the obligatory duties of a husband towards his wife and when a wife
lives in her husbands house it does not mean that the house becomes her
own possession. The actual ownership of the house is still the
husbands.  
 If we supposed that Aa'isha had possessed her room because it was in
her hand, then why could Fadak not be Fatimas possession for the same
reason? There is a great difference between the two hands; between the
daughter who deals with the possessions of her father and before his
sight and hearing which is a sign of ownership no doubt especially if
the daughter is going from her fathers house to her husbands and between
the wife who has a hand over a room in her husbands house. We ask the
human traditions to judge between these two hands!  
 The caliph Abu Bakr (Aa'ishas father) might have made his daughter the
owner of the Prophets house due to his general guardianship and this
could be but we hoped that he would treat the daughter of the messenger
of Allah (concerning Fadak which was in her hand) in the same way as he
had treated his daughter. If he had done so, it would have lead to unite
the umma and to save it from separation. But there is no power save in
Allah, the Exalted, the Almighty.
