Chapter Seven the Slips of the Public (the Sunni)
=================================================

98. Trusting in everyone who has accompanied the Prophet (s)
------------------------------------------------------------

The Sunni have trusted in every Muslim who has accompanied the Prophet
(s) even for one time as if companionship with the Prophet (s),
according to their opinions, has made the companions infallible;
therefore they have trusted in all what the companions have narrated (as
they have claimed) from the Prophet (s) concerning the laws and the
verdicts of the Sharia. They have relied on that and acted according to
it without researching whether the companions, who have narrated the
traditions, were fair, reliable, truthful and faithful or not. This is
not possible at all because companionship itself, even if it is
considered as a virtue, cannot be as evidence of infallibility. The
companions of the Prophet (s) were like the rest of people; among them
there were fair, virtuous, faithful and loyal believers, who were a lot,
and also there were among them disobedient and hypocrite people besides
that there were some companions whose real states were unknown.

The legal evidences have required that a narrator of a single tradition
must be fair and trustworthy even if he was one of the Prophets
companions but as for the unfair and untrustworthy narrator, his
traditions would be of no value at all according to definite evidences.
As for the unknown companions, they would be proved to be fair and then
it could be relied on their tradition concerning the branches of Islam
and not the main principles but if they were proved to be unfair, it
would be not possible to act

according to their traditions.

This is what we know of the opinion of the Sunni concerning the
traditions narrated by a single narrator. There is no disagreement
between us and them about this matter. But they have insisted on relying
on the traditions narrated by the companions without researching or
pondering on the fairness and truthfulness of the narrators believing
that the companions all in all were fair and trustworthy as if they
wanted to sanctify the Prophet (s) by considering all his companions as
fair and faithful. This is a great mistake and ignorance that we deem
them to be far above. Sanctifying the Prophet (s) is by sanctifying his
Sunna and keeping it safe from the distortion of the fabricators. The
Prophet (s) has warned his umma of the fabricators when he has said:
Fabricators will fabricate a lot of lies against me. He, who fabricates
lies against me intendedly, will be in Hell.

If our (Sunni) brothers ponder on the clear verses of the Qur'an, they
will find them full of the mention of the hypocrites and the harm they
have caused to the Prophet (s). Allah has said: **When the hypocrites
come to you, they say: We bear witness that you are most surely Allah's
Messenger; and Allah knows that you are most surely His Messenger, and
Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are surely liars.** Qur'an, 63:1
and **and when the eyes turned dull, and the hearts rose up to the
throats, and you began to think diverse thoughts of Allah. There the
believers were tried and they were shaken with severe shaking. And when
the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease began to say:
Allah and His Messenger did not promise us (victory) but only
delusion.** Qur'an, 33:10-12 and **And from among those who are round
about you of the dwellers of the desert there are hypocrites, and from
among the people of Medina (also); they are stubborn in hypocrisy; you
do not know them; We know them.** Qur'an, 9:101[1] and **Certainly they
sought (to sow) dissension before, and they meditated plots against you
until the truth came, and Allah's commandment prevailed although they
were averse (from it).** Qur'an, 9:48 and **They swear by Allah that
they did not speak, and certainly**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He, who ponders on this verse and other verses like it, knows
well that there have been hypocrites whose faith and fairness were
unknown.

**they did speak, the word of unbelief, and disbelieved after their
Islam, and they had determined upon what they have not been able to
effect, and they did not find fault except because Allah and His
Messenger enriched them out of His grace; therefore if they repent, it
will be good for them; and if they turn back, Allah will chastise them
with a painful chastisement in this world and the hereafter.** Qur'an,
9:74

Would that I know where the hypocrites have gone after the Prophet (s)?
They have caused him a lot of pains and distresses throughout his
lifetime. They rolled the rocks before him[1] and tried to prevent him
from spreading the Qur'an. The historians mentioned that the Prophet (s)
had marched to the battle of Uhud with one thousand of his companions
but before they reached their destination, three hundred hypocrites had
gone back[2] and there might be some other hypocrites who had not gone
back for fear of being exposed.

Even if there were only these three hundred hypocrites among this
thousand of the Muslims, it would be enough evidence confirming that
hypocrisy was spread at the time of the revelation; then how could it be
ceased only when the revelation stopped and the Prophet (s) went to the
better world? Was the existence of the Prophet (s) the reason behind the
hypocrisy of the hypocrites? Was his death the reason behind their
faith, fairness and their being the best of the people after the
prophets? How did they change just when the Prophet (s) died to be,
after being hypocrites, sacred and holy people that no one could suspect
whatever crimes and sins they committed? What was the purpose of this
blind obstinacy that disgusted the hearings, the sights and the hearts?!

The Qur'an and the Sunna have many evidences proving that the hypocrites
have remained on their hypocrisy without repenting. Allah has said:
**(And Muhammad is no more than a messenger; the**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Some ones of the companions had rolled rocks in the night of
al-Aqaba to frighten the she-camel of the Prophet (s) to make him fall
down. That night the Prophet (s) was coming back from the battle of
Tabook where he had left Imam Ali (s) in his place in Medina. Ahmad bin
Hanbal has mentioned in his Musnad, vol.5 a long tradition narrated by
Abut Tufayl about this calamity and at the end of the tradition it has
been said that the Prophet (s) had cursed a group of his companions on
that day.  
 **[2]** Mentioned by all the historians who have recorded the events of
Uhud.

**messengers have already passed away before him; if then he dies or is
killed will you turn back upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon
his heels, he will by no means do harm to Allah in the least and Allah
will reward the grateful)** 3:144.

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his Sahih[1] a tradition narrated by Abu Hurayra
that the Prophet (s) had said: While I will be standing (on the Day of
Resurrection), a group of people will come. When I know them, a man (an
angel) will come out between me and them saying to them: Come on! I will
say: Where to? He will say: To Hell, by Allah. I will ask: What for? he
will say: They have apostatized after you. Then another group will come.
When I know them, a man (an angel) will come out between me and them
saying to them: Come on! I will ask: Where to? He will say: To Hell, by
Allah. I will say: What for? He will say: They have apostatized after
you. I think that only a very few of them will be rescued.

Al-Bukhari has mentioned in the same chapter a tradition narrated by
Asma bint Abu Bakr that the Prophet (s) had said: I will be at the pond
(on the Day of Resurrection) to see who will come to me from you. Many
people will be taken before me. I will say: O my Lord, they are from me
and from my umma. It will be said: Do you know what they have done after
you? By Allah, they have kept on turning back on their heels
(apostatizing). Ibn Maleeka often prayed to Allah by saying: O Allah, we
seek Your protection from turning back on our heels or being seduced
from our faith.

He has also mentioned in the same chapter a tradition narrated by ibn
al-Musayyab that the Prophet (s) had said: Some of my companions will
come to me at the pond but they will be taken away. I will say: O my
Lord, they are my companions! He will say: You do not know what they
have done after you! They have apostatized.

He has also mentioned in the same chapter a tradition from Sahl bin Sad
that the Prophet (s) had said: I will precede you to the pond (in
Paradise). Whoever will come to me, will drink from the pond and whoever
will drink, will never be thirsty forever. Some people will come to me.
I know them and they know me but then they will be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.4 p.94.

prevented from being with me. Abu Hazim said: An-Numan bin Abu Ayyash
heard this from me and he asked me: Have you heard this as it is from
Sahl? I said: Yes, I have. He said: I swear that I have heard it from
Abu Saeed al-Khidri but he added: I will say: They are from me. It will
be said to me: You do not know what they have changed after you! I will
say: Away with whoever has changed (the Sunna) after me!

He has also mentioned a tradition from Abu Hurayra that the Prophet (s)
had said: On the Day of Resurrection some of my companions will come to
me but they will be taken away from the pond. I will say: O my Lord,
they are my companions! He will say: You do not know what they have
changed after you. They have turned back on their heels.

In the same chapter Abdullah narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: I
will precede you to the pond (in Paradise). Some of you will come to me
and then they will be taken away before me. I will say: O my Lord, they
are my companions! It will be said to me: You do not know what they have
fabricated after you.

Al-Bukha has also mentioned in his Sahih[1] a tradition from al-Ala bin
al-Musayyab that his father had said: Once I met al-Bara bin Aazib and
said to him: Blessed you are! You have accompanied the Prophet (s) and
paid homage to him under the tree. He said: O my nephew, you do not know
what we have changed after him.

He has mentioned a tradition from Abdullah bin Abbas that the Prophet
(s) had said: some of my companions will be taken to the left. I will
say: They are my companions! They are my companions! It will be said to
me: They turned back on their heels (apostatized) since you had left
them[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** p.30 chap. (the battle of al-Hudaybiya).  
 **[2]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.2 p.154.

99. Turning away from the infallible imams
------------------------------------------

The Sunni have taken the main principles of religion from Abul Hasan
al-Ashari, al-Matureedi and their likes and they have taken the branches
of religion from the four jurisprudents; Malik bin Anass, Abu Haneefa,
Ahmad bin Hanbal and ash-Shafiiy although they have preferred their own
opinions to the clear texts that have put the infallible imams of Ahlul
Bayt (s) in a position as equal as the Qur'an and made them in the umma
as the Ark of Noah in his people; whoever rode on it would be rescued
and whoever lagged behind it would drown and as the gate of Hitta
(forgiveness) for the Israelites; whoever entered into it would be
forgiven. Ahlul Bayt (s) were in the umma as the head to the body and as
the two eyes to the head. There are many such prophetic traditions that
have put Ahlul Bayt (s) in such a high position.

We have detailed this subject in our book al-Fusool al-Muhimma, chap. 12
and here we quote what we have said there to shed more light on the
subject:

Our Sunni brothers have turned away from the doctrines of the infallible
imams of Ahlul Bayt (s) and paid no attention to their opinions about
the principles and the branches of the religion at all. They have not
referred to them in interpreting the holy Qur'an except less than their
referring to Muqatil bin Sulayman, the fraud and the embodier[1] and
they have not relied on their traditions except less than their reliance
on the traditions of the Kharijites, the Murjites and the fatalists.

If you count all the traditions of Ahlul Bayt (s) that have been
mentioned in the books of the Sunni, you will find them less than the
traditions that al-Bukhari alone has mentioned from Akrima, the
Kharijite, the Berber and the liar. Worse than all that is that
al-Bukjari has never mentioned any tradition from the infallible imams
of Ahlul Bayt (s). He has never mentioned any tradition narrated from
Imam as-Sadiq (s), Imam al-Kadhum (s), Imam ar-Redha (s), Imam al-Jawad
(s), Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (s), who was coeval with al-Bukhari, nor
did he mention any tradition from al-Hasan bin

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Who believes in embodiment; ascribing human aspects to Allah,
the Almighty.

al-Hasan,[1] Zayd bin Ali bin al-Husayn, Yahya bin Zayd, an-Nafs
az-Zakiyya al-Kamil bin al-Hasan ar-Redha bin al-Hasan, Ibraheem bin
Abdullah, al-Husayn al-Fukhkhi bin Ali bin al-Hasan bin al-Hasan, Yahya
bin Abdullah bin al-Hasan, Idrees bin Abdullah, Muhammad bin Jafar
as-Sadiq, Muhammad bin Ibraheem bin Ismaeel bin Ibraheem bin al-Hasan
bin al-Hasan known as ibn Tabataba, al-Qasim ar-Rassiy, Muhammad bin
Muhammad bin Zayd bin Ali, Muhammad bin al-Qassim bin Ali bin Umar
al-Ashraf bin Zaynol Aabideen, who was coeval with al-Bukhari,[2] nor
any other one of the scholars of the Prophets progeny like Abdullah bin
al-Hasan, Ali bin Jafar al-Uraydhi and the other personalities of the
progeny of Ahlul Bayt (s). Al-Bukhari even has not narrated anything of
the traditions of the elder (grand)son of the Prophet (s), Imam Hasan
(s) the master of the youths of Paradise whereas he (al-Bukhari) has
mentioned many traditions from the bitter enemy of Ahlul Bayt (s), the
Kharijite Imran bin Hattan, who had praised Abdurrahman bin Muljim for
killing Imam Ali (s) by saying:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">What a strike by a pious man it
was!</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">He just wanted to attain the contentment
of the Lord of the Throne.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">I often mention him and I think that he
is</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">the best of people near Allah for his
good deeds.</span>*

I swear by the Lord of the Kaaba and the Sender of the prophets that I
have stopped here surprisedly and frightenedly for I have not thought
that the matter would reach this extent!

Ibn Khaldoon has uncovered the hidden secret of this matter when saying
in his Muqaddima in the chapter he has assigned to talk about
jurisprudence after mentioning the Sunni sects: Ahlul Bayt became
irregular with doctrines they had invented and jurisprudence they had
established by themselves that they had based according to their belief
in criticizing some of the companions[3] and believing in the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He was the imam after his uncle Imam Husayn (s) according to the
opinion of the Zaydites and then Zayd and then the others as we have
arranged them above.  
 **[2]** He was killed in Iraq six years before the death of
al-Bukhari.  
 **[3]** I do not know how the jurisprudential doctrines are built on
criticizing some of the companions and I do not know how the legal
verdicts are derived from criticizing

infallibility of their imams and the truthfulness of their sayingswhich
all were weak principles[1]the Kharijites have also been irregular;[2]
therefore the public (the Sunni) have paid no attention to their
doctrines. In fact they have denied them and refuted them. We do not
know anything about their doctrines and we do not read their books.
There is nothing of their books in the countries of the Sunni. The books
of the Shia are in their countries where their state was in Morocco, the
east and Yemen. The same can be said about the Kharijites. Each of them
has books and strange thoughts in jurisprudence... Let you ponder on his
speech to see the wonders!

Then he came back to talk about the Sunni sects. He said: The doctrine
of Abu Haneefa has spread in Iraq, the doctrine of Malik in Hijaz, the
doctrine of Ahmad bin Hanbal in Baghdad and Sham and the doctrine of
ash-Shafiiy in Egypt. Then he said: Then the jurisprudence of the Sunni
has been perished in Egypt when the state of ar-Rafidha[3] (the Shia)
has been established. The jurisprudence of Ahlul Bayt[4] has spread
there and the jurisprudence of the others has vanished until the
(Shiite) state of al-Ubaydiyeen of ar-Rafidha has been overthrown by
Saladin Yousuf bin Ayyoub and then the jurisprudence of ash-Shafiiy has
come back to Egypt

------------------------------------------------------------------------

people! Ibn Khaldoon is considered as one of the philosophersthen what
is this raving of him?!  
 **[1]** The Shia have proved the infallibility of their imams in their
books with rational and traditional evidences. Here we cannot discuss
that because we will be way from the subject of this book. It is enough
evidence on their infallibility that they are the equal of the Qur'an
and they are the safety of the umma from disagreement; if a tribe of the
Arabs disagree with them, they (the Arabs) become as the party of Iblis.
The infallible imams are the ship of rescue and the gate of Hitta
(forgiveness) for the umma. They are the ones who protect the religion
from being distorted and from being interpreted by the ignorants.
Blessing and peace be upon them all.  
 **[2]** Ibn Khaldoon has told a lie in this word! He has said that he
has not known anything about their doctrines or their books then how
could he say that they were irregular, deviate and heretic and how could
he know that their principles were weak?  
 **[3]** Ar-Rafidha means the refusers. The Sunni have called the Shia
with this name claiming that they (the Shia) have refused the first
three caliphs and the companions.  
 **[4]** He acknowledged that ar-Rafidha (the Shia) had believed in the
doctrine of Ahlul Bayt (s).

Ibn Khaldoon and his likes said that they were on guidance and on the
Sunna whereas Ahlul Bayt (s) were irregular, heretic, deviate and
(refusing).

No wonder if a Muslim when hearing this word stands up and sits down and
no wonder if he dies regretfully for Islam and its people. There is no
power save in Allah, the Great, the Almighty!

Ibn Khaldood said that Ahlul Bayt (s) were irregular, deviate and
heretic whereas it was they, whom Allah had purified from all
uncleanness as it had been revealed in the Qur'an,[1] whom the Prophet
(s) had challenged his enemies with by the order of Allah,[2] whom the
Qur'an had imposed loving them on the Muslims,[3] whom Allah had imposed
their guardianship on the Muslims,[4] who were the ship of rescue[5]
when the sea of hypocrisy overflowed, who were the safety of the umma[6]
when the storms of disagreement blew, who

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** With reference to the Quranic verse (Allah only desires to keep
away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House! and to purify you
a (thorough) purifying) 33:33.  
 **[2]** With reference to the verse (But whoever disputes with you in
this matter after what has come to you of knowledge, then say: Come let
us call our sons and your sons and our women and your women and our near
people and your near people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray
for the curse of Allah on the liars) 3:61.  
 **[3]** With reference to the verse (Say: I do not ask of you any
reward for it but love for my near relatives) 42:23.  
 **[4]** Ad-Daylami and others have mentioned a tradition narrated by
Abu Saeed al-Khidri that the Prophet (s) had said: And stop them, for
they shall be questioned (37:24) about the guardianship of Ali.
Al-Wahidy said-as in as-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa-when interpreting this verse:
They will be asked about the guardianship of Ali and Ahlul Bayt.  
 **[5]** Ibn Hajar said in his as-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa, p.93: It has been
narrated from many ways each confirming the other that the Prophet (s)
has said: The example of my family among you is like the Ark of Noah;
whoever rides on it will be rescued. Muslim added in his Sahih : and
whoever lags behind it will drown and perish.  
 **[6]** The Prophet (s) has said: The stars are safety for the people
of the earth from drowning and my family is safety for my umma from
disagreement. If a tribe of the Arabs opposes them (the Prophets
family), they (the people of the tribe) will disagree among them and
will be the party of Iblis. Mentioned by al-Hakim from ibn Abbas as in
as-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa by ibn Hajar, 93. Ibn Abu Shayba and Musaddad in
their Musnads, at-Tarmithi in Nawadir al-Usool, Abu Yala, at-Tabarani
and al-Hakim have mentioned a tradition narrated by Salama bin al-Akwa
that the Prophet (s) had said:

were the gate of Hitta (forgiveness)[1] whoever entered into it would be
forgiven, who were the firmest handhold which should not break off and
who were one of the two weighty things[2] that whoever kept to would
never go astray and whoever deviated from would never be guided. It was
they whom the Prophet (s) had ordered us to regard as the head to the
body[3] and as the eyes to the head and he had forbidden us from
preceding them[4] or lagging behind them. The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The stars are safety for the inhabitants of the heaven and my family is
safety for my umma. Also mentioned by as-Sayooti in his book Ihya
al-Mayyit, an-Nabahani in his Arbaeen and by others.  
 **[1]** The Prophet (s) has said: The example of my family among you is
like the Ark of Noah; whoever rides on it will be rescued and whoever
lags behind it will drown and like the gate of Hitta of the Israelite.
Mentioned by al-Hakim from Abu Tharr. At-Tabarani mentioned in
as-Sagheer and al-Awsat that Abu Saeed had said: I have heard the
Prophet (s) saying: My family among you is like the Ark of Noah; whoever
rides on it will be rescued and whoever lags behind it will drown. My
family among you is like the gate of Hitta of the Israelites; whoever
enters into it will be forgiven.  
 **[2]**With reference to the Prophets saying I have left among you what
if you keep to, you will never go astray after me; the two weighty
things, the Book of Allah and my family. They will never separate until
they will come to me at the pond (in Paradise). Be careful how you will
deal with them. Mentioned by at-Tarmithi and al-Hakim as in Ihya
al-Mayyit by as-Sayooti. It has been mentioned by the most scholars of
Hadith with little differences in the wordings. Ibn Hajar said in
as-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa: Know that this tradition has been narrated by more
than twenty companions. In some ways of this tradition it has been said
that the Prophet (s) had said it in his last (farewell) hajj and in
another he had said it in Medina during his illness when his room was
full of his companions. In another way he had said it in Ghadeer Khum
and in another occasion he had said it after his coming back from
at-Taif when he had made a speech before the people. There was no
contradiction that the Prophet (s) had mentioned this tradition in all
these occasions because he had intended to make people take much care of
the Qur'an and the pure family of the Prophet (s) Refer to as-Sawaiq,
p.92.  
 **[3]** As-Sabban said in his Isaf, p.114: Some scholars of Hadith have
mentioned in their Sunan a tradition narrated by many companions that
the Prophet (s) had said: My family among you is like the Ark of Noah;
whoever rides on it will be rescued and whoever lags behind it will
perish or (will drown) in another tradition or (will be thrown in Hell)
in a third tradition. In another way narrated by Abu Tharr there was an
addition. He said: I have heard him (the Prophet (s)) saying: Consider
my family among you as the head to the body and as the two eyes to the
head.  
 **[4]** With reference to the Prophets saying about keeping to the two
weighty things do not precede them so that you may perish and do not
teach them because they

Prophet (s) had said that they (his family) were the protectors of the
religion, who would keep it safe from the distortion of the deviants
throughout the generations of this umma.[1] The Prophet (s) had declared
that knowing (being dutiful to) them (his progeny) would save from
Hell,[2] loving them would help to pass to Paradise, submitting to them
would save from torment and that the good doings would not benefit the
doers except by knowing their (the Prophets progenys) rights[3] and no
one of this umma will step on the Day of Resurrection unless he will be
asked about loving them.[4] If a man has spent his age standing, sitting
(worshipping Allah) and prostrating between the Kaaba and the temple (of
Abraham) with out believing in the guardianship of Ahlul Bayt, he will
be in Hell.[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

are more aware than you. Refer to Rashfat as-Sadi by Abu Bakr al-Alawi,
chap.5 and as-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa by ibn Hajar, chap.11.  
 **[1]** Al-Mullah mentioned in his Seera that the Prophet (s) had said:
In every generation of my umma there will be virtuous believers from my
progeny, who will keep this religion safe from the distortion of the
deviants, the fabrication of the liars and the interpretation of the
ignorants. Your imams are your delegations to Allah. Be careful whom you
will delegate. As-Sawaiq by ibn Hajar, p.92.  
 **[2]** The Prophet (s) has said: Knowing the family of Muhammad saves
(people) from Hell, loving the family of Muhammad helps to pass to
Paradise and submitting to the family of Muhammad saves from torment.
Ash-Shifa by Judge Ayyadh, vol.2 p.41.  
 **[3]** The Prophet (s) has said: Keep to loving us, Ahlul Bayt. He,
who meets Allah with loving us, will enter Paradise by our intercession.
I swear by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, that no deed will benefit
anyone except by knowing our rights. Mentioned by at-Tabari in al-Awsat,
as-Sayooti in Ihya al-Mayyit and an-Nabahni in al-Arbaeen.  
 **[4]** The Prophet (s) has said: No one will step unless he will be
asked about four things; about his age how he has spent it, his body how
he has worn it out, his money how he has spent and where he has gained
from and about loving us Ahlul Bayt. Mentioned by at-Tabarani from ibn
Abbas, as-Sayooti in Ihyaul Mayyit and an-Nabahani in al-Arbaeen.  
 **[5]** The Prophet (s) has said: If a man spends his age between the
Kaaba and the temple (of Abraham) praying and fasting but hating Ahlul
Bayt, he will be thrown into Hell. Mentioned by at-Tabarani, al-Hakim
and an-Nabahani.  
 Abu Saeed narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: By Him, in Whose hand
my soul is, no man hates us Ahlul Bayt, unless he will be thrown into
Hell. Mentioned by al-Hakim, ibn Habban and an-Nabahani.  
 Imam Hasan (s) has said to Moawiya bin Khudayj: The messenger of Allah
has said: No one hates us and envies us unless he will be tortured on
the Day of Resurrection with whips of fire. Mentioned by at-Tabarani as
in Ihyaul Mayyit.

After all that does it not behoove the Muslim umma to believe in Ahlul
Bayt (s), to submit to them and to follow their way? Is any Muslim, who
believes in Allah and His messenger, permitted to follow other than
them? How could ibn Khaldoon consider Ahlul Bayt (s) as heretic so
openly and impudently without feeling ashamed or fearing Allah?

Have the Quranic verses and the prophetic traditions ordered the Muslims
to turn away from Ahlul Bayt (s), whom Allah has purified and made
loving them obligatory on the Muslims and whom the Prophet (s) has
ordered to keep to in order not to go astray? We have collected all the
true traditions talking about the virtues and the high position of Ahlul
Bayt (s) in our book Sabeel al-Momineen and so have our scholars done in
their books. Refer to them to know the truth and the essence of Ahlul
Bayt (s) and their position in Islam.

They have neither committed any guilt nor have they had any defect that
requires the (Sunni) Muslims to turn away from them. Would that the
people of the four Sunni sects have studied the doctrine of Ahlul Bayt
(s) as just a ppoint of argument as they have done to the other
doctrines which they have not acted according to! We have not found them
dealing with Ahlul Bayt (s) in such a way in any age at all! In fact
they have dealt with Ahlul Bayt (s) as if they have not been created yet
or as if they have had no any bit of knowledge and wisdom!

Yes, they (the Sunni) often treated the followers (the Shia) of Ahlul
Bayt (s) as if they were not Muslims and they fabricated against them
all kinds of lies!

The time of oppression and enmity has gone and the age of brotherhood
has come. It is time for all the Muslims to enter the town of the
prophetic knowledge from its gate, to enter into the gate of Hitta and
to resort to the safety of the people of the earth by riding on the ship
of rescue of Ahlul Bayt (s). They are to be close to the Shia. The time
of disagreement and separation has gone and the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jabbir bin Abdullah narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: Once the
Prophet (s) made a speech and he said: O people, whoever hates us Ahlul
Bayt, Allah will resurrect him on the Day of Resurrection as a Jew.
Mentioned by at-Tabarani in al-Awsat as in Ihyaul Mayyit by as-Sayooti
and al-Arbaeen by an-Nabahani.

morning of the firm relations between the Shia and the Sunni has shone.
Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

100. A call for good faith
--------------------------

O brothers, until when will this disagreement last? What are these
enmities and hatred for? Allah, the One and Only, is the Lord of us all.
Islam is our religion. The holy Qur'an is the Book of all of us. The
Kaaba is our Kiblah. The master of the prophets and the last of the
messengers Muhammad bin Abdullah is our Prophet. His sayings and doings
are our Sunna. The daily five prayers, fasting Ramadan, zakat and hajj
are our obligations. The permissible things are the things that Allah
and His messenger have permitted and the impermissible things are the
things that they have prohibited. The truth is what they have determined
as the truth and the untruth is what they have rejected. The guardians
of Allah and His messenger are our guardians and the enemies of Allah
and His messenger are our enemies. The day of Resurrection will come no
doubt and Allah will resurrect the dead from their graves **(so that He
rewards those who do evil, according to their deeds, and He rewards
those, who do good, with what is best).** Are the Shia and the Sunni not
equal in all these? **(and the believers; they all believe in Allah and
His angels and His books and His messengers; We make no difference
between any of His messengers; and they say: We hear and obey, our Lord!
Thy forgiveness (do we crave), and to Thee is the eventual course)**
2:285.

In fact the dispute between the Shia and the Sunni about the matters of
disagreement is minor and there is no dispute between them about the
great matters in the view of the discerning people at all. Do you not
see that when they argue about the necessity of something or its
impermissibility, or whether it is desirable or not or it is permissible
or when they argue about someone whether he is fair or unfair, faithful
or unfaithful, hypocrite or not or that he must be followed because he
is the guardian of Allah or he must be opposed because he is the enemy
of Allah, they argue to prove that with the legal evidences derived from
the Qur'an, the Sunna, the consensus or reason. Each of them relies on
what the legal evidences require. If the two parties know that a certain
thing has been proved in Islam or

not proved or they both doubt about it, they will not dispute or
disagree at all.

Al-Bukhari has mentioned in his Sahih[1] a tradition narrated by Abu
Salama that the Prophet (s) had said: If a ruler tries his best to give
a judgment and his judgment is correct, he will be rewarded (by Allah)
twice and if he tries his best and his judgment is incorrect, he will be
rewarded with one reward.

Ibn Hazm has said in his book al-Milel wen-Nihal[2]: A group of the
Muslims thinks that a Muslim will not be transgressive or unbeliever if
he issues an opinion or a fatwa. Everyone, who tries his best to look
for the truth and then he believes in what he has found, he will be
rewarded anyhow. If he is correct, he will be rewarded twice and if he
is incorrect, he will be rewarded once. This is the opinion of Abu
Layla, Abu Haneefa, ash-Shafiiy, Sufyan ath-Thawri, Dawood bin Ali and
all the companions who have talked about this matter. We have not known
any disagreement between them about this matter at all

Those, who have declared this opinion from among the scholars of the
umma, are too many; then what are all these troubles for, O you
Muslims?!

Allah has said: **The believers are but brethren, therefore make peace
between your brethren and be careful of (your duty to) Allah that mercy
may be on you.** Qur'an, 49:10 and **and do not quarrel for then you
will be weak in hearts and your power will depart.** Qur'an, 8:46 and
**And be not like those who became divided and disagreed after clear
arguments had come to them, and these it is that shall have a grievous
chastisement.** Qur'an, 3:105

The Prophet (s) has said: The protection of the Muslims is one. Every
one of them has to strive for the sake of it. They must be as one hand
against their enemies. Whoever violates the protection of a Muslim, the
curse of Allah, the angels and all the people will be on him. He will
not be forgiven on the Day of Resurrection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.4 p.177.  
 **[2]** vol.3 p.247.

The true traditions about this matter are recurrent especially from
Ahlul Bayt (s). Refer to our book al-Fusool al-Muhimma for there is what
delights the hearts of the umma especially in the first seven chapters.
