Conclusion
==========

We end our book with the same subject that we have begun with; the
imamate after the Prophet (s) because of its importance near Allah and
His messenger and because of its necessity to the umma in its religion
and life and because of that the Prophet (s) has spared no effort to fix
it for the sake of Allah the Almighty and for the sake of his umma.

He, who has been aware of the way of the Prophet (s) in establishing the
state of Islam since the first step, would find that Imam Ali (s) was
his vizier, his partner in his affairs, his supporter against his
enemies, the container of his knowledge, the heir of his wisdom, his
guardian and the caliph after him. He, who has pondered on the Prophets
sayings and doings in his travel and residing, would find that many of
them have declared these matters since the advent of the mission until
the last day of his holy life. The Prophet (s) has kept on declaring
these meanings in his wise manner throughout twenty-three years since he
has been sent as a prophet until he has left to the better world. He
praised the virtues of Imam Ali (s), mentioned his high position and
glorified his personality in every occasion.

The Prophet (s) has declared the important position of Imam Ali (s) in a
clear text since the first days of prophethood and before the mission
has been spread openly in Mecca when he has warned his close relatives
at the time of his uncle Sheikh al-Bat~ha Abu Talib. He has said to them
in the house of Abu Talib while putting his hand on the neck of Imam Ali
(s), who was the youngest one among the relatives then: This (Ali) is my
brother, my guardian and my caliph

among you. You are to listen to him and to obey him[1]

Since then the Prophet (s) kept on referring to the caliphate of Imam
Ali (s) after him sometimes in clear texts like his saying to Imam Ali
(s) when he had left him on Medina during the battle of Tabook I should
not go unless you remain as my caliph[2] and sometimes in more special
meanings like his saying when Burayda has complained against Imam Ali
(s) Do not get involved with Ali! He is from me and I am from him and he
will be your guardian after me. It has been mentioned by Ahmad bin
Hanbal in this way.

An-Nassaiy has mentioned the tradition in this way: O Burayda, do not
offend Ali! He is from me and I am from him and he will be your guardian
after me.

At-Tabarani mentioned the tradition in details that the Prophet (s) had
said: Why do some people disparage Ali? He, who hates Ali, hates me and
he, who turns away from Ali, turns away from me. Ali is from me and I am
from him. He has been created from my clay and I have been created from
the clay of Abraham but I am better than Abraham; a progeny one from the
other and Allah is Hearing, Knowing. O Burayda, have you not known that
Ali deserves more than the bondmaid he has taken? He will be your
guardian after me.

Imran bin Husayn narrated: Four of the Prophets companions have agreed
to complain of Ali to the Prophet (s). One of them said: O messenger of
Allah, have you not seen that Ali had done so and so? The Prophet (s)
paid no attention to him. The second one said the same to the Prophet
(s) and the Prophet (s) paid no attention to him. The third one said the
same and the Prophet (s) paid no attention to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** We have mentioned this tradition in our book al-Murajaat with
its series of narrators and sources from the books of the Sunni. Refer
to Murajaa no. 20 and 22. Let you ponder on the Prophets saying to his
close relative, among whom were his uncles like Abu Talib and others You
are to listen to him (Ali) and to obey him which has showed that Imam
Ali (s) since those first days was to the Prophet (s) as Aaron was to
Moses except that there would be no prophet after Prophet Muhammad
(s).  
 **[2]** You find this text in a true tradition having more than ten
aspects of Alis each of which nominating him to the imamate. Refer to
our book al-Murajaat, murajaa no.26-34.

him. The fourth one said the same. The Prophet (s) became too angry and
he said: What do you want from Ali? Ali is from me and I am from him and
he will be the guardian of every believer after me.

Wahab bin Hamza said-as in al-Issaba, biography of Wahab: Once I
travelled with Ali and I found that he somehow had turned away from me.
When I came back I mentioned Ali to the Prophet (s) and I criticized
him. The Prophet (s) said to me: Do not say this about Ali because he
will be your guardian after me.

At-Tabarani mentioned this tradition of Wahab in al-Kabeer but he said:
do not say this about Ali because he is the worthiest of the people for
being your guardian after me.[1]

The Prophet (s) might have entrusted some of his sincere companions such
as Salman al-Farisi with his sayings about appointing Imam Ali (s) as
his successor. At-Tabarani mentioned (from Salman) in al-Kabeer that the
Prophet (s) had said: My guardian, the keeper of my secrets, the best
one whom I leave after me, the one, who executes my promises and pays my
debts, is Ali bin Abu Talib.

And the Prophet (s) might have distinguished some of those, who had
diseases in their hearts such as Burayda, with his special saying about
Imam Ali (s). Muhammad bin Hameed ar-Razi mentioned from Burayda that
the Prophet (s) had said: Every prophet has had a guardian and heir. My
guardian and heir is Ali bin Abu Talib.

And like Anass bin Malik who narrated, as mentioned in Hilyatul Awliya
by Abu Naeem, that the Prophet (s) had said to him: O Anass, the first
one, who will come to you from this door, is the imam of the pious, the
master of the Muslims, the guarder of the religion, the last of the
guardians and the leader of the bright-faced people of Paradise. Anass
said: Then Ali came and the Prophet (s) got up delightfully and embraced
him. The Prophet (s) said to him: You carry out my affairs instead of
me, convey to the people my orders and explain to them what they
disagree on after me.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to al-Murajaat, murajaa no.36.  
 **[2]** Al-Murajaat, murajaa no.68.

Anass also narrated that he had heard the Prophet (s) saying: I and Ali
are proofs before the umma on the day of resurrection.[1]

The Prophet (s) had also entrusted some virtuous women with such
traditions like his wife Umm Salama, his uncles wife umm al-Fadhl, Asma
bint Umays, Umm Sulaym al-Ansariya and their likes. He had also declared
this matter (Alis right in leading the umma) from above his minbar. He
had revealed it to some of his companions in al-Baqee and hinted at it
on the day of brotherhood in Mecca before the hijra and the other time
in Medina on the day of brotherhood between the Muhajireen and the
Ansar. In both occasions the Prophet (s) had taken Imam Ali (s) as his
brother preferring him to the all other Muslims saying to him: You are
to me as Aaron was to Moses but there will be no prophet after me.

Such the Prophet (s) had done when he had closed all the doors of the
companions leading to the mosque except the door of Imam Ali (s).[2]

The first caliph Abu Bakr narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: Ali to
me is as my position near Allah.[3]

The Prophet (s) had said: My hand and Alis hand are the same in
justice.[4]

The Prophet (s) had interpreted the verse (7) of the the warner and the
guide mentioned in the sura of ar-Rad (13) by saying: I am the warner
and Ali is the guide. O Ali, by you the people will be guided after
me.[5]

The Prophet (s) had said: Ali to me is as my head to my body.[6]

He had also said: Ali is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali;

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6 p.157.  
 **[2]** Al-Murajaat, murajaa no.32.  
 **[3]** As-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa by ibn Hajar, p. 106, chap. 11 when
talking about the verse 14 mentioned in this chapter.  
 **[4]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6 p.153, al-Murajaat, p.167, 172 third
edition.  
 **[5]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6 p.157.  
 **[6]** As-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa by ibn Hajar, p.75 part 2 chap.9 narrated
by al-Bara and ad-Daylami from ibn Abbas.

they do never separate until they will come to me at the pond (in
Paradise).[1]

The Prophet (s) had also said: I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its
gate and whoever wants to get knowledge has to come through the gate.[2]

The Prophet (s) had said: I am the house of wisdom and Ali is its
gate.[3]

He had also said: O Ali, you explain to my umma what they will disagree
on after me.[4]

He had also said: He, who obeys me, obeys Allah and he, who disobeys me,
disobeys Allah. He, who obeys Ali, obeys me and he, who disobeys Ali,
disobeys me.[5]

There are many other traditions like these ones talking about the same
meaning even if their wordings are somehow different. These traditions
have given Imam Ali (s) a position near the Prophet (s) that no prophet
can give except to the guardian and the caliph after him. This is the
meaning of the traditions that comes to mind

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.3 p.124, Talkhees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi.  
 **[2]** Mentioned by at-Tabarani from ibn Abbas as in al-Jami
as-Sagheer by as-Sayooti, p.107 and al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, vol.3
p.126-127 in two ways; from ibn Abbas and Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansari.
Al-Hakim has proved the tradition to be true with many exact evidences.
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin as-Siddeeq al-Maghribi has written a book to
prove the truthfulness of this tradition and he has called it Fat~h
al-Melik al-Aliy bisihhat Hadeeth Bab Medeenatul Ilm Ali printed in
Egypt in 1354 A.H. Let the fair researchers refer to it because it has
good information and facts. The enemies of Ahlul Bayt (s), who have
denied this tradition, have no value near us because they have no
evidence in denying this tradition which has become as a proverb
narrated by everyone and everywhere. We have pondered on their denying
this tradition and we have found that it was out of impudence and
fanaticism as Salahuddeen al-Alaiy has declared by saying: They have no
evidence in denying this tradition save pretending that it is a
fabricated tradition.  
 **[3]** Mentioned by at-Tarmithi and ibn Jareer in their Sahihs and
quoted from them by some scholars like al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in Kanzol
Ummal, vol. 6 p.401.  
 **[4]** Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.3 p.122. Al-Hakim said that it had
been a true tradition according to the conditions of al-Bukhari and
Muslim but they had not mentioned it.  
 **[5]** Ibid. vol.3 p.121, Talkhees al-Mustadrak by ath-Thahabi in the
same page. They said it was true according to al-Bukhari and Muslim.

according to the rules of the language.

There are other true traditions that have given Imam Ali (s) and the
infallible imams after him the position of the caliphate after the
Prophet (s) and have imposed on the umma to obey them. The Prophet (s)
has bound the umma with the two ropes (the Qur'an and the Prophets
family) and tied the umma; the scholars and the ignorants, the free and
the slaves, the rulers and the public to the two weighty things until
the Day of Resurrection. He has not excluded any one of the umma;
neither Abu Bakr, nor Umar, nor Othman, nor and norwhether men or
womenthe two weighty things are the Book of Allah and the infallible
imams (s) of the Prophets progeny. The Prophet (s) has warned all of his
umma of being deviated from the truth if they would not keep to these
two weighty things and he has told them that these two weighty things
would never separate and the earth would never be empty of them until
they would come to him at the pond (in Paradise) and by this the truth
has shone and there would be no way for suspicion. Praise be to Allah,
the Lord of the worlds.

The Prophet (s) has not been satisfied with the traditions of the two
weighty things. He has compared his progeny once to the Ark of Noah that
whoever has ridden on would have been rescued and whoever has lagged
behind would have drowned and the other time to the Gate of Hitta of the
Israelites that whoever has entered into would have been forgiven. The
Prophet (s) has considered his progeny as safety for the people of the
earth that would keep them safe from disagreement that whenever a tribe
opposed them (the Prophets progeny), it would be the party of Iblis.

The Prophet (s) has spared no effort to bind his umma to obey his
progeny and to follow them. He has excluded no one of the umma from
that.

How could any of the umma have an excuse to turn away from Ahlul Bayt
(s) after they have become as the Ark of Noah and as the Gate of Hitta
and after they have been the equal of the Qur'an that no Muslim could
find a substitute for them?

Someone might say: How could the Prophets companions, if the Prophet (s)
had determined something, contradict his order? Why

did Ali (s) not try to get his promised right? Why did he not dispute or
asked for his right? Why did he keep to his house throughout the period
of the rule of the three caliphs and he always was loyal in advising
them? What would the Shia say about the Prophets saying My umma will
never agree unanimously on deviation or untruth? Why did Ali (s) and his
followers of the Hashemites or other than the Hashemites not protest
against the homage on the Day of as-Saqeefa? Why had the caliphate of
Ali (s) not been revealed by Allah in a clear verse like the verses of
monotheism, prophethood, justice and resurrection?

The answer: as for their (the companions) contradicting the prophetic
traditions, you have known this well from this book and the many
occasions of their contradictions have been shown too clearly.

The conducts of the changeable people of politics and ambition and their
followers from among the Prophets companions have showed us that they
have followed the prophetic traditions concerning the mere affairs of
obligations such as the prayer which should be towards the kiblah and
fasting which should be in Ramadan and the likes but as for the
traditions concerning the affairs of politics such as caliphate,
emirate, managing the affairs of the state and the rule, they have
thought that following these traditions was not necessary and they often
followed their own opinions as we have detailed that in our books
al-Murajaat and al-Fusool al-Muhimma.[1]

As for saying that Imam Ali (s) has given up his right, has not asked
for it, has kept to his house, has advised the caliphs sincerely and the
opinion of the Shia about non-agreement of the umma on deviation, we
have explained these subjects in details in our book al-Murajaat.[2]

As for protesting or not against the homage (of the caliphate) on the
day of as-Saqeefa, we have detailed that in our book al-Murajaat,
murajaa no.102.

As for that Allah has not revealed a clear verse in the Qur'an about

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to murajaa no.84 p.262-265 third edition and chap.8 in
al-Fusool al-Muhimma, p.81-85 second edition.  
 **[2]** Murajaa no.82 and 84.

the caliphate of Imam Ali (s) like the verses of monotheism, justice,
prophethood and resurrection, we refer the questioners to the detailed
word in our thesis Falsafat al-Meethaq wel-Wilaya: the philosophy of the
covenant and guardianship[1] where the truth has shone clearly.

The Prophet (s) has kept on preparing Imam Ali (s) to have his position
in the umma since the first days of the mission. He has declared that in
different ways until he has got ill at the last moments of his holy
life. He has lain in his room, which was crowded with his companions. He
has said: O people, I am about to die and be taken to the other world
soon. I have advised you to beware of your affairs. I have left among
you the Book of Allah, the Almighty, and my family. Then he has lifted
Imam Alis hand and said: This is Ali. He is with the Qur'an and the
Qur'an is with him. They do not separate until they will come to me at
the pond[2]

When the Prophet (s) had been inspired by the revelation that it would
be near to him to leave for the better world, he, due to his great care
for the matter of guardianship, announced that he would go to perform
the hajj. It was the last (farewell) hajj in his life. He left Medina
with about ninety thousand Muslims or more[3] besides those who joined
him along the way and in Arafa. When it was the day of the stop on Mount
Arafa, the Prophet (s) made a speech before the hajjis advising and
preaching. From among what he had said to them was: O people, I am about
to be called (for death) and I will respond. I have left among you what
if you keep to, you will never go astray; the Book of Allah and my
family. They will never separate until they will come to me at the pond
(in Paradise). Beware how you will regard me in dealing with them!

There were many situations before this one and after it in which the
Prophet (s) had bound the umma with the two ropes and the two weighty
things (the Book of Allah and the infallible imams). He promised the
umma of remaining on guidance if it would keep to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** From p.17 to the end of the thesis.  
 **[2]** As-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa, chap.2 p.75.  
 **[3]** As in al-Halabis Seera and ad-Dahlanis Seera.

these two weighty things and warned it of being deviated if it would
turn away from them. He told the umma that these two things would not
separate and the earth would not become empty of them.

These situations of the Prophet (s) were not general but his situation
on the day of Arafat and then his situation on the day of al-Ghadeer
were before great masses of the umma.[1]

Before the Prophet (s) left Arafa, he had made a speech before the
Muslims who were looking at him and listening with their ears and
hearts. He said loudly: Ali is from me and I am from Ali and no one is
to carry out my affairs except me or Ali.[2]

How a great covenant it was; light for the tongue, heavy in the scales!
It has given Ali (s) the authority of carrying out the affairs of the
Prophet (s) as the same as the authority of the Prophet (s) himself in
carrying out his own affairs. It was a permission to Ali (s) to
legislate the legal verdicts the Prophet (s) had entrusted him with when
the people would face problems after the death of the Prophet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibn Hajar said in as-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa: Know that this tradition
has been narrated by more than twenty companions. In some ways of this
tradition it has been said that the Prophet (s) had said it in his last
(farewell) hajj and in another occasion he had said it in Medina during
his illness when his room was full of his companions. In another way he
had said it in Ghadeer Khum and in another occasion he had said it after
his coming back from at-Taif when he had made a speech before the
people. There was no contradiction that the Prophet (s) had mentioned
this tradition in all these occasions because he had intended to make
people take much care of the Qur'an and the pure family of the Prophet
(s) Refer to as-Sawaiq, p.89.  
 Ibn Hajar acknowledged that the Prophet (s) had declared the tradition
of ath-Thaqalayn the two weighty things in many occasions and that it
had been narrated by more than twenty companions. Even if the Prophet
(s) had not declared this tradition except in these two occasions; on
the day of Arafa and on the day of al-Ghadeer, it would have been a
recurrent tradition because those, who had heard it and narrated it from
the Prophet (s), were about ninety thousands at least in each of those
two occasions.  
 **[2]** Mentioned by Ahmad bin Hanbal in his Musnad, vol.4 p.164 from
Habashi bin Junada in many ways all of which were true. Ahmad has
mentioned the tradition from Yahya bin Adam from Israel bin Younus from
his grandfather as-Subayiy from Habashi and all these narrators were
reliable according to al-Bukhari and Muslim who had mentioned their
traditions in their Sahihs. It has also been mentioned by ibn Maja in
his Sunan, vol.1 p.92 and by at-Tarmithi and an-Nassaiy in their Sunans.
Refer to Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6 p.153.

(s).[1] The Prophet (s) has participated Imam Ali (s) in his mission and
entrusted him with the revelation of Allah as Aaron had been to Moses
except that Ali (s) was not a prophet but he was a vizier and a
guardian. Imam Ali (s) has imitated the Prophet (s), followed his orders
and carried out all what he has entrusted him with.

In this wise way the Prophet (s) has declared the matter of guardianship
and in these intelligent manners he has spread it among the umma. He has
advanced step by step with his different traditions and various manners
according to the requirements of the different occasions and conditions
of the umma.

He has not closed the way of misinterpretation (of the traditions)
before the opponents in order not to embarrass them and then they might
turn from Allah and His messenger; therefore he has behaved wisely to
bring the opponents gradually towards the matter he has feared the
opponents would deny and this wise conduct was one of his miracles.

In this way the Prophet (s) has decreased their rage and anger and has
calmed their nerves. They, little by little, accepted the matter
apparently whereas their hearts denied it. This has led the Prophet (s)
to fear for the religion and the umma. When he has come back from the
last (farewell) hajj with the great number of the pilgrims, he felt a
great fear inside him. He prayed to Allah to have mercy on him and to
protect him from people. When he arrived at Ghadeer Khum, Allah revealed
to him: **(O Messenger! deliver what has been revealed to you from your
Lord; and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and
Allah will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people)[2]** 5:67.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This is the meaning of carrying out the affairs of the Prophet
(s) that Imam Ali (s) was the only one who had been permitted to do. The
jurisprudents carry out the principles and branches of the religion as
Allah and His messenger have legislated, the people of Hadith carry out
the traditions of the Prophet (s) and the scholars carry out the
knowledge of the Prophet (s) but no one has a right to legislate legal
verdicts after Allah and His messenger. He, who ascribes fabricated lies
to Allah or His messenger, will be in Hell.  
 **[2]** The Shia have no doubt that this verse have been revealed about
the guardianship of Imam Ali (s) on the day of Ghadeer Khum. The true
traditions narrated from our infallible imams (s) are many and
recurrent. As for the traditions narrated by the

Let the umma ponder on this verse with its severe threat **(O Messenger!
deliver what bas been revealed to you from your Lord; and if you do it
not, then you have not delivered His message)** to see that the position
of guardianship in their Islamic religion is a little less than the
position of prophethood and they both are of the same kind especially
after Allah has said at the end of the verse: **(surely Allah will not
guide the unbelieving people).**

Do you not see that the threat in this verse (if not announcing
guardianship) is like the threat (if giving up monotheism) mentioned in
this verse: **(And certainly, it has been revealed to you and to those
before you: Surely if you associate (with Allah), your work would
certainly come to naught and you would certainly be of the losers)?**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sunni, al-Wahidi has mentioned in his book Asbab an-Nuzool, p.50 when
interpreting this verse a tradition narrated in two ways from Attiyya
that Abu Saeed al-Khidri had said: This was revealed in Ghadeer Khum
concerning Ali bin Abu Talib. The same has been mentioned by Abu Naeem
in his book Nuzool al-Qur'an with two series of narrators one from Abu
Saeed and the other from Abu Rafi and mentioned by Ibraheem bin Muhammad
al-Hamaweeni in his book al-Faraid in many ways from Abu Hurayra. Abu
Isshaq ath-Thalabi has mentioned it in at-Tafseer al-Kabeer. Al-Ayyashi
has mentioned in his Tafseer-as in Majmaul Bayan-that ibn Abu Umayr
narrated from ibn Uthayna from al-Kalbi from Abu Salih that ibn Abbas
and Jabir bin Abdullah had said: Allah has ordered Prophet Muhammad (s)
to present Ali before the people and to inform them of his guardianship.
The Prophet (s) feared that the people might say that he had favored his
cousin or they would criticize him. Allah revealed to him this verse and
then he announced the guardianship of Ali on the day of Ghadeer Khum. In
Majmaul Bayan it has been mentioned: This very tradition has been
narrated to us by Abul Hamd from al-Hakim Abul Qassim al-Hasakani from
Abu Umayr in the book Shawahid at-Tanzeel li-Qawaid at-Tafseel
wet-Taweel. It has also been mentioned in Majmaul Bayan that Hayyan bin
Ali al-Alawi had narrated from Abu Salih that Ibn Abbas had said: This
verse was revealed concerning Ali. The Prophet (s) took Alis hand and
said: Whoever I am his guardian, here is Ali to be his guardian. O
Allah, support whoever supports him and be the enemy of whoever opposes
him  
 What confirms this meaning is that before the revelation of this verse,
the prayers were offered, zakat was collected, fasting in Ramadan and
the hajj to the Kaaba were performed, the permissible things were clear
and the prohibited things were clear, the penalties were executed, the
Sharia was firm and the verdicts were fixed. Then what was that thing
that Allah had ordered the Prophet (s) and insisted on him to announce
and threatened him severely if he would not announce? Was it but the
matter of the caliphate that the Prophet (s) feared of sedition if he
announced and that he needed to be protected from the harm of people
when carrying it out?  

39:65.

If the Muslims ponder on the verse, they will know that the consequences
of the threat concern those, who oppose announcing the matter of
guardianship, and not the Prophet (s). Far be it from Allah to threat
His messenger! It is like His saying **(Surely if you associate (with
Allah), your work would certainly come to naught and you would certainly
be of the losers).** The threat is to those, who associate other gods
with Allah, and not to the master of the prophets (s).

When the verse was revealed to the Prophet (s), he got down of his
sumpter and asked the Muslims, who were with him, to get down of their
sumpters. He sent for the advanced pilgrims to come back and he waited
for the late ones to arrive. When all the people gathered in one place,
the Prophet (s) led them in offering the prayer and then he asked his
companions to make him a minbar. They made a minbar of the saddles of
the camels between two trees to make a shadow for the Prophet (s). The
Prophet (s) ascended the minbar and seated Imam Ali (s) on one step
lower than him. He made a speech before the great mass of the pilgrims.
He began his speech with the name of Allah. He praised Allah and said
whatever he liked loudly to make the all hear him. They directed their
ears and hearts towards him.

Here is some of his speech he made on that day:

O people, I think I am about to be called (die)[1] and thus I must
respond. I am responsible and you are responsible,[2] then what do

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He told them that he was about to die to warn them that it was
time to announce his covenant of appointing the caliph after him and
that he could not delay that for fear that he might leave this world
before confirming this task which the umma could not do without.  
 **[2]** Since his covenant to his brother Ali (s) was heavy for the
people of competition, envy, enmity and hypocrisy, he wanted, before
declaring the covenant, to excuse his situation to reconcile their
hearts so he said: I am responsible and you are responsible to make them
know that he was ordered by Allah and he was responsible to carry out
the order of Allah and that they were ordered to obey and they
responsible for their obedience; therefore there was no way to give up
informing of the order of Allah and that there was no way for them but
to submit to the order of Allah and His messenger.

you say? They said: We witness that you have informed, advised and
striven. May Allah bless you. He said: Do you not bear witness that
there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His servant and Apostle,
and that His Heaven is true, His Hell is true, death is true, the
Resurrection after death is true, that there is no doubt that the Day of
Judgment will come, and that Allah will resurrect the dead from their
graves? They said: Yes, we bear witness.[1] He said: O Allah, bear
witness. Then he said: O people, Allah is my Lord and I am the lord of
the believers. I am worthier of the believers than themselves.[2] Of
whomsoever I had been guardian, Ali here is to be his Guardian. O Allah,
be a supporter of whoever supports him (Ali) and an enemy of whoever
opposes him. Then he said O people, I will go ahead of you and you will
arrive at my Pond (in Heaven) which is wider than the distance between
Busra and Sanaa. It has receptacles as numerous as the stars, and two
cups of gold and two of silver. I will ask you about the two weighty
things that I have left for you when you come to me to see how you dealt
with them. The greater weighty thing is Allahs book; the Holy Quran. One
end is in Allahs hand and the other is in your hands. Keep it and you
will not deviate. The other weighty thing is my family and my
descendents. The Most Kind the Omniscient had told me that both of them
would not separate until they come to my Pond.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ad-Daylami mentioned a tradition narrated by Abu Saeed al-Khidri that
the Prophet (s) had said: Question them! They are responsible for the
guardianship of Ali. Al-Wahidi said: They are responsible for the
guardianship of Ali and Ahlul Bayt (s).  
 **[1]** He, who ponders on this speech, will know that it has intended
to show that the guardianship of Ali (s) was one of the basic principles
(usool) of the religion as the Shia have believed. The Prophet (s) asked
them first: Do you not witness that there is no god but Allah and that
Muhammad is the messenger of Allah there is no doubt that the Day of
Judgment will come, and that Allah will resurrect the dead from their
graves? then he mentioned the matter of guardianship after that
immediately to make them know that guardianship was as important as the
matters he had asked them about and they acknowledged. This is clear to
whoever knows the styles of speech in the language.  
 **[2]** It means: (Allah is worthier of me than myself and I am
worthier of the believers than themselves and whoever I am worthier of
him than himself , Ali is worthier of him than himself).  
 **[3]** Such it has been mentioned by at-Tabari, ibn Jareer, al-Hakim
and at-Tarmithi from Zayd bin Arqam. Many other scholars have mentioned
the tradition from Zayd bin

This tradition is true and recurrent[1] but Sheikh al-Bishri (may Allah
have mercy on him) said in his argument with me about this tradition:
Trusting in the companions or not requires to interpret the tradition
(of al-Ghadeer) whether it was recurrent or not. The Sunni said that the
word mawla-guardian was used to refer to different meanings as mentioned
in the holy Qur'an. Once it means the worthier as Allah has said
addressing the unbelievers: **Your abode is the fire; it is worthier of
you.** Qur'an, 57:15 Another time it means supporter as Allah has said:
**That is because Allah is the Supporter of those who believe and the
unbelievers shall have no supporter for them.** Qur'an, 47:11 Sometimes
it means heir as Allah has said: **And to every one We have appointed
heirs of what parents and near relatives leave.** Qur'an, 4:33 Sometimes
it means relatives as Allah has said: **And surely I fear my cousins
after me.** Qur'an, 19:5 Sometimes it means friend. Allah has said:
**The day on which a friend shall not avail (his) friend aught.**
Qur'an, 44:41 Also the word wali means the one who is worthier to carry
out the affairs of someone like saying the wali of an underage one. It
also means assistant or beloved. The tradition might mean Whoever I was
his supporter, his friend or his beloved, Ali is the same and this
meaning would comply with the dignity of the companions and the imamate
of the three caliphs (may Allah be pleased with them).

I replied: I know that your heart does not believe in what you have said
and your soul does not accept it. You recognize well the excellent
wisdom of the Prophet (s), his infallibility and his last prophethood
and that he was the master of the wise men and the last of the prophets
**Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed. The Lord of Mighty Power has taught him.** If philosophers of
other sects ask you about what has happened on the day of Ghadeer Khum
by saying: Why did the Prophet (s) prevent the many thousands of the
Muslims from keeping on their ways? Why did he order them to stay in the
desert under the heat of summer? Why did he send for the advanced

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Arqam in the same way mentioned above such as Ibn Hajar al-Haythami in
as-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa, chap.5 p.25.  
 **[1]** We have proved the truthfulness of this tradition in our book
al-Murajaat, murajaa no.56 with true evidences.

pilgrims to come back and wait until the late pilgrims would join him?
Why did he make them stop at that desert without food or water to make a
speech before them by the order of Allah at the crossroad from which
they would separate towards their countries? What made him tell them at
the beginning of his speech that he would die before long? He said: I am
about to be called (die) and thus I must respond. I am responsible and
you are responsible. What was the matter that the Prophet (s) would be
responsible for informing it and the umma would be responsible for
obedience? Why did the Prophet (s) ask them: Do you not bear witness
that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His servant and
Apostle, and that His Heaven is true, His Hell is true, death is true,
the Resurrection after death is true, that there is no doubt that the
Day of Judgment will come, and that Allah will resurrect the dead from
their graves? they said: Yes, we witness of that. Why did he take Alis
hand and lift it until the white of their armpits appeared and said: O
people, Allah is my Lord and I am the lord of the believers? Why did he
interpret his word I am the lord of the believers by saying: I am
worthier of the believers than themselves? Why did he say after that: Of
whomsoever I had been guardian, Ali here is to be his guardian. O Allah,
be a supporter of whoever supports him (Ali) and an enemy of whoever
opposes him. Assist whoever assists him and disappoint whoever
disappoints him? Why did he pray for him with such prayers that did not
befit save the imams of the truth and the real caliphs? Why did he make
them witness that he was worthier of them than themselves and when they
said yes, he said: Whoever I had been his guardian, here is Ali to be
his guardian.? Why did he compare his family to the Qur'an? Why did he
make his family as the example for the believers until the Day of
Resurrection? Why was his family equal to the Qur'an? Why did he say
that they would never separate? Why did he say that whoever kept to them
(the Qur'an and the Prophets family) would be guided and that whoever
turned away from them would deviate? What was all this great interest of
the Prophet (s) for?[1] What was the task that needed all these fore

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Glory and praise be to Allah! How wonderful the result of this
great interest was! As the Prophet (s) had put Ali (s) and the
infallible imams (s) of his progeny in the same position of the Qur'an
and as its equal in the scales that they had the right to order, to

procedures? What was the purpose behind the situation on that famous
day? What was the matter that Allah had ordered the Prophet (s) to
announce when He had revealed to him: **(O Messenger! deliver what bas
been revealed to you from your Lord; and if you do it not, then you have
not delivered His message, and Allah will protect you from the
people).** What task that required Allah to stress on it in this way and
to insist on announcing it with a kind of threat? What matter that the
Prophet (s) feared sedition if he would announce? Why did he need the
protection of Allah against the hypocrites in order to announce this
matter? By Allah, if you have been asked all these questions, would you
answer that Allah and His messenger just have wanted to show the
assistance and the friendship of Ali (s) to the Muslims and nothing
else? I do not think that you are satisfied with this answer nor do I
think that you see it is possible for Allah, the Lord of the worlds and
for His messenger, the master of the wise and the last of the prophets
(s). You are loftier than to think that the Prophet (s) may expend all
his determinations to declare something that does not need to be
declared or to clarify something that is clear to conscience and sight
and no doubt that you glorify the Prophets doings and sayings from being
despised by the rational or being criticized by philosophers and wise
men. There is no doubt that you know the wisdom and the infallibility of
the Prophets doings and sayings. Allah has said: **Most surely it is the
Word of an honored messenger. Mighty, having an honorable place with the
Lord of the Dominion. One (to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust. And
your companion is not gone mad.** Qur'an, 81:19-22

Would it be possible for the Prophet (s) to worry himself with
explaining the clear things and expressing the obvious matters and to
present for these clear things preludes and introductions which had
nothing to do with those clear things? Allah and His messenger are far
above that! You, may Allah assist the truth by you, know that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

forbid, to judge and to be the leaders of the people, but we found that
they had become among the rabble of Taym, Adiy, aal Abul Aass and the
likes without having any role in managing the affairs of the umma! The
authority was among other than them! Alas! They had become victims and
captives drawn with their ties to the mosque of Damascus before the
sights and the hearings of the Muslims who neither denied that nor did
they feel sorry for them!

what befitted the Prophets position and interest in that hot weather and
befitted his sayings and doings on the day of al-Ghadeer was to announce
his covenant; to appoint the one who would be in his place and who would
be his successor. All the evidences on that day confirmed that the
Prophet (s) had intended to appoint the guardian and the caliph after
him. The tradition is a clear text determining the caliphate of Imam Ali
(s) and it does not accept any other interpretation and there is no way
to turn it to any other meaning. This is clear **(for him who hath a
heart, or giveth ear with full intelligence).**

This tradition was not safe from being abbreviated by omitting some
parts of it because the authority and the majority at that time were
with the changeable oppositionists who were the people of the power and
the rule. Nevertheless the remainder of the tradition is enough to show
the truth; yet it is wonderful that it has remained! In fact it has
remained **(that he who would perish might perish by clear proof and he
who would live might live by clear proof)** and Allah has the conclusive
argument over people!

As for the Shia, they have true traditions from Imam Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (s) from his fathers (s) that the Prophet (s) had determined
clearly and openly on the day of al-Ghadeer that Imam Ali (s) would be
the caliph after him and that the Prophet (s) had ordered his companions
to greet Imam Ali (s) by calling him as Ameerul Mo'mineen (the commander
of the believers). Some of the companions greeted him without saying
anything and some others greeted him after they had asked the Prophet
(s): O messenger of Allah, is this from Allah and His messenger? the
Prophet (s) said: Yes, it is from Allah and His messenger.[1] The truth
has been clarified then and the morning has shone for the seers! Praise
be to Allah!

Allah has said: **Certainly they sought (to sow) dissension before, and
they meditated plots against you until the truth came, and Allah's
commandment prevailed although they were averse (from it).** Qur'an,
9:48

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Usool al-Kafi by Muhammad bin Yaqoob al-Kulayni.

The oppositionists did not imagine that the Prophet (s) would take that
situation which he had taken on the day of al-Ghadeer at all. When he
surprised them with it and carried out what Allah had ordered him to do,
they found that opposing him at the end of his mission (after the Arabs
had submitted to him and the people had become Muslims group by group)
would be useless. In fact they found that their opposition would bring
them disasters and ordeals because it would cause their decline
especially or the decline of Islam and the Arabs in general and
consequently they would lose the aim they looked forward to and the
position they got themselves prepared for.

Therefore they found that it would be better for them to be somehow
patient and to give up rising at that moment. They decided to wait until
the Prophet (s) would leave to the better world in order that their
rising would not be against the Prophet (s) himself. Hence they behaved
tactfully as possible as they could and they kept to the Islamic rituals
and did well in defending them. Allah had revealed to the Prophet (s)
about what they had hidden in their hearts and informed him of what they
would do after him but the religion must be perfected, the favor must be
completed and the mission must be informed of **(that he who would
perish might perish by clear proof, and he who would live might live by
clear proof) (and nothing rests on the Messenger but clear delivering
(of the message)).**

Yes, the Prophet (s) had recommended his guardian to receive the people,
when opposing him, with magnanimity, to prefer them to his own right, to
face that ordeal with patience and reliance on Allah to save Islam from
any danger and to prefer the general welfare to the personal benefits
and he had ordered the umma to be patient before that ordeal.

Huthayfa bin al-Yaman narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: After me
there will be imams, who will not act according to my guidance and will
not follow my Sunna. Among them there will be some men, whose hearts are
hearts of devils in bodies of human beings. Huthayfa asked: O messenger
of Allah, if I live until then, what shall I do? The Prophet (s) said:
You should listen to and obey the emir even if he beats you and takes
your monies. Listen to him and

obey him![1]

Abdullah bin Massood narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: After me
there will be selfishness and some things that you will deny. The
companions asked: O messenger of Allah, what do you order us to do if we
live until then? He said: You should do your duties and ask Allah for
what you deserve.[2]

Abu Tharr often narrated: My friend, the messenger of Allah (s) has
advised me to listen to and to obey (the emir) even if he is a slave
with amputated limbs.[3]

Salama al-Jufi asked the Prophet (s): O prophet of Allah, if there will
be emirs asking us for their rights but preventing us from our rights,
what do you order us to do then? The Prophet (s) said: Listen to them
and obey them. They will be responsible for their duties and you will be
responsible for your duties.[4]

Umm Salama narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: There will be emirs
(ruling) over you. You will know (their bad deeds) and you will deny
(them). He, who will know, will be innocent and he, who will deny, will
be safe.[5] The companions asked the Prophet (s): Should we fight them?
He said: No, you should not as long as they offer prayers.[6]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih of Muslim, vol.2 p.120 and other books of Hadith. He, who
knows what has befallen upon the Muslims after the death of the Prophet
(s), recognizes that that time was not for dispute and nothing could be
done save being patient before the harms because the disputes would lead
to the decline of the Muslims.  
 **[2]** Sahih of Muslim, vol.2 p.18.  
 **[3]** Ibid. vol.2.  
 **[4]** Ibid. vol.2 p.119.  
 **[5]** It means: he, who knows the abominable (impermissible) doings
and he is not in doubt about them, will be innocent of their sin and
punishment because he can change that abominable doings with his hand or
tongue but if he is unable to do that, he can hate those doings and deny
them with his heart.  
 **[6]** Sahih of Muslim, vol.2 p.122. Praise be to Allah! This is the
end of our comment on the book an-Nass wel-Ijtihad by the poor slave of
Allah and the son of His two slaves, the guilty and the mistaken

The traditions having this meaning are many and recurrent especially the
traditions that have been narrated from Ahlul Bayt (s).

Therefore Ahlul Bayt (s) were patient unwillingly following these sacred
orders of the Prophet (s) and other recommendations and advises that the
Prophet (s) had especially entrusted them with to keep the umma safe
from dangers, to keep the unity of the Muslims, to prefer the religion
to the personal rights and to spare the power of the Muslims. Therefore
Ahlul Bayt (s) (as we have said in our book al-Murajaat and other books)
always advised the rulers and the men of authority with sincere advises
and gave them their loyal consultations although they felt bitter pains
inside them for their lost rights but they always preferred the benefit
of the umma and the benefits of the Muslims to their own. They, although
their position had been extorted, always carried out their duties
towards the umma according to the rational and legal base of preferring
the more important thing to the important thing. Therefore Imam Ali (s)
had been sincere and loyal in giving his advises to the three caliphs
and in responding to their needs when consulting with him about the
different affairs of the states. When Imam Ali (s) had become desperate
of getting his right of the caliphate, he took the way of meekness and
reconciliation towards the rulers. He saw his legal throne in their
hands but he neither fought them for it nor did he try to remove them
from it. He tried his best to keep the umma away from any danger, to
guard the unity of the Muslims, to defend the religion and to prefer the
afterlife to the worldly life. He had been surrounded by serious matters
and disasters; the caliphate with its legal texts and covenants that
called for him with a voice that made his heart and his followers hearts
bleed besides prevailing seditions that were about to turn the Arabia
over, to lead the Arabs to rise and to make Islam liable to be invaded
by the hypocrites of Medina and the Arabs of the desert who were
hypocrites as the holy Qur'an had said, in fact they were the severest
in disbelief and hypocrisy and they were far away from the limits of
Allah and His messenger,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abdul Husayn Sharafuddeen al-Musawi al-Aamily. Praise be to Allah first
and last and blessing and peace be upon Muhammad and his progeny.

besides (at-Tulaqa)[1] of the people of Mecca, who had hidden enmity and
rage, and the other tyrants and enemies of the truth who had become
strong and powerful after the death of the Prophet (s). The Muslims had
become like sheep in a winter night between wolves and savage beasts;
Musaylama the liar, Tulayha bin Khuwaylid the quack, Saja bint al-Harith
the impostor and their followers who were ready to do away with Islam
besides the Romans, the kings of Persia and the other kings of the world
who had lain in wait for the Muslims besides many other figures who were
full of spite against the Prophet (s), his family and his companions and
full of spite against Islam intending to tear down all its bases and
pillars. They found, after the death of the Prophet (s), that the time
had come for them to attack Islam. They wanted to seize the opportunity
of the anarchy that had taken place after the death of the Prophet (s)
before power and order would return to Islam. Ameerul Mo'mineen Imam Ali
(s) stopped between these two dangers; the loss of the caliphate or the
decline of Islam. It was natural for him to sacrifice his right of the
caliphate for the sake of Islam and for the sake of the general welfare
of the umma; therefore he kept to his house. He did not pay homage until
he was taken out of his house by force to pay homage (to Abu Bakr). He
refused to pay homage willingly to keep his right and to protest against
those who had extorted his right and against their followers until the
Day of Judgment. If he had paid homage, he would have had no evidence on
his right later on nor would his followers have any authority at all.
But by doing that, Imam Ali (s) had kept Islam and the Muslims safe and
he had kept his right of the emirate of the believers and this showed
his discernment, magnanimity, patience and preferring the general
welfare too wisely. Surely Imam Ali (s) had gained a high position near
Allah by giving up his right of such a great and important matter (the
caliphate of the Muslims) just for the sake of the religion, the umma
and the public benefits. His aim behind doing this was to win the best
reward from Allah, the Almighty and to be closer to the Lord of the
worlds **(Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honor, above what they
describe and peace be on the messengers and all praise is due to Allah,
the Lord of the worlds)**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** They were the polytheists of Mecca. The Prophet (s) had forgiven
them and set them free when conquering Mecca and then they became
Muslims unwillingly.

and the blessing of Allah on the master of the prophets and the last of
the messengers Muhammad and his pure progeny.

This book has been completed with the grace of Allah, praise be to Him,
in Soor[1] on Wednesday, the tenth of Rajab, 1375 AH, by the poor slave
of Allah, who looks forward to the mercy of Allah, Abdul Hussayn bin[2]
Sharif Yousuf bin Sharif Jawad bin Sharif Ismaeel bin Muhammad bin
Muhammad bin Sharafuddeen, whose name was Ibrahim, bin Zein al-Aabideen
bin Ali Nooruddeen bin Nooruddeen Ali bin Izziddeen al-Hussayn bin
Muhammad bin al-Hussayn bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Tajuddeen, who was
famous as Abul Hassan bin Muhammad, whose surname was Shamsuddeen, bin
Abdullah, whose surname was Jalaluddeen, bin Ahmed bin Hamza bin
Sadullah bin Hamza bin Abus-Saadat Muhammad bin Abu Muhammad Abdullah,
the head of the chiefs of the Talibites[3] in Baghdad, bin Abul Harth
Muhammad bin Abul Hassan Ali, who was famous as ibnud Daylamiyya, bin
Abu Tahir Abdullah bin Abul Hassan Muhammad al-Muhaddith bin Abut Tayyib
Tahir bin al-Hussayn al-Qatei bin Musa Abu Sibha bin Ibrahim al-Murtadha
bin Imam al-Kadhim bin Imam as-Sadiq bin Imam al-Baqir bin Imam Zeinul
Aabideen bin Imam Abu Abdullah al-Hussayn, the Master of the martyrs,
the grandson of the Prophet and the son of Amirul Mumineen, the master
of the guardians, Ali bin Abu Talib. Allahs blessing and peace be upon
the Prophet and all of his progeny and praise be to Allah, the Lord of
the worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A city in Lebanon.  
 **[2]** Bin and ibn mean the son of.  
 **[3]** Related to the progeny of Abu Talib.
