Introduction
============

***By: Allama Sayyid Muhammad Taqi al-Hakeem  
 Professor of Usool in the college of Muntada an-Nashr  
 and the secretary general of the society of Muntada an-Nashr***

I am now before a book that has a great scientific value. It has been
written by a man having the favor of teachership and education on the
most of the researchers of doctrinism of this generation. The cultural
assembly of Muntada an-Nashr wanted me to be honored by writing an
introduction for this book to shed some lights on the contents of some
of its scientific words and then to evaluate it and to show its aspects
and main characteristics and after that to talk about the personality of
the author to show some of his immortal qualities.

As I am confined to obey the will of the assembly, so I have no choice
to avoid this decision though I think that I do not deserve this honor.

**-1-**

Writing an introduction to this book to define some of its idioms and to
clear the importance of its researches takes us in the first to a group
of the teachers of the science of Usool al-Fiqh (the principles of
jurisprudence) to get their opinions on defining some concepts mentioned
in the book, whose author has used the same idioms that they use.

The first thing that faces us is the title of the book an-Nass wel
Ijtihad. What has the author meant by the word an-Nass and what has he
meant by al-Ijtihad and what does the comparison between them lead to?

I think that answering these three questions with all their

surroundings will be enough to understand all the concepts mentioned in
the book.

The professors answer the question of an-Nass[1] that it is the literal
evidence that expresses the legal verdict and that has been proved from
the legislator (Allah or His prophet) in irrefutable way or according to
supposition that is regarded legally and rationally whether the source
is the Book or the Sunna. Of course the author of this book has not
intended other than this meaning as it appears from his researches.

As for the question of ijtihad, they answered with many answers
different according to their different thoughts and points of view
although the differences between them had nothing to do to the essence.

It seems from their words that they have two idioms about this word; one
is more specified than the other. Ijtihad in its general concept
according to al-Aamudi is trying the best to suppose something of the
legal verdicts in a way that it is felt that that one is unable to get
more than it.[2] Some jurisprudents of Usool adopted this definition
with doing some reform to it and changing some of its words. Ad-Dahlawi
defines it as: trying the best to understand the legal sub-verdicts from
their detailed evidences that all belong to four sources; the Book, the
Sunna, consensus and analogy.[3] Muhammad al-Khudhari defines it as:
trying the best by a jurisprudent to know the verdicts of the Sharia
then he adds full ijtihad is to try all that he can until he feels that
he is unable to get anything more.[4]

All these definitions and their likes are not skilled if they have meant
to define the concept logically but if they have intended to explain the
word like the linguists so it is no matter to depend on any of them.
Perhaps the closer skilled definition that is away from criticism
somehow is the ability, by which one can join the little  
 Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nass means proviso, text or wording.  
 **[2]** Refer to al-Ahkam, vol.4 p.218.  
 **[3]** The thesis of al-Insaf fee Bayan al-Ikhtilaf by allama Shah
Waliyullah ad-Dahlawi mentioned in the Encyclopedia of Fareed Wajdi.
This definition is in vol. 3 p.236.  
 **[4]** Usool al-Fiqh by Muhammad al-Khudhari p.357.

matters to the greater ones in order to produce a legal verdict or a
legal or rational practical function and it somehow avoids the defects
of the previous definitions.

Being limited to demand supposing the legal verdict, as in al-Aamudis
definition, excludes analogy,[1] which produces the legal conclusions,
if its little and greater matters are certain and being limited to
knowledge as in al-Khudharis definition excludes the results that lead
to the real verdict if its premises or some of them lead to accepted
supposition legally and rationally because the result -as it is said-
follows in its verdict the least of premises. And being limited to legal
verdicts- as in all definitions-excludes the results, to which a
mujtahid reaches via trying some rules and usools and especially the
ones that annul its obligation like the legal acquittance derived from
this tradition the people of my umma are not responsible for what they
do not know and the rational acquittance derived from the decision of
mind that decides the ugliness of punishing without an evidence and the
likes. Of course these matters and their likes are not from the legal
verdicts at all but they are practical functions determined by mind or
legislation when a mujtahid becomes desperate to get a legal verdict by
the means of knowledge or accepted supposition.

Anyhow the meaning of ijtihad in general is clear even if the previous
definitions fail to give all its limits.

Ijtihad in its special meaning is a synonym of analogy according to
ash-Shafiiys thought. He says: what is analogy? Is it ijtihad or they
are different? I said: they are two names for one meaning.[2] They might
make it as a synonym for approval, opinion, conclusion and analogy as
different names for one meaning. Mustafa Abdur Razaq says: The opinion
that we talk about is dependence on intellect in concluding the legal
verdicts that is what we mean by ijtihad and analogy and it is also a
synonym for approval and conclusion.[3] It is clear for one, who studies
these researches and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Analogy here means logical analogy that depends on Usool.  
 **[2]** Ar-Rissala by ash-Shafiiy, p.477.  
 **[3]** Introduction to the History of the Islamic Philosophy by
Mustafa Abdur Razaq, p.138.

what definitions they have mentioned for these idioms, to find that this
speech has come out according to the requirements of this subject and
its idioms. Its reason might be an ambiguity that the general concepts
have imposed their confirmation upon this great researcher.

Apparently that one, who observes their sayings about the subject of
ijtihad in its special meaning, will find it as a synonym of opinion for
them and analogy, approval, benefits and the likes are just
confirmations for this concept.

When comparing between nass and ijtihad mentioned in the title of the
book, we understand that the author has meant by ijtihad here its
special meaning, which is trying ones opinion to derive the legal
verdict with ignoring the nass that contradicts the verdict.

As for these evidences that have been mentioned repeatedly in some
definitions of ijtihad in its general meaning and ad-Dahlawi has
ascribed to it in his previous definition the whole verdicts, they are
four- as he has mentioned-three of which the Muslims have agreed on and
they are: the Book, the Sunna and consensus. The jurisprudents of the
Shia have added to them reason while their Sunni brothers have added
analogy and perhaps some of them have added approval, benefits and
others.

With regard to the importance of the research on these evidences and
preferring some of them to the others and the important relation with
the researches of this book, we shall talk about in some details as
necessary as the subject requires.

The Book means the Book of Allah that has been revealed to His messenger
Muhammad (s), who has informed his umma of it and it has circulated
among the Muslims until this day with no increase and no decrease. Its
verses that concern the legal verdicts whether worships or dealings such
as personal law, civil law, criminal law, procedure or others, have been
collected to be about five hundred verses; a little more or a little
less. These verses are considered as the first source of legislation
according to the consensus of all the Islamic sects. These verses have
been collected and classified into the chapters of jurisprudence and
have been attached with their comments by some scholars like al-Miqdad
as-Siyori in his book

Kanzul Irfan fee Fiqh al-Quran and al-Jazairy in his book Qalaid
ad-Durar fee Bayan Aayat al-Ahkam bil-Athar and others.

Some of these verses need to be explained as general or special,
absolute or confined, in summary or in details and then to show the
annulling and the annulled ones etc. Besides that there are some
actions, whose verdicts have not been legislated by the Quranic verses,
so we are in need to the second source, which is the Sunna. The Sunna is
the sayings of the infallible ones,[1] their doings and their accepting
and confirming others sayings and doings. This is to complete the
legislation on one side and to interpret the unclear texts of the Book
on the other side.

Then the Sunna is the complement of the Holy Book. In fact both of them
are but one since they belong to the First Legislator **Nor does he
speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is revealed.**
Quran, 53:3-4 The Muslims have agreed unanimously upon considering the
Sunna as a source of legislation. Abdul Wahab Khallaf says: The Muslims
have agreed unanimously upon that all what the Prophet (s) has said or
done or confessed of sayings and doings that have been conveyed to us
correctly and truthfully and by which the Prophet (s) has intended to be
as the essence of legislation and imitation, will be irrefutable proof
for the Muslims and a source of legislation, from which the mujtahids
are to conclude legal verdicts that manage the actions of the ordinary
Muslims. This means that the verdicts derived from the Sunna will be, in
addition to the verdicts mentioned in the Holy Quran, as the law that
must be followed.[2]

Consensus is joined to the Holy Quran and the Sunna as the third source
of legislation. Since we are Muslims and we believe that we have a
divine Sharia, which has defined all what we need to manage our
relations whether with Allah or among ourselves with one another and
that this Sharia, which Allah has made flexible to keep pace with the
time with its rules and principles, is the perfect Sharia

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The infallible ones according to the Shia are the Prophet (s)
and the twelve imams, the first of whom is Imam Ali (s) and the last one
is Muhammad bin al-Hasan (Imam al-Mahdi (s)).  
 **[2]** Ilm Usool al-Fiqh wa Khulasat Tareekh at-Tashree al-Islami,
p.37.

that has ended all the previous laws. And as we believe that the Sharia
is really so; therefore we do not have to violate its legal texts (nass)
and we have no right to determine according to our own thoughts. This is
about to be one of the agreed upon usool determined by the most of the
ulama of usool; the ancient and the recent ones, the Sunni and the Shia.

Professor Khallaf says in his book the Sources of the Islamic
Legislation: The event that an irrefutable verdict has come out of its
text I wording and its meaning It means that mind cannot recognize out
of this text except a definite verdict that there is no way for ijtihad
in it and that the verdict of this very text must be followed.

Hence there is no chance for ijtihad about prayers because offering
prayers is obligatory. The same is said about the shares of the heirs
concerning the matter of inheritance. Therefore the jurisprudents of
Usool say that ijtihad is not permissible on matters with texts having
clear and irrefutable verdicts.

The fact, whose verdict is derived from a text having suppositional
meaning (that it may lead to two verdicts or more and that reason can
recognize which of the verdicts is more suitable), can be submitted to
ijtihad but this ijtihad must be bound to the meanings included by the
text and then to prefer one of these meanings. The mujtahid has to try
his best in preferring one of the meanings relying on the linguistic and
legislative principles and whatever result he gets, he has to act
according to it. For example Allah has said in the verse of wudu[1]:
**(and wipe your heads)[2]** and it is possible to refer either to
wiping all the head because of the preposition (mentioned in the Arabic
wording) or to wiping a part of the head. He adds: The event that
neither a text nor consensus has determined a verdict on can be
submitted to ijtihad.[3]

Some of the legislated verdicts can be got by knowledge either by using
reason or depending on the true traditions and some of them

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wudu : ritual ablution as a prerequisite for offering prayers.  
 **[2]** In the Arabic wording there is a preposition before your
heads.  
 **[3]** The Sources of Islamic legislation, p.8-9.

cannot be got by knowledge but by supposition. Supposition is one of the
ways that may not give the exact reality in order to be relied on. Allah
has mentioned a kind of blame and scolding for absolute (unjustified)
supposition when saying in this verse: **they do not follow anything but
conjecture, and surely conjecture does not avail against the truth at
all.** Qur'an, 53:28 and **O you who believe! avoid most of suspicion,
for surely suspicion in some cases is a sin.** Qur'an, 49:12 and other
verses.

But the Holy Legislator (Allah) has given a permission to depend on some
of the conjectures to be considered as trusted evidences out of His
kindness to his people to make their affairs easy and not difficult. So
a tradition narrated by one narrator, consensus and other ways can be
depended on in legislating legal verdicts if they are considered as
trusted sources; otherwise people should resort to precaution.

Analogy means- as ad-Dawaleebi says: applying a legal verdict of a
matter to another matter when there is a same cause behind them both.[1]
For example wine has been prohibited because it causes intoxication (if
this justification agrees with the Book and the Sunna when prohibiting
wine or other things) so this verdict will be applied to other things,
which cause intoxication, even if they are not wine. The Shia do not
regard analogy as one of the sources of legislation because it has been
proved that the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (s) had forbidden from
depending on it in concluding legal verdicts and because the evidences
of analogy are not sufficient to make analogy accepted as a source of
legislation.

What is said about analogy can be said about approval, whose evidences
are more ambiguous than those of analogy.

As for the suitable benefits as called by the scholars of Usool and the
general benefits as called by the Malikites and istislah-regarding
(something) good as called by al-Ghazali,[2] the Muslims have disagreed
on defining it or depending on it or preferring it to the first sources.
Professor Khallaf defines it by saying: It is the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Entrance to the science of Usool and Fiqh, p.261.  
 **[2]** Ilm Ussol al-Fiqh wa Khulasat at-Tashree al-Islami, p.92.

benefit that the Legislator (Allah) has not legislated a verdict on it
and there is no legal evidence on regarding it or annulling it.[1] The
Shia do not accept it nor do they believe that it is permissible to rely
on it in legislating legal verdicts or in preferring it to the first
sources of legislation. In fact they believe that legislation is
impermissible according to this source of legislation and they say:
adding something, which is not of the Sharia, to the Sharia.

The strange thing is that some researchers have ascribed this matter to
the Shia and said that they have practiced it and preferred it to the
clear texts. The author of this book has refuted this fabrication in his
book al-Irfan and then in this book and he has corrected their view
about this subject.

Some of them have explained it in another way. They said: Istislah in
its real meaning is a kind of legislating a legal verdict according to
the opinion based on the benefit on every matter that the Sharia has had
no text on and that there is no another matter like it in order to
submit it to analogy but the verdict is derived according to the general
bases of the Sharia that any matter, which has no benefit, is not from
the Sharia. These general bases are like what has been said by Allah:
**Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good.**
Qur'an, 16:90 and by the Prophet (s): No harm or damage should be done
(to anyone)[2]

If we add to this explanation the word special after the word nass to
accommodate its parts to each other and to remove the contradiction
between them and we say that they mean by the general benefit this thing
then the Shia will have no excuse to refrain from depending on this
source in their legislation as long as it depends on the general bases
determined by the Holy Legislator and refers to the legal principles.
This is not acting according to the general benefit nor is it a kind of
legislation but it is doing according to the Book and the Sunna.

In fact this research has made some researchers unable to define a
certain concept on it and the examples mentioned on it do not

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]**The Entrance to the science of Usool and Fiqh, p.216.  
 **[2]** The Entrance to the science of Usool and Fiqh, p.274.

concern it alone. Al-Ghazali gives an example by saying: (like some
unbelievers protecting themselves by some Muslim captives by making them
as a shield; if we give up and leave them alone, they will attack us and
defeat Islam and kill all the Muslims and if we shoot at the shield, we
will kill an innocent Muslim, who is not guilty and who must not be
killed, and this is not from the Sharia. If we give up, we will let the
unbelievers prevail over all the Muslim and they will them all and then
they will kill the captives too. So we may shoot at the shield (the
Muslim captives) in order to save the rest of the Muslims. Achieving
this aim in this way (killing innocent people) has not been determined
by a certain source (of legislation).[1] This example is one of the
clearest points of (Tazahum) which means that when two different legal
verdicts meet by accident at the same time and that one cannot achieve
them both because he will have no enough time to do that and that he
cannot give up them both because he has to obey them; therefore one must
use reason to choose one of the two verdicts and certainly one must
choose the more important and the most useful verdict of them. If one
does not know which of them is better or they are equal, one can choose
any of them and acts according to it and ignore the other verdict.

The two verdicts mentioned in the example of al-Ghazali show the
impermissibility of killing a Muslim and the necessity of keeping all
the Muslims safe. Executing the two verdicts together in this case is
impossible because executing one of them requires ignoring the other.
Choosing the more important one of the two and doing according to it
means choosing one of the two texts and doing according to it and this
is like doing according to the Book or the Sunna and not doing according
to the concept of istislah.

It appears from some of the other examples that they have been submitted
to verdicts after comparing the texts with each other. I think that
those, who have said that the Shia prefer general benefits to the texts
and considered them as excessive in practicing that, have thought of
that after referring to the subject of preference[2] mentioned in the
principles of the Shia and considered that as

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usool al-Fiqh by al-Khudhari, p.303.  
 **[2]** Preferring the more important verdict to the important one.

Istislah.

Allah has said: **(He has chosen you and has not laid upon you any
hardship in religion).** The Prophet (s) has said: No harm or damage
should be done to others besides the tradition that shows necessities
permit prohibited things. All these evidences and their likes show that
Allah has permitted his people to make use of the prohibited things in
case of necessity or of facing serious dangers.

If there is no remedy to a sick man except by drinking an impure or a
prohibited substance, then he should drink that prohibited substance and
he will neither be sinful nor will he be punished by Allah because Allah
is too kind to His people and He does not cause them any harm so He will
not punish for drinking that prohibited substance (as remedy) in the
necessary cases.

This is not in the way of preferring istislah to the text but it is
preferring a text to another text and ignoring an evidence from the Book
or the Sunna in special cases. The Shia ulama of Usool have many
accurate studies about preferring some verdicts to others in the special
cases. Let the reader refer to their books to see their opinions on the
subject.

I have found after studying their (the Sunnis) definitions and examples
on the matter of istislah that they are classified into three classes;
two of them belong to the concept of preferring some verdicts to others,
the first of them concerns the matter of tazahum and the second concerns
he matter of preference, which the Shia believe in, and the third class
does not depend on a text whether special or general it is and the Shia
do not believe in this principle. I think that the author of this book
has discussed this class (of innovating verdicts) especially.

It has been mentioned that this kind of legislation has been adopted
under the excuse of the change of the verdicts according to the change
of the time. The Shia do not believe in subjecting the legal verdicts to
the development that takes place. The Sharia with its divine verdicts,
as the Shia believe, keeps pace with the different ages of time. It is
full of vital power that makes it live forever. Its principles and
evidences are enough to make it keep pace with every development that
has taken place or will take place by concluding

legal verdicts out of its texts or by following certain steps when it is
not possible to derive a legal verdict.

The Shiite books of Usool and jurisprudence have a great legislative
supply that has been produced because the Shia have opened the gate of
ijtihad. If these books are read, many reformers, who call for
subjecting the verdicts to the changes of time and ignoring the first
legal verdicts by replacing them with new verdicts that do not rely on
any legal source but just rely on what they call as general benefit,
will make great use of them. We hope that the jurisprudents, who are
interested in such researches, and the scholars of our Sunni brothers to
make use of the experiences of the Shia in opening the gate of ijtihad.

In short, the Book and the Sunna (with consensus) are preferred to the
all other sources of Ijtihad like, analogy, approval, general benefits
and others because they are numerous evidences and a mujtahid cannot do
according to these bases when there is a clear text from the Book and
the Sunna contradicting those bases.

Since this research, which we write this introduction to, is about
verdicts and fatwas that have been issued in the first age of Islam, so
we have no right to impose our opinions in preferring the rank of one
evidence to the other before studying the subject fully.

Some historians have mentioned that when the Prophet (s) had sent Maath
bin Jabal to Yemen (as the wali), he asked him: How will judge if cases
are offered before you? Maath said: I judge according to the Book of
Allah. The Prophet (s) asked him: If you do not find an answer in the
Book of Allah? he said: Then I will judge according to the Sunna of the
messenger of Allah (s). The Prophet (s) said: If you do not found an
answer in the Book of Allah and in the Sunna of the messenger of Allah?
He said: I will judge according to my own opinion.[1] It has been
mentioned that the Prophet (s) had approved Maaths saying and praised
him and said at the end of the tradition: Praise be to Allah who has
guided the messenger of the messenger of Allah to what pleases the
messenger

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Introduction to the History of the Islamic Philosophy, p.145.

of Allah.[1]

Maymoon bin Mihran narrated: When litigants came to Abu Bakr, he
referred to the Book of Allah to judge between them. If he could not
find a judgment in the Book of Allah, he would refer to the Sunna of the
Prophet (s). When he could not find something in the Book and the Sunna
to judge according to it, he went out to ask the Muslims if any of them
knew that the Prophet (s) had judged on such cases. Many Muslims came to
him mentioning the judgments of the Prophet (s) on such cases. Abu Bakr
said: Praise be to Allah, Who has made among us some ones who keep the
knowledge of our Prophet for us. If he failed to find something in the
Sunna of the Prophet (s) to judge with it, he gathered the chiefs and
the notables of the people to consult with them and when they agreed
unanimously on something, he would judge with it.[2]

Umar said to Shurayh the Judge from among his instructions to him: if a
case is offered before you and there is no verdict on it in the Book of
Allah or in the Sunna of the messenger of Allah nor has it been judged
by anyone before you, then you may choose one of two things; either to
judge according to your own opinion if you like to give a quick judgment
or to suspend your judgment if you like. I think that suspending your
judgment is better to you.[3]

Ibn Massood said: Whoever of you happens to judge between people, let
him judge according to the Book of Allah. If he cannot find any judgment
in the Book of Allah, let him judge according to the Sunna of the
Prophet (s). If it happens that a case is offered before him that has
judgment neither in the Book of Allah nor in the Sunna of the Prophet
(s), let him judge according to what the righteous people have judged
with. If a matter comes to him that it is neither in the Book of Allah
nor in the Sunna of the Prophet (s) nor has it been judged by the
righteous people, let him judge according to his own opinion but if he
cannot, let him give up without feeling shy.[4] The traditions like
these ones that have been narrated by the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Introduction to the History of the Islamic Philosophy, p.145.  
 **[2]** Encyclopedia of Fareed Wajdi, vol.3 p.212.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Introduction to the History of the Islamic Philosophy, p.177.

companions are too many. Refer to the books of Hadith.

Dr. Goldzeher, the famous orientalist, has suspected the traditions
saying that ijtihad has been found at the days of the Prophet (s) and
then at the time of Umar after him. Among those traditions was the
tradition of the Prophet (s) with Maath bin Jabal when sending him to
Yemen and the instructions of Umar to Shurayh the Judge and his letter
to Abu Musa al-Ashari, in which he had showed him many systems of
judgment and how to judge when there were no texts (from the Book or the
Sunna) and especially the idiom of analogy was mentioned in this letter
which had not been known except later on.[1]

This orientalist-as Muhammad Yousuf Musa says-who has been interested in
the Islamic studies, thinks that ijtihad has been practiced by the first
generation of the Muslims but ijtihad in this stage was ambiguous and
without positive guiding and it was away from the sect and its special
doctrine. Later on it acquired certain limits and began to take a fixed
direction and then it took the logical form which was analogy.[2]

Dr. Musa has refuted the opinion of Dr. Goldzeher and his other
orientalist historians because they were far away from understanding the
essence of Islam and because the traditions mentioned by ibn Qayyim
al-Jawziyya were enough to prove that. But then he came back to say:
Indeed Ijtihad in that period of the history of the Islamic
jurisprudence was not the analogy that was known later on at the time of
the jurisprudents of the four famous sects but the ijtihad that had been
practiced by some of the companions were not too far from this analogy
if it was not the same even nothing had been mentioned about the cause,
the manners and other researches which must be used in practicing
analogy as we have found in the age of those jurisprudents.[3]

Whatever value this suspicion has and how scientific the disproval is,
it doesnt matter. What is important to us is that what concerns the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Lectures on the History of Islamic Jurisprudence, p.23.  
 **[2]** Ibid. p.24.  
 **[3]** Ibid. p.25.

situations of the companions towards the verdicts determined by the Book
and the Sunna. They have not permitted themselves to depend on other
than these two sources especially when they often recited this verse:
**and whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back.** Qur'an, 59:7 except if some of them violated
the normal condition by committing some contradictions either because of
special psychological cases or certain circumstances that led them to do
that. They might be pleased with the opinions of some of them on the
matters that there were no texts dealing with and so they formed the
seed of consensus that was adopted by the scholars later on. I think
that they resorted to the duty of one who doubted about a matter and
then he should resort to reason and ijtihad even if they had not been as
they had become later on as these two researchers have said.

Of course they did not resort to this duty before they had looked for a
text concerning the matter in the Book and the Sunna. Ibn Hazm said: The
Prophet (s) was in Medina and his companions were busy working to get
their livelihood because life was too difficult in Hijaz. The Prophet
(s) often gave his fatwas and verdicts at the presence of some of his
companions, who could attend his meetings. These few companions, who
might be sometimes one or two, should convey the Prophets verdicts to
the absent companions who had to act according to these verdicts.[1] He
also said: We know that when the Prophet (s) wanted to give a fatwa or
to determine a verdict, he did not gather all the people of Medina for
that but he declared his verdicts before those who could attend his
meetings and then the present companions should inform the absent ones.
There is no doubt in this and it cannot be denied by any one who has
reason and good sense.[2]

As ibn Hazm has said that the present companions should inform the
absent ones of the Prophets verdicts and this would an authority on
them, which was really so, then the absent companions had no right to
neglect searching for the legal texts. They had to search until they

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Ihkam fee Usool al-Ahkam, vol.1 p.114. Refer to Introduction
to the History of the Islamic Philosophy, p.123.  
 **[2]** Ibid.

would fail to find any. Some traditions showed that the companions had
kept on doing so. The tradition narrated by Maymoon bin Mihran mentioned
this matter. He said: if he does not find an evidence in the Book of
Allah, he has to judge according to the Sunna of the Prophet (s) but if
he fails to find he any, he has to consult with the Muslims

Let us now come back to the book (this book) to understand its
researches and to know its scientific value.

**-2-**

This book is an excellent study on doings, judgments and fatwas done by
some of the great companions at the time of the Prophet (s) and after
him. These doings, judgments and fatwas had contradicted the clear texts
of the Book and the Sunna in spite that the doers had done them
intendedly and they had known well that their doings were against the
Book and the Sunna. If these doings had not been justified by some
scholars and if the doers had not been excused in a way or another,
these doings would have been considered as challenge and not ijtihad.
Some other doings were clear in their contradiction to the texts of the
Qur'an and the Sunna but they were different from the previous ones
because the doers had done them while unknowing of the divine texts and
when they were warned of their mistakes, they gave up and repented.
These kinds of doings would not be blamed because the doers had tried
their best to look for the legal evidences and when they failed to find
any, they gave fatwas according to their own opinions.

And since these doings, fatwas and judgments, which this book has
discussed here, had been done intendedly and without paying any
attention to the legal texts or without trying to look for the legal
texts especially the aware people of these texts were close to the
doers, although the doers themselves were aware of the texts, so they
would be blamed and responsible for these doings.

The third kind of these doings were considered as ijtihad on the meaning
of the texts and then choosing what contradicted the real intention of
the texts which normally came to mind and could be understood by all
people. This kind of ijtihad annulled the apparent

meaning of the text and chose another instead. The common thing between
these fatwas and verdicts has been showed by the author of this book in
two words, which they are the title of the book; an-Nass wel-Ijtihad for
all these doings belonged to personal ijtihad and opinions although
there were clear divine texts, that could be obtained easily,
contradicting those doings and fatwas.

The book has wonderful historical chapters discussing these fatwas and
shedding lights on them to make them clear or to explain the view of the
author in criticizing them. The author has distinguished these
historical events from the researches of the book by putting them in
independent chapters.

The style of the author in his researches depends on showing the events
in a historical point of view after taking them from the most reliable
sources. Then he analyzes the event in a pure objective manner with
showing the opinions of the people of those events if they have had
opinions mentioned by the historians or showing the opinions of the
later scholars who have justified the faults of those people. After that
he gives his opinion after discussing all the views about the event in
an accurate scientific discussion.

One glance at any of the important matters discussed in the book makes
you feel how great efforts the author has made in getting these matters
from their sources in the books of history and Hadith or the wide
intellectual power that the author has given to these matters which
shows the great knowledge and the scientific abilities he has which are
seldom available among the writers of this generation.

As for the style of the book, it is not different from the style of the
author in most of his books; brightness, genuineness, easiness besides
giving the events what they deserve whether in brief or in details. We
can say about these researches that they express the power of the great
souls in challenging the heavy burden that time puts on their shoulders
for the author has written this book while he was about eighty-five
years old. He has put in it the extract of his experiences of more than
half a century which he has spent in studying, researching and
inquiring. This book is the most recent work that has been written by
the authors honored pen and we do

not say that it is the last one. May Allah make him live more and more
to produce such great books and useful researches.[1]

**-3-**

Talking about the great personality of Sayyid Sharafuddeen and shedding
some lights on some aspects of this personality may take use back more
that half a century to study some of the factors that have had effects
on forming his personality and have participated in making him straight
with no bit of deviation.

I mean by some of the factors the environment that has had the greatest
favor on developing his talents. The environment was the holy Najaf, the
Islamic university which has been established since more than one
thousand years and it is still having its important scientific position.
Sayyid Sharafuddeen was one of the most famous students of this
university at that time. The university was, as it had been throughout
its ages, rich with its cultural heritage in the sciences of the Arabic
language, jurisprudence, philosophy, literature and poetry. To this
university and to the University of al-Azhar belongs the greatest favor
in connecting the circles of the Islamic culture with each other and in
keeping the chain of this culture pure throughout the dark ages where
ignorance and inactivity had prevailed over most of the cultural
institutes. The University of Najaf might have been distinguished from
the other institutes by opening the door of ijtihad for its students and
leaving the way free for the minds to struggle in order to reach the
truth via the scientific arguments to get out of the fruits of this
struggle experiences full of life and activity.

Whenever the motive of the intellectual struggle is to reach the truth,
it will be one of the most important tools of development and progress
in every field of science and literature. This development that has
joined jurisprudence and its principles in this university, whether in
the programs or the methods, was one of the best fruits of that
intellectual struggle. If we could study jurisprudence throughout its
different ages, we would get, as I think, to a series of experiments

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This introduction has been written while the author was still
alive.

successive in their simplicity and depth and each of them taking you to
the next one to study it deeply and to add to it the new thoughts and
experiences and so on.

The familiarity of Najaf with these kinds of arguments and struggles
during its long scientific life has imparted to it the aspects of
objectivity and humbleness and kept it away from the bad aspects of
disputes such as hatred, grudge and clinging to ones opinion even if it
appears to be wrong. These bad aspects often exist in people whose aim
behind arguments is just to get personal advantages or is out of a
psychological complex. But if the aim is to get to the truth and if the
concept, which is the point of argument, is separate from persons,
objectivity and submitting to the truth will be the axis of the
arguments among most of the arguers.

Quite often we have found great teachers submitting to the opinions of
their students when they find them true besides their submission to
their teachers or to each other. The teachers themselves often encourage
their students to argue with them in order to sharpen their minds on the
one hand and to strengthen their personalities and to accustom them to
genuineness and leaving imitating the opinions of their schools and
their teachers, as weak students often do, on the other hand. In this
sphere of mental freedom and intellectual dispute the author has spent
his youth in Najaf moving between its institutes and great teachers to
receive different sciences and knowledge. He, with his natural and
acquired talents, was ready to receive all that knowledge and to
comprehend it in the best way. He has been affected by this environment
very much until his struggle for the sake of the truth has become as a
nature to him. These effects might pass his mind to reach his conduct in
his social life and so he has become a struggler in the different fields
of life. I think that the clue of his personality after his graduation
from the university might be known in the light of this nature more than
any other aspect of his eternal aspects.

In order to see the effect of that on his mental and social life we show
some sides of his life in which the nature of dispute and struggle for
the sake of the truth has appeared in the most wonderful way.

The first of these sides was his struggle against the French colonists
in Lebanon when he was young then. He had completed his religious study
in Najaf and then he went to Aamila to carry out his duty in educating
the people there. His fame in the field of knowledge had preceded him to
there and concentrated his position inside the souls and since then he
had become the leader of that country and the greatest educator there.
He made use of his wonderful talent of making speeches to move the
public opinion and to spread knowledge among the submissive people and
to incite their zeal to ask for their rights. This had made him liable
to the grudge of the French, who sent one of their mercenaries (ibn
al-Hallaj) to assassinate him and this story became very famous in
Lebanon.

After that he had been exiled from his country, his house had been
plundered and his library had been burned besides the different forms of
torment he had faced. Due to these doings the Islamic library had lost
about twenty books written by the author besides many valuable and rare
books he had in his library after being devoured by fire. He could not
rewrite those burnt books after that.

Another side of his life was his struggle against some social diseases
like appropriating the rights of weak people by some luxurious
feudatories in the country. He found in that appropriation what
contradicted the principles of Islam and so he made his famous rising
against the feudatories. Murtadha aal Yaseen said when mentioning some
scenes of the struggle of Sayyid Sharafuddeen in the introduction of
al-Murajaat: Feudalism was spread then and the public did not have any
control over their affairs. They did not understand from life save the
meaning of injustice and slavery or they were not allowed to understand
something other than of their mean lives which were subjected to serve
the powerful people and the tyrants. When he (Sayyid Sharafuddeen)
resided in Aamila, he could not bear this unjust system of life. He
found that his soul, his faith and his piety did not let him keep silent
before this feudalism, before these powerful tyrants and colonists and
their mercenaries; therefore he revolted against feudalism and its
people and denied it and denied them

Among the defects he found in his people was separation and the

weak religious spirit. the first thing he had done was making his house,
which he possessed in the village, as a Husayniyya (mosque) for people
to gather in on the religious occasions and to be as a minbar for him to
achieve his mission. Then he built them a big mosque to gather them at
the times of prayers. There was no mosque in the village at that time in
which people might offer their prayers. He kept on preaching his people
until he prepare a faithful generation that could recognize the reality
of the society, the value of cooperation and rapport and could keep to
the essence of the Islamic principles.

Some of my friends and I had the honor of visiting him two years ago in
Yathir. We saw him instructing his followers to seize the opportunities
to do good for people. While he was telling us about some of his
reformatory projects and while we were listening to him carefully, we
heard loud noises of delight coming from a far place. Sayyid
Sharafuddeen stopped his talk and said: I think that this approval was
to so-and-so. He has succeeded to cut or to lift the biggest rock. The
workers of the village have gone to build a mosque for them. I have
encouraged them to compete in working. The encouragement you just heard
was as a medal given to the first one of them who could succeed in
carrying out his duty. Then he said: If they come, you should
congratulate them for their blessed work and praise the successful one
of them because this will have an effect on them because you are from
holy Najaf, their religious capital and the city of the master of the
guardians. They came and we congratulated them after Sayyid Sharafuddeen
had introduced us to them with a kind of praise that made us feel shy
before this great man and his companions. It was a good situation of him
to encourage those people to compete in doing good.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen (may Allah have mercy on him) had a short word but
it had a great meaning showing his reformative tendency and one of his
manners in his struggle against the defects of the society. He said:
Guidance is not spread except from where deviation spreads.[1] Sayyid
Sharafuddeen thought that strongest motive of deviation in his society
was the programs of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Introduction of al-Murajaat, p.2.

imperialists which they had issued to teach them in their colonies. They
had built modern schools to educate a generation far away from the
essence of the religion that they would be able to revenge themselves on
the hard struggle they had faced before during their missionary wars. It
seemed that the missionary policy of the imperialists was the same
everywhere. The word of Miss Bell, the famous English spy, was a clear
proof on this matter although her activity was in Iraq especially. She
said: The clergymen were the most active propagandists for the
revolution in Iraq during the First World War and after it and this had
led the rulers to establish modern schools to weaken the religious
principles inside the souls of the new generations and so they would
pluck up the roots of revolution out of its base.[1]

The clergymen then felt the danger of this policy and what subservience
and surrender it would bring to the country; therefore they broke out in
their famous rising against the policy of education and called for
boycotting the modern schools but this call was unfortunately
misunderstood at that time because of the effect of the opponents and
then the clergymen divided into two groups; one group adopted the
negative situation by being satisfied with calling for the boycott and
uncovering the plots of the rulers as possible as they could and the
other group thought that they should add to the boycott a positive
action as it had been showed by the word of Sayyid Sharafuddeen Guidance
is not spread except from where deviation spreads. The base of this call
was to establish modern schools imitating those schools in their
programs and sciences which did not affect the Islamic principles
besides teaching religious programs to concentrate the religious spirit
inside the rising generation.

Among the propagandists of this group in Iraq was a great number of the
scholars of Najaf. They tried many times to establish modern schools to
achieve their aims but they faced many troubles that they could not
solve then. After some time of their tries and thoughts the Society of
Muntada an-Nashr tried to establish primary, secondary and high schools.
These tries succeeded sometimes and failed other times according to
their special circumstances. I think they will be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wuaadh as-Salateen, Ali al-Wardi, p.398.

more successful in the next years inshallah if more accurate systems and
programs derived from the previous experiences and the most modern
programs of the other schools are followed.

In Syria Sayyid Muhsin al-Ameen had untaken this positive movement by
establishing schools having his name which they are still carrying out
their reformatory mission. The author of this book Sayyid Sharafuddeen
had undertaken this task in Lebanon by establishing the Jafari School in
Soor and had run it with the modern programs. He took much care of it by
adding to the programs religious lessons and he entrusted his son Jafar
Sharafuddeen with the school to run it and to develop its religious
concept and aim.

At the time of al-Alwah Magazine I often read on its pages that Sayyid
Sharafuddeen had determined to establish an edifice (Jafari School) and
I saw its designs and maps published on the pages of the magazine. I
thought that such a project could not be carried out by one individual.
It might be nearer to imagination than to reality. In my visit To Soor I
saw this imagination as a fact. I saw the school matching with its high
building the surrounding mountains. It was really more wonderful than
all the colleges we had seen in Lebanon. It was big and large and
included all the utilities that a modern school required. At that moment
I understood that determinations should not be measured with certain
criteria; there might one person who could equal with his struggle and
power many groups of people!

Sayyid Sharafuddeen intended-as he had told us-to join a secondary
department to its primary and intermediate departments to prepare the
pupils to specialize in the religious sciences and then to set out from
it to holy Najaf to complete the high studies and to get the degree of
ijtihad or to specialize in the Islamic missionary affairs like what the
Society of Muntada an-Nashr had done.

As for his struggle and intellectual dispute to get to the truth from
the shortest ways, it can be felt in his works; al-Fusool al-Muhimma,
al-Murajaat, a Word about Vision, to the Scientific Convention, the
Answers on the Questions of Musa Jarullah and other works. All of these
works deal with scholastic matters that have been discussed in the way
of arguing and discussing previous opinions deeply and

impartially as the author always has done and has been known with these
aspects from among the writers of his generation.

These books, besides their scientific value, have excellent method in
research and argument with humbleness that is seldom available except in
the great ulama, whose souls are free from defects, and so they do not
need to resort to haughtiness or flattery at the expense of the truth.

The best example on that is his book al-Murajaat which is a collection
of letters have been exchanged between the author and the head of
al-Azhar University Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri on doctrinal subjects, which
had been and are still objects of disagreement and dispute between the
two greatest Islamic sects; the Sunni and the Shia.

These letters show wide knowledge, deep thinking and wonderful
performance on the one hand and the firmness of argument and mental
dispute besides being away from the emotional methods on the other hand.
How wonderful it is when you see one of them (Sayyid Sharafuddeen and
Sheik al-Bishri) submit to the other when he finds that his friend is
nearer to the truth. He submits to the other without resorting to
crooked ways or confused speech as some arguers do in order to satisfy
their pride and haughtiness and to acquire the sympathy of their
followers of simple people. I think that the researches of this book
represent the best manners of arguments and intellectual disputes and if
they are studied deeply and regarded impartially by the scholars of this
generation, they will do away with most of the points of disagreement
between the two great Islamic sects and they will make them closer to
each other in order to achieve the unity that all the reformers seek
nowadays.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen is one of the propagandists for the unity but not in
its negative form that calls for forgetting the past and ignoring it
totally and drawing the curtain on all its tragedies as some scholars
believe. They forgot that keeping silent before those tragedies and
drawing the curtain on them would not remove their dregs from the souls
but they would remain active inside the souls until they would appear in
exclusion. Sayyid Sharafuddeen thinks that many points of disagreement
between the Sunni and the Shia do

not come out of basic evidences but they are as results of fabrications
and propagandas that have been created by some circumstances and have
been encouraged by some governments and authorities in the old ages and
if they have been studied objectively and impartially, the two sects
would believe that they are far away from reality. As for the other
points of disagreement, they are just as any simple disagreement between
a doctrine and another or between a mujtahid and another and they do not
deserve to cause separation and hatred. Even if these points of
disagreement have been discussed in al-Murajaat by the two scholars,
they would make the different points of views near to each other.

Whenever arguments and intellectual disputes are away from sophism and
away from affecting the public opinion by artificial speeches and they
are close to the modern scientific methods, they will be the best ways
to unite the different sects. The invitation of Sayyid Sharafuddeen is a
positive and a fruitful invitation that he has followed in all his works
and especially his two books al-Fusool al-Muhimma and al-Murajaat. Even
in his book Abu Hurayra, which is as a biography of this companion who
has narrated (and fabricated) too many prophetic traditions, he has not
ignored this positive invitation.

In jurisprudence I have found many researches written by Sayyid
Sharafuddeen having the same method of argument. He has written them out
of this invitation. They are not less than the previous books in being
as high examples on the good manners of arguments and debates. He has
collected some of them under the title of Juristic Questions and
published them in a special thesis. When I had the honor of visiting
him, I expressed to him my admiration to these researches and to their
wonderful method in argument and discussion and I begged him to keep on
supplying the Arabic library with such jurisprudential researches.

His reply was too pleasing where he told us that he had begun writing a
book about the matters of disagreement (in jurisprudence) among the
Muslims since the first age of Islam until the time when the different
Islamic doctrines had been formed in the middle of the Abbasid age. The
book was supposed to be called as al-Ijtihad fee

Muqabil (against) an-Nass but later on it was called as an-Nass
wel-Ijtihad after Sayyid Sharafuddeen had added more details to it. He
told us that he had finished the researches concerning some companions
of the first age of Islam and that he would complete the rest of the
book inshallah.

When we returned to Iraq, we brought this good news to our brothers of
the members of the Cultural Convention who looked forward to reading
this book.

***23<sup>rd</sup> of Ramadan, 1375 A.H. / 4-5-1956 A.D.  
 Muhammad Taqiy al-Hakeem  
 Holy Najaf*<span style="font-size: 13pt"></span>**
