An-nass Wel-ijtihad
===================

***A word written by: Sadruddeen Sharafuddeen***

**<span style="font-size: 19pt">(1)</span>**

I followed up this book step by step and found its firm structure when
growing little by little with the deliberateness of innovation,
improvement and discernment.

I often came to the author at the hours of travail to find him merged in
his subject, enlivening a theme with long pondering and when his mold
straightened up, he began to fill his mold with his high art and then to
dedicate it to his clerk. He referred to his clerk many times before his
work would be ready to appear with its final form. He did not finish his
work until it harmonized before his ears, became firm in structure and
convinced his eyes with its lines and colors.

A word near my father[1] was as a sixth sense. It did not please him,
unless it acquired, besides the conditions of the truth, the criteria of
beauty and the virtue of clearness.

I always saw him surrounded by masses of reference books; some were left
open and others were turned over while he was reading in one of them
sticking his face into its pages narrowing his left eye and closing the
right one. Then he threw the book and combed his beard to spend moments
in pondering while his sight swam in high spheres and hidden worlds. If
you talked to him during these moments of inspiration, he would not hear
you or he would not understand what you said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The writer of this word is the authors son.

His old age that was overburdened with heavy loads did not affect his
young mind and youthful determination. His age did not weaken him to
dive or to fly and his complicated public responsibilities did not
divert him from his intellectual activities as if he had devoted himself
to this field only. His sitting between the books at his last days was
his meeting for people to judge among them and to settle their problems
with his familiar aspects of joy, happy mien and accurate criteria. When
he carried out the affairs of people, he came back to complete his work
(book), which he often stopped. His memory was very accurate in keeping
and recording all his affairs.

**<span style="font-size: 19pt">(2)</span>**

He often asked me to discuss his complete works. He might want me, out
of this discussion, to understand and concentrate on intellectual
matters more and more. He always encouraged me when seeing a good notice
or a correct idea from me.

Once he said to me when this part of this book was about to be
completed: The introduction of this book will be written by you, O my
son! I like you to show its right intention to serve the intellect
because the real motives of research in this field may be unclear for
many readers and that many biased persons may distort them and make them
dangerous against the unity of the umma and may destroy the relations
between its people.

Then he ordered me again and again to write a suitable introduction for
the book. I got ready to undertake this task. I pondered on the subject,
determined its headlines and explained the summary of its content orally
one evening to my father, who became pleased with it and admired it at
that day. Then many distresses happened that prevented me from writing
the introduction. The bitterest of those distresses was the loss of my
father, the author, besides many other distresses that everywhere of
Lebanon was afflicted with their corruption. The country faced many
crises in morals, economics and politics that history had never faced
evil and corruption before. Our matter in this concern was the bitter
loss of the author, to whom and to his likes of the true leaders we were
in urgent need; those leaders, towards whom hearts and hopes would turn
in the moments of

terror.

**<span style="font-size: 19pt">(3)</span>**

After three years I went out[1] to find that my father was no longer
there, alas! But I found that the book had been published with a rich
and judicious introduction written by allama Sayyid Muhammad Taqiy
al-Hakeem. I found in the research of Sayyid al-Hakeem a full
satisfaction that might make me curious if I tried to (show its right
intention to serve the intellect) because Sayyid al-Hakeem had
clarified, in his bright and clear style, the bases and principles of
the book in their scientific and Islamic course. Although the research
of Sayyid al-Hakeem had left no chance to anyone to misunderstand or to
fabricate the real intentions of the book, I found that I had to be
sincere to the will of my father, when he had ordered me to put an
introduction for the book. If I succeeded in this word, it would be a
bit of service, and if not, it would just carry out an obligation from
among many obligations I had towards my father.

**<span style="font-size: 19pt">(4)</span>**

*Nass* and *ijtihad* are two idioms from among the idioms of the Islamic
jurisprudence. Sayyid al-Hakeem has explained them in details in the
light of Usool. They both are two bases, on which legal verdicts,
whether traditional or derivational, depend. Nass, which includes the
evidences of the Qur'an and the Sunna, is a main base that cannot be
violated because it has offered many verdicts and solutions to many
events and cases whether concerning the belief or the obligations and
whether concerning the social and economical cases or any other human
activity. Ijtihad moves from the main base that comprehends the
postulates and rules that lead to conclude a verdict on a case that the
nass has generalized or ignored. This means that ijtihad acts after
being armed with its scientific tools and means in accordance with the
nass and walking in its (nasss) circle- as the jurisprudents
say-otherwise it will be a heresy. In order that an opinion is to be
right according to a certain custom, it must be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He might be in prison then.

confirmed by the basic systems and principles of that custom.

This is the question that the title of the book raises but as for the
motive behind this question, it is the judgments and verdicts the author
has collected, through his wide research, which have been innovated by
famous companions of the Prophet (s) and by their successors that have
contradicted the basic rules of ijtihad.

**<span style="font-size: 19pt">(5)</span>**

It would be better in this situation to put forth this question:

What use is got from reviving an intellectual problem, whose time has
elapsed long ago? Does reviving it not cause a sedition that may delay
the progress of the umma and may part its unity?

The question is notable especially if we permit caution to control our
thinking; the caution of the worry of general life, suspicion and
illusion but if we try the question out according to the fixed practical
criteria, we shall interpret it as the following: what use is got from
paying attention to jurisprudence and its principles? It is a question
that if its meaning becomes more than a joke, it will do wrong to the
reality and will remove an important intellectual matter from its place
that has been deep-rooted in our present life. Rectifying ijtihad and
managing the ways, in which it is used, is a valuable intellectual act
and it will have great importance when being applied according to its
real bases since it has been founded until now on condition that is to
be differentiated between the innovation of ijtihad and the crooked
heresies. In fact many groups of people have been tried during the
abundant mental activities since the day of the battle of al-Jamal (the
day of the perfidious) and the day of the Kharijites (the apostates)
until the golden Abbasid age in the Middle Ages.

The importance of this research is not limited to the historical method
but it exceeds it to include the methods of knowledge and action, which
are connected with our basic system, which is Islam. The nass and
defining the situation of ijtihad due to it are not from the ordinary
heritage or from the extinct languages but they are bases, on which the
reality of millions and millions of Muslims depends and around whose
axis their lives turn in their wide

horizons.

The nass is the existence of the Islamic jurisprudence and the ijtihad,
armed with its mental bases, stands instead of the law of mutability if
we do not say that it is itself. In order that the existence (nass) not
to cause inactivity that may hinder progress, ijtihad comes out to
soften the nass, to make it subdued to life and to supply it into the
way of the civilizational progress and not to annul it or deviate from
it because annulling the nass and being deviate from it lead to annul
the fixed bases and to innovate a new sharia that will be strange to us,
will not depend on our philosophy and will not come out of our
characteristics and customs.

Hence it is clear that raising this question in this time of awakening
will be a step inciting the specialized class of the Muslim ulama to
revive the true soul of Islam and to define our situation towards the
new matters in a way to prove our private Islamic personality among the
modern invading trends.

It is not reactionism when intending to define the concept of ijtihad in
discussing it through the conducts of the Muslims in the first age of
Islam but it is freedom that helps to correct this concept according to
the best opinion related to the true source and to make it easy in order
to develop with it in our present time. But as for what is feared that
it may lead to bad sectarianism, it will not come except to the
narrow-minded, the diseased and those, who are affected by the ism of
imperialism. The learned Arabs and Muslims have been free from the party
spirits of history and have become as one umma. They do not look at
history except from its scientific angle considering it as a test
offering to them the experiences of their past to benefit from its
virtues and to get lessons from its bad deeds in building their present
and future. But as for its events that have been cutting out the shirts
of Othman[1] and producing out of them sentimental tendencies covered
with religious dresses, they have gone with their elapsed days. Any of
us, who discusses these events now, just wants to research on history to
know the stages of the dispute in order to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He was the third caliph, who had been killed by the rebels. His
bloody shirt had been used as an excuse to achieve personal greeds and
that had caused a great sedition among the Muslims.

reform the faults and not to widen them, in order to make use of this
reform at present and to make it grow in the future and not to recall a
past that has elapsed and will never come back again.

Perception and reasonability the Arabs and the Muslims have got are
about to match the progress of the age. This reasonability is enough to
study the problem with objective spirit to restore the morals of our
independent intellect that is connected with our civilizational bases,
which have stopped giving their offers because of well-known reasons.
This reasonability is also enough to study the nass and ijtihad since
they have been founded until they have been codified in a spirit free
from grudges and personal tendencies to make our present active and
productive. It will connect our movement with the productive movements
of the past before they have been separated from their true origins.

**<span style="font-size: 19pt">(6)</span>**

Many people think that connecting ijtihad to the nass will weaken its
ability of progressiveness and prevent it from keeping pace with the
advancement of all activities in the present age.

This is not right. The connection of ijtihad with the nass is necessary
not because it is just a religious tradition or it is inevitable
according to a rule acquired from a scientific decision, but because it
is-before this and that-the source of our originality and a fixed
partition that does not allow violating our basic constituents and does
not allow to wrong the other cultures. In fact it orders to benefit from
the cultures provided that those cultures are to be subjected to our
principles, manners and morals. Ijtihad has this great gate; the gate
that is open towards international meeting. No one is to think that this
gate is narrow! It is a gate wide enough to receive every useful thing
coming from the material civilization. It has been so in the Middle Ages
when it has received the Greek, Persian and Indian civilizations but
according to our conditions in a way that has given our civilization an
aspect of superiority in the world. The reason behind this great
flexibility in our ijtihad is the great flexibility of the nass, on
which ijtihad has relied and has not separated from. Whoever refers to
it, will find its comprehensiveness that has

become, really, the last of all the laws and the eternal Sharia of life
forever. This means that the nass has made, since the beginning, a good
adobe for progress. It has been noticed that since it has been issued,
it has been complied with all the needs of its age and it has been
applied to the new and progressive matters after that.

In more details we draw the attention to the integration of the Holy
Qur'an when being revealed little by little complying with the nature of
progressiveness according to experiments. The same is said about the
Sunna; the mate of the Book in its revelations. It has shed lights on
the clear (decisive) and ambiguous[1] verses of the Book and has formed
with the Book the essence of this Sharia, which Allah has issued to
manage all the affairs of the world with all its creatures in a perfect
structure with great contents and eternal surviving.

**<span style="font-size: 19pt">(7)</span>**

When has ijtihad been determined as a principle?

It is time to put forth this question because of its close relation to
the theme of the book an-Nass wel-Ijtihad and to refute the sayings
showing that this principle has not been determined at the time of the
Prophet (s).

We find, before all, that determining this principle at the time of the
Prophet (s) is a matter, whose answer is with it. The wise legislator
would not ignore such necessary basis like ijtihad, which would develop
his Sharia that e had made to live forever and knew well that life would
not stop after him.

It has been proved by true traditions and correct historical facts that
the Prophet (s) has sent his messengers and deputies to the far
countries and has instructed them to act according to their opinion on
the matters that they would not find their direct answers in the Book
and the Sunna. This was no doubt the foundation of ijtihad. Some of the
orientalists and their disciples think that ijtihad has been founded
after the first age of Islam and that which has led to found it is the
complexities of life after the arising of some needs that have not been
before and that the wide spreading of knowledge

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It can be interpreted into more than one meaning.

has led to it.

This may be right if it has been submitted to the conditions and tools
of ijtihad, which has been limited to the complexity of life but the
real ijtihad that has relied on the nass according to our concept has
been founded at the time of the Prophet (s) no doubt. Besides the
conduct of the Prophet (s) with his messengers and deputies, the ijtihad
of Imam Ali (s) on the day of shura confirms the foundation of ijtihad
at that time. Imam Ali (s) has insisted on his opinion when he has
refused to add the policies of Abu Bakr and Umar during their reigns to
the Book and the Sunna when Abdurrahman has put this condition for Imam
Ali (s) in order to be chosen as a caliph. If ijtihad, in its special
meaning, has not been issued before Abu Bakr and Umar, Imam Ali (s)
would not refuse this condition. If it has been possible to give the
sacredness of the Book and the Sunna to other than the Book and the
Sunna, then this would have raised the position of those two caliphs to
a high degree but he has intended to equal between the minds of the
mujtahids and their opinions besides keeping the Book and the Sunna as
the actual gravity. He has not intended by that save to emphasize on
ijtihad as a principle having the banner of reason to go high with its
dignity and to enrich the true legislation with its innovation.

Imam Ali (s) has followed by his will a custom having got used to
ijtihad even it has had another idiom rather than ijtihad. It has been
called acting according to ones opinion.

**<span style="font-size: 19pt">(8)</span>**

After this I ask myself:

Have I put an-Nass wel-Ijtihad in its real frame of showing the true
intention to unite the umma and to serve the intellect?

Have I been sincere to my first introduction that has made my father
satisfied and pleased?

But there is an inner answer interrupting my chain of inquiries to say:

It is enough to a debtor his trying the best to repay his debt and his
excused failure will be forgiven by the generous people. I have left
commenting on the book because my comments will not suffice not to read
it or to ponder on its words!

***Sadruddeen Sharafuddeen***
