Chapter One Interpretations of Abu Bakr and His Followers
=========================================================

1. The day of saqeefa
---------------------

When Abu Bakr stretched his hand to be paid homage as the caliph after
the Prophet (s), some people paid him homage willingly and others-later
on-paid homage unwillingly although they knew well that the Prophet (s)
had entrusted his brother and cousin Ali bin Abu Talib (s) with the
caliphate after him. They had seen the Prophet (s) and heard him
mentioning this matter many times since the beginning of his prophethood
until the end of his blessed life. The Prophet (s) had mentioned this
tradition in different ways and all of them were clear in declaring that
Ali (s) would be the caliph after him. Whoever wants to know more
details about this subject, let him refer to our book al-Murajaat, in
which we have mentioned a full research on these traditions and all what
have been said about them by the two sects; the Shia and the Sunni. We
have exchanged deliberations with the sheikh of Islam and the teacher of
the ulama Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri al-Maliki, the sheikh of al-Jami
al-Azhar (al-Azhar University) at that time when I have been studying
there.[1] He was then the sheikh (dean) of al-Azhar University. He took
much care of me as he always did to his students. Arguments and written
deliberations began between us about the caliphate after the Prophet (s)
and the traditions concerning it. We tried our best to go deep in
research and to be fair to the truth and because of the good soul of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In the year 1329 A.H. and later after we have returned from the
hawza of holy Najaf.

Sheikh al-Bishri, the result was the useful book al-Murajaat, in which
guidance shone in its brightest signs. Praise be to Allah for this
success.[1]

I hope that you scrutinize into the aims and the intents of the Prophets
sayings and doings, which are the point of deliberation between us (the
Shia) and the Sunni. Let passion not overcome your minds like those, who
have dealt with the clear texts like their dealing with general or
ambiguous sayings without caring for their (the texts) rightness and
clearness. Allah says: **(Most surely it is the Word of an honored
messenger. The processor of strength, having an honorable place with the
Lord of the Dominion. One (to be) obeyed and faithful in trust. And your
companion is not gone mad)** then whereto do you go, O you the Muslims!
**(It is naught but revelation that is revealed. The Lord of Mighty
Power has taught him).**

I have not seen clear and recurrent traditions more than the traditions
talking about the caliphate but they have been confiscated by the most
of the umma while the wound has not recovered yet and the Prophet (s)
has not been buried yet.

The life of the Prophet (s) after his prophethood was full of traditions
that had talked about the caliphate of Imam Ali (s) clearly since the
(day of the warning)[2] in Abu Talibs house and throughout the days
after that until he had lain in the bed of death whereas his room was
crowded with people when he said: O people, I am about to die and to be
taken hastily. I have informed you. I have left among you the Book of
Allah and my progeny. Then he raised Alis hand and said: This is Ali. He
is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with him. They will never separate
until they will come to me at the pond (in Paradise). The traditions of
thaqalayn (two weighty things) are enough to be the judge between the
two sects; the Shia and the Sunni. **Most surely there is a reminder in
this for him who has a heart or he gives ear with full intelligence.**
Qur'an, 50:37

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The deliberations (murajaat) were one hundred and twelve ones.  
 **[2]** The Prophet (s) had invited his close relatives to warn them.
The last of his speech to them was that when he held Alis hand and said:
This is my brother, my vizier, my guardian and my caliph among you.
Listen to him and obey him! Refer to murajaa no. 20 and the one after it
in the book al-Murajaat.

They (the companions) had appropriate the matter (the caliphate) to
themselves on the day of Saqeefa[1] interpreting some prophetic
traditions according to their own opinions without caring for anything
else. They had determined their matter among them without informing
anyone of the Hashemites[2] nor any of their followers; the Hashemites,
who were the family of the Prophet (s), the place of the divine mission,
the descendance of the angels and the descendance of Gabriel and
revelation. As if they had forgotten that the Hashemites were the
weighty thing the Prophet (s) had left, the equal of the Book of
Allah,[3] the protection of the umma from separation,[4] the ship of
rescue for the umma from deviation[5] and the gate of repentance for the
umma.[6] As if they had forgotten that the Prophets family was to the
umma as the head to the body and as the two eyes to the head.[7] In fact
they were as they had been meant by the saying of the poet:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Saqeefa means a shed. They (most of the Prophets companions)
have gathered in the shed of Bani Saida on that day to determine that
caliphate after the Prophet (s).  
 **[2]** Hashem was the Prophets ancestor.  
 **[3]** With reference to the clear traditions mentioned in the
reliable books of traditions; those traditions that have made the
Prophets progeny as the equal of the Qur'an to be the example that must
be followed by the men of understanding. Refer to Muslims Sahih (book of
Hadith), at-Tarmithis Sahih, an-Nassaiys Sahih, Ahmads Musnad,
at-Tabarani in his al-Kabeer, al-Hakims Mustadrak, ath-Thahabis Talkhees
al-Mustadrak, ibn Abu Shaybas Sunan, Abu Yalas Sunan, ibn Sads Tabaqat
and many others. For details refer to murajaa no.8 in our book
al-Murajaat.  
 **[4]** Referring to the Prophets saying: My family is security for my
umma from being separated. If a tribe of the Arabs objects to them, it
will separate and then become the party of Iblis. Refer to al-Hakims
Mustadrak, vol.3 p.149.  
 **[5]** Referring to the Prophets saying: The example of my progeny
among you is like the Ark of Prophet Noah. Whoever rides on it will be
saved and whoever lags behind it, will drown. Refer to al-Hakims
Mustadrak, vol.3 p.151.  
 **[6]** Referring to the Prophet saying: The example of my progeny is
like the Ark of Prophet Noah. Whoever rides on it will be saved and
whoever lags behind will drown. The example of my progeny among you is
like the gate of repentance of the Israelites. Whoever enters into it
will be forgiven. Mentioned by at-Tabarani in his al-Awsat.  
 **[7]** Imam as-Sabban in his book Isaf ar-Raghibeen and Sheikh Yousuf
an-Nabhani in his book ash-Sharaf al-Muayyad and others mentioned that
Abu Tharr had narrated the Prophets saying: Make my family among you as
the head to the body and as the two eyes to the head. The head is not
rightly guided without the eyes. For details refer to our book
al-Murajaat, murajaa no.6 -13.

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">The matter is determined when Taym[1] is
absent</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">And they[2] are not asked permission when
they are present.</span>*

Yes! The matter had been determined in the Saqeefa[3] while the Prophet
(s) was lying between his family and his close companions for three
days. They were around him mourning bitterly and their hearts were about
to be cut into pieces with sorrow that might tear the livers and with
fear that might move the mountains. The world, with all its wideness,
had become too narrow before them.

And those people were away from the ordeal for three days being busy
preparing their determinations to seize his (the Prophets) authority and
to plunder his rule. They did not pay any attention to any affair of him
until they had determined their matter without caring for anything else.

As soon as they finished burying him, they surprised his guardians and
lovers with asking them either to pay homage or to be burned with their
houses.[4]

The poet of the Nile, Hafidh Ibraheem had said in a famous poem:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">And a saying to Ali said by Umar,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Honored is the listener and great is the
sayer</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">I burn your house and let you not alive
longer in it</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">If you do not pay homage</span>*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** One of the great families of Quraysh.  
 **[2]** The people of Taym.  
 **[3]** Saqeefa means shed.  
 **[4]** They had threatened Imam Ali (s) to be burned unless he would
pay homage. Refer to Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhari in his
book as-Saqeefa, p. 130, Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1, p. 134, Ibn
Jareer at-Tabari in his book Tareekh al-Umam wel Mulook, ibn Qutayba in
his book al-Imama wes-Siyasa, ibn Abd Rabbih al-Maliki, in al-Iqd
al-Fareed, vol.2, al-Massoodi in Murooj ath-Thahab, ibn ash-Shuhna in
Rawdhatul Manadhir, Abul Fida in al-Mukhtasar fee Akhbar al-Bashar,
ash-Shahristani in al-Milel wen-Nihal, allama al-Hilli in Nahj as-Sidq
quoted from al-Mahasin wa Anfas al-Jawahir, ibn Khanzabah in al-Ghurar
and Abu Makhnaf in a detailed book talking about the homage of the
Saqeefa.

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Even if the daughter of al-Mustafa[1] is
in it.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">No one save Abu Hafs[2] that has said
it</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Before the knight and protector of
Adnan[3]</span>*

If it has been supposed that there was no clear tradition showing that
the caliphate was to be for one of the Prophets family and if it has
been supposed that no one of them had good ancestry, rank, morals,
knowledge, favors, jihad, faith, sincerity or excellent virtue but they
were just like the rest of the Prophets companions, then was there any
legal, rational or traditional excuse that prevented the companions from
putting off their homage until the funerals of the Prophet (s) would
finish??? Even if they would have ordered the army to control the
situation temporarily until the matter of the caliphate would be
settled???

Would it be not better for them to be somehow kind to the Prophets
family, who were distressed with the great loss, if they had waited a
little? The Prophets family was his deposit and his leftover among the
Muslims. Allah has said: **Certainly a Messenger has come to you from
among yourselves; grievous to him is your falling into distress,
excessively solicitous respecting you; to the believers (he is)
compassionate.** Qur'an, 9:128 Had this Prophet, who became so grievous
when his umma fell in distress, who strove for its prosperity and who
was so kind to his people, not had a right on them that his family would
not be constrained or surprised with what it had faced while the wound
was not yet healed and the Prophet (s) was not yet buried?!

It was enough for his progeny, then, to worry, to pillow on insomnia, to
suffer griefs, to chat with the stars, to bear pangs and to struggle
against agonies. Waiting a little would have been worthier to console
the Prophets progeny, to regard the Prophets dignity, to unite the umma
and would have been nearer to wisdom. But the people had determined to
turn the caliphate away from the Prophets family at any cost. They
feared that waiting a little might lead them to other

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** One of the Prophets surnames.  
 **[2]** It is the surname of Umar bin al-Khattab.  
 **[3]** Adnan is the ancestor of the Hashemites.

than what they had determined because if Muhammads family had attended
the deliberations, their evidences and proofs would prevail; therefore
they had hastened to carry out the homage and seized the opportunity
when the Hashemites were busy with their ordeal and with the ceremonies
of the funeral. What helped those people in achieving their plan was the
astonishment of the Muslims and their fear and confusion besides the
meeting of the most of the Ansar[1] in the Saqeefa to nominate Sad bin
Obada, the chief of al-Khazraj,[2] for the caliphate but his cousin
Basheer bin Sad bin Thalaba and Osayd bin al-Khudhayr, the chief of
al-Owss,[3] competed with him for the rule. They envied him and feared
that he might be the caliph. They agreed among themselves to turn the
caliphate away from him with all means. Owaym bin Saida al-Owssi and
Maan bin Adiy, who were from the Ansar, agreed with them on that. These
two men had been planned secretly with Abu Bakr and Umar and their party
to act so. They had been from among the followers of Abu Bakr during the
time of the Prophet (s) besides that they had had grudge against Sad bin
Obada. Owaym hastened towards Abu Bakr and Umar inciting them to oppose
Sad. He hastened with them, Abu Obayda, Salim the freed slave of
Hudhayfa and then followed by others from their party of the
Muhajireen[4] to the Saqeefa.

The dispute flared up between the Muhajireen and the Ansar. The quarrel
became serious and their shouts loudened until sedition was about to
happen. Abu Bakr made a speech, in which he praised the Ansar and
acknowledged their favors softly and leniently. Then he protested
against them saying that the Muhajireen were the people of the Prophet
(s) and the result of his efforts. He told them that they would be the
viziers if the Muhajireen became the rulers. Then he held Umar and Abu
Obaydas hands and ordered the attendants to pay homage to one of them.
As soon as he said so, Umar and Basheer hastened to pay homage to Abu
Bakr himself. Then he was paid

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ansar means helpers: the people of Medina, who had assisted (and
believed in) the Prophet (s) and his companions when had emigrated from
Mecca.  
 **[2]** One of the greatest tribes in Medina.  
 **[3]** The other greatest tribe in Medina.  
 **[4]** Muhajireen means the emigrants: the first Muslims, who had
emigrated from Mecca to Medina.

homage by Osayd bin al-Khudhayr, Owaym bin Saida, Maan bin Adiy, Abu
Obayda bin al-Jarrah, Salim and Khalid bin al-Waleed and then these men
tried their best to force the people to pay homage. The extremist among
them was Umar and then Usayd, Khalid and Qunfith bin Umayr bin Jadan
at-Tameemi.[1] As soon as Abu Bakr was paid homage, the group that paid
him homage came escorting him towards the Prophets mosque as in a
wedding procession[2] whereas the Prophet (s) was still lain down among
his pure lovers. Imam Ali (s) then could not but to recite this verse of
one of the poets:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Some people began saying whatever they
like</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">And tyrannized when Zayd was afflicted
with calamities[3]</span>*

Imam Ali (s) knew well that people had determined to turn the caliphate
away from him and that if he had asked for his right (the caliphate)
they would have disputed against him and if he had fought them they
would have fought him and that would lead to a sedition in the religion
and would bring dangers over the umma; therefore he chose to retire
preferring the general welfare and preferring the most important thing
to the important thing in order to keep Islam safe from any danger. It
was a covenant from the Prophet (s). Ameerul Momineen[4] became patient
unwillingly and restrained himself from

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** These persons were among the ones, who had broken into the house
of Fatima, the Prophets daughter (s), when intending to set fire to it.
Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.19. Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz
al-Jawhari narrated, as mentioned in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.130,
that: When Abu Bakr had been paid homage, Az-Zubayr, al-Miqdad and some
other people often visited Ali in the house of Fatima (s). Umar went to
Fatima and said: O daughter of the messenger of Allah, none of the
people in the world has ever been more beloved to us than your father
and than you after your father. By Allah, this will not prevent me, if
these people meet here in your house, from ordering to burn the house
over them...  
 **[2]** Mentioned by az-Zubayr bin Bukar in his book al-Muwaffaqiyyat.
Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.8.  
 **[3]** Mentioned by Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhary in his
book as-Saqeefa. Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.5.  
 **[4]** Ameerul Momineen means the commander of the believers. It is
the title of Imam Ali (s).

carrying out the covenant.[1] Yes! He remained at home. He was
discontented with what they had done until they took him out by
force.[2]

He protested against those, who had extorted his right, and how eloquent
his protest was when he said to Abu Bakr:

<span style="font-size: 16pt; font-style: italic">If you protested
against your opponents with kinship,</span>

<span style="font-size: 16pt; font-style: italic">The others were
worthier of the Prophet and closer than you</span>

<span style="font-size: 16pt; font-style: italic">And if you ruled them
by the shura,</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For details refer to our thesis Falsafatul Meethaq wel-Wilaya
(The Philosophy of the Covenant and guardianship) and refer to
al-Murajaat, murajaa no.82, 84, and refer to chap.8 in our book
al-Fusool al-Muhimma.  
 **[2]** Abu Bakr al-Jawhari mentioned in his book as-Saqeefa-as in
Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.19- a tradition narrated by ash-Shibi
saying: Umar and Khalid bin al-Waleed went to Fatimas house. Umar came
into and Khalid stayed at the door. Umar said to az-Zubayr: What is this
sword for? He said: I have prepared it to pay homage to Ali. There were
many people in the house. Among them were al-Miqdad and some of the
Hashemites. Umar snatched the sword from az-Zubayr, struck it against a
rock and broke it. They took az-Zubayr out to Khalid and his companions.
There were many people with Khalid. Abu Bakr had sent them to support
Umar and Khalid. Then Umar said to Ali: Get up and pay homage! He lagged
and hesitated. Umar caught his hand and said to him: Get up! He refused.
They carried him by force and delivered him to Khalid as they did with
az-Zubayr. Umar and his companions drove Ali and az-Zubayr violently.
People gathered looking at the scene. The streets of Medina became full
of people. When Fatima (s) saw what Umar had done, she cried and
shouted. Many women of the Hashemites and others gathered with her. She
went out of her room and shouted: O Abu Bakr, how hasty you attacked the
Prophets family. By Allah, I will not talk with Umar until I meet
Allah.  
Whoever examines the events of those days will find the clear truth in
Abu Bakrs saying when he was about to die: I wished I had not broken
into Fatimas house even if it would lead to war. Abu Bakr al-Jawhari
mentioned in his book as-Saqeefa another tradition narrated by Luhaya
from Abul Aswad: Umar and his companions broke into the house while
Fatima (s) was crying and adjuring them before Allah. They took Ali and
az-Zubayr out being driven by Umar. Al-Jawhari mentioned too that: Umar
came to Fatimas house with people of Ansar and some men of Muhajireen
and said: I swear by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, either you come out
to pay homage or I shall burn the house over your heads. Az-Zubayr came
out drawing his sword but they gathered against him until his sword fell
from his hand. Umar struck the sword against a rock and it broke and
then he took them out of the house drawing them violently with their
collars... Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.19.

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">How is that while the people of the shura
were absent?[1]</span>*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** These two verses are in Nahjol Balagha, the book, in which the
speeches, the letters and the maxims of Imam Ali (s) have been
collected. Abdul Hameed bin Abul Hadeed and Sheikh Muhammad Abda had
commented on these two verses in their books. It would be better to the
researchers to refer to. I have mentioned them in al-Muarajaat no. 80.
Al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib once had protested against Abu Bakr with
something that as if its meaning had been taken from these two verses.
He said to Abu Bakr through an argument between them: If you have
pretended that the Prophet (s) is from you, then you have extorted our
right and if you have evidenced with the believers, then we are the
first and the best of the believers so if this matter (the caliphate)
would not be legal to you unless with the agreement of the believers
then it would not be legal while we were unwilling. In another argument,
as mentioned in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.1, he said to him: As for
your saying we are the tree of the Prophet you are its neighbors and we
are its branches  
 This was the meaning of Imam Alis saying You have argued about the tree
but lost the fruit. Al-Fadhl bin al-Abbas said, as narrated by az-Zubayr
bin Bukar in his Muwaffaqiyyat and mentioned in Sharh Nahjol Balagha,
vol. 2 p.8: O people of Quraysh and especially you bani Taym, you have
taken the caliphate by means of the prophethood whereas we are its
people rather than you but if we ask for this matter, which is our
right, people will hate us more than to hate the others because of their
envy and grudge towards us. We have known well that our man (Imam Ali)
has a covenant that must be carried out.  
 Otba bin Abu Lahab said, as mentioned in Mukhtasar of Abul Fida and in
the last page of vol.2, Sharh Nahjol Balagha:  
 *I have not thought that the matter (caliphate)will be turned away  
 From Hashem (the Hashemites) and then from Abu Hasan (Ali)  
 Was he not the first who had offered prayers toward your Qibla  
 And the most aware of the Qur'an and the Sunna among all people,  
 And the closest one to the Prophet and to Gabriel  
 When helping him (Gabriel) in washing and preparing his coffin?  
 He has had nothing to be doubted  
 And none of them has had a bit of his virtues  
 What made them deny him? Let us know  
 It was injustice that no else was greater than*  
 Az-Zubayr bin Bukar, when mentioning these verses in his
al-Muwaffaqiyyat, said: Ali sent for him (Otba bin Abu Lahab) and
ordered him not to say such a thing again and said to him: The safety of
religion is more important for us than anything else. Az-Zubayr also
mentioned in al-Muwaffaqiyyat as in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.7
that once Abu Sufyan had passed by Alis house. He stopped before the
house and recited:  
 *O bani Hashem, do not let people deem you weak*

Their homage was a slip that Allah had saved the Muslims from its evil
as they had pretended but its cost was on the expense of Ameerul
Momineen when he became patient before harm, silent before injustice and
when he sacrificed his right for the sake of Islam. Allah may reward him
for his favors on Islam and the Muslims with the best of His reward.

2. The second situation
-----------------------

When Abu Bakr was about to die, he entrusted Umar with the caliphate!
How odd! (How wonder! As he has extorted it in his life, he has
entrusted it to another one after his death. How much they have
participated in its two udders!).[1] How wonder! As if the man has given
the other a piece of his own properties! He has entrusted it to whoever
he wished without fearing any punishment, blaming or criticizing. How
wonder! As if he has forgotten or pretended that he has forgotten the
covenant of the caliphate the Prophet (s) had given to Ali and then
after him to the infallible imams of his progeny, who were one of the
two weighty things that whoever kept to would never deviate and whoever
turned away from their path would never be guided to the path of the
truth. They were equal to the Qur'an. They (the Qur'an and the Prophets
progeny) would never separate until they would come to him at the pond
in Paradise. They were like the Ark of Noah (s). Whoever rode on it
would be rescued and whoever lagged behind it would drown. They were
like the gate of repentance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Especially Taym bin Murra and Adiy  
 For the matter is just among you and for you  
 No one deserves it save Abu Hasan Ali  
 O Abu Hasan, be determined for it  
 For you are the only well-qualified one for the hoped matter*  
  
His speech had no any effect on Imam. Ali said: The messenger of Allah
has promised me with something and I am still keeping to it. Abu Sufyan
left Ali and went to al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib in his house. He said
to him: O Abul Fadhl, you are the well-qualified one for it (the
caliphate) and worthier of the heritage of your nephew (the Prophet).
Give me your hand to pay homage to you! Al-Abbas laughed and said: Ali
refuses it and al-Abbas asks for it, how far!!! Abu Sufyan went out
disappointedly. **  
 [1]** This is a part of one of Imam Alis speeches.

Whoever entered through it would be forgiven. They were the security for
the people of the earth from being tortured and they were the security
of the umma from separation (in religion). If a tribe opposed them, its
people would disagreed among themselves and become the party of
Iblisetc. to the rest of the clear traditions that had declared their
right of the caliphate and made that compulsory on the whole peoples. We
have mentioned many of such traditions in our book al-Murajaat.[1]

3. the third situation
----------------------

The battle of Muta: it took place in Jumada al-Oola, the eighth year of
hijra, in which the Prophet (s) had appointed Zayd bin Haritha as the
leader of the army. The Prophet (s) said: If Zayd is struck, then Jafar
bin Abu Talib will be the leader and if he is struck then Abdullah bin
Rawaha will be the leader. This has been said by all the Sunni whereas
the Shia say that the first leader, according to the Prophets tradition,
is Jafar, the second is Zayd and the third is Abdullah bin Rawaha. Our
traditions on this subject are true and recurrent from the pure
infallible imams (s).

Muhammad bin Iss~haq has confirmed this in his Maghazi when mentioning
the poems of Hassaan bin Thabit and Kab bin Malik on praising and
elegizing Jafar when he has been martyred.[2]

However the order of these three leaders was, the fact was that the
Prophet (s) had appointed Zayd as a leader whether he was the first or
the second one. The army and the rest of the companions had heard the
Prophet (s) appointing Zayd as the leader. After that there was no any
excuse for those who had objected to this order unless it was possible
for non-infallible one to interpret (change), according to his own
opinion, a tradition said by an infallible one!!!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** You find them in murajaa no.8 p.20 (the third edition) until
murajaa no.14. The dispute through the murajaat between me and Sheikh
al-Bishri flared up until he said to me in the last of his letters he
had written about this subject: You have sublimated and corrected my
thinking in your last letter, from whose contents the lights of your
star shone and the signs of your victory appeared. I said: Praise be to
Allah, the Lord of the worlds, for granting success and victory.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.607-.

The reason of this battle was that the Prophet (s) had sent his
companion al-Harth bin Umayr to the king of Busra[1] inviting him to be
a Muslim. When he was on his way, Shurahbeel bin Amr stopped him and
asked him: Where are you going to? Al-Harth said: To Sham. He said: Are
you one of Muhammads messengers? Al-Harth said: Yes, I am. Shurahbeel
ordered his mates to tie al-Harth and then he killed him. No one of the
Prophets messengers had been killed except this one. When the Prophet
(s) had been informed of this, he ordered the army to march and
appointed these three leaders according to the order we have mentioned
before.

The Prophet (s) sent this army and another army under the leadership of
Ussama bin Zayd to conquer Sham. Their hearts were full of the dignity
of Islam and the Muslims and the hearts of the Romans were filled with
fear and regard when they saw the seriousness, steadfastness,
devotedness and competing towards martyrdom among the two armies.

How brave Jafar bin Abu Talib was with his three thousand soldiers when
they attacked bravely Hercules and his two hundred thousand soldiers.[2]
Jafar recited:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">How nice Paradise is and its becoming
near!</span>*

<span style="font-size: 16pt; font-style: italic">How good it is with
its cold drinks</span>

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">And the Romans are waiting for their near
torment</span>*

<span style="font-size: 16pt; font-style: italic">They are unbelievers
and strangers for me</span>

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">I will strike them in the meeting</span>*

When the fighting became so violent, Jafar broke into on his horse. He
slaughtered his horse and attacked the enemy. His hands were cut and
then he was killed. Jafar was the first one, who had slaughtered his
horse in Islam. More than eighty wounds were found on his body.

It was narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: Last night (in dream)
Jafar and some angels passed by me. He had two wings. His

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In Syria.  
 **[2]** One hundred thousand soldiers from the Romans and one hundred
thousand from the Arabs from Najm, Jutham and other tribes as mentioned
by Ibnul Atheer in his al-Kamil and by others.

primaries were dyed with blood.[1]

How great the situation of Zayd bin Haritha was when he broke through
the spears of the enemy! May Allah high his position as he has been
honored in this life.

And how great the situation of Abdullah bin Rawaha was when he
encouraged himself to face an army of two hundred thousand soldiers! He
recited:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">O my soul, if you are not killed, you
will die</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">This is the death you are in now</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Whatever you have wished, you have been
given</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">If you do one of them, you will be guided
then</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">He also recited:</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">O my soul, I swear that you must submit
to death</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Willingly or you will be forced to
it</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">As people have got ready to meet the
hope</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">So why you hate Paradise</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">How long you have been reassured</span>*

Then he got off his horse. One of his cousins came to him with a piece
of meat and said: Support yourself with this for you have got much
tiredness. He ate a bit and then he heard a clamor coming from a side of
the army. He said to himself: Do hear this and you are still alive? He
threw the piece of meat and approached to fight until he was martyred.

Some Muslims of this army, after founding that the enemy army was about
two hundred thousands, thought to inform the Prophet (s) about that but
Abdullah bin Rawaha encouraged them to keep on by saying: By Allah, we
do not fight by equipments, powers or numbers. We fight by this
religion, with which Allah has honored us. Go on! It is not but one of
two good things; either victory or martyrdom. The people said: By Allah,
he is right. They went on without feeling weak or submissive. By Allah,
it is the honor that goes high on the wing of the eagle and competes
with the Gemini.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kamil by Ibnul Atheer (the battle of Muta) and other books of
Hadith and history. The surname of Jafar among all the Muslims is the
two-winged man.

Yes! It is the real faith in Allah and His messenger. I wish I were with
them to get the great victory!

4. The army of Ussama bin Zayd
------------------------------

The Prophet (s) had cared much for this army. He ordered his companions
to get ready and incited them too much to join this army. He himself
mobilized them in order to sharpen their determinations and to awaken
their ardors. He let no one of the Muhajireen and Ansar, like Abu Bakr,
Umar,[1] Abu Ubayda, Sad and their likes, unless he mobilized him for
the army.[2] This was in Safar, the eleventh year of hijra. The next day
the Prophet (s) sent for Ussama and said to him: Go (with the army) to
the place where your father has been killed. Let your horses tread on
them (the Romans and the people of Sham). I have appointed you as the
emir of this army. Attack the people of Ubna[3] in the morning. Set fire
to them. Hasten to precede the news. If Allah makes you defeat them, do
not stay long there. Take some guides with you and send spies and
pioneers before you.

On the twenty-eighth of Safar, the Prophet (s) began to feel ill. He got
fever and headache. In the morning of the twenty-ninth he found that his
companions (the army) were sluggish. He went to them and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The historians agreed upon that Abu Bakr and Umar were in this
army and they proved that as an irrefutable fact. Refer to at-Tabaqat by
ibn Sad, At-Tabaris Tareekh, Ibnul Atheers Tareekh, as-Seera
ad-Dahlaniyya and others. Al-Halabi mentioned in his Seera, vol.3: When
al-Mahdi (the Abbasid caliph) came to Basra, he met Iyas bin Moawiya,
who was very clever and intelligent. He was a young boy and behind him
there were four hundred of ulama and notable men. Al-Mahdi said: Woe to
these beards! Is not there among them a notable man to be at the head
other than this boy? Then al-Mahdi turned toward the boy and said to
him: How old are you, boy? The boy said: O Ameerul Mo'mineen, may Allah
make you live long! My old is as the old of Ussama bin Zayd bin Haritha
when the Prophet (s) has appointed him as the leader of an army, in
which Abu Bakr and Umar were. Al-Mahdi said: Come on! May Allah bless
you. Al-Halabi mentioned that Ussama was seventeen years old then.  
 **[2]** Umar often said to Ussama: The Prophet (s) died and you were
the emir over me. Some historians mentioned this like al-Halabi in his
Seera when talking about the army of Ussama.  
 **[3]** It is a village in Syria between Asqalan and ar-Ramla near
Muta, where Jafar bin Abu Talib, Zayd bin Haritha and Abdullah bin
Rawaha have been martyred.

urged them to move. He himself gave the banner to Ussama with his
honored hand in order to motivate their zeal and to awaken their
determination. Then he said: Move in the name of Allah and for the sake
of Allah! Fight those who have disbelieved in Allah! Ussama moved with
the army. He gave the banner to Burayda. They camped in al-Jurf and they
became sluggish there. They did not leave there in spite of the clear
orders they had heard from the Prophet (s) ordering them to hasten like
his saying Attack the people of Ubna in the morning and Hasten to
precede the news and many other orders that they did not obey.

Some of them rejected the leadership of Ussama as they had rejected the
leadership of his father before. They criticized him too much and argued
too much although they saw that the Prophet (s) himself had appointed
him as the leader and had given him the banner of the emirate while he
was ill. All that did not prevent them from rejected the leadership of
Ussama until the Prophet (s) became very angry. He went out wrapped with
his plush and his head was bandaged suffering from fever and
headache.[1] It was Saturday, the tenth of Rabeeul Awwal, two days
before his death (according to the date mentioned by the Sunni). He
ascended the minbar, praised Allah and said (as mentioned by the Sunni
and the Shia and by all the Historians): O people, what is this saying,
which I have been informed of, said by some of you criticizing my
appointing Ussama as the emir of the army? As you criticize my
appointing Ussama as the emir, you have criticized my appointing his
father as the emir before. By Allah, he (Ussamas father) was
well-qualified for the emirate and his son after him is well-qualified
for it too. He urged the people to progress as quickly as they could.
They began to farewell him and they went to the camping in al-Jurf. His
case (illness) became worse. He kept on saying: Prepare the army of
Ussamalet the army of Ussama movesend the army of Ussama He repeated
that while they were still inactive. On Sunday, the twelfth of Rabeeul
Awwal Ussama came from his camp to the Prophet (s). The Prophet (s)
ordered him by saying: Move in the morning with the blessing of Allah.
Ussama farewelled the Prophet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Ibn Sads Tabaqat, al-Halabis Seera, ad-Dahlanis Seera
and all the books that talked about the army of Ussama.

(s) and left to his camp and then he returned with Umar and Abu Ubayda.
They came to the Prophet (s) while he was about to die. He died on that
same day. The army came back to Medina. They determined to cancel
sending the army this time. They talked with Abu Bakr about that and
insisted on him too much in spite of that they had seen the Prophet (s)
caring much for this army and insisting on sending it. They decided to
cancel sending the army but the Caliph Abu Bakr was determined and he
insisted on sending the army. Then Umar came to Abu Bakr requesting him
to depose Ussama and to appoint another one instead of him.

It was not a long time after the anger of the Prophet (s) when they
rejected his appointing Ussama as the emir and his going out of his
house angrily while he was too ill and his legs were about to fail him
and it was not a long time after he had confirmed his orders by
swearing, when they decided to turn over everything but the caliph Abu
Bakr refused to respond to them to depose Ussama and he refused to
cancel sending the army. He got up, caught the beard of Umar[1] and
said: Your mother may lose you O you ibn al-Khattab! The Prophet (s) has
appointed him and you want me to depose him!

When they sent the army-and they were about not to do-Ussama moved with
three thousand warriors, among whom there were one thousand knights.[2]
Some people, whom the Prophet (s) had ordered to join the army, did not
join the army. The Prophet (s) had said: Prepare the army of Ussama!
Allah may curse whoever does not join this army![3]

They lagged behind the army at the first and refused to join it finally
in order to firm the bases of their policy and to establish its pillars
preferring their benefits to obeying the clear orders of the Prophet
(s). They thought that their doing would be better to be carried out and
worthier to be cared for because the army would not stop if they

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Halabi in his Seera, ad-Dahlani in his Seera, ibn Jareer
at-Tabari in his Tareekh, the events of the eleventh year of hijra and
other historians.  
 **[2]** He attacked the people of Ubna, burnt their houses, cut their
palm-trees, made the horses tread on their properties, killed many of
them and captured the rest. On that day he killed his fathers killer. No
one of the Muslims was killed on that day.  
 **[3]** Ash-Shahristani in his book al-Milal wen-Nihal, the fourth
introduction.

lagged behind or if they did not join it whereas the caliphate would be
turned away from them to others if they went to the battle before the
death of the Prophet (s).

The Prophet (s) wanted the capital to be empty of them so that the
situation would be clear and safe for Ameerul Mo'mineen Ali bin Abu
Talib (s). If they came back after the covenant of the caliphate would
have been determined to Ali, they would have no good chance to dispute
or disagree then.

The Prophet (s) had appointed Ussama, who was seventeen years old,[1] as
the emir over them in order to degrade the haughty ones, to control the
fancy of others and to be safe in the future from the disputing of the
competitors if he had appointed one of them as the emir but they
realized what the Prophet (s) had planned to, so they rejected the
emirate of Ussama and refused to go with him to fight. They did not
leave their camping in al-Jurf until the Prophet (s) went to the better
world and then they intended to cancel the battle one time and to depose
Ussama in another time. At last they did not join the army of Ussama and
at the head of them were Abu Bakr and Umar.[2]

These were five things in the matter of the army of Ussama, which they
(the companions) had not obeyed whereas they (these things)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This was the most certain saying. It was also said that he was
18, 19 or 20 years old but no one had said more than that.  
 **[2]** He was not in the army of ibn Zayd (Ussama)  
 *to be led by ibn Zayd  
 nor was he afraid on the day of the cave  
 nor hid himself on the day of al-Fareesh  
 nor was he deposed on the day of Baraa  
 nor was he led behind in a prayer  
 a young man who has not got a root from Taym bin Murra  
 nor from the evil Abdul Lat  
 an imam of guidance who preferred the others to have his disc of
bread  
 and so the red disc of the sun was returned white to him  
 Gabriel competed with him under the garment  
* Composed by ibn Abul Hadeed al-Mutazily al-Hanafi (about Imam Ali (s))

were declared clearly by the prophetic sayings, preferring their fancies
and their own ijtihads to the clear traditions of the Prophet (s).

Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri justified the companions doing in some of our
arguments (murajaat). He said: Yes, the Prophet (s) urged them to hasten
with the army of Ussama and ordered them many times until he said to
Ussama: Attack the people of Ubna in the morning and he did not give him
time even to the evening and he said to him: Hasten He did not accept
from him except hastening but immediately after that the Prophet (s)
became so ill until it was feared for him. Their selves did not allow
them to leave him while he was in such a case. They remained in al-Jurf
waiting to see how he would become. This was because of their pity for
him and their love to him. The aim behind their sluggishness was just
waiting for one of two things; either to be delighted if he would
restore his health or to win the honor of carrying out his funerals and
to establish the affairs of the one, who would rule over them after him.
They were excused and would not be blamed for that.

As for rejecting the emirate of Ussama before the death of the Prophet
(s) in spite of the clear sayings and orders of the Prophet (s), it was
just because Ussama was too young while they were middle-aged and old
men and the souls of the middle-aged and old men would refuse-in their
natures-to be led by the young and hate to submit to the orders of the
youth so their rejecting his emirate was not a heresy but it was due to
the human nature.

And as for their request to depose Ussama after the death of the Prophet
(s), some of the ulama justified that in a way that the companions might
think it would be permissible if the caliph Abu Bakr would have
preferred to depose him due to the general welfare according to their
own opinions.

Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri added: Indeed I do not know any justification
that mind may accepts concerning their request to depose Ussama
especially after the Prophet (s) has become so angry when they have
rejected his appointing Ussama as the emir and he has come out, although
he was seriously ill, wrapped with his plush and his head was bandaged
because of fever and headache and he

has reproached them in his speech from above the minbar. It was one of
the famous historical events, that has spread everywhere. Justifying
their doing, after all that, is something unknown save by Allah.

As for their intention to cancel sending the army after they have seen
the Prophet (s) caring too much to send it and insisting on hastening to
send it and his many traditions about this matter, it was because of
their precautions that the capital of Islam might be overcome by the
polytheists after it would be empty of the forces. After the death of
the Prophet (s) hypocrisy appeared, the Jews and the Christians became
powerful, many tribes apostatized and other tribes refused to pay the
zakat. The companions asked our master Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq to prevent
Ussama from moving with the army but he refused and said: By Allah, if I
am snatched away by birds, is better to me than to change anything
before carrying out the order of the messenger of Allah (s). This is
what has been mentioned by our ulama about the situation of Abu Bakr but
as for the others, they are excused because they have had no intention
save their fearing for Islam.

As for when Abu Bakr, Umar and others had abstained from joining the
army of Ussama, when it went to fight, it was just to establish the
Islamic rule and the Muhammadan state and to save the caliphate, which
the religion and its people would not be saved then except with.

We found what you have quoted from ash-Shahristani in his book al-Milal
wen-Nihal as mursal and not musnad.[1] Al-Halabi and ad-Dahlani said in
their Seeras: No tradition has been narrated about the subject at all.
If you, may Allah assist you, have a tradition narrated by the Sunni,
please guide me to it and thanks be to you.

We said when replying to the sheikh: You have-may Allah keep you
safe-acknowledged that those companions have been sluggish in al-Jurf
and then they have not joined the army when moving to fight

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mursal is a tradition narrated without a series of narrators or
the narrators are unknown or unreliable. Musnad is a tradition narrated
by truthful and reliable narrators.

although they have been ordered by the Prophet (s) to hasten in doing
that.

You have acknowledged too that they rejected the emirate of Ussama in
spite of the clear sayings and orders of the Prophet (s).

You have acknowledged that they have requested Abu Bakr to depose Ussama
after the Prophet (s) has been so angry for that and that he has come
out wrapped and bandaged because of illness. And then he has reproached
them in his speech he made on the minbar that you have said it was a
famous historical event. It was the speech, in which the Prophet (s) had
declared that Ussama and his father, before him, were well-qualified for
the emirate.

You have acknowledged their requesting the caliph to cancel sending the
army, which the Prophet (s) has ordered to be sent, although they have
seen the Prophet (s) insisting on that and inciting his companions to
hasten moving toward Sham and his sayings were too clear and firm.

You have acknowledged that some companions, whom the Prophet (s) has
ordered to join the army, had not joined the army.

You have acknowledged all these things, which have been mentioned by all
the historians, and you have said they (those companions) were excused
for doing that. The conclusion of what you have mentioned as a
justification for their doings was that they have just preferred the
welfare of Islam as they have thought and not according to the sayings
and orders of the Prophet (s). We have not said, in this concern, more
than this.

In another word, we want to ask: have they offered their worships
according to all of the prophetic traditions or not? You have chosen the
first and we have chosen the second. Your acknowledgment, now, that they
have not acted in these matters according to the prophetic traditions
confirms what we have chosen and whether they were excused or not,
certainly has nothing to do with the subject of the research.

Since it has been proved that they have preferred the benefit of Islam,
concerning the matter of the army of Ussama, by acting according to
their own opinions rather than to act according to the

Prophets orders, then why do you not say that they have preferred, in
the matter of the caliphate after the Prophet (s), the benefit of Islam
according to their own opinions too rather than to follow the prophetic
traditions of al-Ghadeer and their likes?!

You have justified the doing of those companions, who have rejected the
emirate of Ussama, by saying that they have rejected his emirate because
he was too young and they were middle-aged and old men and you have said
that the souls of the middle-aged and old men would refuse in their
nature to be led by a young man. Then why have you not said the same
about those who have not carried out the prophetic traditions of
al-Ghadeer that have determined the caliphate of Ali, who was a young
man then, over the middle-aged and old men of the companions for they-in
the same way-have considered him as too young as they have considered
Ussama when the Prophet (s) has appointed him a leader over them in that
army? What difference between the emirate of an army and the caliphate
is! If their souls-according to their human nature-refused to be led by
a young man in an army for a short period of time, they would, no doubt,
refuse to be ruled by a young caliph throughout his lifetime and in all
the worldly and afterlife affairs!

You have mentioned that the souls of the middle-aged and old me
refuse-according to their human natures-to be led by the young. It is
not probable that you have meant to generalize this criterion because
the faithful souls of the sincere old men will never refrain from
obeying Allah and His messenger in being led by the young or in anything
else. Allah says: **But no! by your Lord! they do not believe (in
reality) until they make you a judge of that which has become a matter
of disagreement among them, and then do not find any straitness in their
hearts as to what you have decided and submit with entire submission.**
Qur'an, 4:65 and **and whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and
from whatever he forbids you, keep back.** Qur'an, 59:7 and **And it
behooves not a believing man and a believing woman that they should have
any choice in their matter when Allah and His Messenger have decided a
matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he surely strays
off a manifest straying.** Qur'an, 33:36

As for the word of ash-Shahristani concerning those, who had refused to
join the army of Ussama, it has come in a musnad tradition mentioned by
Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhari in his book Kitab as-Saqeefa.
Here I quote the tradition as it has been mentioned:

Ahmad bin Iss~haq bin Salih narrated from Ahmad bin Yasaar from Saeed
bin Katheer al-Ansari from his companions that Abdullah bin Abdurrahman
had said: The Prophet (s), during his illness that led to his death,
appointed Ussama as the leader of an army, which consisted the most of
the Muhajireen and the Ansar, among whom were Abu Bakr, Umar, Abu Ubayda
bin al-Jarrah, Abdurrahman bin Owf, Talha and az-Zubayr. He ordered him
to attack Muta where his father Zayd had been killed and to invade the
valley of Palestine. Ussama lagged and all the army lagged with him. The
Prophets health changed between a day and another but he still insisted
on carrying out the task of the army of Ussama until Ussama said to him:
O messenger of Allah, may my father and mother die for you! Would you
please allow me to stay some days until Allah restores your health? The
Prophet (s) said to him: Go and set out with the blessing of Allah!
Ussama said: O messenger of Allah, if I leave while you are still in
this case, I will leave and my heart will be full of pain. The Prophet
(s) said: Set out with victory and good will! He said: O messenger of
Allah, I hate to ask the travelers about you. The Prophet (s) said: Do
what I have ordered you! Then the Prophet (s) fainted and Ussama left
and got ready to set out. When the Prophet (s) regained his
consciousness, he asked about Ussama and his army. It was said to him
that Ussama and his army had been preparing to move. The Prophet (s)
said: Let the army of Ussama set out. Allah may curse whoever does not
join Ussama. He repeated that many times. Ussama set out with the banner
fluttering over his head and the companions around him until he arrived
at al-Jurf. He camped there and with him there were Abu Bakr, Umar and
most of the Muhajireen and from the Ansar there were Usayd bin Khudhayr,
Basheer bin Sad and many other notable personalities. Then the messenger
of Umm Aymen[1] came saying to Ussama: Come back to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** She was the Prophets nursemaid.

Medina! The messenger of Allah is dying. Ussama immediately came back to
Medina and the banner was with him. He came and fixed the banner at the
door of the Prophets house where the Prophet (s) had died then.

This tradition has been mentioned by several historians like ibn Abul
Hadeed al-Mutazili in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.20, Egypt Edition.

5. The share of those whose hearts are made to incline (to the truth)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Allah, in His holy Book, has assigned a share from the zakat for a
certain group of people when saying: **The alms are only for the poor
and the needy, and those who collect them, and those whose hearts are to
be reconciled, and to free the captives and the debtors, and for the
cause of Allah, and (for) the wayfarer; a duty imposed by Allah. Allah
is Knower, Wise.** Qur'an, 9:60

The Prophet (s) used to give those people, whose hearts had been
reconciled (to the Truth) this share from the zakat. They were different
kinds of people. Among them there were notable men of the Arab tribes,
whom the Prophet (s) gifted to become Muslims in order to be safe from
their dangers and others who had become Muslims but their determinations
were weak; therefore the Prophet (s) attracted them by gifting them
profusely like Abu Sufyan and his son Moawiyya, Uyayna bin Hissn,
al-Aqra bin Habis and Abbas bin Mirdass, and among them there were those
people, who were waiting for their equals of the Arab personalities to
become Muslims so that they themselves, then, would become Muslims. The
first kind of those people might be those people, whom the Prophet (s)
gifted from the sixth of the khums[1] (fifth), which was his own pure
share, and he had prepared some of those people, by gifting them with a
part of the zakat, to fight the unbelievers.

Thus was the conduct of the Prophet (s) towards those, whose hearts had
been reconciled to Islam, since this verse had been revealed to him
until he left to the better world. He had never ordered anyone to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A type of religious levy, equivalent to one fifth of taxable
income.

annul it after him at all. All the umma has agreed unanimously upon
this.

When Abu Bakr became the caliph, those people came to receive their
shares as it was usual during the time of the Prophet (s). Abu Bakr
wrote them a book confirming their right. They took the book to Umar to
be signed by him. Umar tore the book and said to them: We are not in
need of you. Allah has strengthen Islam and made us no longer need you.
Either you become Muslims or the sword will be between us and you. They
went back to Abu Bakr and said to him: Are you the caliph or he? Abu
Bakr said: It is he inshallah and he agreed to what Umar had done.[1]

The matter had been settled by the two caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar, and
those, who had adopted their opinion, and they determined to deprive
those people, whose hearts had been reconciled to Islam, of their share
and turned it from them to the other classes mentioned

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to al-Jawhara an-Nayyira ala Mukhtasar al-Qaddoori on
Hanafite jurisprudence, vol.1 p.164. Also it has been mentioned by other
historians when talking about the qualities of the two caliphs.  
How many cases like this one Umar had done! One of them, for example, as
mentioned by the historians, was: Once Uyayna bin Hissn and al-Aqra bin
Habiss came to Abu Bakr and said to him: There is a piece of inarable
land that has neither plant nor any advantage. Abu Bakr said: I see to
grant it to you that Allah may make it useful. Abu Bakr asked the people
around him: What do you say? They said: It is ok. He wrote them a book
about that. They took the book to Umar to witness on it. Umar took the
book from them, spit on it and erased it. They became so angry and said
to him bad words. Then they came back to Abu Bakr complaining. They said
to Abu Bakr: By Allah, we do not know who the caliph is, you or Umar!
Abu Bakr said: It is he! Umar came and stopped before Abu Bakr while he
was angry. He said to Abu Bakr: Tell me about this land that you have
granted to these tow ones. Is it yours or it is for the Muslims? Abu
Bakr said: It is for the Muslims. Umar said: So what made you grant it
to these two ones? Abu Bakr said: I consulted with the people around me.
Umar said: Did you consult with all the Muslims and get their consent?
Abu Bakr said: I have said to you before that you are better than me in
this matter (the caliphate) but you forced me to it. Mentioned by ibn
Abul Hadeed in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 12 p.108, al-Asqalani in his
Issaba when mentioning the biography of Uyayna and it has mentioned by
others.  
Would that they had consulted all the Muslims on the day of as-Saqeefa
and would that they had waited a little until the Hashemites would have
finished the funerals of the Prophet (s) to be able to attend that
consultation for they no doubt were the worthiest of that among the
umma!

in the Qur'anic verse.

Some virtuous ulama have talked about this subject that it would be
better to quote their speech and to test it because it has some
advantages.

Professor ad-Dawaleebi[1] said in his book Usool al-Fiqh:[2] The ijtihad
of Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) on stopping the gift that the
Holy Qur'an had determined for the people, whose hearts had been
reconciled to Islam, might have been the first of the verdicts that Umar
had done according to the change of benefits due to the change of time
although the Quranic text about the subject was still valid and had not
been annulled just because he had preferred his own opinion, which had
led to his ijtihad. Let you ponder on what he has said and scrutinize
his following speech.

He added: Allah, the Almighty has assigned, at the beginning of the
advent of Islam and when the Muslims were still weak somehow, a gift to
be given to some people, whose dangers against the Muslims were feared
and whose goodness was expected, to reconcile their hearts to Islam.
They were among the groups, whom the Qur'an had mentioned to be gifted
from the charities of the treasury. Allah said: **(The alms are only for
the poor and the needy, and those who collect them, and those whose
hearts are to be reconciled, and to free the captives and the debtors,
and for the cause of Allah, and (for) the wayfarer).** Thus the Holy
Qur'an had put those people, whose hearts were reconciled, among the
groups of people, who received their shares of the charities, and had
assigned for them certain allowances as some countries do nowadays when
assigning some expenses from their budgets for the political
propaganda.[3] He added: But when

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He is Sheikh Muhammad Maroof, the professor in jurisprudence and
Roman laws in the College of Laws-Syrian University.  
 **[2]** Where he has mentioned examples about changing the verdicts
according to the changes of the ages in p.239.  
 **[3]** They (the countries) might have learnt this from the Quranic
verse talking about those, whose hearts have been reconciled to Islam.
England, U.S.A. and their likes supply the poor and needy people of the
weak countries with food and clothes and reformative projects although
these countries are not in need of those weak countries or their peoples
but they follow the maxim, which is the aim of the Qur'an out of giving
those people to reconcile their hearts.

Islam became strong and its rule became firm, Umar determined to deprive
those people of their gifts, which the Qur'an had assigned for them.

I say: The professor has repeated his saying that Umar had stopped the
gift of those people that the Qur'an had determined as a fixed right in
a clear verse just to prefer his own opinion and then the professor has
justified the doing of the caliph Umar by saying:

That did not mean that Umar had annulled a Qur'anic verdict but he had
noticed the cause of the text (verse) and not its apparent form and he
considered gifting those people as was related to temporary
circumstances when Islam was weak yet and to be safe from their evils
but when Islam became strong and the circumstances requiring to gift
those people were changed then it became obligatory to act according to
the cause[1] of the verse and to stop that gift.

I say: there is no doubt that the verse talking about gifting those
people is absolute and not limited and this is clear in the Qur'an
without any disagreement or ambiguity. We are not to limit it to some
conditions or to justify it according to something unless there is an
authority from Allah or His messenger. It is certain that there is no
authority on this concern.[2]

Then how could we consider gifting those people as being justified
according to temporary circumstances of a certain time, when it was to
reconcile their hearts to Islam when Islam was still weak and not in
other times?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** There was no cause here, on which the verdict relied, that
following it would be required by the text (verse). Reconciling those
people, whom Allah had assigned this share from the charities for, was
not a cause for this legal verdict but it was from among the maxims and
benefits that had been noticed in legislating it. The ulama know well
that the cause of a certain verdict is something and the maxim, which is
the benefit in legislating it, is something else. Have you not seen that
the benefit behind the obligatory iddah (a prescribed period, during
which a widow or a divorcee may not remarry, beginning from the death of
her husband or from the divorce) on the divorced women is to keep the
lineages of the fetuses that may be in their mothers wombs? In spite of
that the iddat of a woman is obligatory even if it becomes certain that
she is not pregnant!  
 **[2]** The revelation of the Qur'an at the beginning of Islam and when
Islam was still weak was not limited to any restrictions.

If the Muslims became safe from the evils of those people, whose hearts
would be reconciled, in a certain time, their becoming Muslims because
of gifting them would not stop. In fact this might increase due to the
powerful authority of Islam and this hope would be sufficient to
reconcile their hearts by gifting them. The Prophet (s) reconciled many
classes of people by giving them gifts; some to be Muslims and
consequently their peoples would be Muslims, some had become Muslims but
their faith was somehow weak and so the Prophet (s) wanted to strengthen
their faith by gifting them and some were gifted in order that the
Muslims would be safe from their evils. Let us suppose that we were safe
from the dangers of the evil ones; nevertheless this gift should be
given to those, whose followers would be Muslims when they themselves
became Muslims, or to those, whose weak faith would be strengthen and
fixed, imitating, by that, the Prophet (s) and whoever imitated his
prophet, surely would be the most beloved one to Allah among His people.

The power of Islam that had defeated the enemies of the Muslims and made
them safe from their dangers changed into the opposite situation. The
foreigners conquered the Muslims and forced them to flatter the
foreigners and to attract their pity by paying them gifts or by other
things as it is seen nowadays or it has been seen some time ago. Hence
it became clear that annulling the share of those people, whose hearts
had been attracted to Islam by being gifted, when Islam had become
strong was just due to their being deceived by their state at that time
but the Holy Qur'an is from Allah, the Knowing, the Wise.

Now we come back to our research on the absolute text and limiting it to
the benefit that changes according to the changes of the different ages
and due to that a legal verdict changes. We research on this principle
according to its conditions.

We, the Shia, all in all and unanimously do not pay any attention to the
benefit in specializing a general verdict or limiting an absolute
verdict except if the Sharia has a clear text confirming this regard. If
there is no source in the Sharia confirming this matter (specializing a
general verdict or limiting an absolute verdict) whether positively or
negatively it will have no any value near us. If there is a benefit or

not it will be the same for us.[1] This opinion is adopted too by the
two sects; the Shafiites and the Hanafites.

As for the Hanbalites, although they have taken in their consideration
the benefits that have no source in the Sharia, they do not make the
benefits stand against the clear texts of the Sharia but they put the
benefits after the texts.[2] Thus they do not limit the clear verse
talking about the people, whose hearts have been attracted to Islam by
gifts. Then they may be added to the Shia, the Shafiites and the
Hanafites in this concern.

The opinion of the Malikites towards the text talking about the people,
whose hearts have been reconciled to Islam, is also like the others,
although they have taken the benefits in their consideration and made
them oppose the text but they oppose with that the traditions narrated
by single narrators (not proved by others) and the traditions that have
not been proved definitely and they also oppose, with the benefits, the
general verse of the Qur'an, which have not had definite meanings. But
as for the texts that have been proved to be true and the ones that have
assigned definite meanings like the verse talking about the people,
whose hearts have been attracted to Islam by gifts, they do never make
the benefits stand against such texts at all[3] because they are
definite in being true and definite in meaning as well.

After all, the principles of jurisprudence according to all these sects
do not permit to justify depriving those people of their shares as
Professor ad-Dawaleebi has justified it.

If the two caliphs (Abu Bakr and Umar) had not annulled-after the
Prophets death-the share of that class of people, whose hearts had been
reconciled to Islam, and stopped their right, which had been determined
by the Holy Qur'an, we could have said that the two caliphs (Abu Bakr
and Umar) had not contradicted the Qur'anic verse even if they had not
given those people their shares then

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The details of this matter are available in the books of the
Shia jurisprudence, which are widespread everywhere.  
 **[2]** Ad-Dawaleebi in his book Usool al-Fiqh, p.294.  
 **[3]** Usool al-Fiqh by ad-Dawaleebi, p.206.

because Allah had made those eight classes of people, mentioned in the
verse, as the only ones, on whom the charities were to be spent just to
limit the spending of the charities to them and not to other than them.
The verse had not made it compulsory to spread the charities among all
the eight classes mentioned. That is to say: if someone gives all his
charity to only one class from among these eight classes, he will act
correctly and will not be blamed exactly as if he has spread the charity
among the eight classes. This has been agreed upon unanimously by all
the Muslims and such they have done after the Prophet (s). So the doing
of Abu Bakr and Umar would have been accepted if they had not annulled
this right and invalidated it in spite of the clear Qur'anic text, which
has been still fixed and not annulled.

Before we end this research, we think that we have to draw the attention
of Professor ad-Dawaleebi to review what he has quoted about the Shia[1]
that they believe in the benefits and prefer them to the definite texts.
This is no true and no one of the Shia has ever said it. Sulayman
at-Touffi was one of the fanatic people, who had been ascribed unjustly
to the Shia by the opponents.

The opinion of the Shia in this concern is as what we have mentioned
previously. All the Shia have agreed upon this unanimously. Their books
are available everywhere. Let the professor refer to them and quote from
them directly instead of quoting from the books of Ahmad bin Hanbal (may
Allah forgive him).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** p.207, 209 in his book Usool al-Fiqh.

6. The share of the relatives
-----------------------------

It is the share that has been mentioned by this verse: **And know that
whatever thing you gain, a fifth*[1]* of it is for Allah and for the
Messenger and for the near relatives and the orphans and the needy and
the wayfarer, if you believe in Allah*[2]* and in that which We revealed
to Our servant, on the day of distinction, the day on which the two
parties met; and Allah has power over all things.** Qur'an, 8:41

The Muslims have agreed unanimously that the Prophet (s) has taken a
share of the khums for himself and given another share to his near
relatives and he has never changed this matter nor has he ordered any
one to change it until he has been invited by Allah to be in the better
world.

When Abu Bakr became the caliph, he interpreted the verse according to
his own thinking and he omitted the share of the Prophet (s) and the
share of his relatives after his death.[3] He prevented the Hashemites
from getting their right of the khums and he considered them as same as
the orphans, the poor and the wayfarers of the other Muslims.

Fatima (s) sent a messenger to Abu Bakr asking him for her inheritance
of what her father (s) had left in Medina and Fadak and what had
remained of the khums of Khaybar but Abu Bakr refused to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The two sheikhs al-Bukhari and Muslim mentioned in their Sahihs
(books of Hadith) a tradition narrated by ibn Abbas that the Prophet (s)
had said to the delegation of Abdul Qayss when ordering them to believe
in Allah, the One and the Only: Do you know what believing in Allah
alone is? They said: Allah and His messenger are more aware. He said:
Witnessing that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the messenger
of Allah, offering the prayers, paying the zakat, fasting in Ramadan and
giving the fifth of ones income.  
 **[2]** The meaning of this conditional phrase is that the khums
(fifth) is a legal right that must be paid to the ones mentioned in the
verse. The verse said: Do not be greedy for this right and pay it to its
deserving ones if you have believed in Allah.  
 **[3]** Refer to al-Kashshaf when talking about the verse of the khums.
The author mentioned a tradition narrated by ibn Abbas: The khums is six
shares; two shares for Allah and His messenger and a share for the
messengers relativesbut Abu Bakr made it three shares. He mentioned the
same about Umar and the caliphs after him (except Imam Ali). He
mentioned that Abu Bakr had prevented the Hashemites from getting their
share of the khums.

give her anything of that. She became very angry with him. She deserted
him and did not talk to him until she died. She lived for six months
after the death of the Prophet (s). When she died, her husband Ali (s)
buried her at night without letting Abu Bakr know or attend the
funerals.[1]

Muslim mentioned in his Sahih a tradition narrated by Yazeed bin Hurmuz
saying: Najda bin Aamir al-Harawri the Kharijite wrote a letter to ibn
Abbas. I was there when ibn Abbas read the letter and when he wrote his
reply. Ibn Abbas said: By Allah, I want just to prevent him from being
in error; otherwise I will not write to him even one word. He wrote to
him: You have asked about the share of the relatives that Allah has
mentioned in His Book and who they are! We have seen that we are the
relatives of the Prophet (s) but our people denied that[2]

Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned this tradition in his Musnad, vol.1
p.294. The tradition has been mentioned in many books of Hadith in true
ways and by reliable narrators. What has been mentioned in the tradition
expresses the real opinion of Ahlul Bayt (s).

But most of the Sunni imams have adopted the opinion of the two caliphs
(Abu Bakr and Umar) without assigning a special share from the khums to
the relatives (of the Prophet (s)).

Malik bin Anass had determined that all the khums would be spent
according to the opinion of the imam, who would spend it on the benefits
of the Muslims as he liked, and there was no shares for the relatives
(of the Prophet (s)), the orphans, the poor or the wayfarers at all.

Abu Haneefa and his followers had omitted the share of the Prophet (s)
and the share of his relatives and divided them among the orphans, the
poor and the wayfarers of the rest of the Muslims where there was no
difference, according to their opinion, between the Hashemites and the
other Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bukharis Sahih, vol.3 p.36, Muslims Sahih vol.2 p.72 and
mentioned in other places of their Sahihs.  
 **[2]** Vol.2 p.105.

Ash-Shafiiy had made it five shares; a share for the Prophet (s) to be
spent in the same ways that the Prophet (s) had been used to spend on
the benefits of the Muslims like supplying the army with horses
(equipments), weapons and the likes and a share for the relatives from
bani Hashem and bani Abdul Muttalib and not bani Abd Shams and bani
Nawfal to be divided in a way that a male would get as double as the
share of a female. The rest of the khums was to be divided among the
other three classes; the orphans, the poor and the wayfarers.

We , the Shia, divide the khums into six shares;[1] two for Allah and
His messenger, and these two shares besides the share of the relatives
(the Prophets progeny) are for the (disappeared) imam, who represents
the Prophet (s), and the rest three shares are to be given to the
orphans, the poor and the wayfarers of the Prophets progeny especially
where no one of the common people has a right to be given from the khums
because Allah has made charities impermissible for the Prophet (s) and
his progeny and so He has compensated them for that by giving them the
khums. This has been mentioned by at-Tabari when talking about Imam Ali
bin al-Husayn as-Sajjad (s) and his son Imam Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir
(s).

Our ulama have agreed unanimously that the khums is obligatory to be
deducted from every benefit one gets from business, trade, crafts,
agricultural products, cattle and others. It is also obligatory on found
(by chance) treasures, minerals, precious things got from the bottom of
the sea by diving and other sources of wealth. This is mentioned in our
jurisprudence and traditions narrated from the Prophet (s) and the
infallible imams. Our evidence in that is he Quranic verse **(And know
that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah and for the
Messenger and for the near relatives and the orphans and the needy and
the wayfarer).** Gain includes all that man can make use of. The
lexicons have shown this meaning clearly and the point of discussion
here is the ijtihad to omit the share of the relatives (of the Prophet)
although the verse has confirmed it so clearly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Jihad wes-Siyyer, vol.2 p.105.

7. Bequeathing by the Prophets
------------------------------

Allah has said: **Men shall have a portion of what the parents and the
near relatives leave, and women shall have a portion of what the parents
and the near relatives leave, whether there is little or much of it; a
stated portion.** Qur'an, 4:7 and **Allah enjoins you concerning your
children: The male shall have the equal of the portion of two females.**
Qur'an, 4:11 These verses are general in concerning the Prophet (s) and
the rest of the peoples equally. They are like the other general verses
such as **O you who believe! fasting is prescribed for you, as it was
prescribed for those before you** Qur'an, 2:183 and **but whoever among
you is sick or on a journey, then (he shall fast) a (like) number of
other days.** Qur'an, 2:184 and **Forbidden to you is that which dies of
itself, and blood, and flesh of swine, and that on which any other name
than that of Allah has been invoked, and the strangled (animal) and that
beaten to death, and that killed by a fall and that killed by being
smitten with the horn, and that which wild beasts have eaten, except
what you slaughter** Qur'an, 5:3 and many other verses that concern the
legal verdicts, which includes the Prophet (s) and the rest of the
peoples with no difference but the orders are addressed to the Prophet
(s) to act according to them and to inform the others of them to act
according to them too. In this case the verses just show that the
Prophet (s) is worthier than the others in keeping to the verdicts.

Allah has said: **and those who are akin are nearer one to another in
the ordinance of Allah.** Qur'an, 8:75 In this verse Allah has
determined that the right of inheritance is for the relatives of the
bequeather. Before the revelation of this verse, bequeathing was among
the rights of wilayah (guardianship) in religion, but when Islam and the
Muslims became powerful and prevailing, the rights of those, who were
among the inheritors previously, were annulled by this verse. The right
of inheritance became limited to the relatives of the bequeather; the
nearest, the nearer and so on, whether the bequeather was the Prophet
(s) or any of the other people according to the apparent meaning of the
verse.

Besides these verses, Allah has said when talking about Zachariah:
**When he called upon his Lord in secret; he said: My Lord! surely my
bones are weakened and my head flares with hoariness, and, my Lord! I
have never been unsuccessful in my prayer to Thee, and surely I**

**fear my cousins after me, and my wife is barren; therefore grant me
from Thyself an heir, who should inherit me and inherit from the
children of Yaqoub, and make him, my Lord, one in whom Thou art well
pleased.** Qur'an, 19:3-6

Fatima az-Zahra (s) and the infallible imams of her progeny have
protested with this verse when asking about their extorted inheritance.
Definitely this verse shows that the prophets bequeath wealth and
properties and the word inherit mentioned here refers to inheriting
properties and not inheriting knowledge or prophethood. All the Shia
ulama have adopted this opinion and said that the word inheritance in
the language and the Sharia does not refer except to movable wealth and
properties and it is not used to refer to other than properties except
figuratively and metaphor does never change a certain fact into a
metaphor without a clear evidence.

Zachariah has said in his invocation: **(and make him, my Lord, one in
whom Thou art well pleased).** This means: O my Lord, make the one, who
will inherit me, pleased near You and make him obedient to Your orders.
So if we interpret inheritance as inheriting prophethood, then the
saying of Zachariah will be nonsense and vain. Do you not think that it
is nonsense when someone invokes Allah by saying: O Allah, send us a
prophet and make him sane and well-mannered? Definitely all the
prophets, whom Allah has sent to guide His people, are the highest
examples of morals.

What evidences our opinion is that Zachariah (s) has declared that he
feared that his cousins might extort his properties after his death when
saying: **(I fear my cousins after me)** so he has invoked Allah to
grant him a child to inherit him. Surely he feared his cousins for his
properties and not knowledge and prophethood because Prophet Zachariah
(s) was aware and did not fear a bit that Allah might entrust someone,
who was not qualified, with prophethood nor would Allah make bad people
inherit His knowledge and wisdom.

Someone may say that this argument ascribes stinginess to Prophet
Zachariah (s).

God forbid! We do never believe so. Wealth is granted (by Allah) to a
believer and to a disbeliever, to a good man and to a bad man. Prophet
Zachariah (s), because his cousins were bad, feared that they

would spend his wealth on corruption. This was the wisdom of Prophet
Zachariah (s) because supporting corrupt people and assisting them to
keep on their bad doings is prohibited by religion and reason. He, who
considers this as stinginess, will be unfair.

His saying **(I fear my cousins after me)** means that he fears their
immorality and bad doings. So he fears that his cousins may inherit his
wealth and spend it on disobedience; therefore he invokes Allah to grant
him a good child to spend his wealth on what will please Allah.

In short, we are to interpret inheritance in this verse to mean wealth
and not prophethood or other things according to the real meaning of the
word, which comes to mind, without supposing other meanings for there is
no any context referring to prophethood or other things. In fact all the
evidences in the verse lead to the real meaning of the word inherit and
not a figurative meaning.

This is the opinion of the infallible imams (s) about this Quranic verse
and no doubt that the infallible imams (s) are equal to the Qur'an and
they both, the Qur'an and the infallible imams, will not separate until
the Day of Resurrection. All people have known what there was between
Fatima az-Zahra (s), the head lady of the worlds women, and Abu Bakr.
She had sent a messenger to Abu Bakr asking him for her inheritance of
her fathers properties. Abu Bakr said: The messenger of Allah said: We
(the prophets) do not bequeath. What we leave is to be considered as
charity.[1] Aaisha said: Abu Bakr refused to give Fatima anything of her
inheritance and he appropriated all the Prophets properties to the
treasury; therefore Fatima became very angry with Abu Bakr. She turned
away from him and did never talk to him until she died. She lived after
the Prophet (s) for six months and when she died, her husband Ali buried
her in the night according to her own will[2] and Abu Bakr did not
attend the funerals[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This tradition has been refuted by Fatima (s) and the infallible
imams. Refer to al-Bukharis Sahih, chap. The battle of Khaybar.  
 **[2]** Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, vol.8 p.157, al-Qastalanis Irshad,
al-Ansaris Tuhfa.  
 **[3]** Al-Bukharis Sahih, vol.3 p.37, Muslims Sahih, vol.2 p.72,
Ahmads Musnad, vol.1 p.6.

Yes! She became very angryshe put on her veil and gown and came, with
her maids and some of her fellow-women walking exactly like her fathers
gait, to Abu Bakr, who was among a crowd of the Muhajireen, the Ansar
and other people. A curtain was put between her and the people. She
moaned in a way that all the people began to cry and the meeting shook.
She waited until they stopped crying and became quiet. She began her
speech with praising Allah and then her eloquence streamed

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">She preached the people in the best of
speeches</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">As if she talked with the tongue of
al-Mustafa</span>*[1]

The sights submitted and the souls surrendered. If politics was not
prevailing over the minds at those days, she would turn back the strayed
tendencies and bridle the worldly greed, but it was politics that had
gone too far with its tendencies without caring for anything.

He, who reads her speech on that day,[2] will find what there was
between her and those people[3] (the caliph Abu Bakr and his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Mustafa is one of the Prophets surnames; Fatimas father.  
 **[2]** The progeny of Ali and Fatima narrated the speech of Fatima,
which she had speechified on that day, one after the other until it
reached us. We, the Fatimites, narrate this speech from our fathers and
our fathers narrate it from their fathers and so on for all generations
until the times of the infallible imams. To see this speech, refer to
al-Ihtijaj by at-Tabarsi, Biharul Anwar by al-Majlisi and refer to the
Sunni books like as-Saqeefa and Fadak by Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz
al-Jawhari, in which there are many traditions about this speech, some
of which are narrated from Zaynab, the daughter of Ali and Fatima (s),
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir(s) and Abdullah bin al-Hasan bin al-Hasan. Refer
to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 4 p.78, 93, 94. Zayd bin Ali bin al-Husayn
bin Ali bin Abu Talib said: I have heard the notables of the Talibites
narrating this speech from their fathers and teaching it to their
children.  
 **[3]** She said to Abu Bakr when he deprived her of her right
(inheritance): O Abu Bakr, if you die, who will inherit you? He said: My
children and family. She said: Then why have you inherited the messenger
of Allah instead of his children and family? He said: O daughter of the
messenger of Allah, I have not done that. She said: Yes, you have! You
have extorted Fadak, which was the Prophets pure property. You have
dared to take it from us and you have dared to change what Allah has
revealed concerning us. It has been mentioned in as-Saqeefa and Fadak by
Abu Bakr al-Jawhari; refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 4 p.87. Abu
Bakr al-Jawhari mentioned in his book a tradition narrated by Abu Salama
saying: When Fatima asked for her inheritance, Abu Bakr said to her: I
have heard the messenger of Allah saying: A prophet does not bequeath.
But I will sustain whomever the messenger of Allah has

followers). She quoted many clear verses to evidence her inheritance.
They were irrefutable evidences that could never be denied. Among what
she had said on that day was this passage: Have you intendedly turned
away from the Book of Allah and left it behind your backs? Allah says in
His Book: **And Solomon was David's heir.** Qur'an, 27:16 and He says
when talking about Prophet Zachariah: **therefore grant me from Thyself
an heir, who should inherit me and inherit from the children of Yaqoub,
and make him, my Lord, one in whom Thou art well pleased.** He also
says: **and those who are akin are nearer one to another in the
ordinance of Allah** and **Allah enjoins you concerning your children;
the male shall have the equal of the portion of two females** and **It
is prescribed for you, when death approacheth one of you, if he leave
wealth, that he bequeath unto parents and near relatives in kindness.
(This is) a duty for all those who ward off (evil).** Qur'an, 2:180 Has
Allah distinguished you with a verse that He has excluded my father
from? Or are you more aware of the special and general verdicts of the
Qur'an than my

------------------------------------------------------------------------

been sustaining and I will spend on whomever he has been spending on.
She said: O Abu Bakr, do your daughters inherit you whereas the Prophets
daughters do not inherit him? He said: It is so. Another tradition like
this one has been mentioned by Ahmad in his Musnad, vol. 1 p.10.
Al-Jawhari mentioned in his book as-Saqeefa and Fadak-as in Sharh Nahjol
Balagha, vol. 4 p.81-a tradition narrated by Umm Hani bint Abu Talib:
Fatima said to Abu Bakr: Who will inherit you when you die? He said: My
children and family. She said: Then why do you inherit the messenger of
Allah instead of us? He said: O daughter of the messenger of Allah, your
father has not bequeathed anything. She said: Yes, he has. It is the
share (Fadak) that Allah has given to us and it is in your hand now. He
said: I have heard the messenger of Allah saying: It is but nourishment
that Allah has granted to us and when I die it will be for the Muslims.
Al-Jawhari mentioned another tradition like this one narrated by Abut
Tufayl. The traditions talking about this speech are so many and
especially those, which have been narrated by the infallible imams. She
has another speech concerning the caliphate after the Prophet (s). It
has been mentioned by al-Jawhari in his book as-Saqeefa and Fadak-as in
Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 4 p.87-narrated from Abdullah bin al-Hasan
bin al-Hasan that his mother Fatima bint al-Husayn has said: When Fatima
(the daughter of the Prophet) became so badly ill, the women of the
Muhajireen and the Ansar gathered around her. They said to her: O
daughter of the messenger of Allah, how have you become now? she said:
By Allah, I have disliked your world and hated your men It is one of the
most eloquent speeches among the speeches of Ahlul Bayt (s). It has also
been mentioned by Imam Abul Fadhl Ahmad bin Abu Tahir in his book
Balaghaatun Nissa. It has been mentioned by al-Majlisi in Biharul Anwar,
at-Tabarsi in al-Ihtijaj and by others.

father and my cousin (Ali)? Or do you say: People of two (different)
religions do not inherit each other?

She protested against the caliph and evidenced her protest by quoting
the clear Quranic verses (of Zachariah and Solomon) that had confirmed
bequeathing by the prophets. By Allah, she is more aware of the meaning
of the Qur'an than those, who have come a long time after the revelation
of the Qur'an and who have distorted the real meaning of inheritance
into inheriting wisdom and prophethood instead of wealth and properties.
They have just preferred the figurative meaning to the real meaning
without any evidence at all to drive the real meaning to another one.
This is impermissible. If it was probable, then Abu Bakr or any one of
that crowd of the Muhajireen and the Ansar would refute Fatimas claim on
that day.[1]

She also protested against the caliph, when asking for her inheritance,
by referring to the general verses concerning inheritance and especially
this general verse **Allah enjoins you concerning your children: The
male shall have the equal of the portion of two females** Qur'an, 11:11
She denied his limiting the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** They had not opposed her on that day with this excuse but they
had just confiscated her inheritance. Abu Bakr said to her: O daughter
of the messenger of Allah, I swear that Allah has not created anyone
more beloved to me than your father. I wished the sky fell over the
ground on the day when your father died. By Allah if Aaisha (Abu Bakrs
daughter) becomes needy is much better to me than to see you being
needy. Do you think I give white and red people their rights and I
deprive you of your right whereas you are the daughter of the messenger
of Allah? This wealth was not for the Prophet (s) but it was among the
wealth of the Muslims, with which the Prophet (s) used to spend on the
armies and to spend for the sake of Allah and when he died I managed it
as he had been managing it. She said: By Allah, I will not talk with you
for ever. He said: By Allah, I will never desert you at all. She said:
By Allah, I will invoke Allah against you. He said: By Allah, I will
invoke Allah for you. When she was about to die, she recommended that
Abu Bakr should not offer the prayer (for the dead) for her. It has been
mentioned by Abu Bakr al-Jawhari in his book as-Saqeefa and Fadak as
mentioned in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 4 p.80. You see here that Abu
Bakr has not opposed Fatima (s) by refuting her evidence of bequeathing
out of the two verses of Prophet David (s) and Prophet Zachariah (s) but
he has pretended that the wealth was not the Prophets. She was not
satisfied with his pretense anyhow for she was more aware of her fathers
affairs than the others. We are Allah's and to Him we shall surely
return!

general verdicts without any legal evidence from the Qur'an or the
Sunna. She said denyingly: Has Allah distinguished you with a verse that
He has excluded my father from? She confirmed by this saying that there
was no any evidence in the Qur'an that might limit these general
verdicts. Then she said: Or are you more aware of the special and
general verdicts of the Qur'an than my father and my cousin (Ali)? By
this saying she confirmed too that there was no any evidence in the
Sunna that might limit these general verdicts. In fact she denied any
kind of limitation at all because if there was something of that, then
the Prophet (s) or his guardian Ali (s), would declare it to her and
they would not let her unaware of it because that would be a kind of
negligence in informing of the Sharia, dilatoriness in warning, hiding
the truth, encouraging ignorance, inciting to ask for the untruth,
injuring her dignity and would make her argue and confront and would
expose her to enmity and hatred without having the right of what she
would ask for. Definitely this is impossible for the prophets and for
their guardians.

In short, the Prophets love and kindness to his daughter was over any
love of the kind fathers towards their dutiful children. He covered her
with the shadow of his great mercy, sacrificed himself for her[1] and
delighted greatly when being with her. He tried whatever he could to
educate her and to honor her to the utmost. He taught her the knowledge
of Allah and the knowledge of His laws. He didnt spare any effort in
that until he made her at the top of every virtue and honor. After that,
was it possible for him to conceal such a verdict without letting her
know her legal obligation? God forbid! Would he expose her, by this
concealment, to all of the troubles she had got after his death because
of her inheritance? In fact all the umma faced a bad sedition, which was
the consequence of depriving her of her inheritance.

And was her husband, the Prophets guardian and spiritual brother, in
spite of his abundant knowledge, wisdom, precedence in Islam,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Once the Prophet (s) mentioned his daughter Fatima (s) and said:
Her father may die for her! Her father may die for her! He repeated that
three times. This tradition has been narrated by Ahmad bin Hanbal and
others as mentioned by Ibn Hajar in his book as-Sawaiqul Muhriqa,
chzp.11, p.159.

kinship to the Prophet (s), honor, high position and guardianship,
unaware, too, of this tradition We, the prophets, do not bequeath? And
why the Prophet (s) had concealed that from his spiritual brother, his
guardian, the guard of his secrets, the gate of the city of his
knowledge, the best judge among his umma; the gate of repentance, the
ship of rescue and the safety of the umma from being separated? And why
had his uncle al-Abbas and the rest of the Hashemites not heard of this
tradition until they were surprised with it after the death of the
Prophet (s)? And why had the Prophets wives not known about it so that
they sent Othman to ask for their inheritance after the Prophets death?
How had the Prophet (s) dared not to inform his wives of this legal
verdict? Definitely the Prophet (s) was not indifferent a bit at all! He
used to announce the verdicts of Allah openly. His morals were not so
towards his relatives. He was so kind and mindful as he had been ordered
by Allah: **And warn your nearest relatives.** Qur'an, 26:214

One word remained for Fatima (s), by which she provoked the zeal of
people and excited their anger to the utmost. She said: Or do you say:
People of two (different) religions do not inherit each other? She meant
that the general verdicts of inheritance were not to be limited
according to those peoples own pretenses. The Prophet (s) had said:
People of two (different) religions do not inherit each other. She
wanted to say to them: You deprive me of my inheritance to say that I am
not on my fathers religion and so you will have a legal evidence on
that! We are Allahs and to Him we shall return!

8. The donation of Fatima
-------------------------

When Allah the Almighty assisted the Prophet (s) to conquer Khaybar and
cast horror into the hearts of the people of Fadak, they submitted to
the Prophet (s) servilely. They made peace with him by giving him a half
of their land[1] and the Prophet (s) accepted that from them and so a
half of Fadak became a pure property for him where **whatever Allah
restored to His Messenger from them you did not press forward against it
any horse or a riding camel but Allah**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It is mentioned that they have given the Prophet (s) all of
their land.

**gives authority to His messengers against whom He pleases.** Qur'an,
59:6 and upon this all the umma had agreed unanimously with no any
objection by anyone.

When Allah revealed **And give to the near of kin his due,** the Prophet
(s) donated Fadak to his daughter Fatima (s). It was still in her
hand[1] until it had been extorted from her to be added to the treasury.

This was what Fatima (s) had claimed after the death of the Prophet (s)
and because of this she had been subjected to trial.

Al-Fakhr ar-Razi said: When the messenger of Allah died, Fatima (s)
claimed that the Prophet (s) had donated Fadak to her. Abu Bakr said to
her: It hurts me to see you needy and it delights me to see you needless
but I do not know whether your saying is true or not;[2] therefore I can
not judge for you. Umm Aymen and another mawla (follower) of the
messenger of Allah[3] witnessed for Fatima but Abu Bakr wanted a
witness, whose witnessing would be accepted

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The infallible imams and their followers have not had any doubt
that the Prophet (s) had donated Fadak to Fatima (s) and that it had
been in her hand until it had been extorted from her. Imam Ali (s) said
to his administrative official on Basra, Othman bin Hunayf: ...Yes,
Fadak was in our hands out of all what was under the sky but some people
felt greedy for it and others withheld themselves from it but the best
of judges is Allah... Refer to Nahjol Balagha. There are many traditions
narrated from the infallible imams talking about the same matter. The
reliable narrators have narrated a tradition from Abu Saeed al-Khidri
saying: When Allah has revealed ***(And give to the near of kin his
due)***, the messenger of Allah gave Fadak to Fatima. Refer to Majmaul
Bayan by at-Tabarsi when interpreting this verse 17:26. You will find
there that it is this tradition that has made al-Mamoon, the Abbasid
caliph, give Fadak back to the progeny of Fatima.  
 **[2]** By Allah O you Abu Bakr, have you really not known whether
Fatimas claim was true or not after Umm Aymen (the Prophets nursemaid)
and Imam Ali (s) had witnessed it was true? Have you considered them all
to be liars, aggressive or mistaken? Certainly not! But ***(Nay, but
your minds have beguiled you into something. (My course is) comely
patience. And Allah it is Whose help is to be sought in that
(predicament) which ye describe).*** **[3]** The other witness besides
Umm Aymen was Ameerul Momineen Ali bin Abu Talib (s) undoubtedly. As if
ar-Razi found the rejection of Imam Alis witness by Abu Bakr abominable
so he did not mention the name of Imam Ali (s) respecting Imam Ali and
Abu Bakr together so he said a mawla of the messenger of Allah.

according to the Sharia.[1]

Ibn Hajar al-Haythami in his book as-Sawaiq said: Fatima, in her claim
that the Prophet (s) had donated Fadak to her, did not bring except Ali
and Umm Aymen as witnesses and so the quorum was not complete[2]

The same has been said by Ibn Taymiyya, ibnul Qayyim and other Sunni
ulama concerning this case.

May Allah forgive them and us and may He be pleased with Abu Bakr and
make Fatima, her father, her husband and her son forgive him! Would he
have preferred a suitable decision in order not to put Fatima (s), the
prophets trust, who had recently lost her father, in those bad
situations; once because of her inheritance, another time because of her
donation of Fadak, a third time, a fourth timeworries and griefswould he
have not let her go angry and disappointed and then to die on her anger
and to recommend in her will what she had recommended!

Glory be to Allah! Where was the deliberateness of the caliph (Abu
Bakr)? Where was his patience? Where was his insight about the ends of
the affairs and where was his caring for the benefits of the Muslims?

Would he have avoided the fail of Fatima (s) in her situations as
possible as he could with all wisdom he had! Had he done so, it would
have been much better for him and it would have kept him away from
regretting and being blamed and it would have been better to unite the
umma!

He could have protected the trust of the Prophet (s) and the only
daughter of him, Fatima (s), from being disappointed and then to go back
upset stumbling with her garment. What would he have lost, where he had
occupied the position of her father, if he had given Fadak to Fatima (s)
without a trial? An imam could do that due to his general guardianship
and what the value of Fadak was before the general advantage of the
Muslims and before avoiding evils!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tafseer Mafateehul Ghayb by ar-Razi, vol.8 p.125.  
 **[2]** P.21 in his book Shubah ar-Rafidha.

This is what many earlier and later scholars have wished that Abu Bakr
had done.

Here we quote a word concerning this subject said by Professor Mahmood
Abu Riyya, the Egyptian coeval scholar: There is a matter that we have
to say a frank word about; it is the situation of Abu Bakr towards
Fatima (may Allah be pleased with her), the daughter of the messenger of
Allah, and what he has done to her concerning the inheritance of her
father. Let us suppose that we submit to the traditions narrated by a
single narrator and submit that they may limit the general verdicts of
the Quran and that the Prophet (s) has said: We, the Prophets, do not
bequeath; nevertheless Abu Bakr could give Fatima (may Allah be pleased
with her) some of her fathers inheritance and that Fadak might be
considered as a part of that inheritance. This would be his right that
no one could refute because he was the caliph and the caliph could give
whatever he liked to whomever he liked. The caliph himself had donated
some of the Prophets inheritance to az-Zubayr bin al-Awwam,[1] Muhammad
bin Maslama and others.[2] This very Fadak itself had been donated to
Marwan by the caliph Othman after a short time![3]

Ibn Abul Hadeed mentioned in his book Sharh Nahjol Balagha some speech
of some earlier scholars, who had criticized the two caliphs, Abu Bakr
and Umar, due to their situations toward Fatima az-Zahra (s) after her
fathers death: It would be better for them to be more generous, besides
their faith, than to commit what they had committed toward the daughter
of the messenger of Allah. Ibn Abul Hadeed commented: This speech has no
answer![4]

Let us away from generosity and let us discuss the matter of the trial.
The legal evidences were sufficient to make it obligatory to judge for

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He was the caliphs son-in-law. His wife was Asma, the daughter
of Abu Bakr.  
 **[2]** Abu Bakr had given his daughter Aaisha the prophets house, in
which she buried him beside the tomb of the Prophet (s) after his death
and in which she buried Umar later on but when Imam Hasan (s), the
Prophets beloved grandson, died she refused to let him be buried in his
grandfathers house and then a sedition was about to happen! Just to
Allah we resort!  
 **[3]** Refer to ar-Risala al-Misriyya magazine, vol.518, 11th year,
p.457.  
 **[4]** vol.4, p.106.

Fatima (s) in order to get her donation back. These evidences, besides
that they were sufficient, were numerous. This was clear to the fair
people of understanding.

It was enough that the ruler (the caliph), at that time, had already
been certain that the claimer (Fatima), with her holiness, was equal to
the Virgin Mary[1] or better than her[2] and that she and Mary, Khadeeja
(the Prophets wife) and Asiya (the Pharaohs wife) were the best of the
women of Paradise[3] and that she and these three women were the best of
the women of the worlds[4] and it was she, to whom the Prophet (s) had
said: O Fatima, are you not satisfied to be the head lady of the
believing women or the head lady of the women of this umma?[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** According to the true traditions; ibn Abdul Birr said in his
book al-Isteeab when mentioning the biography of Fatima (s): The Prophet
(s) visited Fatima when she was ill and said to her: O my daughter, how
are you today? She said: I feel pain and what hurts me more that I have
nothing to eat. He said: O my daughter, are you not satisfied that you
are the head lady of the women of the worlds? She said: O father, what
about Mary the daughter of Imran? He said: She is the head lady of the
women of her world and you are the head lady of your world. By Allah, I
have married you to a master in this world and in the afterworld. Many
such traditions have been mentioned by other scholars and historians.  
 **[2]** The infallible imams and their followers have agreed
unanimously that Fatima (s) is better than the Virgin Mary (s). Many
Sunni scholars have declared that she is better than all the women of
the worlds even the Virgin Mary (s), such as at-Taqiy as-Sabki,
al-Hallal as-Sayooti, al-Badr, az-Zarkashi, at-Taqiy al-Maqreezi, ibn
Abu Dawood and al-Mannawi. Refer to ash-Sharaf al-Muayyad by Allama
an-Nabahani, p.59 when talking about the virtues of Fatima (s). The same
has been said by Ahmad Zayni Dahlan, the mufti of the Shafiites when
talking about the marriage of Fatima and Ali in his book as-Seera
an-Nabawiyya.  
 **[3]** It has been mentioned by Ahmad bin Hanbal in his Musnad, vol.1
p.293, by Abu Dawood as in al-Isteeab, the biography of Khadeeja and by
Qasim bin Muhammad as in al-Isteeab, the biography of Fatima (s).  
 **[4]** Narrated by Abu Dawood from Anass as mentioned in al-Isteeab
when talking about Khadeejas biography and narrated by Abdul Warith bin
Sufyan as in al-Isteeab, biographies of Fatima (s) and Khadeeja.  
 **[5]** Al-Bukharis Sahih, vol.4 p.64, Muslims Sahih, vol.2, the
virtues of Fatima (s), at-Tarmithis Sahih, al-Jam bayna as-Sahihhayn,
al-Jam bayna as-Sihah as-Sitta, Imam Ahmad bin Hanbals Musnad, vol.6
p.282, ibn Abdul Birrs Isteeab, Muhammad bin Sads Tabaqat, vol.2, vol.8.
Al-Bukhari said in his Sahih, vol.4 the last page of chap. al-Istithan:
Musa bin Owana narrated from Firas from Aamir from Masrooq that

All the Muslims have known well that Allah the Almighty has chosen
Fatima (s) from among the women of the umma, chosen her two sons from
among all the sons and chosen her husband from among the near people to
be the elite with the Prophet (s) on the day of Mubahala (supplication)
where Allah has revealed: **But whoever disputes with you in this matter
after what has come to you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our
sons and your sons and our women and your women and our near people and
your near people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the
curse of Allah on the liars.** Qur'an, 3:61

Ar-Razi said in his book at-Tafseer al-Kabeer when interpreting this
Verse: The Prophet (s) came out wearing a black garment of wool while he
was embracing al-Husayn and leading al-Hasan with his hand. Fatima was
walking behind him and behind her was Ali. He said to them: If I invoke
Allah, you say Amen. The bishop of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Aaisha (the Prophets wife) had said: We, the wives of the Prophet, were
all with him and none of us left him when Fatima came walking like the
walking of the messenger of Allah (s). When the Prophet (s) saw her, he
said: O my daughter, welcome! Then he seated her beside him. He
whispered in her ears and she began crying bitterly and when he saw her
crying, he whispered in her ears again and she smiled. I, from among the
Prophets wives, asked her: The Prophet (s) confided a secret to you from
among all of us but you began crying! When the Prophet (s) left, I asked
her: What secret did the Prophet (s) confide to you? She said: I would
never disclose the Prophets secrets. When the Prophet (s) died, I said
to her: I adjure you with my right on you to tell me what the Prophet
(s) has whispered in your ears. She said: Yes, now I shall do. The first
time he told me that Gabriel was used to dictate the (entire) Qur'an to
him once a year but that year Gabriel had dictated the Qur'an to him
twice and so he thought that he would die soon. He said to me: Fear
Allah and be patient. I have been to you the best of fathers. So I began
crying as you saw. When he saw me crying, he said to me: O Fatima, are
you not satisfied to be the head lady of the believing women or the
women of this umma? Ibn Hajar in his book al-Issaba and other authors
mentioned: are you not satisfied to be the head lady of the women of the
worlds? However the tradition is true and preferring Fatima (s) to all
of the other women is clear. Ibn Sad in his book at-Tabaqat, vol.2
mentioned a tradition narrated by Umm Salama saying: When the Prophet
(s) was about to die, I asked Fatima about her crying and smiling on
that day. She said: He (the Prophet (s)) told me that he would die
within a short time and then he told me that I was the head lady of the
women of Paradise. It has been mentioned by Abu Yala and other scholars
of Hadith.

Najran[1] said: O Christian people, I see faces, which if ask Allah to
remove a mountain, He will remove it for them. Do not defy them;
otherwise you will perish and no Christian will remain on the earth
until the Day of Resurrection.[2]

Also the Muslims have agreed unanimously that Fatima (s) was one of
those, about whom Allah has revealed this Verse: **Allah only desires to
keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House! and to purify
you a (thorough) purifying.** Qur'an, 33:33 and she was one of those,
whom Allah has ordered the Muslims to love as a reward for (informing
of) the mission when revealing this Verse: **Say: I do not ask of you
any reward for it but love for my near relatives.** Qur'an, 42:23 and
she was one of those, whom Allah has imposed upon His people to pray for
in their prayers as He has imposed upon them shahada.

Imam ash-Shafiiy said, as mentioned in as-Sawaiqul Muhriqa:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">O people of the Prophets family,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">loving you is an obligation imposed by
Allah in His Qur'an.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">It suffices you, with your high
position,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">that whoever dose not pray for you (in
his prayer)</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">his prayer will not be accepted.</span>*

Sheikh ibnul Arabi said, as in as-Sawaiqul Muhriqa:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">I find my allegiance to the progeny of
Taha[3] an obligation</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">that, in spite of my farness, will make
me near to Allah.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">The Beneficent has not asked for a reward
in return to informing of guidance</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">except to love the relatives (of the
Prophet (s)).</span>*

Allama an-Nabhani said in his book ash-Sharaf al-Muabbad: O progeny of
Taha, you are a progeny of the best of the Prophets.

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Your grandfather is elite and you are
elite.</span>*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A place between Saudi Arabia and Yemen. It was a centre for the
Christians before Islam.  
 **[2]** This tradition has been mentioned by the interpreters, the
narrators, the historians and by everyone, who has recorded the events
of the tenth year of hijra, in which this event has taken place.  
 **[3]** Prophet Muhammad (s).

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Allah has purified you from uncleanness,
O you Ahlul Bayt, since long before, so you are the purest.</span>*

Your grandfather has not asked for reward, when informing the mission,
save loving and kindness to his relatives.

And also Fatima (s) is the best of the righteous, about whom Allah has
said: **(Surely the righteous shall drink of a cup the admixture of
which is camphor. A fountain from, which the servants of Allah shall
drink; they make it to flow a (goodly) flowing forth. They fulfill vows
and fear a day the evil of which shall be spreading far and wide. And
they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan and the
captive. We only feed you for Allah's sake; we desire from you neither
reward nor thanks.** Qur'an, 76:5-9[1]

In short, Fatima (s) was so holy near Allah, near the Prophet (s) and
near the believers that would impose upon the all to trust in whatever
she said. She would not need a witness to prove what she claimed. Her
tongue was too far above every untruth. She would never say but the
truth. Her very claim showed her definite truthfulness without a bit of
doubt. No one of those, who had known her, would doubt this at all. Abu
Bakr had known her very well and believed in whatever she said but the
fact was as Ali bin al-Fariqi, who was one of the famous scholars of
Baghdad, a teacher in the western school (in Baghdad) and one of the
teachers of ibn Abul Hadeed (the author of Sharh Nahjul Balagha), had
said when being asked by ibn Abul Hadeed if Fatima (s) had been truthful
in her claim about her donation of Fadak: Yes. Ibn Abul Hadeed said to
him: Then why did Abu Bakr not give her Fadak while he knew well she was
truthful? He smiled and said nice words and then he added:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Shia have agreed, following their imams, unanimously that
these Verses have been revealed to concern Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn because of a charity (food) they have paid to a poor one, an
orphan and a prisoner of war in three successive nights whereas they
themselves have been badly in need of that charity. They have kept on
fasting during those three days without having except some water for
they have been offering a vow. Az-Zamakhshari in his book al-Kashshaf
has mentioned this matter in a tradition narrated from ibn Abbas. It has
been also mentioned by al-Wahidi in his book al-Baseet, Abu Is~haq
ath-Thalabi in his book at-Tafseer al-Kabeer and by Abul Muayyad
Muwaffaq bin Ahmad in his book al-Fadhail. Many other scholars and
authors have considered it as a reliable tradition.

If he had given her Fadak that day just according to her claim, she
would ask him the next day for the caliphate to be given to her husband
(Imam Ali) and she would move him away from his position and then he
would not find any excuse for that because he would have confirmed that
she had been truthful in all what she had claimed without any need for
witnesses.

Hence Abu Bakr has allowed himself to deny the witness of Ali bin Abu
Talib (s), when witnessing for Fatima (s) concerning her donation,
whereas the Jews of Khaybar, in spite of their meanness and in spite of
that Imam Ali (s) has destroyed them, have considered him (Ali) too
exalted for committing a false testimony. And so the matters were mixed
together that Abu Bakr considered Fatima (s), in whose possession Fadak
was, as a claimer, who had to have evidences to prove her possession. It
was clear that this matter had been planned under darkness!

If we forgot many things, we would not forget Abu Bakrs saying to Fatima
(s) I do not know whether your saying is true or not whereas her saying
was merely the truth and the clearest evidence, due to which he had to
judge for her as she had claimed.

If we gave up all that and we admitted that Fatima (s) was like any
other good believing woman, who had to prove her claim with a true
evidence, then what about Imam Ali (s), who had witnessed to her? It was
Ali (s), who was the Prophets spiritual brother and who was to the
Prophet (s) as was Aaron to Moses. Imam Ali (s) was the lofty witness of
the truth, with whose witnessing the lights of certainty shone. Was
there anything beyond certainty that a judge would seek in his
judgments? Therefore the Prophet (s) had considered the witness of
Khuzayma bin Thabit as a witness of two truthful persons. By Allah, Imam
Ali (s) was worthier of such a witness than Khuzayma and the others and
he was worthier of every virtue than the rest of the Muslims.

If we gave up this too and admitted that the testimony of Imam Ali (s)
was like the testimony of one man of the fair Muslims, then was it not
possible for Abu Bakr to ask Fatima (s) to swear to be as the second
witness? If she swore, he would accept her claim and if she did not, he
would reject her claim. But he did not do that! He

rejected the claim disregarding the testimony of Imam Ali (s) and Umm
Aymen.[1]

Imam Ali (s) was the equivalent of the Qur'an. He was with the Qur'an
and the Qur'an was with him. They would not separate.[2] In the Verse of
Mubahala he was considered as the very self of the Prophet (s). But
alas! In spite of all that, his testimony in this trial was considered
as null! What a misfortune in Islam we have received that we cannot but
say: we are Allahs and to Him we shall return!

9. Hurting Fatima (s)
---------------------

Rejecting Fatimas claim about her inheritance was against the clear
traditions rather than its reasons and environments.[3]

Among those traditions is the one that has been mentioned by ibn Abu
Aasim (as in al-Issaba-Fatimas biography). He mentioned that the Prophet
(s) had said to his daughter Fatima (s): Allah becomes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Umm Aymen was the woman, who had brought up the Prophet (s)
after the death of his mother. Her name was Baraka bint Thalaba. The
Prophet (s) said about her: Umm Aymen is my mother after my (real)
mother. The Prophet (s), when looking at her, often said: She is one of
my family. He said that she would be in Paradise. She had been mentioned
in al-Issaba by ibn Hajar, al-Isteeab by ibn Abdul Birr and by all the
authors, who had mentioned the biographies of the Prophets companions.
They had mentioned her virtues, good faith, reason and loyalty. Her son
Aymen had been martyred during the battle of Khaybar when fighting with
the Prophet (s). She did not worry for that but she became patient
hoping for the divine reward in the Hereafter.  
 **[2]** With reference to the famous tradition of (ath-Thaqalayn-the
two weighty things), which has been mentioned in the books of Hadith
(Sihah) and many other books. The Prophet (s) said: I have left among
you what if you keep to, you will never go astray at all; the Book of
Allah and my family. Definitely the head of his family was Imam Ali
(s).  
 **[3]** With reference to the Prophets saying narrated by Umm Salama
that she said: I have heard the messenger of Allah saying: Ali is with
the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali. They do never separate until they
will come to me at the pond (in Paradise). It has been mentioned by
al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, vol.3 p.124 and by ath-Thahabi in his
Talkhees. The Prophet (s), during the illness that led to his death,
said while the room was crowded of his companions: O people, I am about
to die soon and I will inform you of something so that I will be excused
before you. I have left among you the Book of my god, the Almighty, and
my family. Then he lifted Alis hand and said: This is Ali. He is with
the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali. They do never separate. Refer to
as-Sawaiqul Muhriqa, chap.2 p.75.

angry when you become angry and He becomes pleased when you become
pleased. It has also been mentioned by at-Tabarani and others as in
ash-Sharaf al-Muabbad by an-Nabhani al-Beiruti.

Al-Bukhari and Muslim mentioned-as in al-Issaba and other books when
talking about Fatimas biography-a tradition that al-Musawwir had said: I
have heard the messenger of Allah saying from above the minbar: Fatima
is a piece of me. Whatever hurts her hurts me and whatever distresses
her distresses me. Sheikh Yousuf an-Nabhani mentioned in his book
ash-Sharaf al-Muabbad a tradition quoted from al-Bukhari that the
Prophet (s) had said: Fatima is a piece of me. Whatever makes her angry
makes me angry. In al-Jamiul Sagheer it is mentioned that the Prophet
(s) has said: Fatima is a piece of me. Whatever depresses her depresses
me and whatever pleases her pleases me.

She has said to Abu Bakr and Umar: I adjure you by Allah, have you not
heard the messenger of Allah saying: The contentment of Fatima is my
contentment and her discontentment is my discontentment. Whoever loves
my daughter Fatima loves me, whoever pleases Fatima pleases me and
whoever discontents Fatima discontents me? They said: Yes, we have heard
this from the messenger of Allah.[1]

He, who ponders on these traditions and who appreciates the Prophet (s),
will find that these traditions refer to the infallibility of Fatima (s)
because they show that depressing her, discontenting her, pleasing her,
displeasing her, her contentment or her anger do not occur inexcusably.
It is as same as depressing, discontenting, pleasing or displeasing the
Prophet (s) himself and this is the essence and reality of
infallibility.

Some Sunni scholars, like Ahmad bin Hanbal, have mentioned a tradition
narrated by Abu Hurayra saying: Once the Prophet (s) looked at Ali,
al-Hasan, al-Husayn and Fatima and said: I am a war against whoever
fights you and peace to whoever makes peace with

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Imama wes-Siyasa by ibn Qutayba and other books of history.

you.[1]

At-Tarmithi has mentioned a tradition narrated by Zayd bin Arqam-as in
al-Issaba, Fatimas biography-that once the Prophet (s) mentioned Ali,
Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn and said: I am a war against whoever
fights them and peace to whoever makes peace with them.[2]

Abu Bakr said: Once I saw the messenger of Allah (s) erecting a tent.[3]
He was leaning on an Arabic bow while inside the tent there were Ali,
Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. The messenger of Allah said: O people, I
am peace to whoever makes peace with the people in the tent, a war
against whoever fights them and a guardian to whoever follows them. He,
who loves them, is lucky and of a good origin and he, who hates them, is
wretched and of a bad origin.

Professor Abbas Mahmood al-Aqqad has mentioned this tradition in his
book Abqariyyatu Muhammad under chapt. The Prophet, the Imam and the
companions.

Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned a tradition narrated by Abdurrahman al-Azraq
that Imam Ali (s) had said: Once the messenger of Allah (s) came to me
while I was sleeping. Al-Hasan or al-Husayn asked for some water (or
some milk). The Prophet (s) went to our ewe, which had no milk. He
milked it and it gave much milk. Then al-Hasan came to the Prophet (s)
but the Prophet (s) put him aside. Fatima said: O messenger of Allah, I
think he is the most beloved one to you. He said: But he (al-Husayn)
asked for some milk before him. Then the Prophet (s) added: I, you,
these two boys and that sleeping one

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmads Musnad, vol.2 p.442. It has also been mentioned by
al-Hakim in his Mustadrak and by at-Tabarani in his al-Kabeer.  
 **[2]** It has been mentioned by ibn Habban in his Sahih, al-Hakim in
his Mustadrak, ad-Dhiya in his Mukhtarat, at-Tabarani and ibn Shayaba
from Zayd bin Arqam and by Abu Yala in as-Sunna and ad-Dhiya in
al-Mukhtarat from Sad bin Abu Waqqas. Also mentioned by other famous
scholars like allama Alawi in his book al-Qawl al-Fasl, vol.2 p.7.  
 **[3]** This tent might be the garment, with which the Prophet (s)
covered them (Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn) when Allah revealed
to him: ***(Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying).*** Refer
to chapt.2 in this book for details.

will be in one place on the Day of Resurrection.[1]

Among their (the Prophets progenys) rights on the umma and especially
the men of authority was that they should not be surprised by extorting
their position in the umma after the Prophet (s) and doing without them
even in consultation besides being so severe to them in the matter of
the caliphate and denying their rights, khums, inheritance and donation
as well as considering them as the rest of the ordinary people while the
wound had not yet recovered and the Prophet (s) had not yet buried!

The seizers of the umma and their assistants at that time had arranged
their affairs in a way that they had not left any chance to any one to
opposite them otherwise that one would separate the umma and so they had
become safe from the opposition of Imam Ali (s) and his followers. For
full details about this matter, please refer to al-Murajaat.

Among the principles of the rulers at that time was to be strict in
carrying out the verdicts without differentiating between this and that
or between the noble and the low. They controlled the treasury and
enriched it with wealth and monies and they equalized between the
recidivists and the others in the judgments.

What assisted them in carrying out their principles was their
satisfaction and being away from greediness and transient pleasures of
this worldly life besides their asceticism and so they satisfied the
public and therefore they ruled with no troubles. But when the matter
became serious on the trial of Fatima (s), they considered Fatima, the
Prophets piece, as any other woman, who was not purified from
fabricating and lying.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmads Musnad, vol.1 p.101.  
 **[2]** In fact she was not even treated as an ordinary Muslim woman,
because when a Muslim woman, who was not purified from fabrication, had
one witness (a fair Muslim man) on her claim, then it would be enough
for her, instead of the other witness, to be put to oath and her claim
would not be rejected unless she abstained from the oath. As for Fatima
(s), her husband Imam Ali (s) had witnessed for her and so the rulers
had to put her to oath and if she abstained from oath then they would
reject her claim. They did not do that. They just hastened to reject her
claim without asking her for any kind of oath.

10. The Prophet (s) orders Abu Bakr and Umar
--------------------------------------------

The Prophet (s) had ordered Abu Bakr and Umar to kill Thu ath-Thadiyya
but they did not kill him.

Thu ath-Thadiyya was al-Khusayra at-Tameemi Harqoos bin Zuhayr,[1] who
was the head of the apostates. The Prophet (s) wanted to uproot the
ravage and corruption of this apostate man when he ordered to kill him
but the hypocrisy of this man and his false reverence in his praying
deceived Abu Bakr and Umar and so they hated to kill him and they let
him alive.

This has been mentioned by the scholars, the historians and the authors
of the books of Hadith.

Abu Yala has said in his Musnad-as mentioned in al-Issaba by ibn Hajar,
Thu ath-Thadiyyas biography: At the age of the messenger of Allah (s)
there was a man, whose worship and loyalty we had admired too much. We
mentioned his name to the Prophet (s) but the Prophet (s) did not know
him. We described him to the Prophet (s) and he did not know him. After
a little the man came towards us. We said to the Prophet (s): It is him.
The Prophet (s) said: You have told me about a man, in whose face there
is a scorch of the Satan. He came until he stopped before us but he did
not greet us. The Prophet (s) said to him: I adjure you by Allah, did
you say, when you stopped before the people: there is no one among this
people better than me? He said: Yes, I did. Then he went in to offer
prayer. The Prophet (s) said: Who kills him? Abu Bakr said: I do. Abu
Bakr went to him and he found him offering prayer. He said: Glory be to
Allah, shall I kill a praying one whereas the messenger of Allah has
prohibited killing a praying one? He came

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In fact she had Fadak in her possession and had full control over it and
so she had not to have evidence to prove her possession but the opposite
side had to have an evidence according to the saying of the Prophet (s)
Evidence is on him, who claims, and oath is on him, who denies. This is
one of the clear traditions that they have opposed depending on their
own ijtihad.  
 **[1]** Ibnul Atheer mentioned his biography in his book Usdol Ghaba
and mentioned another tradition narrated by Abu Saeed saying: As the
messenger of Allah was taking an oath one day, al-Khuwaysara at-Tameemi
said: O messenger of Allah, be just! The Prophet (s) said: Woe unto you!
And who is just if I am not? It was mentioned by Muslim too.

back. The Prophet (s) said: What did you do? Abu Bakr said: I hated to
kill him while he was praying and you have prohibited killing praying
people. The Prophet (s) said: Who kills him? Umar said: I do. He went to
him and found him lying prostrate and his forehead touching the ground.
Umar said to himself: Abu Bakr is better than me and he came back. The
Prophet (s) said to him: What did you do? He said: I found him prostrate
before Allah and I disliked killing him. The Prophet (s) said: Who kills
him? Ali said: I do. The Prophet (s) said: Yes, you do if you find him.
Ali went to him and found that he had gone. The Prophet (s) said: If he
was killed, then no two men of my umma would ever disagree.

Al-Hafidh (memorizer) Muhammad bin Musa ash-Shirazi has mentioned this
tradition in his book, which he had written according to the tafseers
(interpretations) of Yaqoob bin Sulayman, Yousuf al-Qattan, al-Qassim
bin Salam, Muqatil bin Hiyad, Ali bin Harb, as-Sadiy, Qatada, Waqee, ibn
Jurayh and others.

Some scholars have mentioned this tradition and considered it as true
like ibn Abd Rabbih al-Andalusi in his book al-Iqd al-Fareed. He
mentioned at the end of the tradition that the Prophet (s) had said:
This is the first horn that appears in my umma. If you kill him, no two
men will disagree after him. The Israelites have separated into
seventy-two groups and this umma will separate into seventy-three
groups, all of which will be in Hell except one group.

11. The Prophet (s) orders Abu Bakr and Umar for the second time
----------------------------------------------------------------

The Prophet (s) ordered Abu Bakr and Umar to kill this apostate for the
second time but they did as they had done in the first time.

A friend of mine, whom I trust in his virtue, piety and knowledge, told
me that once Abu Bakr passed by this apostate (Thu ath-Thadiyya), after
he had been ordered to kill him but he disliked to kill him, and he
found him offering prayer in one of the valleys where no one could see
him save Allah. He admired his devotedness and supplication. He thanked
Allah that he did not kill him. He came to the Prophet (s) interceding
for that man. He mentioned to the Prophet (s) the sincerity and
submissiveness of that man while

offering his prayer where no one could see him save Allah. The Prophet
(s) did not accept Abu Bakrs intercession and he ordered him immediately
to kill that apostate man. When Abu Bakr did not kill the man, the
Prophet (s) ordered Umar and then ordered Imam Ali (s) and stressed on
killing him and his companions. This is what I have been told by the
one, whom I know well and know about his deep research and careful
study.[1] He has confirmed it to me but I forgot to ask him about the
source of the tradition. I began to research by myself until I found the
tradition, and all thanks be to Allah, in Ahmad bin Hannibals Musnad,
vol.3 that Abu Saeed al-Khidri had said: Once Abu Bakr came to the
Prophet (s) and said to him: O messenger of Allah, I passed through the
valley of so and so and I saw a good looking man offering prayer
reverently. The Prophet (s) said to him: Go and kill him! Abu Bakr went
to him and when he saw him in that state, he disliked killing him and
then he came back to the Prophet (s). Then the Prophet (s) said to Umar:
Go and kill him! Umar went to him and he saw him in that state, which
Abu Bakr had seen him in. he disliked to kill him and he returned to the
Prophet (s). He said to the Prophet (s): O messenger of Allah, I found
him offering prayer reverently and I disliked killing him. The Prophet
(s) said to Ali: Go and kill him! Ali went but he did not find the man.
He came back to the Prophet (s) and said: O messenger of Allah, I did
not find him. The Prophet (s) said: This man and his companions[2]
recite the Qur'an but the Qur'an does not go past their clavicles. They
get out of religion as an arrow that slips away from a hunted animal.
Kill them for they are the worst of people.

He, who ponders on these two traditions concerning this apostate man;
the tradition mentioned by Abu Yala and narrated by Anass and the
tradition mentioned by Ahmad bin Hanbal and narrated by Abu Saeed
al-Khidri, will know that the Prophet (s) has ordered to kill this man
two times in different events. The first tradition narrated by Anass
shows that the Prophet (s) has not known this

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He is the pious Sheikh Mirza Husayn an-Noori, the author of
al-Mustadrakat ala al-Wassail.  
 **[2]** Later on, during the rule of Imam Ali (s), they seceded from
Imam Ali (s) and were called the Kharijites.

apostate man before. The Prophets companions mentioned and described the
man to the Prophet (s) but he did not know him until he saw him and knew
him because of the scorch in his face and because of his self-conceit
and then the Prophet (s) ordered his companions to kill him. The prayer
of that apostate, which pleased Abu Bakr and Umar on that day, was in
the mosque whereas the second tradition mentioned by Ahmad and narrated
by Abu Saeed showed that Abu Bakr had seen this apostate offering his
prayer in one of the valleys and not in the mosque where Abu Bakr had
admired this apostates devotion and reverence where no one saw him save
Allah the Almighty. Abu Bakr told the Prophet (s) about that and the
Prophet (s) immediately ordered him to kill that man without seeing the
man. This was because the Prophet (s) had already ordered before to kill
that man so the traditions talked about two events with a period of time
between them. Here the clear orders of the Prophet (s) were opposed by
Abu Bakr and Umar due to their own ijtihad.

### The Kharijites

The Kharijites were the Muslims, who apostatized from religion when they
rebelled against Imam Ali (s). They denied the arbitration (between Imam
Ali (s) and Moawiya), which they themselves had forced Imam Ali (s) to
accept. They were about eighty thousands or more. Imam Ali (s) sent for
them to remind them of Allah and the hereafter and to show them their
faults and mistakes in what they had thought and kept to **and most
surely the frailest of the houses is the spider's house if they but
knew.** Qur'an, 29:41 but they refused to come to him and they asked him
to acknowledge that he had become unbeliever and he had to repent. When
they did not come to him, Imam Ali (s) sent to them Abdullah bin Abbas,
who tried his best to refute their opinions with clear evidences but
they insisted on their deviation as if there was deafness in their ears
and there were veils on their hearts.

They agreed unanimously on considering every Muslim, who did not adopt
their opinions, as unbeliever and that he and his family were to be
killed and his properties were to be appropriated. They rebelled against
the Muslims and they killed whoever passed by them. Among

those, whom they had killed, was Abdullah bin al-Khabbab bin al-Arth
at-Tameemi. They cut open his wifes abdomen while she was pregnant.
Their evils spread everywhere. Imam Ali (s) came to them preaching them
and showing them that they had mistaken when they rebelled against him.
He refuted their excuses and warned them that if they insisted on their
deviation, they would be killed and in the hereafter they would be in
Hell.

They insisted on their transgression without intending to repent and
they became like the people of Noah when **they put their fingers in
their ears, cover themselves with their garments, and persist and are
puffed up with pride.** Qur'an, 71:7 and then Imam Ali (s) fought them
and killed them.[1] Only ten of them escaped death and only ten of Imam
Alis companions were killed. This was exactly what Imam Ali (s) had
predicted when warning them but they did not desist from doing evil.

Then some deviate people, who believed in the opinions of the Kharijites
concerning the arbitration and rebelling against the walis, joined the
few Kharijites, who had not been killed. When Abdullah bin az-Zubayr
became the wali, some of those people appeared with Nafi bin al-Azraq in
Iraq and some appeared with Najda bin Aamir al-Harawri in Yamama (in the
Arabia). Najda went too far in his opinions and he even exceeded the
doctrine of the Kharijites themselves. He considered every one, who did
not join him and his followers to fight the Muslims, as unbeliever. They
annulled the verdict of stoning a married adulterer. They made it
obligatory to cut a thiefs arm from the armpit. They made it obligatory
on a woman to offer prayers during the period of menstruation and many
other heresies that there was no need to mention here.

Until now there is a remainder of them spread here and there. The
explorer ibn Batota has met some of them in Oman during his travel

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** By doing that Imam Ali (s) just followed the orders of the
Qur'an and the Sunna. Allah said: ***(fight that (group) which acts
wrongfully until it returns to Allah's command) and: (The punishment of
those who wage war against Allah and His messenger and strive to make
mischief in the land is only this, that they should be murdered).*** As
for the orders of the Sunna, I shall mention them in the main text of
the book inshallah.

in the eighth century of hijra. He has mentioned them in his book Rihlat
ibn Batota (ibn Batotas travel)[1] and said: They are Ibadhite in
doctrine. They offer Friday prayer in four rakas and when they finish
it, their imam recites some verses of the Qur'an and then he praises Abu
Bakr and Umar but he does not mention Othman and Ali. If they want to
mention Ali, they nickname him by saying the man. They praise the cursed
Abdurrahman bin Muljam (Imam Alis killer) and call him as the good
servant of Allah in spite of the great sedition he has caused. Their
women commit adultery too much and their men do not deny that nor have
they jealousy. One day I was with their chief Abu Muhammad bin Nabhan,
who was from the tribe of al-Azd. A young beautiful woman came and said
to him: O Abu Muhammad, the Satan has played with my mind (her sexual
lust was provoked). He said to her: Go and drive the Satan away from
your mind! She said: I cannot do unless you protect me. He said: Go and
do whatever you like. When she left, he said to me: This one, and
whoever does like her, will be under my protection. She goes to commit
adultery and neither her father nor any of her relatives will be able to
show their jealousy. If they kill her they will be killed in return
because she is under my protection.

The messenger of Allah (s) has informed of the truth when he has said: O
Ali, no one hates you but a bastard, a child of menstruation[2] or a
hypocrite.

### Killing the Kharijites

Many traditions have been narrated about killing the Kharijites
especially from the infallible imams (s). Here we mention some of those
traditions, which have been mentioned by the Sunni scholars. The Prophet
(s) said describing the Kharijites: They recite the Qur'an but it does
not go past their clavicles. They kill the Muslims and set the idolaters
free. They apostate from Islam like an arrow slipping out of a game
animal. If I live until they appear, I shall kill them like the killing
of the people of Aad.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.1 p.172.  
 **[2]** That he has been created out of making love during a period of
menstruation.  
 **[3]** Muslims Sahih, vol.1 p.393.

In another tradition the Prophet (s) said: If I live until they appear,
I shall kill them.[1]

In a third tradition the Prophet (s) said describing them: They are
young and foolish. They repeat the best of saying. They recite the
Qur'an but it does not go past their clavicles. They apostate from
religion like an arrow that slips away from a hunted animal. If you find
them, you are to kill them. Whoever kills them will be rewarded by Allah
on the Day of Resurrection.[2] There are many other traditions like this
mentioned in the books of Hadith. These traditions show that these
people are unbeliever for killing them is like killing the people of Aad
and Thamood.

### They are the worst of people

The tradition narrated from the infallible imams (s) and showing that
the Kharijites are the worst of people are clear and recurrent but here
we mentioned the traditions mentioned by the Sunni scholars. Muslim
mentioned in his Sahih a tradition narrated by Abu Tharr and Rafi bin
Umar al-Ghifari that the Prophet (s) had said: After me there will be
some people of my umma who recite the Qur'an but the Qur'an does not go
past their throats.[3] They get out of religion as an arrow that slips
away from a hunted animal and then they do not go back to it (religion).
They are the worst of people.[4]

Muslim mentioned in his Sahih another tradition narrated by Abu Saeed
al-Khidri that the Prophet (s) had mentioned some people, who would
appear from among his umma, and said: They are the worst of people. They
will be killed by the righteous people. And then the Prophet (s) gave an
example when saying: like a man, who shots his arrow at an animal and
then he looks at the arrowhead

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muslims Sahih, vol.1 p.394.  
 **[2]** Narrated from Imam Ali (s) and mentioned by Muslim in his
Sahih, vol. 1 p.396.  
 **[3]** It means that their hearts do not perceive what they recite and
they do not benefit from it. They do not do but uttering the words of
the Qur'an in their mouths when reciting them. Their hearts are covered
with the stain of the (ill) which they do! Nothing of the light of the
Qur'an gets into their hearts. Neither their reciting the Qur'an nor any
of their doings will be accepted by Allah.  
 **[4]** Vol.1 p.398.

but he does not see anything and he looks at the bowstring and he does
not see anything.[1]

Ahmad mentioned in his Musnad a tradition narrated by Abu Barza in two
ways that the Prophet (s) had described the Kharijites and said: They
recite the Qur'an but the Qur'an does not go past their clavicles. They
get out of religion as an arrow that slips away from an animal and they
do not go back to religion. They will still appear until the last of
them will be killed with ad-Dajjal (the fraud). If you meet them, you
are to kill them for they are the worst of people and the worst in
nature. They are the worst of people and the worst in nature. They are
the worst of people and the worst in nature.[2]

If they were the worst of people and the worst in nature, then the
idolaters and the unbelievers would not be worse than them and this
would be a clear evidence showing their unbelief.

### The Kharijites apostasy

There have been many clear prophetic traditions talking about the
apostasy of the Kharijites. Here are some of them besides the ones we
have mentioned above. Al-Bukhari and Muslim have mentioned in their
Sahihs a tradition narrated by Abu Saeed al-Khidri saying: While we were
with the Prophet (s), who was taking an oath, Thul Khuwaysira, who was a
man from the tribe of Tameem, said: O messenger of Allah, be just! The
messenger of Allah said: Woe unto you! And who is just if I am not?
Surely I shall fail and lose if I do not do right. Umar said (to the
Prophet (s)): Would you allow me to kill him?[3] The messenger of Allah
(s) said: Let him alone! He has companions, who exaggerate in offering
prayers and in fasting. They recite the Qur'an but it does not go past
their clavicles. They apostatize from religion as an arrow that slips
away from a game animaltheir sign is a black man whose upper arm is like
a womans breast or like a dangling piece of fleshthey will appear at the
time of a good group of people.[4] Abu Saeed said: I witness that I have

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** vol.1 p.395 and Ahmads Musnad, vol.3 p.5.  
 **[2]** Ahmads Musnad, vol.4 p.422, 424.  
 **[3]** Would he have killed him when he had been ordered to!  
 **[4]** The group of Imam Ali (s) and his followers.

heard this tradition from the messenger of Allah and I witness that Imam
Ali (s) has fought them and I was with him. Imam Ali (s) ordered that
man to be brought. When he was brought, I looked at him and I saw that
he was as the Prophet (s) had described him.[1]

The prophetic traditions talking about the evil doings and aspects of
the Kharijites are true and recurrent whether have been narrated from
the infallible imams (s) or the Sunni. These traditions were among the
signs of the Prophet (s) and Islam due to the unseen that appeared like
the light of morning to people after the death of the Prophet (s).
People saw clearly the apostasy of that group (the Kharijites) from
religion when they revolted against Imam Ali (s), who was the legal
caliph.[2] Their rising was when people had separated into two
groups.[3] They were killed and their killer was the imam of the
truth.[4] They, as the Prophet (s) had predicted, killed the faithful
people and let the idolaters free. They became too strict in religion
where there was no necessity for strictness. They recited the Qur'an but
it did not go past their clavicles because their hearts were covered
with their apostasy. Nothing of the light of the Qur'an got into their
hearts. They exaggerated in offering prayer and fasting but they ignored
the rights of Islam by apostatizing and being away from its guidance.
Their sign, as the Prophet (s) had predicted, appeared to the people. It
was a black man whose upper arm was like a womans breast or like a
dangling piece of flesh as the Prophet (s) had said. The Prophet (s) had
confirmed, through his sayings about this apostate group, that the umma
would remain prevailing unlike what the fabricators had fabricated. It
was the unseen that Allah had revealed to the Prophet (s). Allah said:
**The Knower of the unseen! So He does not reveal His secrets to any
except to him whom He chooses as a messenger; for surely He makes a
guard to march before**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmads Musnad, vol.3 p.56.  
 **[2]** The Prophet (s) had predicted that: They will revolt against
the best group. (He means Imam Ali (s) and his followers).  
 **[3]** Their appearance was in Siffeen when the people were in two
groups; one with Imam Ali (s) and the other with Moawiya.  
 **[4]** The Prophet (s) said: They will be killed by the one, who is
the nearest to the truth or the worthiest of the truth in another
tradition mentioned by Muslim in his Sahih.

**him and after him.** Qur'an, 72:26-27

Let us finish our speech about this apostate group with a tradition
narrated by Jundub[1] and mentioned by at-Tabarani in his book al-Awsat.
Jundub said: When the Kharijites parted with Ali, he decided to pursue
them and we joined him. We moved until we reached their camp. There were
noises like those of bees. They were busy reciting the Qur'an and among
them there were notable and respected persons. When I saw them, I
hesitated to fight them. I stepped aside, fixed my spear in the ground,
got down of my horse, put off my burnoose, spread my armor on me, held
the halter of my horse and began praying. I said in my prayer: O Allah,
if fighting these people is obedience to You, allow me to fight them and
if it is disobedience to You, show me the truth. As I was doing so, Ali
bin Abu Talib came near to me and said: O Jundub, ask Allah to protect
you from His wrath! I beseeched him. He began praying. Then a man came
to him saying: O Ameerul Momineen, have you anything to do with the
people? He said: What is there? The man said: They (the Kharijites)
crossed the river and went away. Ali said: They have never crossed the
river. The man said: Glory be to Allah! Another man came and said to
him: They have crossed the river and went away. Ali said: They have not
crossed the river and they will never cross it. They will be killed
before it. It is a promise from Allah and His messenger. Then he rode on
his horse and said to me: O Jundub, I will send to them a man to invite
them to the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Jundub bin Zuhayr bin al-Harith bin Katheer bin Sab bin Malik
al-Azdi al-Ghamidi was one of Imam Alis close companions. Ibn Hajar has
mentioned him in his book al-Issaba. There was a debate about his
companionship with the Prophet (s) but there was no doubt that he was
one of the great successors and he was one of their heads and ascetics.
He fought with Imam Ali (s) in the battles of al-Jamal, Siffeen and
an-Nahrawan. In the battle of an-Nahrawan he was the leader of the
infantrymen. Abu Durayd mentioned in his book al-Amali a tradition
narrated by Abu Ubayda that Younus had said: Abdullah bin az-Zubayr had
lined us up on the day (the battle) of al-Jamal. Salih came out to us
saying: O people of Quraysh, I warn you of two men; Jundub bin Zuhayr
and (Malik) al-Ashtar because you cannot stand against their swords.
This Jundub bin Zuhayr was not Jundub, who had killed the magician. The
one, who had killed the magician, was Jundub bin Kab al-Abdi and he had
been killed in the battle of Siffeen when fighting with Imam Ali (s).
This has been mentioned by az-Zubayr bin Bukar in his book
al-Muwaffaqiyyat quoted from ibnul Kalbi and others.

Book of their god and the Sunna of their prophet but when he will come
to them, they will shoot at him with arrows. O Jundub, less than ten
persons from us will be killed and less than ten persons from them will
escape death. Then he said: Who will take this Qur'an and go to the
people (the Kharijites) to invite them to the Book of Allah and to the
Sunna of His messenger but he will be killed and will go to Paradise? A
young man from bani[1] Aamir bin Sasaa responded to him. The young man,
holding the Qur'an, went towards the Kharijites. As soon as he became
near to them, they began shooting at him with arrows. Then Ali said:
Attack them! I (Jundub) myself had killed eight persons of them before I
offered Dhuhr[2] Prayer. Less than ten persons from us were killed and
less than ten from them escaped death as Ali had predicted. Praise be to
Allah.[3]

12. Fighting innocent people
----------------------------

Abu Bakr ordered to fight the people who had hesitated to pay him the
zakat. They did so because they had doubted whether Abu Bakr was the
legal guardian after the Prophet (s) or not.

Abu Bakr had gathered the companions to consult with them about fighting
those people. Umar and many other Muslims thought that they were not to
fight faithful people, who had believed in Allah and His messenger, and
instead they were to make use of them to fight the enemy.[4] Those, who
had adopted this opinion, were the most of the attendants whereas those,
who had thought to fight against those people, were few. The debate
about this serious matter might have taken a long time until Abu Bakr
himself interfered supporting the opinion of the few companions. He
insisted on this opinion and this was clear out of his saying: By Allah,
if they refused to give me even a headband that they were used to give
to the messenger of Allah (s), I would fight them for that. This saying
did not deter Umar from seeing that such a fight would expose the
Muslims to dangers and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bani means the family of or the tribe of.  
 **[2]** Dhuhr means noon.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.71.  
 **[4]** As-Siddeeq by Ahmad Hasanayn Haykal, p.104.

bad ends. Umar said sharply: How do you fight these Muslims whereas the
messenger of Allah (s) has said: I have been ordered (by Allah) to fight
people until they say There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah. Whoever says that his life and monies will be safe
except their due. It is Allah, Who will punish people.

But Abu Bakr did not hesitate to answer Umar by saying: By Allah, I will
fight whoever separate between offering prayers and paying zakat. Zakat
is the due on properties and he (the Prophet (s)) said: except their
due.

I say: may Allah forgive Abu Bakr! He brushed aside this clear tradition
and interpreted it as he liked according to his policy of fighting. No
one of the believers, who had been fought and killed on that day,
separated between prayer and zakat but they just hesitated to submit to
Abu Bakr because they doubted (the legality of) his replacement for the
Prophet (s)[1] and they were excused for that and in fact they would be
rewarded for that.

They had the right not to obey except the orders of Allah and His
messenger or the orders of the one, whose guardianship was determined by
Allah and His messenger (s).

If Abu Bakr perceived those peoples excuse, he would consider it as an
evidence against him but how would those oppressed people be treated
fairly by Abu Bakr on that day!

The Sihah and books of Hadith are full of true traditions that show the
impermissibility of shedding the bloods of those faithful people and
their likes and there is no tradition that annuls this verdict;
nevertheless their bloods were shed by the order of the caliph, who
interpreted the prophetic traditions according to his own tendency.

As for the zakat that Abu Bakr had talked about it was just an
obligation on the Muslims. The guardian, who replaced the Prophet (s),
was to ask the Muslims for the zakat and he was to take it from them. If
they refused to pay it obeyingly, he then had to force them to pay it
unwillingly by using his power but without fighting or

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** We shall explain this matter later on inshallah.

killing them.

Fighting them just to take the zakat from them contradicted the verdicts
that had determined to protect their bloods and monies.

Here are some of these traditions that have been mentioned by Muslim in
his Sahih[1] under the chapter of Alis virtues. The messenger of Allah
(s) said to Ali when he gave him the banner on the day (the battle of)
Khaybar: Move and do not turn. Imam Ali walked a little and then he
stopped but did not turn. He cried: O messenger of Allah, what for shall
I fight the people? The messenger of Allah (s) said: fight them until
they witness that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah. If they do, they will spare their bloods and monies
except for their due and they will be answerable before Allah.

In al-Bukhari and Muslims Sahihs there is a tradition narrated by Usama
bin Zayd saying: The messenger of Allah (s) sent us (among an army) to
al-Mahraqa. In the morning we reached there. We defeated the people. I
and another man from the Ansar followed after a man from those people.
When we caught him, he said: There is no god but Allah. My companion
abstained from killing him but I stabbed him with my spear. When we came
back, the Prophet (s) knew about what we had done. He said to me: O
Usama, did you kill him after he had said there is no god but Allah? I
said: He just wanted to save his life. The Prophet (s) kept on repeating
this question until I wished I had not become a Muslim before that day.

He did not wish that unless he thought that all what he had offered of
faith, prayers, zakat, fasting, companionship (with the Prophet (s)),
jihad and other things before that day would not compensate for this sin
and that all his good doings had come to nothing because of this sin.
His saying showed clearly that he feared that Allah would not forgive
him for ever after that sin and so he wished he had not become a Muslim
before that day in order to be included by the Prophets saying:
(Believing in) Islam forgives all the sins committed before.

It is a sufficient evidence that shows the dignity of the people of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.2 p.324.

 there is no god but Allah and the protection of their bloods.

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his Sahih that a man had said to the Prophet
(s): O messenger of Allah, fear Allah! The Prophet (s) said: Woe unto
you! Am I not the worthiest among all the people of the earth of fearing
Allah? Khalid (bin al-Waleed) said: O messenger of Allah, do you allow
me to kill him? The Prophet (s) said: No, he may offer prayers.[1]

In al-Bukhari and Muslims Sahihs there is a tradition narrated by ibn
Umar that the Prophet (s) has said in Mina while he was pointing at the
Kaaba: Do you know what country is this? His companions said: Allah and
His messenger are more aware. He said: This is a prohibited country.
Then he said: Do you know what day is this? They said: Allah and His
messenger are more aware. He said: It is a prohibited day. Do you know
what month is this? They said: Allah and His messenger are more aware.
He said: It is a prohibited month. Allah has prohibited your bloods,
your monies and your honors like the prohibition of this day in this
month in this country.

The Sihah and books of Hadith are full of such traditions, whose

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This tradition has been mentioned by Ahmad in his Musnad, vol.
p.4 and by ibn Hajar al-Asqalani in his book al-Issaba when talking
about Sarhooq the hypocrite that he was brought to be killed. The
Prophet (s) said: Does he offer prayers? It was said: When people see
him (it means when he thinks that people may see him during the time of
prayers, he offers prayers). The Prophet (s) said: I have prohibited
killing the prayers (ones who offer prayer). Ath-Thahabi in his Mizan,
when talking about the biography of Aamir bin Abdullah bin Yasar,
mentioned a tradition narrated by Anass who said: Once a man was
mentioned to the Prophet (s) and it was said that he had been the head
of the hypocrites. When people mentioned many bad things about him, the
Prophet (s) allowed them to kill him and then he asked: Does he offer
prayers? The companions said: Yes, useless prayers. The Prophet (s)
said: I have prohibited killing the prayers.  
Would Khalid bin al-Waleed have regarded the prayer of Malik bin Nuwayra
and refrained from killing him although that Abdullah bin Umar and Abu
Qatada al-Ansari had witnessed that Malik had offered Fajr (dawn) prayer
with them! But Khalid had been charmed by Maliks beautiful wife as his
coeval the poet Abu Zuhayr as-Sadi had said in his poem:  
 Khalid killed him aggressively just for his wife.  
 He had tended to her before that.

contents are clear to the Muslims. According to these traditions
fighting a Muslim just because he has hesitated in paying the zakat to
the imam is prohibited especially if his hesitation is due to his
doubting about the real imam as what has happened among some tribes when
the Prophet (s) has left to the better world. A great Sedition has
happened at that time and its evils spread everywhere. Many Muslims
apostatized. The Muhajireen and the Ansar disagreed about the matter of
the caliphate. Each of them had two opinions and the Ansar might have
three opinions. During this sedition and evils Abu Bakr was paid homage
as the caliph and his homage was as a slip that Allah had protected the
Muslims from its evil as Umar had said! It was naturally at that time
that people might doubt about the legality of such homage and the
unanimous agreement on it while people were in disagreement. In fact the
state at that time was much worse than what had been mentioned. So there
was no blame on those, who had doubted the caliphate of Abu Bakr, when
they did not submitted to him concerning the matter of zakat and other
things until they would become certain that he was the legal caliph
after the Prophet (s).

13. The day of al-Bitah
-----------------------

It was the day of al-Bitah or the day of Malik bin Nuwayra and his
people and what they had got from Khalid bin al-Waleed. Khalid was the
absolute leader of the armies at that time so he ordered as he liked and
he judged as he wished. He was satisfied with killing the believers but
he exceeded in mutilation, capturing women and violating what Allah had
prohibited of monies, honors and legal verdicts. He committed sins and
evils that had never happened even in the pre-Islamic times.

### Who was Malik?

Malik bin Nuwayra bin Hamza bin Shaddad bin Abd bin Thalaba bin Yarboo
at-Tameemi al-Yarbooiy was the top of honor for bani Tameem and the peak
of glory for bani Yarboo. He was one of the famous notables among the
Arabs and an example of magnanimity, generosity, courage and valor in
all their meanings. He was like the kings. When he became a Muslim, all
the people of his tribe became

Muslims. The Prophet (s) had entrusted him with the charities of his
people because he had great confidence and trust in him.

### What was the guilt of Malik?

Maliks guilt, according to Abu Bakrs thought, was his situation
concerning the matter of zakat and other religious obligations. Malik
was looking for his legal duty according what Allah and His messenger
had legislated.

He did not intend, out of his situation, to cause a separation among the
Muslims, to cause a sedition or to cause a fight. He was surprised by
the raid led by Khalid bin al-Waleed at the beginning of Abu Bakrs
caliphate where disagreement was still burning about the caliphate.
Ahlul Bayt (s) and their followers had their own opinion and Abu Bakr,
Umar, Abu Ubayda, Salim and their followers had their own opinion. The
Ansar, who had protected and supported the Prophet (s), were defeated
especially their chief Sad bin Ubada, who had sworn if he had
assistants, he would fight against Abu Bakr and his party but he
withdrew from the political life and he did not participate in those
peoples occasions until he died lonely in Hawran. Add to that the
disasters that were caused (by the ruling party) around the houses,
about which Allah had said: **O you who believe! do not enter the houses
of the Prophet unless permission is given to you.** Qur'an, 33:53 and
the distresses that were caused to the Prophets daughter Fatima (s) just
because she asked for her inheritance, donation and khums although she
faced them with clear evidences, besides many other matters that the
Qur'an had warned of. Hence it was naturally for a man like Malik, who
had a high position among his people, to look for the one, who would
carry out the will of Allah and who would lead the people to the truth.
Malik waited in order to see the true man, who was qualified to replace
the Prophet (s), and then he would pay him the zakat so that he would
achieve his covenant with Allah. The ruling party had to give him enough
time to look for the ambiguous truth at that confused time. They had not
to surprise him with those disasters for he was not among those, who had
denied the zakat, nor was he among those, who had separated between the
prayer and zakat, nor was he among those who had permitted fighting Abu
Bakr or other Muslims.

This was the truth of the situation of Malik and his companions; leading
to it his advise to his people to keep to Islam and not to stand against
Khalid. He ordered his people to separate in order not to clash with the
army of Khalid and he forbade them from gathering in one place so that
Khalid and his army might think that they were camping to be ready to
fight.[1]

### Khalids advance towards al-Bitah

When Khalid finished his fights against bani Asad and Ghatafan, he
decided to move towards al-Bitah to meet Malik and his people but Malik
had withdrawn from al-Bitah and had ordered his people to separate here
and there-as we have said before-for he was looking forward to peace in
order to protect Islam at that critical time. When the Ansar knew that
Khalid would go to fight Malik and his people, they refused to go with
him and they said: This is not the order of the caliph. The caliph has
ordered that when we finish fighting al-Buzakha we are to camp until he
will write to us again. Khalid said: The caliph has not entrusted you
with anything. He has ordered me to go on. I am the emir and the orders
come to me. If no book or order comes to me, I will find any opportunity
to seize and then I will inform the caliph. If we face something that
the caliph has not sent his order about, we will decide the best to do.
Malik bin Nuwayra is in view of us and I will go to face him with my
men.[2] Then he went with his men towards al-Bitah but when they arrived

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** All that has been mentioned by Professor Muhammad Hasanayn
Haykal in his book as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr, p.144. Professor Mahmood Abbas
al-Aqqad in his book Abqariyat Khalid, p.131 said when talking about
Maliks situation: It was not a situation of obstinacy or being ready to
fight. But Professor al-Aqqad has mistaken when he has interpreted
Maliks verses of poetry into other than their real meaning.  
 **[2]** As-Siddeeq Abu Bakr by Professor Haykal, p.143 and Abqariyatu
Umar by Professor al-Aqqad, p.267. You see here through this dialogue
that the caliph has not ordered the army to attack Malik but Khalid
claimed that the caliph had entrusted him especially with the order of
the attack and according to this the caliph had used trick to show the
people that he was not responsible for the crimes that had been
committed on the day of al-Bitah but it was Khalid who was responsible
for that and then he would protect Khalid by justifying his doing by
saying that he had interpreted the verdict but he had mistaken. This
event showed that Abu Bakr was too skilful in politics.

there, they did not find anyone.[1]

### Killing Malik and his people

When they did not find any one of Maliks people in al-Bitah, Khalid sent
his brigades to follow after them. They came back with Malik and some of
his people. They were put in prison and then they were killed in a bad
way which we will detail later on.

At-Tabari mentioned a tradition narrated by Abu Qatada al-Ansari, who
was one of the leaders of the brigades of Khalids army. He said: When we
found Malik and his companions and it was night, they took their weapons
and got ready. We said: We are Muslims. They said: We are Muslims too.
We said: Then why have you got your weapons ready? They said to us: And
why have you got your weapons ready? We said: If you are as you say then
put your weapons down. Then we offered prayer and they offered prayer.

But after the prayer they (Khalids soldiers) hastened to seize the
weapons of Malik and his companions and then they tied Malik and his
companions and drove them as captives to Khalid. Among them was Maliks
wife Layla bint al-Minhal Umm Tameem, who was (as Professor Abbas
Mahmood al-Aqqad said in his book Abqariyatu Umar according to the
historians) one of the most beautiful women among the Arabs especially
her eyes and legs. It was said that no one had seen more beautiful than
her eyes and legs.

Therefore Khalid was attracted by her beauty while he was debating with
Malik where she was beside him.

Khalid said to Malik: I will kill you. Malik said: Has your master (Abu
Bakr) ordered you of this? Khalid said: By Allah, I will kill you.

Abdullah bin Umar and Abu Qatada al-Ansari were present then. They
talked with Khalid about this matter but he rejected their talks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The historians agreed upon that when Khalid occupied al-Bitah
with his army, he did not find anyone of its people. That was because
Malik had separated his people here and there and had ordered them not
to fight against Khalid and his army. He had advised his people to keep
to Islam and to remain separated until Allah would regather them. Refer
to as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr by Haykal, p.144.

Then Malik said: O Khalid, send us to Abu Bakr and he will decide what
to do to us. You have sent to him other than us whose guilt is greater
than ours. Abdullah bin Umar and Abu Qatada insisted on Khalid to send
Malik and his companions to the caliph but Khalid refused and said: Let
Allah not forgive me if I do not kill him. Khalid asked Dhirar bin
al-Azwar al-Asadi to kill Malik. Malik turned towards his wife and said
to Khalid: It is she who has killed me! Khalid said: It is Allah Who has
killed you because you have apostatized from Islam. Malik said: I am
still on Islam. Khalid said to Dhirar: Kill him! Dhirar killed Malik.
Khalid arrested Maliks wife and married her in that very night.

Khalid ordered his companions to put the captives (Maliks people) in
prison. It was very cold. In a dark night Khalids caller called out:
Warm your prisoners! According to the dialect of Kinana this was a
metonymy to mean killing and so all the prisoners were killed.

Khalid had ordered the executioners of his men to kill the prisoners
when they heard this call. This was a trick used by Khalid to show that
he was not responsible for this crime but it was obvious to Abu Qatada
and his likes of the acute people. It was unknown just for the ordinary
people, who had been deceived by the powerful rulers and their
prevailing policies.

This is the truth behind the event that has happened between Khalid and
Malik. Whoever studies carefully what has been mentioned by the
historians about the event of al-Bitah, will find this truth clearly.

Let not the contradicting sayings scattering here and there keep you
away from the truth; those sayings which have been woven by the personal
tendencies and the flattery to the caliph and to the general leader of
his armies in order to justify their mistakes.

We studied this event carefully and we did not find except a clear
evidence showing that the caliph tried to distort the truth due to his
loyalty in his love to Khalid and in defending him. Allah is the witness
over the all!

### The anger of Abu Qatada and Umar

Professor Haykal says in his book as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr:[1] Abu Qatada
al-Ansari became too angry at the crime of Khalid when he killed Malik
and married his wife. Abu Qatada left Khalid and went to Medina deciding
that he would never be under the leadership of Khalid at all. Mutammim
bin Nuwayra, Maliks brother, went with him. When they arrived at Medina,
Abu Qatada, who was still too angry, went to Abu Bakr and told him of
what Khalid had done to Malik and his wife. He added that he had sworn
by Allah not to be under the leadership of Khalid at all. But Abu Bakr
was too pleased with Khalid and his victories and he became displeased
with Abu Qatada. In fact he denied all what Abu Qatada said about the
sword of Islam (Khalid)!

Professor Haykal adds: Do you think that Abu Bakrs anger frightened Abu
Qatada and made him keep silent? Certainly not! His revolt against
Khalid was too violent; therefore he went to Umar bin al-Khattab and
told him all the story and showed him Khalid as the man, whose
tendencies prevailed over his duties and who ignored the orders of Allah
in order to satisfy himself. Umar confirmed Abu Qatadas opinion and
participated with him in criticizing Khalid. Umar went to Abu Bakr and
he was too angry at what Khalid had done. He asked Abu Bakr to depose
Khalid. Umar said to Abu Bakr that Khalids sword had committed a sin and
the caliph had to punish Khalid. But Abu Bakr would not have punished
any of his officials![2] Therefore Abu Bakr said when Umar insisted on
him many times to punish Khalid: O Umar, let him alone. He interpreted
but he mistook. Do not blame him any more! But Umar was not satisfied
with this answer and he did not refrain from asking to punish Khalid.
When Abu Bakr became unable to bear the insistence of Umar, he said to
him: O Umar, no! I would not have to sheathe a sword that Allah has
unsheathed against the unbelievers.

Professor Haykal adds: But Umar found that Khalids doing was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** p.147.  
 **[2]** In doing so Abu Bakr behaved according to his own ijtihad and
ignored the order of Allah when saying: (And We prescribed to them in it
that life is for life) Qur'an, 5:45.

abominable and so his conscience was displeased. How, then, would he
keep silent and let Khalid at ease feeling as if he had not committed
any sin or crime? Umar had to repeat his request to Abu Bakr and to
mention to him frankly that the enemy of Allah had killed a Muslim man
transgressively and committed adultery with his wife and it was not fair
at all not to be punished for his crime. Before the fiery anger of Umar,
Abu Bakr could not but to send for Khalid and ask about what he had
done. Khalid came to Medina. He came into the mosque with his war
materiel wearing a garment, whose iron parts were rusty, and inserting
some arrows into his turban. When Umar saw him coming into the mosque,
he hastened to him, pulled the arrows out of his turban, destroyed them
and said to him: You have killed a Muslim man and committed adultery
with his wife. By Allah, I will stone you until you die. Khalid kept
silent and did not apologize. He came to Abu Bakr and told him the story
of Malik and his hesitation (in paying the zakat). Khalid justified his
doing with some excuses and Abu Bakr excused him and forgave him but he
blamed him for marrying a woman, whose husbands blood had not dried yet.
The Arabs hated sleeping with women during the wars and considered that
as disgrace.

I say: Islam prohibits marrying a woman, whose husband has died, until
she finishes her iddah.[1] If a man gets married to a woman during her
iddah, she will be prohibited for him forever. If we suppose that Khalid
has considered Maliks wife as a captive, also getting married to a
captive woman is not permissible except after the legal absolution[2]
whereas Khalid has killed Malik and married his wife in the same night.

Professor Haykal adds: Umar did not change his opinion a bit about what
Khalid had committed. When Abu Bakr died and Umar became the caliph, the
first thing he did was sending a letter to Sham announcing the death of
Abu Bakr and with it there was a book having a decree of deposing Khalid
from the emirate of the army.

Professor Haykal says: The historians agreed unanimously that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Womans prescribed waiting period after divorce or death of
husband.  
 **[2]** Legal absolution here means that a woman has to pass at least
one menstruation to be sure that she is not pregnant from the previous
husband.

Umar had remained on his situation towards Khalid concerning the matter
of killing Malik and marrying his wife and this situation had had its
effect on the caliph when he had deposed Khalid.

### How wonder it is!

How wonder and odd it was that during the reign of Abu Bakr all those
bloods, honors and properties were wasted in vain! Allahs sacred rites
were violated and His penalties were annulled. Khalid was not deposed in
spite of all what he had committed! He kept on his extravagancy until
the caliph died but when Umar became the caliph, he deposed him
immediately.

Abu Bakrs opinion about the criminals on the day of al-Bitah was the
first of the opinions that contradicted the Qur'an and the Sunna. He
preferred benefit to obeying Allah.

### Showing the opinion

Professor Haykal says in his book as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr when talking about
Abu Bakrs opinion and excuse: Abu Bakr thought that the situation was
more dangerous than to regard such things.[1] Was there any importance
of killing a man or a group of men due to a mistake in interpretation or
even without a mistake where dangers surrounded all the state and the
revolts had broken out throughout the Arab countries?[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This is an exaggeration. Yes, the situation was too dangerous
but this did not lead to ignore what was possible for the sake of what
was not possible. The possible thing, which was the least thing that
must be done, at that time was to depose Khalid from his position and to
appoint a qualified one like Umar, Abu Ubayda, Maath bin Jabal, Sad or
any other one and to put off the trial of Khalid until the circumstances
would become suitable and then to be punished according to the legal
verdicts.  
 **[2]** This is an exaggeration too. His saying due to a mistake in
interpretation or even without a mistake is just a fabrication. Maliks
faith in Islam was doubted neither by Khalid nor by Abu Bakr and
marrying Maliks wife while she was under her iddah deserved stoning
according to the consensus of the Muslims. This was what Umar wanted to
do if he could. His saying was there any importance of killing a man or
a group of men shows indifference to killing whereas Allah says:
***(whoever slays a soul, unless it be for manslaughter or for mischief
in the land, it is as though he slew all men) and (And whoever kills a
believer intentionally, his punishment is hell; he shall abide in it)
and (And they who do not call upon another god with***

This leader, who was accused of being mistaken,[1] was one of the
greatest powers, with which disasters and dangers were repelled.[2]

What was the problem in marrying a woman unlike the traditions of the
Arabs if it was done by a conqueror, who had conquered countries and
consequently had captive women who would be his possession?[3]

Professor Haykal adds: If we apply the Sharia, then we have not to
criticize the great personalities like Khalid[4] especially if that will
harm the state and expose it to dangers.[5]

The Muslims were in need to the sword of Khalid. They were in need to
Khalid on the day when Abu Bakr sent for him and scolded him

------------------------------------------------------------------------

***Allah and do not slay the soul, which Allah has forbidden except in
the requirements of justice, and (who) do not commit fornication and he
who does this shall find a requital of sin. The punishment shall be
doubled to him on the day of resurrection, and he shall abide therein in
abasement).*** **  
 [1]** Khalid was really a killer and an adulterer. He intended to do
prohibited things and he did not miss them. In fact he got them
intendedly even after being forbidden by the caliph.  
 **[2]** He could be replaced by any other qualified man as we have
mentioned above.  
 **[3]** I do not think that Professor Haykal has believed in this
saying and the sayings before and after it nor has Abu Bakr! I do not
think that Professor Haykal is indifferent to the honors when saying:
What was the problem in marrying a woman unlike the traditions of the
Arabs if it was done by a conqueror and I do not think that he allows
every conqueror to do what Khalid has done! This may be allowed to a
Muslim conqueror, who conquers a country of Muslims, who do not believe
in Allah, and most surely that Malik and his people were among the
believers who keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and of the hereafter
they are sure.  
 **[4]** Uttering such a word by one like Professor Haykal is something
odd and astonishing. As long as you live, you see many wonders! How
wonder! Professor Haykal says that the legal verdicts do not allow
criticizing great persons like Khalid whereas Allah has created the
Paradise to every one, who obeys Him even if he is a black Abyssinian,
and has created the Hell to every one, who disobeys Him even if he is a
Qurayshi master. There is no flattery between Allah and any of His
creatures; people are equal before Him. A noble man is low until the
others right is taken from him and he is punished and a low man is
honorable until his right is restored to him.  
 **[5]** If carrying out the legal penalties causes dangers, then the
penalties should be put off until the dangers disappear. But the caliph
(Abu Bakr) did not put off executing the penalties nor did he wait for
the dangers to disappear. Rather he forgave all those sins and crimes
and became pleased to the full with those criminals.

more than their need to him before. Musaylama the Liar with forty
thousand men revolted in Yamama near al-Bitah and their revolt was the
worst against Islam and the Muslims.[1] Was it possible to let the
Muslim armies be defeated by Musaylama and the religion of Allah be
struck with many dangers just for the murder of Malik bin Nuwayra or for
the sake of beautiful Layla who had captivated Khalid?[2] Khalid was the
sign of Allah and his sword was the sword of Allah. It was the policy of
Abu Bakr when he sent for Khalid to be satisfied with scolding[3] him
and to order him at the same time to move with his army towards
al-Yamama to meet Musaylama and his men.

When Abu Bakr ordered Khalid at that time to go to fight Musaylama, he
might want to show the people of Medina, especially those who had
adopted Umars opinion, that Khalid was the qualified man who would
defeat the difficulties and that he (Abu Bakr) had thrown him into a
hell which would swallow him and that would be the punishment for what
he had committed with Layla and her husband Malik[4] or victory would
purify him and then he would come back to the Muslims as triumphant and
so he would calm their fears and then his doing committed in al-Bitah
would be unmentionable thing beside his victory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This meaning has been repeated by Professor Haykal and here we
say again that Khalid could be replaced with another leader and even if
there was no one like Khalid, the orders of Allah could never be
annulled for any reason. Executing the penalties could be put off but it
could never be annulled at all. Abu Bakr behaved as if there were no
crimes and no criminals!  
 **[2]** Yes, Khalid had to be deposed and to be killed immediately
according to the verdict of Allah. A killer must be killed and an
adulterer, who has a wife, must be stoned. If there is danger in
executing the penalties, they will be put off until the danger
disappears. The penalties can never be annulled for ever. All the
Muslims have agreed on this matter unanimously.  
 **[3]** But Allah would not be satisfied with that! The legal verdicts
that have determined to kill the killer and to stone the adulterer are
clear but Abu Bakr interpreted them as he liked and he preferred his own
opinion to those divine verdicts.  
 **[4]** Let us ponder on what Professor Haykal says as he quotes Abu
Bakrs thoughts. Do you think that Abu Bakr and Haykal have ignored that
an adulterer, who has a wife, must be punished by the Muslim ruler? Have
they ignored that the punishment must be stoning especially and not to
throw the adulterer into the hell of Yamama or other hells?

Yamama has tested and purified Khalid[1] even no long after that he
married a young girl as he had done with Layla while the Muslims bloods
were not dried yet nor were the bloods of Musaylamas followers. Abu Bakr
scolded him for this doing more than he had scolded him for his doing
with Layla before.[2][3]

Professor Haykal has showed clearly that Abu Bakr had preferred the
benefits to the acting according to the verdicts of Allah and His
messenger. Such was the opinion of many of the virtuous scholars of
al-Azhar University about Abu Bakr. They themselves told me of that when
I had met them in al-Azhar University in 1392 A.H. and later.

But Umar, even he himself had gone too far in interpreting the divine
verdicts according to his own opinion, did not agree with Abu Bakr when
he had forgiven Khalid. Professor Haykal declares Umars opinion in
details when saying: Umar was the exact example of Justice. He thought
that Khalid had killed a man transgressively and committed adultery with
his wife before she had finished her iddah and so Khalid could never
remain as the leader of the army lest he would commit another sin like
that and then he would defame the Muslims and dishonor their position
among the Arabs. Khalid could never be left without punishment for what
he had committed with Layla. If it was as Abu Bakr said that Khalid
interpreted the verdict but he mistook in his interpretation when he
killed Malik, which Umar did not accept at all, then Khalid would be
punished for the sin he had committed with Layla. Even if Khalid was the
sword of Allah and he was the victorious leader, this would not be an
excuse to protect him from being punished or to justify his crimes. If
it was so, then Khalid and every one like Khalid would be free to commit
any crime and sin as they liked without being punished and this would be
the worst example of the Muslims who had to submit to the Book of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** What purifies the sinners is returning to Allah by repenting and
doing good deeds sincerely for the sake of Allah only. Allah says:
***(Save him who shall repent and believe and do right).*** **  
 [2]** This young girl might have had a husband and Khalid committed
adultery with her as he had done with Layla; therefore Abu Bakr scolded
him for that more than he had scolded him after his sin with Maliks
wife. If it had been not so, Abu Bakr would have not scolded him
severely or in fact he would have not scolded him at all.  
 **[3]** As-Siddeeq Abu Bakr, p.152.

Allah absolutely. Therefore Umar insisted on Abu Bakr to punish Khalid
until Abu Bakr sent for Khalid and scolded him.

This is the very speech of Professor Haykal about Umars opinion and
evidence about the matter of Khalid quoted from his book As-Siddeeq Abu
Bakr, p.151.

### Some fairness

Professor al-Aqqad, after mentioning the contradicted sayings about the
murder of Malik to defend Khalid, says: Out of all these sayings we have
to consider the true and indisputable one among them. It was not clear
or decisive that Malik bin Nuwayra had to be killed.[1] Malik was
worthier to be sent to the caliph than the chiefs of Fazara tribe and
others, whom Khalid had sent to Abu Bakr to judge how to deal with,
after the battle of al-Buzakha. Khalid got married to Maliks wife and
took her with him to Yamama after meeting the caliph.[2]

After these facts, the truth imposed on us to say that the event of
al-Bitah was a page in Khalids history. It would be better for him if
this page would have been omitted and not mentioned with any of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In fact it was the impermissibility of killing Malik that was
clear and decisive. This murder was one of the great sins that must lead
the murderer to the legal punishment because Malik was a sincere Muslim
with no doubt at all. This was a clear fact to every one who had known
the truth of the event of al-Bitah and had known the secret behind the
violent revolt of Umar, Abu Qatada and all the people of Medina against
Khalid. The last thing that Malik had said was I am on Islam. Abu Bakr
and Umar confessed that Malik was a Muslim when he died. Umar said to
Abu Bakr: Khalid has committed adultery and you have to stone him. Abu
Bakr said: I will not stone him. He interpreted (the verdict) but he
mistook. Umar said: He has killed a Muslim and you have to kill him. Abu
Bakr did not say to Umar that Khalid had killed an apostate but he said:
I will not kill him. He interpreted (the verdict) but he mistook. This
was a confession by Abu Bakr that Malik had been a Muslim; therefore Abu
Bakr had paid the diyah (blood-money) to Maliks family from the public
treasury of the Muslims and he had considered the captives of Maliks
family as free people and so he had set them free besides that he had
not accepted from Khalid his capturing them.  
 **[2]** Suppose that when Khalid committed adultery with Maliks wife,
he was mistaken in his interpretation, then what was the excuse of Abu
Bakr when he kept Khalid as the leader of his armies especially after
meeting him and scolding him and what was the excuse of Abu Bakr when he
kept Khalid in his position after taking Maliks wife with him to Yamama
committing adultery with her while he had a wife?

justifications at all.[1]

### Conclusion

We end our speech about this subject with reference to those who have
written about Malik concerning his position among the Arabs and among
the Muslims and concerning the calamity that has afflicted Malik and his
people on the day of al-Bitah. Here are some of the books that have
detailed the matter of Malik; Tareekh al-Umam wel Mulook by Muhammad bin
Jareer at-Tabari, Jamharat an-Nasab by ibnul Kalbi, al-Kamil by ibnul
Atheer, Kitab ar-Riddah wel Futooh by Sayf bin Umar, al-Muwaffaqiyyat by
az-Zubayr bin Bakar, al-Aghani by Abu Faraj al-Isfahani, ad-Dalail by
Thabit bin Qassim, Nuzhat al-Manadhir by ibn Shuhna, al-Mukhtasar by
Abul Fida, Sharh Nahjol Balagha by ibn Abul Hadeed and other books of
history and biographies.

The judge ibn Khillikan said in his book Wafiyyatul Ayan when mentioning
the biography of Wuthayma bin Musa bin al-Furat al-Washsha al-Farisi:
Malik bin Nuwayra was a noble man who accompanied the kings. Malik was
mentioned in the proverbs; it was said: No pasture like sadan,[2] no
water like (that of) Sada[3] and no youth like Malik. He was a knight, a
poet and an obeyed notable man among his people. He was somehow proud.
He had a great group of companions. He was called al-Jafool.[4] He came
to the Prophet (s) among the Arabs who had come to declare their faith
in Islam. He became a Muslim and the Prophet (s) entrusted him with the
zakat of his tribehis situation with Khalid bin al-Waleed on the day of
al-Bitah had been detailed. There had been a long argument between them.
Khalid said to Malik: I am going to kill you. Malik said: Has your
friend (Abu Bakr) ordered you to do that? Khalid said: By Allah, I will
kill you. Abdullah bin Umar and Abu Qatada were present then. They
mediated to solve the problem but Khalid

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abqariyyatu Khalid, p.134.  
 **[2]** A kind of herbage.  
 **[3]** A famous spring whose water was very pure and palatable.  
 **[4]** Al-Jafool: the one who is always ready to help and aid the
others; whenever he hears a call for help he hastens towards the caller.

paid no attention to their speech. Malik said to Khalid: Send us to Abu
Bakr and he will decide what to do with us for you have sent other than
us whose guilt was greater than ours. Khalid said: Let Allah not forgive
me if I do not kill you. He asked Dhirar bin al-Azwar to behead Malik.
Malik turned to his wife Umm Tameem and then said to Khaild: It is she
who has killed me! Maliks wife was very beautiful. Khalid said to Malik:
Allah has killed you because you have apostatized from Islam. Malik
said: I am still on Islam. Khalid said to Dhirar: Behead him! He cut his
head and made it as an andiron under a pot. Ibnul Kalbi said in his book
Jamharat an-Nasab: Malik was killed on the day of al-Bitah and Khalid
captured his (Maliks) wife and married her. About this matter the poet
Abu Zuhayr as-Sadi had composed a poem.

After that ibn Khillikan mentioned Umars revolt against Khalid and his
saying to Abu Bakr: Khalid has committed adultery and you have to stone
him. Abu Bakr said: I do not stone him. He interpreted (the verdict) but
he mistook. Umar said: He has killed a Muslim man and you have to kill
him for that killed one. Abu Bakr said: I do not kill him for that one
because he interpreted but he mistook. Umar said: Then depose him! Abu
Bakr said: I will not sheathe a sword that Allah has unsheathed against
them. Ibn Khillikan mentioned more details about the matter. He said
that Mutammim bin Nuwayra, Maliks brother, stood beside Abu Bakr leaning
on his bow and began reciting his poem:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">The best one you have killed O you son of
al-Azwar,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">When the wind wept behind the
houses.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Have you invited him by Allah and then
you betrayed him?</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">If he has invited you with a
pact,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">He will never betray you.</span>*

He made a sign to Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr said: by Allah, I have neither
invited him nor have I betrayed him.

Then Mutammim bin Nywayra recited the rest of his poem. He wept and
collapsed from his bow to the ground.

Ibn Khillikan talked too much about Maliks qualities such as his
courage, generosity, zeal and high position among his people.

Among the historians, who had talked about Malik in their books, was
Abul Fadhl Ahmad bin Ali famous as ibn Hajar al-Asqalani. He said in the
first part of his book al-Isaba fee Tamyeez as-Sahaba[1]: His name was
Malik bin Nuwayra bin Hamza bin Shaddad bin Abd Thalaba bin Yarboo
at-Tameemi al-Yarbooiy. He was surnamed as al-Jafool. Al-Marzabani said
that Malik was a noble poet, a great knight and one of the honored
notables among his people in the pre-Islamic period. He was a companion
of the kings. The Prophet (s) had entrusted him with the zakat of his
people. When the Prophet (s) died, he stopped taking the zakat[2] and he
spread (the zakat that had been already in his hand) among his
people.[3] He recited:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">I said: Take back your monies.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">I am not afraid nor expecting what
tomorrow will bring.[4]</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">If a right one will undertake the
religion,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">We will obey[5] and say: the religion is
that of Muhammad.</span>*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tabari mentioned Malik in his Mujam and said: He is Malik bin
Hamza at-Tameemi. The Prophet (s) has entrusted him with the zakat of
Bani Yarboo after he and his brother Mutammim had become Muslims  
 **[2]** He stopped taking the zakat from his people after the Prophet
(s) had went to the better world because he wanted to be certain that
the one, who would be the caliph after the Prophet (s), would be the
right one and then he would carry out his duty concerning the zakat. You
will find that clearly in his poetry which we have mentioned herein with
our comment.  
 **[3]** He spread the zakat among the poor and needy people of his
tribe because he had taken it from them as he had the guardianship over
the zakat from the Prophet (s) when he was alive and so he thought that
he had had the right to dispose of it according to its legal ways. Malik
was known for his pity towards the orphans, the widows and the poor as
it had been showed through the poem of his coeval poet as-Sadi when
saying: Who will be for the orphans and the widows after him? And who
will be for the poor and needy people?  
 **[4]** He meant by this verse that he had not committed any wrong or a
sin (when he took the zakat or when he spread it again) that he might
fear on the Day of Resurrection.  
 **[5]** This verse has been mentioned with the phrase we will obey by
al-Asqalani in his book al-Isaba, by ibn Sad and by Alamul Huda
ash-Shareef ar-Radhiy in his book ash-Shafiiy who had mentioned other
verses when saying: When Malik knew that the Prophet (s) had died, he
stopped taking zakat from his people and he said to them: Wait until a
guardian will undertake the rule after the Prophet (s) and then we will
see what to do. He indicated that in his poetry when saying:  
***Some men said: Malik has done right today.***  
 ***Some men said: Malik has not done right.  
***

Malik and his companions were killed. He was mutilated. His wife was
raped. The verdicts of Allah were annulled. His sanctity was violated.
The cause behind all that was that they (Abu Bakr, Khalid and their
likes) had interpreted the divine verdicts according to their own
opinion and they had mistaken. We are Allahs and to Him we shall return!

14. Preventing from writing down the prophetic traditions
---------------------------------------------------------

Al-Hakim mentioned in his Tareekh a tradition narrated by Abu Bakr that
the Prophet (s) had said: He, who has written down knowledge or a
tradition from me, will be granted with (divine) reward as long as that
knowledge or tradition will remain.[1] In spite of that no

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I said: let me alone. I have not done wrong.  
 I said: Take back your monies.  
 I am not afraid nor expecting what tomorrow will bring.  
 Here are the monies. They are yours.  
 I will defend you what you fear with my soul,  
 And I will achieve the truth as I say.  
 If a right one will undertake the religion,  
 We will obey**[5]** and say: the religion is that of Muhammad.  
But Professor Haykal in his book as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr and Professor
al-Aqqad in his book Abqariyat Kkalid have mentioned the verse with the
phrase we will refrain (or stop). I think that they have quoted the
verse from someone of the historians who has taken sides against Malik
to defend Khalid or Abu Bakr. Anyhow there is nothing in the verse
showing apostasy or something like that.**  
 [1]** The prophetic traditions that the umma has narrated from Abu Bakr
are one hundred and forty-two which have been mentioned in a special
chapter by as-Sayooti in his book Tareekh al-Khulafa. This tradition is
the eighty-ninth one among them. The narrators have confirmed its
content by the traditions they have narrated from Imam Ali (s), Abdullah
bin Umar, Abdullah bin Masood, Abu Saeed al-Khidri, Abud Darda, Anass
bin Malik, Maath bin Jabal and Abu Hurayra that the Prophet (s) had
said: Whoever has kept forty traditions for my umma, Allah will
resurrect him on the Day of Resurrection among the jurisprudents and
ulama. In another tradition Allah will resurrect him as a jurisprudent
and as an aalim. In the tradition narrated by Abud Darda it has been
mentioned as I will be his witness and his intercessor. In the tradition
of ibn Masood he will enter into Paradise from any

tradition had been written down during the reign of Abu Bakr and Umar.

Abu Bakr, during his rule, had decided to write down the prophetic
traditions. He had written down five hundred traditions but he had
become upset. He could not sleep and he tossed about in his bed all that
night. Aaisha, his daughter, said: I was uncomfortable because he was
upset. In the morning he said to me: O my daughter, bring me the
traditions that are with you. I brought them to him and he burnt them[1]

Az-Zuhri mentioned from Urwa that once Umar bin al-Khattab wanted to
write down the prophetic traditions. He consulted with the Prophets
companions about the subject and they counseled him to write them down.
He went asking Allah to inspire him with the best decision. He kept on
that for a month and then he said: I wanted to write down the prophetic
traditions but I remembered some peoples before you who had written some
books and then they kept to their books and ignored the Book of Allah.
By Allah, I will not corrupt the Book of Allah with anything at all.[2]

Abu wahab said: I have heard Malik (bin Anass) saying that Umar wanted
to write down the prophetic traditions or he had already written them
down but then he (Umar) said: There is no book with the Book of
Allah.[3]

Yahya bin Juda said: Once Umar wanted to write down the Sunna but then
he changed his mind and decided not to write it down. He sent a decree
to the countries saying: Whoever has written down

------------------------------------------------------------------------

gate he likes. In the tradition of ibn Umar he will be considered as one
of the ulama and he will be resurrected with the martyrs. They might
have confirmed this tradition by the tradition in which the Prophet (s)
had said: Let the present of you inform the absentmay Allah have mercy
on one who has heard my saying and he perceived it and spread it as he
has heard it.  
 **[1]** Mentioned by Imadudeen bin Katheer in Musnad as-Siddeeq from
al-Hakim bin Abu Abdullah an-Naysaboori and mentioned by Abu Umayya
al-Ahwas bin al-Mufadhdhal al-Ghilabi. It has been mentioned in Kanzol
Ummal, vol.5 p.237.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.5 p.239, al-Mukhtasar by ibn Abdul Birr,
p.33, it also has been mentioned by ibn Sad from az-Zuhri as in Kanzol
Ummal, vol.5 p.239.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.5 p.239, al-Mukhtasar by Ibn Abdul Birr,
p.32.

some of the Sunna, has to delete it.[1]

Al-Qassim bin Muhammad bin Abu Bakr said: The (writing down of)
traditions have been increased during the reign of Umar so he asked the
people to bring him those (written) traditions. When the people brought
him the traditions, he ordered to burn them.[2]

Ibn Umar said: Once Umar wanted to write down the traditions. He prayed
Allah for a month to inspire him with the best choice. Then he said: I
remembered that there were peoples before you who had written some books
and they kept to those books and ignored the book of Allah.[3]

During the rule of Umar one of his companions came and said to him: O
Ameerul Momineen, when we have conquered the different countries, we
have got some books of the Persian sciences and other wonderful
subjects. Umar began striking those books with his stick until they were
torn. Then he recited: **(We narrate to you the best of narratives, by
Our revealing to you this Qur'an)** and then he said to the man: Woe
unto you! Are these stories better than the Book of Allah?[4]

The news showing that Umar had prevented people from writing and
collecting the prophetic traditions and everything of the Sunna were
certain and recurrent. He might have prevented them from narrating any
prophetic tradition at all and he might have detained the great

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Mukhtasar by ibn Abdul Birr, narrated by Ibn Khaythama as in
Kanzol Ummal, vol. 5 p.239.  
 **[2]** Ibn Sads Tabaqat, vol. 5 p.140.  
 **[3]** As-Salafi in his book at-Tuyooriyyat and as-Sayooti in his
Tareekh al-Khulafa.  
 **[4]** This tradition has been mentioned in the books of Hadith. Ibn
Abul Hadeed has mentioned in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.122. The
caliph Umar had to check those books to see which of them was useful and
which was not and then he would tear useless ones. This was the right of
the umma and the right of the books themselves. Islam does never permit
to tear the useful books such as those of medicine, mathematics, geology
and history of the previous and ancient nations. Imam Ali (s) has said:
Knowledge is the long-sought aim of the believers. Try to gain knowledge
even from the polytheists. He also has said: Wisdom is the long-sought
goal of the believers. They are to look for it even it is in the
policemens hands. These two traditions of Imam Ali (s) have been
mentioned by ibn Abdul Birr in al-Mukhtasar, p.51

figures in Medina so that they would not spread the traditions in the
other countries.[1]

No doubt that many corruptions had happened because of the decisions of
the two caliphs (when preventing from writing down the Sunna) and those
corruptions could not be avoided. Would have the two caliphs, Abu Bakr
and Umar, tried with Imam Ali (s) and Ahlul Bayt (s) to collect the
Prophets traditions and Sunna and to write them down in a special book
that the later Muslims and their successors of every generation in this
umma would inherit! The holy Qur'an has analogous and ambiguous
meanings. The Sunna explains the analogous and ambiguous meanings of the
Qur'an and it details many of its special verdicts. It makes the
scholars perceive the essence of the Qur'an and so it saves many
verdicts of the Qur'an from being lost. It would have been better for
the two caliphs if they had written down the Sunna because in doing that
they would have saved the umma and the Sunna from the fabricators who
had fabricated many lies against the Prophet (s). If the Sunna had been
written down at that time in a book, which the umma would have
sanctified, fabricators and liars would refrain from distorting or
inserting any lie in the Sunna. And since the Sunna had not been
collected in a special book, so the fabricators, who fabricated lies
against the Prophet (s), were too active and politics played a great
rule in distorting the Sunna especially during the reign of Muawiya and
his oppressive party until imposture spread everywhere and vanities and
trifles sold well.

The two caliphs and their followers could have saved the umma from the
evil of those people if they had written down the Sunna. In fact they
had known the great use of that and they had known that it was very
necessary but their greed and tendencies, which they had prepared and
got ready to achieve, did not meet with many of those

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdurrahman bin Ouff said: By Allah, Umar, before he died, he
had sent for the Prophets companions who were in the different
countries. He sent for Abdullah bin Huthayfa, Abud Darda, Abu Tharr and
Uqba bin Aamir and said to them: What are these traditions of the
Prophet (s) that you have spread throughout the countries? They said: Do
you prevent us from doing that? He said: No! You stay here! You will
never be away from me as long as I am alive. Refer to Kanzol Ummal,
vol.5 p.239.

clear prophetic traditions.

As for the Prophet (s), he had entrusted the Book, the Sunna and the
heritage of the prophets with his guardian Ali bin Abu Talib (s) and
hence he had recorded them in a clear book which falsehood should not
come to from before nor from behind. He asked Imam Ali (s) to entrust
the infallible imams after him with this trust. Hence this trust, the
Qur'an, the Sunna and the prophets heritage, would be guarded by the
infallible imams (s) one after the other until they would come to the
Prophet (s) at the pond (in Paradise) on the Day of Resurrection.

The Prophet (s) has said: Ali is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with
Ali. They will not separate until they will come to me at the pond.[1]

### A task

Some polytheists had come to the Prophet (s) for some task and he had
referred to his two companions (Abu Bakr and Umar) in order to reject
the polytheists task but they (Abu Bakr and Umar) behaved as
intercessors for the polytheists.

The story was when some polytheists came to the Prophet (s) saying: O
Muhammad, we are your neighbors and allies. Some of our slaves have
resorted to you neither for religion nor for jurisprudence but they have
fled from our farms and properties. Please return them back to us. The
Prophet (s) did not respond to them lest they would spoil the faith of
those slaves. The Prophet (s) did not want to tell them the truth openly
so he referred to Abu Bakr saying: O Abu Bakr, what do you say? and he
hoped that Abu Bakr would reject their request. Abu Bakr said: O
messenger of Allah, they are right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Hakims Mustadrak, vol.3 p.124 and ath-Thahabis Talkhees. We
would like to attract the readers attention that this sacred
accompaniment between Imam Ali (s) and the Qur'an has been continuous
every moment until they will come to the Prophet (s) at the pond in
Paradise without a moment of separation between them at all. Imam Ali
(s) has died hundreds of years before coming with the Qur'an to the pond
in Paradise so how would the inseparability between him and the Qur'an
be valid? ***(Most surely, it is the Word brought by an honored
Messenger. And it is not the word of a poet; little is it that you
believe. Nor the word of a soothsayer; little is it that you mind. It is
a revelation from the Lord of the worlds). Qur'an,*** 69:40-43.

The Prophet (s) blushed because Abu Bakrs answer was not as Allah and
His messenger wanted. Then the Prophet (s) asked Umar hoping that he
would be frank with them: O Umar, what do you say? Umar said: O
messenger of Allah, they are right. They are your neighbors and allies.
The Prophet (s) blushed again this tradition has been mentioned by Ahmad
bin Hanbal in his Musnad, vol.1 p.155 (traditions concerning Imam Ali)
and by an-Nassaiy in al-Khasais al-Alawiya, p.11. Here is the tradition
as it has been mentioned by an-Nassaiy: then the messenger of Allah (s)
said: O people of Quraysh, I swear by Allah that He will empower over
you a man from you, whose heart Allah has tested with faith. He will
strike you to keep to the religion. Abu Bakr said: O messenger of Allah,
is it me? The Prophet (s) said: It is the one who is mending the shoes.
The Prophet (s) had given his shoes to Ali in order to mend them.
