Chapter Two Interpretations of Umar and His Followers
=====================================================

#### Part 1

15. The calamity of Thursday
----------------------------

It was in the eleventh year of hijra during the Prophets illness which
had led to his death.[1]

### The true fact of this calamity

The authors of Sihah (books of Hadith) and the historians had detailed
this event in their books and considered it as one of the true facts.

Al-Bukhari mentioned[2] a tradition narrated by Ubaydillah bin Abdullah
bin Masood that ibn Abbas had said: When the Prophet (s) was about to
die, there were some men in his house among whom was Umar. The Prophet
(s) said: Come on! Let me write you a book that you will never go astray
after it. Umar said: The Prophet (s) has been overcome by pain. We have
the Qur'an. The Book of Allah suffices us. The men in the house
disagreed. Some of them said: Approach the Prophet! Let him write you a
book after which you will never go astray. Some of them repeated what
Umar had said. When they did much noise and disagreement, the Prophet
(s) said to them: Get out! Abdullah bin Masood said: Ibn Abbas often
said: It was the great calamity when their clamor and disagreement had
prevented the Prophet (s) from writing that book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Prophets death was on Monday; four days after this event.  
 **[2]** In his Sahih, vol.1 chap. Knowledge and vol.4 chap. The sick.

Muslim has mentioned this tradition in his Sahih, vol.2. Ahmad also has
mentioned it in his Musnad[1] and so have all the historians but they
have changed the wording somehow. The actual word of Umar was the
Prophet (s) is raving but they used the Prophet (s) has been overcome by
pain in order to soften the horrible statement of Umar.

Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhari mentioned in Kitab
as-Saqeefa[2] that ibn Abbas had said: When the Prophet (s) was about to
die, he said, while there were some men in the house among them was
Umar: Bring me an inkpot and a piece of paper to write you a book after
which you will never go astray. Umar said a word which meant that the
Prophet (s) had been overcome by pain and then he added: We have the
Qur'an. The Book of Allah suffices us. The men in the house disagreed
and disputed among them. Some of them said: Approach! Let the Prophet
(s) write a book to you. Some others said as Umar had said. When they
did much clamor and disagreement, the Prophet (s) became angry and said
to them: Get out!

It is clear, out of this tradition, that the historians have quoted the
meaning of Umars words and not the exact words he has said.

When the narrators had narrated the exact words of the man, who had
opposed the Prophet (s), they did not mention the name of that man.
Al-Bukhari said in his Sahih:[3] Qubaysa narrated from ibn Uyayna from
Salman al-Ahwal from Saeed bin Jubayr that ibn Abbas had said:
Thursdayand what Thursday is! He cried until his tears fell on the
ground and then he said: The Prophet (s) had become very ill on
Thursday. He said: Bring me a piece of paper to write you a book after
which you will never go astray at all. They (the men who were in the
Prophets house) disputed whereas no one should dispute before a prophet.
They said: The messenger of Allah is raving. The Prophet (s) said: Let
me alone! What I am in is better than what you ascribe to me. When he
was about to die, he ordered

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.1 p.325.  
 **[2]** As in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.20 **  
 [3]** vol.2 p.118.

of three things: Drive the polytheists out of Arabia, reward the
delegations as I have rewarded them and I have forgotten the third
one[1].

This is another tradition that has been mentioned by Muslim in his
Sahih, by Ahmad in his Musnad[2] and by the rest of narrators. Muslim
has mentioned in his Sahih, chap. The will the tradition from another
way narrated by Saeed bin Jubayr that ibn Abbas had said: Thursday and
what Thursday is! His tears began flowing on his cheeks and then he
said: The Prophet (s) said: Bring me a blade and an inkpot (or a tablet
and an inkpot) so that I write you a book after which you will not go a
stray at all. They said: The messenger of Allah is raving.[3]

He, who has studied the calamity in the Sihah, knows well that the first
one, who has said The Prophet (s) is raving was Umar and then the
present men, who had adopted his opinion, imitated his situation. You
have seen above the saying of ibn Abbas in the first tradition the men
in the house disputed. Some of them said: Approach! Let the Prophet (s)
write you a book after which you will never go astray and some others
said as Umar had said. That is The Prophet (s) is raving.

At-Tabarani mentioned a tradition in his book al-Awsat[4] that Umar had
said: When the Prophet (s) became ill, he said: Bring me a piece of
paper and an inkpot to write you a book after which you will never go
astray at all. The women from behind the curtain said: Do you not hear
what the messenger of Allah is saying? I (Umar) said (to the women): You
are like the women of Yousuf (Prophet Joseph). If he becomes ill, you
press your eyes and if he becomes alright, you ride on his neck. The
Prophet (s) said: Let them (the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Definitely the third thing was the order which the Prophet (s)
wanted to write down to his umma in order not to go astray after that at
all but politics had forced the narrators to pretend that they had
forgotten it as the mufti of the Hanafites (in Soor) Sheikh Abu Sulayman
Haj Dawood ad-Dada has said.  
 **[2]** Vol.1 p.232.  
 **[3]** This tradition with the same wording has been mentioned by
Ahmad in his Musnad, vol.1 p.355 and by other scholars of Hadith.  
 **[4]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p.138.

women) alone. They are better than you.

You see here that they have not obeyed the order of the Prophet (s). If
they had done, they would have been safe from deviation. Would that they
had been satisfied with disobeying the Prophet (s) only and had not
rejected his order when they said: The Book of Allah suffices us as if
he did not know the position of the Book of Allah among them or as if
they were more aware of the Book and its values than him! And would that
they were satisfied with all that and they did not surprised him with
their horrible word the messenger of Allah is raving while he was about
to die! What a word it was that they wanted to farewell their prophet
with! They did not obey him pretending that the Book of Allah sufficed!
Had they not heard the Book of Allah announcing day and night: **and
whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back.** Qur'an, 59:7 and as if they, when saying: the
messenger of Allah is raving had not read the sayings of Allah: **Most
surely it is the Word of an honored messenger. The processor of
strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of the Dominion. One
(to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust. And your companion is not gone
mad.** Qur'an, 81:19-22 and **Most surely, it is the Word brought by an
honored Messenger. And it is not the word of a poet; little is it that
you believe. Nor the word of a soothsayer; little is it that you mind.
It is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds.** Qur'an,69:40-43 and
**Your companion does not err, nor does he go astray. Nor does he speak
out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is revealed. The Lord of
Mighty Power has taught him.** Qur'an, 53:2-5

They knew that the Prophet (s) wanted to certify the caliphate of Ali
(s) and the infallible imams of his progeny especially with a written
covenant and therefore they prevented him from writing that book as the
second caliph Umar had confessed later on through an argument between
him and ibn Abbas.[1]

If you ponder on the saying of the Prophet (s) Come on! Let me write you
a book after which you will never go astray and on his saying in the
tradition of Thaqalayn: I have left to you what if you keep to, you will
never go astray; the Book of Allah and my progeny

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.3 p.114.

you will know that the purpose of the two sayings is the same. The
Prophet (s), during his illness, wanted to write them the details of
what he had ordered them of in the tradition of Thaqalayn.

The Prophet (s) had given up writing that book because the horrible word
of those men had forced him to give up that for there would be no use of
his book. It would cause sedition and disagreement after him for they
would dispute whether his book was out of his raving or not. They
disagreed and disputed and caused much clamor before him and so he had
nothing to do except to say: Get out! If he had insisted on writing that
book, they would have persisted in their saying the messenger of Allah
is raving and then their followers would try their best to prove that
the Prophet (s) had really been raving and they would fabricate many
stories and tales to refute that book and to refute whoever believed in
it.

Therefore wisdom had led the Prophet (s) to give up writing that book
lest those people and their followers would open a gap to criticize
prophethood, Allah forbid! The Prophet (s) had found that Imam Ali (s)
and his followers would submit to the content of that book whether it
had been written or not and that the others would not regard nor would
they do according to it whether it had been written or not. Hence wisdom
determined to give up that book for it would lead to opposition and
sedition.

### The excuses of the resistants

Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri, through some of the murajaats (arguments)
between him and me in Egypt in 1329 A.H. and after that, has justified
that event by saying: The Prophet (s), when ordering his companions to
bring a paper and an inkpot, might not intend to write anything but he
just wanted to inform them only and then Allah inspired Umar from among
the companions with the intent of the Prophet (s) and so he prevented
the others from bringing the paper and the inkpot. Hence we have to
consider this prevention of Umar as one of his assents to his god and
one of his charismata, may Allah be pleased with him. Thus some of the
scholars have said. But it is fair to say that the saying of the Prophet
(s) you will never go astray after it refutes that situation (of Umar)
because the Prophets saying is a conditional statement which

means: if you bring me a paper and an inkpot and let me write you the
book, you will never go astray after that at all. Definitely informing
of such a thing just for mere informing to test the others is a kind of
clear lying which we have to exalt the prophets far above especially in
a time when not bringing the paper and the inkpot would be better than
bringing them. This justification is weak from other sides and so we
have to find another justification.

What we can say is that the matter was not a compulsory order that it
could not be argued and the arguer would be disobedient but it was a
matter of consultation. The companions often discussed some of those
orders with the Prophet (s) and especially Umar who knew that he was
always in conformity with the benefits and he was inspired by Allah.
Umar, due to his kindness to the Prophet (s), wanted to cause no
tiredness to the Prophet (s) when he would dictate that book while he
was ill; therefore Umar thought that not bringing the paper and the
inkpot would be better.

Or Umar might fear that the Prophet (s) would write some things that
people would be unable to carry out and so they would deserve punishment
due to that for the orders of the Prophet (s) would be compulsory and
would not be interpreted in another way.

Or he might fear that the hypocrites would criticize that book because
the Prophet (s) was ill when he wrote it and then it would cause
sedition; therefore Umar said: The book of Allah suffices us for Allah
has said: **(We have not neglected anything in the book)** and **(This
day have I perfected for you your religion)** as if Umar was certain
that the umma would not go astray because Allah had perfected the
religion for it (the umma) and completed His favor on it.

This is the justification of the ulama. The saying of the Prophet (s)
you will never go astray is decisive and compulsory because trying to
assure what prevents deviation, if one is able to, is compulsory no
doubt. The Prophets anger and his saying to the companions get out when
they did not obey his order was another evidence showing that the matter
was compulsory and it was not a matter of consultation.

If you say: if the matter was compulsory, the Prophet (s) would not

give it up just because the companions opposed him as he had not given
up informing of the mission in spite of the opposition of the
unbelievers. The answer is that writing that book was not compulsory to
the Prophet (s) after his companions had opposed him and this did not
mean that bringing the paper and the inkpot was not compulsory
especially when the Prophet (s) ordered them and declared to them that
the book would save them from deviation. The fact is that a command is
compulsory to the commanded one and not to the commander especially if
the benefit of that command concerns the commanded one; therefore
compulsoriness of this order concerned the companions and not the
Prophet (s).

It might be compulsory to the Prophet (s) too but it became not so when
the companions disobeyed him and said the messenger of Allah is raving
for the book, after that, would not lead save to sedition.

Some scholars might justify that Umar and those, who had assisted him,
did not understand from the Prophets saying that the book would be the
cause of saving every individual of the umma from deviation that no one
would go astray after that at all. They understood from the saying you
will not go astray that the whole umma all in all would not go astray
and deviation would not reach every individual in the umma after writing
that book. They knew that it was impossible for the whole umma to go
astray; therefore they thought that writing that book was not necessary.
They thought that the Prophet (s) just wanted to attract their attention
to the matter due to his kindness and mercifulness. They opposed the
Prophet (s) thinking that the matter was not necessary but it was out of
his kindness and mercifulness so they wanted not to tire the Prophet (s)
when they refused to bring the paper and the inkpot. This is all what
has been said to justify this doing. But he, who ponders on this
justification, will find it far away from the truth because the Prophets
saying you will not go astray means that the matter is necessary as we
have said besides that his being angry with them means that they have
left an obligatory order. The Prophet (s) has ordered them to get out in
spite of his great patience and this is an evidence showing that they
have left the most obligatory and the most useful thing as it has been
known of his great morals.

It would be better, when talking about this event, to say: it was a
matter that took place unlike their conducts. It was a slip and a
stumble of them which we do not know a way to justify. Allah is the
Guide to the straight path.

Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri tried his best to justify this resistance and to
find an excuse for those resistants but he did not find a way to that.
Rather his knowledge and fairness refused save to refute these trifles.
He was not satisfied in refuting them with one evidence yet he examined
all the evidences he could get. May Allah reward him for what he has
done.

### Refuting the excuses in other ways

As we have had other evidences to refute those justifications, I liked
at that time to offer these evidences to him (Sheikh al-Bishri) and
asked him to judge on them.

You (Sheikh al-Bishri) said: they (who defended Umar) said that the
Prophet (s), when he had ordered his companions to bring a paper and an
inkpot, might have not intended to write anything but he just wanted to
test them.

I say, in addition to what you have said: this event took place while
the Prophet (s) was about to die. The time was not a time of testing;
rather it was a time of warning and advising the umma. One, who was
about to die, would be away from fun and jesting. He would be busy with
himself, with his important affairs and the important affairs of his
relatives, especially if he was a prophet.

If he, throughout his life, could not test his people, then how would he
be able, at the time of dying, to test them?

When the companions disputed and did much clamor before him, the Prophet
(s) ordered them to get out. This showed that he had become angry with
them. If the resistants were right, the Prophet (s) would accept that
from them and he would be pleased with them!

He, who studied this tradition and especially their saying the messenger
of Allah is raving, would be certain that those companions were aware
that the Prophet (s) had intended to declare something that they had
hated; therefore they surprised him with

that horrible word and they disputed and made much ado before him.

The crying of ibn Abbas for this event and his considering it as a
calamity was another evidence refuting this justification.

Those, who justified the event, said: Umar was always right in
perceiving the benefits and he was inspired by Allah. This nonsense
could never be listened to because it showed that the right in that
event was on the side of Umar and not on the side of the Prophet (s) and
it showed that Umars inspiration was more truthful than the revelation
that had been revealed to the Prophet (s) by Allah.

They also said: Umar wanted to relieve the Prophet (s) from the
tiredness that he would get if he dedicated that book while he was ill.
It was definitely that writing the book would make the Prophets heart
delighted because he would be certain that his umma would be safe from
deviation.

The order and the divine will of the Prophet (s) must be obeyed. The
Prophet (s) wanted the companions to bring him a piece of paper and an
inkpot to write a book and the companions had no right to disobey him or
to oppose his will. Allah said: **And it behooves not a believing man
and a believing woman that they should have any choice in their matter
when Allah and His Messenger have decided a matter; and whoever disobeys
Allah and His Messenger, he surely strays off a manifest straying.**
Qur'an, 33:36

The resistance of the companions and their disputes and clamors before
the Prophet (s) were more tiresome to him than dictating that book. So
how did the one, who pitied the Prophet (s) for being tired because of
dictating the book, resist him and surprise him by saying: the messenger
of Allah is raving?

They said: Umar thought that not bringing the paper and the inkpot was
better although the Prophet (s) had ordered of that. Did Umar think that
the Prophet (s) ordered of something which was better to be neglected?

Odder than that was their saying: Umar might fear that the Prophet (s)
would write some things that people would not be able to carry out and
then they would deserve punishment because of not carrying

them out!

How did Umar fear that whereas the Prophet (s) had said: you will never
go astray at all? Did they think that Umar was more aware of the ends
than the Prophet (s) and more compassionate and more careful for the
umma? Certainly not!

They also said: Umar might fear that the hypocrites would consider the
book as untrue because the Prophet (s) was ill when he wrote it and this
would cause a sedition.

This was impossible because the Prophet (s) had said: you will never go
astray. He had confirmed that the book would save the umma from
deviation; then how would it be a cause for sedition if the hypocrites
criticized it?

If Umar was afraid that the hypocrites might consider the book as
untrue; then why did he lead them to that when he resisted and said: The
messenger of Allah is raving?

As for their saying when interpreting Umars saying the Book of Allah
suffices us according to these two verses: **We have not neglected
anything in the Book** and **This day have I perfected for you your
religion** is not right because these two verses do not refer to being
safe from deviation and they do not assure guidance to people. How could
it be possible for them to leave that book and to depend on these two
verses? If the existence of the Qur'an would save the umma from
deviation, then this deviation and disagreement among the Muslims would
not have taken place![1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Prophet (s) did not say: I want to write the legal verdicts
so that one might say: The book of Allah suffices us to understand the
verdicts. If we supposed that the Prophet (s) wanted to write the
verdicts, then writing them might be the cause to save the umma from
deviation and hence no one would be excusable in neglecting that book
and pretending to be satisfied with the Qur'an. In fact if that book had
nothing except to save from deviation only, it would not be permissible
to leave it depending on the Qur'an.  
 You know well that the umma is in necessary need of the sacred Sunna
and it cannot do without it to depend on the Qur'an only because
concluding the verdicts from the Qur'an is not easy for every one. If
the Qur'an has sufficed without the Sunna, Allah would have not ordered
the Prophet (s) to explain it to the people. Allah has said:

They said in their last justification: Umar did not understand from the
Prophets saying that that book would be the cause to save every
individual of the umma from deviation but he understood that it would be
a cause that would prevent the umma as whole from going astray and he
(Umar), may Allah be pleased with him, knew that the umma would not get
together on deviation at all whether that book had been written or not
and therefore he resisted the Prophet (s) on that day.

I say, in addition to what you have said:[1] Umar was not of that kind
that he would not understand from the tradition what had been clear to
all of the people because every one had understood that if that book had
been written, it would have been a perfect cause to save every
individual from going astray. It is this meaning which is understood by
the people.

Umar knew well that the Prophet (s) had not feared for his umma to get
together on deviation because he often heard the Prophet (s) saying: My
umma does not get together on deviation nor on error and A group of my
umma will still keep to the truth. Allah has said: **Allah has promised
to those of you who believe and do good that He will most certainly make
them rulers in the earth as He made rulers those before them, and that
He will most certainly establish for them their religion which He has
chosen for them, and that He will most certainly, after their fear, give
them security in exchange; they shall serve Me, not associating aught
with Me.** Qur'an, 24:55 There are many clear texts in the Qur'an and
the Sunna showing that the umma as whole will not gather together on
deviation. Hence it was not reasonable that Umar or other than Umar
might think that the Prophet (s) had feared for the umma to be deviate
all in all. It behooved Umar to understand from the tradition what came
to mind and not what the Qur'an and the Sunna had denied!

The Prophet (s) became angry and said to the companions: Get out! This
meant that what they had resisted was one of the necessary obligations
which they had to follow. If the resistance of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

***(and We have revealed to you the Reminder that you may make clear to
men what has been revealed to them)*** 16:44.  
 **[1]** The author addresses Sheikh al-Bishri.

Umar was because he had misunderstood the Prophets saying as they, who
defended him, pretended, then the Prophet (s) would have removed his
misunderstanding and would have declared his (the Prophets) intent to
the companions. In fact if the Prophet (s) could have convinced them of
what he had ordered them, he would not have got them out of his house.
The weeping and sadness of ibn Abbas is one of the clearest evidences
that prove what we have said.

Indeed this calamity can never be excused. If it was, as you said, a
slip and a stumble, it would be easy but it was the disaster that had
broken the back! In fact the resistants were among those who believed in
ijtihad against the clear text and in this event they had practiced
ijtihad before the text of the Prophet (s). They had their own opinions
and Allah had His own opinion!

### Sheikh al-Bishri admires what we have said

When Sheikh al-Bishri read our speech in refuting those excuses, he
replied to it saying: You have closed the way before the justifiers,
controlled their routes and separated between them and their intents.
There is no doubt about what you have mentioned and there is nothing
leading to suspect a bit of what you have declared

16. Treaty of al-Hudaybiya[1]
-----------------------------

On the day of al-Hudaybiya the Prophet (s) preferred peace to war and he
ordered of that as Allah had revealed to him. The benefit of Islam
required that treaty of peace but that benefit was unknown by the
Prophets companions and so some of his companions denied the treaty and
resisted the Prophet (s) openly. The Prophet (s) paid no attention to
their resistance and he went on carrying what he had ordered by Allah
and then the end was of the best ends of the conquerors.

### The event in details

The Prophet (s) left Medina on Monday, the first of Thul Qada in the
sixth year of hijra to offer the minor hajj. He feared that Quraysh
might wage a war against him or they might prevent him from

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Hudaybiya is a village about nine miles from Mecca.

offering the hajj to the Kaaba as they had done before. He called out
the people to offer the minor hajj with him. One thousand and four
hundred men of the Muhajireen, the Ansar and other tribesmen followed
him.[1] Among them there were two hundred knights. He took with him
(al-hadiy) seventy camels as gift to the Kaaba. He did not take with him
weapons except the weapons that travelers might take with them; swords
and water-skins.[2] When the Prophet (s) and his companions reached Thul
Hulayfa, they marked (al-hadiy) the camels and they became in the state
of ritual consecration (ihram) so that the people would know that he and
his companions had come as pilgrims and not warriors.

Then he and his companions went on and after he passed some of the way,
he knew that Khalid bin al-Waleed was in al-Ghameem (a place near Mecca)
with two hundred knights from Quraysh. At the head of them was Akrima
bin Abu Jahl. The Prophet (s) told his companions of that and ordered
them to take the right way in order to avoid the way of Khalid and his
men. They moved around al-Hamdh[3] and Khalid did not notice them until
he saw the black dust of their army. Khalid and his knights came near to
the Prophet (s) and his companions. The Prophet (s) ordered Abbad bin
Bishr to be with his knights opposite to Khalid.

The time of Dhuhr prayer came. The Prophet (s) offered the prayer with
his companions. The polytheists said: Muhammad and his companions have
given you the opportunity to overcome them. Khalid said: Yes, they were
in inadvertence. If we had attacked

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It was also mentioned that they were more and it was mentioned
that they were less. The Prophet (s) took with him his wife Umm Salama
(may Allah be pleased with her). Many of the nomads had not followed
him. They were hypocrites whom Allah had dispraised in the Sura of
al-Fath which had been revealed after this event: ***(and Allah is wroth
with them and has cursed them and prepared hell for them, and evil is
the resort).***  
 Among those, who went with him, were al-Mugheera bin Shuba and ibn
Salool, who had paid homage to him under the tree in al-Hydaybaiya.  
 **[2]** Umar said to the Prophet (s): O messenger of Allah, you fear
Abu Sufyan and his companions. Why do you not take weapons with you? The
Prophet (s) said: I do not take weapons with me while I am going to
offer the hajj.  
 **[3]** A place near al-Hudaybiya.

them, we would have overcome them. But after a short time they will have
another prayer which is more beloved to them than themselves and their
children. Then Allah revealed to the Prophet (s): **And when you are
among them and keep up the prayer for them, let a party of them stand up
with you, and let them take their arms; then when they have prostrated
themselves let them go to your rear, and let another party who have not
prayed come forward and pray with you, and let them take their
precautions and their arms; (for) those who disbelieve desire that you
may be careless of your arms and your luggage, so that they may then
turn upon you with a sudden united attack, and there is no blame on you,
if you are annoyed with rain or if you are sick, that you lay down your
arms, and take your precautions; surely Allah has prepared a disgraceful
chastisement for the unbelievers. Then when you have finished the
prayer, remember Allah standing and sitting and reclining; but when you
are secure (from danger) keep up prayer; surely prayer is a timed
ordinance for the believers. And be not weak hearted in pursuit of the
enemy; if you suffer pain, then surely they (too) suffer pain as you
suffer pain, and you hope from Allah what they do not hope; and Allah is
Knowing, Wise.** Qur'an, 4:102-104

Then the Prophet (s) offered Asr prayer with his companions as fear
prayer which was legislated by these previous verses. **(And Allah
turned back the unbelievers in their rage; they did not obtain any
advantage).**

17. Aggressiveness of Quraysh and the wisdom of the Prophet (s)
---------------------------------------------------------------

When the Prophet (s) came to al-Hudaybiya, he got much harm from the
polytheists. He and his companions faced rudeness, disgust, hatred and
open enmity from them. Also the polytheists got from the Prophets
companions like that and more for they did according the saying of
Allah: **(and let them find in you hardness).** But the Prophet (s), due
to his patience that Allah had granted to him, tolerated the polytheists
with his wisdom, which was a part of his nature, and his high morals
with which Allah had preferred him to the rest of the prophets and
messengers (s).

The polytheists prevented him from entering Mecca in a rude and
offensive way but he did not become angry nor was his patience provoked.
He dealt with those harsh people with leniency and indifference. He said
humble words about them full of highness that made them see him above
the stars and see themselves under the ground. His words were full of
pity and advice to them and full of divine wisdom that moved their
hearts in spite of their hardness and harshness and also were full of
warning and threatening to uproot them if they kept on their way.

Here are some of the Prophets sayings to ponder on them and to find out
the Prophets aims. The Prophet (s) said: Woe unto Quraysh! The war has
exhausted them. What will they lose if they let me alone with the Arabs?
If the Arabs kill me, it will be the wish of them (Quraysh) and if Allah
makes me prevail over them, they will become Muslims honorably and if
they refused (to be Muslims), they will fight me with their full power!
What does Quraysh think? By Allah, Whom there is no god but, I will
still fight for the sake of what my god has sent me to until Allah makes
it prevail or this neck is cut!

He said attracting them towards his great morals and favors: I swear by
Him, in Whose hand my soul is, that if Quraysh invites me today for a
plan, in which they ask me for keeping relations of kinship, I will
respond to them.

He declared his mercifulness through these wise and compassionate words
and then he gathered his companions to consult them for fighting Quraysh
if Quraysh would insist on preventing him from visiting the Kaaba. Most
of his companions or perhaps all of them were ready to fight Quraysh and
other than Quraysh. They were zealous for that. During that enthusiasm,
al-Miqdad rose expressing the situation of the all. He said: O messenger
of Allah, we do not say to you as the Israelites have said to Prophet
Moses (s): **So go thou and thy Lord and fight! We will sit here** but
we say: go, you and your Lord, and fight; we will fight with you. O
messenger of Allah, by Allah, if you take us to Bard al-Ghamad,[1] we
will go with you even if

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It was one of the impenetrable forts in Yemen. Marching towards
that fort did mean that they would face inevitable death because the
fort was very strong and defended.  
 The fort, whose inhabitants were polytheists, was surrounded by
mountains and the ways leading to it were very rough.

just one of us will remain alive. The Prophet (s) became delighted to
hear that. They paid him homage and promised him to support him until
the last breath. They were one thousand and four hundred men. Among them
was the head of the hypocrites; ibn Salool.[1] No one had refrained from
paying homage to him except a man called al-Jadd bin Qays al-Ansari.[2]

### Fright of the polytheists and request for peace

As soon as Quraysh homage (the homage of ar-Radhwan)[3] their hearts
shook and their chests were filled with fright

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Halabi said in his Seera: The historians, who had recorded
the history of the battle of al-Hudaybiya, mentioned that Quraysh had
sent a message to ibn Salool while he was with the Prophet (s). They
said to him: You can enter Mecca, if you like, and circumambulate the
Kaaba. His son Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him) said to him: O
father, for the sake of Allah, do not shame us everywhere. How will you
circumambulate the Kaaba while the Prophet (s) will not? Then he refused
to do that and said: I will not circumambulate the House until the
Prophet (s) will do. When the Prophet (s) knew of that, he thanked Ibn
Salool and asked Allah to be pleased with him. So ibn Salool was one of
those who had paid homage to the Prophet (s) under the tree. Hence no
one of those, who were with the Prophet (s) in al-Hudaybiya, had
refrained from paying homage to the Prophet (s) except al-Jadd bin Qays
al-Ansary according to all of the historians.  
 **[2]** Al-Halabi said in his Seera that Salama bin al-Aqwa had said:
We have promised the Prophet (s) to die for him and none of us has
refrained from that save al-Jadd bin Qays. He has stuck to the armpit of
his camel to hide himself from people.  
 **[3]** This homage had been paid to the Prophet (s) under a tree;
therefore it had been called the homage of the tree and it also had been
called the homage of ar-Radhwan (pleasedness of Allah with the
believers) due to the saying of Allah: ***(Certainly Allah was well
pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the
tree)*** and His saying at the end of the sura: ***(Allah has promised
those among them who believe and do good, forgiveness and a great
reward).***  
 Blessed were those who had kept to faith and good doings until they met
their Lord Who had been pleased with them and praised them in His Book
and promised them with forgiveness and great reward. Allah said: ***(And
if you desire Allah and His Messenger and the latter abode, then surely
Allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a mighty reward) and
((As for) those who say: Our Lord is Allah, then continue in the right
way, the angels descend upon them, saying: Fear not, nor be grieved, and
receive good news of the garden which you were promised).*** The

especially after Akrima bin Abu Jahl with five hundred knights had
attacked the Muslims and the Prophet (s), as mentioned in al-Kashshaf,
had sent to him some of his companions who had defeated him and his men
and forced them to retreat until they resorted to the walls of Mecca.
Ibn Abbas said: Allah has made the Muslims defeat Akrima and his men
with stones until they entered into the house and then they knew that
they would not be able to stand against Muhammad (s) and his companions.

Then the wise people of Quraysh were obliged to request the Prophet (s)
for peace. They had known before that the Prophet (s) had said: I swear
by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, that if Quraysh invites me today for a
plan, in which they ask me for keeping relations of kinship, I will
respond to them so they sent to the Prophet (s) some of their notables,
at the head of whom was Suhayl bin Amr bin Abd Widd al-Aamiry to
represent all of Quraysh before the Prophet (s) to ask for a truce on
some conditions which they had put. The conditions were too oppressive
for the Muslims and so they refused them but the polytheists of Quraysh
insisted on them resorting to the promise the Prophet (s) had promised
to respond to them if whenever they asked him for a matter of kinship.
The Prophet (s) had been ordered by Allah to grant this promise and to
act according to it. He had accepted their heavy conditions because he
obeyed the revelation of Allah and according to the advantage that Allah
had been aware of. Later on all the Muslims knew that advantage. You
will see the details in a coming chapter inshallah.

### Umar disdains the conditions of the truce

When peace was determined with those conditions by the two sides, Umar
bin al-Khattab became too angry and zealotry occupied his mind. He came
to Abu Bakr while he was flamed up with rage. He said to Abu Bakr:[1] O
Abu Bakr, is he not the messenger of Allah?

Abu Bakr said: Yes, he is.

Umar said: Are we not Muslims?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

sincere believers are far above all the false traditions the fabricators
have fabricated against them for the holy verses of the Qur'an refute
all these false traditions.  
 **[1]** As in al-Halabis Seera and other books of history.

Abu Bakr said: Yes, we are!

Umar said: Are they not polytheists?

Abu Bakr said: Yes, they are?

Umar said: Then why do we submit to their conditions?

Abu Bakr said: O man, he is the messenger of Allah and he does never
disobey his Lord, Who supports him. Keep to him, follow him and obey him
until you die. I witness that he is the messenger of Allah[1]

Muslim mentioned in his Sahih, vol.2 chap. the Truce of al-Hudaybiya
that Umar had said to the Prophet (s): Are we not on the truth and are
they not on the untruth?

The Prophet (s) said: Yes.

Umar said: Then why do we submit to their conditions and com back
(without offering the hajj) before Allah has judged between us and them?

The Prophet (s) said: O ibn al-Khattab, I am the messenger of Allah and
Allah will never neglect me at all.

Umar became too angry and went to Abu Bakr saying to him: Are we not on
the truth and are they not on the untruth?

Abu Bakr said: Yes, we are.

Umar said: Are our killed ones not in Paradise and are their killed ones
not in Hell?

Abu Bakr said: Yes, they are.

Umar said: Then why do we submit to them and do not defend our religion?

Abu Bakr said: O ibn al-Khattab, he is the messenger of Allah and Allah
will never neglect him at all. Many other scholars have mentioned this
tradition in their books.

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his Sahih[2] that Umar had said to the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Woe! As if Umar doubted the prophethood of the Prophet (s)!  
 **[2]** vol.2 p.81.

Prophet (s): Are you not really the messenger of Allah?

The Prophet (s) said: Yes, I am.

Umar said: Are we not on the truth and is our enemy not on the untruth?

The Prophet (s) said: Yes, we are.

Umar said: Then why do we submit to them and do not defend our religion?

The Prophet (s) said: I am the messenger of Allah. I do not disobey[1]
Him and He will support me.

Umar said: Have you not told us that we would circumambulate the Kaaba?

The Prophet (s) said: Yes, I have; but have I told you that we would
circumambulate the Kaaba this year?

Umar said: No, you have not.

The Prophet (s) said: You will come to the Kaaba and you will
circumambulate it.[2]

Umar came to Abu Bakr and said to him: O Abu Bakr, is he not really the
prophet of Allah?

Abu Bakr said: Yes, he is.

Umar said: Are we not on the truth and is not our enemy on the untruth?

Abu Bakr said: Yes, we are.

Umar said: Then why do we submit and do not defend our religion?

Abu Bakr said: O man, he is the messenger of Allah. He does not

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Prophets saying I do not disobey Him confirms what we have
said that the Prophet (s) has been ordered by Allah to carry out the
truce as it has been taken place.  
 **[2]** In the year of al-Fat~h (the conquest) when the Prophet (s)
took the key of Mecca, he sent for Umar. When he came, the Prophet (s)
said to him: O Umar, it is this that I have said to you. In the farewell
hajj (al-wada) when the Prophet (s) stopped at Arafa, he sent for Umar
too and said to him: It is this that I have said to you.

disobey his Lord and Allah will support him.[1] Keep to him and follow
him. By Allah, he is on the truth.

Umar said: Has he not told us that we would go to the Kaaba and would
circumambulate it?

Abu Bakr said: Yes, he has, but has he told you that you would
circumambulate the Kaaba this year?

Umar said: No, he has not.

He said: You will visit the Kaaba and you will circumambulate it.

Umar said: I did many things for that.[2]

When the Prophet (s) finished writing the book of the truce, he said to
his companions: Go and slaughter the sacrifices and then cut your hair.
The narrator added: By Allah, no one of them moved to carry out the
Prophets order. The Prophet (s) repeated that for three times. When no
one of them did that, the Prophet (s) came into his tent and then he
went out without talking to anyone of them. He slaughtered a camel and
then he asked a companion to cut his hair. When the companions saw that,
they began to slaughter the sacrifices and then they cut each others
hair until they were about to kill each other. Ahmad bin Hanbal
mentioned this tradition in his Musnad from al-Musawwir bin Makhrama and
Marwan bin al-Hakam. Al-Halabi in his Seera and many other historians,
when talking about the truce of al-Hudaybiya, mentioned that Umar had
debated with the Prophet (s) on that day. Then Abu Ubayda bin al-Jarrah
said to him: O ibn al-Khattab (Umar), do you not hear what the Prophet
(s) is saying? We resort to Allah from the evil of the Satan! Al-Halabi
and other historians mentioned that the Prophet (s) had said to Umar on
that day: O Umar, I myself have agreed so why have you not agreed? They
also mentioned that Umar often said after that: I am still keeping on
fasting, praying, paying charities

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abu Bakrs saying he does not disobey his Lord showed that Abu
Bakr was aware that the Prophet (s) had been ordered by Allah to
conclude the agreement of peace.  
 **[2]** This word of Umar showed clearly the great doings he had done
to spoil the peace and because of that Umar and his followers did not
obey the Prophet (s) when he ordered them to slaughter the sacrifices
until he repeated his order for three times. You will see the details
later on inshallah.

and setting slaves free so that my speech I have said to the Prophet (s)
may be forgiven

### Carrying out the treaty of peace

The Prophet (s) on that day did not pay any attention to the resistance
of those people for he had been ordered by Allah to do that. The treaty
of peace was too heavy because of its oppressive conditions. The Prophet
(s) sent for Imam Ali (s) to write the form of the treaty. He said to
Imam Ali (s): Write: in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the merciful.
Suhayl bin Amr said: We do not know this. Let him write: in the name of
You, O Allah. The Muslims began clamoring and said: No, by Allah, he
will not write except what the messenger of Allah has said. But the
Prophet (s) stopped the dispute by saying to Imam Ali (s): Write: in the
name of You, O Allah. Imam Ali (s) wrote the book as the Prophet (s) had
ordered him. Then the Prophet (s) said to him: Write: This is what
Muhammad, the messenger of Allah, has agreed on with Suhayl bin Amr.
Suhayl said: If we have regarded you as the messenger of Allah, we will
not have fought you or prevented you from the House (the Kaaba). But let
him write: this is what Muhammad bin Abdullah has agreed on with Suhayl
bin Amr. The Muslims broke out shouting and denying what Suhayl had
said. They refused that and insisted on writing what the Prophet (s) had
said. Sedition was about to take place. The Prophet (s) said: I am
Muhammad the messenger of Allah even if you do not believe in me. And I
am Muhammad bin Abdullah. O Ali, write: This is what Muhammad bin
Abdullah has agreed on with Suhayl bin Amr. Imam Ali (s) wrote it
unwillingly. The Prophet (s) said to him: O Abul Hasan (Ali), you will
be in the same situation one day or he said to him: O Abul Hasan, you
will receive the same and you will respond while you are oppressed.[1]

The conditions of the truce required that the Prophet (s) and his
companions were to go back from al-Hudaybiya to Medina and in the next
year the people of Quraysh were to go out of Mecca so that the Prophet
(s) and his companions would enter it and would stay there

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This saying of the Prophet (s) has been considered by all of the
Muslims as one of the signs of prophethood and one of the signs of
Islam. The details have mentioned in al-Halabis Seera, ad-Dahlanis Seera
and other books of history.

for three days. The Prophet (s) and his companions had to come with no
weapons except swords in the sheaths. The war between them had to stop
for ten years[1] during which people would live peacefully. They had to
avoid provoking each other. Whoever of (other tribes of) the Arabs
wanted to conclude peace with Muhammad,[2] could do that and whoever
wanted to ally with Quraysh could do that. The two sides had not to have
hidden grudge in their hearts against each other. They had to refrain
from robbery and treason. If any one of Quraysh, who believed in
Muhammad (s), resorted to Muhammad (s) without permission of his master,
he must be returned to his master and if some one of Muhammads
companions resorted to Quraysh after having apostatized, Quraysh would
not have to return him to Muhammad (s). The Muslims said: Glory be to
Allah! How do we return a Muslim, who resorts to us, to the polytheists
of Quraysh? The Muslims found it too difficult to accept this condition.
They said: O messenger of Allah, do you accept this condition against
yourself? He said: Yes, I do. He, who leaves us after having
apostatized, let Allah do away with him and he, who comes to us after
being a Muslim and we return him to them, Allah will grant him
deliverance.

While the Prophet (s) and Suhayl bin Amr were writing the treaty with
the agreed upon conditions, Abu Jandal al-Aass bin Suhayl bin Amr (the
son of Suhayl bin Amr) came to the Muslims trailing with his ties. Abu
Jandal had become a Muslim in Mecca some time ago but his father had
prevented him from immigrating to Medina. He tied him and put him in
prison. When Abu Jandal heard that the Prophet (s) and his companions
had come to al-Hudaybiya, he played a trick to get out of prison. He
took a way between the mountains until he came to the Muslims who became
pleased to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Due to other traditions mentioned by the historians the period
of the truce was two years or four years.  
 **[2]** The tribe of Khuzaa concluded a treaty with the Prophet (s).
They had been before the allies of the Prophets grandfather Abdul
Muttalib. The tribe of Bakr allied with Quraysh. Then a war took place
between Khuzaa and Bakr, in which Quraysh supported their ally (the
tribe of Bakr) against the Prophets ally (the tribe of Khuzaa) and hence
Quraysh broke the treaty of al-Hudaybiya with the Prophet (s) and then
the Prophet (s) declared to invade Quraysh. The result of that invasion
was the great victory and the significant conquest of Mecca.

receive him. But his father Suhayl dragged him with his clothes and hit
him on the face severely[1] while saying to the Prophet (s): O Muhammad,
this is the first one whom I will ask you to return to me. The Prophet
(s) said to him: We have not finished writing the treaty yet. Suhayl
said: Then I will not make peace with you. The Prophet (s) said to him:
Let him be my resorter then! he said: I will not. The Prophet (s) said:
You are to do that. He said: I will not do. Mukriz bin Hafs and Huwaytib
bin Abdul Uzza, who were notable men of Quraysh, said to the Prophet
(s): O Muhammad, we will protect him for you. They took Abu Jandal into
a pavilion and took his father away from him. Then Suhayl said: O
Muhammad, the matter between me and you has been concluded and completed
before my son came to you. The Prophet (s) said: You are right. Then the
Prophet (s) said to Abu Jandal: Be patient and wait for the reward of
Allah. The treaty of peace has been concluded before you came and we do
not betray. We requested your father concerning you but he refused.
Allah will grant you and the weak like you with deliverance.

Here Umar jumped to Abu Jandal tempting him to kill his father and
trying to give him a sword. Umar said, as mentioned in ad-Dahlanis Seera
and other books: I wished he had taken the sword and struck his father.
He said to Abu Jandal: One may kill his father. By Allah, if we had met
our fathers, we would have killed them. But Abu Jandal did not respond
to Umar in killing his father because he feared to cause sedition[2] and
he obeyed the Prophet (s) when he had ordered him to be patient and to
wait for the reward of Allah.[3] He said to Umar: Why do you yourself
not kill him? Umar said: The Prophet (s) has forbidden us from killing
him and other than him.[4]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Muslims began weeping for him.  
 **[2]** If Suhayl had been killed on that day, sedition would have
occurred between the Muslims and Quraysh the evil of which would have
spread everywhere.  
 **[3]** No doubt that when Umar tempted Abu Jandal to kill his father,
he objected to the Prophet (s), who had ordered Abu Jandal to be patient
and to expect the deliverance of Allah.  
 **[4]** This was another objection to the Prophet (s), who had
forbidden his companions from killing Suhayl and other than Syhayl but
Umar had tempted Abu Jandal to kill Suhayl.
