(Part 4)
========

#### Part 4

33. Uncles inheritance from his sisters son
-------------------------------------------

Saeed bin Mansoor mentioned in his Sunan: Once a man recognized his
sister, who had been taken captive in the pre-Islamic period. He found
her with a son but he had not known who the father of the son was. He
bought them both and set them free (for they were as slaves). The son
(when he grew up) gained some wealth and then he died. The uncle came to
ibn Massood and told him the matter. Ibn Massood asked him to go to Umar
and then to come back to tell him what Umar would say. He went to Umar
and told him his matter. Umar said to him: He (the nephew) is not your
relative and he is not included in the verdicts of inheritance. Umar
refused to let the man inherit his nephew. The uncle went back to ibn
Massood and told him what Umar had said. Ibn Massood came with the man
to Umar and said to him: How did you give this fatwa to this man? Umar
said: I have not found him as one of his blood relations nor has he been
among those who have deserved inheritance; therefore I have not
permitted him to inherit that young man. What do you think, O Abu
Abdullah? Ibn Massood said: I see him as a kin (for being his uncle) and
a benefactor (for he has set his nephew free from being as a slave) and
so I see that he has the right to inherit his nephew. And then Umar
annulled his first judgment and permitted the man to inherit his nephew.

This event has been mentioned by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in his Kanzol
Ummal, vol. 6 p.8. This fatwa would have been true if the mother had
died before her son.

34. Iddah of a pregnant woman
-----------------------------

Al-Bayhaqi mentioned in his book Shuab al-Eeman that once a pregnant
woman had asked Umar for a legal judgment saying to him: I have given
birth to my child after the death of my husband and before the end of my
iddah. He asked her to wait until the end of the longest one of the two
terms of iddah.[1] Ubayy bin Kab objected to Umar at the presence of the
woman and said to him that her iddah had ended since she had given birth
to her child and he permitted her to get married before the end of the
four months and ten days (of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Four months and ten days.

the iddah). Umar said nothing to the woman save this statement: I am
hearing what you are hearing[1] and he gave up his fatwa. After that
Umar agreed with Ubayy bin Kab and said: If she had given birth to her
child and her husband was still not buried yet, she could get
married.[2] The followers of the four Sunni sects have followed this
principle until nowadays.

But we, the Shia, have found in the holy Qur'an two verses opposing each
other concerning the iddah of a woman whose husband dies while she is
pregnant; in the first verse Allah has said: **and (as for) the pregnant
women, their prescribed time is that they lay down their burden.**
Qur'an, 65:4 and in the second one He has said: **And (as for) those of
you who die and leave wives behind, they should keep themselves in
waiting for four months and ten days.** Qur'an, 65:4 A pregnant woman,
whose husband dies, can get married after giving birth to her child if
she follows the first verse even if she has not passed the period of
iddah mentioned in the second verse but if she follows the second verse,
she can get married only after passing the period mentioned in the verse
even if she has not given birth to her child yet. In both suppositions
she will objects to one of the verses and she cannot follow both of the
verses at the same time unless she will wait until passing the longer of
the two periods (either to pass four months and ten days or until giving
birth to her baby) and then she has no way except to do that. This is
what has been narrated from Imam Ali (s) and ibn Abbas.[3] The Shia have
followed their imams in acting according to this opinion.

### Note

The Muslims have disagreed on the beginning of the iddah of death,[4]
which is four months and ten days. The Sunni believe that the iddah of
death begins since the husband dies whether the wife knows of her
husbands death or she does not know because of his being far away

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 5 p.166.  
 **[2]** Sunan of al-Bayhaqi, Sunan of ibn Abu Shayba and Kanzol Ummal,
vol. 5 p.166.  
 **[3]** Mentioned by az-Zamakhshari in his Kashshaf when interpreting
this verse ***(and (as for) the pregnant women, their prescribed time is
that they lay down their burden).*** This is the opinion of Ahlul Bayt
(s) and it is the most cautious opinion.  
 **[4]** When a wifes husband dies.

from her or because of any other reason.

As for the Shia, they believe that the iddah of death begins when a wife
knows of her husbands death even if the death has taken place some time
ago. She has no right to get married until she passes the iddah, which
is four months and ten days, since the moment she knows of her husbands
death. And then she can get married according to the clear verse after
passing the iddah and after the mourning that a wife has to show after
the death of her husband.

35. Marrying a missing husbands wife
------------------------------------

Ad-Dawaleebi said:[1] also Umar has judged according to his own opinion
concerning the wife of a missing husband. He judged that a wife of a
missing husband can get married after passing four years since the
absence of the husband and after passing the iddah even if it had not
been proved that her husband had died so that the wife would not remain
in suspense forever. So was the opinion of Malik bin Anass which was
unlike the opinion of the Hanafites and the Shafiites who believed that
a wife had to wait until she would become certain of her husbands death
because he would be considered as alive until a certain evidence on his
death would appear. But the opinion of Umar was worthy of being regarded
because it protected the wife of a missing husband from certain harms
and dangers. He permitted the wife of a missing husband to get married
despite that this decision opposed the clear texts of the Sharia, on
which the rest of jurisprudents depended. This was not but changing the
verdicts according to the change of the conditions which must be
regarded to avoid some harms. The Prophet (s) had said: No harm (to be
done against the others) and no reciprocal harm! Allah had said: **and
He has not laid upon you any hardship in religion.** Qur'an, 22:78 In
doing so, Umar did not annul the legal texts but he activated them in
the light of the benefit and according to the different circumstances

As for the Shia, they have followed their infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt
(s) in this matter. They have had fixed texts deciding according to the
apparent principles. These texts say that when no information

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In his book Usool al-Fiqh, p.241.

can be obtained about a missing husband, his wife, if there is someone
spends on her, must wait until her husband comes or his death is proved
or something like that. But if the wife has no one to spend on her, she
can bring her case to the legal judge to decide. When she does so, the
judge will begin to search for the missing husband for four years in the
possible places, in which the husband can be found, otherwise he looks
for him in everywhere since the moment when the wife offers her case
before him. Then the judge divorces her or he orders her guardian (the
one who is responsible for her) to decide. It is necessary that the
guardian may decide first but if he refuses to divorce her, then the
judge is to divorce her but after passing the period of researching or
after the return of the messengers who go to look for the missing
husband or the like. After that the wife spends the period of the iddah
of death which is four months and ten days and then she can get married.
If the missing husband comes back during her iddah, he will have the
right to marry her again but if he comes back after the iddah, he will
have no right to marry her whether he finds her married or not. This is
the principle of the Shia on this matter according to their infallible
imams (s).

36. Selling bondwomen
---------------------

All the Sunni Muslims of the four sects have confirmed that the one, who
had prohibited selling bondwomen, was Umar whereas it had been
permissible at the time of the Prophet (s), the reign of Abu Bakr and
some time of Umars rule. They have considered that as one of Umars
virtues as they have considered Taraweeh Prayer and its likes.

But the scholars, who have looked for the truth of this matter, found in
the true prophetic traditions that the Prophet (s) had prohibited
selling bondwomen and so found that Umar had followed those traditions
and acted according to them. He (Umar) said to his son Abdullah that he
had heard the Prophet (s) saying: A bondwoman is not to be sold, nor to
be given as a gift, nor to be bequeathed and not to be considered as
entailment. Her owner enjoys himself with her along his life. When he
dies, she is to be set free.

Ibn Abbas narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: Every bondwoman, who
gives birth to a child from her master, becomes free after his death.

These two traditions have been mentioned by Abu Jafar Muhammad bin
al-Hasan at-Toossi in his book al-Khilaf, vol.2. And according to the
apparent meaning of the two traditions, it was clear that Umar had not
prohibited selling bondwomen due to his own opinion, but he had acted
according to the tradition of his son Abdullah and the tradition of ibn
Abbas.

But Sheikh at-Toossi was forced by the traditions of the infallible
imams of Ahlul Bayt (s) about this subject to interpret these two
traditions in a way to make them submit to the doctrine of Ahlul Bayt
(s). He said: When a bondwoman gives birth to a child from her master
while she is still in his possession, she will have the right to be free
due to her bearing a child. It is not permissible to sell a pregnant
bondwoman and when she gives birth to her child, she is still in the
possession of her master and she is not permissible to be sold as long
as her child is alive but when her child dies, she may be sold anyhow.
If her master dies, she is made in the possession of her child and then
she is set free due to that. If her master does not leave save her, the
share of her child (in her) is set free and she becomes among the shares
of the rest of the heirs. Such was the opinion of Ali (s), ibn
az-Zubayr, ibn Abbas, Abu Saeed al-Khidri, ibn Massood, al-Waleed bin
Uqba, Suwayd bin Ghafla, Umar bin Abdul Aziz, ibn Seereen and Abdul
Melik bin Yala. Dawood said: It is permissible to dispose of her in any
way but he did not give any details. Abu Haneefa, his companions,
ash-Shafiiy and Malik said: She is not permissible to be sold nor to be
disposed of in any way but she is to be set free when her master dies.

Sheikh at-Toossi added: Our evidence on that is the consensus of the
sect (the Shia) and their traditions. Also there is no disagreement on
the possibility of being slept with by her possessor but if she becomes
dispossessed, sleeping with her becomes not possible. The rule says that
she is a slave and he, who pretends that she is freed after the death of
her master, has to show the evidence on that. The tradition narrated by
ibn Abbas that the Prophet (s) had said: Every

bondwoman, who gives birth to a child from her master, becomes free
after his death means that when her master dies and she becomes her
childs possession, then she is set free due to that. The tradition
narrated by Abdullah bin Umar that the Prophet (s) had said: A bondwoman
is not to be sold, nor to be given as a gift, nor to be bequeathed and
not to be considered as entailment. Her owner enjoys himself with her
along his life. When he dies, she is to be set free means that she
cannot be sold as long as her child is alive. When her master dies, she
is set free due to what we have said in the first tradition.

37. Necessity of Tayammum[1] when there is no water
---------------------------------------------------

It suffices as evidence on this matter that Allah has said in the sura
of al-Maida: **O you who believe! when you rise up to prayer, wash your
faces and your hands as far as the elbows, and wipe your heads and your
feet to the ankles; and if you are under an obligation to perform a
total ablution, then wash (yourselves) and if you are sick or on a
journey, or one of you comes from the privy, or you have touched the
women, and you cannot find water, betake yourselves to pure earth and
wipe your faces and your hands therewith.** Qur'an, 5:6 and He has said
in the sura of an-Nissa: **O you who believe! do not go near prayer when
you are intoxicated until you know (well) what you say, nor when you are
under an obligation to perform a bath, unless (you are) traveling on the
road, until you have washed yourselves; and if you are sick, or on a
journey, or one of you comes from the privy or you have touched the
women, and you cannot find water, betake yourselves to pure earth, then
wipe your faces and your hands; surely Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving.**
Qur'an, 4:43

The true traditions on this matter are many and one confirming the other
and all the umma has agreed unanimously on that except Umar, the only
one who had contradicted the consensus. The famous traditions narrated
from him showed that he had believed that one, who had no water, had not
to offer the prayer until he would find

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tayammum is performing ritual ablution, before offering prayers
and other obligations, with earth when there is no water.

water.[1]

Al-Bukhari and Muslim mentioned in their Sahihs a tradition narrated by
Saeed bin Abdurrahman bin Abzi from his father that once a man had come
to Umar and said to him: I have been in ritual impurity and I could not
find water to perform the ritual ablution. Umar said to him: Do not
offer the prayer! Ammar bin Yassir was present then. Ammar said: O
Ameerul Momineen, have you not remembered once when you and I were in a
brigade (during a war) and we became impure and could not find water (to
perform ablution). You did not offer the prayer but I rubbed myself with
earth and offered the prayer. Then the Prophet (s) said: It would have
sufficed you to hit the earth with your hands and then you blow and rub
your face and your two hands. Umar said: O Ammar, fear Allah! Ammar
said: If I do not narrate it!![2] Umar said: We will see how to deal
with you!

It has been said that ibn Massood had adopted the opinion of Umar in
this matter. Al-Bukhari, and others, mentioned a tradition that Shaqeeq
bin Salama had said: Once I was with Abdullah bin Massood and Abu Musa
al-Ashari. Abu Musa asked Abdullah bin Massood: O Abu Abdurrahman, if
one becomes impure and he does not find water, what will he do then?
Abdullah ibn Massood said: He does not offer the prayer until he finds
water. Abu Musa said: Then how about the saying of Ammar when the
Prophet (s) has said to him: It would have sufficed you to? Ibn Massood
said: Do you not see that Ammar has not been satisfied with that? Abu
Musa said: Let us put the saying of Ammar aside! What do you do with
this verse he recited to him the verse of Tayammum mentioned in the sura
of al-Maida. Abdullah did not know what to say.[3]

I say: Abdullah bin Massood was cautious in his speech with Abu Musa
because he feared both Umar and Abu Musa. There is no doubt in that.
Allah is more aware!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Irshad as-Sari fee Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari by al-Qastalani, vol.2
p.131.  
 **[2]** Ammar said that out of his fear from Umar because the saying of
Umar We will see how to deal with you was as a threat to Ammar.  
 **[3]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.50.

38. Two supererogatory Rakas after Asr prayer
---------------------------------------------

Muslim mentioned in his Sahih[1] a tradition narrated by Urwa bin
az-Zubayr from his father that Aaisha (the Prophets wife) had said: The
Prophet (s) had never ignored the two rakas (which he had been used to
offer) after Asr prayer in my house at all.

He also mentioned a tradition narrated by Abdurrahman bin al-Aswad from
his father that Aaisha had said: There were two prayers that the
messenger of Allah (s) had never ignored, when being in my house,
neither secretly nor openly; two rakas before Fajr Prayer and two rakas
after Asr Prayer.

He mentioned another tradition that al-Aswad and Masrooq had said: We
witness that Aaisha has said: Whenever the messenger of Allah (s) was in
my house, he offered the two rakas after Asr prayer.

But Umar bin al-Khattab prohibited them (these two rakas) and punished
whoever offered them.

Malik mentioned in his Muwatta[2] a tradition narrated by ibn Shihab
from as-Saib bin Yazeed who said that he had seen Umar bin al-Khattab
beating al-Mukandar[3] because he had offered two rakas after Asr
prayer.

Abdurrazaq mentioned that Zayd bin Khalid had said that once the caliph
Umar had seen him offering two rakas after Asr prayer and beaten him for
thatthen Umar said: O Zayd, unless I fear that people may take it (the
prayer after Asr prayer) as a (ladder) to prayer until the night, I will
not punish for it.

He also mentioned a tradition like that narrated by Tameem ad-Dariy but
he said in it Umar said: but I fear that some people may come after you
that they offer prayers since the afternoon until

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** vol.1 p.309.  
 **[2]** At the end of the chapter (prohibiting praying (two rakas)
before Fajr prayer and after Asr prayer.  
 **[3]** Ibn Muhammad bin al-Mukandar al-Qarashi at-Taymi al-Madani, as
in Sharh al-Muwatta by az-Zarqani.

the sunset that they may offer prayers during the time,[1] at which the
Prophet (s) had prohibited from offering prayers.

39. Displacing Abrahams temple
------------------------------

The temple of Prophet Abraham (s) is the rock by which the pilgrims
offer prayer according to the saying of Allah: **Take as your place of
worship the place where Abraham stood (to pray).** Qur'an, 2:125

Abraham and Ishmael (s), when building the House, stood on this rock to
hand over rocks and clay. The rock was stuck to the Kaaba but the Arabs
after Prophet Abraham (s) moved it to its place nowadays. When Allah has
sent Muhammad (s) as the prophet and granted him with means of power, he
stuck the rock to the Kaaba again as it had been at the time of his
fathers Abraham and Ishmael. When Umar became the caliph, he displaced
it as it is nowadays. At the time of the Prophet (s) and the time of Abu
Bakr the rock was stuck to the Kaaba.[2]

In the seventeenth year of hijra Umar enlarged the mosque by adding to
it some of the companions houses around it. The companions had refused
to sell their houses but Umar tore down their houses and put their
prices in the treasury until they, later on, took their monies.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He meant the time of sunset that the Prophet (s) had forbidden
from offering prayers in. The true prophetic traditions about this
matter have been mentioned in the books of Hadith. Malik in his Muwatta
mentioned a tradition from ibn Umar that the Prophet (s) had said: Do
not offer prayers at the sunshine nor at the sunset. The wisdom behind
this was that the umma shouls not imitate the Magi in their worshipping
the sun when shining and when setting. But the caliph Umar became
cautious to prevent the Muslims from offering prayers after Asr prayer
at all and not only the time of the sunset. And so he contradicted the
Sharia even if he intended to do good. Would that he had been satisfied
with prohibiting offering this prayer without beating the servants of
Allah while offering their prayers before their Lord!  
 **[2]** Tabaqat of ibn Sad, vol.3 p.204, Tareekh al-Khulafa of
as-Sayooti, p.53, Sharh Nahjol Balagha of ibn Abul Hadeed, vol.3 p.113,
Kitab al-Haywan of ad-Dimyari, Tareekh Umar by Abul Faraj al-Jawzi
p.60.  
 **[3]** Mentioned by ibn al-Atheer in Al-Kamil, the events of the 17th
year of hijra and by other historians.

40. Weeping for the dead
------------------------

The sorrow of man for losing his lovers and his crying for them are
parts of the sentiment of human beings besides that they are among the
requirements of mercy if they are not accompanied with bad sayings and
doings.

The Prophet (s) has said: Whatever comes out of the heart and the eye is
from Allah and mercy and whatever comes out of the hand and the tongue
is from the Satan.[1]

The Muslims have done so everywhere and always without having any
evidence to prohibit it. The necessity required it (sorrowfulness or
crying) to be permissible.

In fact the Prophet (s) himself has cried in many occasions and he has
approved the others when crying in many occasions and admired it
(crying) in other occasions. In fact he might have invited to it.

The Prophet (s) has cried for his uncle Hamza, the lion of Allah and the
lion of His messenger. Ibn Abdul Birr and other historians said When the
Prophet (s) saw Hamza killed, he cried and when he saw him mutilated, he
sobbed.[2]

Al-Waqidy said: The Prophet (s) often cried when Safiyya[3] cried and he
sobbed when she sobbed. He added: Fatima began crying and the messenger
of Allah (s) began crying too for her crying.[4]

Anass bin Malik said: When the army of the Muslims was in Muta, Zayd
took the banner but he was injured. Then Jafar took the banner and he
was injured too. Then Abdullah bin Rawaha took the banner and he was
injured too. The Prophets eyes were shedding tears[5]

Ibn Abdul Birr said in his al-Isteeab: The Prophet (s) cried for Jafar
and Zayd and he said: They are my brothers, friends and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A tradition narrated by ibn Abbas and mentioned by Ahmad in his
Musnad, vol.1 p.335.  
 **[2]** Al-Isteeab by ibn Abdul Birr, biography of Hamza bin Abdul
Muttalib.  
 **[3]** She was the Prophets aunt.  
 **[4]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.387.  
 **[5]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.148, vol.3 p.39.

talkers.

Anass said: then we came to him (to the Prophet (s)) while Ibraheem (the
Prophets son) was dying. The Prophets eyes began shedding tears.
Abdurrahman bin Ouff said to him: Do you cry while you are the messenger
of Allah?! The Prophet (s) said: O ibn Ouff, it is mercy! Then he cried
again and said: The eye sheds tears and the heart becomes sad but we do
not say what discontents our Lord. O Ibraheem, we are sad for your
leave![1]

Ussama bin Zayd said: The daughter of the Prophet (s) sent for him that
one of her sons had died. The Prophet (s) went with Sad bin Ubada, Maath
bin Jabal, Ubayy bin Kab and Zayd bin Thabit. The Prophet (s) lifted the
boy while his breath was still clattering. The Prophets eyes began
shedding tears. Sad said: O messenger of Allah, what is this? The
Prophet (s) said: It is mercy that Allah has put in the hearts of His
people. Allah has mercy on the merciful ones of His people[2]

Abdullah bin Umar said: One day Sad bin Ubada became ill. The Prophet
(s) came to visit him with Abdurrahman bin Ouff, Sad bin Abu Waqqas and
Abdullah bin Massood. He found him in the middle of his relatives. The
Prophet (s) asked: Is he dead? They said: No, O messenger of Allah. The
Prophet (s) began crying. When the people saw the Prophet (s) crying,
they began crying too. Then the Prophet (s) said: Allah does not punish
for the tears of the eyes nor for the sadness of the heart but He
punishes and has mercy (on people) for this. He pointed to his
tongue.[3]

Ibn Abdul Birr said in al-Isteeab: When the Prophet (s) was informed
that Jafar had been martyred, he went to his wife (Jafars wife) Asma
bint Umays and consoled her. Then Fatima (s) (the Prophets daughter)
came in crying and saying: O uncle! The Prophet (s) said: Let the criers
cry for one like Jafar![4]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.154.  
 **[2]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.152, Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 chap.
Crying for the dead.  
 **[3]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.155, Sahih of Muslim, vol.1
p.341.  
 **[4]** In this tradition the Prophet (s) has approved crying for the
dead and ordered of it. In fact the crying of Fatima (s) only could be
enough evidence on the subject.

The historians like ibn Jareer, Ibnul Atheer, ibn Katheer and ibn Abd
Rabbih mentioned the tradition of ibn Umar that Ahmad bin Hanbal had
mentioned in his Musnad.[1] Ibn Umar narrated: When the Prophet (s) (and
his army) had come back from the battle of Uhud, the women of the Ansar
began crying for their killed husbands. The Prophet (s) said: But Hamza
has no one crying for him! Then the Prophet (s) went to bed. When he
waked up, he heard the women crying. He said: Then they are crying for
Hamza today.

Ibn Abdul Birr in al-Isteeab quoted from al-Waqidy his saying: The women
of the Ansar, after this saying of the Prophet (s) But Hamza has no one
crying for him, did not cry for a dead one of the Ansar unless they
cried for Hamza first.

Crying for Hamza at the time of the Prophet (s), the time of the
companions and the time of the companions successors was clear evidence
on the permissibility of the crying for one like Hamza even if it was a
long time since he had died.

The saying of the Prophet (s) But Hamza has no one crying for him and
his saying Let the criers cry for one like Jafar proved that crying for
(good) dead people were desirable.

In spite of all that, Umar bin al-Khattab had prohibited crying for a
dead man whatever great he was. In fact he beat with a stick, threw with
stones and threw soil on whoever cried for the dead. He did that since
the time of the Prophet (s) and he kept on that until the end of his
life.[2]

Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad a tradition narrated by ibn
Abbas about the death of Ruqayya, the Prophets daughter, and the crying
of women for her and then he said: Umar began beating the women with his
whip. The Prophet (s) said to him: Let them cry! The Prophet (s) sat by
the tomb and Fatima (s) was crying beside him. The Prophet (s) began
wiping Fatimas eyes with his dress compassionately.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.2 p.40.  
 **[2]** Al-Bukhari's Sahih, vol. 1 p.255.  
 **[3]** vol.1 p.335.

Ahmad also mentioned in his Musnad[1] a tradition narrated by Abu
Hurayra that once a procession of funerals passed by the Prophet (s).
Among them there were some women crying. Umar scolded them. The Prophet
(s) said: Let them cry. The heart is sad and the eye is shedding
tears.[2]

Aaisha and Umar were in disagreement on this matter. Umar and his son
Abdullah narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: A dead is tortured
because of the crying of his relatives for him\\her. In another
tradition: because of some of his relatives crying in a third saying
because of the crying of (people of) the quarter in a fourth one he is
tortured in his grave whenever it is cried for him in a fifth one
whoever is cried for, is tortured. All these sayings are untrue due to
reason and tradition.

An-Nawawi said, when mentioning these sayings: All these narrations have
been narrated by Umar and his son Abdullah. Aaisha denied that and
accused them of being forgetting or mistaken. She refuted their sayings
by reciting the saying of Allah: **(no bearer of burden shall bear the
burden of another).**

Ibn Abbas and all of the infallible imams of Ahlul Bayt (s) have denied
these traditions and confirmed that the narrators were mistaken. Aaisha
and Umar were still in disagreement about this matter until Aaisha cried
for her father when he died. Because of that there were some things
happened between them. At-Tabari mentioned in his Tareekh al-Khulafa,
vol.4 when talking about the events of the thirteenth year of hijra,
that Saeed bin al-Musayyab had said: When Abu Bakr died, Aaisha (with
her fellow women) began crying for him. Then Umar came to her house and
forbade her and the other women from crying for Abu Bakr. They refused
to refrain from crying. Umar said to Hisham bin al-Waleed: Go inside the
house and bring me the daughter of ibn Abu Quhafa (Aaisha the daughter
of Abu Bakr). Aaisha said to Hisham when she heard the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** vol.2 p.333.  
 **[2]** One day during his caliphate, Umar heard some women crying
inside one of the houses. He came into the house and began beating the
crying women until their veils fell down of their heads. Then he said to
his servant: Beat the weeping womenbeat them. They have no sanctity
Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.3 p.111.

saying of Umar: I forbid you from entering my house. Umar said to
Hisham: Enter the house! I have permitted you. Hisham went in and
brought Umm Farwa, Abu Bakrs sister, to Umar. Umar began beating Umm
farwa with his stick. When the crying women heard that, they separated
here and there.

Here we attract the attention of the men of understanding to search
about the reason that has led Fatima (s) to be away from the country
when she wanted to cry for her father (s). She went, with her two sons
and her fellow women, to al-Baqee (graveyard). They cried for the
Prophet (s) under the shadow of a tree there and when this tree was cut,
Imam Ali (s) built her a house in al-Baqee to weep for her father in it.
It was called the house of sorrows. This house had been visited by the
different generations of this umma like the other sacred places. This
house was demolished recently by the order of King Abdul Aziz bin Saood
al-Jundi when he prevailed over Hijaz and he destroyed the sacred places
in al-Baqee according to his Wahabite belief. It was in the year 1344
A.H. In the year 1339 we have got the honor of visiting this house (the
house of sorrows) when Allah has granted us with the favor of offering
the hajj and visiting the Prophet (s) and the places of his pure family
in al-Baqee.

41. The Prophet (s) confirms truthfulness of Hatib
--------------------------------------------------

Al-Bukhari mentioned in his Sahih a tradition narrated by Abu Owana that
Hussayn had said: Once Abu Abdurrahman and Habban bin Atiyya disputed.
Abu Abdurrahman said to Habban: I knew what had encouraged your
friend-he meant Ali-to shed the bloods. Habban said: Woe unto you! What
was that? Abu Abdurrahman said: Something I have heard him saying it.
Habban said: What is it? Abu Abdurrahman said: Ali said: One day the
Prophet (s) sent for us; me, az-Zubayr and Abu Marthad, and all of us
were knights, and he said to us: You go to Rawdhat Haj.[1] There is a
woman there having a letter from Hatib bin Abu Baltaa to the
polytheists. Bring me the letter. We set out on our horses until we
found the woman where the Prophet (s) had said to us that she was on a
camel. Hatib had written a letter to the people of Mecca informing them
that the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It may be Rawdat Khakh, which is a place between Mecca and
Medina.

Prophet (s) would attack them. We asked the woman: Where is the book
which you have? She said: I do not have any book. We made her camel
kneel down and we searched her baggage but we did not find any book. My
two companions said: We do not think that she has a book. I (Ali) said:
We know well that the Prophet (s) has not told a lie. Then I swore: By
Him, Who is sworn by, either you take out the book or I shall disrobe
you.[1] She took the letter out of her garment. They brought the letter
to the Prophet (s). Umar said: O messenger of Allah, he (Hatib) has
betrayed Allah, His messenger and the believers. Let me behead him! The
Prophet (s) said to Hatib: O Hatib, what made you do that? Hatib said: O
messenger of Allah, I still believe in Allah and His messenger but I
wanted to do the people (the polytheists) a favor so that they would not
harm my family and properties. Every one of your companions there has
someone of his tribe to defend his family and properties. The Prophet
(s) said to his companions: He is right. Do not say to him save good.
Umar said again: O messenger of Allah, he has betrayed Allah, His
messenger and the believers. Let me behead him![2]

It was necessary for Umar no to say that after the Prophet (s) had told
them that Hatib was right and after he had ordered them not to harm him.

42. The Prophets book to his emirs
----------------------------------

Malik bin Anass and al-Bazzaz mentioned[3] that the Prophet (s) had sent
books to his emirs asking them that when they wanted to send him their
mails they should make their letters and books with fine titles and in
fine forms. When Umar knew that, he got up saying: I do not know! Shall
I say or shall I keep silent? The Prophet (s) said to him: O Umar, say!
Umar said to the Prophet (s): You have forbidden us from being
pessimistic but how do you become pessimistic now? The Prophet (s) said:
I am not pessimistic but I have chosen the best.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imam Ali (s) threatened to disrobe her of her outer garment in
which the book was.  
 **[2]** Al-Bukhari's Sahih, vol. 4. chap. Forgiving the apostatized.  
 **[3]** As in Hayat al-Haywan by ad-Dimyari, chap. luqha she-camel.

43. Dividing the charities
--------------------------

Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad[1] that Salman bin Rabeea had
heard Umar saying: One day the Prophet (s) distributed charities among
some people. I said to him: O messenger of Allah, there are other people
who are more deserving than these people; they are the people of the
Suffa.[2] The Prophet (s) said: You ask me greedily (and at the same
time) you intend to make me miser while I am not.

But the division has been done as Allah and His messenger willed. Abu
Musa said that Umar had asked the Prophet (s) about some things that the
Prophet (s) disliked until he became angry. Umar saw the anger in the
Prophets face.[3]

44. The Prophet (s) orders Umar to hide his faith
-------------------------------------------------

Muhyiddeen ibn al-Arabi mentioned that the Prophet (s) had said to Umar
bin al-Khattab, when he had become a Muslim: Keep your faith secret. But
Umar refused to do that and he announced his being a Muslim openly.[4]

Necessity then required the Muslims to conceal their faith because the
mission would not succeed except with concealment but the (valor) of
Umar led him to announce his being a Muslim even if he would contradict
the order of the Prophet (s)!

45. Fasting at the beginning of Islam
-------------------------------------

In Ramadan, at the beginning of Islam, a fasting Muslim could eat,
drink, sleep with his wife and do the other permissible things since the
sunset until he offered Isha prayer or he slept. If he offered Isha
prayer or he slept, it would be impermissible for him to eat, to drink,
to sleep with his wife or to do other things that were not permissible

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.1 p.20.  
 **[2]** Suffa means shed, in which the neediest people lived at that
time. It was erected beside the mosque of the Prophet (s).  
 **[3]** Al-Bukhari's Sahih, vol. 1 p.19.  
 **[4]** Tareekh Falsafatul Islam (history of the philosophy of Islam)
by Muhammad Lutfi, p.301.

for a fasting one until the next night. But one night after Isha prayer
Umar slept with his wife. He regretted what he had done. He came to the
Prophet (s) and said to him: O messenger of Allah, I apologize to Allah
and to you my mistaken soul He told the Prophet (s) of what he had done.
Then some men got up and confessed that they often did as Umar had done
after Isha prayer. Then Allah revealed to the Prophet (s) this verse:
**It is made lawful to you to go into your wives on the night of the
fast; they are an apparel for you and you are an apparel for them; Allah
knew that you acted unfaithfully to yourselves, so He has turned to you
(mercifully) and removed from you (this burden); so now be in contact
with them and seek what Allah has ordained for you, and eat and drink
until the whiteness of the day becomes distinct from the blackness of
the night at dawn, then complete the fast till night.** Qur'an, 2:187
The verse showed clearly that they disobeyed Allah more than one time
but Allah had forgiven them and accepted their repentance and He
permitted them to practice what had been impermissible for them as mercy
from Him.

46. Prohibiting wine
--------------------

Allah has revealed three verses about wine; the first was: **They ask
you about intoxicants and games of chance. Say: In both of them there is
a great sin and means of profit for men, and their sin is greater than
their profit.** Qur'an, 2:219

After this verse some of the Muslims drank wine and others refrained
from drinking it until a man offered his prayer while he was drunk and
so he mistook in reciting the verses in the prayer. Then Allah revealed:
**O you who believe! do not go near prayer when you are intoxicated
until you know (well) what you say.** Qur'an, 4:43 After the revelation
of this verse some Muslims drank wine and some others gave it up. Some
historians mentioned that one day Umar drank wine and then he took a
jawbone of a camel and struck Abdurrahman bin Ouff on the head. Then he
sat weeping for the killed people of the battle of Badr and reciting
some poetry of al-Aswad bin Yafur:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Is he unable to keep death away from
me,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">or resurrect me when my bones become
destroyed?</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Is there someone who tells the
Beneficent</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">that I have given up the month of
fast?</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Say to Allah to prevent me my
drink</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">And say to Allah to prevent me my
food.</span>*

The Prophet (s) was informed of that and he became very angry. He went
out dragging his garment and he hit Umar with something he had in his
hand. Umar said: May Allah save me from His wrath and from the wrath of
His messenger! Then Allah revealed: **The Shaitan only desires to cause
enmity and hatred to spring in your midst by means of intoxicants and
games of chance, and to keep you off from the remembrance of Allah and
from prayer. Will you then desist.** Qur'an, 5:91 Umar said: We desist!
We desist![1]

47. The Prophet (s) forbids from killing al-Abbas and others[2]
---------------------------------------------------------------

During the battle of Badr the Prophet (s) said to his companions: I know
that some men of Bani Hashim have been forced to go to the battle (to
fight against the Muslims) unwillingly. We have no need to fight them.
When you meet any one of them (the Hashemites), you are not to kill him
and if any one of you meets Abul Bukhturi bin

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Mustatraf fee Kulli Fanin Mustadhraf by Shihabuddeen
al-Absheehi, vol.3 chap.74. It has also been quoted by some scholars
from Rabeeul Abrar by az-Zamakhshari. Al-Fakhr ar-Razi has referred to
some of this event in his Tafsee al-Kabeer, vol.3 p.446 when
interpreting the Quranic verse ***(The Shaitan only desires to cause
enmity and hatred to spring in your midst by means of intoxicants and
games of chance).*** He said: It has been narrated that when Allah has
revealed ***(O you who believe! do not go near prayer when you are
intoxicated),*** Umar said: O Allah, declare to us a full declaration
about wine! And when this verse ***(The Shaitan only desires to cause
enmity and hatred to spring in your midst by means of intoxicants and
games of chance, and to keep you off from the remembrance of Allah and
from prayer. Will you then desist)*** was revealed, Umar said: O our
Lord, we desist!  
 **[2]** The Prophet (s) has forbidden from killing al-Abbas (the
Prophets uncle). It has been mentionen in many true traditions and the
books of Hadith are full of such traditions. All the historians, who
have recorded the history of the battle of Badr, have mentioned this and
mentioned that the Prophet (s) had forbidden from killing any one of the
Hashemites.

Hisham bin al-Harith bin Asad, he has not to kill him[1] and if any of
you meets al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib (the Prophets uncle) he has not to
kill him because he has gone to war unwillingly.

The Prophet (s) has forbidden his companions from killing any one of the
Hashemites and then he has forbidden them from killing his uncle
al-Abbas especially to confirm and to stress on that al-Abbas were not
to be killed. When al-Abbas had been captured as prisoner, the Prophet
(s) had spent that night sleeplessly. His companions asked him: O
messenger of Allah, why could you not sleep? He said: I heard my uncle
writhing in his ties and I could not sleep. They went and set al-Abbas
free of his ties and then the Prophet (s) could sleep.[2]

Yahya bin Katheer said: On the day (the battle) of Badr the Muslims have
captured seventy men of the polytheists, among whom was al-Abbas, the
Prophets uncle. Umar bin al-Khattab was responsible for tying him.
Al-Abbas said: O Umar, by Allah, what leads you to tighten my ties is
because of my slapping you for the sake of the messenger of Allah.

The Prophet (s) heard the moaning of al-Abbas and he could not

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh by ibn Katheer, vol.3 p.284 and other
books of history like Seera of ibn Isshaq. The Prophet (s) has forbidden
his companions from killing Abul Bukhturi because he was one of those
who had broken the bond (as-Saheefa) of the blockade against the
Hashimites and he was among those who had not harmed the Prophet (s) or
showed him what he disliked. The Prophet (s) intended to keep him alive
so that Allah might guide him to the right path one day. In the thick of
the battle al-Mujthir bin Ziyad al-Balawi met Abul Bukhturi and said to
him: The messenger of Allah (s) has forbidden us from killing you. Abul
Bukhturi had a companion with him. He was Junada bin Maleeha from bani
Layth who had come with him from Mecca. Abul Bukhturi said to
al-Mujthir: Will my friend not be killed too? Al-Mujthir said: No by
Allah, we will not leave your friend. The messenger of Allah has ordered
us about you alone. Abul Bukhturi said: Then I will die with him. I do
not let the women of Quraysh in Mecca say that he has left his friend
alone for the sake of his own life. They fought each other until
al-Mujthir killed him. Then al-Mujthir came to the Prophet (s) and said
to him: I swear by Him, Who has sent you with the truth! I have insisted
on him to be as prisoner to bring him to you but he refused except to
fight me. We fought each other until I killed him.  
 **[2]** It has been mentioned by the historians who have recorded the
events of the battle of Badr.

sleep. The companions asked: O messenger of Allah, what prevents you
from sleeping? He said: How can I sleep while I hear the moaning of my
uncle? Then the Ansar set him free[1]

All the Prophets companions of the Ansar, the Muhajireen and others knew
well what high position Abul Fadhl al-Abbas had near the Prophet (s).
When the Prophet (s) heard the word of Abu Huthayfa bin Utba bin Rabeea
bin Abd Shams, who fought with the Prophet (s) in Badr, when he said: Do
we kill our fathers and brothers and we leave al-Abbas free? By Allah,
if I meet him, I will strike him with the sword he became very angry for
that and then he said to Umar provoking his zeal: O Abu Hafs, is it
right that the face of the Prophets uncle is struck with the sword? Umar
said: By Allah, it was the first day that the Prophet (s) had called me
as Abu Hafs.[2]

The war came to an end. The Prophet (s) gained victory and his army
returned with honor. Seventy of the tyrants were killed and other
seventy of them were captured. The prisoners were brought dragging their
ties. Abu Hafs (Umar) began inciting to kill them with severe words. He
said: O messenger of Allah, they have (considered you as a liar)
disbelieved in you, exiled you and fought you. Would you permit me to
kill so-and-so (one of his relatives) and permit Ali to kill his brother
Aqeel and permit Hamza to kill his brother al-Abbas?

Glory be to Allah! Al-Abbas and Aqeel were neither among those who had
considered the Prophet (s) as a liar nor among those who had exiled him
nor among those who had harmed him! They were with him in the Shib
during the long period of the blockade against the Hashimites suffering
distresses with him. They had been taken to the battle unwillingly as
the Prophet (s) himself had witnessed and the Prophet (s) had forbidden
his companions from killing them under the heat of the war so how would
they be killed while they were captives? As the withering of al-Abbas
had worried the Prophet (s) and prevented him from sleeping, then how
would he become if his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 5 p.272, also mentioned by ibn Asakir.  
 **[2]** Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh, vol.3 p.285.

uncle was killed for no reason? Al-Abbas had been a Muslim before that
but he had concealed his faith for a wisdom behind which there was
contentment to Allah and His messenger and goodness to him and to the
umma.[1]

48. Taking ransom from the prisoners of Badr
--------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmad Zayni Dahlan, the Mufti of the Shafiites, said in his book
as-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.504 when mentioning al-Abbas during the
battle of Badr: Al-Abbas, according to what the scholars and historians
had said, had become a Muslim a long time ago but he had concealed his
faith. He became delighted when the Muslims obtained victory. The
Prophet (s) often told him of his secrets when he was in Mecca and he
always accompanied the Prophet (s) when going to invite the different
tribes to believe in Islam. Al-Abbas always encouraged the tribes to
support the Prophet (s). He had attended the homage of al-Aqaba which
was between the Prophet (s) and the Ansar. All that showed that he was a
Muslim. The Prophet (s) had ordered him to stay in Mecca in order to
write to him the secrets and news of Quraysh. When Quraysh wanted to go
to the war in Badr and called upon people to fight (against the Muslims)
he could not but to go with them; therefore the Prophet (s) had said on
the day of Badr: He, who meets al-Abbas, has not to kill him because he
has gone to the war unwillingly. This did not contradict the Prophets
saying when he asked him for redemption: Apparently you were against us
because his being apparently against them did not contradict his being
with them in his innerness. The Prophet (s) treated him according to his
apparent condition to please the hearts of the companions where he had
treated their fathers, sons and tribes in the same way. Al-Abbas had
properties and monies near the people of Quraysh and he feared that if
he had announced his being a Muslim, his properties would have been lost
among them. He had concealed his faith according to the order of the
Prophet (s). The Prophet (s) himself had not told his companions about
the faith of his uncle out of his kindness to his uncle and because he
had feared that his uncles monies would have been lost. The Prophet (s)
had had another aim in concealing his uncles faith. He wanted him to be
as a spy to bring him the news of Quraysh. But then when Islam prevailed
over Quraysh on the day of conquering Mecca, al-Abbas declared his faith
openly. He had not declared his faith until the conquest of Mecca.
Al-Abbas often asked the Prophet (s) to permit him to immigrate to
Medina to be with the Prophet (s) but the Prophet (s) wrote to him: Your
stay in Mecca is better to you. In another tradition the Prophet (s) had
written to him: O uncle, stay in the place where you are. Allah will
complete the hijra (emigration) with you as he has completed
prophethood. And it was so because al-Abbas was the last emigrant for he
had met the Prophet (s) in al-Abwa where he had not known that the
Prophet (s) had gone to conquer Mecca and then he went back with
himAl-Halabi in his Seera has had clearer speech about the preceding
faith of al-Abbas and his wife Umm al-Fadhl, who had immigrated to the
Prophet (s) too early. Let you refer to that and to the sayings of the
other scholars about this subject.

When Allah has granted His servant and messenger with victory on the day
of distinction, the day on which the two parties met; the prisoners have
been brought to the Prophet (s). It seemed then that he would keep them
alive so that Allah might guide them to His religion later on; and it
happened by the grace of Allah!

But the Prophet (s) decided, after forgiving them, to take ransom from
them in order to weaken them so that they would not be able to stand
against him again and that he would be stronger than them with that
ransom. This was the best for the two parties and it was the loyalty to
Allah and to His people undoubtedly; **Nor does he speak out of desire.
It is naught but revelation that is revealed.** Though the Prophet (s)
was merciful in nature and wherever he found a way he would not fail to
show his mercy.

Umar thought that all of the prisoners should be killed as a reward
because they had considered the Prophet (s) as a liar, harmed him,
exiled him and fought him. Umar was too determined to do away with them
and that they should be killed by their Muslim relatives.

But the Prophet (s) had exemplified the word of Allah: **I follow naught
but what is revealed to me; surely I fear, if I disobey my Lord, the
punishment of a mighty day.** Qur'an, 10:15

The Prophet (s) forgave them and set them free after taking the ransom.
After that those, who were ignorant of his infallibility and wisdom,
became as if they **cannot arise except as one, whom the Satan has
prostrated by (his) touch, does rise. That is because they say** that
the Prophet (s), when keeping them (the prisoners) and taking ransom
from them, acted according to his own ijtihad (opinion)[1] whereas the
right thing for him was to kill them and to get rid of their evil. They
depended on false and fabricated traditions that neither reason nor
custom would accept.

Among those false traditions was this one: After the Prophet (s) had
taken the ransom from the prisoners of Quraysh (and set them free), Umar
came to him and found him and Abu Bakr crying. Umar said to them: What
are you crying for? The Prophet (s) said: We are about to be afflicted
with a great torment because we have

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ad-Dahlani in his as-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol.1 p.512.

contradicted (Umar) ibn al-Khattab. If torment comes down, no one will
be safe from it except ibn al-Khattab.[1] (they said) then Allah
revealed: **It is not fit for a prophet that he should take captives
unless he has fought and triumphed in the land; you desire the frail
goods of this world, while Allah desires (for you) the hereafter; and
Allah is Mighty, Wise. Were it not for an ordinance from Allah that had
already gone forth, surely there would have befallen you a great
chastisement for what you had taken to.** Qur'an, 8:67-68

**And they did not assign to Allah the attributes due to Him** when they
went far in deviation and ascribed ijtihad to the Prophet (s) whereas
Allah said: **It is naught but revelation that is revealed.** They were
too ignorant when they thought that the Prophet (s) had been mistaken
and they went astray to the full when they preferred the saying of other
than the Prophet (s). They became confused with this verse and became
blind before its intents. They said that it had been revealed to scold
the Prophet (s) and his companions when they-as the fool had
pretended-preferred the pleasures of this life to the afterlife by
keeping the prisoners alive and taking ransom from them before they
**had fought and triumphed in the land.** They pretended that no one
innocent of that sin save Umar and if the great chastisement would come
down, no one would be safe from it except Umar!

Had told lies he who had pretended that the Prophet (s) had kept the
prisoners and taken ransom from them before he **(had fought and
triumphed in the land).** The Prophet (s) did that after he had fought
and killed the heroes and tyrants of Quraysh like Abu Jahl bin Hisham,
Utba, Shayba bin Abu Rabeea, al-Waleed bin Utba, al-Aass bin Saeed,
al-Aswad bin Abdul Asad al-Makhzoomi, Umayya bin Khalaf, Zama bin
al-Asad, Aqeel bin al-Aswad, Nabeeh, Munabbih, Abul Bukhturi, Handhala
bin Abu Sufyan, Tuayma bin Adiy bin Nawfal, Nawfal bin Khuwaylid,
al-Harith bin Zama, an-Nadhr bin al-Harith bin Abd ad-Dar, Umayr bin
Othman at-Tameemi, Othman

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyya by ad-Dahlani, vol.1 p.512, other
traditions having somehow the same meaning mentioned in as-Seera by
al-Halabi and al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh quoted from Ahmad bin Hanbal,
Muslim, Abu Dawood and at-Tarmithi all narrated from Umar bin
al-Khattab.

and Malik, the brothers of Talha, Massood bin Umayya bin al-Mugheera,
Qayss bin al-Faqih bin al-Mugheera, Huthayfa bin Abu Huthayfa bin
al-Mugheera, Abu Qayss bin al-Waleed bin al-Mugheera, Amr bin Makhzoom,
Abul Munthir bin Abu Rifaa, Hajib bin as-Saib bin Uwaymir, Ouss bin
al-Mugheera bin Louthan, Zayd bin Malees, Aasim bin Abu Ouff, Saeed bin
Wahab, Moawiya bin Abdul Qayss, Abdullah bin Jameel bin Zuhayr bin
al-Harith bin Asad, as-Saib bin Malik, Abul Hakam bin al-Ahnass, Hisham
bin Umayya bin al-Mugheerato the seventy heads of disbelief and the
chiefs of polytheism. After all that how could the Prophet (s) have
taken ransom before fighting? Would that they had minds! How did they
dare to blame the Prophet (s) after his victories, O you Muslims?! Allah
forbid! The Prophet (s) is too far above all what they have raved!

The fact was that the verse had been revealed to scold those who wanted
to obtain the caravans and to capture their keepers as Allah had said
about the event: **And when Allah promised you one of the two parties
that it shall be yours and you loved that the one not armed should be
yours and Allah desired to manifest the truth of what was true by His
words and to cut off the root of the unbelievers.** Qur'an, 8:7

The Prophet (s) had consulted with his companions and said to them: The
people (the polytheists) have set out on their camels. Are camels more
beloved to you or fighting? They said: Camels are more beloved to us
than meeting the enemy. One of them said to the Prophet (s) when he saw
him insisting on fighting: You have better told us about fighting so
that we could get ready for it. We have come to obtain the camels and
not to fight. The Prophet (s) became too angry.[1] Then Allah revealed:
**Even as your Lord caused you to go forth from your house with the
truth, though a party of the believers were surely averse. They disputed
with you about the truth after it had become clear, (and they went
forth) as if they were being driven to death while they saw (it).**
Qur'an, 8:5-6

Then Allah wanted to convince them by justifying the situation of the
Prophet (s) in his insisting on fighting and in his indifference to the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Halabis Seera, ad-Dahlanis Seera and other books of history.

camels and their keepers when He said: **It is not fit for a prophet**
(from among the prophets who had come before your Prophet Muhammad)
**that he should take captives unless he has fought and triumphed in the
land** so your prophet would have no captives **unless he has fought and
triumphed in the land** like the other previous prophets before him. But
you wanted, by taking the camels and capturing their keepers, to obtain
the pleasures of this life but Allah wanted the hereafter by doing away
with His enemies and Allah is (Mighty, Wise). Might and wisdom at those
days required to do away with the power of the enemies and to put out
their flame. Then Allah said scolding them: **(Were it not for an
ordinance from Allah that had already gone forth)** to prevent them from
taking the camels and capturing their keepers, they would have captured
the people and taken their camels. If they had done so (surely there
would have befallen you a great chastisement for what you had taken to)
before fighting in the land!

This is the meaning of the verse and it cannot be interpreted into other
than this meaning. I do not know that there is someone preceding me in
this interpretation when I have mentioned this verse and explained it in
my book al-Fusool al-Muhimma (the important chapters).[1]

49. Prisoners of Hunayn
-----------------------

When Allah made His messenger defeat the tribe of Hawazin in Hunayn and
granted him with that great victory, the caller of the Prophet (s)
announced: No prisoner is to be killed! Umar bin al-Khattab passed by a
tied captive called Ibn al-Akwa who had been sent before by the tribe of
Huthayl to Mecca as a spy on the Prophet (s) to convey the news of the
Prophet (s) and his companions. When Umar saw him, he said: This is the
enemy of Allah. He had been spying on us. He is a captive here. Kill
him! One of the Ansar beheaded him. When the Prophet (s) was informed of
that, he scolded them for doing that and said: Have I not ordered you
not to kill any captive?[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Chap.8.  
 **[2]** Sheikh al-Mufeeds Irshad, chap. the battle of Hunayn.

After killing this one, they killed Jameel bin Mamar bin Zuhayr. The
Prophet (s) sent for the Ansar while he was very angry. He said to them:
Why did you kill him whereas my messenger has come to you ordering you
not to kill any prisoner? They apologized and said that Umar had ordered
them to kill the prisoner. The Prophet (s) became angry and deserted
them (Umar) until Umayr bin Wahab interceded with him (for Umar) and
then he forgave them.[1]

Among those, who had been killed in Hunayn, was a woman from Hawazin.
She was killed by Khalid bin al-Waleed. The Prophet (s) became very
angry when he passed by her body, around which many people had gathered.
The Prophet (s) said to one of his companions: Follow after Khalid and
said to him that the Prophet (s) orders you not to kill women, children
or employees. It has been narrated by ibn Isshaq.

Ahmad bin Hanbal said: Abu Aamir bin Abdul Melik narrated from
al-Mugheera bin Abdurrahman from Abu az-Zinad from al-Muraqqi bin Sayfi
that his grandfather Rabah bin Rabee had told him that once the Prophet
(s) had come back from one of his battles where Khalid bin al-Waleed was
the leader of the army. Rabah and the companions of the Prophet (s)
passed by a killed woman, who had been killed by of the front of the
army. They stopped looking at her astonishingly. When the Prophet (s)
arrived, they spread out. The Prophet (s) stopped, looked at her and
said: She would not have fought! He said to one of his companions:
Follow after Khalid and say to him not to kill a woman or an
employee.[2] It has also been mentioned by ibn Dawood, an-Nassaiy and
ibn Maja from al-Muraqqi bin Sayfi.

50. The fleers from jihad
-------------------------

Allah has prohibited fleeing from jihad at all by this verse: **O you
who believe! when you meet those who disbelieve marching for war, then
turn not your backs to them. And whoever shall turn his back to them on
that day, unless he turn aside for the sake of fighting or withdraws to
a company, then he, indeed, becomes deserving of**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sheikh al-Mufeeds Irshad, chap. the battle of Hunayn.  
 **[2]** Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh by ibn Katheer, chap. The battle of
Hunayn.

**Allah's wrath, and his abode is hell; and an evil destination shall it
be.** Qur'an, 8:15-16

It is a clear and absolute text in a clear verse of the holy Qur'an. But
some of the companions have interpreted it according to their own
opinions preferring the benefits to obeying the holy texts. In fact they
have violated this clear text in many occasions.

One of those occasions was on the day of Uhud. Ibn Qama attacked Musab
bin Umayr (may Allah be pleased with him) and killed him thinking that
he was the Prophet (s). He returned to Quraysh telling them that he had
killed Muhammad. The polytheists began bringing good news to each other.
They said: Muhammad was killed! Muhammad was killed! Ibn Qama killed
him. The Muslims were frightened and they fled unknowing what to do as
Allah has said expressing their state: **When you ran off precipitately
and did not wait for any one, and the Messenger was calling you from
your rear, so He gave you another sorrow instead of (your) sorrow.**
Qur'an, 3:153

The Prophet (s) was calling upon them: O slaves of Allah, come to me! O
slaves of Allah, come to me! I am the messenger of Allah. He, who
attacks the enemy, will be in Paradise! He was calling upon them while
he was at the rear but they did not turn to any one at all (while
fleeing).

Ibn Jareer and Ibnul Atheer mentioned in their Tareekh: The defeat of
the fleeing group of the Muslims, among whom was Othman bin Affan and
others, took them to al-Awas. They stayed there for three days and then
they came back to the Prophet (s) who said to them when he saw them: You
have gone where you liked![1]

Ibn Jareer and Ibnul Atheer also mentioned that Anass bin an-Nadhr, who
was the uncle of Anass bin Malik, met Umar, Talha and some of the
Muhajireen, who had put their weapons aside and given up fighting. He
asked them: Why have you given up fighting? They said: The Prophet (s)
has been killed. He said to them: Then what do you do with life after
him? Die for what the Prophet (s) has died for! Then he attacked the
polytheists and fought them until he was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** These details have been mentioned by all the historians who have
talked about the Battle of Uhud.

killed. Seventy stabs and strokes were found in his body and no one
could know him save his sister.

They mentioned that Anass bin an-Nadhr had heard some of the Muslims,
among whom were Umar and Talha, saying when they heard that the Prophet
(s) had been killed: Would that Abdullah bin Abu Salool come to take
safeguard for us from Abu Sufyan before they kill us! Anass said to
them: O people, if Muhammad has been killed, the Lord of Muhammad has
not been killed. Fight for what Muhammad has fought for! O Allah, I
apologize to You for what these people say and acquit myself from what
they do! Then he fought until he was martyred.[1] Blessings of Allah be
upon him.

And another one of those occasions was **on the day of Hunayn, when your
great numbers made you vain, but they availed you nothing and the earth
became strait to you notwithstanding its spaciousness, then you turned
back retreating. Then Allah sent down His tranquility upon His Messenger
and upon the believers.** Qur'an, 9:25-26 who kept to the Prophet (s)
when his companions fled; the companions among whom was Umar as
al-Bukhari said in his Sahih[2] when mentioning a tradition that Abu
Qatada al-Ansari had said: on the day of Hunayn the Muslims fled away
and I fled with them. I saw Umar among the fleers. I said to him: What
is the matter with the people? He said: It is an affair of Allah

And another occasion; when the Prophet (s) marched to conquer Khaybar,
he sent Abu Bakr at the head of the army. He was defeated and came
back.[3]

Imam Ali (s) said: The Prophet (s) marched to conquer Khaybar. He sent
Umar at the head of the companions (the army). He and his companions
were defeated and came back; one cowarding the other[4]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This story has been mentioned by the historians who have
detailed the events of the battle of Uhud.  
 **[2]** Vol.3 p.46. Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh by ibn Katheer, vol.4 p.329
from al-Bukhari, Muslim and others.  
 **[3]** Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.3 p.37, Talkhees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi.  
 **[4]** Mustadrak of al-Hakim, Talkhees al-Mustadrak of ath-Thahabi.

Al-Hakim mentioned in his Mustadrak[1] that Jabir bin Abdullah had said:
The messenger of Allah said: Tomorrow I will send a man, who loves Allah
and His messenger and they love him. He will not turn his back (to the
enemy). Allah will grant him victory. The men looked forward to it. Ali
was sore-eyed on that day. The Prophet (s) asked him to set out with the
army. Ali said: O messenger of Allah, I can see nothing. The Prophet (s)
spit in Alis eyes and gave him the banner. Ali asked: O messenger of
Allah, what shall I fight them for? the Prophet (s) said: To witness
that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the messenger of
Allah. If they do, they will spare their bloods and monies and their
reward will be with Allah. He fought them (the people of Khaybar) and
defeated them.

Al-Hakim, after mentioning this tradition, said: Al-Bukhari and Muslim
have agreed on the tradition (of the banner) but they did not mention it
in this way. So has been said by ath-Thahabi in his Talkhees after
mentioning the tradition.

Iyass bin Salama narrated that his father had said: We have fought with
the Prophet (s) in Khaybar when he spit in Alis eyes and they recovered
and then the Prophet (s) gave him the banner. Marhab came out to Ali
reciting:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Khaybar has known that I am
Marhab,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">Expert hero with sharp weapons</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">When wars come flaming.</span>*

Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) came out to him reciting:

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">It is me, whom my mother has called me
Haydara,</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">like a lion of forest with bad
look.</span>*

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">I kill (many of) you with the
sword.</span>*

Ali struck Marhab and split his head and then the victory came.[2]

And another occasion during the battle of as-Silsila in the valley of
ar-Raml (sand); it was like the battle of Khaybar. First the Prophet (s)
sent Abu Bakr and then he came back defeated with his army.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Vol.3 p.38.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak of al-Hakim, who said it was a true tradition
according to the conditions of al-Bukhari and Muslim. So was said by
ath-Thahabi in his Talkhees.

Then the Prophet (s) sent Umar who came back with defeat too. After that
the Prophet (s) sent Imam Ali (s) who came back with victory, booties
and captives.[1]

The battle of as-Silsila is other than the battle of Thaat as-Salasil,
which was in the seventh year of hijra under the leadership of Amr bin
al-Aass. Abu Bakr, Umar and Abu Ubayda were among the army on that day
according to all of the historians.

There were some problems between Umar and Amr bin al-Aass as al-Hakim
has mentioned in his Mustadrak.[2] Abdullah bin Burayda narrated that
his father had said: The Prophet (s) had sent Amr bin al-Aass to the
battle of Thaat as-Salasil as the leader of the army, in which Abu Bakr
and Umar were as soldiers. When they arrived at the place of the battle,
Amr ordered his army not to light any fire. Umar bin al-Khattab became
angry and tried to attack Amr but Abu Bakr forbade him from doing that
and said to him that the Prophet (s) had appointed Amr as the leader
because he knew that he was expert in the affairs of the wars and then
Umar became quiet.

Al-Hakim said, after mentioning this tradition, that it was true and
ath-Thahabi said the same after mentioning the tradition in his
Talkhees.

### Note

The Prophet (s) had wise ways in announcing the virtues of Imam Ali (s)
and in preferring him to the rest of the companions. The researchers
knew that well.

Among these ways was that the Prophet (s) had never appointed any one as
a leader over Imam Ali (s) neither in war nor in peace whereas the other
companions had been under the leadership of others.[3] The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to al-Irshad by Sheikh al-Mufeed for more details.  
 **[2]** Vol.3 p.43.  
 **[3]** Once al-Hasan al-Basri was asked about Imam Ali (s) and he
said: What shall I say about one, who has obtained the four aspects;
being entrusted with the sura of Baraa, what the Prophet (s) has said
about him in the battle of Tabook if he missed any thing of virtues
other than prophethood, the Prophet (s) would exclude him, the saying of
the Prophet (s): the two weighty things; the Book of Allah and my family
and that no emir has ever been appointed over him at all whereas the
emirs have

Prophet (s) had appointed Amr bin al-Aass as the emir over Abu Bakr and
Umar in the battle of Thaat as-Salasil. When the Prophet (s) left to the
better world, Ussama bin Zayd, although he was too young, was the emir
over the heads of the Muhajireen and the Ansar like Abu Bakr, Umar, Abu
Ubayda and their likes.

When the Prophet (s) appointed Imam Ali (s) as a leader of an army, he
joined to his army famous personalities but when he appointed other than
him, he excluded him from those armies and kept him to be with him.[1]

When the Prophet (s) sent two brigades; one under the leadership of Imam
Ali (s) and the other under the leadership of another one, he ordered
them that when the two brigades gathered together, both would be under
the leadership of Imam Ali (s) and when they separated again, each one
would lead his brigade.[2]

The Prophet (s), more than one time, had sent other than Imam Ali (s) on
the armies but they came back unsuccessfully and then the Prophet (s)
sent Imam Ali (s) to obtain great victories[3] and in this

------------------------------------------------------------------------

commanded other (companions) than him Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha,
vol. 1 p.369.  
 **[1]** As he had done in the battle of Khaybar when he appointed Abu
Bakr and then Umar as the leaders but he was not under their leaderships
but when he appointed Imam Ali (s) as the leader, they both were under
his leadership. Praise be to Allah for all of that!  
 **[2]** Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad, vol.5 p.356 that
Burayda had said: The Prophet (s) had sent two armies to Yemen; one of
them was under the leadership of Ali bin Abu Talib and the other was
under the leadership of Khalid bin al-Waleed. He said to them: If you
meet together, Ali will be the leader of the two armies and if you
separate, each one of you will lead his army. We met the tribe of
Zubayda and we fought each other. The Muslims defeated the polytheists.
We killed the warriors and captured the women. Ali chose a woman from
among the captives to himself. Khalid sent a letter with me to the
Prophet (s) telling him about that. When I came to the Prophet (s), I
gave him the book. It was read to him. The sign of anger seemed on the
face of the Prophet (s). I said: O messenger of Allah, you have sent me
with a man and ordered me to obey him and I did as I was ordered. The
Prophet (s) said: Do not involve yourself with Ali in any problem! He is
from me and I am from him and he is your guardian after me. This
tradition has been mentioned by other scholars of Hadith. Refer to our
book al-Murajaat, no.36.  
 **[3]** As in the battle of Khaybar and the battle of Thaat as-Salasil
mentioned above.

way the virtue of Imam Ali (s) appeared better than if the Prophet (s)
would have sent him from the first.

The Prophet (s) might have sent other than Imam Ali (s) in a task, to
which the necks stretched, and then Allah revealed to the Prophet (s)
that: No one is to carry out your tasks save you or a man from you
meaning Imam Ali (s) as it was with the matter of the sura of Baraa and
breaking the covenants of the polytheists on the day of the great
hajj.[1]

51. The Prophet (s) orders his companions not to answer Abu Sufyan in Uhud
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

On the day of Uhud, the Prophet (s) and his companions stopped at the
bank of the valley and they let the mountain behind them. The
polytheists were three thousand and seven hundred armored warriors and
two hundred knights. There were fifteen women with them. The Muslims
were two hundred armored fighters and two knights.

The two armies got ready to fight. The Prophet (s) (and his companions)
turned his face to Medina and left the mountain of Uhud behind him. He
made the archers, who were fifty men, behind him and appointed Abdullah
bin Jubayr as their emir and said to him: Keep the knights away from us
by the arrows. Do not let them attack us from behind. Keep on your
places whether we win or lose for we will not be attacked except from
this defile (shib); the defile of Uhud.

Talha bin Othman, the bearer of the polytheists banner, came out
calling: O companions of Muhammad, you claim that Allah will hasten us
to Hell by your swords and He will hasten you to Paradise by our swords.
Let some one of you, who wants to hasten me to Hell by his sword and to
be hastened to Paradise by my sword, advance!

Ibnul Atheer said in al-Kamil: Ali bin Abu Talib came out to him and
struck him and his leg was cut. He fell to the ground and his private
parts appeared. He begged Ali and Ali left him alone. He

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** We have written a good research on this subject in our book Abu
Hurayra. Please refer to p.157-188, tradition no.18.

weltered in his blood until he died. The Prophet (s) said: Allahu
akbar-Allah is great. The (ram) of the battalion! The Muslims began
crying: Allahu akbar after the Prophet (s). The Prophet (s) said to Ali:
What prevented you from finishing him off? Ali said: He begged me by
Allah and kinship. I felt shy to kill him after that.

After that Imam Ali (s) withstood. He killed the bearers of the banner
one after the other. Ibnul Atheer and other historians said: The Muslims
killed the bearers of the banner and it remained thrown on the ground;
no one approached it. Then Amra bint Alqama al-Harithiyya took the
banner and raised it and then Quraysh gathered around the banner. Then a
slave of bani Abd ad-Dar, who was very strong, took the banner and he
also was killed. He, who had killed the bearers of the banner, was Ali
bin Abu Talib. Abu Rafi said that.

People fought severely. Hamza, Ali, Abu Dijana and some of the Muslims
had done well in the fight. Allah granted them victory and the
polytheists were defeated. The women of the polytheists fled to the
mountain. The Muslims entered the camp of the polytheists to rob their
properties. When the archers saw their fellows robbing, they left their
places in the defile and hastened to rob too forgetting what the Prophet
(s) had ordered them of.

When Khalid bin al-Waleed, who was with the polytheists on that day, saw
that the archers in the defile were a few, he killed them and attacked
the Prophets companions from the rear. The fled polytheists came back
again with activity and fought the Muslims and defeated them after
killing seventy of Muslim heroes, among whom was Hamza bin Abdul
Muttalib, the lion of Allah and of His messenger. On that day the
Prophet (s) fought severely until all his arrows finished. His bow was
broken and he was injured in his cheek and his front. One of his teeth
was broken and his lip was cut. Ibn Qama attacked him with his sword and
was about to kill him.

Imam Ali (s) and five men of the Ansar, who were martyred then, fought
before the Prophet (s) and defended him. Abu Dijana made himself as
armor for the Prophet (s). The arrows stuck into the back of Abu Dijana
while he was covering the Prophet (s) with his body. Musab bin Umayr
fought bravely and then he was martyred. He was

killed by Abu Qama, who thought that he had killed the Prophet (s). He
went back to Quraysh saying: Muhammad is killed. The people began
crying: Muhammad is killed! Muhammad is killed! The Muslims fled
aimlessly. The first one, who recognized the Prophet (s), was Kab bin
Malik. He shouted at the top of his voice: O Muslims, this is the
messenger of Allah. He is alive. He is not killed. The Prophet (s) asked
him to keep silent.[1]

Then Imam Ali (s) and his companions took the Prophet (s) to the defile,
in which he protected himself. Imam Ali (s) and his companions
surrounded the Prophet (s) defending him.

Ibn Jareer and Ibnul Atheer in their Tareekhs and other historians said:
the Prophet (s), while he was in the defile, saw some polytheists. He
said to Ali: Attack them! Ali attacked them, killed some of them and
scattered the others. The Prophet (s) saw another group of the
polytheists. He said to Ali: Do away with them! Ali attacked them,
killed some of them and scattered the others. Gabriel said: O messenger
of Allah, this is the assistance! The Prophet (s) said: He (Ali) is from
me and I am from him. Gabriel said: And I am from you both. Then a voice
was heard saying: No sword save Thul Faqar[2] and no youth save Ali!

Imam Ali (s) began bringing water with his leather shield to wash the
Prophets wounds but the bleeding did not stop.[3]

Hind (Abu Sufyans wife) and her fellow women went to the martyrs of the
Muslims and began mutilating their bodies. They made from the ears, the
noses and the fingers of the martyrs necklaces and rings. She had given
Wahshi her rings and necklaces for his killing Hamza. Hind cut open the
chest of Hamza and took out his liver. She chewed it but she found it
unpleasant and then she emitted it.

Then Abu Sufyan came near to the Muslims and said: Is Muhammad among
you? He repeated that three times. The Prophet (s) said to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** That the enemy might hear him and might attack the Prophet (s)
again.  
 **[2]** Thul Faqar was the name of the famous sword of Imam Ali (s).  
 **[3]** After that Fatima (s) burnt a piece of a straw mat and put some
of the ash on the wound and then the bleeding stopped. She had attended
the event. She embraced her father while he was wounded and she was
crying.
