


MATERIALIST PHYSICALISM
The success of secular Western culture and worldview over the revealed
or faith-based worldview was facilitated by the emphasis on
individuality, personality, and the power of the self. The conventional
wisdom still prevails that: “It is the moment of**secularity** , freedom
from religious/ecclesiastical tutelage, that separates the Modern
Period, especially its science and philosophy, from the Middle
Ages.”[^8] The preponderant sway of empirical science over modern
thought results in neurobiology and psychophysiology studying
intelligence at the level of neural chemistry, where mental and
behavioral phenomena are understood merely as manifestations
of*physical* processes. Contemporary discussions on consciousness and
the philosophy of mind also reflect this conceptual drift toward a
(monist) brain conception, where ‘mind’ substitutes for the ‘soul’
concept of the past. ‘Mind’ is frequently allied with brain functions
and given a physical locus, or alternatively it is denied any spatial
locale and simply reduced to “**mental events** ”.[^9]

However, this dominant biological-materialist or physicalistic paradigm
is now increasingly being perceived as conceptually inadequate, with
rational empirical methods proving to be unreliable and insufficient in
providing a theoretically adequate conception of mind or intelligence.
In reviewing the pitfalls of current thinking on the ‘mind-body
problem’, Colin McGinn concludes: “But we have not explained how a
physical organ of the body, namely the brain, could be the basis of
consciousness—how a physical object can come to have an inner
aspect.”[^10] Sergio Moravia observes, “They have spoken of ‘mind’ and
‘mental’—and the unsettling,*real* question was whether one may admit a
human dimension which is autonomous and irreducible in relation to the
bodily.” And he goes on to ask: “Can one posit something which*exists,*
and yet at the same time is*non-physical* ? … Do the rejection of the
‘soul’ and the achievements attained by the bio- and neurosciences
oblige us to hold that man is*nothing but body* ?”[11] Thinkers are thus
being forced into the fields of epistemology, ontology and
psychoanthropology in search of answers to such questions. Recently
there have appeared a number of creative but tentative attempts to
re-conceptualize notions of ‘reason’ and ‘intelligence’ along
anti-mentalistic or ‘personological’ lines,[^12] several drawing on the
experience and practice of older non-Western traditions or even popular
‘folk’ conceptions.[^13]

Contemporary materialism is in essence a program of reduction,
assimilation, and annexation, which is being applied to meet the felt
need to construct a*unitary* image of the world (ie.
a***meta*** -physics)—and to construct it under the cover of ‘Science’.
For the ‘human’ is the “last frontier” of a physicalistically
constituted knowledge, being the last part of reality which must be
shown to be reducible to empirical observations and verifiable
explanations of a materialist nature, resulting in the ‘scientific
theory’ of man—identified with the neurophysiological interpretation of
the human being. Having banished the transcendent metaphysic of the
spiritual and reduced it to the ‘irrational’, science finds itself
searching for a substitute to plug the hole in its knowledge, finding it
in a naturalist or physicalistic materialism. As Hilary Putnam points
out: “the appeal of

materialism lies precisely in this, in its claim to be*natural*
metaphysics, metaphysics within the bounds of science.” In this manner,
materialism “has replaced positivism and pragmatism as the dominant
contemporary form of scientism”, which he portrays as being “one of the
most dangerous contemporary intellectual tendencies.”[^14]

Of course, a chief element of pre-modern scientific thinking was the
lack of clear distinction between the sciences and philosophy, thus
making the sciences dependent upon philosophy. This is true at least of
the physical sciences, cosmology, and of psychology, which were treated
under the category of*t}abi\>‘iyya\>t* ‘Physics’ in Islamic philosophy.
Modern conceptions of scientific knowledge separate ‘science’ from any
philosophical rationalist system, freeing the scientific method of
empirical investigation and deduction from the worldview of a
philosophic metaphysic. ‘Scientism’ attempts to fill this void by
collapsing immaterial dimensions of human experience into the physical.


