Seventh Hadith: Anger (Ghadhab)
===============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إِلى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ عَنْ عَلِيٍّ
بْنِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عِيسَى، عَنْ يُونُسَ، عَنْ
دَاوُدَ بْنِ فَرْقَدٍ، عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
قَالَ: الغَضَبُ مِفْتُاحُ كُلِّ شَرٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

...Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni), from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from
Muhammad ibn ‘Isa, from Yunus, from Dawud ibn Farqad, who reports al
‘Imam al-Sadiq (A) to have said, “Anger is the key (that opens the door)
to all kinds of vices.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

The great researcher Ahmad ibn Muhammad, popularly known as Ibn
Maskawayh, in his book *Taharat al-’a’raq,* which is a fine book of rare
excellence in beauty of style and orderliness of contents, writes
something which can be summarized as follows: Anger, in fact, is an
inner psychic movement due to which a state of agitation is produced in
the heart’s blood, arousing a desire for vengeance. And when this
agitation becomes more violent, it intensifies the fire of anger.

A violent commotion in the blood seizes the heart, filling the arteries
and the brain with a flurry of dark smoke, on account of which the mind
and the intellect lose control and become powerless. At that time, as
the *hukama’* maintain, the inner state of the person resembles a cave
where fire has broken out, filling it with flames and suffocating clouds
of smoke that leap out of its mouth with intense heat and a fiery howl.

When that happens, it becomes extremely difficult to pacify such a
person and to extinguish the fire of his wrath; whatever is thrown in it
to cool it down becomes a part of it, adding to its intensity. It is for
this reason that such a man becomes blinded to propriety and deaf to
guidance. In such a condition, there is no hope for him.

Then Ibn Maskawayh adds: “Hippocrates says that he is more hopeful about
a ship encircled by a fierce storm and violent winds which has been
knocked away from its course by the sea waves into rocky waters, than
about an enraged person. Because, in such conditions, the sailors may
somehow manage to save the ship by means of clever maneuvers, but there
is no hope of deliverance for the soul engulfed in rage; for all such
efforts as counsel, advice, and exhortation fail to appease him. The
more one tries to pacify it through humble entreaties and tearful
supplications, the more violent it becomes.”

Advantages Of Al-Quwwah Al-Ghadabiyyah (The Power Of Anger)
-----------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that the Power of Anger is one of the biggest favors
of God conferred upon His creatures, by means of which they are enabled
to pursue activities constructive to their world and Hereafter, are
assured the continuity of the species as well as, the safety and
survival of the individual and the family.

It also plays a great role in the establishment and maintenance of
social order and civic life.’ If this noble faculty were not ingrained
in the animal’s nature, it would not have been able to defend itself
against natural adversities, and would have been defenseless against the
dangers of destruction and extinction. And if it were absent in the
human nature, man would have failed to achieve most of his
accomplishments and attainments.

Moreover, even its deficiency and insufficient presence below the
moderate level is itself considered a moral weakness and flaw which
gives rise to innumerable vices and defects like: fear; timidity;
weakness; laxity; laziness; greed; lack of restraint, patience and
tolerance; lack of constancy and perseverance when needed; love of
comfort; torpor; lethargy; submissiveness to oppression and tyranny;
submitting to insults and disgraces to which an individual or his family
may be subjected; dastardliness; spiritlessness, etc. Describing the
qualities of the believers God Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَشِدَّاءُ عَلَى الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاءُ بَيْنَهُمْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

(***The believers***) ***are hard against the unbelievers and merciful
among themselves.*** (***48:29***)

The fulfillment of the duty of *al-’Amr bi al-ma’ruf wa al-nahy ‘an
al-munkar* (to enjoin good conduct. and forbid indecency), the
implementation of *hudud* (punishment prescribed by the Islamic penal
law), *ta’zirat* (punishments adjudged by a judge), and the carrying out
of other policies set forth by religion or guided by reason, would not
have been possible without the existence of this noble Power of Anger.

On this basis, those who believe in eradicating the Power of Anger and
consider its destruction as an accomplishment and mark of perfection are
highly mistaken and in great error, ignorant as they are about the signs
of perfection and the bounds of moderation.

Poor fellows, they do not know that God Almighty has not created this
noble faculty in vain in all the species belonging to the animal
kingdom. To the children of Adam (A) He bestowed this power as the
source of securing a good life in this world and the Hereafter, and a
vehicle for procuring various blessings and felicities.

The holy *jihad* with the enemies of the *Din;* the struggle for the
preservation of mankind’s social order; the defense and protection of
one’s own life, property and honor, as well as the Divine values and
laws; and above all the combat with one’s inner self, which is the
biggest enemy of man, none of these could be possible without the
existence of this noble faculty.

It is under the banner of this noble faculty that aggressions and
encroachments upon rights are repelled, borders and frontiers are
protected, and other social and individual offences, noxious practices,
and harmful deeds are checked. It is for this very reason that the
*hukama’* have recommended various remedies for treating any deficiency
in this Power, and prescribed numerous practical and theoretical
remedies for the purpose of its regeneration, like participation in acts
of heroism and going to battlefronts on the occasion of war with the
enemies of God.

It is even narrated of some sages that they used to visit risky places,
stayed there and exposed themselves to great perils and dangers. They
would board a ship at a time while the sea was turbulent and stormy, so
that they might get rid of fear and overcome their timidity and
sluggishness.

In any case, the Power of Anger is ingrained in the nature of human
beings and animals, except that in some cases it is dormant and torpid,
like a fire smouldering under the ashes. If someone perceives in himself
any signs of torpor and lack of the sense of honor, he must try to
overcome this condition by means of its antidote, courage, which is a
commendable quality and a moral virtue, to return to a normal state. We
shall have occasion to refer to it again in due course.

Vice Of Immoderation In Anger
-----------------------------

In the same way as the deficiency and lack of moderation is considered a
moral vice and source of numerous moral corruptions, the excess and
going beyond the upper limits of moderation is also regarded, morally,
as a vice and source of countless deviations. The tradition quoted in
*al-Kafi* is sufficient to indicate the dangers of such a state:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: الغَضَبُ يُفْسِدُ الإيمَانَ كَمَا
يُفْسِدُ الخَلُّ العَسَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is reported on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq (A) that the Apostle of
God (S) said, “Anger spoils faith in the same way as vinegar destroys
honey.”[^2]

It may happen that someone gets angry and, in a bout of extreme anger,
turns away from the *Din* of God. The hot flames and the dark fumes of
anger not only destroy his faith by consuming his righteous beliefs,
they also lead him to apostatize by rejecting God, thus leading him to
eternal damnation. And when he becomes aware of it, his remorse is of no
avail, as the fire of anger, which was lit by a spark thrown in by
Satan, continues to roar in his heart, as Imam al-Baqir (A) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ هَذَا الغَضَبَ جَمْرَةٌ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ تُوقَدُ فِي قَلْبِ
ابْنِ آدَمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed, this anger is the spark lit by Satan in the heart of the son of
Adam.[^3]

In the next world, this fire will acquire the form of the fire of Divine
Wrath, as reported from al-Baqir (A) in *al-Kafi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَكْتُوبٌ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ فِي مَا نَاجَى اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِهِ
مُوسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: يَا مُوسَى أَمْسِكْ غَضَبَكَ عَمَّنْ
مَلَّكْتُكَ عَلَيْهِ أَكُفَّ عَنْكَ غَضَبِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is recorded in the Torah regarding that which God Almighty confided
to Moses (A), saying: “O Moses, control your anger towards those over
whom I have given you authority, so that I may spare you from My
Wrath.”[^4]

It must be known that no fire is more painful than the fire of Divine
Wrath. It is mentioned in a tradition that Jesus, the son of Mary, was
asked by his disciples as to which of the things is the hardest to bear.
“The Fury of the Most High God is the hardest thing to bear,” he
replied. They questioned him, “How can we save ourselves from it?” “By
not getting angry,” Jesus said.

Therefore, it must be obvious that God’s Wrath is more painful and
severer than any thing else, and the fire of His Fury is most
destructive. The Hereafterly form of our anger in this world is the fire
of Divine Wrath in the next world. In the same way as anger emanates
from the heart, perhaps the fire of Divine Wrath, which is the abode of
our anger and all other inner vices, will also emanate from the inner
depths of the heart and spread over the external being, and its
tormenting flames will emerge from the external sense organs like the
eyes, the ears, and the tongue.

Rather, the external senses are themselves the doors which shall be
opened to the fire of Hell. The fire of the hell of deeds and the
physical hell encompasses the without and travels towards the within.
Hence man is tortured from both the sides by these two hells: one
emanates from within the heart and its flames enter the body through pia
mater of the brain, and the other, which is the result of the vicious
deeds, advances towards the inner being from without, and man is
subjected to torments and pressures.

What sort of torment and torture it will be? God alone knows what pain
and distress it will bring in addition to the burning and melting. You
imagine that the topological mode of the Hell’s encompassment is
something that you know. Here things are surrounded only externally and
outwardly; but in that world, encirclement will occur both externally
and internally; it will cover the outer surface of the body as well as
the inner depths of the human heart and being.

And if, God forbid, anger becomes permanent part of one’s nature, it
will be more catastrophic; for the form that such a one shall acquire in
the *Barzakh* and on the Day of Resurrection will be a beastly form,
that too one which has no match in this world; for the brutality of the
person in this state cannot be compared with any of the ferocious
beasts. In the same way-as none of the creatures can touch this marvel
of nature from the aspect of attainment of nobility and perfection, so
also from the aspect of his capacity for degeneration and meanness and
his leaning towards perverseness, man cannot be compared with any
creature. It is about his perverseness that the Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أُوْلَئِكَ كَالْأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***These are as the cattle-nay, they are worse in misguidance.***
(***7:179***)

It is about the hardness of the human heart that it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَهِيَ كَالْحِجَارَةِ أَوْ أَشَدُّ قَسْوَةً.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

(***Then the hearts of the Jews***) ***became hardened like stones, or
even yet harder.*** (***2:74***)

All this that you have heard about the evil effects of this consuming
fire of anger is merely a fraction of its danger. It holds true in cases
where no other vice and offence spring from it, that is, if this inner
fire lies dormant in the inner darkness, having been choked and
suffocated, although having extinguished the light of faith by its dense
smoke.

However, it is very rare, or rather impossible, that in a fit of its
intense conflagration one should remain immune from committing other,
even mortal, sins. It happens that in a brief outburst of anger, this
cursed firebrand thrown by the Devil, man falls over the precipice of
destruction and doom. He may even, God be our refuge, abuse the prophets
of God and saints, assassinate an innocent person, or desecrate
something holy, thus bringing about his own destruction in the world as
well as in the Hereafter, as is mentioned in a *hadith* of *al-Kafi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فِي حَدِيثٍ: كَانَ أَبِي
يَقُولُ: أَيُّ شَيْءٍ أَشَدُّ مِنَ الغَضَبِ؟ إنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَغْضَبُ
فَيَقْتُلُ النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللهُ وَيَقْذِفُ المُحْصَنَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is reported from Imam al-Sadiq (A) that he said that his father used
to say: “Is there anything more violent than anger? Verily, a man gets
angry and kills someone whose blood has been forbidden by God, or
slanders a married woman.”[^5]

Many atrocious deeds have been committed under a spell of anger and its
agitation. Therefore, one, while in a state of tranquility of mind,
should be apprehensive of his own anger if he is in a habit of often
getting angry. He should contemplate upon its cure, when in a state of
mental composure, and think about its causes, its bad consequences and
repercussions, and he should strive to get rid of it.

He should consider that a faculty which was granted by God Almighty for
the sake of the preservation of the world’s order, for the continuity
and survival of human species and individual, for the discipline and
order of the family system, for the advancement and progress of
humankind, and for protecting human rights and safeguarding Divine laws,
a faculty under whose shadow the visible as well as the invisible system
of the visible world and the hidden world is to be reformed and
maintained, if he acts contrary to this purpose and makes use of this
power against the Divine design, it will be a breach of trust of a
severe kind that deserves censure and punishment.

What an act of ignorance and injustice it is not to fulfill the Divine
trust, by employing what could be easily employed for the purposes of
justice in incurring His Wrath. It is clear that such a person will not
be sheltered from the Divine Wrath. Hence it is in order to think
seriously about the moral vices and vicious deeds that are the outcome
of anger, and to try to remove the effects of this crooked quality, each
one of which is capable of afflicting a person till eternity, causing
many a calamity in this world as well as chastisement and damnation in
the Hereafter.

Moral Hazards Of Anger
----------------------

As to the moral hazards, it may cause malice towards creatures of God,
leading sometimes even to the enmity not only of prophets and *awliya*’,
but also of the Holy Essence of the Necessary Being and the Nourisher.
This shows how dangerous and disgraceful its consequences may be. I seek
refuge in God from the evil of the rebellious self, which, if left
reinless for a moment, throws one down rolling in the dust of ignominy
or dashes with him towards eternal damnation. It may also give rise to
other vices, like *hasad*, about whose evils you have read in the
exposition of the fifth tradition, and many more besides it.

Its Behavioral Hazards
----------------------

There is no limit to the behavioral hazards that are products of this
vice. Perhaps, it may lead one, God save us, to use abusive language or
revile the prophets of God and *awliya*’. Or he may desecrate sanctities
and utter slanders about venerable persons. He may murder a pious soul,
wreck the lives of innocent creatures, wreck a family, or reveal the
secrets of others tearing up the veils that cover them. There seems to
be no limit to such monstrous acts that man may commit at the time of
outbreak of this faith-consuming fire that also destroys many homes.

As such, it can be said that this habit is the mother of all spiritual
maladies and the key to each and every evil action. As opposed to this
vice is the ability to restrain one’s anger. This ability to extinguish
the fire of anger has been considered the essence of wisdom and the
focus of all virtues and noble qualities, as stated in this tradition of
*al-Kafi:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِدَّةٌ مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا، عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ خَالِدٍ،
عَنْ أَبِيهِ، عَنِ النَّضْرِ بْنِ سُوَيْدٍ، عَنِ القَاسِمِ بْنِ
سُلَيْمَانَ، عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ
أَبِي عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: أَتَى رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِه رَجُلٌ بَدَوِيٌّ فَقَالَ: إنِّي أَسْكُنُ البَادِيَةَ،
فَعَلِّمْنِي جَوامِعَ الكَلامِ. فَقَالَ: آمُرُكَ أَنْ لا تَغْضَبَ.
فَأَعَادَ عَلَيْهِ الأعْرَابِيُّ المَسْأَلَةَ ثَلاثَ مَرَّاتٍ حَتّى
رَجَعَ الرَّجُلُ إلَى نَفْسِهِ فَقَالَ: لا أَسْأَلُ عَنْ شَيْءٍ بَعْدَ
هَذَا.مَا أَمَرَنِي رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ إلا
بِالخَيْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: وَكَانَ أَبِي يَقُولُ: أَيُّ شَيْءٍ أَشَدُّ مِنَ الغَضَبِ؟ إنَّ
الرَّجُلَ لَيَغْضَبُ فَيَقْتُلُ النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللهُ
وَيَقْذِفُ المُحْصَنَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Kulayni says) From a number of our (i.e. al-Kulayni’s) companions,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid (al-Barqi), who narrates on the
authority of a chain of narrators from Imam al-Sadiq (A) that he heard
his father (Imam al-Baqir [A]) as saying: “A Bedouin came to the Prophet
(S) and said: ‘I live in the desert. Teach me the essence of wisdom.’
Thereupon the Prophet (S) said to him: ‘I command you not to get angry’
After repeating his question thrice (and hearing the same reply from the
Prophet every time) the Bedouin said to himself: ‘After this I will not
ask any question, since the Apostle of God (S) does not command anything
but good’.” Imam al-Sadiq (A) says, “My father used to say, ‘Is there
anything more violent than anger? Verily, a man gets angry and kills
someone whose blood has been forbidden by God, or slanders a married
woman.”[^6]

After that a wise person coolly ponders upon its evil consequences and
the benefits of restraint, he should make it incumbent upon himself to
put out this fire in the region of his heart with every possible effort
and to clear from his heart the black soot of its smoke. This is
something which is not very difficult when one resolves to act against
one’s inner self and its desires, after having reflected upon their evil
effects and by admonishing one’s self. In fact, one may get rid of all
moral evils and ugly spiritual traits and acquire all good qualities and
excellences of character and soul whenever he resolves to improve his
spiritual condition.

Controlling Anger
-----------------

There are also several practical and theoretical remedies for curing
anger when it has flared up. The theoretical remedy involves reflecting
upon the matters mentioned above, which is also a kind of practical
remedy in this case. But among the practical remedies the important ones
involve withholding of the self in the initial stages of anger. This is
because it is ignited little by little, becoming more intense until its
furnace is set burning fiercely and its flame becomes violent and
furious. When that happens, it gets completely out of control and shuts
off the lights of one’s faith and intellect. Blowing off the lamp of
guidance, it reduces man to an utterly wretched state.

Therefore, one should be on one’s guard so as to dissociate oneself by
some means before its fierceness mounts and its fire becomes more
violent. He should either leave the place where his anger may be
provoked, or change his posture: that is, if seated, he should stand up,
and if standing sit down, or engage his mind in the remembrance of God
(some people consider it even obligatory), or he should make himself
busy in some other activity to divert his attention.

In any case, it is easier to put a curb on it in the beginning. It has
two results. Firstly, he will be able to pacify his self at that early
stage and the flames of anger will be put out. Secondly, the experience
will always remain with one as a primary cure for treating one’s self.
If one always pays attention to one’s condition and treats one’s self in
this way, one will undergo a complete transformation as one’s inner
state moves towards the point of moderation. An allusion to this matter
is made in the following traditions from *al-Kafi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: إنَّ هَذَا الغَضَبَ
جَمْرَةٌ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ تُوقَدُ فِي قَلْبِ ابْنِ آدَمَ. وَإنَّ
أَحَدَكُمْ إذَا غَضِبَ احْمَرَّتْ عَيْنَاهُ وَانْتَفَخَتْ أَوْدَاجُهُ
وَدَخَلَ الشَّيْطَانُ فِيهِ. فَإذَا خَافَ أَحَدُكُمْ ذَلِكَ مِنْ
نَفْسِهِ فَلْيَلْزَمِ الأَرْضَ، فَإنَّ رِجْزَ الشَّيْطَانِ لَيَذْهَبُ
عَنْهُ عِنْدَ ذَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is reported from al ‘Imam al-Baqir (A) that he said, “Verily, anger
is a spark ignited by the Devil in the human heart. Indeed, when anyone
of you gets angry, his eyes become red, the veins of his neck become
swollen and Satan enters them. Therefore, whosoever among you is
concerned about himself on account of it, he should lie down for a while
so that the filth of Satan may be removed from him at the time.”[^7]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مَيْسِرٍ قَالَ: ذُكِرَ الغَضَبُ عِنْدَ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ فَقَالَ: إنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَغْضَبُ فَمَا يَرْضَى أَبَداً
حَتَّى يَدْخُلَ النَّارَ. فَأَيُّمَا رَجُلٍ غَضِبَ عَلَى قَوْمٍ وَهُوَ
قَائِمٌ فَلْيَجْلِسْ مِنْ فَوْرِهِ ذَلِكَ، فَإنَّهُ سَيَذْهَبُ عَنْهُ
رِجْزُ الشَّيْطَانِ. وَأَيُّمَا رَجُلٍ غَضِبَ عَلَى ذِي رَحِمٍ
فَلْيَدْنُ مِنْهُ فَلْيَمِسَّهُ. فَإنَّ الرَّحِمَ إذَا مُسَّتْ
سَكَنَتْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Maysir reports that once anger was discussed in the presence of Imam al
Baqir (A). He said, “Verily, it happens that an angry person would not
be satisfied until he enters the Fire (i.e. his anger does not subside
unless it drags him into the hellfire). Therefore, whoever is angry with
someone let him sit down immediately if he is standing; for, indeed, it
would repel from him the uncleanliness of Satan. And whoever gets angry
with his kinsman, let him approach him and pat him; for the feeling of
consanguinity, when stimulated by touch, induces calmness.”[^8]

These two traditions suggest two practical remedies of anger in its
initial stage. One is general and recommends sitting down and bringing
about a change in posture (according to another tradition, if somebody
be seated at the time of getting angry, he should stand up). It is
reported by Sunni sources that the Apostle of God (S), if he ever got
angry while standing, would sit down, and if seated, would recline, and
his anger would subside. The other remedy which is particular is
concerned with blood relations and suggests that if anybody gets angry
with someone related to him by blood, if he touches him with his hand
his anger will cool down.

These are the methods of curing oneself of one’s anger; but if others
want to treat an enraged person, if his anger is in the initial stage,
any one of the methods from among the various practical and theoretical
ones suggested may be useful. But if he is in extreme anger, advice and
counsel give opposite results, and it becomes very difficult to treat
him in this stage, except by being put in a state of alarm by someone
whom he holds in high esteem; for anger vents itself on those whom one
deems weaker and inferior to oneself or at least as equal in power and
position. But in front of those persons with whom he is impressed, his
anger is never provoked.

Rather his outer excitement and agitation will be transformed into an
internal fury confined to his inner self. Not finding any outlet, it
will change into a grief within the heart. Hence, it is not at all an
easy task to appease a person undergoing outbursts of extreme rage. We
seek refuge in God from it.

How To Eradicate The Roots Of Anger
-----------------------------------

Among the fundamental remedies of anger, one is to exterminate the
factors responsible for its provocation. They are many, and here we can
mention only a few of them. One of them is self-love, which in ‘turn
begets the love of wealth, glory, and honor and the desire to impose
one’s will and expand one’s domain of power.

These factors are inherently responsible for exciting the fire of anger,
as the individual infatuated with these things tends to hold them in
high regard and they occupy a high place in his heart. He, improperly,
gets angry and excited if any one of these aspired goals is not achieved
or when his desire faces any obstacle and loses control over himself.
Greed, avarice, and such other vices that take root in his heart as a
result of self-love and the love of glory, snatch the reins of reason
from his hands, leaving the self to commit deeds that deviate from the
path of Divine Law and reason.

But if his love and interest in these things is not intense-and he gives
lesser importance to these matters, his inner calm and contentment,
obtained by giving up the love of wealth, honor and the like, will not
allow his self to act against the demands of justice. Then, he will not
find it difficult to maintain his patience in hardships, and will not
lose grip of self-restraint. He would not get angry unnecessarily and
abnormally. If the love of the world is eradicated from his heart and
this vice is completely wiped out, then all other vices also take leave
and vanish from it, vacating the realm of the soul to be taken over by
moral virtues.

Another factor that arouses anger is that sometimes anger and its evil
manifestations, which are in fact great moral defects and indecencies,
are imagined to be merits and accomplishments on account of ignorance
and lack of understanding. Some fools reckon those vices as marks of
bravery and courage and brag about themselves on account of them. They
confuse the virtue of valor, which is a superb attribute of the
believer’s character and a commendable quality, with this pernicious
vice.

However, it should be noted that courage or valor is a different thing,
and its source, its causes, effects and characteristics differ totally
from those of that injurious vice. Courage originates in the strength of
one’s spirit, serenity of mind, moderateness, faith, and lack of concern
for the vanities of life and indifference to its vicissitudes; whereas
anger is the product of spiritual weakness and degeneration,
insufficiency of faith, immoderation of character and soul, love of the
world and concern for mundane things and the fear of losing the
pleasures of life.

Hence this vice is found more frequently in women than in men, more in
sick individuals than in healthy people, more in children than in grown
ups, more in the elderly than in young people. Valor and courage is its
opposite. Those suffering from moral infirmities are more liable to get
angry sooner than those who are morally sound. Thus, we often see such
people get angry sooner and becoming fiercer if any encroachment is made
upon their property than the others.

This was about the origins and motives of anger and courage. However,
they are also different as to their effects. The irascible person, when
under the spell of anger and its excitement, behaves unreasonably like a
lunatic or like an animal which acts without rationally considering the
consequences of its actions, and commits ugly and indecent acts. His
tongue, limbs, and other parts of the body go out of his control. His
eyes, lips and mouth are distorted in such an ugly manner that he will
be ashamed of his ugly features if he is shown a mirror at the time.

Some persons who are afflicted with this vice not only do not refrain
from venting their anger on innocent animals, but do not spare even
inanimate things. They curse air, water, earth, snow, rain and other
elements of nature if anything happens against their wish. Sometimes
they vent their fury on a book, pen, glass or jug, tearing it up or
breaking it into pieces.

But the behavior of a courageous person is different in all these
matters. His acts are based on reason and tranquility of soul. He gets
angry on the proper occasion and is patient and restrained when required
to be so. He is not provoked or incensed by each and every annoyance. He
becomes angry on the proper occasion to the proper extent and takes his
vengeance with reason and discretion. He knows well as to against whom
to take his revenge, on what occasion, to what degree and in what
manner, and as to whom he should forgive and what to overlook and
ignore.

In the state of anger, he does not lose control of his reason, and he
never makes use of indecent language nor acts indiscreetly. All his acts
are based on rational considerations and are in accordance with the
norms of justice and Divine Law. He always acts in such a manner so as
not to regret later on.

Thus an aware human being should not confuse this quality, which is one
of the attributes of prophets, *awliya*’ and true believers and is
considered a spiritual accomplishment and achievement, with the vice
which is one of the attributes of Satan, a diabolical incitement, a
spiritual abomination and a flaw of the heart. Yet, the veils of
ignorance and folly and the curtains of self-love and attachment to the
world cover man’s hearing and blind his vision, rendering him helpless
and bringing about his destruction.

Certain other causes of anger have also been pointed out, such as
*‘ujb,* bragging (*iftikhar*)*,* pride (*kibr*)*,* disputatiousness
(*mira’*)*,* obstinacy (*lajaj*)*,* jesting and the like; but to go into
their details will prolong this discussion and might be cumbersome.
Possibly most or all of them, directly or indirectly, originate in the
two sources already discussed. And praise be to God.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Tehran), Vol. III (Arabic text with
Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi, p. 412.

[^2]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Tehran), Vol. III (Arabic text with
Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi, p. 412.

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Tehran), Vol. III (Arabic text with
Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi, p. 415.

[^4]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Tehran), Vol. III (Arabic text with
Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi, p. 415.

[^5]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Tehran), Vol. III (Arabic text with
Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi, p. 415.

[^6]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Tehran), Vol. III (Arabic text with
Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi, p. 415.

[^7]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Tehran), Vol. III (Arabic text with
Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi, p. 415.

[^8]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Tehran), Vol. III (Arabic text with
Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi, p. 415.


