Eighth Hadith:  Prejudice (‘Asabiyyah)
======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إِلى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ عَنْ عَلِيٍّ
بْنِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، عَنِ النَّوْفَلِيِّ، عَنِ
السَّكُونِيِّ، عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ
رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: مَنْ كَانَ فِي قَلْبِهِ
حَبَّةٌ مِنْ خَرْدَلٍ مِنْ عَصَبِيَّةٍ بَعَثَهُ اللهُ يَوْمَ
القِيَامَةِ مَعَ أَعْرَابِ الجَاهِلِيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni), from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from his
father, from al-Nawfali, from al-Sakuni, who reports on the authority of
Abu ‘Abd Allah (Imam al-Sadiq ) (A) that the Prophet (S) said,
“Whosoever possesses in his heart ‘asabiyyah (prejudice in any of its
forms such as tribalism, racism, nationalism) even to the extent of a
mustard seed, God will raise him on the Day of Resurrection with the
(pagan) Bedouins of the Jahiliyyah (the pre-Islamic era).”[^1]

Exposition
----------

Although now *khardal* is current in modern Persian for the mustard
seed, the word for it in old Persian was *espandan.* It is said that the
mustard seed has many medicinal uses and is also used for making
candles. As to the word *‘asabiyyah* it is the characteristic of the
person who supports his kinsmen and relatives even for a wrong and
unjust cause.

*‘Usbah* refers to paternal relatives, as they are more likely to be
those among whom one is surrounded (*‘asaba:* to wrap around) and those
from whom one derives strength (*‘asaba* means, also, to bind).
*‘Asabiyyah* and *ta’assub* in general give the sense of favoring and
defending. So much for the lexical meaning.

As to its nature, I believe that *‘asabiyyah* is an inner psychic
quality which is manifested in patronizing and defending one’s kindred
and those with whom one has some kind of affinity or relation, whether
it be religious creed or ideology, or whether it be soil or home. The
affinity may also be similarity of profession or the relationship of
teacher and pupil, or something else. It is a moral vice and an
abominable trait which itself begets many more moral and behavioral
deviations and vices as well. In itself a condemnable quality, it may
take the form of defense of truth or religion, but in reality it is not
aimed to defend a just and truthful cause but for extending one’s own
influence or that of one’s co-religionists and allies.

As to the defense of truth, the efforts to disseminate it and to posit
something which is true, are either not *‘asabiyyah,* or, if they are,
represent a commendable kind of it. The criterion lies in the distinct
aims and purposes, and to the extent to which it involves selfish and
diabolical ends or serves just and godly purposes.

In other words, when a man supports his kinsmen and friends, if he does
so purely for the sake of upholding justice and defeating injustice,
this kind of *‘asabiyyah* is commendable and praiseworthy; because
supporting justice and truth is among the sublimest of human qualities,
being one of the attributes of the prophets of God (A) and His
*awliya’.* Its sign is that one should support the party which is on the
side of truth and justice, even though it may consist of one’s enemies.

Such a person is a defender and lover of truth; he will be counted among
the champions of human sublimity, a rightful citizen of the ideal human
society, and a wholesome member of society whose presence exerts a
reforming influence on the evils of the public. And if one’s selfish and
tribal instincts arouse him to defend and patronize the vices and wrongs
of his kinsmen and associates, he is inflicted with the vice of
*‘asabiyyah;* he is a corrupt member of society, who corrupts it by
confusing vice with virtue, and stands with the Bedouins of the
*Jahiliyyah,* who were a group of nomadic Arabs who inhabited the desert
before the advent of Islam, in an era of prevalence of darkness and
ignorance.

This vice had taken hold of them to the highest degree, and among Arabs
in general, who are guided by the light of guidance (through Islam) this
vice is more than in any other nation. According to a tradition reported
from Imam ‘Ali (A), God Almighty will punish six groups of people for
six kinds of sins: He will punish the Arabs for *‘asabiyyah,* the
peasants for pride, the rulers for oppression, the jurisprudents for
jealousy, the merchants for dishonesty, and the villagers for ignorance.

The Evils Of ‘Asabiyyah
-----------------------

From traditions narrated from the Household of the Prophet (S) it may be
inferred that the vice of *‘asabiyyah* is one of the fatal sins, which
results in an evil life in the Hereafter and drives man out from the
precincts of faith, being one of the abominable traits of the Devil:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: مَنْ تَعَصَّبَ أَوْ
تُعُصِّبَ لَهُ فَقَدْ خَلَعَ رِبْقَةَ الإيمَانِ مِنْ عُنُقِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[In al-Kafi, through a chain of authentic narrators], it is reported
from Abu ‘Abd Allah (Imam al-Sadiq (A) that the Prophet (S) said, “The
one who exerts ‘asabiyyah or the one on whose behalf it is exerted, the
tie of faith is taken off his neck.”[^2]

That is, such a man is deprived of faith and abandoned. As to the person
in whose interest *‘asabiyyah* is exerted, perhaps he is also included
in the *hadith* due to his compliance to the behavior of the one
exerting *‘asabiyyah* and hence made to share his lot jointly. And it is
stated in *hadith* that whosoever approves of the action of a certain
group is counted amongst it. However, if he does not approve of it and
detests it, this tradition would not apply to him.

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: مَنْ تَعَصَّبَ
عَصَبَهُ اللهُ بِعِصَابَةٍ مِنْ نَارٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (A) is reported to have said, “Whosoever practices
‘asabiyyah (against someone), God shall wrap around him (‘asabahu) a
fold (‘isabah) of Fire.”[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ الحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ قَالَ: لَمْ
يَدْخُلِ الجَنَّةَ حَمِيَّةٌ غَيْرَ حَمِيَّةِ حَمْزَةَ بْنِ عَبْدِ
المُطَّلِبِ - وَذَلِكَ حِينَ أَسْلَمَ - غَضَباً لِلنَّبِيِّ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (A) is reported to have said: No hamiyyah shall
ever enter Paradise, except the hamiyyah of Hamzah ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib,
which was (expressed) at the time when he became a Muslim on account of
his anger in support of the Prophet (S).”[^4]

The episode of Hamzah’s conversion to Islam has been reported variously,
and is not relevant to our discussion. In any case, it is obvious that
faith-which is the invisible holy gift of God to His special servants,
the sincere devotees of His Court, and the champions of His love-is
contrary to a quality that disregards truth and reality and tramples
truthfulness and uprightness under its feet.

Of course, if the mirror of the heart be covered with the dust of
self-love and the love of the kindred and improper and blind
*‘asabiyyah,* the light of faith will not shine in it; it will not be
fit to be the hidden abode of the Most High.

The person whose heart has been the mirror for the light of faith and
gnosis, the one whose neck has been tied in the firm and unbreakable
rope of faith, the one who is the hostage of reality and Divine
knowledge, the one who remains wedded to the religious precepts and
confined to rational principles and laws, the one who derives all his
impulses from reason and Divine Law-no force of customs, ways, or
familiar things can cause him to quiver or deviate from the right path.

One can profess Islam and claim iman only when he is submissive to truth
and humble in front of it, and when he deems his own aims and purposes,
no matter however great they may be, as trivial and transitory, before
the aims and purposes of his Lord and Provider; he annihilates his own
will in the Will of his real Lord. Of necessity, such a person will be
free from all traces of ignorant *‘asabiyyah;* his face will be turned
towards reality, and thick curtains of ignorance and *‘asabiyyah* would
not obstruct his vision.

When called to administer justice and utter the word of truth, he puts a
firm foot on the head of all associations and ties, sacrificing all ties
of kinship and customary affinities at the altar of the aims and
objectives of his Lord. If there is a clash between the Islamic
*‘asabiyyah* and the *‘asabiyyah* of the *Jahiliyyah,* he gives
precedence to his Islamic *‘asabiyyah* and his *‘asabiyyah* for truth.

An enlightened human being knows that all the *‘asabiyyahs* and all
associations and relationships are merely transitory accidents and are
perishable. The only relationship that is permanent and lasting and the
only *‘asabiyyah* that is true, is the relationship between the Creator
and the created being, and is essential and unbreakable; it is firmer,
higher, and prior to all the ties of lineage and alliance.

A Prophetic Tradition
---------------------

The Prophet of God (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ حَسَبٍ وَنَسَبٍ مُنْقَطِعٌ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ إلا حَسَبِي
وَنَسَبِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

All the ties of lineage and affinity will be broken on the Day of
Resurrection except the ties of my lineage and affinity.

It is obvious that the ties of lineage and affinity of that holy
personage are spiritual and lasting, and free from all pre-Islamic
biases and *‘asabiyyahs.* In fact the spiritual ties of lineage will be
more vivid in that world and its merits more conspicuous. On the other
hand, the physical and terrestrial relationships that are rooted in
human habits and customs are very weak and fragile and are broken
easily.

None of them have any worth and value whatsoever in the next world,
except those relationships that are established according to the Divine
celestial system and under the auspices of the precepts of the Law and
dictates of reason: only they are unbreakable and unseverable.

The Otherworldly Form Of ‘Asabiyyah
-----------------------------------

It was mentioned in some of the *ahadith* discussed previously that the
criteria of the otherworldly forms, which human traits will acquire in
the *Barzakh* and on the Day of Resurrection, are the habits and
qualities and their strength. That world is the domain of the dominance
of the spirit and the subservience of the body. It is possible that men
should be raised in the forms of animals or Satans.

The present tradition which we are expounding, and which maintains that
‘the person who possesses in his heart *‘asabiyyah* even to the extent
of a mustard seed, God Almighty will resurrect him on the Day of
Judgment with the Bedouins of the pre-Islamic era’, may also refer to
the above-mentioned point. The man possessing this vice, after being
transferred to the other world may behold himself as one of the pre
Islamic heathen Bedouins, who neither had faith in God Almighty nor
believed in prophets and prophethood.

Whatever the inner and outer form of that tribe had been, he will find
himself when resurrected as one of them. Perhaps he will himself not
understand as to why such a thing would happen to him, while in the
world he professed the true religion of God and claimed to be an
adherent of the faith of the Holy Prophet (S). It is mentioned in a
tradition that the inhabitants of Hell will not be able to remember the
name of the Prophet (S), and, as such, would not be able to introduce
themselves as his followers, unless God Almighty resolves on their
deliverance.

And since, according to some of the traditions, the trait of
*‘asabiyyah* is one of the attributes of Satan, may be the heathen
Bedouins of the pre-Islamic era, as well as the individuals possessing
the primitive habit of *‘asabiyyah* would be resurrected in the form of
Satan:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: إنَّ المَلائِكَةَ
كَانُوا يَحْسَبُونَ أنَّ إبْلِيسَ مِنْهُمْ وَكَانَ فِي عِلْمِ اللهِ
أَنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنْهُمْ، فَاسْتَخْرَجَ مَا فِي نَفْسِهِ بِالحَمِيَّةِ
وَالغَضَبِ فَقَالَ: خَلَقْتَنِي مِنْ نَارٍ وَخَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ طِينٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(According to a reliable hadith of al-Kafi), Abu ‘Abd Allah (Imam al
Sadiq) (A) is reported to have said, “Verily, the angels counted Satan
as one of themselves, and it was in the knowledge of God that he was not
of them; then he spoke out whatever was inside him, out of hamiyyah and
anger, and said (to God): ‘Thou createdst me of fire, and him (Adam)
Thou didst create of clay.”[^5]

Thus my dear, you should know that this vice belongs to Satan and is a
fallacy inspired in you by that accursed being based on false analogical
inference. He committed the mistake because of the dense veils of
*‘asabiyyah.* This veil conceals all realities from the sight, or rather
shows all one’s vices as virtues and the virtues of others as vices. And
it is obvious as to where the deeds of the person who beholds things in
a contrary perspective would lead him. Besides being itself a source of
human ruin and doom, it gives rise to a number of moral, spiritual and
behavioral villainies, the description of which would be cumbersome.

As such, a wise person, who understands these villainies as the products
of this vice and confirms the testimony of the truthful Holy Prophet
(S)-whose truthfulness has been confirmed by God-and the Members of his
Household (A), who all state that this trait leads man to destruction
and makes him an inhabitant of the Fire, should seriously consider about
curing himself, and if, God forbid, there is the slightest speck of this
vice in his heart, equal to the size of a mustard seed, he should purge
it, so that he may be thoroughly purified before leaving this world and
being transferred to the next.

He should be free from this vice at the hour of his death, so as to put
his feet into the other world with a pure soul. He should keep in his
mind that he has fiery little time and very limited opportunity; for he
does not know as to when he will have to depart from this world.

A Colloquy With The Self
------------------------

O my vicious self! Perhaps your death may approach while you are still
busy in writing these pages, and transfer you with all your moral vices
to the next world from where there is no return. And O you dear reader
of these pages, draw a lesson from the life of this writer who may be
today under the ground and in the other world, a victim of his ugly acts
and wicked behavior. As long as he was given opportunity, he spent the
precious days of his life in vain pursuit of lusts and desires and
squandered that gift of God with vain profligacy. Yet you must be
careful as you too shall be in a condition similar to his, and you don’t
know when.

Perhaps as you are reading these pages, the opportunity may slip if you
go on procrastinating. O brother! Do not put off these matters; they are
not to be postponed. Remember, how many hail and hearty people have
suddenly been snatched away by the claws of death, and we have no
knowledge about what awaited them in the Hereafter.

Therefore, do not let the chance slip and consider every second as
precious; for the matter matters a lot and the journey is a perilous
one. If you lose the opportunity of doing something in this world, which
is the field whose harvest is the Hereafter, you will not be able to do
anything any more and you will not be able to straighten your
crookedness. There will be nothing left except regret, perplexity,
chastisement, and degradation.

The men of God were never at ease even for a little while; they were
never oblivious of the perilous and hazardous journey ahead. The
condition of the fourth Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (A) was amazing. The
laments of Amir al-Mu’minin Imam ‘Ali (A) are stunning.

What is the matter with us that we are so negligent? Who has given us
assurance except the Devil, who makes us put off our actions for
tomorrow and wants to bulge the number of his followers and companions
by making us share his attributes? Doesn’t he, in this way, want to
include us in his company so that we may be resurrected in his retinue?

The accursed creature always diminishes the importance and seriousness
of the matters of the Hereafter in our eyes, and makes us oblivious of
the remembrance of God and obedience to His commands by means of the
promises of His mercy and the intercession of the intercessors. But,
alas, such temptations have no truth and belong to the deceitful
paraphernalia of the snares of that accursed creature.

Of course, even at present, you are immersed in the mercy and compassion
of God, rejoicing in the gifts of sound health and well-being, life and
safety, guidance and reason, opportunity and directions for the
reformation of the soul and other such myriad favors. Yet you are not
drawing benefit from these favors in this world by complacently
following the Devil. Beware if you fail to draw any benefit from God’s
mercy in this world, in the next world also you will not be able to
benefit from the infinite mercy of God and the intercession of the
intercessors. The guidance provided by them is this-worldly reflection
of the intercession of the intercessors in the next world and the
otherworldly reflection of the guidance provided by them here is
intercession.

But if you cannot benefit from the guidance, remember that you will not
be able to receive the benefit of intercession either; it depends on the
guidance you utilize here. The intercession of the Holy Prophet (S) is
general and universal; however, like the blessings of God, the receiver
must have capacity to receive it. If, God forbid, Satan robs you of the
faculty of faith, you will be incapable and unworthy of receiving Divine
mercy and the intercession of the intercessors. Yes, God’s bounties in
the two worlds are plenty and His mercy unlimited; but if you really
seek His mercy, then why do you neglect His unceasing bounties in this
world that are like seeds of His favors in the other?

All the prophets of God and the *awliya*’ have invited you to the Divine
feast, yet you turn away and you do not accept it on account of the evil
insinuations of the Devil. You sacrificed the *muhkamat* (the firm
verses) of the Book of God, the *mutawatirat* of the prophets and
*awliya*’, the compelling rational arguments of the wise, and the
definite proofs of the *hukama*’ for the fiendish fantasies and fancies
of your own. Woe to you and me for our state of neglectfulness,
blindness, deafness, and ignorance.

On The ‘Asabiyyahs Of The Intellectuals
---------------------------------------

One of the types of *‘asabiyyahs* is stubbornness in intellectual
matters and the habit of supporting the statements and ideas of one’s
own or that of one’s teacher or spiritual master not for the sake of
defending truth and refuting falsehood. It is obvious that such a kind
of *‘asabiyyah* is worse and more improper in some ways than other types
of *‘asabiyyah.* This, because a scholar and an intellectual ought to be
an instructor of mankind, scholarship being a branch of the tree of
prophethood and *wilayah* itself.

He should be aware of the evil effects and bad consequences of moral
vices. If, God forbid, he himself possesses the vice of *‘asabiyyah* and
attaches to himself the mean attributes of Satan, he will have scarcely
anything to offer in self-defense and will be taken to task severely.

The person who poses himself as a guiding beacon of light, a source of
enlightenment in the assembly of mankind, as a guide to the path of
felicity, and as one who is charged with the duty of guiding men on the
path of Hereafter, if, God forbid, he does not remain faithful to his
words and his inner being contradicts his outward appearance, he will be
grouped with the hypocrites and the pretentious. He will be branded as
an evil scholar, a man of knowledge devoid of good deeds, whose
retribution is a painful chastisement, as described by God Almighty in
the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿بِئْسَ مَثَلُ الْقَوْمِ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ
وَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Wretched is the likeness of those who deny the revelations of Allah.
And Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.*** (***62:5***)

Hence it is essential for scholars to retain their integrity and to keep
themselves free from such vices, so that having corrected themselves
they may be able to reform their society through a truly effective
preaching and exhortations that can penetrate the hearts and minds. The
corruption of a scholar can lead to the corruption of a nation. And it
is obvious that the vice which generates multiple vices and the
transgression which begets other transgressions is worse and greater
than an isolated, non-contagious vice in the eyes of the Almighty.

Another hideous aspect of this vice in intellectuals is the atrocity
done to knowledge itself; as this *‘asabiyyah* on the part of an
intellectual amounts to the abuse of knowledge and disrespect to it. The
one who is entrusted with this valuable trust and enrobed in its
precious robes, it is his duty to preserve its sanctity and deliver it
safely to its owner. And if one is guilty of the *‘asabiyyah* of pagan
Bedouins with regard to it, he is of course guilty of the sin of breach
of trust, an injustice and a major sin and offense.

The other ugly side of this vice is the wrong done to the other side.
Because, the other side that participates in intellectual discourses
also comprises of scholars. He too enjoys a sanctity which it is
obligatory to observe and to safeguard his honor. Insulting him will be
synonymous with violating Divine sanctities, and it is a great sin.
Sometimes, senseless *‘asabiyyahs* make one insult scholars. I seek
refuge in God from this major offense.

Yet another aspect of *‘asabiyyah* relates to the person in whose favor
‘*asabiyyah* is exercised, who may be one’s instructor and tutor. He may
be forced to disown his pupil, because all the great masters and
saints-*karram Allah wujuhahum* are naturally attracted towards truth
and justice and are abhorrent to untruth and injustice. They detest him
who violates justice and gives currency to falsehood through his acts of
*‘asabiyyah*.

Of course, the harms of spiritual disownment are greater than the harms
of parental disownment, for spiritual fatherhood is above physical
parenthood. Thus, it is incumbent upon scholars-may God increase their
station and honor-to protect themselves from all moral and behavioral
vices, to adorn themselves with the ornaments of good deeds and moral
virtues, and not to be unmindful of the duties of the holy office which
the Most High has bestowed on them, the failure to do which may bring
ruin whose extent is not known to any one except God Almighty alone.
Wassalam.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Intisharat ‘Ilmiyyah Islamiyyah,
Tehran), vol. III (Arabic text with Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad
Mustafawi), p. 419.

[^2]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Intisharat ‘Ilmiyyah Islamiyyah,
Tehran), vol. III (Arabic text with Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad
Mustafawi), p. 419.

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Intisharat ‘Ilmiyyah Islamiyyah,
Tehran), vol. III (Arabic text with Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad
Mustafawi), p. 419.

[^4]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Intisharat ‘Ilmiyyah Islamiyyah,
Tehran), vol. III (Arabic text with Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad
Mustafawi), p. 419.

[^5]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Intisharat ‘Ilmiyyah Islamiyyah,
Tehran), vol. III (Arabic text with Persian translation by Sayyid Jawad
Mustafawi), p. 419.


