Ninth Hadith: Hypocrisy (Nifaq)
===============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى ثِقَةِ الإسْلامِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ
الكُلَيْنِي عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَحْيَى، عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ
بْنِ عِيسَى، عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ سِنَانٍ، عَنْ عَوْنٍ القَلانِسِيِّ،
عَنِ ابْنِ أَبِي يَعْفُورَ، عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
قَالَ: مَنْ لَقِيَ المُسْلِمِينَ بِوَجْهَيْنِ وَلِسَانَيْنِ جَاءَ
يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ وَلَهُ لِسَانَانِ مِنْ نَارٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thiqat al-Islam Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni, from Muhammad ibn Yahya,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa, from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from ‘Awn ibn
al-Qalanisi, from Ibn Abi Ya’fur, who reports Abu ‘Abd Allah (Imam
al-Sadiq) (A) to have said, “One who meets Muslims with a double face
and a double tongue, on the Day of Judgment he will come with two
tongues of fire.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

Double-facedness is the characteristic of the person who assumes an
outward appearance and simulates a behavior which is contrary to his
inner state. For instance, one may give an impression of friendship and
affection and pretend to be sincere and sympathetic, while in his heart
he harbors an opposite feeling. Such a person displays sympathy and
friendship in front of people, but is different in their absence.

Double-tonguedness is the quality of the person who praises and flatters
people whenever he meets them, appearing to befriend them, but denounces
them and speaks slanderously of them in their absence. Therefore, in the
light of this description, the first quality may be specified as
‘behavioral *nifaq’* and the second as ‘verbal *nifaq’.* Perhaps the
tradition refers to the evil of *nifaq,* since these two features are
among the prominent and peculiar characteristics of the *munafiqun*
(hypocrites).

*Nifaq* is one of psychic maladies and a vicious quality with its own
specific signs and symptoms. It has also numerous grades and degrees,
which, God willing, we shall discuss, together with their method of
treatment, in the following sections.

Degrees Of Nifaq
----------------

It should be known that, like other vices and virtues, there are
different degrees and stages of intensity and weakness of *nifaq.* In
the case of any vice, if one does not take steps to cure it and does not
persevere in the course of its treatment, it would lead him towards its
extreme degrees, for there is no limit to the degree of intensity of
vices and virtues.

If man leaves his carnal self to its wishes, its innate propensity
towards corruption, its instinctive appetite for worldly pleasures, the
assistance of the Satan and the insinuations of the *Khannas,* all
together incline it towards evil, and its vices, increasing day by day
in intensity, reach the stage when they become an intrinsic, essential
and ultimate quality of the soul. Then the regions of one’s inner being
as well as outer self come under its sovereignty and rule. And if the
vice is characteristic of the Devil, such as *nifaq* and
double-facedness, which are attributes of that cursed being-whom the
Quran quotes as having said to Adam and Eve:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَقَاسَمَهُمَا إِنِّي لَكُمَا لَمِنْ النَّاصِحِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he swore unto them*** (***saying***)***: Lo. I am a sincere
adviser unto you.*** (***7:21***)

Whereas in reality he was the opposite of what he claimed-the realm of
your being will be annexed by the Devil’s empire. When that happens, the
ultimate form the spirit acquires will be satanic, and its inner essence
and substance will also be satanic in nature. It is also possible that
the external appearance in the next world will be of the Satan, though
here you have a human form and appearance.

Thus, if man does not try to guard himself from this vice and allows his
carnal self to act according to its wishes, within a short time all the
means of control will be so thoroughly gone that all his labors and
efforts will be put into the service of this vice. With whomever he will
come in contact, he will meet and greet him double-facedly and with a
double tongue.

Socially, his intercourse and relations with others will become tainted
with the vice of duplicity, dissemblance and hypocrisy. He will have no
other objective except his own personal benefit and no goal except
self-aggrandizement. Having trampled upon all the values of
truthfulness, sincerity, magnanimity and courage, he will employ
duplicity in all of his pauses and deeds, not abstaining from any
indecency or perversion. Such a person is away from the domain of
humanity and humanness, and on the Day of Judgment he will be raised as
a member of the legions of the Satan.

All that was stated above was regarding the degrees of intensity and
weakness of *nifaq* per se, but it also varies according to that to
which it is related. Sometimes one practices *nifaq* in relation to the
religion of God, sometimes with respect to virtues, sometimes in regard
to righteous deeds and holy rites, and sometimes in ordinary matters of
day-to-day life and common civilities. Also, sometimes one may act with
*nifaq* with respect to the Prophet (S) or the Imams (A), and sometimes
with regard to the *awliya*’, the scholars and the believers. Sometimes
one may behave with *nifaq* with Muslims and sometimes with God’s
creatures belonging to other communities and creeds.

Of course, these types of *nifaq* vary in the degree of their ugliness
and indecency, though all of them are similar in that they share the
quality of ugliness and indecency and are the buds and leaves of the
same vicious tree.

Effects Of Nifaq
----------------

*Nifaq* and double-facedness, besides being an abominable, ignoble and
vicious quality itself, which no decent person would like to adopt and
whose possessor is not only excluded from the human category, but cannot
be likened to any of the beasts as well, it is a cause of humiliation
and ignominy in this world in front of one’s fellows and friends, and
brings about disgrace and punishment in the Hereafter also.

As mentioned in the tradition, in the Hereafter such a person will be
resurrected with two tongues of fire in his mouth. This will be a source
of disgrace for him in front of the creatures of God and will bring
about his infamy in the presence of His prophets, apostles and
archangels. The severity of the punishment is also indicated by this
tradition. Because, if the substance of the body becomes that of fire,
imagine how severely it will be felt and what a great pain and suffering
it will inflict. I seek refuge in God from its severity.

It is reported in another tradition that the Prophet (S) said that the
double-faced person will come on the Day of Resurrection in such a
condition that one of his two tongues will protrude from the back of his
head and the other from the front, and both the tongues will be aflame,
making his entire body ablaze with fire.’[^2] Thereupon, it will be
announced that he was double-faced and double-tongued in the world.

He will be known on that day by this vice of his, the following Quranic
verse having become applicable to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَيَقْطَعُونَ مَا أَمَرَ اللَّهُ بِهِ أَنْ يُوصَلَ وَيُفْسِدُونَ فِي
الْأَرْضِ أُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمُ اللَّعْنَةُ وَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And sever that which Allah hath commanded should be joined, and make
mischief in the earth; theirs is the curse and theirs the ill abode.***
(***13:25***)

*Nifaq* is source of many an evil and destructive trait, each one of
which may bring about one’s doom and eternal damnation. One of them is
causing discord and sedition (*fitnah*)*,* which, according to an
express text of the Quran, is worse than homicide. Another is slandering
(*namimah*)*,* which is denounced by Imam al-Baqir (A) in the following
tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَرَّمَةٌ الجَنَّةُ عَلَى الفَتَّانِينَ المَشَّائِينَ
بِالنَّمِيمَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Entry to) Paradise is prohibited to slanderers who walk on the path of
calumny (i.e. are habitual slanderers).[^3]

The sins of slandering others and backbiting are worse than the sin of
adultery, according to a statement of the Prophet (S), and are
equivalent to subjecting a believer to torture, reviling him, and
divulging his secrets; each one of which alone is enough to bring about
one’s destruction.

Let it be known to you that other bad habits which belong to the
category of *nifaq* are: making gestures, allusions, winking, making
signals with the eyes and so on-things that some persons do in order to
mock some others, whereas they pose to be friendly and sincere in front
of them. One should be very cautious of his own state and be careful of
his deeds and behavior, because the snares of the self and the designs
of the Satan are very subtle, and there are very few people who are able
to save themselves from them.

It is possible that on account of an inappropriate act of beckoning or
an improper winking one may be branded as double-faced and
double-tongued. Perchance one may possess this bad habit as long as he
is alive and imagine himself to be morally healthy, sound and pure.

Therefore, it is essential for an individual to take care, like a
devoted and sympathetic physician, of his spiritual and moral health and
constantly keep an eye on his own deeds and habits, like a careful and
vigilant nurse, and never fall short of his duty. He should know that
none of the diseases of the heart is more concealed and elusive, and at
the same time so fatal, than this disease, and no nurse should be more
sympathetic and kind than an individual to himself.

Cure Of The Disease Of Nifaq
----------------------------

There are two ways of getting rid of this greatly evil vice:

The first is to think about the harms that proceed from this vice, in
this world as well as in the Hereafter. One should deliberate upon the
matter that if he becomes known in this world for having this bad habit,
he will be degraded in the eyes of his fellows and become infamous among
his fellow human beings. They will avoid his company and he will be
deprived of their friendliness. Moreover, he will fail to achieve any
merit and to reach his higher goals. Thus it is necessary for a man of
honor and dignity endowed with the conscience to purge himself of this
ignominy that consumes honor, and not to allow himself to be entrapped
in its disgraces.

Besides, in the other world, which is the realm of the unveiling of
secrets, where things that remained concealed from the eyes of people
shall not be hidden, there, he will be raised a deformed, ugly creature
possessing two tongues of fire and punished along with the hypocrites
and devils. Therefore, it is incumbent upon a man of wisdom, who sees no
good in it but harm, ugliness and abomination, to get rid of this vice.

The other treatment, which involves action, is another method of curing
the self. It requires the individual to be extremely vigilant regarding
his acts and pauses, and that he should act deliberately against his
base wishes, wage a war against himself and try to improve his self
inwardly as well as outwardly, in deed as well as in speech.

He should abstain from affectation, coquetry and dissemblance in
practice, and beseech the Almighty’s help and assistance during this
period to give him supremacy over his carnal self and its desires and to
guide and accompany him in this undertaking. His mercy and grace towards
His creatures are boundless, and whosoever advances towards Him wishing
to reform himself, He extends His support and help to him.

If one perseveres in this for several days, it is hoped that the soul
would become purified and the rust of hypocrisy and double-facedness
will be removed from it. The mirror of his heart and his inner being
will be cleansed of this vice, and it will be ready again to receive the
favors and blessings of the Bestower.

Because it has been established through rational proofs, and also
confirmed by experience, that as long as man lives in this world, he is
conditioned by the deeds and actions committed by him, and every one of
his deeds, the pious as well as the vicious ones, leave their
impressions and effects on the soul. If the deeds are pious and good,
they leave a luminous and sublime effect; if not, a dark and negative
impression is left on the soul.

Thus, as a result, the heart is either rendered bright and luminous or
dark and gloomy, according to the deeds. He is either grouped with the
good and virtuous, or with the vicious and corrupt. Therefore, as long
as we tarry in this house of action and this place of cultivation, we
can freely steer our hearts in the direction of felicity or in the
direction of wretchedness. We are hostages of our actions, about which
the Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَه. وَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ
مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَه.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoso doth good an atom’s weight will see it, and whoso doth ill
an atom’s weight will see it.*** (***99:7-8***)

Some Forms Of Nifaq
-------------------

Let it be known to you, dear friend, that one of the forms of *nifaq,*
double-facedness and double-tonguedness is *nifaq* with the Almighty,
the King of kings, and the Bestower and the Nourisher, with which we are
inflicted in this world but are not aware of it. Thick curtains of
ignorance and folly and dark veils of the love of the self and the world
have obstructed our vision in such a way that it is not possible for us
to know our defects before the time of the divulging of secrets and the
raising of these curtains and veils and before departing from this world
of nature and saying farewell to this house of illusion and this zone of
neglect and stupor.

Although now we have receded into a state of physical stupor and
obliviousness, and are intoxicated by the attractions of physical life
and sensual existence, which beautify all moral and behavioral
villainies in our eyes, the moment shall come when we shall wake up and
come to our senses, and realize that there is nothing left for us to be
done, that we have lost the opportunity-and have been branded as
*munafiqun,* double-faced, and double-tongued, and resurrected with two
flaring tongues or with two hideous faces.

Then, even if we weep and wail, and yell out, “Lord, send me back into
the world,” the answer will come, “Never.” Such will be the fate of our
double-faced ness; while, in this life, you and I have been claiming
faith in the Unity of God throughout, and professing to be Muslims and
true believers untiringly, and even making ardent claims of His love.

If we are laymen, we boast of our faith in Islam, our sincerity of faith
and our piety. If we belong to the class of *ulama* and jurisprudents,
we pretend the highest degree of sincerity (*ikhlas*) and put forth
claims to the *wilayah* and the *khilafah* of the Prophet (S). We
imagine that the words uttered by the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّّهُمَّ ارْحَمْ خُلَفَائِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O God! Have mercy upon my successors.

And by the present Imam (A) -may my soul be sacrificed for him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُمْ حُجَّتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily they are my proofs.

And all other statements of the Imams (A) about *ulama* and *fuqaha*’,
to have been spoken about ourselves.

And if we belong to the class of scholars of philosophy and the rational
sciences, claiming to possess true faith based on deductive proofs, we
deem ourselves to be men of certain knowledge (*‘ilm al-yaqin*)*,* and
those who possess *‘ayn al-yaqin* and *haqq al-yaqin,* considering all
others as possessing imperfect knowledge and infirm faith, and applying
all the pertinent Quranic verses and traditions to ourselves.

And if we count ourselves among the mystics and men of ‘*irfan*,
claiming mystic knowledge, ecstasies of love, states of annihilation in
God and subsistence through Him (*fana’ fi Allah, baqa’ bi* *Allah*) and
His vicegerency (*wilayat al- amr*)*,* we apply such appellations, and
whatsoever that appears to be attractive, to ourselves.

Thus, each one of our various groups claims some kind of high station by
employing a vocabulary that it considers suitable for itself and for the
display of its particular relation to the Truth. If this outward display
complies with his inner reality and this appearance corresponds to his
secret inward, he is of course truthful in claims and his blessed
condition indeed deserves congratulations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَنِيئاً لَهُ وَلأرْبَابِ النَّعِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

May the blessing do much good to him and to its other possessors.

But if he is, like this writer, a deformed wretch, he should know that
he belongs to the class of *munafiqun* and the double tongued. He should
set out to treat himself and make use of the opportunity before it slips
away, and do something about his unfortunate condition and the day of
darkness and humiliation that awaits him.

My dear, you who claim adherence to Islam, there is a tradition in
*al-Kafi* reported from the Apostle of God (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُسْلِمُ مَنْ سَلِمَ المُسْلِمُونَ مِنْ يَدِهِ وَلِسَانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Muslim is one whose hand and tongue spare all Muslims.[^4]

What is the matter with us that we give ourselves the right to harass
and hurt, by all possible means, our subordinates, and never hesitate to
cause them inconvenience or to create problems for them? Or, if we
cannot do any harm by our hands, why do we hurt them with the dagger of
our tongue, by using derogatory language in their presence, or, in their
absence, by opening their secrets, by slandering them and making false
accusations against them?

Therefore, we, whose hands and tongues do not spare Muslims, our claim
of adherence to Islam contradicts our reality, and the state of our
hearts is opposite to what our knowledge of Islam tells us. Hence we
belong to the category of *munafiqun* and the double-faced.

O you who profess to adhere to the true faith and to submit your heart
to the sovereignty of the Almighty! If you have full faith in the
Oneness of God, and your heart is devoted to the worship of the One and
yearns for the One, and that if you do not believe in the existence of
any deity except God, if your heart mirrors your outward and your inner
is true to your claims, what is wrong with you that you are so subdued
and humble in front of the people? Why do you worship and idolize them?
Is it for some other reason than this that you believe them to be
powerful and influential, and you imagine their power and wealth to be
of some consequence?

Perhaps the only thing that you do not believe to be effective and
active in this world is the Will and Determination of God Almighty.
Aren’t you humble and subdued in front of all the external phenomena,
yet neglectful towards the really Powerful, the First Cause? Yet in
spite of this state of mind, you assert your faith in the Unity of God!
You should know that you are a foreigner to the community of believers,
and belong to the group of *munafiqun* and the double-tongued and will
be resurrected with them.

You who profess to be a genuine monotheist and of sincere piety, if you
are really sincere and abstain from worldly pleasures only for the sake
of God and His abode of bliss, what is wrong with you that you are so
eager to hear people say in your praise that so and so is such a pious
man, and are jubilant when someone says such a thing? Why are you
willing to die for the company of the rich and affluent and flee from
that of the poor and needy?

You must know that neither your monotheism nor your piety are genuine.
Your piety and abstinence are for the sake of the world, and your heart
is not sincerely devoted to God. Your claims are false and you belong to
the category of the double-faced and *munafiqun.*

And you who claim to be an appointee to the office of *wilayah*
(leadership) by the *Wali Allah* (i.e. the Twelfth Imam) and to that of
*khilafah* by the Apostle (S) of God, if your condition is in accordance
with the specifications mentioned in the tradition of *al-’Ihtijaj:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَائِناً لِنَفْسِهِ حَافِظاً لِدِينِهِ مُخَالِفاً لِهَوَاهُ مُطِيعاً
لأمْرِ مَوْلاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who keeps his soul chaste, safeguards his faith, opposes his desires,
and obeys the commands of his Master.[^5]

If you are yourself a branch of the tree of *wilayah* and *risalah*
(prophethood), and if you are neither inclined towards the world, nor
yearn for the nearness of kings, rulers and nobles, nor you are averse
to the company of the poor, then indeed you deserve your name and title
and you are certainly one of the proofs (*hujjah*) of God among the
humankind; otherwise you are one of the wicked *ulama* and the
*munafiqun,* and your plight is worse than that of the aforementioned
group of people, and your deeds more abominable and your life far more
wretched and miserable; since there is no ground for any plea or pretext
for the *ulama*.

And you who claim to possess the Divine *hikmah* and the knowledge of
the realities of the origin and the end (*al-mabda’ wa al-ma’ad*)*,* if
you do possess the knowledge of the realities of causes and effects, and
if in reality you know the forms assigned to men in *Barzakh* and the
matters of heaven and hell, you should not have found peace for a while
and should have spent each and every moment of your life in the
construction of the life in eternity.

You should have sought refuge from this world and its temptations. You
know as to what sort of torments lie ahead and what darkness and
severities await you. Yet why didn’t you step out from behind the
curtain of terms and concepts? Why haven’t the rational demonstrations
and proofs exerted any influence on your heart, even to the extent of
the wing of a fly?

Hence, in such a state, know that you stand outside the class of true
believers and *hukama’,* and on the Day of Judgment you will be
resurrected in the ranks of *munafiqun.* Woe unto the man who spent his
whole life arid energies in acquiring the knowledge of the metaphysical,
yet could not overcome his intoxication and infatuation with the
physical, so that not even one of the truths ever entered his heart!

And you who claim the gnosis of God, and speak of spiritual fervor, of
wayfaring, of His love and your wish to annihilate yourself in the
Divine Essence, if you are sincere in your devotion to God and belong to
the category of *ashab al-qulub,* men of enlightenment with a record of
virtuous past, then may it do you much good. Otherwise, inflated,
theopathetic utterances (*shathiyyat*)*,* pretentious ecstasies, and
extravagant claims reveal only your self love and your -satanic
tendencies, which are opposed to the love of God and godly fervor, for
God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ أَوْلِيائِي تَحْتَ قِبابِي لا يَعْرِفُهُمْ غَيْرِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, My awliya’, under My vault (i.e. the sky), are known to none
except Me.[^6]

If you do belong to the category of the *awliya’* of God, His lovers and
those absorbed totally in His love, it is indeed known to God. There is
no need for you to boast about your high station in front of people. Do
not distract the unsteady hearts of the creatures of God from their
Creator, by inclining them towards a creature of His. Do not trespass
upon the house that belongs to God. Know that those creatures are dear
to God, and their hearts are valuable and precious they are to be
employed in the service of God. Do not make a sport of the house of the
Lord, and do not put your hands on His sanctities, for it has been said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّ لِلْبَيْتِ رَبّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed the house has a Master.

Hence, if you are not true in your claims, you will be grouped with the
double-faced and the men of *nifaq.* But let me stop here, since it
isn’t proper for a wretch like me to speak any further.

O you vile self of the writer, who make much pretence: do something
about the dark days of your life and find a way out of your
wretchedness. If you are really sincere and your heart agrees with your
tongue and your inner intention is compatible with your outward
appearance, why are you so heedless, your heart so blackened, and your
lusts so indomitable? Why don’t you think about the journey of death,
which is so full of perils? Your days are past, yet you have not given
up your lusts and desires. You have spent your days in satisfying lusts
and in neglect and mischief.

The time of your death draws near, yet you are enmeshed in your vicious
deeds and entrapped in your indecent conduct. O preacher, who would not
learn any lesson, you stand in the midst of *munafiqun* and the
double-faced. Being one of them, it is feared that you will be
resurrected with two tongues of fire and two faces of fire, if you
continue in your present state.

O God, awaken us from this protracted spell of deep slumber, and bring
us back to our senses from this state of intoxication and
unconsciousness. Illumine our hearts with the light of faith and have
mercy on us. We are not champions of this field. You Yourself succor us
and deliver us from the talons of the Devil, for the sake of Your chosen
servants, Muhammad and his undefiled progeny, upon all of whom be God’s
benedictions.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi (Akhundi), vol. 2, p. 343.

[^2]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Iqab al-’a’mal (Maktabat al-Saduq), p. 319.

[^3]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 369.

[^4]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2; Fayd al-Kashani, al-Mahajjat al-bayda’, vol. 3,
p. 358.

[^5]: Al-Tabarsi, al-’Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p. 106; al-Hurr al-’Amili,
Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. 18, p. 99; al-Kulayni, op. cit., vol. 1, p.412;
al-Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Tahdhib, vol. 6, p. 301; al-Shaykh al-Saduq, Man
la yahduruhu al-faqih, vol. 3; al-Nuri, Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 3, p.
187 ; Shaykh Muhammad Hasan, al-Jawahir, vol. 40, p. 32.

[^6]: Ahadith qudsi. Source untraced.


