Tenth Hadith: Desire And Hope
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالأَسْنَادِ المُتَّصِلَةِ إلَى رَئِيسِ المُحَدِّثِينَ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
يَعْقُوبَ رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ، عَنِ الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ،
عَنْ مُعَلَّى بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ، عَنِ الوَشَّاءِ، عَنْ عَاصِمِ بْنِ
حَمِيدٍ، عَنْ أَبِي حَمْزَةَ، عَنْ يَحْيَى بْنِ عَقِيلٍ قَالَ: قَالَ
أَمِيرُ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: إنَّمَا أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمُ
اثْنَتَيْنِ: إتِّبَاعَ الهَوَى وَطُولَ الأَمَلِ. أَمَّا اتِّبَاعُ
الهَوَى فَإنَّهُ يَصُدُّ عَنِ الحَقِّ وَأَمّا طُولُ الأَمَلِ فَيُنْسِي
الآخِرَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni) (R) reports from al-Husayn ibn
Muhammad, he from Mu’alla ibn Muhammad, from al-Washsha’, from ‘Asim ibn
Humayd, he from Abu Hamzah, who narrates on the authority of Yahya ibn
‘Aqil that the latter reported that Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (A) said, “I
am apprehensive for you on account of two things: submission to desire
and cherishing of inordinate hope. As to desire, it prevents one from
haqq (Truth, righteousness, God); and as to inordinate hope, it makes
man oblivious of the Hereafter.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

Literally *hawiya* means ‘to love’, ‘to desire’ and ‘to become fond of
something’. It may either be something commendable or abominable, or it
may be something towards which one is inclined as a result of natural
urge. The carnal self is inclined towards lust and desire, if it is not
bridled by reason and the *Shari’ah*. But the possibility of *hawd*
being used here as a legal term (*haqiqah Shar’iyyah*) with a special
meaning, as maintained by some scholars, seems remote.

The phrase (صَدَّ عَنْ) gives the sense of repelling something, turning
away, preventing or dissuading from something. But here the verb *sadda*
is used in the transitive sense of stopping and preventing. God willing,
we shall discuss the two evils and their consequent conditions: first,
that of being prevented from the truth and from God; and, secondly, that
of obliviousness of the Hereafter. We implore God’s assistance in this
regard.

1. On The Evil Of Following One’s Desires
-----------------------------------------

### (A):

Though it is not directly relevant to our topic, it is essential to know
that the human soul is by nature and instinct inclined to believe not
only in the principle of *tawhid* (monotheism), but to follow all
truthful doctrines also. Yet, since the moment of birth and stepping
into this universe, man starts growing and developing along with his
natural urges and animal desires, except for those who are protected and
assisted by God, the Holy Preserver. The latter being exceptions and
among the marvels of existence, are not our concern here.

We are here concerned with the condition of the species in general. It
is evident that at the time of his birth, after passing through certain
stages, man is no better than a weak animal and has no distinction over
other animals, except for his potentiality of becoming a human being.
That is, his humanness is potential, not present.

Therefore, man is an animal in actuality in the initial stages of his
life in this world. No power but the law of animal nature, which governs
through the faculties of Desire (*shahwah*) and Anger (*ghadhab*)*,*
rules over him. And since this marvel of nature is capable of acquiring
all kinds of attributes, in order to cater to the needs of these two
faculties he employs another fiendish power, the faculty of imagination
(*quwwah wahmiyyah*) also in this direction through such means as:
lying, deceit, hypocrisy, slander and all the other kind of tools. He
grows and develops with these three powers, which are the roots of all
other vices and fatal sins, and they too develop and flourish within him
with age.

If he is not influenced by an instructor or guide, after having grown
and reached the age of maturity he becomes a beast of uncommon rarity
which surpasses all other beasts and devils in the above-mentioned
qualities, becoming only stronger and more completely devilish and
bestial. If he retains the same pattern of growth, he will not do
anything except follow the desires of the carnal self and servilely obey
these three powers. No sign of Divine knowledge or awareness, moral
excellence or righteous deed can be found in him, and the innate light
of nature gets stifled within his personality.

Thus all the dimensions of spiritual health-which do not go beyond the
three above-mentioned things, i.e., Divine knowledge, moral virtues and
righteous deeds-are suppressed by the desires of the carnal self. His
servility to sensual inclinations and bestial comforts does not allow
any of the manifestations of righteousness to appear in his being. The
darkness of sensual desire extinguishes the light of reason and faith.
He does not experience the second birth which in reality is the birth of
the human being. He continues to exist in the same state and is cut off
and removed from God and truth.

When he departs from this world in this state and enters the next world,
which is the realm of unveiling of reality, he does not find himself in
any other form except that of a beast or a devil. With no reminiscence
and memory whatsoever of a human existence, he dwells in this state in
the abode of eternal darkness, torment and dread, until God Almighty
wills what He may. Such is the fate of total servility to sensual
desires which causes one to be cut off absolutely from God and
righteousness.

It can be concluded from this that the amount of alienation from God is
the measure and criterion of the extent of servility to the desires of
the self. Conversely, the extent of such alienation can be gauged by
means of the extent of such servility.

For instance, a person who had espoused these three faculties since the
initial stages of his life, having developed and grown with them, if he
is influenced and trained by means of the teachings of the prophets and
instructions of scholars and sages, gradually submitting himself to the
educative influence of the prophets and the *awliya’* of God (A) it is
possible that the innate potentiality for perfect humanness, which is
inherent in his nature, may soon become an actuality. When that happens,
all the modes of his inner being acquire a human dimension and the inner
devil of the carnal self is converted to faith, as the Prophet of God
remarked about himself:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ شَيْطَانِي آمِنٌ بِيَدِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The devil inside me has been converted to faith at my hand.

The bestial self then surrenders itself to the human self in such a way
that it carries its rider like a docile and subdued celestial mount on
the journey towards the skies of perfection, becoming a *buraq* carrying
its rider swiftly towards the horizons of the Hereafter, never turning
wild again. The powers of Desire and Anger having been subdued by the
forces of justice and law (*shar’*)*,* spiritual peace, balance and
justice rule over the domain of man’s being, establishing there the
Kingdom of God and the rule of righteousness and Divine Law. Nothing
that is opposed to justice and truth can occur in it, and the whole
kingdom is absolutely freed from all sorts of untruth and injustice.

Therefore, in the same way as the criterion of deprival from truth and
righteousness is the pursuit of desire, the criterion of attainment of
truth and achievement of righteousness is submission to reason and
Divine Law. In between these two extremities, that is, total servility
to desire and total subservience to reason, are an infinite number of
stages so that every step towards desire is a step away from
righteousness.

With every such step the reality is further hidden behind misty veils
and the lights of human excellence and the secrets of human existence
grow dimmer. And, contrarily, every step that is taken away from desire
is instrumental to the same extent in removing the veils and in
brightening the gleams of Divine light in the domain of the inner being.

### (B) The Qur’an And Hadith On The Evil Of Submission To Desire

Denouncing submission to desires, God Almighty says in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَا تَتَّبِعْ الْهَوَى فَيُضِلَّكَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And follow not desire lest it lead thee astray from the way of
God.*** (***38:26***)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنْ اتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ بِغَيْرِ هُدًى مِنْ اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And who is further astray than he who follows his desire without
guidance from God?*** (***28:50***)

And in a tradition of *al-Kafi* from Imam al-Baqir (A), the Imam is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: يَقُولُ اللهُ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ: وَعِزَّتِي وَجَلالِي وَعَظَمَتِي وَكِبْرِيَائِي وَنُورِي
وَعُلُوِّي وَارْتِفَاعِ مَكَانِي، لا يُؤْثِرُ عَبْدٌ هَوَاهُ عَلَى
هَوَايَ إلا شَتَّتُّ عَلَيْهِ أَمْرَهُ وَلَبَسْتُ عَلَيْهِ دُنْيَاهُ
وَشَغَلْتُ قَلْبَهُ بِهَا وَلَمْ أُؤْتَهُ مِنْهَا إلا مَا قَدَّرْتُ
لَهُ. وَعِزَّتِي وَجَلالِي وَعَظَمَتِي وَكِبْرِيَائِي وَنُورِي
وَعُلُوِّي وَارْتِفَاعِ مَكَانِي، لا يُؤْثِرُ عَبْدٌ هَوَايَ عَلَى
هَوَاهُ إلا اسْتَحْفَظْتُهُ مَلائِكَتِي وَكَفَّلْتُ السَّمَاوَاتِ
والأَرَضِينَ رِزْقَهُ وَكُنْتُ لَهُ مِنْ وَرَاءِ تِجَارَةِ كُلِّ
تَاجِرٍ وَأَتَتْهُ الدُّنْيَا وَهِيَ رَاغِمَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) said: God Almighty said: “By My honor, My Glory, My
Greatness, My Light, My Loftiness, and by the Highness of My Station!
When My slave gives preference to his desire over My wish, I put his
affairs into confusion, make his life baffling in this world and his
heart preoccupied with the world, although I do not give him anything of
it except what I have preordained for him. And by My honor, My Glory, My
Greatness, My Light, My Loftiness and by the Highness of My Station! If
My slave prefers My wish to his desire, My angels protect him, the
heavens and the earth guarantee his sustenance, and I look after his
trade and bring the world to him though it should be reluctant and
recalcitrant.”[^2]

This tradition is a very authentic one, whose text and wording bear
testimony to its pure origin, that its source is no other than God
Almighty, the Fountainhead of all knowledge, though its chain of
transmission may be a weak one, and to discuss this matter further is
not possible here. There is another tradition reported from Amir al
Mu’minin (A), which is different from the one we have expounded:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي أَخْوَفُ مَا أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمُ اثْنَتَيْنِ: إتِّبَاعُ الهَوَى
وَطُولُ الأَمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am apprehensive for you concerning two things: Submission to desire
and entertaining of endless hope.[^3]

In *al-Kafi* Imam al-Sadiq (A) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إحْذَرُوا أَهْوَاءَكُمْ كَمَا تَحْذَرُونَ أَعْدَاءَكُمْ، فَلَيْسَ
شَيْءٌ أَعْدَى لِلرِّجَالِ مِنِ اتِّبَاعِ أَهْوَائِهِمْ وَحَصَائِدِ
أَلْسِنَتِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Be apprehensive of your desires in the same way as you are apprehensive
of your enemies. For there is no greater enemy for human beings than
their own desires and what their tongues reap.[^4]

My dear, remember that desires are endless and ever insatiable. If man
takes one step in following them, he will be bound to take a few more.
If he submits to one of the desires, he will soon be forced to yield to
a number of them. If you open one door to the desires of the self, you
will soon be forced to open several other doors to them.

Thus a single act of submission will expose you to a number of vices
following it and through them you will fall victim to a thousand
abominations, until, God forbid, all the roads to God are closed to you,
as stated by God Almighty in the Holy Book.

That is why the Commander of the Believers (A), the Wali al-’Amr and the
spiritual master and instructor of mankind, who was assigned the task of
guiding the human family, has expressed so much concern and apprehension
on account of it. Rather, the Holy Prophet (S) and all the Imams (A) are
anxious lest the tree of *nubuwwah* (prophethood) and *wilayah* - of
which the believers are the leaves- should shed its foliage and become
as if autumn stricken. Look what the Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنَاكَحُوا وَتَنَاسَلُوا، فَإنِّي أُبَاهِي بِكُمُ الأُمَمَ، وَلَوْ
بَالسَّقْطِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Marry and procreate, for indeed I shall be proud of you over other
nations, even though it should be on account of an aborted fetus.[^5]

Obviously, if man happens to stand on such a dangerous path as this,
where it is feared that he may fall over the precipice of annihilation,
being disowned by his real father-the Holy Prophet (S), who is a mercy
for all the worlds-having caused his indignance, what a great misfortune
it would be and what disasters and woes it would involve? Thus if you
know the Holy Prophet (S) and love the Master of the Faithful (A) and
befriend their pure progeny, relieve their blessed hearts from their
fear, anguish and uncertainty on your account. In a verse of the Surat
*Hud* of the Quran the Prophet (S) is addressed thus

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَاسْتَقِمْ كَمَا أُمِرْتَ وَمَنْ تَابَ مَعَكَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So be steady as thou hast been commanded, thou and those who have
turned*** (***unto Allah***) ***with thee.*** (***11:112***)

And the Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَيَّبَتْنِي سُورَةُ هُودٍ لِمَكَانِ هَذِهِ الآيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Surat Hud caused my hair to turn grey on account of this verse of
it.[^6]

Shaykh Shahabadi, the accomplished ‘*Arif* -may my soul be ransomed for
him- has said:

Although the same verse occurs in the *Surat al-Shura*- though without
the phrase (وَمَنْ تَابَ مَعَكَ)—and those who have turned with thee—
the reason that the Prophet (S) has made special mention of the Surat
*Hud* is that in it God Almighty has demanded from the Prophet (S) the
steadiness of his ummah also. The Prophet (S) feared that this task
might not be carried out, otherwise he himself had the steadiness, or,
rather, he was in fact the very incarnation of justice and
righteousness.

So, my brother, if you consider yourself one of the followers of that
holy personage and a participant of his mission, come and don’t be an
embarrassment to him in its fulfillment on account of your ugly, vicious
deeds. Think yourself that if one of your children or your kinsmen does
something odious or improper by your norms, how ashamed you feel in
front of others on their account! And you know that the Prophet of God
(S) and Amir al-Mu’minin (A) are the true fathers of the ummah, for in
the Prophet’s own words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا وَعَلِيٌّ أَبَوَا هَذِهِ الأُمَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I and ‘Ali are the two fathers of this ummah.[^7]

If we are taken into the presence of the Almighty and are called to
account in front of them, and should the record of our deeds reflect
nothing except evil and odiousness, it would be very hard upon them, for
they would feel ashamed in front of the angels and prophets of God. What
a great injustice it would be! What a catastrophe we shall have invited
for ourselves and what treatment will be meted out to us by God
Almighty?

So, O unjust and ignorant man who have not only done injustice to
yourself but are guilty of injustice to your benefactors, who laid down
their lives and sacrificed their worldly possessions and comforts of
life for the sake of your guidance, who were assassinated after
undergoing the hardest sufferings and the harshest tortures and whose
women and children were taken captive for the sake of your guidance and
your deliverance, should you, instead of being grateful to them for
their merciful efforts, be guilty of such a flagrant injustice and
imagine that you have been unjust to yourself alone?

Wake up for a while from this deep slumber and be a little ashamed of
yourself. Don’t allow yourself to commit the same inequities that were
committed by the enemies of the *Din.* You, who claim to be a friend, do
not be unjust, for the acts of injustice committed by a friend and the
one who claims to be a friend are more grievous and odious.

### (C) On Numerousness Of Desires

It should be remembered that the desires of the carnal self are numerous
and of diverse kinds, varying according to their intensity as well as
the desired object. Sometimes they are so subtle that one is not aware
of them as suspect wiles of Satan and of the self, unless he is made
conscious and waken up. With all their variety, all of them work
together in obstructing people from the Divine path and deviating them
from it. Their grades are various. There are the victims of desire who
take gold and wealth and the like to be their god; there are others
about whom Almighty God informs us in these words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَرَأَيْتَ مَنْ اتَّخَذَ إِلَهَهُ هَوَاهُ؟﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Hast thou seen him who has taken his desire*** (***hawa***) ***to be
his god?*** (***25:43***)

Again, there are those who, according to the holy tradition under
discussion, are alienated from God by following the desires of the self
and the fabrications of the Devil, in the form of false creeds, corrupt
norms or something else. There are the perpetrators of mortal and major
or minor and venial sins who are kept from the path of God in a measure
proportional to the degree of their transgressions.

Then there are the followers of legitimate pleasures and desires who, on
account of their overindulgence in them, are kept back from treading the
Divine path in a different way. There are the devout given to prayers
and formal rites, which are aimed to secure a good life in the Hereafter
or to satisfy some worldly purpose or are meant to secure higher
spiritual stations or to avoid spiritual decline, who are prevented from
the path of God in a different way.

There are the practitioners of ethics devoted to purification of the
soul and spiritual disciplining for the sake of attaining self control
or reaching the paradise of moral excellence, who are kept from God and
righteousness in their own manner. There are the practitioners of
*‘irfan*, the wayfarers of the Path, the seekers of ecstasies and of
mystic stations and states, who have no other purpose except His vision
and His vicinity, yet whose vision is obstructed in a different way and
are kept from receiving the special illuminations.

Besides, there are other stages whose description is not possible here.
Thus it is necessary for every individual, in accordance with the
category to which he belongs, to examine his own condition and purge
himself of the desires of the self in order not to be kept from the path
of righteousness and of truth, so that the doors of compassion and
benevolence are opened to him, whatever his station and stage:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهُ وَلِيُّ الِهدَايَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed God is the Lord of guidance.

2. On The Evil Of Endless Hopes
-------------------------------

This discussion also consists of two sections:

### (A) On The Endlessness Of Hopes

Remember that the first and foremost step towards authentic humanness is
that of awareness and awakening (*yaqzah*)*,* as mentioned by the
leading mystics (*mashayiq*) concerning the stages of wayfaring. There
are ten stages in this step, as enumerated by the great Shaykh
Shahabadi, which we are not in a position to elaborate here.

However, it is essential to mention here that unless man does not wake
up to the fact that he is a traveler with an inescapable journey lying
ahead and a destination towards which he must move, he will not muster
the resolution necessary to reach his goal. Each of these matters needs
an elaboration from which we must abstain for brevity’s sake.

However, it is enough to say that one of the biggest obstacles in the
way of the awakening that leads one to forget his destination and
neglect his journey and deadens his will and resolution is the feeling
that there is plenty of time for the journey, that if one does not set
out today he may do it tomorrow, if not this month then the next and so
on.

Such a state of extended and outstretched hope, together with a false
assurance of unlimited life and unbounded availability of time, make man
oblivious of his ultimate goal, the Hereafter, and prevent him from
preparing for the unavoidable journey and securing provisions for it,
ultimately leading him to completely forget the Hereafter and his goal.

May God save us from the state in which one who has a long and perilous
journey before him and is given a limited time in which to procure the
provisions and dire necessities of the way, does not possess anything
having forgotten both about the journey and his destination. It is
obvious that if such a state of neglect befalls one, he will fail to
procure the necessary provisions for his way, being helpless and at a
loss at the time of departure. Such a man will perish on his way and his
journey will not take him to his desired destination.

### (B) Provisions For The Long Journey Ahead

And so, my dear, remember that you have a perilous journey ahead, for
which the provisions of sound knowledge and fruitful action are needed.
The time of departure is unknown. Possibly, there is little time and
opportunity left. No one knows when the call for departure will come and
one would be forced to depart. This prolonging of hope by you and me
arises from self love and is the most masterly of the guiles of the
accursed Satan.

Through it he distracts our attention from the Hereafter and keeps us
from attending to its affairs. And with the perils of the journey and
the obstacles in the way of preparing for it, if we fail to repent or to
return to God and if we fail to procure provisions for the journey, the
appointed call shall come unexpectedly and send us unprepared and
unprovided on the way, without any store of righteous deeds and useful
knowledge which together make up the provisions of the Hereafterly
journey.

For even if we have performed good deeds, they are not pure and
untainted. A thousand contaminations, each of which is enough to make
them unacceptable to God, afflict them. If we acquired any knowledge, it
was futile and fruitless for us, our learning being either nonsensical
and absurd or itself a big impediment in the path of the Hereafter. Had
the deeds that we have done and the knowledge that we have learnt been
beneficial, they should have left some mark on us who have been in their
pursuit for years and should have transformed our habits and morals.

What went wrong that our forty or fifty years’ labor has produced an
opposite result and has hardened our hearts, harder even than flint?
What did we achieve from *salat*, which is the *mi’raj* of a mu’min?
Where is that fear of God which is the outcome of true knowledge? God
forbid, if we are called to depart from this world in this present state
of ours, there are many a lasting disappointment and remorse in store
for us!

Therefore, if obliviousness of the Hereafter caused by endless hope is
something on account of which the greatest Wali of God, Amir al-Mu’minin
‘Ali (A) is concerned for us, he is justified; for he knows as to how
perilous a journey awaits us and that with such a journey in view no one
should ever be complacent even for a while. At all times, one should be
busy, without a moment of rest, in gathering the provisions for the
Hereafterly journey. If one becomes oblivious of that world or considers
it a mere dream, as if that world did not exist and there was no journey
to be undertaken, one cannot imagine the calamities that one will have
to face and the misfortunes that are in store for him.

It would do us much good if we think for a while about the general state
of mind of the Prophet (S) and of Amir al-Mu’minin (A) who were the best
of God’s creatures and free from error, lapse or forgetfulness-in order
to understand our own state in relation to theirs. Their cognition of
the hardships and perils of the journey had made them renounce ease and
rest, while our ignorance has bred forgetfulness in us. The Seal of the
Prophets (S) subjected himself to such austerities and strenuously stood
in prayer before his Lord for such lengthy hours that his blessed feet
became swollen and the following verse was sent down to him by the Most
Exalted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿طه. مَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لِتَشْقَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Ta Ha. We have not sent down the Quran upon thee to cause thee
distress.*** (***20:1, 2***)

The state of Amir al-Mu’minin during prayers and his fear of God
Almighty are also well known.

Hence, we should know that the journey is full of perils and this spell
of obliviousness and forgetfulness of ours is nothing except a ruse of
the Devil and a guile of our own self. These endless hopes and unlimited
expectations are the biggest snares of *Iblis* and the most artful of
his ruses. So wake up from this sleep and remember that you are a
traveler with goal and purpose. Your destination is the next world and
you will be forced to leave this world ultimately.

If you are prepared to set out on this journey and have procured the
provisions needed, you will not be rendered helpless or stranded on this
journey. Otherwise you will find yourself in a distress which knows no
relief, a wretchedness that is not followed by felicity, a humiliation
that will last and never be followed by honor, a poverty that does not
terminate in abundance, a torment that is not followed by comfort, a
fire that never cools down, and a regret and shame which knows no end.

My dear, look what the Commander of the Faithful (A) says, in *Du’a
Kumayl*, in his supplications to the Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْتَ تَعْلَمُ ضَعْفِي عَنْ قَلِيلٍ مِنْ بَلاءِ الدُّنْيَا
وَعُقُوبَاتِهَا وَمَا يَجْرِي فِيهَا مِنَ المَكَارِهِ عَلَى أَهْلِهَا،
عَلَى أَنَّ ذَلِكَ بَلاءٌ وَمَكْرُوهٌ قَلِيلٌ مَكْثُهُ يَسِيرٌ
بَقَاؤُهُ قَصِيرٌ مُدَّتُهٌ، فَكَيْفَ احْتِمَالِي لِبَلاءِ الآخِرَةِ
وَجَلِيلِ وُقُوعِ المَكَارِهِ فِيهَا وَهُوَ بَلاءٌ تَطُولُ مُدَّتُهُ
وَيَدُومُ مَقَامُهُ وَلا يُخَفَّفُ عَنْ أَهْلِهِ لأَنَّهُ لا يَكُونُ
إلا عَنْ غَضَبِكَ وَانْتِقَامِكَ وَسَخَطِكَ وَهَذَا مَا لا تَقُومُ
لَهُ السَّمَاوَاتُ وَالأَرْضُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(My Lord) You know my frailness before a little of the afflictions and
torments of this world and before the kind of calamities that affect its
inhabitants, though such afflictions and adversities are transitory and
short-lived. And how shall I endure the afflictions of the Hereafter and
the severity of its calamities, which are enduring, perpetual and
unabating on its inhabitants, since they are nothing other than Your
wrath, Your retribution and Your displeasure, which neither the heavens
nor the earth can bear.

A torment which the heavens and earth cannot stand has been reserved for
you, and it is not enough to awaken you from your deepening slumber and
your obliviousness increases day by day!

O slumberous heart! Awake and arise! Get ready for the journey to the
Hereafter!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَدْ نُودِيَ فِيكُمْ بِالرَّحِيلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The call of the caravan’s departure has been sounded and all around
there is the clamor of those who depart and take leave. The agents of
‘Izra’il (the angel of death) are at work and they are driving you every
moment nearer and nearer to the gates of the Hereafter and yet you are
neglectful, unmindful and ignorant!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ التَّجَافِي عَنْ دَارِ الغُرُورِ
والإنَابَةَ إلَى دَارِ السُّرُورِ والإسْتِعْدَادِ لِلْمَوْتِ قَبْلَ
حُلُولِ الفَوْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O God, I implore Thee to save me from the house of illusion and the
abode of delirium and help me return to the abode of joy. Grant me the
ability and preparedness to die before such an opportunity is lost.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 336.

[^2]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 336.

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 336.

[^4]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 336.

[^5]: Al-Hurr al-Amili, Wasai’il al-Shi’ah, Bab 1, hadith 2.

[^6]: Al-Tabarsi, Majma’ al-bayan, vol. 3.

[^7]: Al-Amini, al-Ghadir, vol. 3, p. 100.


