Twelfth Hadith: Contemplation (Tafakkur)
========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسَنَدي المُتَّصِلِ إِلى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ رِضْوَانُ اللهِ
عَلَيْهِ، عَنْ عَلِيٍّ بْنِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، عَنِ
النَّوْفَلِيِّ، عَنِ السُّكُونِيِّ، عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ قَالَ: كَانَ أَمِيرُ المُؤْمِِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
يَقُولُ: نَبِّهْ بِالتَّفَكُّرِ قَلْبَكَ وَجَافِ عَنِ اللَّيْلِ
جَنْبَكَ وَاتَّقِ اللهَ رَبَّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni), from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from his
father, from al-Nawfali, from al-Sakuni, from Abu ‘Abd Allah (Imam al
Sadiq) (A) that he said: Amir al-Mu’minin (A) used to say: “Arouse your
heart to contemplation; keep your side clear off the night; and be
heedful towards your Lord.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

The phrase *kana yaqul* (used to say) has a meaning different from
*qala* (said) or *yaqul* (says), as it indicates continuation and
perpetuation. It shows that Amir al-Mu’minin (A) repeatedly used to
utter these words. The word *tanabbuh* means ‘to arouse’, ‘to warn’, ‘to
call attention to’, and ‘to awaken from sleep.’ Here all of these
meanings are suitable, for the hearts are in a state of neglectfulness
and sleep prior to contemplation, and they come out of this state by
means of it. Sleep and awakening, unconsciousness and consciousness are
different for the realm of the body and the kingdom of the soul.

Many a time the outward eye is awake, the corporeal personality is
conscious but the inner eye and the inward vision is deep asleep, and
the spiritual regions and the domain of the soul are heedless and
unconscious. *Tafakkur* (contemplation, intellection) is the activity of
the intellect. It is the reordering of known matters for the purpose of
reaching hitherto unknown conclusions. It includes the kind of
contemplation which is one of the characteristics of mystics and
wayfarers of the Path. Khwajah ‘Abd Allah al-’Ansari has described it in
these words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إعْلَمْ أَنَّ التَّفَكُّرَ تَلَمُّسُ البَصِيرَةِ لإسْتِدْرَاكِ
البُغْيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Know that contemplation is the inquisitive groping of the inner vision
for attaining the coveted end.[^2]

It is obvious that *ma’rifah* (gnosis) is the desired object of the
heart. Accordingly, in this *hadith* also contemplation has a specific
sense concerned with the heart and its life.

What Is Heart?
--------------

There are various applications and denotations of the word ‘heart’. For
physicians and the common people it is a tiny piece of flesh, whose
contractions and expansions cause the flow of blood through arteries and
veins, which generates a subtle élan vital. The philosophers (*hukama*)
use it for a certain seat of the psyche (*nafs*)*.* The *urafa* assign
to it grades (*maratib*) and stages (*maqamat*)*,* and to go into their
details is not our concern here. In the Holy Quran and the *ahadith*, it
has been used both in its general as well as its particular senses in
different places.

In the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَبَلَغَتْ الْقُلُوبُ الْحَنَاجِرَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The hearts reached to the throats.*** (***33:10***)

‘Heart’ is used in the same sense as used by physicians. And in:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ لَا يَفْقَهُونَ بِهَا وَلَهُمْ أَعْيُنٌ لَا
يُبْصِرُونَ بِهَا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They have hearts wherewith they understand not, and they have eyes
wherewith they see not.*** (***7:179***)

It is used in the sense used by the philosophers. And in:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَذِكْرَى لِمَنْ كَانَ لَهُ قَلْبٌ أَوْ أَلْقَى
السَّمْعَ وَهُوَ شَهِيدٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Therein verily is a reminder for him who hath a heart, or giveth ear
with full intelligence.*** (***50:37***)

‘Heart’ is used in the same sense as used by the *urafa*.

In the tradition, *tafakkur* is used in the sense as is generally used
by *hukama’,* but the ‘heart’ as meant by *urafa* has no relation to
*tafakkur,* especially on its certain levels, as those who are familiar
with their terminology know well.

In the statement: (جَافِ عَنِ اللَّيْلِ جَنْبَكَ جفاً) gives the sense
of *bu’d*, to keep away, to shun, and such is its meaning in (جَافَاهُ
عَنْهُ فَتَجَافَى عَنِ الفِرَاشِ) as given by al-Sihah. ‘Night’, here,
has been used allegorically for ‘bed’ and as discussed in detail by the
*usuli* *faqih* Aqa Shaykh Rida Isfahani in *Jaliyyat al-hal*, the
avoiding of ‘night’ refers to getting up from the bed for night prayers
God willing, we shall discuss the holy tradition in a number of
sections.

Merits Of Contemplation
-----------------------

It should be known that there is a great merit in contemplation.
Contemplation is the key to the doors of *ma’rifah* and to the treasure
chests of knowledge and excellence. It is the necessary and the surest
first step on the path of genuine humanness. It has been highly
commended and glorified by the Glorious Quran and in traditions, and one
who abandons it has been censured and denounced.

In *al-Kafi it* is reported from Imam al-Sadiq (A) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفْضَلُ العِبَادَةِ إِدْمَانُ التَّفَكُّرِ فِي اللهِ وَفِي
قُدْرَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The best form of worship is to contemplate about God and His Power.[^3]

In another *hadith*, it is stated that an hour’s contemplation is better
than a night’s worship.’[^4] And according to a Prophetic tradition, the
contemplation of an hour is better than a year’s worship. In another
tradition it is stated that an hour’s contemplation is better than sixty
years of worship (according to another *hadith*, seventy years). And
some traditionists and *fuqaha*’ have even mentioned it as being better
than a thousand years of worship. In any case, there are different
grades and levels of contemplation, and every grade gives certain
results and consequences. Here we shall mention a few of them.

1. The first kind of contemplation is about God, His Names, Attributes
and His Perfections, the result of which is the knowledge of His
existence and His irradiations (*tajalliyat*) from which the archetypes
(*ayan*) and the manifestations (*mazahir*) emerge. And this is the most
superior level of contemplation which yields the sublimest of the kinds
of knowledge, and the firmest of the arguments (*burhan*)*;* for
thinking about the essence of the Cause and meditating on the Absolute
Cause imparts knowledge about Him and the understanding of the effects.
Such is the outline of the revelations on the hearts of the Truthful
(*siddiqun*)*,* and it is for this reason that it is called *burhan
al-siddiqin,* the Proof of the Truthful; since the Truthful observe the
Names and the Attributes, and view the first essences (*a’yan*) and
manifestations (*mazahir*) in the mirror of the Names through the
witness of the Essence.

The reason, however, that this type of proof is called *burhan
al-siddiqin* is that if a Truthful one (*siddiq*) wishes to set forth
his observations in the form of a proof and give his gnostic, intuitive
experience the apparel of words, it would appear in this form; not that
anyone who gains the knowledge of the Essence and its irradiations
through this proof becomes one of the Truthful, or that the knowledge of
the Truthful belongs to the category of proofs, even especial ones. How
far from the truth to imagine that their knowledge is of the category of
contemplation, or that their cognitions are like arguments and their
premises!

As long as the heart is covered within the wrapping of arguments and one
is in the stage of contemplation, one has not yet reached even the first
grade of the Truthful. And when the thick curtains of knowledge and
proof are set aside and contemplation brushed aside, it is at the
extremity of the Path drat there, without the mediation of
contemplation - in fact without any means or agency whatsoever - that he
ultimately succeeds in viewing the glory and beauty of the Absolute at
the end of his voyage; it is then that he experiences perpetual and
everlasting delight. He transcends the world and everything therein,
covered under the mantle of the Almighty to remain existent in total
annihilation.

Nothing remains of him, and he passes into absolute oblivion, save that
Divine favor should take him back to his realm and to the regions of
(relative) being, in accordance with the capacity of his unchanging
essence (*al-‘ayn al-thabitah*)*.* In the state of this return, the
spheres of Divine glory and beauty are revealed to him, and he perceives
(the meaning of) the Names and the Attributes in the mirror of the
Essence.

Through that he witnesses his own unchanging essence and everything that
is under His shelter and protection, and discovers the tracks of the
manifestations and the ways of recourse to the heart’s exterior. Then he
is conferred with the robes of prophethood and the difference of the
stations of the apostles and prophets becomes evident to him. The
vastness or narrowness of the circle of prophethood and that of those
from whom the prophet is raised and those towards whom he is sent are
revealed to him. And to enlarge on this topic further is not proper for
these pages. So we shall leave it here and part, too, with the theme of
*burhan al-siddiqin,* as it needs a preparatory introduction with its
elaborate details.

The Desirable And The Forbidden Contemplation On The Divine Essence
-------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that what we said about the possibility of
contemplation on the Essence, the Names and the Attributes may lead the
ignorant to imagine that it is forbidden in accordance with certain
*riwayat,* knowing not that that which is forbidden is to attempt to
fathom the quality and depths of the Essence, as is clear from the
traditions.’[^5]

Sometimes those who are not capable of such (otherwise desirable)
contemplation are also forbidden from reflecting on certain kinds of
*ma’arif* which require initiation into certain subtleties. The
*hukama’* confirm both of these points. The impossibility of fathoming
the Essence is demonstrated in their writings, and the prohibition on
contemplation on it is acknowledged by all of them. Also the conditions
of entry into these sciences and the prohibition of the unworthy from
learning them is also mentioned in their books; it is a customary advice
which is mentioned by them either in the beginning or at the end of
their works. For instance, the two great philosophers of Islam and
authorities in this field, Shaykh Bu ‘Ali Sina and Sadr al-Muta’allihin
(R) have stated this at the end of *al-’Isharat*[^6] and at the
beginning of *al-’Asfar.*[^7]

They have given eloquent counsels in this regard. But to contemplate the
Essence for positing the principle of *al-tawhid* and affirming Its
transcendence (*al-tanzih*) and sanctity was the ultimate goal and
purpose of the sending of the prophets and the cherished end of the
*urafa*. The Holy Quran and the sacred *ahadith* are loaded with the
knowledge of the Essence, Its Perfections and the Divine Names.

Reliable books of traditions, like *Usul* *al-Kafi* and *al-Tawhid* of
al Shaykh al-Saduq, also do not forbid contemplation for the purpose of
affirmation of the Essence, the Names and the Attributes. The difference
between the scriptures and traditions of the prophets and the writings
of the philosophers is regarding their terminology and their synoptic or
elaborate treatment of the subject, as is the case with the difference
between *fiqh* and traditions.

But the calamity is that certain ignorant persons have appeared in the
garb of scholars during the last few centuries, who, being bereft of the
knowledge of the Quran and the *Sunnah*, consider their sheer ignorance
as the sole proof of the vanity of the knowledge of *al-mabda’* and
*al-ma’ad.* Such a man for the sake of promoting his trade, labels these
*ma’arif*, which were the ultimate goal of the apostles and the Awliya’
(A) of God and with whose description the entire Book of God and the
traditions of the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) are replete, as *haram.*

Not sparing any charge and calumny against those who pursue these
*ma’arif*, he diverts the hearts of the creatures of God from the
knowledge of *al-mabda’* and *al-ma’ad,* in addition to sowing the seeds
of discord and disharmony in the community of Muslims. When asked about
the reason for all this *takfir* (calling someone *kafir*) and *tafsiq*,
(calling someone *fasiq* ), he immediately clings to the tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَتَفَكَّرُوا فِي ذَاتِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not contemplate upon the Essence (of God).

The ignorance and the error of this wretch is for two reasons: Firstly,
he believes that the *hukama’* contemplate on the Essence, whereas they
consider its intellection as impossible and probing deep into its
mysteries as forbidden, and this itself is one of the established issues
of their discipline. Secondly, having misunderstood the meaning of the
tradition, he believes that not a single word be uttered regarding the
Sacred Essence.

Here we shall cite some of the related traditions and, in our humble
capacity, try to reconcile them, leaving the Judgment to the (reader’s
sense of) justice. Though this makes us digress from the proposed
exposition of the *hadith* - our original goal -it is essential for
eliminating doubts and refuting misconceptions. The following tradition
is mentioned in *al-Kafi:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي بَصِيرٍ قَالَ: قَالَ أَبُو جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامِ:
تَكَلَّمُوا فِي خَلْقِ اللهِ وَلا تَتَكَلَّمُوا فِي اللهِ، فَإنَّ
الكَلامَ فِي اللهِ لا يَزْدَادُ صَاحِبُهُ إلا تَحَيُّراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Basir reports Abu Ja’far (A) as having said: Speak (takallamu) about
the creation of God, and do not speak about God (fi Allah), for
discourse about God will bring nothing but confusion (tahayyur) to the
discourser.[^8]

This tradition itself indicates that the purpose of the prohibition is
to discourage discourse aimed at fathoming the depths (*iktinah*) of the
Essence and Its *kayfiyyah* (quality) with a view to discovering its
cause. Otherwise, discoursing about the Essence with a view to affirming
It, Its Perfections, Its Unity and Transcendence does not cause
confusion. It is also possible that the prohibition here relates to such
persons in whom discourse about these matters will cause perplexity and
confusion. The late muhaddith al-Majlisi (R) has allowed both of these
possibilities without elaborating them, but he gives more weight to the
first one. Another tradition of *al-Kafi* states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي رِوَايَةٍ أُخْرَى عَنْ حَرِيزٍ: تَكَلَّمُوا فِي كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
وَلا تَتَكَلَّمُوا فِي ذَاتِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From Hariz, from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said, “Discuss everything,
but do not discuss the Essence of the Almighty.”[^9]

There are other traditions which are identical or close in import to
this *riwayah,* and to cite them all is not essential. Another tradition
of *al-Kafi* states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: إيَّاكُمْ وَالتَّفَكُّرَ
فِي اللهِ وَلَكِنْ إذَا أَرَدْتُمْ أَنْ تَنْظُرُوا إلَى عَظَمَتِهِ
فَانْظُرُوا إلَى عَظِيمِ خَلْقِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Ja’far (A) said, “Beware of tafakkur in God. But if you wish to view
His grandeur, observe the great of His creations.”[^10]

Apparently, this *riwayah* also seems to forbid probing into the reality
of the Essence, for the tradition adds that if someone wants to perceive
the glory of the Almighty he should infer it from the grandeur of His
creation. This kind of parabolic approach is intended for various types
of persons whose knowledge of God is derived through the means of the
creation.

This and other such traditions which appear to forbid discourse and
contemplation on God by themselves support our claim, which is expressly
confirmed by the following tradition of *al-Kafi* on contemplation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفْضَلُ العِبَادَةِ إِدْمَانُ التَّفَكُّرِ فِي اللهِ وَفِي
قُدْرَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The best form of worship is to contemplate about God and His Power.[^11]

Accordingly, contemplation on God for positing His Essence and
contemplating His Power, His Names and Attributes is not only not
prohibited, but is the most superior kind of worship. Another tradition
of *al-Kafi* states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُئِلَ عَلِيُّ بْنُ الحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ عَنِ التَّوْحِيدِ
فَقَالَ: إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَلِمَ أَنَّهُ يَكُونُ فِي آخِرِ
الزَّمَانِ أَقْوَامٌ مُتَعَمِّقُونُ، فَأَنْزَلَ اللهُ تَعَالَى: ﴿قُلْ
هُوَ اللهُ أَحَدٌ.﴾ وَالآيَاتِ مِنْ سُورَةِ الحَدِيدِ إلَى قَوْلِهِ:
﴿وَهُوَ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ.﴾ فَمَنْ رَامَ وَرَاءَ ذَلِكَ
فَقَدْ هَلَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali (A) ibn al-Husayn (A) was questioned about tawhid; he answered
“Verily, God Almighty knew that during the Last Age there would be a
people of profound thinking. Hence the Almighty revealed Surat al-Tawhid
and the verses of the Surat al-Hadid up to ‘And God is the Knower of all
that is in the hearts.’[^12] So whosoever goes beyond that will
perish.”[^13]

This shows that these verses about *tawhid* and *tanzih,* the verses
about the emergence and the return of the creation mentioned therein,
are for those who contemplate profoundly. Can then anyone still claim
that contemplating on God Almighty is prohibited? What ‘*arif* and
*Hakim* has brought anything that goes beyond the commencing verses of
the *Surat al-Hadid?* The ultimate of their achievement is that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿سَبَّحَ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifieth Allah.*

Is there any better way of describing God Almighty and the aspects of
His Sacred Essence than the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿هُوَ الْأَوَّلُ وَالْآخِرُ وَالظَّاهِرُ وَالْبَاطِنُ وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ
شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He is the First and the Last, and the Outward and the Inward, and He
is the Knower of all things.*** (***57:3***)

By the Life of the Beloved, had there been nothing besides this verse in
the Glorious Book of God, it would have been sufficient for the men of
heart!

If one were to consider the Book of God and the sermons and the
traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and his infallible vicegerents (A),
one shall notice that no ‘*arif* or *Hakim* has said anything on any of
the conceivable sub-issues of the Divine teachings that goes beyond
these; all their statements are replete with the description (*tawsif*)
of the Almighty and full of arguments about His sacred Essence and
Attributes, so that every class of scholars benefits from them according
to the capacity of its comprehension.

Then all of these traditions show that contemplating and meditating on
the Essence is forbidden on a certain level, which is to probe into the
inmost mysteries (*kunh*) of the Essence and Its Quality
(*kayfiyyah*)*,* as stated in this tradition of *al-Kafi:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ نَظَرَ فِي اللهِ كَيْفَ هُوَ هَلَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever contemplates in God to see how He is, perishes.[^14]

Moreover, the traditions forbidding contemplation and those enjoining
it, when reconciled, give the conclusion that a group of people who do
not possess the strength of giving ear to philosophical arguments
(*burhan*)*,* having no capacity of entering into such discussions, are
forbidden from doing so, and there are indications in the *riwayat*
which testify to this. But as for those who have an aptitude for it, it
is not only proper but is the highest form of worship.

In any case, we have digressed completely from our proposed theme, but
there was no way we could avoid examining those degenerate views and the
kind of calumnies, displeasing to God, which have acquired circulation
during recent times on tongues, with the hope that it will make some
effect on some hearts, and if one person were to accept this it would be
sufficient for me. And praise is God’s and to Him do we complain.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالحَمْدُ للهَ وَإلَيْهِ المُشْتَكَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Contemplation On Creation
-------------------------

Another level of contemplation is reflecting on the subtleties of
creation, its perfection and refinement, to the extent that it is in
human power. Such contemplation leads to the intellection of its Perfect
Source, its Wise Maker, and is a process which is the reverse of the
*burhan al siddiqin;* for, in the latter, the point of departure is the
station of God Almighty, glorious is His Name, wherefrom is acquired the
knowledge of the manifestations of His Sovereignty (*wilayah*)*.*

Here, however, the point of departure is creation, whereafter is
acquired the knowledge of its Source and Maker. This proof (*burhan*) is
for ordinary people, who do not partake of the *burhan al-siddiqin.*
Therefore, perhaps, many of them would negate that the contemplation of
God can bring the knowledge of Him and that the knowledge of the Origin
can lead to the knowledge of the creation.

Hence, the contemplation of the subtleties and the marvels of creation
and the firmness and finesse of the system of creation belongs to the
category of beneficial knowledge; it is the most meritorious of the
actions of the heart and superior to all worships, since its result is
the noblest of all results. Although in all forms of devotional rites
(*‘ibadat*) the main aim and the real secret is the acquisition of
transcendental knowledge (*ma’arif*), yet the likes of us find no access
to such secrets and such results. They are for their own people, to whom
every devotional rite is like a grain of one or several revelations.

In any case, man has not been able to acquire the real knowledge of the
subtleties and secrets of creation. So subtle are its foundations and so
firm its design, so beautiful and perfectly planned is its system that
if we consider any creature, however insignificant and humble it should
appear to be, with all the scientific development acquired during
centuries of studies man has been unable to discover even one of its
thousand secrets, let alone the majesty of the cosmic system of creation
whose intricacies and mysteries are beyond the reaches of our vision and
inaccessible to our imperfect, limited ideas. Now we shall draw your
attention to one of the subtleties of creation which is relatively near
to understanding and comprehension and is considered to lie in the realm
of the sensible.

The Earth And The Sun: Two Masterpieces Of Creation
---------------------------------------------------

My dear, observe and reflect on the relationship between the earth and
the sun, the fixed distance and the suitable speed with which the earth
spins on its axis and revolves in its orbit around the sun, causing day
and night and the seasons. What a perfection of creative skill and what
a work of immaculate wisdom it is that had it been not exactly so - that
is had the earth been a little away or nearer to the sun - there would
not have been any vegetation and animal life, on account of chilling
cold due to the former and excessive heat due to the latter.

And, similarly, had the earth remained static, there would not have been
any days and nights and seasons either, and the earth would have been
without any trace of life despite possessing everything else to support
life.

Yet He did not suffice at this; He made its north furthest from the sun
(in the northern hemisphere), so as to ensure that excessive heat does
no harm to the creatures; the point nearest to the sun was situated
towards the south, so that coldness should not harm the inhabitants of
the earth. This was also not enough; the moon, which also influences the
earth’s creatures, was assigned a different course than the earth, in
such a way that when the sun is the northern region of the earth, the
moon appears in the southern, and vice versa.

This was for the sake of the utmost benefit of their positions relative
to the earth. These are essentially sensible phenomena, yet to encompass
their subtleties and secrets is not possible for anybody but their
omnipotent Creator.

Why should we go so far ? If one contemplates his own creation,
according to the scope of his knowledge and capability, beginning with
the external senses he will see that they have been contrived according
to the kind of sensations and sense perceptions they receive. For every
group of sensible objects a separate faculty of perception has been
created, and that too with what astounding propriety and skill! And for
matters of a supra-sensible nature, which cannot be perceived through
the outward senses, internal senses have been fashioned to perceive
them.

Let alone the knowledge of the soul and its spiritual faculties, which
the human intellect cannot comprehend, and contemplate upon the human
body, its anatomy, its physical constitution and the functioning of each
and every external and internal organ. See what a wonderful system and
what a striking order they constitute!

In spite of a hundred centuries of scientific study, man has not been
able to understand a thousandth fraction of it, and all the scientists
declare their inability in this regard in unambiguous terms, although
this body of man is no more than an insignificant speck in comparison to
other creatures on the earth’s crust, and the earth with all its
inhabitants is of little significance as compared with the solar system
and our complete solar system is of no consequence when compared with
other solar systems and galaxies; and all these macro and micro systems
are parts of a disciplined and orderly system, no speck of which can be
found faulty by anyone and all the human intellects are unable to
understand even a single secret of its myriad recondite subtleties and
secrets.

Does your intellect still need something more after this reflection to
believe that an Omniscient, Omnipotent and All-Wise Being, who does not
resemble any other being in anything, has created all these creatures
with their firm orderliness and subtlety?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَفِي اللَّهِ شَكٌّ فَاطِرِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Can there be any doubt concerning God, the Creator of the heavens and
the earth?*** (***14:10***)

All this orderly and systematic artistry, whose general laws no human
mind can comprehend, has not come into existence by itself and
spontaneously. Blind be the inner eye that fails to perceive the Truth
and cannot observe its beauty in these creatures! Perish the man who is
skeptical and doubtful despite seeing all these effects and signs! But,
what else can helpless man, captivated by fantasies, do? If you take out
your rosary and claim that its beads got assembled on the thread by
themselves, without anybody arranging them, everyone will laugh at your
intelligence.

You will invite a calamity if you take out your pocket watch and make
similar claims about it; if you do such a thing will you not have stuck
off your name from the list of the sane and wouldn’t all the sane people
of the world consider you a lunatic? If one who considers this simple
and small mechanical system to originate without a cause and as being
outside causality is considered insane and is likely to be stripped of
all the rights belonging to men of reason, what is to be done with the
person who claims not the whole cosmic system but even man and the
complex system of his body and soul alone to have come into existence by
itself? Is he still to be reckoned among men of reason? What fool is
more stupid than such a man?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُتِلَ الْإِنْسَانُ مَا أَكْفَرَهُ!﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Perish man! What has made him an unbeliever?*** (***80:17***)

Death to him whom knowledge cannot revive and who is drowned in the sea
of his own error!

Contemplation On The States Of The Soul
---------------------------------------

One of the levels of contemplation is meditation on the states of the
soul, which is of immense benefit being the source of vast
transcendental knowledge. Here we intend to discuss two benefits: one is
the knowledge of the Day of Resurrection, and the other is the knowledge
of (the necessity of) prophethood and revealed scriptures - that is, of
general prophethood (*al-nubuwwat al-’ammah*) and systems of Divine Law
(*sharayi’ haqqah*)*.* One of the issues pertaining to the soul is its
state of independence (from the body), a problem which has been given
more significance than any other philosophical issue by all the eminent
*hukama* about which they have given numerous proofs and explanations.
Here we are not in a position to offer an elaborate proof of this. We
shall confine ourselves to mentioning some simple preliminaries and then
return to our subject.

All the physicians, scientists and anatomists unanimously agree that all
the human organs, from the pia mater - which is the centre of sense
perceptions and the stage for the manifestation of all psychic
faculties - to the coarser parts and organs of the body, weaken,
deteriorate and decline after the age of thirty or thirty-five years. We
ourselves have experienced how weakness and sluggishness overtake all
the organs of the body after that age.

However, at the same time, that is at the age of thirty and forty and
after that, the spiritual faculties and intellectual perceptions become
more refined and gain in growth and strength. This implies that the
rational faculties are not physically based, for had they been corporeal
like other physical faculties, they would also have declined.

It is not right to imagine that it is the extent of intellectual
activity as well as experience which strengthen the intellectual
faculties, because all the physical faculties weaken and decline despite
prolonged use and do not grow in strength and perfection. This proves
that the intellectual faculty is not physically rooted.

It is also improper to say that the faculty of intellect also declines
with age, because, firstly, none of the physical faculties grows strong
till middle age, so that it may be said that a certain organ of the body
has been the centre of intellectual perception that grows in strength
till middle age and then becomes weaker, thus rendering weak the faculty
of intellect as well.

Secondly, the weakness which continues into middle age is associated
with rational thought, which is either a faculty present in the body or
is dependent on the physical faculties. The purely intellectual and
higher faculties continue to become stronger than ever before during
middle age, although their expression and outward manifestation may be
lesser. In short, the strength of the faculty of intellectual perception
at the age of forty or fifty years is enough for proving our contention.

Moreover, every such faculty which is nearer to the physical and
corporeal domain is inclined to deteriorate and decay more rapidly, and
that which is more removed from it weakens more latterly. But the powers
belonging to the world of the transcendent and the celestial become
stronger and their vitality increases. This proves that the soul is not
corporeal and physical in nature. Since the properties, effects and
activities of the soul are opposed to the properties, effects and
activities of the purely corporeal organs, it proves that the soul is
not corporeal in nature. For instance, through prior knowledge we know
that a body does not accept more than one form. If it is to receive
another form, it will have to part with the form it earlier had.

For example, if a picture is drawn on a paper, another picture cannot be
painted on that page as long as the first picture is not erased
completely. This principle is applicable to all bodies; but for the
soul, while one form is impressed on it, other totally different forms
can also be stamped on it without the first form being wiped out. Every
corporeal body can receive only finite forms, whereas the soul can
receive infinite forms, and it is for this reason that it can posit
infinity.

Also, every corporeal body, if it loses one form, that form cannot be
restored to it without a renewed cause; but in the case of the soul, any
form, after having left it, may return to it without any resumption of
the cause. This shows that the soul is opposed to all corporeal bodies
regarding properties, effects and action. Hence it has a non-corporeal
existence of its own and does not belong to the category of bodies and
physical objects.

Anything that is non-corporeal is not subject to decay - as has been
demonstrated in its own place - because decay cannot occur without
matter, and the non-corporeal is independent of matter. Matter is the
precondition of corporeal bodies; therefore, decay is not possible for
the soul. Hence we come to the conclusion that the soul does not weaken
and decay or is destroyed with the weakening, decay or destruction of
the body, or after separating from it. It remains in another world and
there is no death and extinction for it; this is a spiritual
resurrection for the souls, prior to the Day of Resurrection, when they
are united with the bodies by the will of God.

Now we reach the point of absolute affirmation of Resurrection, and
stand opposed to those who negate it absolutely. From these
preliminaries it should be clear that there is health and disease,
reform and corruption, knowledge and wretchedness for souls, and to
discover their source and to know the secrets of their corruption and
welfare is not possible for anyone except the Holy Essence of the
Almighty.

In the perfect system of the cosmos, which is the best of possible
systems ordered by the Absolutely Wise and the Omniscient, it is
impossible that there should be any negligence regarding the education
of mankind as to the ways of its felicity and wretchedness, its guidance
towards the causes of spiritual soundness and corruption, and the
prescription of remedies for curing the soul.

This is because such a negligence would imply a defect either in God’s
knowledge or His power, either His generosity or His justice, whereas it
is known that His Holy Being is free from all these defects. He is
absolutely perfect and absolutely generous. Any neglect providing
guidance pointing out the paths of knowledge and wretchedness will imply
a great defect in Divine wisdom, which would lead to cosmic disorder and
chaos. Therefore, the perfect system necessitates the declaration of the
paths of felicity and the road to guidance. This explanation leads to
two clear conclusions.

One is that the *Shari’ah* is the prescription for spiritual maladies
and is known to none except the Sacred Being of the Almighty. The other
is that it is necessary for God to bring it to the knowledge of man. It
is obvious that such a momentous, perfect and precise knowledge, whose
apprehension is not possible through the intellectual faculties of men -
none of which can grasp either the relationships between tile corporeal
and transcendental worlds or the effects of the transcendental forms on
the inner depths of the soul - can only be accessible through the agency
of *wahy* or revelation, that is, by means of Divine teaching.

It is clear that every human individual is not worthy of this office and
does not have the capability of occupying this station and performing
this duty. It is only once in several centuries that one such individual
is to be found who is worthy of performing this task and who can
undertake such a great mission. God Almighty assigns to him the task of
expounding the paths of felicity and wretchedness to humanity, to make
them aware of that wherein lies their welfare. This is general
prophethood (*al-nubuwwat al-’ammah*)*.* Now that we have arrived at
this point in our discussion, we may explain a further point which
should be considered as one of self-evident truths.

A Conclusive Proof
------------------

Now that we know that there should necessarily be a *Shari’ah* laid down
by the Divine Lawgiver for mankind, when we turn to the *Shari’ahs*
prevailing amongst mankind we see that there are three principal ones:
the *Shari’ah* of Jews, the *Shari’ah* of Christians, and the *Shari’ah*
of Islam. We find that in all the three essential foundations which
constitute the basis of all *Shari’ahs* (of which the first is concerned
with the true doctrines and Divine teachings about God’s Attributes and
His transcendence, the knowledge of angels and the qualities of the
prophets (A) and their infallibility, which are the principal and main
component of the *Shari’ahs*; the second is about praiseworthy
qualities, purification of the soul and moral excellences; the third is
about outward individual and social acts and rites pertaining to
political and civic actions and their like), the Islamic *Shari’ah* is
more complete than the others.

Anyone who tries to judge without prejudice will discover that it is
incomparable to the others, and there does not exist any religious law
pertaining to all the aspects and stages of life more perfect regarding
its worldly and otherworldly aspects than this Law. This is itself the
biggest proof in favor of its Divine origin.

Accordingly, after affirming the doctrine of universal prophethood and
the doctrine that God Almighty has legislated a Divine *Shari’ah* for
humanity, showing them the path of guidance and bringing them under the
cover of one discipline and system, no preliminaries are required for
proving the truthfulness of the Islamic *Din* except for examining it
and comparing it with other religious laws on every conceivable level of
human need - from righteous qualities and spiritual learning to
individual and social responsibilities. And this is the meaning of the
following sacred tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإسْلامُ يَعْلُو وَلا يُعْلَى عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Islam surpasses (every creed) and is not surpassed (by anything).

This is because the more the intellects of men progress and the more
they gain in understanding, they bow their heads in front of its light
of guidance when they consider its proofs (*hujaj*) and arguments
(*barahin*)*,* and no *hujjah* in the world can refute them.

The result of our arguments relating to the positing of the prophetic
mission of the Seal of Prophethood (S) is that in the same way as the
creative perfection manifest in the creation of the cosmos and its
perfect arrangement and order directs us towards the intellection of a
Being who has ordered it and whose omniscience encompasses all its
particulars, subtleties and grandeurs, the perfection of the
*Shari’ah* - whose perfect order and methodical finesse is capable of
guaranteeing all the material and spiritual, this-worldly and
otherworldly, collective and individual needs - guides us to the fact
that the system of this *Shari’ah* has been ordered by a knowledge which
encircles all the needs of the human species.

And since our intellects tell us that the intellectual faculties of a
man whose biography has been written by all the historians of religion
and who was an unlettered person brought up in a society devoid of all
higher knowledge and virtues, could not have produced such a perfect and
systematic *Shari’ah*. Hence, of necessity, we have to acknowledge that
this *Shari’ah* has a metaphysical and transcendental source, and
reached that glorious personage (S) by means of Divine revelation and
*wahy.* And praise is God’s for the clarity of proofs.

We had intended to describe another stage of contemplation -the
contemplation on this world, and *zuhd* is its fruit - but since this
pen broke its reins in the earlier stages of this discourse making it
somewhat lengthier than intended, we shall refrain from going into it.

Virtues Of The Midnight Prayer
------------------------------

Now remains the exposition of these two phrases of the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَافِ عَنِ اللَّيْلِ جَنْبَكَ وَاتَّقِ اللهَ رَبَّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Keep your side clear off the night; and be heedful towards your
Lord.[^15]

In this blessed pronouncement, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali
(A), has placed the actions of the heart, contemplative awareness, and
the *taqwa* of God by the side of night vigils and keeping aloof from
the bed for the sake of worship. This proves the distinction and merit
it commands, and the practice has been greatly glorified in the
traditions. The biographies of the Imams of guidance (A), and those of
great sages and eminent scholars, indicate that they not only
assiduously observed it, but attached great importance to the practice
of staying awake until the late hours of night, aside from the aim of
worship.

There are forty-one *ahadith* recorded in *Wasai’l al-Shi’ah* (the
greatest of Shi’i books, which is the pivot of the Shi’i legal school
and the source book of Shi’i scholars and *fuqaha*’) about the benefits
and merits of observing this practice, and there are several *ahadith*
about the undesirability of giving up this habit. There are, of course
countless of similar traditions in the books of supplications and
prayers, but we shall quote only a few in the following, as a token of
*barakah* and blessing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ مُعَاوِيَةَ بْنِ عَمَّارٍ قَالَ:
سَمِعْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: كَانَ فِي
وَصِيَّةِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لِعَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ أَنْ قَالَ: يَا عَلِيُّ، أُوصِيكَ فِي نَفْسِكَ بِخِصَالٍ
فَاحْفَظْهَا. ثُمَّ قَالَ: اللَّهُمَّ أَعِنْهُ. إلَى أَنْ قَالَ:
وَعَلَيْكَ بِصَلاةِ اللَّيْلِ وَعَلَيْكَ بِصَلاةِ اللَّيْلِ وَعَلَيْكَ
بِصَلاةِ اللَّيْلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is reported in al-Kafi from Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Amman who said that he
heard Imam al-Sadiq (A) say: “In the wasiyyah addressed to ‘Ali (A) by
the Prophet (S), he (S) said: “O ‘Ali, I enjoin you regarding certain
habits that you must safeguard.” Then the Prophet (S) prayed, “O God,
succor him.” Then (continuing his advice) he said, “Observe the midnight
prayer. Observe the midnight prayer. Observe the midnight prayer.”[^16]

Its great significance may be understood from the entire tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنِ الخِصَالِ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
وَسَلَّمَ لِجِبْرَئِيلَ: عِظْنِي. فَقَالَ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ، عِشْ مَا
شِئْتَ فَإنَّكَ مَيِّتٌ، وَأَحْبِبْ مَا شِئْتَ فَإنَّكَ مُفَارِقُهُ،
وَاعْمَلْ مَا شِئْتَ فَإنَّكَ مُلاقِيهِ. شَرَفُ المُؤْمِنِ صَلاتُهُ
بِاللَّيْلِ، وَعِزُّهُ كَفُّهُ عَنْ أَعْرَاضِ النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Khisal, Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) is reported to have said, “The Prophet
(S) asked Jibra’il to exhort him about something. Jibra’il said, “O
Muhammad! Live you as you wish, for verily you will die one day. And
love whatever you like, for verily you will have to part from it. Act as
you wish, for verily you will have to face it. Know that the distinction
of a believer lies in his establishing the night vigil and his nobleness
lies in refraining from (maligning) the people’s honor.”[^17]

The high degree of its significance can be understood from Jibrail’s
especially recommending it to the Messenger of God (S); for had Jibra’il
(A) deemed anything else as more important, he would have mentioned it
while giving advice.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي المَجَالِسِ؛ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ ابْنِ عَبَّاسٍ، قَالَ: قَالَ
رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فِي حَدِيثٍ: فَمَنْ رُزِقَ
صَلاةَ اللَّيْلِ مِنْ عَبْدٍ أَوْ أَمَةٍ؛ قَامَ للهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
مُخْلِصاً، فَتَوَضَّأَ وُضُوءاً سَابِغاً وَصَلَّى للهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
بِنِيَّةٍ صَادِقَةٍ وَقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ وَبَدَنٍ خَاشِعٍ وَعَيْنٍ
دَامِعَةٍ، جَعَلَ اللهُ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى خَلْفَهُ تِسْعَةَ صُفُوفٍ
مِنَ المَلائِكَةِ، فِي كُلِّ صَفٍّ مَا لا يُحْصِي عَدَدَهُمْ إلا اللهُ
تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى، أَحَدُ طَرْفَيْ كُلِّ صَفٍّ بِالمَشْرِقِ
وَالآخَرُ بِالمَغْرِبِ. فَإذَا فَرَغَ كَتَبَ لَهُ بِعَدَدِهِمْ
دَرَجَاتٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is reported in al-Majalis on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that the
Prophet (S) sad in a hadith: “When God Almighty appoints the night vigil
as sustenance for His slave, man or woman, when he/she wakes up at night
with sincere devotion towards God, performs a full ablution, and says
prayer for the Almighty God with the purity of intention, with whole
heartedness and with tearful eyes, God Almighty appoints seven rows of
angels (to pray) behind him/her. No one except God can count their
number on each side of each row, which extends from the east to the
west. When he concludes the prayer, God Almighty writes grades for him
equal to their number.”[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنِ العِلَلِ (عِلَلِ الشَّرَائِعِ)، بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَنَسٍ،
قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يَقُولُ:
الرَّكْعَتَانِ فِي جَوْفِ اللَّيْلِ أَحَبُّ إلَيَّ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا
وَمَا فِيهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In ‘Ilal al-shara’i, it is reported from Anas that he heard the
Messenger of God say: “Two rak’ah of prayer performed in the middle of
night are dearer to me than the entire world and everything
therein.”[^19]

In a number of *ahadith* it has been reported that the midnight prayer
is the mu’min’s honor and dignity, and his adornment in the Hereafter,
in the same way as children and wealth are the adornments of this world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنِ العِلَلِ (عِلَلِ الشَّرَائِعِ)، بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ جَابِرِ بْنِ
عَبْدِاللهِ الأنْصَارِيِّ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يَقُولُ: مَا أتَّخَذَ اللهُ إبْرَاهِيمَ خَلِيلاً إلا
لإطْعَامِهِ الطَّعَامَ وَصَلاتِهِ بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّاسُ نِيَامٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In ‘Ilal al-shara’i, Jabir is reported to have heard the Prophet (S)
say: “God did not befriend Ibrahim (A) except for his feeding people and
offering prayers by night while the people were fast asleep.”[^20]

Had there been no other merit besides this for the midnight prayer, it
would have been enough - but for those alone who deserve to practice it,
not the likes of me. We do not know what honor and distinction it is and
what it means to possess the station of being befriended by God. All
intellects fail to comprehend it. If all the adornments of Paradise were
displayed before his eyes, such a man would not even glance at them. You
also, had you a beloved dear to your heart, or a very dear friend, were
he to be present in front of you, it will cause you to neglect all the
good and delicious things, absorbing your attention entirely with the
vision of the beloved and the radiance of the countenance of the dear
one, though this similitude is out of proportion for describing this
condition, to the extent that the east is far from the west.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ إبْرَاهِيمَ بِإسْنَادِهِ، عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: مَا مِنْ عَمَلٍ حَسَنٍ يَعْمَلُهُ العَبْدُ
إلا وَلَهُ ثَوَابٌ فَي القُرْآنِ إلا صَلاةَ اللَّيْلِ، فَإنَّ اللهَ
لَمْ يُبَيِّنْ ثَوَابَهَا لِعَظِيمَ خَطَرِهَا عَنْدَهُ، فَقَالَ:
﴿تَتَجَافَى جُنُوبُهُمْ عَنْ الْمَضَاجِعِ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُمْ خَوْفًا
وَطَمَعًا وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنفِقُونَ. فَلَا تَعْلَمُ نَفْسٌ مَا
أُخْفِيَ لَهُمْ مِنْ قُرَّةِ أَعْيُنٍ جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا
يَعْمَلُونَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

From ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim who, with his chain of narrators, reports from
Imam al-Sadiq (A) that he said, “For every good deed that a slave of God
performs, the reward for it is specified in the Quran, except for the
midnight prayer, which commands an unusually high reward on account of
its great worth. (God says in the Quran): ***Their sides shun their beds
as they call on their Lord in fear and hope; and they expend of what We
have provided them. No soul knows what delight is laid up for them
secretly, as a recompense for that they were doing (32:16,17)***.”[^21]

What can be the delight that God Almighty has kept in store for them,
concealing it from the eyes of all? Had it been something similar to the
flowing streams, the magnificent mansions, and the diverse bounties of
Paradise, He would have described it - as in the case of other deeds, of
which (at least) the angels are aware. This shows that this reward is
above all these and of a different kind; its greatness stands beyond
that which can be communicated to anyone, especially the inhabitants of
this lowly world. Do not liken the bounties of this world to those of
the other.

Do not imagine that the Paradise and the gardens therein are similar to
the gardens of this world, only somewhat vaster and of a greater degree
of grandeur. There is the abode of Divine beneficence and the house of
the hospitality of the Lord. The entire world is not comparable in
grandeur to a single hair of a houri of Paradise. Rather it is not
comparable even to a thread of the garments made for its inhabitants.

Despite all this, God Almighty has named none of these as reward for the
performers of the midnight prayer, and has only referred to the high
station of theirs in the words of the above verse. But, alas, we are
indolent, being not men of certitude. Otherwise, it would not have been
possible for us to be neglectful to such a degree and to be so drowned
in deep sleep till morning. If the night vigils were to make man aware
of the mysteries of *salat*, were he to preoccupy his mind with the
remembrance and contemplation of the Lord, and were his nights to become
mounts of ascent into the Divine Proximity, his reward would be nothing
other than the vision of the Absolute Beauty.

And woe to us, the negligent who do not wake up from slumber till the
end of life and remain under the intoxication of nature! Woe to us, whom
every day increases in stupefaction! Woe to us, who live on the animal
plane, comprehending nothing but eating, drinking and lovemaking!
Whatever we do, even if it is worship, that too is merely meant for
catering to the needs of the belly and the underneath. Do you imagine
that the *salat* of Khalil al-Rahman, the Friend of the Beneficent
(Ibrahim), was similar to that of ours? He did not speak of his wishes
even to Jibra’il - and we? We do not hesitate to beg even Satan (if we
believe him to be mighty enough to grant our prayers) to fulfill our
desires!

Yet there is no need to lose hope. It is possible that after a period of
performing the night vigil and habituating ourselves to it God Almighty
may gradually help you and cover you, with an invisible gesture of
grace, with the robe of His mercy. But, on the whole, do not be
oblivious of the mysteries of worship, and do not devote yourself merely
to the outward refinements of Quranic recitings. If you cannot perform
it with a sincerity of intention, strive at least for the delight that
God Almighty has kept hidden from all the sights. And remember in your
prayers, should it be your wish, this rebellious and beastly sinner who
has forgone all higher stations to remain content to thrive on the
animal plane. And chant with full attention and sincerity of intention
this prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ ارْزُقْنِي التَّجَافِي عَنْ دَارِ الغُرُورِ والإنَابَةَ
إلَى دَارِ الخُلُودِ والإسْتِعْدَادِ لِلْمَوْتِ قَبْلَ حُلُولِ
الفَوْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

My God, I implore Thee to rescue me from the house of illusion and this
abode of delirium, and help me to return to the abode of eternity. Grant
me the ability and preparedness to die before such an opportunity is
lost.[^22]

What Is Taqwa?
--------------

This should be known that *taqwa* (derived from *wiqayah,* defense) is a
kind of defense and shielding. In common speech, as well as in the
vocabulary of traditions, it means to restrain or bridle oneself from
violating Divine commands (*awamir* and *nawahi*) and from going against
what is pleasing to God. It is usually used for efficacious guarding of
the soul and total control of it from falling into illegal and
illegitimate acts, by refraining from all that is suspect (i.e. not
known to be permissible for certain):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَخَذَ بِالشُّبُهَاتِ وَقَعَ فِي المُحَرَّمَاتِ وَهَلَكَ مِنْ
حَيْثُ لا يَعْلَمُ. وَمَنْ رَتَعَ حَوْلَ الحِمَى يُوشَكُ أَنْ يَقَعَ
فِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever pursues dubious things, falls into forbidden things
(muharramat) and is destroyed on account of his ignorance, such as an
animal that grazes around a mire is liable to soon get entrapped in
it.[^23]

This should be known that although mere *taqwa* does not by itself
constitute the higher stages of perfection and spiritual accomplishment,
but reaching a high station is also not possible without it; for as long
as the soul is smeared with commission of prohibited deeds, one cannot
enter the door of humanity and cannot be a wayfarer of its path. As long
as man remains obedient to his carnal wishes and sensual pleasures and
their sweetness hangs in his mouth, he cannot even reach the preliminary
grades of human perfection. As long as he cherishes the love of the
world in his heart and has the fondness: for mundane things, he cannot
reach the station of even those who are halfway on the road
(*mutawassitun*) and the *zuhhad.*

And as long as self-love lies embedded in his essence, he will not reach
the station of the sincere (*mukhlisun*) and the lovers of God. Until
the love for the pluralities of the world (*mulk*) and the Hereafter
(*malakut*) is evident in his heart, he will not reach the high station
of the *majdhubun* (those immersed in the Divine and detached from all
worldly attachments). And until the plurality of the Names is manifest
within the core of his essence, he cannot attain total annihilation
(*fana*)*.* As long as his heart is turned towards the spiritual
station, he has not attained the station of complete extinction. And
until his essence is prone to take up different colors (*talwin*)*,* he
has not reached the station of stable endurance, and the Essence; as the
referent of the Name of the Essence, will not cast Its eternal and
everlasting radiance into his heart.

Thus, for ordinary men *taqwa* is with respect to the forbidden things;
for the elect it is vis-a-vis sensual pleasures; for the ascetics it is
in relation to the world, for the sincere it is in relation to the love
of the self; and for the *majdhubun* it is in relation to the plurality
of Act; for the *faniyun* (those who have annihilated themselves in the
Essence) it is in relation to the plurality of the Names; for, the
*wasdun* (those who have reached the Essence) *taqwa* is in relation to
absorption in the annihilation; and for the *mutamakkinun* it is in
regard to inner instabilities (*talwinat*)*,* and hence the Quran
enjoins:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَاسْتَقِمْ كَمَا أُمِرْتَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So be as steadfast as thou art commanded.*** (***11: 112***)

There is much that can be said for each one of these stations, the
description of which would not lead the likes of us anywhere except into
confusion and bafflement over terms, blind as we are to the meanings
concealed by the veils of concepts, and there are a people who befit
every field. Now we shall turn our attention to *taqwa* in its
elementary form, which is more significant for mankind.

Taqwa For The Common People
---------------------------

Remember, my dear, that in the same way as there is health and sickness
for the human body and remedies and cures for correcting it, there is
also health and disease and remedies and cures for the human soul as
well. Its health and well-being is observance of moderation, it lies in
treading the human path, and sickness and affliction is the result of
deviating from the right path of humanity.

The spiritual maladies and diseases are a thousand times more
significant than the physical maladies; for at the most the latter
ultimately lead to death. As soon as death approaches and the soul
leaves the body, all physical maladies and corporeal defects and
infirmities disappear for one, and one does not feel any bodily pain and
affliction any more.

But if, God forbid, one is afflicted with spiritual maladies and
diseases of the soul, the time of death is withdrawal of the soul’s
attention from the body and its redirection towards the domain of the
spirit: that is the beginning of the experience of these sicknesses and
afflictions. The similitude of attention toward the world and its
attachments is like the narcotics which makes its addict oblivious of
himself. The breaking of the soul’s bonds with the realm of the physical
world makes the soul gain self-consciousness.

As soon as it becomes self-conscious, all the pains, diseases and
indispositions that lie latent within the depths of the essence, now
overwhelm it and each and every thing that remained invisible until that
time, like fire smouldering under ashes, becomes evident. Those diseases
and maladies either cannot be driven away and adhere firmly to one, or
if they are remediable, it is only after being subjected to tortures,
pains, fire and burning for thousands of years that they can be wiped
away:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آخِرُ الدَّوَاءِ الكَيُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The last cure is cauterization.

God Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَوْمَ يُحْمَى عَلَيْهَا فِي نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ فَتُكْوَى بِهَا
جِبَاهُهُمْ وَجُنُوبُهُمْ وَظُهُورُهُمْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It will be heated in the fire of hell, and their foreheads and their
flanks and their backs will be branded therewith.*** (***9:35***)

The apostles of God are similar to kind physicians who out of great
concern for treating illnesses prescribe different remedies in
accordance with the severity of the disease. They have strived to guide
mankind on the right path of genuine guidance (We are God-trained
physicians). The effect of the spiritual deeds and actions of the heart,
as well as the external deeds and actions of the body, is similar to
that of a medicine. In the same way, the effect of taqwa, on each of its
levels, is similar to abstaining from those things that aggravate the
disease.

Unless the sick man does not abstain from harmful things, it is not
possible that his malady be replaced by well-being and the prescribed
remedy be effectual. During physical illness, sometimes, despite a
little intemperance, medicine and nature do their work and one may
regain his health and well-being; for nature itself is a protector of
health and medicine acts as its assistant. But the matter is more
serious in the case of spiritual maladies, as here the nature dominates
the spirit from the very beginning. and the spiritual side heads towards
corruption and decline:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ النَّفْسَ لَأَمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, it is the self which incites to evil*** (***12:53***)

Accordingly, the disease overwhelms it on the slightest indulgence and
intemperance, making inroads and destroying its health and vigor
completely. Therefore, anyone who is concerned with his spiritual
soundness, will try to improve his condition after finding the ways of
getting rid of painful chastisement. His well-being rests upon two
things: one is to adopt those things which bring spiritual health, and
the other is to abstain from things which bring spiritual harm and
affliction.

It should be remembered that the spiritual harm inflicted by the
forbidden things is greater than all other vices, and it is for this
very reason that they have been forbidden. And to perform the obligatory
and incumbent duties is also most necessary, and it is for this reason
that they have been made obligatory and given priority over all other
things. These have been considered as the foremost and the most
essential steps in the direction of spiritual advancement.

Treading the path of felicity and reaching the highest human grades and
stations depends upon having traversed these two stages. Anyone who
observes them acquires felicity and salvation. Of these two, *taqwa,* or
abstinence from *muharramat,* is the more significant. The mystics and
the wayfarers have also considered it more significant than the other
step. A study of the traditions (of the Prophet [S] and the Imams [A])
and the sermons of the *Nahj al-balaghah* further confirms this that the
Infallible Ones (A) also laid great emphasis on this step.

Therefore, O dear, consider the first stage to be of utmost importance
and be greatly heedful and attentive regarding these matters. If the
first step is taken rightly and this foundation is laid solidly, there
is hope of reaching the other stations; otherwise it is impossible to
attain the higher stations and very difficult and painstaking to obtain
salvation. Our precious Shaykh used to enjoin us to attend constantly to
the following verses of the *Surat al-Hashr:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَلْتَنْظُرْ نَفْسٌ
مَا قَدَّمَتْ لِغَدٍ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
تَعْمَلُونَ. وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ
أَنْفُسَهُمْ أُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ الْفَاسِقُونَ. لَا يَسْتَوِي أَصْحَابُ
النَّارِ وَأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ هُمْ
الْفَائِزُونَ. لَوْ أَنْزَلْنَا هَذَا الْقُرْآنَ عَلَى جَبَلٍ
لَرَأَيْتَهُ خَاشِعًا مُتَصَدِّعًا مِنْ خَشْيَةِ اللَّهِ وَتِلْكَ
الْأَمْثَالُ نَضْرِبُهَا لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ. هُوَ
اللَّهُ الَّذِي لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ
وَالشَّهَادَةِ هُوَ الرَّحْمَانُ الرَّحِيمُ. هُوَ اللَّهُ الَّذِي لَا
إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْمَلِكُ الْقُدُّوسُ السَّلَامُ الْمُؤْمِنُ
الْمُهَيْمِنُ الْعَزِيزُ الْجَبَّارُ الْمُتَكَبِّرُ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ
عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ. هُوَ اللَّهُ الْخَالِقُ الْبَارِئُ الْمُصَوِّرُ
لَهُ الْأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَى يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالْأَرْضِ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O ye who believe! Observe your duty*** (***taqwa***) ***to God. And
let every soul look to that which it sendeth on before for the morrow.
And observe your duty*** (***taqwa***) ***to God! Verily, God is
informed of what ye do. And be not ye as those who forgot God, and He
caused them to forget their souls. Such are the evildoers. Not equal are
the people of the Fire and the people of the Garden. The people of the
Garden, they are the victorious. If We had caused the Quran to descent
upon the mountain, thou*** (***O Muhammad***) ***verily hadest seen it
humbled, rent asunder by the fear of God. Such similitudes coin We for
mankind that haply they may reflect. He is God, than Whom there is no
other god, the Knower of the invisible and the visible. He is the
Beneficent, the Merciful. He is God, than Whom there is no other god,
the Sovereign Lord, the Holy One, Peace, the Keeper of faith, the
Guardian, the Majestic, the Compeller, the Superb. Glorified be God from
all that they ascribe as partners*** (***unto Him***)***! He is God, the
Creator, the Shaper out of naught, the Fashioner. His are the most
beautiful names. All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifieth
Him, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.*** (***59:18-24***)

Our Shaykh would ask us to recite these verses after daily prayers and
to contemplate over their meaning, especially in the late hours of night
when the heart is relaxed, stating that it is very effective for curing
the soul and for holding the mischief of the self and Satan at bay. He
would recommend us to be with ablution (*wudu’*) all the time, for, he
would say, it is like a warrior’s armor.

In any case, beseech and entreat God Almighty with supplications and
tears to succor you and assist you during this trial and to help you in
acquiring the faculty of *taqwa.* Remember that in the beginning it will
appear to be a little hard, but after strict observance of a few days
discomfort will change into comfort and hardship into leisure and
tranquility; rather, it will give you a unique spiritual joy, which
those who have tasted value higher than all other enjoyments.

God willing, after strict vigilance and total *taqwa,* you will progress
towards the station of *taqwa* attained by the elect, which is *taqwa*
against sensual pleasures. When you taste the sweetness of spiritual
enjoyment, you will gradually turn away from physical pleasures and try
to evade them. Traversing the path will become easier for you and you
will not attach any value to transitory physical enjoyments; rather, you
will abhor them. The worldly treasures will appear ugly and coarse to
your eyes.

In this state of consciousness, you will realize that each one of the
worldly pleasures leaves its trace on the soul, a black blot on the
heart: it intensifies the love for this world, which itself causes one
to cling to this place, and, at the time of the wrenching away of the
soul from the body, takes the form of the agony of death and its
distresses and squeezes. Mainly, the anguish and agony of death and its
severity are the result of these pleasures and these attachments to the
corporeal world, as said earlier. As soon as man gains consciousness of
this fact, all the physical pleasures lose their significance in his
eyes.

He becomes abhorrent towards the world, its treasures and adornments.
This itself is another success, whence the wayfarer advances towards the
third grade of *taqwa.* Thereupon, treading the Path of God becomes
easier for him and the road to humanness becomes illuminated and
spacious. Every step that he takes carries him further on the way of
Truth.

His exercises assume sacred validity. He becomes averse to the self, its
ways and its demands. He senses within his being the love of God and he
is no more satisfied now with the promises of Paradise and the palaces
and the houris thereof. He yearns for a higher ideal and end hating his
(earlier) self-seeking and self-love. His *taqwa* is now directed
against self love and he becomes *muttaqi* in regard to his own
self-indulgence. This is a high and lofty attainment and the first step
in the direction of sensing the fragrance of *wilayah.* God Almighty
specifies a seat for him under the shelter of His grace and succors him
with His special favors.

The matters that the wayfarer on the Divine path experiences after this
are beyond the ken of expression. And praise belongs to God, in the
beginning and the end, outwardly and inwardly, and may His benedictions
be upon Muhammad and the pure of his progeny.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi (Akhundi, ed. by ‘Ali’ Akbar Ghaffiri), II, 54.

[^2]: Manazil al-sa’irin, I, 57.

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi, II, 55.

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi, II, 55.

[^5]: Al-Mahajjat al-bayda ; VIII, 193: تَفَكَّرُوا فِي خَلْقِ اللهِ
وَلا تَتَفَكَّرُوا فِي اللهِ، فَإنَّكُمْ لَنْ تَقْدِرُوا قَدْرَهُ.

[^6]: Al- Isharat wa al-tanbihat (Tehran: Haydari), III, 419.

[^7]: Al- Asfar al-’arba’ah (Dar al-Ma’arif al-Islamiyyah ), I, 10.

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, I, 92, hadith 1.

[^9]: Usul al-Kafi, I, 92, hadith 1.

[^10]: Usul al-Kafi, I, 93, hadith 7.

[^11]: Usul al-Kafi, II, 55.

[^12]: The first six ayahs of Surat al-Hadid.

[^13]: Usul al-Kafi, I, 91, hadith 3.

[^14]: Usul al-Kafi, I, 93, hadith 5.

[^15]: Usul al-Kafi (Akhundi, ed. by ‘Ali’ Akbar Ghaffiri), II, 54.

[^16]: Al-Kulayni, Rawdat al-Kafi, p.162; al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il
al-Shi’ah, V, 268; al-Shaykh al-Saduq, Man la yahduruhu al-faqih. I,
484; al-Kulayni, Furu al al-Kafi, I, 73.

[^17]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, Thawab al-’a’mal, p.63, hadith 41; Man la
yahduruhu al-faqih, I, 471.

[^18]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, V, 275.

[^19]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Ilal al-shara’i, p.138.

[^20]: Ibid., p.23; Wasa’il al Shi’ah, V, 276.

[^21]: ‘Ilal al-shara’i, p.23; Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, V, 276.

[^22]: Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al jinan.

[^23]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah.


