Fourteenth Hadith: Fear of God
==============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسَنَدي المُتَّصِلِ إِلى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ ثِقَةِ الإسْلامِ
وَعِمَادِ المُسْلِمِينَ، عَنْ عِدَّةٍ مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا، عَنْ أَحْمَدَ
بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ، عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ حَدِيدٍ، عَنْ مَنْصُورِ بْنِ
يُونُسَ، عَنِ الحَارِثِ بْنِ المُغِيرَةِ أوْ أَبِيهِ، عَنْ أَبِي
عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قُلْتُ لَهُ: مَا كَانَ فِي
وَصِيَّةِ لُقْمَانَ؟ قَالَ: كَانَ فِيهَا الأعَاجِيبُ. وَكَانَ أَعْجَبَ
ما كَانَ فِيهَا أَنْ قَالَ لإبْنِهِ: خَفِ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ خِيفَةً
لَوْ جِئْتَهُ بِبِرِّ الثَّقَلَيْنِ لَعَذَّبَكَ. وَارْجُ اللهَ رَجَاءً
لَوْ جِئْتَهُ بِذُنُوبِ الثَّقَلَيْنِ لَرَحِمَكَ. ثُمَّ قَالَ أَبُو
عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: كَانَ أَبِي يَقُولُ: إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ
مِنْ عَبْدٍ مُؤْمِنٍ إلا [و] فِي قَلْبِهِ نُورَانِ: نُورُ خِيفَةٍ
وُنُورُ رَجَاءٍ، لَوْ وُزِنَ هَذَا لَمْ يَزَدْ عَلَى هَذَا وَلَوْ
وُزِنَ هَذَا لَمْ يَزَدْ عَلَى هَذَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thiqat al-Islam wa ‘Imad al-Muslimin Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni):
From a number of our companions, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad, from ‘Ali ibn
Hadid, from Mansur ibn Yunus, from al-Harith ibn al-Mughirah or his
father, from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) (Imam al-Sadiq). Al-Harith, or his
father, says, “I asked him (A), ‘What was (mentioned) in the testament
of Luqman?’ ‘There were marvelous things in it’, he said, ‘and the most
wonderful of that which he said to his son was this: “Have such a fear
of God Almighty that were you to come to Him with the virtues of the two
worlds (thaqalan) He would still chastise you, and put such a hope in
God that were you to come to Him with the sins of the two worlds He
would still have compassion for you.” Then Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) added: ‘My
father used to say, “There is no believer who does not have two lights
in his heart: the light of fear and the light of hope. Were one of these
to be measured it would not exceed the other, and were the other one to
be measured, it would not exceed this one.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

According to al-Jawhari in his *al-Sihah, a’ajib* is the plural of
*u’jubah,* in the same way as *ahadith* is the plural of *uhduthah.*
Some lexicographers state that *u’jubah* is something amazing, either on
account of its beauty or its ugliness, and the former (i.e. beauty) is
meant in this tradition. It appears that the word primarily has the
specific sense of something of striking beauty, and is used in a wider
sense, parasitically, *Birr* is the opposite of *‘uquq,* disobedience.
فُلانٌ يَبَرُّ خَالِقَهُ means so and so is obedient to his Creator, as
pointed out by al-Jawhari. *‘Thaqalan’* means mankind and the *Jinn*.

This noble *hadith* means that the fear of God and hope in Him should be
at the highest degree. Despairing of Divine mercy and considering
oneself secure from God’s devising (*makr*) are totally prohibited, as
indicated by a great number of traditions and explicitly stated by the
Noble Qur’an. Secondly, none of these should exceed the other. God
willing, we shall elaborate upon this and other aspects of the holy
tradition in the course of a few sections.

Between Hope And Fear
---------------------

Let it be known to you that the man cognizant of the realities and the
relationship between possible existents (*mumkin al-wujud*) and the
Necessary Being (*wajib al-wujud*)*,* exalted and sublime is He, holds a
two-sided viewpoint: The first thing he has in view is the essential
defectiveness of his own, of all possible beings, and the wretchedness
of the entire universe.

Through direct experience or through indirect knowledge he discovers
that the entire existence of a possible being is immersed in lowliness
and want, drowned in the dark ocean of possibility, poverty and need,
always and for ever. The possible existents have nothing of their own:
they are utterly insignificant, thoroughly devoid of majesty, and
absolutely defective. Rather, none of these expressions can adequately
express their utter neediness, and we use them for lack of proper words.
Otherwise, defectiveness, poverty and need are a part of the quality of
thingness. None of the possible beings and none of tile creatures has
anything that is its own.

Accordingly, even if a man were to accomplish all the worships, follow
all the Divine teachings and obey the Holy Lord most perfectly and
meticulously, he has nothing but shame, humiliation and fear to his
share. What obedience can lie offer? what worship? from whom? and to
whom? Are not all the attributes of excellence His own, without the
possible having any share whatsoever therein? Rather when the possible
being approaches the threshold of these excellences, in order to praise
God Almighty, it throws the shadow of its defectiveness on His praise
and soils the purity and infinitude of His holy Names. It is regarding
this station (of finitude and possibility vis-a-vis the infinitude of
the Necessary Being) that He declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿مَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ حَسَنَةٍ فَمِنْ اللَّهِ وَمَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ
سَيِّئَةٍ فَمِنْ نَفْسِكَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whatever good visits thee, it is from God; whatever evil visits thee
is of thyself.*** (***4:79***)

And it is regarding the first station (of the absolute neediness of the
possible existent) that He declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ كُلٌّ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say*** (***O Muhammad***)***: Everything is from God.*** (***4:78***)

And it is about. these stations that the poet (Hafiz) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
پير گفت خطا بر قلم صنع نرفت آفرين بر نظر پاك خطا پوشش باد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Our master said, ‘The pen of creation did not make any error’.*

*Praised be the immaculate eye that conceals all defects!*

The statement of the mystic master (*pir*) relates to the second
station, and the statement of the speaker himself relates to the first
one. Hence, this view fills mall with dread, grief, shame and
humiliation.

In the other view, he beholds the Perfection of the Necessary Being, the
expanse of His mercy, compassion and love. Therein, he sees the
unlimited vastness of His various bounties and favors whose number is
beyond limit and number and which are bestowed without any prior
capacity or deservedness (on the recipient’s part).

He has opened the doors of favor and bounty on His creatures without any
deservedness. The initiative lies with His bounteousness, which precedes
request and demand. The Imam Sayyid al-Sajidin Zayn al-Abidin (A) in the
prayers of *al-Sahifat al-Kamilah* and his other prayers has recurrently
pointed out this matter.

This view gives strength to his hope, making him hopeful of Divine
mercy. He sees his magnanimous Lord Whose bequests are purely due to His
care and compassion, the Lord of all kings Who bestows without asking
and prior to the receiver’s capacity. All the intellects fall short in
knowing even an iota of His nobility. The disobedience of the sinners
cots not cause any disturbance iii the order of Isis vast dominion, and
the obedience of the obedient does not add anything to it.

Rather, the guidance of the Holiest Essence to the paths of obedience,
anti. His prohibition of disobedience, ate for the sake of the
creatures, in order that they may attain to His beneficence, His vast
mercy and bounty, that they may attain the stations of perfection and
higher degrees of freedom from defect, deformity and ugliness. Hence,
should it be that when tomorrow when we enter the court of the Almighty
and stand in the presence of His compassion and mercy, we should be able
to say: “O God, Who clothed us with the robes of existence and provided
us all the means of our life and comfort, over and above the perception
of perceivers, Who showed to us all the paths of guidance - all these of
Your favors were for our own good and in order to benefit us further
from the vast store of Your love and bounty.

Now that we stand in Your glorious and magnanimous presence, we have
come with the sins of the two worlds. Yet the sins of the sinners have
not created any defect in the order of Your dominion, nor diminished the
infinitude of Your mercy. What will You have for this handful of dust,
that has no significance in front of Your greatness, except pity and
compassion? Can anything except pity and compassion be hoped from You, O
Lord?”

Hence, man should always be moving back and forth between these two
views: neither should he ever close his eyes to his defects and
shortcomings in fulfilling the duties of creaturehood, nor should he
ever take his eyes off the expansive and all-encompassing mercy, love
and compassion of God Almighty.

Stages And Degrees Of Fear
--------------------------

My dear, know that there are various levels and degrees of fear and hope
in accordance with the condition of persons and the level of their
knowledge (*ma’rifah*). The fear of the common people is in regard to
chastisement. The fear of the elect is in regard to the wrath. The fear
of the elect of the elect is from concealment (*ihtijab*) (i.e.
deprivation from beatitude). Here, it is not our purpose to describe
these stations and we will confine our discourse to certain points
pertinent to what has been said earlier.

You should know that no creature can worship God Almighty as He deserves
to be worshipped; for worship means extolling the praise of that Sacred
Essence, and the praise offered by every creature is derived from its
knowledge of Him, which in reality does not apprehend His Sacred
Essence. Thus, it is not possible for them to praise His beauty and
grandeur. Hence the Noblest of creatures and the Most knowledgeable of
beings about His Lordship (i.e. the Prophet [S]), confesses his
inadequacy in this regard, and declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عَرِفْنَاكَ حَقَّ مَعْرِفَتِكَ وَلا عَبَدْنَاكَ حَقَّ عِبَادَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We did not know You as You deserve to be known. We did not worship You
as You deserve to be worshipped.[^2]

The second sentence is intended to explain the cause of what is stated
in the first one. And he (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتَ كَمَا أَثْنَيْتَ عَلَى نَفْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are as You have praised Yourself.[^3]

Therefore, imperfection is essential to possible being and Absolute
Sublimity belongs exclusively to the Sacred Essence of the Almighty. And
since the creatures are unable to attain to the praise and worship of
the Sacred Essence without the knowledge and worship of God, none of
them can attain to the degrees of perfection and the stations of the
Hereafter (as has been demonstrated in its own place for the knowers of
the Hereafter, and in regard to which the common people are oblivious,
as they consider the Hereafterly stations as extravagances and the like,
and regarding their fancies it must be said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَعَالَى اللهُ عَنْ ذَلِكَ عُلُوّاً كَبِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘High indeed is He exalted above that (they say)’!), God Almighty, with
His expansive favor and His all-inclusive compassion, opened a door of
His mercy upon them, out of His love, of the teachings regarding the
hidden and of revelation and inspiration, through His angels and
prophets. That is the door of worship (*‘ibadah*) and knowledge
(*ma’rifah*)*.*

He, thus, indicated the paths of worship to His servants and threw open
the road of knowledge to them, that they may, as far as is possible,
remove their shortcomings and defects and attain to the possible degrees
of perfection, that they may be guided by the light of servitude to the
world of Divine magnanimity, to the domain of the spirit and the aroma,
to the paradise of His bounties, or, rather, to the good pleasure of
God, which is greater than all that.

Thus, the opening of the gates of worship and service is one of the
greatest of bounties, for which the creatures owe their deepest
gratitude, although it is a favor for which they can never offer
adequate thanks, for each expression of gratitude is itself the key that
opens a further door to sublimity. Thus, they are ever incapable of
offering adequate thanks for His bounties.

Thus when man attains the knowledge of this fountainhead and his heart
becomes familiar with it, he confesses to his own shortcoming, and even
if he is able to enter into the court of the Almighty with a record of
service and worship equal to that of the worship and service of all
mankind, *Jinn*, and angels near to God, he would still be fearful and
conscious of inadequacy.

Also, the knowing servants of God and His elect friends, on whom the
sacred doors of Providence have been opened and whose hearts have been
illumined by the light of *marifah* - their hearts are so full of dread
and trembling that even if all tree excellences were accessible to them,
and were all the keys to the treasures of Divine knowledge be given
them, and should their hearts be filled with Divine irradiation, that
would not reduce their fear by an atom’s weight nor diminish the
trembling of their quaking hearts. Hence- one of them says. ‘All are
afraid of the End, and I am dreadful of the beginning.’

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ اللهِ وَلا حَوْلَ وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا بِاللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

May glory be to God, and there is no power or might which is not by God!
I seek refuge in God Almighty! God knows, these words tear a man’s heart
to pieces. They make the heart melt, and take away his wits. But, alas!
How negligent is man!

Another thing is that which we mentioned while expounding an earlier
tradition, that all our obedience and worship are for the sake of
selfish aims and motivated by self-love. In reality, it is abstinence
from the world for the sake of the rewards of the Hereafter - which,
nevertheless, for free men, is abstinence from the world for worldly
rewards.

Hence, were we to come to our Lord with the worship of the two worlds,
we would not deserve anything except expulsion from the Divine
proximity. This is because, God, the Blessed and the Exalted, has
invited us into His sacred proximity and love, declaring:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَلَقْتُكَ لأَجْلِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have created thee for Myself.

He has made the knowledge of Him the end of our creation and shown to us
the paths of knowledge and servitude. Despite it, all that we are
occupied with is catering to our belly and our carnal lusts, with no
purpose in view except self-seeking and self-love!

Then, O wretched man, whose worship and devotion do not entitle thee to
anything except expulsion and remoteness from His sanctified proximity
and to His wrath and chastisement! What have thee to rely upon? Why,
shouldn’t the fear of God’s Might unsettle you and make your heart
bleed? Do you, have anything to rely upon? Do you rely upon your works
and trust your deeds? If that be so, woe to you and your estimation of
yourself! And woe to you for your estimation of the Master of all
masters! However, should your reliance and trust be upon the bounty of
your Lord, His expansive compassion and the all-inclusive love of the
Sacred Essence, your reliance is indeed well placed; you have relied
upon a truly reliable thing, and have sought a firm refuge.

Hope And Prayer
---------------

O God! O Lord! Our hands are empty, and we know that we are imperfect
and insignificant. We have nothing that is worthy of Thy sacred court.
We are faulty, head to foot, and full of defects. Our inward and outward
being is soaked in mortal sins, deserving eternal damnation. What are we
that we should be worthy of praising Thee, when Thy friends (*awliya’*)
declare:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَبِلِسَانِي هَذَا الكَالِّ أَشْكُرُكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How shall I thank Thee with this dumb tongue of mine?

And confess to their incapacity, weakness and shortcoming? What can we,
blindfolded sinners that we are, have to say about His Majesty, except
declaring with the inconsequent oscillations of our tongue: “Our hope
lies with Your mercy and our reliance in Your favor and forgiveness, and
our trust in the generosity and magnanimity of Your Holy Essence, as
expressed in the prayers of Your friends:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: قَالَ اللهُ تَبَارَكَ
وَتَعَالى: لا يَتَّكِلِ العَامِلُونَ لِي عَلَى أَعْمَالِهِمُ الَّتِي
يَعْمَلُونَهَا لِثَوَابِي، فَإنَّهُمْ لَوِ إجْتَهَدُوا وَأَتْعَبُوا
أَنْفُسَهُمْ - أَعْمَارَهُمْ - فِي عِبَادَتِي كاَنُوا مُقَصِّرِينَ
غَيْرَ بَالِغِينَ فِي عِبَادَتِهِمْ كُنْهَ عِبَادَتِي فِيمَا
يَطْلِبُوُن َعِنْدِي مِنْ كَرَامَتِي وَالنَّعِيمِ فِي جَنَّاتِي
وَرَفِيعِ الدَّرَجَاتِ العُلَى فِي جِوَارِي وَلَكِنْ بِرَحْمَتِي
فَلْيَثِقُوا وَفَضْلِي فَلْيَرْجُوا، وَإلَى حُسْنِ الظَّنِّ بِي
فَلْيَطْمَئِنُّوا، فَإنَّ رَحْمَتِي عِنْدَ ذَلِكَ تُدْرِكُهُمْ،
وَمَنِّي يُبَلِّغُهُمْ رِضْوَانِي وَمَغْفِرَتِي تُلْبِسُهُمْ عَفْوِي.
فَإنِّي أَنَا اللهُ الرَّحْمَنُ الرَّحِيمُ وَبِذَلِكَ تَسَمَّيْتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kulayni, in al-Kafi, reports with his chain of narrators from Imam
Baqir (A) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said: God, the
Sublime and the Blessed, said, “The workers (of deeds) for My sake
should not, for My reward, trust the works they have done: for, verily,
should they labor and toil for all their lives in My service and
worship, they would fall short in their worship and will not attain to
the reality of My service in what they seek with Me of My magnanimity
and bounty, My paradise and the high stations in My proximity. Rather,
they should rely upon My mercy and put hope in My favor and be contented
of their good opinion (husn al-zann) of Me; for, verily, therein My
mercy will reach them, My good pleasure will go forth to them, and My
forgiveness shall envelop them. For, indeed, I am Allah, the Beneficent
and the Merciful, and I have been named so on that account.”[^4]

Contemplation, Fear And Hope
----------------------------

Of things that cause fear of God, is contemplation of the extremeness of
Divine Might, the precision and sharpness of the path (*Sirat*) of the
Hereafter and the perils that man has to face during the days of his
life and at death, as well as the hardships of the Purgatory (*barzakh*)
and the Resurrection and the scrutinies of the Reckoning (*hisab*) and
the Balance (*mizan*). In the same way, reflection over the verses and
traditions about the promises of God Almighty can bring about complete
and perfect hope.

It is reported in traditions that on the Day of Resurrection God
Almighty’s mercy shall be so abundant that even Satan will aspire for
God’s pardon. In this world, at which God has never looked with favor,
and on which since its creation His mercy has not descended (in
comparison to the other worlds) except for a droplet of it, we encounter
so much of the abundance of God’s mercy, bounty and care, which has
enveloped everything, apparent and the invisible, that the world is a
vast table of the bounties and gifts of the Almighty, so widespread that
were all the world’s intellects attempt to encompass even a fragment of
it, they would be unable to do so. If this is so, then what would be a
world which is the house of the hospitality of the generous Lord and the
abode of the expansive mercy and compassion of the All-merciful and the
Compassionate? Of course, .Satan would be justified in his aspiring for
His pity and his hoping from God’s generosity. Hence, make perfect your
good opinion of Him and rely upon His grace, as He has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ جَمِيعًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, God shall forgive all the sins.*** (***39:53***)

And immerse all in the ocean of His mercy and beneficence. It is
impossible that God should break His promise, although it is possible
that He may withdraw His threats, and how often He does that! So gladden
your heart with the hope of His mercy, for had it not enveloped you, you
would not be a creature; every creature is the recipient of His mercy,
for He has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَرَحْمَتِي وَسِعَتْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***My mercy embraces all things.*** (***7:156***)

The Difference Between Hope And Delusion
----------------------------------------

However, my dear, you should be careful of distinguishing between hope
and delusion, for it may be that you be a deluded man, but imagine
yourself to be a man of hope. Yet it is easy to distinguish between them
on the basis of their grounds. You should reflect over the state of
yours that makes you regard it as hope, to see whether that state of
yours has come into being as a result of your belittling of Divine
commands or as a result of conviction in the all-embracing character of
Divine mercy and the greatness of the Holy Essence.

Should that prove to be difficult, the distinction can be made on the
basis of their effects. Should the greatness of God be imprinted on the
believer’s heart and should it be content in the expansive mercy and
bounty of His Holy Essence, he would be committed to His obedience and
service, for esteem for someone great and gratitude and willingness to
serve one’s benefactor are inviolable features of human nature.

Hence, should you be committed to the duties of slavehood and unsparing
in your efforts to obey and worship; should you not rely on your works
and consider them insignificant; should your hope rest on God’s mercy,
grace and bounty; should you consider yourself entitled to every kind of
blame, disfavor, reproof and wrath on account of your deeds; and should
your sole reliance be the mercy and generosity of the Absolutely
Magnanimous - should you be such, then you are indeed in possession of
the state of hope. Then, thank God Almighty for that, and implore His
Holy Essence to establish it firmly in your heart and to elevate you to
a higher degree of it.

But if, God forbid, should you be one who belittles and takes lightly
the commands of God, one who considers unimportant and insignificant the
Words of the Holiest Essence, then rest assured that it is delusion that
has appeared in your heart as a result of the guiles of Satan and your
carnal self. Had you any faith in God’s greatness and His expansive
mercy, its effects would have been obvious in you. A claimant whose acts
are contrary to his claims is one who falsifies himself, and there are
many traditions to this effect.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ ابْنِ أبِي نَجْرانَ، عَمَّنْ ذَكَرَهُ، عَنْ
أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قُلْتُ لَهُ: قَومٌ
يَعْمَلُونَ بِالمَعَاصِي وَيَقُولُونَ نَرْجُو، فَلا يَزَالُونَ
كَذَلِكَ حَتّى يَأْتِيَهُمُ المَوْتُ. فَقَالَ: هَؤُلاءِ قَوْمٌ
يَتَرَجَّحُونَ فِي الأَمَانِي. كَذِبُوا، لَيْسُوا بِرَاجِينَ. مَنْ
رَجَا شَيْئاً طَلَبَهُ، وَمَنْ خَافَ مِنْ شَيءٍ هَرَبَ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni, with his chain of narrators, reports from Imam
al Sadiq (A) on the authority of an unnamed narrator who narrated it to
Ibn Abi Najran, that he said to the Imam (A): “There are some people who
commit sins and say we are hopeful. They remain in this condition until
death comes to them.” The Imam said, “They are a people who have been
swept away by false hopes. They lie, they are not the hopeful; for
verily, one who has hope of something pursues it, and one who fears
something flees from it.”[^5]

Close to this in meaning is another tradition of the noble *al-Kafi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ الحَسَنِ بْنِ أَبِي سَارَةَ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ
أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: لا يَكُونُ المُؤْمِنُ
مُؤْمِناً حَتَّى يَكُونَ خَائِفاً رَاجِياً، وَلا يَكُونُ خَائِفاً
رَاجِياً حَتَّى يَكُونَ عَاِملاً لِمَا يَخَافُ وَيَرْجُو.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Kulayni), with his chain of narrators reports from al-Husayn ibn Abi
Sarah that he said: I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) say: “A believer is not
but fearful and hopeful, and he is not (truly) fearful and hopeful
unless he responds in action in regard to that which he fears and
hopes.”[^6]

Some have said that the person who is hopeful without doing anything is
like the one who awaits the result without preparing its needed means,
like the farmer who awaits a ready harvest without sowing the seeds,
without tilling and watering his land and without removing the
hindrances in the way of a sufficient produce. Such a man cannot be said
to have hope. What characterizes him is stupidity and folly. The
similitude of the person who does not reform his morals and acts without
refraining from sins, is the farmer who sows his seeds in barren, saline
soil: of course, such farming does not yield any produce.

Therefore, the genuine kind of hope is that man should first prepare all
the means that are available to him and have been provided to him by the
grace of God Almighty, Who has also guided him regarding the paths of
right and corrupt conduct and commanded him to make ready those means,
and only then he should wait and hope that God, with His favor, will
provide the remaining means over which he has no power, and remove the
hindrances and perils from his path.

Hence, when the devotee has cleared the field of his heart of the thorns
of moral vices and of the stones, rocks and salinity of sins, sowing
therein the seeds of good works and watering it with the clear waters of
beneficial knowledge and sincere faith and guarded his field against the
pests of pride (*‘ujb*) and ostentation (*riya’*), which like weeds
hinder the wholesome growth of the harvest, then he may sit and wait for
God’s grace, hoping that the Almighty may keep him firm and on the
straight path until the last moment of his life. This is the desired and
genuine kind of hope, as declared by God Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَالَّذِينَ هَاجَرُوا وَجَاهَدُوا فِي سَبِيلِ
اللَّهِ أُوْلَئِكَ يَرْجُونَ رَحْمَةَ اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ
رَحِيمٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But the believers, and those who migrate and struggle in the way of
God -those have hope of God’s compassion; and God is All-forgiving,
All-compassionate.*** (***2:213***)

The noble tradition at its end mentions that neither fear nor hope
should exceed one another, and the same thing is stated in the *mursal*
*hadith* of Ibn Abi ‘Umayr from Imam al-Sadiq (A). When man observes his
extreme shortcoming in fulfilling the demands of servitude and
creaturehood and when he contemplates the narrowness of the path of the
Hereafter, a high degree of fear seizes him. And when he observes his
own sins and reflects over the condition of those persons who were
righteous at the start but fell into wretchedness and departed from the
world in a state of unbelief and without good works, ultimately meeting
an evil goal, his fear is intensified. And in a noble tradition of
*al-Kafi*, Imam al-Sadiq (A) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُؤْمِنُ بَيْنَ مَخَافَتَيْنِ: ذَنْبٍ قَدْ مَضَى لا يَدْرِي مَا
صَنَعَ اللهُ فِيهِ وَعُمُرٍ قَدْ بَقِيَ لا يَدْرِي مَا يَكْتَسِبُ
فِيهِ مِنَ المَهَالِكِ. فَهُوَ لا يُصْبِحُ إلا خَائِفاً وَلا
يُصْلِحُهُ إلا الخَوْفُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The believer stands between two dreadful things: the past sins,
regarding which he does not know what God will do (with him), and the
remainder of his life, regarding which he does not know what mortal sins
he will commit therein. So he does not wake up except in a state of
dread, and nothing keeps him righteous except fear.[^7]

The same thing is stated in the sermon of the Noble Messenger (S)
reported in a *hadith* of Imam al-Sadiq (A) in *al-Kafi*.[^8] The gist
of the matter is that the self is in a state of utter imperfection and
shortcoming, and God at the height of greatness, glory, all-embracing
mercifulness and grace, and the devotee is always in a median state of
fear and hope between these two views. And since the Divine attributes
of glory and perfection cast their light simultaneously on the
wayfarer’s heart, none of the two, fear or hope, exceeds the other.

Some have said that sometimes fear is more beneficial for man -as in the
state of health and robustness - in order that he may endeavor in
attaining perfection and performing good works, and that hope is better
in some conditions - as when the signs of approaching death appear - so
that man may meet God in a state which He loves more. But this opinion
does not agree with the above discussion and the traditions mentioned,
for the genuine and lovable hope also induces one to good works and
hereafterly conduct. Fear of God is also always desirable and is not
contrary to confirmed hope in Him.

And some have said that fear is not a moral or intellectual merit in the
Hereafter, and that its benefit is limited to the world, which is the
abode of works and; deeds, for inducing obedience and service and for
restraining men from sin. It is of no use after this world is left
behind. On the other hand, hope rill never end and shall endure in the
Hereafter, for the more of God’s beneficence man receives, the more does
he aspire to ‘His grace and bounty, because the stores of God’s mercy
axe inexhaustible. Hence, fear comes to an end, while hope continues.

The Opinion Of Al-Majlisi
-------------------------

The great *muhaddith* al-’*Allamah* al-Majlisi (M) says, “The truth is
that as long as the devotee is in the abode of duty, i.e. this world, he
is bound to have both fear and hope. However, after his witnessing of
the matters of the Hereafter, one of them, of necessity, must surpass
the other.”

This writer says: That which has been said regarding the dominance of
fear or hope in the Hereafter does not agree with the above discussion
about the meaning of hope and fear. Even if supposedly true, it would
apply only to those of middle stations, for the state of the elect and
the *awliya*’ is different from that; for their witnessing of the Divine
majesty and glory and the irradiations (*tajilliyat*) of the Names of
love and beauty, which are attained in the heart, are not effaced by the
witnessing of the matters of the Hereafter; as a result their fear and
hope do not surpass each other.

Rather, the effects of Divine majesty and glory and the irradiations of
His beauty and love are greater in the world of the Hereafter, and the
awe resulting from God’s majesty is one of the spiritual pleasures,
which on reflection will not be found to be contrary to the noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَلَا إِنَّ أَوْلِيَاءَ اللَّهِ لَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely God’s friends - no fear shall be on them, neither shall they
sorrow.*** (***10:62***)

And that which has been said regarding fear, that it is not a spiritual
merit—it is not true of the awe in front of God’s greatness and glory,
for it is an excellence and is more intense in those of perfect and
complete character (*kamilun, mukammalun*) than others. And praise
belongs to Allah, for His majesty and His beauty, and may His
benedictions be upon Muhammad and his Family.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, ed. ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghifari, 4th edition, Dar
Mus’ab Dar al-Ta’aruf, Beirut, 1401 H., II, 67, hadith 1.

[^2]: Safinat al-Bihar, II, 180.

[^3]: Safinat al-Bihar, II, 180.

[^4]: Al-Kafi, II, 71, hadith 1.

[^5]: Al-Kafi, II, 68, hadith 5.

[^6]: Al-Kafi, II, 71, hadith 11, from al-Hasan ibn Sarah.

[^7]: Al-Kafi, hadith 12.

[^8]: Al-Kafi, hadith 2.


