Fifteenth Hadith: The Believer’s Trials And Tribulations
========================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسَنَدي المُتَّصِلِ إِلى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ رِضْوَانُ اللهِ
عَلَيْهِ، عَنْ عَلِيٍّ بْنِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، عَنِ ابْنِ
مَحْبُوبٍ، عَنْ سُمَاعَةَ، عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
قَالَ: إنَّ فِي كِتَابِ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ أنَّ أَشَدَّ
النَّاسِ بَلاءً النَّبِيُّونَ، ثُمَّ الوَصِيُّونَ، ثُمَّ الأمْثَلَ
فَالأمْثَلَ. وَإنَّمَا يُبْتَلى المُؤْمِنُ عَلَى قَدْرِ أَعْمَالِهِ
الحَسَنَةِ، فَمَنْ صَحَّ دِينُهُ وَحَسُنَ عَمَلُهُ اشْتَدَّ بَلاؤُهُ،
وَذَلِكَ أنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَمْ يَجْعَلِ الدُّنْيَا ثَوَاباً
لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلا عُقُوبَةً لِكَافِرٍ، وَمَنْ سَخُفَ دِينُهُ وَضَعُفَ
عَمَلُهُ قَلَّ بَلاؤُهُ، وَإنَّ البَلاءَ أَسْرَعُ إلَى المُؤْمِنِ
التَّقِيِّ مِنَ المَطَرِ إلَى قَرَارِ الأرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from his
father, from Ibn Mahbub, from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he (A) said:
“Verily, it is mentioned in the Book of ‘Ali that of all mankind the
prophets undergo the severest of trials, and after them the awsiya’, and
after them the elect to the extent of their nobility. Indeed, the
believer undergoes trial in proportion to his good deeds. So one whose
faith is sound and whose deeds are good, his trials are also more
severe. That is indeed because God Almighty did not make this world a
place for rewarding the believer and punishing the unbeliever. And one
whose faith is feeble and whose (good) deeds are few faces fewer
tribulations. Verily, tribulations hasten towards the believer with
greater speed than rainwater towards the earth’s depths.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

Some have said by *nas* (people, mankind) in this noble tradition and
its like are meant perfect human beings (*kamilun*) such as the prophets
and the *awsiya*’, and that in reality it is they who are the *nas*,
whereas other people are *lil-nas* (for the people), as mentioned in
some traditions.

However, that interpretation does not apply here and it seems proper
that mankind and people in general should have been meant in this place.
This is evident from the other traditions of this chapter of *al-Kafi,*
and if it has been said in some traditions that by *nas* are meant the
*kamilun,* it does not mean that the word has this meaning in every
place that it occurs. Also, *bala’* means trial, test and examination,
and it applies to the good as well as the bad among people, and the
lexicographers have stated this expressly. Al-Jawhari in *al-Sihah* says
in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالبَلاءُ الإخْتِبَارُ يَكُونُ بِالشَّرِّ وَالخَيْرِ. يُقاَلُ:
أَبْلاهُ اللهُ بَلاءً حَسَناً. وَأَبْلَيْتُهُ مَعْرُوفاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And God Almighty’ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلِيُبْلِيَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْهُ بَلَاءً حَسَنًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And that He may try the believers with a fair trial.*** (***8:17***)

All that with which God, to Whom belongs Glory and Majesty, tries His
servants is *bala’* and *ibtila’,* whether it is one of the diseases and
ailments, or adversities like poverty, humiliation and loss of worldly
fortunes, or a thing of an opposite kind such as acquisition of power
and glory, wealth, riches, high status, honor, and the like. However,
whenever *bala’, baliyyah* or *ibtila’* and the like are mentioned, it
is the former kind of things that are meant. Amthal means ‘nobler and
better’:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُقَالُ: هَذَا أَمْثَلُ مِنْ هَذَا. أَيْ أَفْضَلَ وَأَدْنَى إلَى
الخَيْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hence, the phrase (ثُمَّ الأمْثَلَ فَالأمْثَلَ) means that one who is
better and nobler after the prophets and the awsiya’ has to face a
severer kind of bala’ than the others, and those who are better and
nobler than others after them have to face a severer degree of trial.
The degree of the severity of bala’ is in accordance with the decree of
merit. This kind of expression (i.e., like ثُمَّ الأمْثَلَ فَالأمْثَلَ )
does not exist in Persian.

*‘Sukhf’* means ‘feebleness of the rational faculty’ or ‘foolishness’,
as mentioned by *al-Sihah,* and other lexicographical works. *Qarar*
means ‘resting place,’ as mentioned in the dictionaries:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القَرَارُ وَالقَرَارَةُ: مَا قَرَّ فِيهِ والمُطْمَئِنُّ مِنَ الأَرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The apology means that in the same way as the earth is the resting place
where rainwater comes to rest and abide, the believer is the resting
place of sufferings and tribulations, which rush toward him, come to
rest in him, and do not depart from him. God willing, we will mention
that which is needed for the exposition of this noble tradition in the
course of a few sections.

The Meaning Of Trial
--------------------

Let it be known to you that the human souls exist at a level of
potentiality from the beginning of their origin, their attachment to the
bodies, and their descent to the realm of corporeal existence
(*mulk*)*,* in respect of all things, including knowledge, good and evil
traits, and all kinds of perceptive and behavioral faculties. Gradually
they move from potentiality to actuality with the grace of God, the
Almighty and the Sublime. At first, weak impressions related to
particulars (as opposed to universals) emerge in the soul, such as
impressions of touch and other outward senses, moving from the lower to
the higher.

Following that, the inward perceptions also arise in it. However, all
its faculties exist only at a level of potentiality, and they do not
grow without proper stimulation. For instance, if the base kind of
faculties come to dominate it, it becomes disposed to ugliness and evil,
for its inner powers, such as *shahwah* (lust), *ghadhab* (anger), etc.,
impel it towards sin, licentiousness, aggression and tyranny. After
following them for some time it grows into a strange monster and a
highly grotesque devil.

However, since the grace and mercy of God Almighty have been
accompanying the Children of Adam since eternity, He bestowed upon them
two educators and teachers which are like two wings with which they can
fly from the depths of ignorance, defectiveness, ugliness and
wretchedness to the heights of knowledge, perfection; beauty and
felicity, and deliver themselves from the narrow valley of nature to
reach the expansive and open horizons of the realms of the spirit
(*malakut*)*.* The first of these is the faculty of intellect and
discernment, which is the inner teacher; and the second, the outward
teacher, is represented by the prophets and the divine guides who shove
the path of felicity as distinct from the ways of wretchedness.

None of these two can singly achieve this end without the other. For the
human intellect by itself can neither identify the paths of felicity and
wretchedness nor find the way to the hidden world and the realm of
Hereafterly existence. Similarly, the guidance of the prophets cannot be
effective without the exercise of the discerning faculties of the
intellect.

Thus God, the Beneficent and the Sublime, gave them these two educators
so that through them all the potentialities and hidden faculties and
capacities, latent in the human soul, should be realized and actualized.
God Almighty blessed them with these two great bounties in order to try
and test human beings, for it is through these bounties that individual
human beings are separated into the felicitous and the wretched, the
obedient and the rebellious, the perfect and the defective. And so the
Great *Wali* of God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِي بَعَثَهُ بِالحَقِّ، لَتُبَلْبَلُنَّ بَلْبَلَةً
وَلَتُغَرْبَلُنَّ غَرْبَلَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by Him Who sent him (the Prophet (S)) with the Truth, you shall
indeed be mixed and intermingled and then separated in the sieve (of
Divine trial and tribulation)?[^2]

In the noble *al-Kafi,* in the chapter relating to Divine test and trial
(*bab al-tamhis wa al-’imtihan*)*,* Ibn Abi Ya’fur reports Imam al-Sadiq
(A) as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: لا بُدَّ لِلنَّاسِ مِنْ أنْ يُمَحَّصُوا وَيُمَيَّزُوا
وَيُغَرْبَلُوا وَيُسْتَخْرَجَ فِي الغِرْبَالِ خَلْقٌ كَثِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is inevitable that mankind should be purified, separated and sieved
so that a great number is excluded by the sieve.[^3]

Also al-Kulayni reports with his *isnad* from Mansur the following
tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَبُو عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: يَا مَنْصُورُ إنَّ هَذَا
الأَمْرَ لا يَأْتِيكُمْ إلا بَعْدَ إِيَاسٍ وَلا واللهِ حَتَّى
تُمَيَّزُوا وَلا وَاللهِ حَتَّى تُمَحَّصُوا وَلا وَاللهِ حَتَّى
يَشْقَى مَنْ يَشْقَى وَيَسْعَدُ مَنْ يَسْعَدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (A) said, “O Mansur! Indeed this affair (i.e. the
appearance of al-Mahdi (A)) will not come to you except after despair
and not, by God, until you have been separated, and not, by God, until
you have been purified, and not, by God, until the wretched attain
wretchedness and the felicitous attain felicity.”[^4]

In another tradition, Abu al-Hasan (A) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُخْلَصُونَ كَمَا يُخْلَصُ الذَّهَبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You shall be purified in the way gold is purified.[^5]

In *al-Kafi, bab al-’ibtila’ wa al-’ikhtibar,* the following tradition
is reported with *isnad* from Imam al-Sadiq (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: مَا مِنْ قَبْضٍ وَلا بَسْطٍ إلا وَللهِ فِيهِ مَشِيئَةٌ
وَقَضَاءٌُ وَابْتِلاءٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He said, “There is no qabd (extension) and bast (contraction) except
that in it there is for God a purpose, a decree, and a trial.”[^6]

In another tradition he is (A) reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُ لَيْسَ شَيْءٌ فِيهِ قَبْضٌ أَوْ بَسْطٌ مِمَّا أَمَرَ اللهُ بِهِ
أَوْ نَهَى عَنْهُ إلا وَفِيهِ للهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ ابْتَلاءٌ وَقَضَاءٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed there is no qabd and bast in that which God has commanded or
forbidden except that there is in it from God a trial and a decree?[^7]

*Qabd* means *imsak* (withholding), *man’* (obstruction, prevention) and
*akhdh* (seizure). *Bast* is *nashr* (unfolding, spreading,
resurrection) and *‘ata’* (gift, bestowal). Hence every gift, expansion
and obstruction, and every command, prohibition and duty is for the sake
of trial.

Thus we came to know that the sending of prophets and the revelation of
heavenly scriptures is all for the sake of the separation of humanity,
of the separation of the wretched from the happy and the felicitous, of
the obedient from the sinful. And the meaning of Divine testing and
examination is this very separation of men from one another, not the
*knowledge* of their separateness, because the knowledge of God Almighty
is pre-eternal; it encompasses all things prior to their creation. The
*hukama’* have elaborately discussed the reality of trial and *ibtila*’
and it is beyond the scope of this exposition to mention their opinions.

In any case, the result of this trial and examination is the separation
of the felicitous from the wretched. In the course of it the proof
(*hujjah*) of God is established against the creatures. Thereafter,
their life, felicity and salvation, or their destruction and damnation
occurs after the establishment of the proof and testimony
(*bayyinah*)*,* and there remains no room for objection for anyone. One
who attains felicity and eternal life does so through Divine succor and
guidance, for God has bestowed all the means of attaining them.

Also, one who earns wretchedness and falls into destruction, following
Satan and his carnal self, his wretchedness and damnation are also
earned by him out of his own free will, because he does so despite the
availability of all the means of guidance and felicity. The conclusive
proof of God is established against him and there is no room for any
pretext. Hence the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***For it*** (***the soul***) ***is what it has earned and against it is
what it has merited.*** (***2:286***)

The Prophets And Divine Trial
-----------------------------

It was mentioned earlier that every act of the human being, or rather
every event that occurs in the realm of the body and is related to the
soul’s perceptions, leaves a kind of impression in the self. This is
true of both good and evil deeds (whose impression upon the soul is
mentioned in traditions as the appearance of a ‘white dot’ or a ‘black
dot’ respectively) as well as of pleasures and pains.

For instance, every experience of pleasure, derived either from food,
drink, sex or something else, leaves an impression upon the soul and
creates or increases the love and attachment for that kind of, pleasure
in the soul. The more that one plunges into such pleasures and lusts,
the greater becomes the self’s love and attachment for this world and
its reliance upon it. Thus the self is nourished with the love of the
world and trained in accordance with it.

The greater the sensual pleasures that it derives, the stronger become
the roots of this love; and the more the available means of comfort and
luxury, the sturdier becomes the tree of attachment to the world. And
the. more the soul’s attention is directed towards the world, the
greater is proportionately its negligence toward God and the world of
the Hereafter. Thus when this reliance upon the world becomes complete,
the soul assumes a worldly and materialistic form, and the absence of
attention towards God Almighty and the ‘realm of His munificence and
bounty also becomes total and complete. It is about such a soul that,
the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَخْلَدَ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ وَاتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He inclined towards the earth and followed his lust.*** (***7:176***)

The inevitable result of this inner immersion in the sea of pleasure and
lust is the love of the world, and the love of the world creates
antipathy towards that which is unlike it; attention towards the
corporeal realm (*mulk*) brings negligence towards the spiritual world
(*malakut*)*.*

On the contrary, if one has a bad and painful experience of something,
the impression of that experience creates an antipathy in the soul. The
stronger that impression is, the greater is that inward antipathy. For
instance, if after moving to a city one has to face there numerous
torments and ailments and undergo outer and inner adversities, he will
inevitably abhor that place. The greater the number of adversities that
he faces therein, the more will be his abhorrence for that place. If he
knows a better place, he will migrate to it, and if he is unable to make
the journey, his heart will migrate and go out to the city of his
liking.

Thus if a man faces adversities, pain and torments in this world and is
overtaken therein by waves of calamities and tribulations, he will
inevitably come to resent it. His attachment to it will diminish and he
will come to distrust it. If he believed in another world, a vast world
free of every kind of pain and grief, he will inevitably want to migrate
to it, and if he were unable to make the journey physically, he will
send his heart out to it.

Moreover, it is evident that all the spiritual, moral and behavioral
evils arise from the love of the world and negligence of God Almighty
and the Hereafter. The love of the world is the source of all sins, in
the same way as the love of God, the aspiration for the eternal abode of
His bounty, the renunciation of the world and absence of reliance upon
and trust in its adornments are the source of all spiritual cures and
moral and behavioral reform.

After these preliminaries we come to know that whenever God Almighty has
a greater consideration and love for someone, and when someone is the
object of the mercy of His Sacred Essence to a greater extent, He
restrains him from this world and its charms with the waves of calamity
and tribulation, so that his soul turns away in disgust from the world
and its adornments and turns his face and his heart, to the extent of
his faith, toward the world of the Hereafter. If there weren’t any other
reason except this one for endurance of severe calamities it would have
been sufficient, and a noble tradition also points towards this matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
لَيَتَعَاهَدُ المُؤْمِنَ بِالبَلاءِ كَمَا يَتَعَاهَدُ الرَّجُلُ
أَهْلَهُ بِالهَدِيَّةِ مِنَ الغَيْبَةِ وَيَحْمِيهِ الدُّنْيَا كَمَا
يَحْمِي الطَّبِيبُ المَرِيضَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Baqir (A) said “Verily, God Almighty treats the believer with
tribulations in the same way as a man treats his family with gifts after
an absence (upon a journey), and He restrains him from the world in the
same way as the physician prescribes restraints for the sick man.”[^8]

The same thing is said in another *hadith*, and one should not imagine
that God’s love and the great care of His Sacred Essence for some people
is - God be our refuge - extravagant and pointless. Rather, with every
step that a faithful servant of God takes towards Him, God’s grace turns
towards him and the Almighty moves closer to him. The similitude of the
degrees of faith and the availability of the means of Divine succor is
that of a man moving with a lamp in darkness; with every step that he
takes forward, some more of the path in front of him is illuminated,
which allows him to take another step forward. With every step that a
man takes forward on the path of the Hereafter, that path appears
clearer to him and God’s grace upon him increases, preparing the means
of attention towards the world of Divine proximity and of antipathy
towards the world of separation and distance.

The pre-eternal grace of God Almighty upon the prophets and the
*awliya’* is on account of His pre-eternal knowledge of their obedience
during their terms of duty. For instance, if you have two children about
whom you have prior knowledge in their childhood that one of them will
bring you satisfaction while the other will grow up to cause you
displeasure and resentment, your love for the obedient child would be
greater from the very beginning.

God’s Remembrance
-----------------

Another point relating to the severity of the tribulations of the elect
among God’s servants is that they are made to remember God on account of
these adversities and tribulations and to pray and lament in front of
His Sacred Essence. This makes them accustomed to remember Him and keep
their thoughts busy with Him. It is natural for human beings to seek and
learn upon what they think is a source of support in times of
‘adversity. In times of comfort and welfare they forget and neglect it.
And since the elect know no source of support other than God, their
attention turns towards Him, they putting their sole reliance in His
sacred station, and God Almighty, also, with the love that He has for
them, prepares the means of that undivided attention and reliance.

However, this, as well as the foregoing point, is not true of the
prophets and the perfect *awliya’*, for their station is too high in
sanctity and their heart too firm in faith for them to develop
attachment for worldly things on account of such things (as comfort and
welfare) or for them to waver in their sole reliance upon God. This may
be so because the prophets and the perfect *awliya*’ have, through their
inward light and spiritual experience, ascertained that God Almighty has
no regard for this world and its adornments and that everything therein
is base and lowly in the eyes of His Sacred Essence, and for this reason
they have preferred poverty to wealth, tribulation to comfort and ease,
and adversity to that which is unlike it. Several noble traditions also
support this view.

It is mentioned in the *hadith* that Gabriel brought the key of the
earth’s treasures to the Seal of the Prophets (S) and said to him (S)
that should he (S) accept it, nothing would diminish from his (S)
Hereafterly stations. But the Prophet (S) did not accept it for the sake
of humility before God Almighty and chose poverty.

In the noble *al-Kafi*, al-Kulayni, with a chain of transmitters
reaching up to Imam al-Sadiq (A), reports the Imam (A) as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الكَافِرَ لَيَهُونُ عَلَى اللهِ حَتَّى لَوْ سَأَلَهُ الدُّنْيَا
بِمَا فِيهَا أَعْطَاهُ ذَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed God has so little regard for the unbeliever that should he ask of
Him the world and that which is in it, He would give that to him.[^9]

And this is due to the worthlessness of the world in the eyes of the
Almighty. It is mentioned in the *hadith* that from the time that the
Almighty created the corporeal world, He did not look at it with favor.

Another point related to the severity of the believer’s tribulations
that has been mentioned in traditions is that there are certain stations
for the believers which they cannot attain without undergoing suffering,
pain and affliction. It is possible that these afflictions are the
corporeal forms of the degrees of renunciation of the world and devotion
to God, and it is also possible that these sufferings have celestial
forms (*suwar al-malakuti*) which cannot be realized without their
occurrence in the corporeal world and afflictions therein. Imam al-Sadiq
(A), in a noble tradition of *al-Kafi* with a continuous chain of
transmission going up to him, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: إنَّهُ لَيَكُونُ لِلْعَبْدِ مَنْزِلَةٌ عِنْدَ اللهِ فَمَا
يَنَالهََُا إلا بِإحْدَى خِصْلَتَيْنِ؛ إمَّا بِذَهَابِ مَالِهِ أوْ
بِبَلِيَّةٍ فِي جَسَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, the servant has certain stations near God that cannot be
realized without one of these two attributes: either the loss of his
wealth or affliction in his body.[^10]

In a tradition relating to the martyrdom of the Doyen of the Martyrs
(Imam al-Husayn) (A) it is mentioned that he (A) saw the Prophet (S) in
a dream. The Prophet (S) said to that *mazlum*, “There is a station for
you in the Paradise which you cannot attain except through martyrdom.”
The celestial form of martyrdom cannot be attained without its
occurrence in the corporeal realm, as has been demonstrated in the
higher sciences. It is mentioned in *mutawatir* traditions that for
every action there is a corresponding form in the other world, and al
Imam al-Sadiq (A) is reported to have said in *al-Kafi* that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ عَظِيمَ الأَجْرِ لَمَعَ عَظِيمِ البَلاءِ. وَمَا أَحَبَّ اللهُ
قَوْماً إلا ابْتَلاهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The greatness of man’s reward goes with the greatness of suffering, and
God did not love a people but that He subjected them to suffering.[^11]

There are many traditions containing this theme.

The Prophets’ Suffering
-----------------------

The great *muhaddith* al-Majlisi (M) says:

These traditions relating to the tribulations of the prophets, which
have been narrated both through Sunni and Shi’i chains of transmission
(turuq), clearly indicate that the prophets and the awliya’ differ from
others in respect of ailments and bodily afflictions. Rather, they have
a greater right than others to suffer on account of their great reward
which is responsible for the loftiness of their stations. And this
suffering is not only not contrary to their station, it even causes the
confirmation of their affair. Should they not undergo afflictions,
despite the manifestation of miracles and extraordinary things at their
hands, people might say such things about them as the Christians did
about their prophet. This explanation is also mentioned in traditions.

The subtle researcher and the great, sacred philosopher al-Tusi, may God
fill his grave with aroma, states in *al-Tajrid*: “Of the things that
the prophets should be free from is that which is regarded as
abhorrent.” And the *Allamah* of the *ulama* of Islam (al-*Allamah*
al-Hilli) (R) adds in *Sharh al-Tajrid* that the prophets should be free
from such abhorrent diseases as absence of urinary control, leprosy and
leukoderma, for their abhorrent character is contrary to the aim of
prophecy.

This writer says: The station of prophethood is subject to spiritual
levels and excellences and has no relation to corporeality. Hence
physical diseases and defects do no harm to the spiritual station of the
prophets and affliction with abhorrent diseases diminishes nothing from
the sublimity and greatness of their station, although they may not
contribute in a way of confirmation to their (already established)
excellences and degrees of sublimity. But that which these two
researchers have said is also not devoid of validity. This is because
the common people cannot make a distinction between the two stations (of
spirituality and corporeality) and imagine that physical defectiveness
is related or caused by spiritual defectiveness.

Hence they consider some defects as being contrary to the high and great
station of the prophets. Hence Divine grace dictates that the prophets
who are messengers and bringers of Divine *Shari’ah* should not be
afflicted with such diseases as are considered disgusting and abominable
by the people. Therefore, the absence of this kind of affliction is not
because it is harmful to the station of prophethood, but for the sake of
maximizing the effectiveness of the prophetic mission of communicating
the Divine teachings (*tabligh*)*.* Hence there is nothing wrong if some
prophets without a *Shari’ah*, great *awliya*’ and the faithful are
afflicted with this kind of afflictions, as in the case of Hadrat Ayyub
(Job) and Habib al-Najjar. There are many traditions concerning the
affliction of Hadrat Ayyub (A), of which are the following two:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُوِيَ فِي تَفْسِيرِ عَلِيِّ بْنِ إبْرَاهِيمَ عَنْ أبِي بَصِيرٍ عَنْ
أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فِي حَدِيثٍ طَوِيلٍ، قَالَ:
فَسَلَّطَهُ عَلَى بَدَنِهِ مَا خَلا عَقْلَهُ وَعَيْنَهُ فَنَفَخَ فِيهِ
إبْلِيسُ فَصَارَ قَرْحَةً وَاحِدَةً مِنْ قَرْنِهِ إلَى قَدَمِهِ.
فَبَقِيَ فِي ذَلِكَ دَهْراً طَوِيلاً يَحْمِدُ اللهَ وَيَشْكُرُهُ
حَتَّى وَقَعَ فِي بَدَنِهِ الدُّودُ. وَكَانَتْ تَخْرُجُ مِنْ بَدَنِهِ
فَيَرُّدَهَا وَيَقُولُ لَهَا ارْجِعِي إلَى مَوْضِعِكِ الَّذِي خَلَقَكِ
اللهُ مِنْهُ. وَنَتُنَ حَتَّى أَخْرَجَهُ أهْلُ القَرْيَةِ مِنَ
القَرْيَةِ وَأَلْقَوْهُ فِي المَزْبَلَةِ خَارِجَ القَرْيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim in a long tradition narrates on the authority of Abu
Basir that Imam al-Sadiq (A) said, “Then his whole body, excepting his,
intellect and his eyes, was subjected to the disease. Then Iblis blew
upon it and it became a single wound extending from his head to feet. He
(Job) remained for a period in that condition, praising and thanking
God, until it became infested with worms. Whenever a worm fell off from
his body, he would put it back, saying to it, “Return to your place,
from where God created you.” And it began to stench until his townsfolk
expelled him from his town and his food came from the garbage thrown
outside the town.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي الكَافِي بإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي بَصِيرٍ، عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قُلْتُ لَهُ: ﴿فَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ
فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّهِ مِنْ الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ. إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ
لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَلَى رَبِّهِمْ
يَتَوَكَّلُونَ.﴾ فَقَالَ: يَا أَبَا مُحَمَّدٍ؛ يُسَلَّطُ وَاللهِ مِنَ
المُؤْمِنِ عَلَى بَدَنِهِ وَلا يُسَلَّطُ عَلَى دِينِهِ. قَدْ سُلِّطَ
عَلَى أَيُّوبَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فَشَوَّهَ خَلْقَهُ وَلَمْ يُسَلَّطْ
عَلَى دِينِهِ وَقَدْ يُسَلَّطُ مِنَ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَى أَبْدَانِهِمْ
وَلا يُسَلَّطُ عَلَى دِينِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports from Abu Basir that he asked Imam
al-Sadiq (A) about the verse, “When thou recitest the Qur’an, seek
refuge in God from the accursed Satan, he has no authority over those
who believe and trust in their Lord; (his authority is over those who
take him for their guardian and ascribe associates to God) (16:98-100)”
The Imam said, “O Abu Muhammad, by God, He gives authority to him
(Satan) over the believer’s body but not over his faith (din). He gave
him (Satan) authority over Ayyub and Satan disfigured him physically,
but He did not give authority to him over his faith. And He does give
him authority over the faithful’s bodies but not over their faith.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ نَاجِيَةٍ قَالَ: قُلْتُ لأَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ: إنَّ المُغِيرَةَ يَقُولُ: إنَّ المُؤْمِنَ لا يُبْتَلَى
بِالجُذَامِ وَلا بِالبَرَصِ وَلا بِكَذَا وَلا بِكَذَا؟ فَقَالَ: إنْ
كَانَ لَغَافِلاً عَنْ صَاحِبِ يَاسِينَ. إنَّهُ كَانَ مُكَنَّعاً. ثُمَّ
رَدَّ أَصَابِعَهُ فَقَالَ: كَأَنِّي أَنْظُرُ إلَى تَكْنِيعِهِ
أَتَاهُمْ فَأَنْذَرَهُمْ، ثُمَّ عَادَ إلَيْهِمْ مِنَ الغَدِ
فَقَتَلُوهُ. ثُمَّ قَالَ: إنَّ المُؤْمِنَ يُبْتَلَى بِكُلِّ بَلِيَّةٍ
وَيَمُوتُ بِكُلِّ مِيتَةٍ إلا أنَّهُ لا يُقْتُلُ نَفْسَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Najiyah says, “I said to Abu Ja’far (A) that al-Mughirah says that a
believer is never afflicted with leprosy, leukoderma and such other
ailments (is that true?) The Imam replied, ‘Didn’t he know that the
Sahib Ya Sin (Habib al-Najjar, the man mentioned in Surat Ya Sin) was
mutilated (mukanna’)?’ He (A) closed his fingers and said, ‘It is as if
I see him go to his people in his mutilated state (takannu’) to warn
them and come back the next day, when they killed him.’ Then he added,
‘Verily, the believer suffers all kinds of afflictions and dies in all
manners of dying except suicide.’ “[^12]

*Sahib Ya Sin* is Habib al-Najjar and *takannu*’ (the word is with nun
in most of the manuscripts), according to al-Majlisi, means shortening
and mutilation. He adds that it was probably leprosy which had resulted
in the shortening of his fingers. However, this, as well as many other
*ahadith*, indicate that the believers and prophets are sometimes
afflicted with abominable diseases on account of some higher expediency,
although there are some other traditions which negate the disfigurement
of Hadrat Ayyub’s body and its petrifaction, and not much benefit lies
in discussing them further with a view to affecting a reconciliation. On
the whole, these kind of diseases do no harm to the condition of
believers and do not diminish anything from the station of the prophets
(A) rather, they lead to the elevation of their station, and God
Almighty knows best the truth.

The World Is Not A Place Of Reward Or Punishment
------------------------------------------------

Let it be known to you that this world, due to its defective, feeble and
weak nature, is neither the abode of the reward of God Almighty nor the
place of His chastisement and punishment. This is so because the abode
of Divine munificence is a realm whose bounties are pure, unadulterated
with torment, and its comforts are not mixed with pain and grief. Such
bounties are not possible in this world, which is an abode where
contradictories throng together and each of whose bounties is mixed with
numerous kinds of pains, hardships and torments.

Rather, as the philosophers have said, pleasure in this world lies in
avoiding pain. It may be said that even its pleasures cause pain and
every one of its pleasures is followed by pain and hardship. Rather, the
very material of this world lacks the capacity to accept absolute
goodness and unadulterated bounty. In the same way, its pains and
hardships, torments and punishments are also mixed; each of its pains
and hardships carries within itself some goodness and bounty, and none
of its afflictions and adversities is unmixed.

The very material of this world lacks the capacity to accept pure,
absolute punishment, whereas the abode of Divine chastisement is a place
where punishment is pure and absolute; its pains and afflictions are not
like those of this world, which while they afflict one member of the
body are absent from the other members. While the healthy members are in
comfort and ease, the afflicted member suffers pain and agony. The noble
tradition partly refers to what we have stated here when it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَلِكَ أنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَمْ يَجْعَلِ الدُّنْيَا ثَوَاباً
لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلا عُقُوبَةً لِكَافِرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, the reason that the believer is afflicted in this world with
tribulation is that God Almighty has made it neither the place of His
reward for the believer nor the place of chastisement for the infidel.
This world is the abode of duty and the farm of the Hereafter. It is a
place of trade and earning whereas the Hereafter is the abode of reward
and punishment, of bounty and damnation.

Those who expect that God Almighty would immediately get hold of one who
commits some sin or indecency in this world or perpetrates some
injustice or aggression against someone, and cut his hand off and
expunge him from the realm of existence, are unaware that their
expectation is contrary to this world’s order and opposed to God’s wont
and *sunnah*.

Here is the place of trial and the zone of the separation of the
wretched from the felicitous and the sinful from the obedient. Here is
the realm of the manifestation of deeds, not the abode of the emergence
of the results of personal deeds and qualities. If occasionally God
Almighty does take hold of an oppressor, it may be said that it is due
to the Almighty’s mercy for that oppressor (for it stops him from
sinning further). For, when God Almighty leaves the sinful and the
tyrants to themselves, His wrath takes the form of *istidraj,* the
gradual seizing.

Hence, God Almighty declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿سَنَسْتَدْرِجُهُمْ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ. وَأُمْلِي لَهُمْ
إِنَّ كَيْدِي مَتِينٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

(***And those who cry lies to Our signs***)***, We will draw them on
little by little whence they know not; and I respite them - assuredly My
guile is firm.*** (***7:182-183***)

And He also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَا يَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنَّمَا نُمْلِي لَهُمْ خَيْرٌ
لِأَنْفُسِهِمْ إِنَّمَا نُمْلِي لَهُمْ لِيَزْدَادُوا إِثْمًا وَلَهُمْ
عَذَابٌ مُهِينٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And let not the unbelievers suppose that the respite We grant them is
better for them; We grant them respite only that they may increase in
sin; and there awaits them a humiliating chastisement.*** (***3:178***)

In *Majma’ al-bayan,* this tradition is cited from Imam al-Sadiq (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا أَحْدَثَ العَبْدُ ذَنْباً جُدِّدَ لَهُ نِعْمَةٌ فَيَدَعُ
الإسْتِغْفَارَ فَهُوَ الإسْتِدْرَاجُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imam (A) said, “When a person commits a sin and the bounty (that he
had received) is renewed for him, he leaves off asking for forgiveness
(istighfar), and this is al-’istidraj (as mentioned in verse 7:182).”

At the end of the noble tradition, the Imam (A) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ سَخُفَ دِينُهُ وَضَعُفَ عَمَلُهُ قَلَّ بَلاؤُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And one whose faith is feeble and his intellect is weak, his tribulation
is also slight.

This shows that tribulations are both bodily and spiritual, for the
persons of weak intellects and feeble sensibility are secure from
spiritual tribulations and intellectual suffering in proportion to their
intellectual weakness and the feebleness of their sensibility.

On the contrary, those with more complete intellects and acuter
sensibility have to undergo spiritual tribulations more intensely in
proportion to the perfectness and acuteness of their intellect and
sensibility. Perhaps it was for this reason that the Holy Messenger (S)
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أُوذِيَ نَبِيٌّ مِثْلَ مَا أُوذِيتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

No prophet was tormented to the extent that I was.

This complaint of the Prophet (S) refers to this point, for whoever
perceives the greatness and glory of the Lord to a greater extent and
knows the sacred station of God Almighty more than others, he suffers
more and is tormented to a greater extent by the sins of the creatures
and their offences against the Lord’s sanctity.

Also, one who has a greater love and compassion for the creatures of God
is tormented to a greater extent by their crooked and wretched condition
and ways. And, of course, the Seal of the Prophets (S) was more perfect
in all these stations and higher than all of the prophets and the
*awliya’* in respect of his degree of excellence and perfection. Hence
his torment and suffering was greater than that of any one of them.
There is also another explanation of the Holy Messenger’s statement,
whose mention is not appropriate for this place.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهُ العَالِمُ وَلَهُ الحَمْدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And God knows best and to Him belongs all the praise.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, vol. II, p.259, hadith No.29.

[^2]: Nahj al-balaghah, Khutbah No.16.

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi, vol II, p.370, hadith No.2.

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi, vol II, p.370, hadith No.2.

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, hadith No.4:

[^6]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. I, p.152.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. I, p.152.

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. II, p.255, hadith No.17.

[^9]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. II, p.255, hadith No.17.

[^10]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. II, p.255.

[^11]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. II, p.255.

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. II, p.255.


