Sixteenth Hadith: Patience (Sabr)
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ يَعْقُوبَ الكُلَيْنِي رَضِيَ اللهُ عَنْهُ عَنْ عِدَّةٍ
مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا، عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ خَالِدٍ، عَنْ
أَبِيهِ، عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ النُّعْمَانِ، عَنْ عَبْدِاللهِ بْنِ
مَسْكَانَ، عَنْ أَبِي بَصِيرٍ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: إنَّ الحُرَّ حُرٌّ عَلَى جَمِيعِ
أحْوَالِهِ. إنْ نَابَتْهُ نَائِبَةٌ صَبَرَ لَهَا وَإنْ تَدَاكَّتْ
عَلَيْهِ المَصَائِبُ لَمْ تَكْسِرْهُ وَإنْ أُسِرَ وَقُهِرَ
وَاسْتُبْدِلَ بِاليُسْرِ عُسْراً كَمَا كَانَ يُوسُفُ الصِّدِّيقُ
الأمِينُ صَلَوَاتُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ لَمْ يَضْرُرْ حُرِّيَّتَهُ أَنْ
اسْتُعْبِدَ وَقُهِرَ وَأُسِرَ وَلَمْ تَضْرُرْهُ ظُلْمَةُ الجُبِّ
وَوَحْشَتُهُ وَمَا نَالَهُ أَنْ مَنَّ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ فَجَعَلَ
الجَبَّارَ العَاتِيَ لَهُ عَبْداً بَعْدَ إذْ كَانَ [لَهُ] مَالِكاً.
فَأَرْسَلَهُ وَرَحِمَ بِهِ أُمَّةً وَكَذَلِكَ الصَّبْرُ يُعَقِّبُ
خَيْراً.فَاصْبِرُوا وَوَطِّنُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ عَلى الصَّبْرِ
تُؤْجَرُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from a group of his teachers, from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, from his father, from ‘Ali ibn al-Nu’man,
from ‘Abd Allah ibn Muskan, from Abu Basir, who says, “I heard Abu ‘Abd
Allah (A) say, ‘A free human being is free in all circumstances. Should
a misfortune befall him he bears it with patience (sabr). If calamities
strike him, they don’t shatter him. If taken captive and subdued; he
turns hardship into ease, as was the case of Joseph, the truthful and
trustworthy (A). His freedom saved him from harm, although he was
enslaved, subdued, and imprisoned. The darkness of the pit, the dread
and whatever befell him did him no harm, until God favored him and made
the insolent tyrant, who had been his master, his slave. Then God made
him His apostle and through him was merciful to a people. In this way
patience is followed by good. So be patient and reconcile yourself to
patience in order to be rewarded.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

*Naibah’* is the singular of *nawa’ib,* which means ‘events’ and
‘accidents’ and according to *al-Sihah* means misfortune (*musibah*)*.
Dakka* is synonymous with *daqqa,* which means ‘to is conjoined to
pound’, crush’, ‘grind’, and ‘to knock’. *Al-Sihah* says: دَكَكْتُ
الشَّيْءَ أَدُكُّهُ دَكّاً إِذَا ضَرَبْتُهُ وَكَسَرْتُهُ حَتَّى
سَوَّيْتُهُ بِالأَرْضِ It also remarks, تَدَاكَّتْ عَلَيْهِ: أَيْ
تَدَاقَّتْ.

This world also gives the sense of swarming, crowding and pressing
together (*ijtima’* and *izdiham*), as mentioned in *al-Nihayah*. In a
*hadith*, Amir al-Muminin (A) is reported to have said:[^2] ثُمَّ
تَدَاكَكْتُمْ عَلَيَّ تَدَاكُكَ الإبِلِ الهِيمِ عَلَى حِياضِها means,
إزْدَحَمْتُمْ.

According to *al-Nihayah, dakka* also means *casara* (to break). In the
present noble tradition, the former meaning is more appropriate in view
of the phrase لَمْ تَكْسِرْهُ following it, although the second meaning
also fits here. The prepositionو in وإنْ أَسِرَ signifies wusliyyah and
is وَقُهِرَ وَاسْتُبْدِلَ conjoined to it. Al Majlisi (M) states that it
is وَاسْتُبْدِلَ بِاليُسْرِ عُسْراً in some manuscripts, and is
accordingly conjoined to لَمْ تَكْسِرْهُ , thus making it the result of
sabr.

The phrase أَنْ اسْتُعْبِدَ is the passive participle and لَمْ يَضْرُرْ
is the active subject of the verbal sentence. In Mir’at al Uqul it is
اسْتُعْبِدَ , and appears as اسْتُعْبِدَ in Wasa’il al-Shi’ah. It seems
that it is a calligraphers error in the manuscript of the Mir’at ,
although its meaning is not totally invalid. However, that which is in
Wasa’il is more in agreement with the totality and content of the noble
tradition. وَمَا نَالَهُ is conjoined to ظُلْمَةُ الجُبِّ , implying
that Joseph was not harmed by that which he suffered at his brothers
hands, nor by grief and adversity.

As to the phrase, أَنْ مَنَّ اللهُ , it appears that it involves the
ellipsis of إلى (until) and relates to لَمْ تَضْرُرْ in two possible yet
conflicting ways. Al-Majlisi (M) has mentioned several possible meanings
of it whose description is not devoid of prolixity. The meaning of the
master of Joseph (A) becoming his slave is that he became subservient
and obedient to him (A).

Desire, The Source Of All Bondage
---------------------------------

Let it be known to you that in a man subjugated to the domination of
lust and carnal desire, his servitude, servility and indignity increase
in proportion to the intensity of their domination; for servitude means
complete submission and obedience. The man obedient to lusts and
subjugated to the carnal self is their obedient slave. He submissively
obeys whatever they command and is a humble and obedient servant and
slave in front of them. This obedience reaches a limit when he prefers
obedience to them to obedience to the Creator of the heavens and the
earth. He prefers their service to the service of the real King of kind.

In that state, honor, dignity and freedom depart from his heart on which
then settle the dusts of indignity, destitution and servitude. He
becomes humble before worldly people and his heart bows down in
prostration before them and before the possessors of worldly power and
glory. In order to achieve the objects of his carnal desires and to
satisfy the craving of his belly and underneath, he submits to all kinds
of disgrace and indignities.

As long as he remains in the bondage of lust and the carnal self, he
does not abstain from violating the demands of honor, freedom and
chivalry. He readily submits to the obedience of anyone, and is willing
to accept favor from any insignificant person, as soon as he sees the
probability of attaining his objective through his means, even if that
person is the meanest and basest of all creation and even if the
probability involved is something imaginary. And it is said that mere
fancy is the proof of the greedy.

The servants of lust and mundane ambition have put on the shackles of
slavery to carnal desire. They are ready to be slaves of anyone whom
they know or imagine to be of worldly benefit to them. If verbally they
declare themselves to be chaste and honorable, such lip service to honor
is mere deception, for their words and deeds contradict such a
declaration. This servility and captivity is a thing which always causes
man to undergo suffering, pain, dishonor and distress. Hence a man with
a sense of honor and dignity should seriously strive to cleanse himself
of this abomination by all means and deliver himself from this bondage.
Such purification and emancipation can only be attained through a
fundamental treatment, which takes place through curative knowledge and
action.

As to curative action, it consists of religious exercises and opposition
to the carnal self. Over a period of time these free the soul from
excessive love of the world and the pursuit of carnal lust and desire,
until it becomes accustomed to virtues and moral excellences. As to
curative knowledge, it lies in making oneself understand and causing
this to enter into his heart that other creatures are as weak, needy,
dependent and impoverished as himself. He should tell his heart, “Since
all other creatures are, like me, dependent, in matters big and small,
on Him Who is absolutely Able and Powerful, they are not capable of
fulfilling anyone’s needs.

They are too insignificant to deserve the soul’s attention or the
heart’s humbleness. The same Powerful Being that has bestowed honor,
dignity and riches upon them is capable of bestowing these on anybody.
In fact, it is a matter of shame that man should submit so much to
dishonor and indignity for the sake of his belly and his lusts as to
accept the favor of an insignificant, impoverished, powerless and lowly
creature devoid of wisdom and vision. If at all you should seek anyone’s
favor, then seek the favor of the Absolutely Self-Sufficient, the
Creator of the heavens and the earth, for if you pay attention to His
sacred Essence and make your heart humble in His presence, that will
liberate you from both the worlds and emancipate you from the servitude
of creatures, as it has been said: [^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العُبُودِيَّةُ جَوْهَرَةٌ كٌنْهُهَا الرُّبُوبِيَّةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, the inner, invaluable essence of servitude to God is freedom
and lordship. Thus servitude to God, attention to the unique focus of
all being, and subjugation of all powers and dominations to the
Sovereignty of God create such a state in the devotee’s heart that he
comes to wield power and kingdom over all the worlds. His spirit rises
to such heights of sublimity that he does not pay obeisance to anyone
except the Sacred Divine Essence, and even if, accidentally, he should
be under the domination and power of anyone, that does not shake his
heart, which preserves its independence and freedom, as in the case of
Joseph (A) and Luqman (A) whose apparent subservience and servitude did
not harm their free and freedom-seeking character.

And there may be many a powerful despot and king, who having no trace of
inner freedom, dignity and honor in their character, are base servants
and obedient slaves of lust and carnal desire and who obsequiously
ingratiate themselves to creatures.

Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (A) is reported to have said in the course of a
discourse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي لآنَفُ أنْ أَطْلُبَ الدُّنْيَا مِنْ خَالِقِهَا، فَكَيْفَ مِنْ
مَخْلُوقٍ مِثْلِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am ashamed to ask anything of worldly things from their Creator, so
how can I seek them from creatures like myself?[^4]

My dear, if you are not ashamed of seeking the world, at least don’t ask
for it of weak creatures like yourself. Do understand that creatures
have no power to do anyone any worldly good. I admit that you might have
succeeded in attracting someone’s attention through a thousand indignity
and cajolery, but his will has no effect in the kingdom of God and no
one has any role in the dominion of the King of kings.

Hence do not degrade yourself so much by flattering insignificant
creatures for the sake of a passing world and for passing and paltry
desires. Don’t forget your Lord and preserve your freedom. Remove the
shackles of servitude and captivity and never forget Him under any
circumstance, for, as stated in the noble tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الحُرَّ حُرٌّ عَلَى جَمِيعِ أحْوَالِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The freeman is free in all circumstances.

Let it be known to you that contentment comes from the heart and the
absence of neediness is a spiritual state, unrelated to external matters
that lie outside the human self. I have myself seen certain persons
amongst rich and wealthy classes who say thins which no honorable poor
man would say and whose statements are shameful. The hearts of those
wretches were covered by the dusts of dishonor and destitution.

The Jews, who, in proportion to their number, are the richest and
wealthiest of all people on the earth, have faces that manifest
debasement, poverty, indigence, beggarliness, hunger and wretchedness.
They spend all their lives in hardship, indignity, destitution and
squalor. This is nothing but their inner poverty and spiritual
abasement.

I have seen amongst pious and darvish-like persons some individuals
whose hearts are so magnanimously free of want and need that they look
at the entire world with indifference and consider none except the
Sacred Essence of God Almighty as deserving of making a request. You too
study carefully the conditions of worldly and ambitious people and you
will find that their lack of self-respect and their degradation in
flattering others is greater than that of others and their
obsequiousness in front of people is greater.

Those (pseudo mystic masters) who are in pursuit of disciples and claim
to guide others, suffer indignities and put up with degrading flattery
and ingratiation for some day’s satisfaction of their carnal lusts. The
heart of the seeker of disciples and adherents is humbler in front of
the disciple than that of the latter in front of him. This is because of
the difference in the character of their respect for one another. While
the disciple’s humbleness and affection is of a spiritual and godly
character, the master’s affection has a mundane and satanic character:

These that have been mentioned are the worldly forms of these evils and
indignities. But were the curtains to rise, the real spiritual forms of
these servitudes, bondages and chains of carnal lusts and desires will
reveal themselves. Perhaps the seventy-cubit chain, of which God
Almighty has informed us, a chain with which we shall be shackled and
bound in that world, is the Hereafterly form of this very servitude and
subjugation to the domination of Passion and Anger. And God Almighty
declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا حَاضِرًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they shall find all they wrought present.*** (***18:49***)

And He also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ
وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

(***God charges no soul save to its capacity;***) ***standing to its
account is what it has earned, and against its account what it has
merited.***(***2:286***)

That is, that which we obtain in the other world is a form of our own
deeds.

Therefore, break away the lengthy chains of lust and desire. Remove the
locks that bar the heart’s entrance and set yourself free from bondage.
Live like a free human being in this world so that you may be free in
the other world; otherwise, you will encounter there the intolerable
Hereafterly form of this bondage. The hearts of the saints of God,
despite their absolute and total freedom from bondage, were so much
dreadful of the final outcome and so much full of lamentations that it
amazes all minds.

I am aware that the matters mentioned in these pages are of a common and
repetitive character. However, there is nothing wrong in such
repetition, for constant reminding of the self and repetition of the
truth is a desirable thing. This is why repetition has been considered
desirable in prayers, supplications, worship and rituals. The main
purpose is to accustom the self by means of repetitive exercises.

My dear, don’t be deluded; understand that as long as man remains in the
bondage of the carnal self and its desires and as long as the lengthy
chains of Passion and Anger are around his neck, he cannot attain to any
of the spiritual stations; the inward authority of the soul and the
domination of its higher will shall not manifest itself. Also, the
station of spiritual independence and dignity, which is one of the
highest of spiritual stations, shall not be realized. Rather, this
bondage and slavery restrains man from revolting against the authority
of the carnal self. And when the authority of the carnal self and Satan
becomes consolidated in the inward realm and all the faculties of the
self become their obedient slaves, becoming submissive and humble in
front of them, they do not remain satisfied with mere sins.

Little by little, they draw man from minor to major sins and from there
to weakening of beliefs, from there to darkening of the intellect, from
there to the constricted path of denial and contestation (of the truth),
and from there to the hostility and enmity of the prophets and the
*awliya’*. Throughout these stages, the self, which is their slave and
under their domination, cannot disobey them. At last this obedience and
captivity becomes so severe that it may take man to the most dangerous
point.

Hence, the intelligent man with sympathy for himself must try by all
means to liberate himself from this slavery, and as long as there is
opportunity and his powers are intact and his life, health and youth are
there and his faculties have not been totally subjugated (by Satan and
the carnal self), he must rise to undertake this task. For some time he
must exercise vigilance over himself, study his own inner states,
reflect about the conditions of those who have passed away and faced an
evil fate, and make his heart understand the passing character of
worldly life. He must awaken his heart and inform it of the truth
narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّنْيَا مَزْرَعَةُ الآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The world is the farm of the Hereafter.[^5]

That is, if we do not sow the seeds of righteous deeds in the few days
of our life here, the opportunity will be lost for ever. When we reach
the threshold of the other world and death seizes us, deeds come to an
end., hopes are extinguished. If, God forbid, we continue to remain in
the slavery of lusts and the captivity of various carnal desires until
the Angel of Death arrives, it is possible that Satan may achieve his
ultimate objective of wresting away our faith. He may treat us in such a
fashion and metamorphose our hearts to such an extent that we may depart
from the world as enemies of God and His prophets and *awliya*’. If that
happens, God knows what calamities, what darkness and what terrors await
us.

So, O base self! O negligent heart! Awake from thy sleep and arise to
confront this enemy who for years has subdued you and made a captive of
you, who drags you whenever he wants and commands you to perform every
ugly and destructive deed! Arise and break these bonds! Sever these
chains! Seek thy freedom and throw away this disgrace and indignity.
Wear the girdle of servitude to God, the Almighty and the Glorious, that
you may be free from every kind of servitude and slavery, that you may
attain to the absolute kingdom of God in both the worlds.

My dear, although this world - being the believer’s prison - is not the
abode of Divine award and the place of the manifestation of God’s
kingdom, but should you come out from the captivity of the carnal self
and submit to the servitude of God, make your heart a true monotheist
and clear the dusts of plurality from the mirror of the spirit, and turn
your heart’s attention to the focal point of Absolute Perfection, you
will witness its effects in this world itself and your heart will attain
such an expanse that it will become the realm of the manifestation of
God’s total sovereignty, thus becoming greater than all the worlds.
Hence He has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَسَعُنِي أَرْضِي وَلا سَمَائِي، بَلْ يَسَعُنِي قَلْبُ عَبْدِيَ
المُؤْمِنُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Neither [the vastness of] My earth, nor [that of] My heaven can contain
Me.

Indeed it is the heart of the man of faith which can contain Me.[^6]

Such richness and contentment will then pervade your heart that all the
outward and inward realms will become worthless in your eyes and your
will, will become so mighty that it shall not attach itself to the
corporeal and the celestial realms; rather it will not even consider
them worthy of itself.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طيران مرغ ديدي توزپاي بند شهوت درآي تا ببيني طيران آدميت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You have watched the bird’s flight;*

*But should you remove the shackles of lust,*

*You will witness the flight of man.*

Sabr, The Outcome Of Freedom From Lust
--------------------------------------

One of the great results and precious fruits of this freedom and
emancipation from servitude to the carnal self is patience in calamities
and misfortunes. Now it remains for us to explain briefly the meaning of
*sabr,* the kinds of its fruits and its relation to freedom.

As defined by the researcher of the righteous sect, the explorer of the
subtleties of the confirmed creed, the perfect in knowledge and deed,
Nasir al-*Din* al-Tusi (Q)[^7] *sabr* means restraining the self from
agitation when confronted with undesirables. And the famous, confirmed
‘*arif* (Khwajah ‘Abd Allah al-’Ansari), says in *Manazil al-sa’irin:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صبر، نگاهداري نفس است از شكايت بر جزع مستور.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sabr means restraining the self from complaint about hidden anguish.

And let it be known to you that *sabr* has been considered as one of the
stations of those in the middle group (*mutawassitun*)*,* for as long as
the self regards misfortunes and calamities as detestable and feels
inward anguish on their account, its *marifah* is deficient. Thus the
station of *rida* in regard to Divine destiny and satisfaction at the
turning up of misfortunes represents a higher station, although we
consider this also to be one of the stations pertaining to the
*mutawassitun.* So also *sabr* in regard to abstinence from sins and in
regard to fulfillment of duties (*ta’at*) is also related to deficient
knowledge of the secrets of *ibadat* and the Hereafterly forms of sin
and obedience.

For if one were to understand the reality of *ibadah* and to believe in
the purgatorial forms of worships and sins, *sabr* in regard to these
has no meaning for him. Rather, the contrary becomes true here, and if a
joy or comfort causes him to neglect worship or commit a sin, they (such
joys and comforts) become detestable for him and his inward anguish
becomes greater than that of those who bear misfortunes and calamities
patiently.

The righteous servant and the knower of the duties of servitude, the
possessor of noble stations and miraculous characteristics, ‘Ali ibn
‘Tawus (Q) is narrated to celebrate the first day of his becoming
*mukallaf.* He gave feasts and festivated in commemoration of that day,
for God, the Blessed and the Supreme, had blessed him with the
permission to perform duties on that day. Can anyone say that that
sublime spirit exercised *sabr* in regard to worship and duties
considering them as inwardly unwelcome?

What a difference between us and those obedient servants of God! We
think that God Almighty has burdened us with duties; we consider them
troublesome and view them as a botheration. If one of us attempts to
offer his prayer at the outset of its time, he says that it is better to
be done with it and the sooner one relieves oneself the better! All our
misfortunes are due to ignorance and foolishness and on account of the
lack or absence of faith.

In any case, *sabr* is concealed anguish. And that which has been said
about the great prophets and the Righteous Imams - who have been
characterized with *sabr -* that could mean forbearance in regard to
physical sufferings, which are painful as a matter of human nature; or
it could mean *sabr* in regard to separation from the Beloved, which is
one of the great stations of the lovers --and to this we shall return
later. Otherwise, *sabr* in regard to obedience or misfortune or sin is
not only inapplicable in regard to them but also in regard to their
followers (*shi’ah*)*.*

The famous ‘*arif* ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-Kashani, in *Sharh Manazil al
sa’irin,* says:

The intent of the Shaykh, when he says that sabr means abstinence from
complaint, is complaining to creatures. Otherwise, complaining to God
Almighty and beseeching Him for relief is not opposed to sabr. Hadrat
Ayyub complained to God and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَنِّي مَسَّنِي الشَّيْطَانُ بِنُصْبٍ وَعَذَابٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Behold, Satan has visited me with weariness and chastisement.***
(***38:41***)

And God yet praises him, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا وَجَدْنَاهُ صَابِرًا نِعْمَ الْعَبْدُ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely We found him. a steadfast man. How excellent a servant he was!
He was penitent.*** (***38:44***)

And Hadrat Ya’qub (Jacob) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا أَشْكُو بَثِّي وَحُزْنِي إِلَى اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I make complaint of my anguish and my sorrow unto God,***
(***12:86***)

Although he was one of the forbearing. Rather, to quit complaining to
God is a manifestation of the hardening (of the heart) and a sign of
grudgefulness.

The accounts of the lives of the great prophets and the Infallible
Imams - upon all of whom be God’s benedictions- reveal that although
their stations were over and above the stations of *sabr*, *rida* and
*taslim* (surrender), they never stopped supplicating lamenting and
confessing their impotence before the Worshipped One. They expressed
their needs to God Almighty and this is not contrary to their spiritual
stations.

Rather, remembering God, cherishing the intimacy of solitude with the
Beloved, and expression of servitude and humility in front of His
absolute perfection and greatness is the ultimate end of the hopes of
the mystics (*‘arifun*) and the final destination of the journey of the
wayfarers (*salikun*).

Results Of Sabr
---------------

You should know that *sabr* produces many results, among which is the
soul’s training and discipline. If a human being bears patiently with
misfortunes and calamities for some time, if he seriously endures the
hardships entailed by worship and rites and the bitterness arising from
the renunciation of carnal pleasures, and if he does all this for the
sake of obedience to his Lord and Provider, his soul gradually becomes
accustomed to these things. Then it becomes disciplined and docile and
relinquishes its earlier recalcitrance. To bear with hardships and
difficulties becomes an easy thing for it. There develops within it an
enduring luminous faculty through which he can rise over the station of
*sabr* to reach other higher spiritual stations.

*Sabr* in regard to sins is the source of the self’s *taqwa*. *Sabr* in
regard to obedience (*ta’at*) is the source of intimacy with God. And
*sabr* in misfortunes is the source of rids or contentment with Divine
destiny and decrees. These are the stations of the faithful (*ahl al-
iman*) or rather those of the gnostics (*ahl al-’irfan*). In the noble
traditions of the Infallible Ahl al-Bayt we find forceful emphasis on
*sabr*. The following is a tradition of Imam al-Sadiq (A) from the noble
*al-Kafi*, in which the Imam says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّبْرُ مِنَ الإيمَانِ بِمَنْزِلَةِ الرَّأْسِ مِنَ الجَسَدِ، فَإذَا
ذَهَبَ الرَّأْسُ ذَهَبَ الجَسَدُ، كَذَلِكَ إذَا ذَهَبَ الصَّبْرُ
ذَهَبَ الإيمَانُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, sabr is to faith what the head is to the body. The body perishes
without the head, and so also when sabr goes faith also disappears?[^8]

In another tradition whose *isnad* reaches Imam al-Sajjad (A), he is
reported to have stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّبْرُ مِنَ الإيمَانِ بِمَنْزِلَةِ الرَّأْسِ مِنَ الجَسَدِ، وَلا
إيمَانَ لِمَنْ لا صَبْرَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, sabr is to faith what the head is to the body: one who has no
sabr has no faith.[^9]

There are many traditions relating to this topic and we will mention
some of them later in relevance with the context.

*Sabr* is the key to the gates of felicity and the main means of
deliverance from mortal perils. *Sabr* makes man bear calamities with
ease and face difficulties with composure. It strengthens the will and
the power of resolution. It brings independence to the dominion of the
soul. Anguish and anxiety on the other hand, aside from their shameful
character, are symptoms of the soul’s weakness. They deprive one’s being
of its stability, weaken the determination, and enfeeble the intellect.
The informed researcher Khwajah Naqir al-*Din* al-Tusi (Q) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ – أيْ الصَّبْرَ – يَمْنَعُ البَاطِنَ عَنِ الإضْطِرَابِ
وَاللِّسَانَ عَنِ الشِّكَايَةِ وَالأعْضَاءَ عَنِ الحَرَكَاتِ غَيْرِ
المُعْتَادَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sabr restrains the inner being from anguish, the tongue from complaint
and the bodily members from untoward movements.

On the contrary, the inward being of the impatient person is full of
anxiety and alarm. His heart is full of tremors and shaky, and this. is
itself the greatest calamity that can befall a human being and deprive
him of peace. But *sabr* diminishes misfortune and makes the heart
overcome hardship and assists the will to overpower calamities. In the
same way, the impatient person complains of his troubles to everyone,
and this, aside from causing disrepute among people who look down upon
him as a weakling of instable character, makes him lose his standing in
the court of the Holy Lord and in front of His angels.

What faith in God and what surrender to the Holy Lord has the servant
who cannot bear an adversity that visits him from his Beloved, the
Absolute, after having received thousands upon thousands of His bounties
and while being immersed in the sea of His favor, and opens his mouth in
front of people to complain as soon as an adversity strikes him? So it
is right if it is said that one who has no *sabr* has no faith.

If you have faith in your Lord and believe all the affairs to lie in His
mighty hands, if you believe none else to have any say in the matters,
of course you will not complain of the hardships of life and the
adversities that strike you before God Almighty. Rather you will accept
them willingly and thank Him gratefully for His bounties.

Hence that inner agitation, those plaintive utterances, those unbecoming
bodily movements - all these bear testimony to our lack of faith. As
long as we find ourselves amid favors, we are grateful, with a
gratefulness that is formal and lacking inner substance, a gratefulness
that is offered in greed of further favors. However, when a tragedy
occurs or a pain or disease strikes us, we take our complaints against
the Blessed and the Almighty Lord in front of the creatures. With a
plaintive tongue and a tone brimming with taunts and cynicism, we
complain about Him to all and sundry. Gradually those complaints,
anxieties and misgivings sow the seeds of hostility towards God and His
decrees inside the self. Slowly they sprout and grow, making the once
passing feeling into an enduring trait.

Thereupon, God forbid, the form of one’s inward being assumes the form
of enmity towards God and His ordainments. When that happens, things go
out of one’s control and one is no longer able to check his thoughts and
feelings. His inward and outward being becomes colored with the
hostility towards God Almighty, and he departs from this world to face
eternal wretchedness and gloom, with a spirit infused with the enmity
and hatred of the Lord of Bounties. I seek refuge in God from the evil
of a disastrous end and from a provisional faith (*iman* *mustawda’*)*.*
Hence it has been truly said that when *sabr* goes faith also departs.

And so, my dear, the matter is of great importance and the road is full
of perils. Muster all the strength at your command and be patient and
forbearing throughout the ups and downs of life. With manly courage
stand against adversities and calamities. Make your self understand that
agitation and anguish, aside from involving a great shame by themselves,
are futile in confrontation with sufferings and calamities. No purpose
is served by complaining about the irresistible decrees and inevitable
ordainments of God in front of weak and powerless creatures, as pointed
out by the following noble tradition from *al-Kafi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ يَعْقُوبَ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ سُمَاعَةَ بْنِ مَهْرَانَ،
عَنْ أبِي الحَسَنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ لِي: مَا حَبَسَكَ
عَنِ الحَجِّ؟ قَالَ: قُلْتُ: جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ، وَقَعَ عَلَيَّ دَيْنٌ
كَثِيرٌ وَذَهَبَ مَالِي، وَدَيْنِي الَّذِي قَدْ لَزِمَنِي هُوَ
أَعْظَمُ مِنْ ذَهَابِ مَالِي. فَلَوْلا أنَّ رَجُلاً مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا
أَخْرَجَنِي مَا قَدَرْتُ أَنْ أَخْرُجَ. فَقَالَ لِي: إنْ تَصْبِرْ
تُغْتَبَطْ وَإنْ لا تَصْبِرْ يُنْفِذِ اللهُ مَقَادِيرَهُ رَاضِياً
كُنْتَ أَمْ كَارِهاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni reports with his chain of transmitters
from Sama’ah ibn Mihran from Imam al-Kazim (A) that the Imam said to
him, “What stopped you from going for hajj?” Sama’ah says that he
replied, “May I be your ransom, a big debt has fallen upon me and I have
lost my property. However, the debt that lies upon me weighed more
heavily upon me than the loss of property. Had it not been for one of
our companions, I could not have come out of it.” The Imam said, “If you
are patient, you will be the object of envy, and if you don’t God will
enforce His decrees regardless of your pleasure or displeasure.”[^10]

Thus we know that anxiety and anguish are not only futile, they are
capable of inflicting terrible injuries and are followed by fatal
consequences destructive to faith. On the other hand, *sabr,*
forbearance and restraint bring fair, plentiful rewards and have sublime
and beautiful forms in the world of *Barzakh*. This is stated at the end
of the noble tradition expounded by us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ الصَّبْرُ يُعَقِّبُ خَيْراً.فَاصْبِرُوا وَوَطِّنُوا
أَنْفُسَكُمْ عَلى الصَّبْرِ تُؤْجَرُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thus the ultimate result of *qabr* is good in this world - as known from
the example of Hadrat Yusuf (A) - and it is the cause of reward in the
Hereafter. In another noble tradition of *al-Kafi*, whose *sanad* goes
up to Abu Hamzah al-Thumali (M)Imam al-Sadiq (A) is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: قَالَ أَبُو عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: مَنِ ابْتُلِيَ مِنَ
المُؤْمِنِينَ بِبَلاءٍ فَصَبَرَ عَلَيْهِ كَانَ لَهُ مِثْلُ أَجْرِ
أَلْفِ شَهِيدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Hamzah says: Abu Abd Allah said: “Whoever of the believers that
bears patiently with a tribulation that befalls him, has the reward of a
thousand martyrs.”[^11]

There are many traditions relating to this subject and we will mention
some of them in the following section. However, as to that which was
said above that *sabr* has a beautiful purgatorial form, this is
mentioned - apart from the demonstrative proofs confirming it - in the
following tradition of the noble *al-Kafi* from Imam al-Sadiq (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: إذَا دَخَلَ المُؤْمِنُ فِي قَبْرِهِ، كَانَتِ الصَّلاةُ عَنْ
يَمِينِهِ وَالزَّكَاةُ عَنْ يَسَارِهِ وَالبِرُّ مُظِلٌّ عَلَيْهِ.
وَيَتَنَحَّى الصَّبْرُ نَاحِيَةً، فَإذَا دَخَلَ عَلَيْهِ المَلَكَانِ
اللَّذَانِ يَلِيَانِ مَسَاءَلَتَهُ قَالَ الصَّبْرُ لِلصَّلاةِ
وَالزَّكَاة وَالبِرِّ: دُونَكُمْ صَاحِبَكُمْ، فَإنْ عَجِزْتُمْ عَنْهُ
فَأنَا دُونَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imam (A) said, “When the believer enters his grave, salat is on his
right hand, zakat on his left, virtue faces him, with sabr taking him
under its shelter. When the two angels in charge of questioning enter
upon him, sabr says to salat, zakat and virtue: Take care of your
companion, and if you fail to assist him I will take care of him
myself.”[^12]

The Degrees And Levels Of Sabr
------------------------------

Let it be known to you that, as indicated by the noble traditions, there
are various degrees and levels of sabr, and its reward and merit vary in
accordance with its degree and level. This is revealed by the following
tradition of the noble *al-Kafi* narrated by the Master of the
God-fearing, Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (A) from the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: الصَّبْرُ
ثَلاثَةٌ: صَبْرٌ عِنْدَ المُصِيبَةِ وَصَبْرٌ عَلَى الطَّاعَةِ وَصَبْرٌ
عَنِ المَعْصِيَةِ. فَمَنْ صَبَرَ عَلَى المُصِيبَةِ حَتَّى يَرُدَّهَا
بِحُسْنِ عَزَائِهَا كَتَبَ اللهُ لَهُ ثَلاثَمِائَةِ دَرَجَةٍ: مَا
بَيْنَ الدَّرَجَةِ إلَى الدَّرَجَةِ كَمَا بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ إلَى
الأرْضِ. وَمَنْ صَبَرَ عَلَى الطَّاعَةِ كَتَبَ اللهُ لَهُ سِتَّمِائَةِ
دَرَجَةٍ مَا بَيْنَ الدَّرَجَةِ إلَى الدَّرَجَةِ كَمَا بَيْنَ تُخُومِ
الأرْضِ إلَى العَرْشِ. وَمَنْ صَبَرَ عَنِ المَعْصِيَةِ كَتَبَ اللهُ
لَهُ تِسْعَمِائَةِ دَرَجَةٍ مَا بَيْنَ الدَّرَجَةِ إلَى الدَّرَجَةِ
كَمَا بَيْنَ تُخُومِ الأرْضِ إلَى مُنْتَهَى العَرْشِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali (A) said: The Messenger of Allah said: “Sabr Is of three kinds:
sabr at the time of affliction, sabr in regard to obedience, and sabr in
regard to disobedience. One who bears patiently with affliction,
resisting it with a fair consolation, God writes for him three hundred
degrees (of sublimity), the elevation of one degree over another being
like the distance between earth and heavens. And one who is patient in
regard to obedience, God writes for him six hundred degrees (of
sublimity), the elevation of one degree over another being like the
distance between the earth’s depths and the Throne (al-’arsh). And one
who is patient in regard to disobedience, God writes for him nine
hundred degrees (of sublimity), the elevation of one degree over another
being like the distance between the earth’s depths and the furthest
frontiers of the Throne.”[^13]

This noble tradition reveals that *sabr* in regard to disobedience is
superior to the other levels of *sabr*, for it not only possesses
greater number of degrees but also the range between its degrees is
greater than those of the other kinds. It also shows that the extent of
Paradise is much greater than what can come into our imagination, for
our vision is limited and confined. That which has been said as a
description of Paradise that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَجَنَّةٍ عَرْضُهَا كَعَرْضِ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And a Garden the breadth whereof is as the breadth of heaven and
earth.*** (***57:21***)

(The Verse) perhaps refers to the Paradise of deeds. That which has been
referred to here in this noble tradition is the Paradise of character
and the criterion in the Paradise of character is the strength and
perfection of will. Hence its extent should not be confined within any
limits. Some have stated that that which has been meant here is height.
That is, it is possibly equal in breadth (to the Paradise of deeds) and
different in height. But this appears to be remote, for evidently
‘breadth’ here refers to extent not to breadth as opposed to length, for
‘breadth’ in reference to heaven and earth also has no meaning when
taken in the ordinary sense of something opposed to length, although
they do have ‘breadth’ in the sense of a ‘second dimension’ in the
terminology of natural philosophers. The Book of God, however, does not
speak in accordance with any specific terminology.

The noble *al-Kafi* records the following tradition of the Prophet (S)
with a chain of narration reaching Imam al-Sadiq (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: سَيَأْتِي
عَلَى النَّاسِ زَمَانٌ لا يُنَالُ المُلْكُ فِيهِ إلا بِالقَتْلِ
وَالتَّجَبُّرِ، وَلا الغِنَى إلا بِالغَصْبِ وَالبُخْلِ، وَلا
المَحَبَّةِ إلا بِاسْتِخْرَاجِ الدِّينِ وَاتِّبَاعِ الهَوَى. فَمَنْ
أَدْرَكَ ذَلِكَ الزَّمَانَ فَصَبَرَ عَلَى الفَقْرِ وَهُوَ يَقْدِرُ
عَلَى الغِنَى وَصَبَرَ عَلَى البُغْضَةِ وَهُوَ يَقْدِرُ عَلَى
المَحَبَّةِ وَصَبَرَ عَلَى الذُّلِّ وَهُوَ يَقْدِرُ عَلَى العِزِّ
آتَاهُ اللهُ ثَوَابَ خَمْسِينَ صِدِّيقاً مِمَّنْ صَدَّقَ بِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imam (A) said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “A time will come
upon the people wherein political authority will not be attainable
without bloodshed and tyranny, nor wealth without usurpation and
stinginess, nor affection without discarding religion and pursuing lust
and desire. Whoever lives in such times and bears patiently with poverty
despite possessing the capacity to become rich (illegitimately), and
bears up with hostility despite being capable of acquiring favor and
affection, and bears with humiliation despite possessing the capacity to
acquire honor, God will give him the reward of fifty truthful ones, of
those who confirmed me.”[^14]

Something close to this has been said in another tradition from Amir al
Mu’minin (A) and there are many traditions relating to this theme. The
few which have been quoted here are sufficient for our purpose.

The ‘Urafa’s Degrees Of Sabr:
-----------------------------

Let it be known to you that that which has been said hitherto relates to
the condition of ordinary people and the *mutawassitun.* We stated at
the beginning of this exposition that *sabr* has been considered as
something pertaining to the stations of the *mutawassitun.* But *Sabr*
hays other levels which belong to the wayfarers of the path of
perfection and the *awliya’.* One of such levels of *sabr* is *sabr fi
Allah* (*Sabr* in God), and it means steadfastness (*thabat*) in
spiritual endeavor (*mujahadah*) and abstinence from objects of love and
attraction. Rather it means the renunciation of selfhood in the path of
the Beloved.

This stage belongs to the wayfarers (*ahl al-suluk*)*.* Another level is
that of *sabr ma’a Allah* (*sabr* with God). It belongs to those blessed
with the Presence and the Beatific vision, which comes at the time of
exit from the garment of manhood, and freedom from the curtains of deeds
and attributes, and irradiation upon the heart of the lights of the
Names and Attributes, and entry into the state of intimacy and awe and
safeguarding of the self against changing from color to color and
absence from the station of intimacy and vision.

Another level is that of *sabr ‘an Allah* (*sabr* from God) which
pertains to the stations of lovers of God and piners for Him, of those
blessed with epiphany (*ahl al-shuhud wa al-’ayan*) at the time of
returning to their own world, the world of plurality and sobriety (after
intoxication with God). This is the hardest and the most difficult of
the stations, and to it has referred the Master of the Wayfarers, the
Commander of the Faithful, and the Leader of the Perfect (i.e. ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (A) in the noble Du’a’ Kumayl:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَبْنِي، يَا إلَهِي وَسَيِّدِي وَمَوْلايَ، صَبَرْتُ عَلَى عَذَابِكَ،
فَكَيْفَ أَصْبِرُ عَلَى فِرَاقِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my God, my Master and my Lord! Even if I were able to endure Thy
chastisement, how shall I bear Thy separation?

The following is narrated about al-Shibli:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُوِيَ أنَّ شَابّاً مِنَ المُحِبِّينَ سَأَلَ الشِّبْلِيَّ عَنِ
الصَّبْرِ فَقَالَ: أَيُّ الصَّبْرِ أَشَدُّ؟ فَقَالَ: الصَّبْرُ للهِ.
فَقَالَ: لا. فَقَالَ: الصَّبْرُ بِاللهِ. فَقَالَ: لا. فَقَالَ:
الصَّبْرُ عَلَى اللهِ. فَقَالَ: لا. فَقَالَ: الصَّبْرُ فِي اللهِ.
فَقَالَ: لا. فَقَالَ: الصَّبْرُ مَعَ اللهِ. فَقَالَ: لا. فَقَالَ:
وَيْحَكَ فَأَيُّ؟ فَقَالَ: الصَّبْرُ عَنِ اللهِ. فَشَهِقَ الشِّبْلِيُّ
وَخَرَّ مَغْشِيّاً عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated that a youth from among the Lovers questioned al-Shibli
about sabr. “Which kind of sabr is the hardest?” He asked. “The sabr for
God,” replied al-Shibli. “No,” said the youth. “The sabr by God,”
answered al-Shibli. “No,” said the youth. “The sabr over God,” said
al-Shibli. “No,” said the youth again. “The sabr in God,” said
al-Shibli. “No,” came the answer. “The sabr with God?” said al Shibii,
and the youth said “No,” again. “Woe to you, which one is it?” said
al-Shibli, exasperated. “The sabr from God,” came the answer. Al-Shibli
gave a cry and swooned.[^15]

Another level is that of *sabr bi Allah,* which is for those blessed
with stability and steadfastness, which is attained after the state of
sobriety and endurance with God (*baqa’ bi Allah*) and after moulding
oneself in accordance with Divine norms (*takhalluq bi akhlaq Allah*)*.*
It is something attained by none except the perfect, and since we have
nothing to partake of those stations, to elaborate further about these
matters is not appropriate for these pages.

And Praise is God’s at the beginning and the end, and may God’s
benedictions be upon Muhammad and, his immaculate Progeny.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, ii, Kitab al- iman wa al-kufr, bab
al-sabr, 128. hadith No. 6.

[^2]: Ibn al-’Athir, al-Nihayah, ii, 128.

[^3]: Misbah al-Shariah, bab 100.

[^4]: Ilal al-Shari’ah, i, 165; Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, x, 29.

[^5]: Ihya’ al-ulum, iv, 14.

[^6]: Ghwali al-lia’ili, iv, 7.

[^7]: For maintaining readability, (Q) which is an acronym for “Quddisa
sirruh” is used throughout the book to denote “May God sanctify
his/their soul(s).” It is used for the deceased ulama, urafa, and
awliya.

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, ii, bab al-sabr, 128, hadith No. 2.

[^9]: Usul al-Kafi, hadith No. 3.

[^10]: Usul al-Kafi, hadith No. 10.

[^11]: Usul al-Kafi. hadith No. 17.

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi, hadith No. 8.

[^13]: Usul al-Kafi, hadith No. 15.

[^14]: Usul al-Kafi, hadith No. 12.

[^15]: Sharh Manazil al-sa’irin, bab al-sabr, 88. No.28.


