About The Author
================

**By Hamid Algar**[^1]

It is in many ways remarkable that ten years after his death and twenty
years after the triumph of the revolution that he led no serious,
comprehensive biography of Imam Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khumayni has yet
been written, whether in Persian or any other language. He was, after
all, the pre-eminent figure of recent Islamic history, for his impact,
considerable enough in Iran itself, has also reverberated throughout
much of the Muslim world and helped to transform the worldview and
consciousness of many Muslims.

Indeed, it may be precisely this magnitude of the Imam’s achievement,
together with the complexity of his spiritual, intellectual, and
political personality that has so far discouraged potential biographers.
The materials available for the task are, however, as abundant as his
accomplishments were varied, and the present writer hopes to take up the
challenge in the near future.

What follows is therefore nothing more than a preliminary sketch,
intended to acquaint the reader with the outlines of the Imam’s life and
the main aspects of his person as an Islamic leader of exceptional
stature.

Childhood and Early Education
-----------------------------

Ruhullah Musawi Khumayni was born on 20 Jamadi al-Akhir 1320/ 24
September 1902, the anniversary of the birth of Hazrat Fatima, in the
small town of Khumayn, some 160 kilometers to the southwest of Qum. He
was the child of a family with a long tradition of religious
scholarship. His ancestors, descendants of Imam Musa al-Kazim, the
seventh Imam of the Ahl al-Bayt, had migrated towards the end of the
eighteenth century from their original home in Nishapur to the Lucknow
region of northern India.

There they settled in the small town of Kintur and began devoting
themselves to the religious instruction and guidance of the region’s
predominantly Shi’i population. The most celebrated member of the family
was Mir Hamid Husayn (d. 1880), author of *‘Abaqat al-Anwar fi Imamat
al-A’immat al-Athar*, a voluminous work on the topics traditionally
disputed by Sunni and Shi’i Muslims.[^2]

Imam Khumayni’s grandfather, Sayyid Ahmad, a contemporary of Mir Hamid
Husayn, left Lucknow some time in the middle of the nineteenth century
on pilgrimage to the tomb of Hazrat ‘Ali in Najaf.[^3] While in Najaf,
Sayyid Ahmad made the acquaintance of a certain Yusuf Khan, a prominent
citizen of Khumayn.

Accepting his invitation, he decided to settle in Khumayn to assume
responsibility for the religious needs of its citizens and also took
Yusuf Khan’s daughter in marriage. Although Sayyid Ahmad’s links with
India were cut by this decision, he continued to be known to his
contemporaries as “Hindi,” an appellation, which was inherited by his
descendants; we see even that Imam Khumayni used “Hindi” as penname in
some of his ghazals.[^4]

Shortly before the outbreak of the Islamic Revolution in February 1978,
the Shah’s regime attempted to use this Indian element in the Imam’s
family background to depict him as an alien and traitorous element in
Iranian society, an attempt that as will be seen backfired on its
author. By the time of his death, the date of which is unknown, Sayyid
Ahmad had fathered two children: a daughter by the name of Sahiba, and
Sayyid Mustafa Hindi, born in 1885, the father of Imam Khumayni.

Sayyid Mustafa began his religious education in Isfahan with Mir
Muhammad Taqi Mudarrisi before continuing his studies in Najaf and
Samarra under the guidance of Mirza Hasan Shirazi (d.1894), the
principal authority of the age in Shi’i jurisprudence. This corresponded
to a pattern of preliminary study in Iran followed by advanced study in
the *‘atabat*, the shrine cities of Iraq, which for long remained
normative; Imam Khumayni was in fact the first religious leader of
prominence whose formation took place entirely in Iran.

In Dhu’l-Hijja 1320/ March 1903, some five months after the Imam’s
birth, Sayyid Mustafa was attacked and killed while traveling on the
road between Khumayn and the neighboring city of Arak. The identity of
the assassin immediately became known; it was Ja’far-quli Khan, the
cousin of a certain Bahram Khan, one of the richest landowners of the
region. The cause of the assassination is, however, difficult to
establish with certainty. According to an account that became standard
after the triumph of the Islamic Revolution, Sayyid Mustafa had aroused
the anger of the local landowners because of his defense of the
impoverished peasantry.

However, Sayyid Mustafa himself, in addition to the religious functions
he fulfilled, was also a farmer of moderate prosperity, and it is
possible that he fell victim to one of the disputes over irrigation
rights that were common at the time. A third explanation is that Sayyid
Mustafa, in his capacity of *shari’a* judge of Khumayn, had punished
someone for a public violation of the fast of Ramadan and that the
family of the offender then exacted a deadly revenge.[^5]

The attempts of Sahiba, Sayyid Mustafa’s sister, to have the killer
punished in Khumayn proved fruitless, so his widow, Hajar, went to
Tehran to appeal for justice, according to one account carrying the
infant Ruhullah in her arms. She was followed there by her two elder
sons, Murtaza and Nur al-*Din*, and finally, in Rabi’ al-Awwal 1323/ May
1925, Ja’far-quli Khan was publicly executed in Tehran on the orders of
‘Ayn al-Dawla, the prime minister of the day.

In 1918, the Imam lost both his aunt, Sahiba, who had played a great
role in his early upbringing, and his mother, Hajar. Responsibility for
the family then devolved on the eldest brother, Sayyid Murtaza (later to
be known as Ayatullah Pasandida). The material welfare of the brothers
seems to have been ensured by their father’s estate, but the insecurity
and lawlessness that had cost him his life continued. In addition to the
incessant feuds among landowners, Khumayn was plagued by the raids
mounted on the town by the Bakhtiyari and Lurr tribesmen whenever they
had the chance.

Once when a Bakhtiyari chieftain by the name of Rajab ‘Ali came raiding,
the young Imam was obliged to take up a rifle together with his brothers
and defend the family home. When recounting these events many years
later, the Imam remarked, “I have been at war since my childhood.”[^6]
Among the scenes, he witnessed during his youth and that remained in his
memory to help shape his later political activity mention may also be
made of the arbitrary and oppressive deeds of landowners and provincial
governors. Thus, he recalled in later years how a newly arrived governor
had arrested and bastinadoed the chief of the merchants’ guild of
Gulpaygan for no other purpose than the intimidation of its
citizens.[^7]

Imam Khumayni began his education by memorizing the Qur’an at a maktab
operated near his home by a certain Mullah Abu ‘l-Qasim; he became a
hafiz by the age of seven. He next embarked on the study of Arabic with
Shaykh Ja’far, one of his mother’s cousins, and took lessons on other
subjects first from Mirza Mahmud Iftikhar al-'*Ulama*’ and then from his
maternal uncle, Hajji Mirza Muhammad Mahdi. His first teacher in logic
was Mirza Riza Najafi, his brother-in-law. Finally, among his
instructors in Khumayn mention may be made of the Imam’s elder brother,
Murtaza, who taught him Najm al-*Din* Katib Qazvini’s *al-Mutawwal on
badi’ and ma’ani* and one of the treatises of al-Suyuti on grammar and
syntax.

(Although Sayyid Murtaza - who took the surname Pasandida after the law
mandating the choice of a surname in 1928 - studied for a while in
Isfahan, he never completed the higher levels of religious education;
after working for a while in the registrar’s office in Khumayn, he moved
to Qum where he was to spend the rest of his life).

In 1339/1920-21, Sayyid Murtaza sent the Imam to the city of Arak (or
Sultanabad, as it was then known) in order for him to benefit from the
more ample educational resources available there. Arak had become an
important center of religious learning because of the presence of
Ayatullah ‘Abd al-Karim Ha’iri (d.1936), one of the principal scholars
of the day. He had arrived there in 1332/1914 at the invitation of the
townspeople, and some three hundred students - a relatively large
number - attended his lectures at the Mirza Yusuf Khan Madrasa.

It is probable that Imam Khumayni was not yet advanced enough to study
directly under Ha’iri; instead, he worked on logic with Shaykh Muhammad
Gulpayagani, read the *Sharh al-Lum’a* of Shaykh Zayn al-*Din* al-Amili
(d. 996/1558), one of the principal texts of Ja’fari jurisprudence, with
Aqa-yi ‘Abbas Araki, and continued his study of al-Mutawwal with Shaykh
Muhammad ‘Ali Burujirdi. Roughly a year after the Imam’s arrival in
Arak, Ha’iri accepted a summons from the *Ulama* of Qum to join them and
preside over their activity.

One of the earliest strongholds of Shi’ism in Iran, Qum had
traditionally been a major center of religious learning as well as
pilgrimage to the shrine of Hazrat-I Ma’suma, a daughter of Imam Musa
al-Kazim, but it had been overshadowed for many decades by the shrine
cities of Iraq with their superior resources of erudition. The arrival
of Ha’iri in Qum not only brought about a revival of its madrasas but
also began a process whereby the city became in effect the spiritual
capital of Iran, a process that was completed by the political struggle
launched there by Imam Khumayni some forty years later.

The Imam followed Ha’iri to Qum after an interval of roughly four
months. This move was the first important turning point in his life. It
was in Qum that he received all his advanced spiritual and intellectual
training, and he was to retain a deep sense of identification with the
city throughout the rest of his life. It is possible, indeed, although
not in a reductive sense, to describe him as a product of Qum. In 1980,
when addressing a group of visitors from Qum, he declared, “Wherever I
may be, I am a citizen of Qum, and take pride in the fact. My heart is
always with Qum and its people.”[^8]

The Years of Spiritual and Intellectual Formation in Qum, 1923 To 1962
----------------------------------------------------------------------

After his arrival in Qum in 1922 or 1923, the Imam first devoted himself
to completing the preliminary stage of madrasa education known as
*sutuh*; this he did by studying with teachers such as Shaykh Muhammad
Riza Najafi Masjid-i Shahi, Mirza Muhammad Taqi Khwansari, and Sayyid
‘Ali Yasribi Kashani. However, from his early days in Qum, the Imam gave
an indication that he was destined to become more than another great
authority on Ja’fari jurisprudence. He showed an exceptional interest in
subjects that not only were usually absent from the madrasa curriculum,
but were often an object of hostility and suspicion: philosophy, in its
various traditional schools, and Gnosticism (‘*irfan*).

He began cultivating this interest by studying the *Tafsir*-i Safi, a
commentary on the Qur’an by the Sufistically-inclined Mullah Muhsin
Fayz-i Kashani (d.1091/1680), together with the late Ayatullah ‘Ali
Araki (d. 1994), then a young student like himself. His formal
instruction in gnosticism and the related discipline of ethics began
with classes taught by Hajji Mirza Javad Maliki-Tabrizi, but this
scholar died in 1304/1925.

Similarly, the Imam was not able to benefit for long from his first
teacher in philosophy, Mirza ‘Ali Akbar *Hakim* Yazdi, a pupil of the
great master Mullah Hadi Sabzavari (d.1295/1878), for Yazdi passed away
in 1305/1926. Another of the Imam’s early instructors in philosophy was
Sayyid Abu ‘l-Hasan Qazvini (d. 1355/1976), a scholar of both
peripatetic and illuminationist philosophy; the Imam attended his circle
until Qazvini’s departure from Qum in 1310/1931.

The teacher who had the most profound influence on Imam Khumayni’s
spiritual development was, however, Mirza Muhammad ‘Ali Shahabadi (d.
1328 Sh. /1950); to him the Imam refers in a number of his works as
shaykhuna and ‘*arif*-I kamil, and his relationship with him was that of
a murid with his murshid.

When Shahabadi first came to Qum in 1307 Sh. /1928, the young Imam asked
him a question concerning the nature of revelation, and was captivated
by the answer he received. At his insistent request, Shahabadi consented
to teach him and a few other select students the *Fusus al-Hikam* of Ibn
‘Arabi. Although the basis of instruction was Da’ud Qaysari’s commentary
on the Fusus, the Imam testified that Shahabadi also presented his own
original insights on the text. Among the other texts that Imam Khumayni
studied with Shahabadi were the *Manazil al-Sa’irin* of the Hanbali
Sufi, Khwaja ‘Abdullah Ansari (d.482/1089), and the *Misbah al-Uns* of
Muhammad b. Hamza Fanari (d. 834/1431), a commentary on the *Mafatih
al-Ghayb* of Sadr al-*Din* Qunavi (d. 673/1274).

It is conceivable that the Imam derived from Shahabadi, at least in
part, whether consciously or not, the fusion of gnostic and political
concerns that came to characterize his life. For this spiritual master
of the Imam was one of the relatively few *ulama* in the time of Riza
Shah to preach publicly against the misdeeds of the regime, and in his
*Shadharat al-Ma’arif*, a work primarily gnostic in character, described
Islam as “most certainly a political religion.”[^9]

Gnosis and ethics were also the subject of the first classes taught by
the Imam. The class on ethics taught by Hajji Javad Aqa Maliki Tabrizi
were resumed, three years after his death, by Shahabadi, and when
Shahabadi left for Tehran in 1936, he assigned the class to Imam
Khumayni. The class consisted in the first place of a careful reading of
Ansari’s Manazil al-Sa’irin, but ranged beyond the text to touch on a
wide variety of contemporary concerns.

It proved popular to the extent that the townsfolk of Qum as well as the
students of the religious sciences attended, and people are related to
have come from as far a field as Tehran and Isfahan simply to listen to
the Imam. This popularity of the Imam’s lectures ran contrary to the
policies of the Pahlavi regime, which wished to limit the influence of
the *ulama* outside the religious teaching institution. The government
therefore secured the transfer of the lectures from the prestigious
location of the Fayziya madrasa to the Mullah Sadiq madrasa, which was
unable to accommodate large crowds.

However, after the deposition of Riza Shah in 1941, the lectures
returned to the Fayziya madrasa and instantly regained their former
popularity. The ability to address the people at large, not simply his
own colleagues within the religious institution, which the Imam
displayed for the first time in these lectures on ethics, was to play an
important role in the political struggles he led in later years.

While teaching ethics to a wide and diverse audience, Imam Khumayni
began teaching important texts of gnosis, such as the section on the
soul in *al-Asfar al-Arba’a* of Mullah Sadra (d. 1050/1640) and
Sabzavari’s Sharh-I Manzuma, to a select group of young scholars that
included Murtaza Mutahhari and Husayn ‘Ali Muntaziri, who subsequently
became two of his principal collaborators in the revolutionary movement
he launched some three decades later.

As for the earliest writings of the Imam, they also indicate that his
primary interest during his early years in Qum was gnosis. In 1928, for
example, he completed the *Sharh Du’a’ al-Sahar*, a detailed commentary
on the supplicatory prayers recited throughout Ramadan by Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir; as with all Imam Khumayni’s works on gnosis, the terminology
of Ibn ‘Arabi is frequently encountered in this book. Two years later,
he completed *Misbah al-Hidaya ila ‘l-Khilafa wa ‘l-Wilaya*, a dense and
systematic treatise on the main topics of gnosis. Another product of the
same years of concentration on gnosis was a series of glosses on
Qaysari’s commentary on the Fusus.

In a brief autobiography written for inclusion in a book published in
1934, the Imam wrote that he spent most of his time studying and
teaching the works of Mullah Sadra; that he had for several years been
studying gnosis with Shahabadi; and that at the same time he was
attending the classes of Ayatullah Ha’iri on *fiqh*.[^10]

The sequence of these statements suggests that *fiqh* was as yet
secondary among his concerns. This situation was to change, but gnosis
was for the Imam never simply a topic for study, teaching, and writing.
It remained an integral part of his intellectual and spiritual
personality, and as such infused many of his ostensibly political
activities in later years with an unmistakably gnostic element.

The Imam did not engage in any overt political activities during the
1930’s. He always believed that the leadership of political activities
should be in the hands of the foremost religious scholars, and he was
therefore obliged to accept the decision of Ha’iri to remain relatively
passive toward the measures taken by Riza Shah against the traditions
and culture of Islam in Iran. In any event, as a still junior figure in
the religious institution in Qum, he would have been in no position to
mobilize popular opinion on a national scale.

He was nonetheless in contact with those few *ulama* who did openly
challenge Riza Shah, not only Shahabadi, but also men such as Hajji
Nurullah Isfahani, Mirza Sadiq Aqa Tabrizi, Aqazada Kifai, and Sayyid
Hasan Mudarris. He expressed his own opinions of the Pahlavi regime, the
leading characteristics of which he identified as oppression and
hostility to religion, as yet only allusively, in privately circulated
poems.[^11]

He assumed a public political stance for the first time in a
proclamation dated 15 Urdibihisht 1323/ 4 May 1944 that called for
action to deliver the Muslims of Iran and the entire Islamic world from
the tyranny of foreign powers and their domestic accomplices. The Imam
begins by citing Qur’an, 34:46 (“Say: ‘I enjoin but one thing upon you,
that you rise up for Allah, in pairs and singly, and then reflect’”).
This is the same verse that opens the chapter on awakening (bab
al-yaqza) at the very beginning of Ansari’s Manazil al-Sa’irin, the
handbook of spiritual wayfaring first taught to the Imam by Shahabadi.
The Imam’s interpretation of “rising up” is, however, both spiritual and
political, both individual and collective, a rebellion against lassitude
in the self and corruption in society.

The same spirit of comprehensive revolt inspires the first work written
by the Imam for publication, Kashf al-Asrar (Tehran, 1324 Sh. /1945). He
is said to have completed the book in forty-eight days from a sense of
urgency, and that it indeed met a need is proven by the fact that it
went through two impressions in its first year.

The principal aim of the book, as reflected in its title, was to refute
‘Ali Akbar Hakamizada’s *Asrar-i Hazarsala*, a work calling for a
“reform” of Shi’i Islam. Similar attacks on Shi’i tradition were being
made in the same period by *Shari’a*t Sanglaji (d.1944), an admirer of
Wahhabism despite that sect’s marked hostility to Shi’ism, and Ahmad
Kasravi (d. 1946), competent as a historian but mediocre as a thinker.
The Imam’s vindication of such aspects of Shi’i practice as the mourning
ceremonies of Muharram, pilgrimage (ziyara) to the tombs of the Imams,
and the recitation of the supplicatory prayers composed by the Imams,
was therefore a response to the criticisms made by all three.

Imam Khumayni connected their assaults on tradition with the
anti-religious policies of Riza Shah and bitterly criticized the Pahlavi
regime for destroying public morality. He stopped short, however, of
demanding the abolition of the monarchy, proposing instead that an
assembly of competent mujtahids should choose “a just monarch who will
not violate God’s laws and will shun oppression and wrongdoing, who will
not transgress against men’s property, lives, and honor.”[^12]

Even this conditional legitimacy of monarchy was to last “only so long
as a better system could not be established.”[^13] There can be no doubt
that the “better system” already envisaged by Imam Khumayni in 1944 was
*Wilayat al-faqih*, which became the constitutional cornerstone of the
Islamic Republic of Iran established in 1979.

When Shaykh ‘Abd al-Karim Ha’iri died in 1936, the supervision of the
religious institution in Qum had been jointly assumed by Ayatullah
Khwansari, Ayatullah Sadr, and Ayatullah Hujjat. A sense of lack was
nonetheless felt. When Ayatullah Abu ‘l-Hasan Isfahani, the principal
*marja’-i taqlid* of the age residing in Najaf, died in 1946, the need
for a centralized leadership of Shi’i Muslims became more felt more
acutely, and a search began for a single individual capable of
fulfilling the duties and functions of both Ha’iri and Isfahani.
Ayatullah Burujirdi, then resident in Hamadan, was seen to be the most
suitable person available, and Imam Khumayni is said to have played an
important role in persuading him to come to Qum.

In this he was no doubt motivated in part by the hope that Burujirdi
would adopt a firm position vis-a-vis Muhammad Riza Shah, the second
Pahlavi ruler. This hope was to remain largely unfulfilled. In April
1949, Imam Khumayni learned that Burujirdi was engaged in negotiations
with the government concerning possible emendations to the constitution
then in force, and he wrote him a letter expressing his anxieties about
the possible consequences. In 1955, a nationwide campaign against the
Baha’i sect was launched, for which the Imam sought to recruit
Burujirdi’s support, but he had little success.

As for religious personalities who were militantly active in the
political sphere at the time, notably Ayatullah Abu ‘l-Qasim Kashani and
Navvab Safavi, the leader of the Fida’iyan-i Islam, the Imam’s contacts
with them were sporadic and inconclusive. His reluctance for direct
political involvement in this period was probably due to his belief that
any movement for radical change ought to be led by the senior echelons
of the religious establishment. In addition, the most influential
personage on the crowded and confused political scene of the day was the
secular nationalist, Dr. Muhammad Musaddiq.

Imam Khumayni therefore concentrated during the years of Burujirdi’s
leadership in Qum on giving instruction in *fiqh* and gathering round
him students who later became his associates in the movement that led to
the overthrow of the Pahlavi regime, not only Mutahhari and Muntaziri,
but younger men such as Muhammad Javad Bahonar and ‘Ali Akbar
Hashimi-Rafsanjani.

In 1946, he began teaching usul al-*fiqh* at the kharij level, taking as
his text the chapter on rational proofs from the second volume of the
*Kifayat al-Usul* of Akhund Muhammad Kazim Khurasani (d. 1329/1911).
Initially attended by no more than thirty students, the class became so
popular in Qum that five hundred were in attendance the third time it
was offered.

According to the reminiscences of some of those who took the class, it
was distinguished from other classes taught in Qum on the same subject
by the critical spirit the Imam instilled in his students, as well as
his ability to connect *fiqh* with all the other dimensions of Islam -
ethical, gnostic, philosophical, political, and social.

The Years of Struggle And Exile, 1962-1978
------------------------------------------

The emphases of the Imam’s activity began to change with the death of
Burujirdi on March 31, 1961, for he now emerged as one of the successors
to Burujirdi’s position of leadership. This emergence was signaled by
the publication of some of his writings on *fiqh*, most importantly the
basic handbook of religious practice entitled, like others of its genre,
*Tauzih al-Masa’il*. He was soon accepted as *marja’-i taqlid* by a
large number of Iranian Shi’is. His leadership role was, however,
destined to go far beyond that traditional for a *marja’-i taqlid* and
to attain a comprehensiveness unique in the history of the Shi’i
*ulama*.

This became apparent soon after the death of Burujirdi when Muhammad
Riza Shah, secure in his possession of power after the CIA-organized
coup of August 1953, embarked on a series of measures designed to
eliminate all sources of opposition, actual or potential, and to
incorporate Iran firmly into American patterns of strategic and economic
domination.

In the autumn of 1962, the government promulgated new laws governing
elections to local and provincial councils, which deleted the former
requirement that those elected be sworn into office on the Qur’an.
Seeing in this a plan to permit the infiltration of public life by the
Baha’is, Imam Khumayni telegraphed both the Shah and the prime minister
of the day, warning them to desist from violating both the law of Islam
and the Iranian Constitution of 1907, failing which the *ulama* would
engage in a sustained campaign of protest. Rejecting all compromise
measures, the Imam was able to force the repeal of the laws in question
seven weeks after they had been promulgated. This achievement marked his
emergence on the scene as the principal voice of opposition to the Shah.

A more serious confrontation was not long in coming. In January 1963,
the Shah announced a six-point program of reform that he termed the
White Revolution, an American-inspired package of measures designed to
give his regime a liberal and progressive facade. Imam Khumayni summoned
a meeting  
 of his colleagues in Qum to press upon them the necessity of opposing
the Shah’s plans, but they were initially hesitant. They sent one of
their number, Ayatullah Kamalvand, to see the Shah and gauge his
intentions.

Although the Shah showed no inclination to retreat or compromise, it
took further pressure by Imam Khumayni on the other senior *ulama* of
Qum to persuade them to decree a boycott of the referendum that the Shah
had planned to obtain the appearance of popular approval for his White
Revolution.

For his own part, Imam Khumayni issued on January 22, 1963 a strongly
worded declaration denouncing the Shah and his plans. In imitation,
perhaps, of his father, who had taken an armored column to Qum in 1928
in order to intimidate certain outspoken *ulama*, the Shah came to Qum
two days later. Faced with a boycott by all the dignitaries of the city,
he delivered a speech harshly attacking the *ulama* as a class.

On January 26, the referendum was held, with a low turnout that
reflected the growing heed paid by the Iranian people to Imam Khumayni’s
directives. He continued his denunciation of the Shah’s programs,
issuing a manifesto that also bore the signatures of eight other senior
scholars. In it he listed the various ways in which the Shah had
violated the constituent, condemned the spread of moral corruption in
the country, and accused the Shah of comprehensive submission to America
and Israel: “I see the solution to lie in this tyrannical government
being removed, for the crime of violating the ordinances of Islam and
trampling the constitution, and in a government taking its place that
adheres to Islam and has concern for the Iranian nation.”[^14] He also
decreed that the Nauruz celebrations for the Iranian year 1342 (which
fell on March 21, 1963) be cancelled as a sign of protest against
government policies.

The very next day, paratroopers were sent to the Fayziya madrasa in Qum,
the site where the Imam delivered his public speeches. They killed a
number of students, beat and arrested a number of others, and ransacked
the building. Unintimidated, the Imam continued his attacks on the
regime. On April 1, he denounced the persistent silence of certain
apolitical *ulama* as “tantamount to collaboration with the tyrannical
regime,” and one day later proclaimed political neutrality under the
guise of *taqiya* to be *haram*.[^15]

When the Shah sent his emissaries to the houses of the *ulama* in Qum to
threaten them with the destruction of their homes, the Imam reacted
contemptuously by referring to the Shah as “that little man (mardak).”
Then, on April 3, 1963, the fortieth day after the attack on the Fayziya
madrasa, he described the Iranian government as being determined to
eradicate Islam at the behest of America, Israel, and himself as
resolved to combat it.

Confrontation turned to insurrection some two months later. The
beginning of Muharram, always a time of heightened religious awareness
and sensitivity, saw demonstrators in Tehran carrying pictures of the
Imam and denouncing the Shah in front of his own palace. On the
afternoon of ‘Ashura (June 3, 1963), Imam Khumayni delivered a speech at
the Fayziya madrasa in which he drew parallels between the Umayyad
caliph Yazid and the Shah and warned the Shah that if he did not change
his ways the day would come when the people would offer up thanks for
his departure from the country.[^16]

This warning was remarkably prescient, for on January 16, 1979, the Shah
was indeed obliged to leave Iran amidst scenes of popular rejoicing. The
immediate effect of the Imam’s speech was, however, his arrest two days
later at 3 o’clock in the morning by a group of commandos who hastily
transferred him to the Qasr prison in Tehran.

As dawn broke on June 3, the news of his arrest spread first through Qum
and then to other cities. In Qum, Tehran, Shiraz, Mashhad and Varamin,
masses of angry demonstrators were confronted by tanks and ruthlessly
slaughtered. It was not until six days later that order was fully
restored. This uprising of 15 Khurdad 1342 (the day in the Iranian
calendar on which it began) marked a turning point in Iranian history.

Henceforth the repressive and dictatorial nature of the Shah’s regime,
reinforced by the unwavering support of the United States, was
constantly intensified, and with it the prestige of Imam Khumayni as the
only figure of note - whether religious or secular - willing to
challenge him. The arrogance imbuing the Shah’s policies also caused a
growing number of the *ulama* to abandon their quietism and align
themselves with the radical goals set forth by the Imam. The movement of
15 Khurdad may therefore be characterized as the prelude to the Islamic
Revolution of 1978-79; the goals of that revolution and its leadership
had already been determined.

After nineteen days in the Qasr prison, Imam Khumayni was moved first,
to the ‘Ishratabad military base and then to a house in the Davudiya
section of Tehran where he was kept under surveillance. Despite the
killings that had taken place during the uprising, mass demonstrations
were held in Tehran and elsewhere demanding his release and some of his
colleagues came to the capital from Qum to lend their support to the
demand. It was not, however, until April 7, 1964 that he was released,
no doubt on the assumption that imprisonment had tempered his views and
that the movement he had led would quietly subside.

Three days after his release and return to Qum, he dispelled such
illusions by refuting officially inspired rumors that he had come to an
understanding with the Shah’s regime and by declaring that the movement
inaugurated on 15 Khurdad would continue. Aware of the persisting
differences in approach between the Imam and some of the other senior
religious scholars, the regime had also attempted to discredit him by
creating dissension in Qum. These attempts, too, were unsuccessful, for
early in June 1964 all the major *ulama* put their signatures to
declarations commemorating the first anniversary of the uprising of 15
Khurdad.

Despite its failure to sideline or silence Imam Khumayni, the Shah’s
regime continued its pro-American policies unwaveringly. In the autumn
of 1964, it concluded a status of forces agreement with the United
States that provided immunity from prosecution for all American
personnel in Iran and their dependents. This occasioned the Imam to
deliver what was perhaps the most vehement speech of the entire struggle
against the Shah; certainly one of his close associates, Ayatullah
Muhammad Mufattih, had never seen him so agitated.[^17]

He denounced the agreement as a surrender of Iranian independence and
sovereignty, made in exchange for a $200 million loan that would be of
benefit only to the Shah and his associates, and described as traitors
all those in the *Majlis* who voted in favor of it; the government
lacked all legitimacy, he concluded.[^18]

Shortly before dawn on November 4, 1964, again a detachment of commandos
surrounded the Imam’s house in Qum, arrested him, and this time took him
directly to Mehrabad airport in Tehran for immediate banishment to
Turkey. The decision to deport rather than arrest Imam Khumayni and
imprison him in Iran was based no doubt on the hope that in exile he
would fade from popular memory. Physical elimination would have been
fraught with the danger of an uncontrollable popular uprising. As for
the choice of Turkey, this reflected the security cooperation existing
between the Shah’s regime and Turkey.

The Imam was first lodged in room 514 of Bulvar Palas Oteli in Ankara, a
moderately comfortable hotel in the Turkish capital, under the joint
surveillance of Iranian and Turkish security officials. On November 12,
he was moved from Ankara to Bursa, where he was to reside another eleven
months. The stay in Turkey cannot have been congenial, for Turkish law
forbade Imam Khumayni to wear the cloak and turban of the Muslim
scholar, an identity which was integral to his being; the sole
photographs in existence to show him bareheaded all belong to the period
of exile in Turkey.[^19]

However, on December 3, 1964, he was joined in Bursa by his eldest son,
Hajj Mustafa Khumayni; he was also permitted to receive occasional
visitors from Iran, and was supplied with a number of books on *fiqh*.
He made use of his forced stay in Bursa to compile *Tahrir al-Wasila*, a
two-volume compendium on questions of jurisprudence. Important and
distinctive are the fatwas this volume contains, grouped under the
headings of *al-amr bi ‘l-ma’ruf wa ‘l-nahy ‘an al-munkar* and *difa’*.

The Imam decrees, for example, that “if it is feared that the political
and economic domination (by foreigners) over an Islamic land will lead
to the enslavement and weakening of the Muslims, then such domination
must be repelled by appropriate means, including passive resistance, the
boycott of foreign goods, and the abandonment of all dealings and
association with the foreigners in question.” Similarly, “if an attack
by foreigners on one of the Islamic states is anticipated, it is
incumbent on all Islamic states to repel the attack by all possible
means; indeed, this is incumbent on the Muslims as a whole.”[^20]

On September 5, 1965, Imam Khumayni left Turkey for Najaf in Iraq, where
he was destined to spend thirteen years. As a traditional center of
Shi’i learning and pilgrimage, Najaf was clearly a preferable and more
congenial place of exile. It had moreover already functioned as a
stronghold of *ulama* opposition to the Iranian monarchy during the
Constitutional Revolution of 1906-1909. But it was not in order to
accommodate the Imam that the Shah arranged for his transfer to Najaf.

First, there was continuing disquiet among the Imam’s followers at his
forced residence in Bursa, away from the traditional milieu of the Shi’i
madrasa; such objections could be met by moving him to Najaf. Second, it
was hoped that once in Najaf, the Imam would either be overshadowed by
the prestigious *ulama* there, men such as Ayatullah Abu ‘l-Qasim Khu’i
(d. 1995), or that he would challenge their distaste for political
activism and squander his energies on confronting them.

He skirted this dual danger by proffering them his respect while
continuing to pursue the goals he had set himself before leaving Iran.
Another pitfall he avoided was association with the Iraqi government,
which occasionally had its own differences with the Shah’s regime and
was of a mind to use the Imam’s presence in Najaf for its own purposes.
The Imam declined the opportunity to be interviewed on Iraqi television
soon after his arrival, and resolutely kept his distance from succeeding
Iraqi administrations.

Once settled in Najaf, Imam Khumayni began teaching *fiqh* at the Shaykh
Murtaza Ansari madrasa. His lectures were well attended, by students not
only from Iran but also from Iraq, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and the
Persian Gulf states. In fact, a mass migration to Najaf from Qum and
other centers of religious learning in Iran was proposed to the Imam,
but he advised against it as a measure bound to depopulate Qum and
weaken it as a center of religious guidance.

It was also at the Shaykh Murtaza Ansari madrasa that he delivered,
between January 21 and February 8, 1970, his celebrated lectures on
Wilayat al-faqih, the theory of governance that was to be implemented
after the triumph of the Islamic Revolution. (The text of these lectures
was published in Najaf, not long after their delivery, under the title
*Wilayat al-faqih ya Hukumat-i Islami*; a slightly abbreviated Arabic
translation soon followed). This theory, which may be summarized as the
assumption by suitably qualified *ulama* of the political and juridical
functions of the Twelfth Imam during his occultation, had already been
put forward, somewhat tentatively, in his first published work, Kashf
al-Asrar.

Now he presented it as the self-evident and incontestable consequence of
the Shi’i doctrine of the Imamate, citing and analyzing in support of it
all relevant texts from the Qur’an and the traditions of the Prophet
(S)[^21] and the Twelve Imams (A)[^22] He emphasized also the harm that
had come to Iran (as well as other Muslim countries) from abandoning
Islamic law and government and relinquishing the political realm to the
enemies of Islam. Finally, he delineated a program for the establishment
of an Islamic government, laying particular stress on the
responsibilities of the *ulama* to transcend their petty concerns and to
address the people fearlessly: “It is the duty of all of us to overthrow
the *taghut*, the illegitimate political powers that now rule the entire
Islamic world.”[^23]

The text of the lectures on Wilayat al-faqih was smuggled back to Iran
by visitors who came to see the Imam in Najaf, as well as by ordinary
Iranians who came on pilgrimage to the shrine of Hazrat ‘Ali (A) The
same channels were used to convey to Iran the numerous letters and
proclamations in which the Imam commented on the events that took place
in his homeland during the long years of exile. The first such document,
a letter to the Iranian *ulama* assuring them of the ultimate downfall
of the Shah’s regime, is dated April 16, 1967. On the same day he also
wrote to prime minister Amir ‘Abbas Huvayda accusing him of running “a
regime of terror and thievery.”[^24]

On the occasion of the Six Day War in June 1967, the Imam issued a
declaration forbidding any type of dealing with Israel as well as the
consumption of Israeli goods. This declaration was widely and openly
publicized in Iran, which led to the ransacking of Imam Khumayni’s house
in Qum and the arrest of Hajj Sayyid Ahmad Khumayni, his second son, who
had been living there. (Some of the unpublished works of the Imam were
lost or destroyed on this occasion).

It was also at this time that the Shah’s regime contemplated moving the
Imam from Iraq to India; a location from which communications with Iran
would have been far more difficult, but the plan was thwarted. Other
developments on which the Imam commented from Najaf were the extravagant
celebrations of 2500 years of Iranian monarchy in October 1971 (“it is
the duty of the Iranian people to refrain from participation in this
illegitimate festival”); the formal establishment of a one-party system
in Iran in February 1975 (the Imam prohibited membership in the party,
the *Hizb-i Rastakhiz*, in a *fatwa* issued the following month); and
the substitution, in the same month, of the imperial (shahanshahi)
calendar for the solar Hijri calendar that had been official in Iran
until that time. Some developments were met with fatwas rather than
proclamations: for example, the Imam rejected as incompatible with Islam
the Family Protection Law of 1967 and classified as adulteresses women
who remarried after obtaining a divorce under its provisions.[^25]

Imam Khumayni had also to deal with changing circumstances in Iraq. The
Ba’th Party, fundamentally hostile to religion, had come to power in
July 1967 and soon began exerting pressure on the scholars of Najaf,
both Iraqi and Iranian. In 1971, as Iraq and Iran entered a state of
sporadic and undeclared war with each other, the Iraqi regime began
expelling from its territory Iranians whose forebears had in some cases
been residing there for generations. The Imam, who until that point had
scrupulously kept his distance from Iraqi officialdom, now addressed
himself directly to the Iraqi leadership condemning its actions.

Imam Khumayni was, in fact, constantly, and acutely aware of the
connections between Iranian affairs and those of the Muslim world in
general and the Arab lands in particular. This awareness led him to
issue from Najaf a proclamation to the Muslims of the world on the
occasion of the hajj in 1971, and to comment, with special frequency and
emphasis, on the problems posed by Israel for the Muslim world. The
Imam’s strong concern for the Palestine question led him to issue a
*fatwa* on August 27, 1968 authorizing the use of religious monies
(*vujuh-i shar’i*) to support the nascent activities of *al-Asifa*, the
armed wing of the Palestine Liberation Organization; this was confirmed
by a similar and more detailed ruling issued after a meeting with the
Baghdad representative of the PLO.[^26]

The distribution in Iran, on however limited a scale, of the
proclamations and fatwas of Imam Khumayni was in itself enough to ensure
that his name not be forgotten during the years of exile. Equally
important, the movement of Islamic opposition to the Shah’s regime that
had been inaugurated by the uprising of 15 Khurdad continued to develop
despite the brutality unhesitatingly dispensed by the Shah.

Numerous groups and individuals explicitly owed their allegiance to the
Imam. Soon after his exiling there came into being an organization
called *Hay’atha-yi Mu’talifa-yi Islami* (the Allied Islamic
Associations), headquartered in Tehran but with branches throughout
Iran. Active in it were many who had been students of the Imam in Qum
and who came to assume important responsibilities after the revolution,
men such as Hashimi-Rafsanjani and Javad Bahunar. In January 1965, four
members of the organization assassinated Hasan ‘Ali Mansur, the prime
minister who had been responsible for the exiling of the Imam.

There were no individuals designated, even clandestinely, as Imam
Khumayni’s authorized representatives in Iran while he was in exile.

However, senior *ulama* such as Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahhari, Ayatullah
Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Bihishti (d. 1981), and Ayatullah Husayn ‘Ali
Muntaziri, were in contact with him, directly and indirectly, and were
known to speak on his behalf in important matters. Like their younger
counterparts in the *Hay’atha-yi Mu’talafa-yi Islami*, all three went on
to perform important functions during and after the revolution.

The continued growth of the Islamic movement during Imam Khumayni’s
exile should not be attributed exclusively to his abiding influence or
to the activity of *ulama* associated with him. Important, too, were the
lectures and books of ‘Ali Shari’ati (d. 1977), a university-educated
intellectual whose understanding and presentation of Islam were
influenced by Western ideologies, including Marxism, to a degree that
many *ulama* regarded as dangerously syncretistic. When the Imam was
asked to comment on the theories of Shari’ati, both by those who
supported them and by those who opposed them, he discreetly refrained
from doing so, in order not to create a division within the Islamic
movement that would have benefited the Shah’s regime.

The most visible sign of the persisting popularity of Imam Khumayni in
the pre-revolutionary years, above all at the heart of the religious
institution in Qum, came in June 1975 on the anniversary of the uprising
of 15 Khurdad. Students at the Fayziya madrasa began holding a
demonstration within the confines of the building, and a sympathetic
crowd assembled outside. Both gatherings continued for three days until
they were attacked on the ground by commandos and from the air by a
military helicopter, with numerous deaths resulting.

The Imam reacted with a message in which he declared the events in Qum
and similar disturbances elsewhere to be a sign of hope that “freedom
and liberation from the bonds of imperialism” were at hand.[^27] The
beginning of the revolution came indeed some two and a half years later.

The Islamic Revolution, 1978-79
-------------------------------

The chain of events that ended in February 1979 with the overthrow of
the Pahlavi regime and the foundation of the Islamic Republic began with
the death in Najaf on October 23, 1977 of Hajj Sayyid Mustafa Khumayni,
unexpectedly and under mysterious circumstances. This death was widely
attributed to the Iranian security police, SAVAK, and protest meetings
took place in Qum, Tehran, Yazd, Mashhad, Shiraz, and Tabriz. Imam
Khumayni himself, with the equanimity he customarily displayed in the
face of personal loss, described the death of his son as one of the
“hidden favors” (*altaf-i khafiya*) of God, and advised the Muslims of
Iran to show fortitude and hope.[^28]

The esteem in which Imam Khumayni was held and the reckless
determination of the Shah’s regime to undermine that esteem were
demonstrated once again on January 7, 1978 when an article appeared in
the semi-official newspaper *Ittila’at* attacking him in scurrilous
terms as a traitor working together with foreign enemies of the country.
The next day a furious mass protest took place in Qum; it was suppressed
by the security forces with heavy loss of life. This was the first in a
series of popular confrontations that, gathering momentum throughout
1978, soon turned into a vast revolutionary movement, demanding the
overthrow of the Pahlavi regime and the installation of an Islamic
government.

The martyrs of Qum were commemorated forty days later with
demonstrations and shop closures in every major city of Iran.
Particularly grave were the disturbances in Tabriz, which ended only
after more than 100 people had been killed by the Shah’s troops. On
March 29, the fortieth day after the killings in Tabriz was marked by a
further round of demonstrations, in some fifty-five Iranian cities; this
time the heaviest casualties occurred in Yazd, where security forces
opened fire on a gathering in the main mosque. In early May, it was
Tehran itself that saw the principal violence; armored columns appeared
on the streets for the first time since June 1963 in order to contain
the trend to revolution.

In June, the Shah found it politic to make a number of superficial
concessions - such as the repeal of the “imperial calendar” -to the
forces opposing him, but repression also continued. When the government
lost control of Isfahan on August 17, the army assaulted the city and
killed hundreds of unarmed demonstrators. Two days later, 410 people
were burned to death behind the locked doors of a cinema in Abadan, and
the government was plausibly held responsible.

On ‘Id al-fitr, which that year fell on September 4, marches took place
in all major cities, with an estimated total of four million
participants. The demand was loudly voiced for the abolition of monarchy
and the foundation of an Islamic government under the leadership of Imam
Khumayni. Faced with the mounting tide of revolution, the Shah decreed
martial law and forbade further demonstrations.

On September 9, a crowd gathered at the *Maydan-i Zhala* (subsequently
renamed *Maydan-i Shuhada’*) in Tehran was attacked by troops that had
blocked all exits from the square, and some 2000 people were killed at
this location alone. Another 2000 were killed elsewhere in Tehran by
American-supplied military helicopters hovering overhead. This day of
massacre, which came to be known as Black Friday, marked the point of no
return. Too much blood had been spilt for the Shah to have any hope of
survival, and the army itself began to tire of the task of slaughter.

As these events were unfolding in Iran, Imam Khumayni delivered a whole
series of messages and speeches, which reached his homeland not only in
printed form but also increasingly on tape cassettes. His voice could be
heard congratulating the people for their sacrifices, denouncing the
Shah in categorical fashion as a criminal, and underlining the
responsibility of the United States for the killings and the repression.
(Ironically, US President Carter had visited Tehran on New Year’s Eve
1977 and lauded the Shah for creating “an island of stability in one of
the more troubled areas of the world.”[^29]

As the façade of stability dissolved, the United States continued its
military and political support of the Shah uninterrupted by anything but
the most superficial hesitation). Most importantly, the Imam recognized
that a unique juncture had been reached in Iranian history, that a
genuinely revolutionary momentum had come into being which if dissipated
would be impossible to rebuild. He therefore warned against any tendency
to compromise or to be deceived by the sporadic conciliatory gestures of
the Shah.

Thus on the occasion of ‘Id al-Fitr, when mass demonstrations had passed
off with deceptive peacefulness in Tehran, he issued the following
declaration: “Noble people of Iran! Press forward with your movement and
do not slacken for a minute, as I know full well you will not! Let no
one imagine that after the blessed month of Ramadan his God-given duties
have changed. These demonstrations that break down tyranny and advance
the goals of Islam are a form of worship that is not confined to certain
months or days, for the aim is to save the nation, to enact Islamic
justice, and to establish a form of divine government based on
justice.”[^30]

In one of the numerous miscalculations that marked his attempts to
destroy the revolution, the Shah decided to seek the deportation of Imam
Khumayni from Iraq, on the assumption, no doubt, that once removed from
the prestigious location of Najaf and its proximity to Iran, his voice
would somehow be silenced. The agreement of the Iraqi government was
obtained at a meeting between the Iraqi and Iranian foreign ministers in
New York, and on September 24, 1978, the Imam’s house in Najaf was
surrounded by troops. He was informed that his continued residence in
Iraq was contingent on his abandoning political activity, a condition he
was sure to reject.

On October 3, he left Iraq for Kuwait, but was refused entry at the
border. After a period of hesitation in which Algeria, Lebanon and Syria
were considered as possible destinations, Imam Khumayni embarked for
Paris, on the advice of his second son, Hajj Sayyid Ahmad Khumayni, who
by now had joined him. Once arrived in Paris, the Imam took up residence
in the suburb  
 of Neauphle-le-Chateau in a house that had been rented for him by
Iranian exiles in France.

Residence in a non-Muslim land was no doubt experienced by Imam Khumayni
as irksome, and in the declaration he issued from Neauphle-le-Chateau on
October 11, 1978, the fortieth day after the massacres of Black Friday,
he announced his intention of moving to any Muslim country that assured
him freedom of speech.[^31] No such assurance ever materialized.

In addition, his forced removal from Najaf increased popular anger in
Iran still further. It was, however, the Shah’s regime that turned out
to be the ultimate loser from this move. Telephonic communications with
Tehran were far easier from Paris than they had been from Najaf, thanks
to the Shah’s determination to link Iran with the West in every possible
way, and the messages and instructions the Imam issued flowed forth
uninterrupted from the modest command center he established in a small
house opposite his residence. Moreover, a host of journalists from
across the world now made their way to France, and the image and the
words of the Imam soon became a daily feature in the world’s media.

In Iran meanwhile, the Shah was continuously reshaping his government.
First he brought in as prime minister Sharif-Imami, an individual
supposedly close to conservative elements among the ‘*ulama*. Then, on
November 6, he formed a military government under General Ghulam-Riza
Azhari, a move explicitly recommended by the United States. These
political maneuverings had essentially no effect on the progress of the
revolution.

On November 23, one week before the beginning of Muharram, the Imam
issued a declaration in which he likened the month to “a divine sword in
the hands of the soldiers of Islam, our great religious leaders, and
respected preachers, and all the followers of Imam Husayn, Sayyid
al-shuhada’.” They must, he continued, “make maximum use of it; trusting
in the power of God, they must tear out the remaining roots of this tree
of oppression and treachery.” As for the military government, it was
contrary to the *Shari’ah* and opposition to it a religious duty.[^32]

Vast demonstrations unfurled across Iran as soon as Muharram began.
Thousands of people donned white shrouds as a token of readiness for
martyrdom and were cut down as they defied the nightly curfew. On
Muharram 9, a million people marched in Tehran demanding the overthrow
of the monarchy, and the following day, ‘Ashura, more than two million
demonstrators approved by acclamation a seventeen-point declaration of
which the most important demand was the formation of an Islamic
government headed by the Imam. Killings by the army continued, but
military discipline began to crumble, and the revolution acquired an
economic dimension with the proclamation of a national strike on
December 18. With his regime crumbling, the Shah now attempted to co-opt
secular, liberal-nationalist politicians in order to forestall the
foundation of an Islamic government.

On January 3, 1979, Shahpur Bakhtiyar of the National Front (*Jabha-yi
Milli*) was appointed prime minister to replace General Azhari, and
plans were drawn up for the Shah to leave the country for what was
advertised as a temporary absence. On January 12, the formation of a
nine-member regency council was announced; headed by Jalal al-*Din*
Tihrani, an individual proclaimed to have religious credentials, it was
to represent the Shah’s authority in his absence. None of these
maneuvers distracted the Imam from the goal now increasingly within
reach. The very next day after the formation of the regency council, he
proclaimed from Neauphle-le-Chateau the formation of the Council of the
Islamic Revolution (*Shaura-yi Inqilab-i Islami*), a body entrusted with
establishing a transitional government to replace the Bakhtiyar
administration. On January 16, amid scenes of feverish popular
rejoicing, the Shah left Iran for exile and death.

What remained now was to remove Bakhtiyar and prevent a military coup
d’état enabling the Shah to return. The first of these aims came closer
to realization when Sayyid Jalal al-*Din* Tihrani came to Paris in order
to seek a compromise with Imam Khumayni. He refused to see him until he
resigned from the regency council and pronounced it illegal. As for the
military, the gap between senior generals, unconditionally loyal to the
Shah, and the growing number of officers and recruits sympathetic to the
revolution, was constantly growing. When the United States dispatched
General Huyser, commander of NATO land forces in Europe, to investigate
the possibility of a military coup, he was obliged to report that it was
pointless even to consider such a step.

Conditions now seemed appropriate for Imam Khumayni to return to Iran
and preside over the final stages of the revolution. After a series of
delays, including the military occupation of Mehrabad airport from
January 24 to 30, the Imam embarked on a chartered airliner of Air
France on the evening of January 31 and arrived in Tehran the following
morning. Amid unparalleled scenes of popular joy - it has been estimated
that more than ten million people gathered in Tehran to welcome the Imam
back to his homeland – he proceeded to the cemetery of Bihisht-i Zahra
to the south of Tehran where the martyrs of the revolution lay buried.

There he decried the Bakhtiyar administration as the “last feeble gasp
of the Shah’s regime” and declared his intention of appointing a
government that would “punch Bakhtiyar’s government in the mouth.”[^33]
The appointment of the provisional Islamic government the Imam had
promised came on February 5. Its leadership was entrusted to Mahdi
Bazargan, an individual who had been active for many years in various
Islamic organizations, most notably the Freedom Movement (*Nahzat-i
Azadi*).

The decisive confrontation came less than a week later. Faced with the
progressive disintegration of the armed forces and the desertion of many
officers and men, together with their weapons, to the Revolutionary
Committees that were springing up everywhere, Bakhtiyar decreed a curfew
in Tehran to take effect at 4 p.m. on February 10. Imam Khumayni ordered
that the curfew should be defied and warned that if elements in the army
loyal to the Shah did not desist from killing the people, he would issue
a formal *fatwa* for jihad.[^34] The following day the Supreme Military
Council withdrew its support from Bakhtiyar, and on February 12, 1979,
all organs of the regime, political, administrative, and military,
finally collapsed. The revolution had triumphed.

Clearly no revolution can be regarded as the work of a single man, nor
can its causes be interpreted in purely ideological terms; economic and
social developments had helped to prepare the ground for the
revolutionary movement of 1978-79. There was also marginal involvement
in the revolution, particularly during its final stages when its triumph
seemed assured, by secular, liberal-nationalist, and leftist elements.
But there can be no doubting the centrality of Imam Khumayni’s role and
the integrally Islamic nature of the revolution he led.

Physically removed from his countrymen for fourteen years, he had an
unfailing sense of the revolutionary potential that had surfaced and was
able to mobilize the broad masses of the Iranian people for the
attainment of what seemed to many inside the country (including his
chosen premier, Bazargan) a distant and excessively ambitious goal. His
role pertained, moreover, not merely to moral inspiration and symbolic
leadership; he was also the operational leader of the revolution.
Occasionally he accepted advice on details of strategy from persons in
Iran, but he took all key decisions himself, silencing early on all
advocates of compromise with the Shah. It was the mosques that were the
organizational units of the revolution and mass prayers, demonstrations
and martyrdom that were - until the very last stage - its principal
weapons.

1979-89: First Decade of the Islamic Republic, Last Decade of the Imam’s Life
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Imam Khumayni’s role was also central in shaping the new political order
that emerged from the revolution, the Islamic Republic of Iran. At first
it appeared that he might exercise his directive role from Qum, for he
moved there from Tehran on February 29, causing Qum to become in effect
a second capital of Iran. On March 30 and 31, a nationwide referendum
resulted in a massive vote in favor of the establishment of an Islamic
Republic.

The Imam proclaimed the next day, April 1, 1979, as the “first day of
God’s government.”[^35] The institutionalization of the new order
continued with the election, on August 3, of an Assembly of Experts
(*Majlis*-*i Khubragan*), entrusted with the task of reviewing a draft
constitution that had been put forward on June 18; fifty-five of the
seventy-three persons elected were religious scholars.

It was not however to be expected that a smooth transition from the old
regime would prove possible. The powers and duties of the Council of the
Islamic Revolutionary, which was intended to serve as an interim
legislature, were not clearly delineated from those of the provisional
government headed by Bazargan.

More importantly, significant differences of outlook and approach
separated the two bodies from each other. The council, composed
predominantly of *ulama*, favored immediate and radical change and
sought to strengthen the revolutionary organs that had come into being -
the revolutionary committees, the revolutionary courts charged with
punishing members of the former regime charged with serious crimes, and
the Corps of Guards of the Islamic Revolution (*Sipah-i Pasdaran-i
Inqilab-i Islami*), established on May 5, 1979. The government, headed
by Bazargan and comprising mainly liberal technocrats of Islamic
orientation, sought as swift a normalization of the situation as
possible and the gradual phasing out of the revolutionary institutions.

Although Imam Khumayni encouraged members of the two bodies to cooperate
and refrained, on most occasions, from arbitrating their differences,
his sympathies were clearly with the Council of the Islamic Revolution.
On July 1, Bazargan offered the Imam his resignation. It was refused,
and four members of the council l- Rafsanjani, Bahunar, Mahdavi-Kani,
and Ayatullah Sayyid ‘Ali Khamna’i - joined Bazargan’s cabinet in an
effort to improve the coordination of the two bodies. In addition to
these frictions at the governmental level, a further element of
instability was provided by the terrorist activities of shadowy groups
that were determined to rob the nascent Islamic republic of some of its
most capable personalities.

Thus on May 1, 1979, Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahhari, a leading member of
the Council of the Islamic Revolution and a former pupil close to the
Imam’s heart, was assassinated in Tehran. For once, the Imam wept in an
open display of grief.

The final break between Bazargan and the revolution came as a
consequence of the occupation of the United States embassy in Tehran on
November 4, 1979 by a coalition of students from the universities of
Tehran. Despite declarations of willingness to “honor the will of the
Iranian people” and its recognition of the Islamic Republic, the
American government had admitted the Shah to the United States on
October 22, 1979.

The pretext was his need for medical treatment, but it was widely feared
in Iran that his arrival in America, where large numbers of high-ranking
officials of the previous regime had gathered, might be the prelude to
an American-sponsored attempt to restore him to power, on the lines of
the successful CIA coup of August 1953. The Shah’s extradition to Iran
was therefore demanded by the students occupying the embassy as a
condition for their liberating the hostages they were holding there.

It is probable that the students had cleared their action in advance
with close associates of Imam Khumayni, for he swiftly extended his
protection to them, proclaiming their action “a greater revolution than
the first.”[^36] Two days later, he predicted that confronted by this
“second revolution,” America would be “unable to do a damned thing
(*Amrika hich ghalati namitavanad bukunad*).”[^37]

This prediction seemed extravagant to many in Iran, but a military
expedition mounted by the United States on April 22, 1980 to rescue the
American hostages and possibly, too, to attack sensitive sites in
Tehran, came to an abrupt and humiliating end when the American gunship
crashed into each other in a sandstorm near Tabas in southeastern Iran.
On April 7, the United States had formally broken diplomatic ties with
Iran, a move welcomed by Imam Khumayni as an occasion of rejoicing for
the Iranian nation.[^38] It was not until January 21, 1981 that the
American hostages were finally released.

Two days after the occupation of the US embassy, Bazargan once again
offered his resignation, and this time it was accepted. In addition, the
provisional government was dissolved, and the Council of the Islamic
Revolution temporarily assumed the task of running the country. This
marked the definitive departure of Bazargan and like-minded individuals
from the scene; henceforth the term “liberal” became a pejorative
designation for those who questioned the fundamental tendencies of the
revolution.

In addition, the students occupying the embassy had access to extensive
files the Americans had kept on various Iranian personalities who had
frequented the embassy over the years; these documents were now
published and discredited the personalities involved. Most importantly,
the occupation of the embassy constituted a “second revolution” in that
Iran now offered a unique example of defiance of the American superpower
and became established for American policymakers as their principal
adversary in the Middle East.

The enthusiasm aroused by the occupation of the embassy also helped to
ensure a large turnout for the referendum that was held on December 2
and 3, 1979 to ratify the constitution that had been approved by the
Assembly of Experts on November 15. The constitution, which was
overwhelmingly approved, differed greatly from the original draft, above
all through its inclusion of the principle of Wilayat al-faqih as its
basic and determining principle. Mentioned briefly in the preamble, it
was spelled out in full in Article Five:

“During the Occultation of the Lord of the Age (Sahib al-Zaman; i.e.,
the Twelfth Imam)… the governance and leadership of the nation devolve
upon the just and pious *faqih* who is acquainted with the circumstances
of his age; courageous, resourceful, and possessed of administrative
ability; and recognized and accepted as leader (rahbar) by the majority
of the people. In the event that no *faqih* should be so recognized by
the majority, the leader, or leadership council, composed of *fuqaha*’
possessing the aforementioned qualifications, will assume these
responsibilities.”

Article 109 specified the qualifications and attributes of the leader as
“suitability with respect to learning and piety, as required for the
functions of mufti and marja’.” Article 110 listed his powers, which
include supreme command of the armed forces, appointment of the head of
the judiciary, signing the decree formalizing the election of the
president of the republic, and – under certain conditions - dismissing
him.[^39]

These articles formed the constitutional basis for Imam Khumayni’s
leadership role. In addition, from July 1979 onwards, he had been
appointing Imam Jum’a’s for every major city, who not only delivered the
Friday sermon but also acted as his personal representatives. Most
government institutions also had a representative of the Imam assigned
to them. However, the ultimate source of his influence was his vast
moral and spiritual prestige, which led to him being designated
primarily as Imam, in the sense of one dispensing comprehensive
leadership to the community.[^40]

On January 23, 1980, Imam Khumayni was brought from Qum to Tehran to
receive treatment for a heart ailment. After thirty-nine days in
hospital, he took up residence in the north Tehran suburb of Darband,
and on April 22 he moved into a modest house in Jamaran, another suburb
to the north of the capital. A closely guarded compound grew up around
the house, and it was there that he was destined to spend the rest of
his life.

On January 25, during the Imam’s hospitalization, Abu’l-Hasan Bani Sadr,
a French-educated economist, was elected first president of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. His success had been made possible in part by the
Imam’s decision that it was not opportune to have a religious scholar
stand for election. This event, followed on March 14 by the first
elections to the *Majlis*, might have counted as a further step to the
institutionalization and stabilization of the political system.

However, Bani Sadr’s tenure, together with the tensions that soon arose
between him and a majority of the deputies in the *Majlis*, occasioned a
severe crisis that led ultimately to Bani Sadr’s dismissal. For the
president, his inherent megalomania aggravated by his victory at the
polls, was reluctant to concede supremacy to Imam Khumayni, and he
therefore attempted to build up a personal following, consisting largely
of former leftists who owed their positions exclusively to him.

In this enterprise, he inevitably clashed with the newly formed Islamic
Republic Party (*Hizb-i Jumhuri-yi Islami*), headed by Ayatullah
Bihishti, which dominated the *Majlis* and was loyal to what was
referred to as “the line of the Imam” (*khatt-i Imam*). As he had
earlier done with the disputes between the provisional government and
the Council of the Islamic Revolution, the Imam sought to reconcile the
parties, and on September 11 1980 appealed to all branches of government
and their members to set aside their differences.

While this new governmental crisis was brewing, on September 22, 1980,
Iraq sent its forces across the Iranian border and launched a war of
aggression that was to last for almost eight years. Iraq enjoyed
financial support in this venture from the Arab states lining the
Persian Gulf, above all from Saudi Arabia. Imam Khumayni, however,
correctly regarded the United States as the principal instigator of the
war from the outset, and American involvement became increasingly
visible as the war wore on.

Although Iraq advanced territorial claims against Iran, the barely
disguised purpose of the aggression was to take advantage of the
dislocations caused in Iran by the revolution, particularly the
weakening of the army through purges of disloyal officers, and to
destroy the Islamic Republic. As he had done during the revolution, Imam
Khumayni insisted on an uncompromising stance and inspired a steadfast
resistance, which prevented the easy Iraqi victory many foreign
observers had confidently foretold. Initially, however, Iraq enjoyed
some success, capturing the port city of Khurramshahr and encircling
Abadan.

The conduct of the war became one more issue at dispute between Bani
Sadr and his opponents. Continuing his efforts at reconciling the
factions, Imam Khumayni established a three-man commission to
investigate the complaints each had against the other. The commission
reported on June 1, 1981 that Bani Sadr was guilty of violating the
constitution and contravening the Imam’s instructions. He was
accordingly declared incompetent by the *Majlis* to function as
president, and the next day, in accordance with Article 110 section (e)
of the constitution, Imam Khumayni dismissed him. He went into hiding,
and on July 28 fled to Paris, disguised as a woman.

Toward the end of his presidency, Bani Sadr had allied himself with the
*Sazman-i Mujahidin-i Khalq* (Organization of People’s Strugglers;
however, the group is commonly known in Iran as munafiqin, “hypocrites,”
not mujahidin, because of its members’ hostility to the Islamic
Republic). An organization with a tortuous ideological and political
history, it had hoped, like Bani Sadr, to displace Imam Khumayni and
capture power for itself. After Bani Sadr went into exile, members of
the organization embarked on a campaign of assassinating government
leaders in the hope that the Islamic Republic would collapse.

Even before Bani Sadr fled, a massive explosion had destroyed the
headquarters of the Islamic Republic Party, killing more than seventy
people including Ayatullah Bihishti. On August 30, 1981, Muhammad ‘Ali
Raja’i, Bani Sadr’s successor as president, was killed in another
explosion. Other assassinations followed over the next two years,
including five Imam Jum’a’s as well as a host of lesser figures.

Throughout these disasters, Imam Khumayni maintained his customary
composure, declaring, for example, after the assassination of Raja’i
that the killings would change nothing and in fact showed Iran to be
“the most stable country in the world,” given the ability of the
government to continue functioning in an orderly manner.[^41] The fact
that Iran was able to withstand such blows internally while continuing
the war of defense against Iraq was indeed testimony to the roots the
new order had struck and to the undiminished prestige of Imam Khumayni
as the leader of the nation.

Ayatullah Khamna’i, a longtime associate and devotee of the Imam, was
elected president on October 2, 1981, and he remained in this position
until he succeeded him as leader of the Islamic Republic on his death in
1989. No governmental crises comparable to those of the first years of
the Islamic Republic occurred during his tenure. Nonetheless, structural
problems persisted. The constitution provided that legislation passed by
the *Majlis* should be reviewed by a body of senior *fuqaha*’ known as
the Council of Guardians (*Shaura-yi Nagahban*) to ensure its conformity
with the provisions of Ja’fari *fiqh*.

This frequently led to a stalemate on a variety of important legislative
issues. On at least two occasions, in October 1981 and January 1983,
Hashimi- Rafsanjani, then chairman of the *Majlis*, requested the Imam
to arbitrate decisively, drawing on the prerogatives inherent in the
doctrine of Wilayat al-faqih, in order to break the deadlock. He was
reluctant to do so, always preferring that a consensus should emerge.

However, on January 6, 1988, in a letter addressed to Khamna’i, the Imam
put forward a far-reaching definition of Wilayat al-faqih, now termed
“absolute” (*mutlaqa*), which made it theoretically possible for the
leadership to override all conceivable objections to the policies it
supported. Governance, Imam Khumayni proclaimed, is the most important
of all divine ordinances (*ahkam-i ilahi*) and it takes precedence over
secondary divine ordinances (*ahkam-i far’iya-yi ilahiya*).

Not only does the Islamic state permissibly enforce a large number of
laws not mentioned specifically in the sources of the *shari’a*, such as
the prohibition of narcotics and the levying of customs dues; it can
also suspend the performance of a fundamental religious duty, the hajj,
when this is necessitated by the higher interest of the Muslims.[^42]

At first sight, the theory of *wilayat -i mutlaqa-yi faqih* might appear
to be a justification for unlimited individual rule by the leader
(rahbar). One month later, however, Imam Khumayni delegated these
broadly defined prerogatives to a commission named the Assembly for the
Determination of the Interest of the Islamic Order (*Majma’-i Tashkhis-i
Maslahat-i Nizam-i Islami*.) This standing body has the power to settle
decisively all differences on legislation between the *Majlis* and the
Council of Guardians.

The war against Iraq continued to preoccupy Iran until July 1988. Iran
had come to define its war aims as not simply the liberation of all
parts of its territory occupied by Iraq, but also the overthrow of the
regime of Saddam Husayn. A number of military victories made this goal
appear attainable. On November 29, 1981, Imam Khumayni congratulated his
military commanders on successes achieved in Khuzestan, remarking that
the Iraqis had been obliged to retreat before the faith of the Iranian
troops and their eagerness for martyrdom.[^43]

The following year, on May 24, Khurramshahr, which had been held by the
Iraqis since shortly after the outbreak of war, was liberated, and only
small pockets of Iranian territory remained in Iraqi hands. The Imam
marked the occasion by condemning anew the Persian Gulf states that
supported Saddam Husayn and describing the victory as a divine
gift.[^44] Iran failed, however, to follow up swiftly on its surprise
victory and the momentum, which might have made possible the destruction
of Saddam Husayn’s regime, was lost as the tide of war flowed back and
forth. The United States was, in any event, determined to deny Iran a
decisive victory and stepped up its intervention in the conflict in a
variety of ways.

Finally, on July 2, 1988, the US navy stationed in the Persian Gulf shot
down a civilian Iranian airliner, with the loss of 290 passengers. With
the utmost reluctance, Imam Khumayni agreed to end the war on the terms
specified in Resolution 598 of the United Nations Security Council,
comparing his decision in a lengthy statement issued on July 20 to the
drinking of poison.[^45]

Any notion that the acceptance of a ceasefire with Iraq signaled a
diminution in the Imam’s readiness to confront the enemies of Islam was
dispelled when, on February 14, 1989, he issued a *fatwa* calling for
the execution of Selman Rushdie, author of the obscene and blasphemous
novel, The Satanic Verses, as well as those responsible for the
publication and dissemination of the work.

The *fatwa* received a great deal of support in the Muslim world as the
most authoritative articulation of popular outrage at Rushdie’s gross
insult to Islam. Although its demand remained unfulfilled, it
demonstrated plainly the consequences that would have to be faced by any
aspiring imitator of Rushdie, and thus had an important deterrent
effect. Generally overlooked at the time was the firm grounding of the
Imam’s *fatwa* in the existing provisions of both Shi’i and Sunni
jurisprudence; it was not therefore innovative. What lent the *fatwa*
particular significance was rather its issuance by the Imam as a figure
of great moral authority.

The Imam had also gained the attention of the outside world, albeit in a
less spectacular way, on January 4, 1989, when he sent Mikhail
Gorbachev, then general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, a letter in which he predicted the collapse of the Soviet Union
and the disappearance of communism: “Henceforth it will be necessary to
look for communism in the museums of political history of the world.” He
also warned Gorbachev and the Russian people against replacing communism
with Western-style materialism: “The basic problem of your country has
nothing to do with ownership, the economy, or freedom; it is the lack of
a true belief in God, the same problem that has drawn the West into a
blind alley of triviality and purposelessness.”[^46]

Internally, however, the most important development in the last year of
Imam Khumayni’s life was, without doubt, his dismissal of Ayatullah
Muntaziri from the position of successor to the leadership of the
Islamic Republic. Once a student and close associate of the Imam, who
had gone so far as to call him “the fruit of my life,” Muntaziri had had
among his associates over the years persons executed for
counterrevolutionary activity, including a son-in-law, Mahdi Hashimi,
and made far-reaching criticisms of the Islamic Republic, particularly
with regard to judicial matters.

On July 31, 1988, he wrote a letter to the Imam questioning what he
regarded as unjustified executions of members of the Sazman-i
Mujahidin-I Khalq held in Iranian prisons after the organization, from
its base in Iraq, had made a large-scale incursion into Iranian
territory in the closing stages of the Iran-Iraq war. Matters came to a
head the following year, and on March 28, 1989, the Imam wrote to
Muntaziri accepting his resignation from the succession, a resignation
that under the circumstances he was compelled to offer.[^47]

On June 3, 1989, after eleven days in hospital for an operation to stop
internal bleeding, Imam Khumayni lapsed into a critical condition and
died. The outpouring of grief was massive and spontaneous, the exact
counterpoint to the vast demonstrations of joy that had greeted his
return to Iran a little over ten years earlier. Such was the press of
mourners, estimated at some nine million that the body ultimately had to
be transported by helicopter to its place of burial to the south of
Tehran on the road leading to Qum. A still expanding complex of
structures has grown up around the shrine of the Imam, making it likely
that it will become the center of an entire new city devoted to ziyara
and religious learning.

The testament of Imam Khumayni was published soon after his death. A
lengthy document, it addresses itself principally to the various classes
of Iranian society, urging them to do whatever is necessary for the
preservation and strengthening of the Islamic Republic. Significantly,
however, it begins with an extended meditation on the *hadith-i
thaqalayn*: “I leave among you two great and precious things: the Book
of God and my progeny; they will never be separated from each other
until they meet me at the pool.” The Imam interprets the misfortunes
that have befallen Muslims throughout history and more particularly in
the present age as the result of efforts precisely to disengage the
Qur’an from the progeny of the Prophet (S).

The legacy of Imam Khumayni was considerable. He had bequeathed to Iran
not only a political system enshrining the principles both of religious
leadership and of an elected legislature and head of the executive
branch, but also a whole new ethos and self-image, a dignified stance of
independence vis-à-vis the West are in the Muslim world. He was deeply
imbued with the traditions and worldview of Shi’i Islam, but he viewed
the revolution he had led and the republic he had founded as the nucleus
for a worldwide awakening of all Muslims.

He had sought to attain this goal by, among other things, issuing
proclamations to the hujjaj on a number of occasions, and alerting them
to the dangers arising from American dominance of the Middle East, the
tireless activity of Israel for subverting the Muslim world, and the
subservience to America and Israel of numerous Middle Eastern
governments. Unity between Shi’is and Sunnis was one of his lasting
concerns; he was, indeed, the first Shi’i authority to declare
unconditionally valid prayers performed by Shi’is behind a Sunni
imam.[^48]

It must finally be stressed that despite the amplitude of his political
achievements, Imam Khumayni’s personality was essentially that of a
gnostic for whom political activity was but the natural outgrowth of an
intense inner life of devotion. The comprehensive vision of Islam that
he both articulated and exemplified is, indeed, his most significant
legacy

[^1]: English-born Hamid Algar received his Ph.D. in oriental studies
from Cambridge. Since 1965, he has served on the faculty of the
Department of Near Eastern Studies at the University of California,
Berkeley, where he teaches Persian and Islamic history and philosophy.
Dr. Algar has written extensively on the subject of Iran and Islam,
including the books Religion and State in Iran, 1785-1906 and Mirza
Malkum Khan: A Biographical Study in Iranian Modernism. He has been
following the Islamic movement in Iran with interest for many years. In
an article published in 1972, he assessed the situation there and
forecast the Revolution “more accurately than all the U.S. government’s
political officers and intelligence analysts,” in the words of Nicholas
Wade, Science magazine. Dr. Algar has translated numerous books from
Arabic, Turkish, and Persian, including the book Islam and Revolution:
Writings and Declarations of Imam Khomeini.

[^2]: See Muhammad Riza Hakimi, Mir Hamid Husayn, Qum, 1362 Sh./1983.

[^3]: However, according to a statement by the Imam’s elder brother,
Sayyid Murtaza Pasandida, his point of departure was Kashmir, not
Lucknow; see ‘Ali Davani, Nahzat-i Ruhaniyun-I Iran, Tehran, n.d., VI,
p. 760).

[^4]: See Divan-I Imam, Tehran, 1372 Sh./1993, p. 50.

[^5]: Interview of the present writer with Hajj Sayyid Ahmad Khomeini,
son of the Imam, Tehran, 12 September, 1982.

[^6]: Imam Khomeini, Sahifa-yi Nur, Tehran, 1361 Sh., /1982, X p. 63.

[^7]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XVI, p. 121.

[^8]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XII, p. 51.

[^9]: Shadharat al-Ma’arif, Tehran, 1360 Sh./1982, pp. 6-7.

[^10]: Sayyid ‘Ali Riza Yazdi Husayni, Aina-yi Danishvaran, Tehran,
1353/1934, pp. 65-7.

[^11]: Sayyid Hamid Ruhani, Barrasi va Tahlili az Nahzat-I Imam
Khumayni, I, Najaf, n.d., pp. 55-9.

[^12]: Kashf al-Asrar, p. 185.

[^13]: Kashf al-Asrar, p. 186.

[^14]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, p. 27.

[^15]: Kauthar, I, p. 67; Sahifa-yi Nur, I, p. 39.

[^16]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, p. 46.

[^17]: Interview with the present writer, Tehran, December 1979.

[^18]: Kauthar, I, pp. 169-178.

[^19]: See Ansari, Hadis-I Bidari, p. 67.

[^20]: Tahrir al-Wasila, I, p. 486.

[^21]: For maintaining readability, (S) which is an acronym for “Salla
(a)llahu alayhi wa aalihi wa sallam” is used throughout the book to
denote “May peace and benedictions of God be upon him and his family.”
It is used for Prophet Muhammad.

[^22]: For maintaining readability, (A) which is an acronym for “Alayhi
(alayhim) al-salaam” is used throughout the book to denote “May peace of
God be upon him/her/them.” It is used for the Prophets, Imams, and
saints.

[^23]: Wilayat al-faqih, Najaf, n.d., p. 204.

[^24]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, pp. 129, 132.

[^25]: Imam Khomeini, Risala-yi Ahkam, p. 328.

[^26]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, pp. 144-5.

[^27]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, p. 215.

[^28]: Shahidi digar az ruhaniyat, Najaf, n.d., p. 27.

[^29]: New York Times, January 2, 1978.

[^30]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, p. 97.

[^31]: Sahifa-yi Nur, II, p. 143.

[^32]: Sahifa-yi Nur, III, p. 225.

[^33]: Sahifa-yi Nur, IV, pp. 281-6.

[^34]: Sahifa-yi Nur, V, p. 75.

[^35]: Sahifa-yi Nur, V, p. 233.

[^36]: Sahifa-yi Nur, X, p. 141.

[^37]: Sahifa-yi Nur, X, p. 149.

[^38]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XII, p. 40.

[^39]: Qanun-i Asasi-yi Jumhuri-yi Islami-yi Iran, Tehran, 1370
Sh./1991, pp. 23-24, 53-58.

[^40]: Suggestions that the use of this title assimilated him to the
Twelve Imams of Shi’i belief and hence attributed infallibility to him
are groundless.

[^41]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XV, p. 130.

[^42]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XX, pp. 170-71.

[^43]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XV, p. 234.

[^44]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XVI, pp. 154-5.

[^45]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XXI, pp. 227-44.

[^46]: Ava-yi Tauhid, Tehran, 1367 Sh./1989, pp. 3-5.

[^47]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XXI, p. 112.

[^48]: Istifta’at, I, p. 279.


