Seventeenth Hadith: Repentance (Tawbah)
=======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلى الإمَامِ الأَقْدَمِ حُجَّةِ الفِرْقَةِ
وَرَئِيسِ الأُمَّةِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ الكُلَيْنِيِّ رَحِمَهُ
اللهُ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَحْيَى، عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
عِيسَى، عَنِ الحَسَنِ بْنِ مَحْبُوبٍ، عَنْ مُعَاوِيَةَ بْنِ وَهَبٍ
قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: إذَا
تَابَ العَبْدُ تَوْبَةً نَصُوحاً أَحَبَّهُ اللهُ فَسَتَرَ عَلَيْهِ فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ. فَقُلْتُ: وَكَيْفَ يَسْتُرُ عَلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ:
يُنْسِي مَلَكَيْهِ مَا كَتَبَا عَلَيْهِ مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ وَيُوحِي إلى
جَوَارِحِهِ: إكْتُمِي عَلَيْهِ ذُنُوبَهُ وَيُوحِي إلى بِقَاعِ الأَرْضِ
اكْتُمِي مَا كَانَ يَعْمَلُ عَلَيْكِ مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ. فَيَلْقَى اللهَ
حِينَ يَلْقَاهُ وَلَيْسَ شَيْءٌ يَشْهَدُ عَلَيْهِ بِشَيْءٍ مِنَ
الذُّنُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With a continuous chain of transmission reaching the pioneering leader,
a proof of the sect and a chief of the ummah, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub
al-Kulayni (R) from Muhammad ibn Yahya, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
‘Isa, from, al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, from Mu’awiyah ibn Wahab, who said, “I
heard Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) says: ‘When a servant turns to God with sincere
repentance (tawbatan nasuhan), God loves him and covers him (i.e. his
sins) in the world and the Hereafter.’ I said, ‘And how does He cover
him? ‘The Imam (A) replied, “He makes the two angels (assigned to write
his deeds) forget that which they have written of his sins. Then He
inspires his bodily members (saying), “Do conceal his sins,” and He
inspires the earth’s places (saying), “Conceal the sins that he used to
commit over you.” Then he meets God, at the time that he meets Him, in
such a manner that there is nothing to give witness against him
regarding any sin.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

Know that *tawbah* (repentance) is one of the important as well as
difficult stages, which signifies the return from (physical) nature
(*tabi’ah*) to the soul’s spirituality after that the light of
(primordial) human nature (*fitrah*) and the spirit has been blinded by
the darkness of carnal nature through sins and disobedience. To explain,
the soul in its initial natural state (*fitrah*) is devoid of any kind
of excellence, beauty, light or delight, in the same way as it is free
from their opposites. It is like a blank tablet absolutely without any
inscription.

Neither it possesses any spiritual merits nor any vices. But there has
been planted in it the sparks of capacity and capability to attain any
kind of station. Its nature (*fitrah*) is straight and its essence
carries intrinsic luminosity. But commission of sins causes obscurity
within the heart and this obfuscation increases with the number of sins
until it becomes totally darkened. The light of intrinsic nature is
extinguished and changed into abiding wretchedness. But between these
two states, before the onset of total darkness over the heart’s tablet,
if it awakes from its slumber of negligence, this state of awakening is
followed by that of repentance.

The benefit arising from this state - with the conditions to be
mentioned, God willing, in the following pages - becomes complete and
the soul returns from the darkness and obscurity of carnal nature to the
light of original nature and its essential spirituality. In other words,
it becomes again like a tablet devoid of virtues and vices., as
mentioned in the famous *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّائِبُ مِنَ الذَّنْبِ كَمَنْ لا ذَنْبَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who repents from sin is like one who has not sinned.[^2]

This shows that *tawbah* in reality is a return from the domain of
physical nature (*tabi’ah*) and its laws to the domain of spirituality
and primordial nature (*fitrah*). Similarly, the reality of *inabah* is
return from *fitrah* and spirituality to God and setting out and
migrating from the soul’s habitat to its ultimate destination. Hence the
station of *tawbah* is prior to that of *inabah* and an elaboration of
this point is not proper for these pages.

Tawbah And Postponement
-----------------------

An important point whose awareness is necessary for the wayfarer of the
path of guidance and salvation is that success in a complete and sound
repentance, meeting all its conditions (to be mentioned), is a difficult
thing and rarely attainable. The indulgence in sin, especially the major
and mortal ones, causes man to become totally forgetful of *tawbah*. If
the tree of sinfulness growing in the orchard of the human heart reaches
maturity and fruition, its roots becoming strong, the results are
calamitous, one of which is to turn away man totally from repentance.

Even if once in a while it comes to his mind, he keeps on postponing it
from day to day and from one month to another, telling himself, “I will
make a sound repentance at the end of my life and in old age,”
forgetting that this is a Divine stratagem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَاللَّهُ خَيْرُ الْمَاكِرِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And God is the best of devisers.*** (***3:54***)

Don’t imagine that man can perform *tawbah* after the strengthening of
the roots of sinfulness or meet its conditions. Therefore, the
springtime for *tawbah* is the time of-youth when the sins are fewer,
the inner darkness of the heart incomplete, the conditions of *tawbah*
easier, and their fulfillment less difficult.

Moreover, man’s greed is greater in old age and so also are his love of
wealth,. ambition and his hopes. This is proved by experience and borne
out by the Prophet’s noble tradition. Even if it be admitted that man
can succeed in performing *tawbah* in old age, there is no certainty of
reaching old age and-of not meeting one’s death in youth in the
condition of habitual disobedience. The relative fewness of old people
is also an indication of the fact that death is closer to the young. In
a city of fifty thousand we do not see more than fifty octogenarians.

Therefore, my dear, beware of Satan’s guiles and abstain from playing
tricks with your Lord by telling yourself: “I will lead a life of lust
for some fifty years or more, and will make amends for the past by
asking His pardon.” This is wishful thinking.

If you have heard or read in a tradition that God Almighty has favored
this ummah and accepts the repentance of its members until before the
appearance of death or its signs, that is true. But alas, that is the
time when the opportunity of *tawbah* is taken away from man. Do you
think that *tawbah* is a mere verbal exercise? No, such is not the case;
the performance of-*tawbah* requires effort and hardship. The return, as
well as the determination to return, requires practical effort as well
as the exercise of knowledge.

Otherwise it rarely happens for a man, either to think of *tawbah* or to
succeed in performing it, or to fulfill the conditions of its validity
and acceptance, or the conditions of its perfection. And it often
happens that death grants no respite for the thought of *tawbah* to
occur, or for *tawbah* to materialize, as one is transferred from this
habitat with the burden of weighty sins and their endless darkness.
Then, only God knows what ‘misfortunes and calamities befall him.

Even if it be assumed that one is ultimately destined to salvation and
felicity in the Hereafter, the atonement of sins is not an easy task in
that world. It entails terrible squeezes, hardships and burnings before
one becomes worthy of the intercession (of the intercessors) and the
mercy of the Most Merciful.

So, my dear, make up your mind as soon as possible and make firm your
resolution and will. Repent from your sins so long as you are young and
alive in this world. Don’t let this God-given opportunity to slip away.
Don’t pay attention to satanic enticements and the tricks of the carnal
self.

An Important Point
------------------

Here it is also necessary to pay attention to another important point.
The person who repents cannot completely recover that inward spiritual
purity and that intellectual illumination (of those who abstain from
sin) even after *tawbah.* Because a sheet of paper does not regain its
former whiteness after being blackened and then cleaned with an eraser.
It is difficult for a broken pot when repaired to recover its former
condition. Great is the difference between a lifelong faithful and
sincere friend and the friend who apologizes after betraying one.

Moreover, few are they who can correctly fulfill the duties of
repentance.

Hence man should try as much as possible not to enter sin and
disobedience, for the correction of the soul after its corruption is a
difficult task. And if, God forbid, should such an adversity occur, one
should try to take a curative step as soon as possible, for a slight
damage is sooner and better repaired.

My dear, do not pass by this stage nonchalantly’ and indifferently!
Meditate and reflect over your condition and your ultimate end. Turn to
the Book of God, the traditions of the Seal of Prophets and the Imams of
guidance - upon all of whom be God’s salutations - to the utterances of
the *ulama* of the Ummah as well as to the dictates of your own
intellect and conscience. Do open this door, which is the key to all
other openings, and enter this house which, for us, is the main abode of
humanity.

Consider it important and attend to it with care. Implore God, the
Exalted and the Blessed, to grant you success in finding your cherished
goal. Seek help from the spiritual station of the Noble Messenger and
the Imams of guidance - upon all of whom be peace - and seek refuge in
the *Wali al-’Amr*, the Age’s honor and its Leader (the Twelfth Imam),
may God hasten his appearance. Of course, that holy personage does
assist the weak and the destitute and answer the call of the helpless.

The Essentials Of Tawbah
------------------------

Let it be known to you that there are certain essentials and
requirements of a thorough repentance without whose materialization an
authentic repentance is not attained. We shall mention the main ones of
these, which are essential.

One of them, which is the most essential, is regret and remorse for
one’s past sins and faults. Another is resolving not to make a return to
their commission ever. These two, in fact, constitute the essential
reality of *tawbah* and comprise its essential constituents. The main
thing in this respect is the attainment of this state and the
realization of this reality, which should take place in such a manner
that man recognizes the effect of sins on the soul and its consequences
in the world of *Barzakh* and the Day of Resurrection, both by means of
rational reflection as well as from tradition.

For it is a demonstrable truth for the *urafa*, which has also been
mentioned in the traditions of the Household of Inerrancy (A) that sins
have reified forms in Barzakh and at the time of Resurrection which
correspond with those sins. They are endowed with a life and will of
their own in that world and torment men awaringly and willfully. In the
same way, the fire of Hell also burns men awaringly and willfully. That
is because that realm is the realm of total life.

Hence in that world we shall encounter forms which are the result of our
evil or good deeds. This matter has been often mentioned, expressly or
implicitly, in the Holy Qur’an and the noble traditions. It is also in
accordance with the creed of the emanationist philosophers and the
experience and discoveries of the mystics and ‘urafa. Similarly, every
sin has an effect upon the soul that has been called *al-nuqtat
al-sawda’* (a black spot) in traditions. It is an obfuscation which
appears in the heart and the soul and grows gradually. Ultimately, it
may grow to completion and lead man to disbelief, apostasy and
everlasting wretchedness, as explained earlier.

Hence the intelligent man when he becomes aware of this fact and pays as
much heed to the statements of the prophets and *awliya’* as to the
advice of a physician and doctor, he would certainly abstain from sin
and distance himself from it. And if, God forbid, he commits any he
would turn away loathfully in penitence and his heart would be filled
with remorse. The result that this remorse produces is something great
and its effects are very beneficial. The determination to quit
disobedience and sin is a consequence of this remorse.

If these two essential conditions are realized, the task of the wayfarer
of the Hereafter becomes easier. God’s graceful succor becomes his lot,
and, in accordance with the explicit meaning of the holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ التَّوَّابِينَ وَيُحِبُّ الْمُتَطَهِّرِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily God loves the repentant,*** (***2:222***)

as well as the present noble tradition, he becomes the beloved of God if
he is sincere in his repentance.

And man should strive in the sincerity of his repentance with practical
and meditative exercises and contemplative effort, realizing that being
beloved of God is something priceless, beyond all worth. Only God knows
what spiritual resplendence and what flares of perfection make up the
Hereafterly form of that love, and only God, the Sublime and the
Blessed, knows how He shall treat His beloved ones.

O man! How sinful and foolish thou art not to know the worth of the
bounties of thy Provider (*wali al-ni’am*). After having spent years in
disobedience and after prolonged disloyalty to such a Lord, Who has
provided all the means of your comfort and ease - without that being,
*na’udhu bi Allah,* of any imaginable benefit to Him - having violated
His sanctities and taken shamelessness and recalcitrance to their
extreme, now that you are remorseful, penitent and repentant, God
Almighty has taken you for His loved one. What abundance of mercy and
what plentitude of bounty is it!

O God! We are incapable of thanking You for Your bounties. Our tongues
and those of all other beings are unable to praise You and extol You.
All that we can do is to bow our heads in shame and to ask Your pardon
for our shamelessness. What are we to deserve Your mercy? Yet Your mercy
is more abundant and Your bounties are more inclusive than can be
described. Indeed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتَ كَمَا أَثْنَيْتَ عَلَى نَفْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are as You have praised Yourself.[^3]

And man should endeavor to intensify the form of contrition and remorse
in the heart so that God willing, it enters the burning chamber. That
is, through meditation about the terrible consequences of sin, remorse
becomes stronger in his heart, thereby voluntarily kindling the holy
fire, the fire of which the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿نَارُ اللَّهِ الْمُوقَدَةُ. الَّتِي تَطَّلِعُ عَلَى الْأَفْئِدَةِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The fire of God kindled, roaring over the hearts covered down upon
them, in columns outstretched.*[^4]

In his heart, burning the heart in the fire of remorse to incinerate all
its sins and to burn away all its rust and corrosion. He should know
that were he not to kindle himself this fire in this world and were he
not to open upon himself the door of this hell - which itself is the
main gateway of Paradise - he would inevitably pass from this world into
the other to face the terribly cauterizing fire prepared for him there.
Thereupon the doors of Hell shall be opened and the doors of Paradise
closed to him.

O God! Give us a breast lit with the fire of remorse. Set our hearts
aflame with the worldly fire and set it afire by throwing into it the
sparks of remorse. Remove the corrosion of our hearts and take us from
this world in a state of freedom from the consequences of sins. Verily
Thou art the Lord of bounties and are powerful over everything.

The Conditions Of Tawbah
------------------------

That which was mentioned in the section above were the essential
requirements of *tawbah.* There are certain conditions for its
acceptance, as well as for its perfection, that we shall mention below.

The main conditions for the acceptance of *tawbah* are two. So also
there are two main conditions for its perfection. In this section we
shall mention the noble utterance of Hadrat *Mawla* al-Mawali, ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (A), for, in fact, it is the essence of wisdom, being of the
order of ‘speech of kings and king of speech’:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُوِيَ فِي نَهْجِ البَلاغَةِ أنَّ قائلاً قَالَ بِحَضْرَتِهِ:
أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللهَ. فَقَالَ لَهُ: ثَكَلَتْكَ أُمُّكَ أَتَدْرِي مَا
الإسْتِغْفَارُ؟ الإسْتِغْفَارُ دَرَجَةُ العِلِّيِّينَ. وَهُوَ اسْمٌ
وَاقِعٌ عَلَى سِتَّةِ مَعَانٍ: أَوَّلُهَا النَّدَمُ عَلَى مَا مَضَى.
وَالثَّانِي العَزْمُ عَلَى تَرْكِ العَوْدِ إلَيْهِ أَبَداً.
والثَّالِثُ أَنْ تُؤَدِّيَ إلَى المَخْلُوقِينَ حُقُوقَهُمْ حَتَّى
تَلْقَى اللهَ أَمْلَسَ لَيْسَ عَلَيْكَ تَبِعَةٌ. وَالرَّابِعُ أنْ
تَعْمَدَ إلَى كُلِّ فَرِيضَةٍ عَلَيْكَ ضَيَّعْتَهَا فَتُؤَدِّيَ
حَقَّهَا. والخَامِسُ أَنْ تَعْمَدَ إلَى اللَّحْمِ الَّذِي نَبُتَ عَلَى
السُّحْتِ فَتُذِيبُهُ بِالأحْزَانِ حَتَّى تُلْصِقَ الجِلْدَ بِالعَظْمِ
وَيَنْشَأَ بَيْنَهُمَا لَحْمٌ جَدِيدٌ. وَالسَّادِسُ أَنْ تُذِيقَ
الجِسْمَ أَلَمَ الطَّاعَةِ كَمَا أَذَقْتَهُ حَلاوَةَ المَعْصِيَةِ
فَعِنْدَ ذَلِكَ تَقُولُ أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated by al Sayyid al Radi (R) in the Nahj al balaghah that
some said ‘Astaghfirullah (I seek God’s forgiveness) before ‘Ali (A).
‘Ali said to him. “May thy mother mourn for thee! Do you know what is
istighfar? Verily istighfar is a degree of the ‘illiyyun and it is a
word that means six things. First is remorse over the past. Second, the
resolution not to return to it ever. Third, to return to the creatures
their rights (usurped in the past) so that you meet God Almighty in such
a state of purity that no one has a claim against you. Fourth, that you
fulfill every duty that was neglected by you, in order to satisfy your
obligation in respect of it. Fifth, that you attend to the flesh of your
body that had grown on unlawful nourishment so that it melts away as a
result of grief and mourning and the skin adheres to the bones, after
which new flesh grows there between. Sixth, that you make your body
taste the pain of obedience in the same way as it tasted earlier the
pleasure of sinfulness. When you have done these things then say
Astaghfirullah!”[^5]

This noble tradition mentions firstly two essential requirements of
penitence, which are remorse and the resolution not to relapse into sin.
Then it mentions the two important condition for its acceptance, which
are returning the rights of creatures and then of the Creator. *Tawbah*
is not accepted from anyone on the mere verbal declaration, ‘I repent.’
The penitent man is one who returns everything illegitimately taken from
others. If anyone has a claim against him, he should satisfy it if
possible, or acquire his propitiation.

He should discharge whatever divine obligations and duties that have
remained unfulfilled, and if all of them cannot possibly be fulfilled he
should try to make amends to the extent that he can. He should know that
everyone of these is a claim with a claimant that would demand it of him
in the other life in the hardest of conditions, and he would be unable
to satisfy it without taking up the burden of others’ sins and
exchanging his good deeds for the satisfaction of those claims. At that
time, he will be helpless and destitute and have no way out for his
relief.

My dear, let not Satan and the carnal self take hold of you and make the
matter appear an insurmountable difficulty in your eyes and thus finish
you off by making you refrain from *tawbah. Do* know that it is better
to act in this regard even if to a small extent. If the unoffered
prayers, fasts and atonements are many, if God’s unfulfilled duties are
numerous and the people’s usurped rights are innumerable, if your sins
are abundant and your vices are plenty, do not despair of God’s grace
and’ do not lose hope in His mercy. God Almighty will facilitate your
passage if you act to the extent of your capacity and He will show you
the path of salvation. You should know that to despair of the mercy of
God is the biggest of sins and I don’t think that any other sin has a
more evil effect upon the soul.

A person that despairs of divine mercy, his heart is so full of gloom
and he becomes so unbridled that nothing can correct him. Beware, lest
you despair of God’s mercy and consider sins and their consequences as
insurmountable. God’s mercy is greater than everything and encompasses
all things, and God’s justice is not bound by conditions. What were you,
to begin with? In the void of nothingness, when there was no question of
capacity or worthiness, God, the Supreme and the Glorious, endowed you
with the bounty of being and the excellences of existence without any
request or prayer or any worthiness or capacity on your part.

Then He provided you with His unlimited bounties and His unending
favors, subjecting all the creatures to you. Even now your condition is
not worse than absolute nothingness and pure non-being. Moreover, God
has promised mercy and forgiveness. Take a step forward towards His Holy
threshold and He will Himself assist you by all means. If you cannot
make amends for the return of His rights, He will overlook your failure.
If you cannot satisfy the rights of others, He will compensate for it.
And you have already heard the story of the young grave-opener during
the times of the Messenger of Allah (S).

My dear, the path of God is easy and simple. All that it requires is
some attentiveness. Postponement, delay, neglect and allowing the sins
to pile up day after day is what makes the matter difficult. But
resolute action and decision to set aright the affairs of the soul makes
the path shorter and the task easier. Make an experiment by taking some
action. If you achieve results, the truth of this matter will be proved
to you. Otherwise the path of perversion is open and the hands of your
sinfulness are long.

The other two things mentioned by Amir al-Mu’minin (A) are the
conditions for a perfect *tawbah* and a thorough penitence. Not that
*tawbah* is not realized or accepted without them, rather it does not
become perfect in their absence.

Let it be known to you that everyone of the stations (*manazil*) of the
wayfarers has stages (*maratib*)which differ in accordance with the
state of their hearts. If the penitent person wants to attain to its
perfect degree, after having attended to the omissions - i.e. after
having made good for the neglect of the duties-he should now attend to
the accretions also. That is, he must now take up the spiritual
accretion acquired during the days of sinfulness.

That takes place by completely wiping out the physical and spiritual
effects produced in the realm of the self so that the soul recovers its
former refinement and its primordial, natural spirituality by a process
of thorough purification. As you already know, every sin and pleasure
produces an effect upon the soul in the same way as the body too derives
nourishment from some of them. Hence the penitent person should with
manly courage and determination exterminate all those effects and their
traces through physical and spiritual austerities, as taught by *Mawla*
‘Ali (A).

Thus through physical austerities and abstinence from pleasures and
dietary luxuries, through obligatory or supererogatory fasting, he
should remove the flesh that accumulated in his body through sin or
during his sinful days. By means of spiritual exercises, worship and
ritual devotions he must attend to the accretions of carnal nature. This
is because the forms of physical pleasures still linger in the soul, and
as these forms are present there the carnal self is inclined toward them
and the heart is infatuated with them and it is feared that, God forbid,
the self would rebel again and snatch away its reins.

Hence it is necessary for the wayfarers of the Hereafterly path and the
penitent from sins to make the soul taste the pain of austerities and
worship. If a night was spent in sin and licentiousness, that must be
compensated with a night’s watch devoted to the worship of God. If a day
was spent in corporeal pleasures, that must be compensated with fasts
and appropriate devotional rites. This is necessary so that the soul may
be completely purged of the effects arid traces of the attachments
arising from the love of the world. If this is done, *tawbah*, of
course, becomes perfect arid the soul’s primordial brilliance returns to
it.

Throughout the course of such exercises he must contemplate and meditate
upon, the consequences of sin, the severity of God Almighty’s might, the
precision of the Balance of deeds, and the intensity of the chastisement
of *Barzakh* and Resurrection. He must understand and make his self and
heart understand that all these things are consequences and forms of
one’s vicious deeds, of opposition to the King of kings. It is hoped
that after this knowledge and reflection the soul will loath sins and
detest them with a complete and total hatred, thus attaining the
intended result of *tawbah,* which now becomes perfect and complete.

Those two stages thus are what make the station of *tawbah* perfect and
complete. Of course, when man at first wishes to enter the station of
*tawbah,* he must not think that he is required to reach the last of
stages, so that the path appears to him to be full of difficulty and
hardship and he decides to leave off once for all. To whatever extent
the wayfarer of the path of Hereafter is able to traverse this path, it
is good and desirable to that extent. After that, when he sets out on
the path, God Almighty makes the journey easy for him.

Hence the difficulty of the journey must not stop one from setting out
towards his destination. For the goal is very great and important, and
once one understands the greatness of the goal the hardships of the path
become easy and bearable. Tell me, what goal is higher than eternal
salvation, joy and bless? What peril is greater than eternal
wretchedness and damnation? By shunning *tawbah* or postponing it and
delaying it one may subject oneself to eternal wretchedness, unending
punishment and everlasting damnation, and by performing it one may
obtain absolute felicity and become the beloved of God. Hence if the
goal is so great, why should one be scared of a few days’ hardship?

You should know that whatever action one can take, even if little, is
beneficial. Compare the matters of the Hereafter with worldly affairs,
wherein the worldly wise, if they are incapable of attaining their
highest objective, do not desist from reaching a lower goal. If an
objective cannot be obtained in its totality, that does not prevent them
from attaining it partially. You too, if you are incapable of attaining
this objective to its perfect degree, should not give up the principal
goal itself. Try to achieve it to the extent that is possible for you.

The Result Of Istighfar
-----------------------

Of the things in respect of which it is necessary for the penitent
person to act is taking refuge in the forgiveness of God Almighty and
attainment of the state of *istighfar.* Openly and secretly, mournfully
and pleadingly, in solitude, with lamentation, tears and wails of woe,
he should implore the forgiveness of His Sacred Essence to cover his
sins and wipe out their consequences.

Of course, the forgivefulness and the veiling grace of that Sacred
Essence implies the covering of defects and forgiveness of the sins’
consequences. And since the spiritual forms of deeds are like a man’s
offspring, or something even more closely linked to him, and since the
reality of *tawbah* and the form of *istighfar* is tantamount to
disowning and cursing (*li’an*), God Almighty, since He is the
All-forgiving and the Veiler, dissociates those offsprings of the
penitent from him on account of his *li’an* and separates them from him.

Thereupon He obscures that sin from the sight to all those beings that
have come to know about his sin, including the angels and the notaries
of offences, the time and the place of its commission, as well his own
bodily members and organs, and makes them forget it, as pointed out in
the noble tradition which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُنْسِي مَلَكَيْهِ مَا كَتَبَا عَلَيْهِ مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He makes His two angels forget that which they have recorded of his
sins.

And possibly God Almighty’s ‘inspiring’ the bodily members and organs,
as well as the earth’s locations, to conceal the sins, as mentioned in
the noble tradition, is the same as the erasing of the sins from their
memory. It is also possible that it means a command to abstain from
giving testimony. Or perhaps that which is meant is the obliteration of
the effects of sins from bodily members, whose presence amounts to their
existential witness, so that if one did not perform *tawbah* every one
of his organs, either with the tongue of speech or condition, would bear
testimony to his deeds.

As it is, God’s station of forgivefulness and His veiling grace have
required that now that we are in this world our organs and members
abstain from giving testimony about our deeds and time and space conceal
our actions. In the same way, if we leave this world with genuine
*tawbah* and sincere *istaghfar*, they will conceal our deeds, or our
deeds will be totally obscured for them. And perhaps the second
explanation is more in order in view of the God Almighty’s magnanimity,
so that the penitent human being is not ashamed in front of anyone. And
God knows best.

On The Interpretation Of Tawbah Nasuh
-------------------------------------

You should know that there is difference of opinion regarding the
interpretation of the term *tawbah nasuh* and a brief mention of it is
suitable here. Here we will confine ourselves to translating the words
of the greater researcher al-Shaykh al-Bahai (Q).

The informed traditionist al-Majlisi (M) quotes al-Shaykh al-Baha’i as
having said that the exegetes have given several meanings of *tawbatan
nasuh*. According to one of them, it means a *tawbah* that ‘advise’ the
people, that is invites them to simulate him on account of the good
effect produced in its performer, or that it ‘counsels’ its performer to
root out sins and to never return to their commission.

Another interpretation is that *tawbah nasuh* is a *tawbah* which is
done purely (*khalis*) for God’s sake, in the same way as pure honey
free from wax is called *‘asal nasuh*. And sincerity means that the
remorse should be on account of the ugliness of sins or because they are
contrary to God’s good pleasure, not for the fear of hellfire.

The honorable researcher al-Tusi has ruled in the *Tajrid* that a
remorse felt for sins on account of the fear of hellfire is not *tawbah
at* all.

According to another interpretation, *nasuh* is related to *nasabah*,
which means tailoring, because *tawbah* sews together the body of faith
torn by sin, or because it joins the penitent person to God’s *awliya’*
and His lovers in the same way as separate pieces of cloth are joined
together by tailoring.

According to yet another interpretation, *‘nasuh’* here is an attribute
of the penitent and is linked to *tawbah* in a metaphorical manner. That
is, *tawbah nasuh* is a *tawbah* whose performer counsels and advises
himself to perform it as perfectly and completely as it is worthy of
being performed until the effects of sins are totally purged from the
heart, which is attained by making the soul melt with regret and grief
and by clearing the darkness of vices by the light of virtues.

All Beings Are Endowed With Life And Knowledge
----------------------------------------------

Let it be known to you that there are certain realities, mysteries and
subtleties for *tawbah,* and there is a specific *tawbah* particular to
his own station for every one of the wayfarers of the path towards God.
And since we do not partake of those stations, an elaboration of their
details is not proper for these pages. Therefore it is better to
conclude this discourse with the mention of a point inferable from the
noble tradition, which is also in accordance with the literal meanings
of the verses of the Noble Qur’an and a large number of traditions
scattered through various chapters. That point is that every one of the
existents is possessed of knowledge, life and consciousness.

Rather, all the existents possess the *marifah* (gnosis) of the station
of God, the Glorious and the Sublime. The inspiration imparted to bodily
organs and members and the earth’s locations regarding the concealment
(of sins) and their obedience to divine commands, the *tasbih* of all
existents referred to expressly in the Glorious Qur’an and with the
mention of which things the noble traditions are replete - all these are
proof of their knowledge, cognition and life. Rather, they constitute
the proof of a special relation between the Creator and the creation, of
which none has any knowledge except the Sacred Essence of God Almighty
and those who it pleases Him should know.

And this is itself one of the teachings that the Noble Qur’an and the
traditions of the inerrant Imams have imparted to mankind, which is also
in agreement with the views of the emanationist philosophers and the
mystics, as well as the experience of the mystics. In the sublime
science of metaphysics it has been proved that existence is identical
with divine Excellences, Names and Attributes and at whatever level they
manifest themselves and are reflected in a mirror, the manifestation is
accompanied with all the aspects and excellences, including life,
cognition and the rest of the seven main Attributes. And every one of
the phases of manifestation of the reality of being and every level in
the descendence of the light of the perfect beauty of the Deity has a
special relation with the One, through which it has the secret gnosis of
the Lord, as stated in the noble verse.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿مَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ إِلَّا هُوَ آخِذٌ بِنَاصِيَتِهَا إِنَّ رَبِّي عَلَى
صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There is no creature that crawls, but He takes it by the forelock.***
(***11:56***)

It is said that *huwa* (He) refers to the mystery of Divine Ipseity, and
‘the taking by the forelock’ is the same mysterious, secret primordial
existential relation the way to whose cognition is closed to all
existents.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr, bab
al-tawbah, hadith No. 1.

[^2]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, hadith No. 10.

[^3]: Safinat al-Bihar, II, 180.

[^4]: 104:6

[^5]: Nahj al-balaghah, ed. Subhi al-Salih, Beirut 1387(1967), p.549,
Hikam, No. 417.


