Eighteenth Hadith: Remembrance Of God
=====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى فَخْرِ الطَّائِفَةِ وَذُخْرِهَا مُحَمَّدِ
بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ، عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَحْيَى،
عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عِيسَى، عَنِ ابْنِ مَحْبُوبٍ، عَنْ
عَبْدِاللهِ بْنِ سِنَانٍ، عَنْ أبِي حَمْزَةَ الثَّمَالِيِّ، عَنْ أبِي
جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: مَكْتُوبٌ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ الَّتِي
لَمْ تُغَيَّرْ أَنَّ مُوسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ سَأَلَ رَبَّهُ فَقَالَ:
يَا رَبِّ أَقَرِيبٌ أَنْتَ مِنِّي فَأُنَاجِيكَ أَمْ بَعِيدٌ
فَأُنَادِيكَ؟ فَأَوْحَى اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إِلَيْهِ: يَا مُوسَى أَنَا
جَلِيسُ مَنْ ذَكَرَنِي. فَقَالَ مُوسَى: فَمَنْ فِي سِتْرِكَ يَوْمَ لا
سِتْرَ إلا سِتْرَكَ؟ فَقَالَ: الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَنِي فَأَذْكُرُهُمْ
وَيَتَحَابُّونَ فِيَّ فَأُحِبُّهُمْ. فَأُولَئِكَ الَّذِينَ إَذَا
أَرَدْتُ أَنْ أُصِيبَ أَهْلَ الأرْضِ بِسُوءٍ ذَكَرْتَهُمْ فَدَفَعْتُ
عَنْهُمْ بِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from Muhammad ibn Yahya, from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa, from Ibn Mahbub, from ‘Abd Allah ibn Sinan, from
Abu Hamzah al-Thumali, from Abu Ja’far (A) that he said, “It is written
in the Torah that has not been altered that Moses (A) asked his Lord
(saying): ‘O Lord! (Tell me) art Thou near me, so that I should pray to
Thee in whispers, or art Thou far, that I should cry out. to Thee?’
Thereat God Almighty revealed to him: ‘O Moses! I am the companion of
one who remembers me.’ Moses said: ‘Who are those that shall be in Thy
refuge on the day when there shall be no refuge except Thy refuge?’ He
replied: ‘Those who remember Me, whom I do remember; those who love one
another for My sake, whom I love. They are those whom I remember
whenever I wish to strike the earth’s people with affliction, and
consequently spare them on their account.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

It is shown by this noble tradition that the Torah current amongst the
Jews is a corrupted and an altered one. The knowledge of the true Torah
was with the Ahl al-Bayt (A). From the contents of the current Torah and
Gospels it appears that they do not meet the standard of even the speech
commonly acceptable of a human being (to say nothing of the criterion of
Divine speech); rather, the delusions of some followers of carnal lust
and desire have been incorporated in them.

The researcher and traditionist al-Majlisi (M) says, “It appears that
the intention of Hadrat Musa by this question was to inquire about the
etiquette of prayer, while he knew that God is nearer to one than his
jugular vein, with an encompassing nearness based on knowledge, power
and causal efficiency.

He meant to say, ‘Do You like to be prayed to in whispers, like one
speaks to someone near, or should I call You like one who calls out to
someone far away?’ In other words, ‘When ‘I look at You, I find You
nearer than anything that is near, and when I look at myself I find
myself .at a far distance. Thus, I don’t know whether I should take into
consideration Your situation in my prayer or my own condition:’ And it
is possible that this question was made on behalf of someone else, like
the question related to the possibility of Beatific vision” (mentioned
in the Qur’an, 7:148).

It is possible that Moses intended to express his feeling of loss and
wonder in respect of the manner of praying. He meant to say, “O Lord!
You are too immaculate and above everything for nearness and farness to
be attributable to You, that I may address You as one who is near or one
who is far. Hence I am at a loss in this matter, for I do not consider
any manner of prayer to be suitable for Your glorious station. So permit
me to pray, and show me its manner. Teach me that which is appropriate
for Your sacred station.” The answer came from the Source of Glory and
Majesty that, “I, as the Sustainer, am present in all the manifold
levels and realms of existence. All the worlds constitute My presence.
Yet, I am the companion of those who remember Me and am by the side of
those who call Me.”

Of course, proximity and distance cannot be attributed to that Sacred
Essence. It possesses the encompassment of sustenance (*ihateh ye
qayyumi* i.e. the encompassment that God Almighty possesses over all
being as its sustainer) and existential all-inclusiveness (*shumul
al-wujudi*) over all the domains of being and all the streams of
reality. However, that which is mentioned in the noble verses of the
Glorious Book of God regarding the attribution of nearness and proximity
to God Almighty, such as the verses,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِي إِذَا دَعَانِي.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when My servants question thee concerning Me,*** (***tell them
that***) ***I am near to answer the call of the caller, when he calls to
Me.*** (***2:186***)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَنَعْلَمُ مَا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِ نَفْسُهُ وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ
مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We know what his soul whispers within him, and We are nearer to
him than the jugular vein.*** (***50:16***)

and others like them, constitute a kind of metaphor and allegory.
Otherwise, His sacred being is above proximity and distance, physical or
immaterial; for these qualities entail limitation (*tahdid*) and
likeness (*tashb’ih,* i.e. to creatures) and God Almighty is beyond
them. Rather, the presence of all existents in the court of His sanctity
is a relational presence, and the encompassment of that Sacred Essence
over the particles of the universe and the chains of existents is the
encompassment of sustenance, which is something other than sensible or
spiritual presence and is different from outward and inward
encompassment.

From this noble tradition, and some other traditions as well, the
preference for concealed remembrance (*dhikr al-khafi*) and the
desirability of remembrance within the heart and secretly can be
inferred. This is also indicated by the noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَاذْكُرْ رَبَّكَ فِي نَفْسِكَ تَضَرُّعًا وَخِيفَةً وَدُونَ الْجَهْرِ
مِنْ الْقَوْلِ بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالْآصَالِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Remember thy Lord in thy soul, humbly and fearfully, not loud of
voice, at morn and eventide.*** (***7:205***)

In a noble tradition it is stated that the reward (*thawab*) of this
remembrance, on account of its greatness, is known to none except God
Almighty. In some circumstances and states the preference may lie with
overt remembrance, like the remembrance done in front of the negligent
for the sake of reminding them. Hence it is mentioned in a noble
tradition of *al-Kafi* that one who recalls God Almighty amongst the
negligent is like one who fights against the *muharibun* (i.e. those who
have taken up arms against God and Islam). The following tradition is
mentioned in the *‘Uddat al-dai* of Ibn Fahd:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ النَّبِيُّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: مَنْ ذَكَرَ اللهَ فِي
السُّوقِ مُخْلِصاً عِنْدَ غَفْلَةِ النَّاسِ وَشُغْلِهِمْ بِمَا هُمْ
فِيهِ كَتَبَ اللهُ لَهُ ألْفَ حَسَنَةٍ وَيَغْفِرُ اللهُ لَهُ يَوْمَ
القِيَامَةِ مَغْفِرَةً لَمْ تَخْطُرْ عَلَى قَلْبِ بَشَرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The narrator says that the Prophet (S) said, “One who recalls God in the
marketplace, with sincerity, in the midst of the people’s obliviousness
and their engagement in its affairs, God writes for him a thousand
merits and forgives him on the Day of Resurrection with a forgiveness
that has not occurred to any human heart.”[^2]

Similarly, it is *mustahabb* to make the *dhikr* aloud in the *adhan,*
in sermons, and other things.

It is stated in this noble tradition that the remembrance of God and
mutual love and friendship for His sake have certain characteristics.
One of them, which is more important than the others, is that the
remembrance’ of God by the servant results in God’s remembering him, and
this matter is also mentioned in other traditions. This remembrance
stands in opposition to the neglect (*nisyan*) mentioned by God Almighty
in relation to one who forgets God’s *ayat* (signs, verses):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قَالَ رَبِّ لِمَ حَشَرْتَنِي أَعْمَى وَقَدْ كُنتُ بَصِيرًا. قَالَ
كَذَلِكَ أَتَتْكَ آيَاتُنَا فَنَسِيتَهَا وَكَذَلِكَ الْيَوْمَ تُنسَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He shall say, ‘O my Lord, why hast Thou raised me blind, and I was
wont to see?’ God shall say, ‘Even so it is. Our ayat came unto thee,
and thou didst forget them; and so today thou art forgotten.’***
(***20:126***)

In the same way as the forgetting of the *ayat* and inward blindness to
the manifestations of Divine glory and beauty result in blindness in the
other world, so do the remembrance of the *ayat,* the Names, and the
Attributes and the remembrance of God, His beauty and majesty strengthen
the inward vision and remove the obscuring screens in proportion to the
strength of the *dhikr* and its luminosity. When the remembrance of the
*ayat* becomes a faculty (*malakah*)*,* the inner vision becomes so
strong that it begins to see Divine beauty in the *ayat.* The
remembrance of the Names and the Attributes results in the vision of God
in the manifestations of the Names and the Attributes (*tajalliyat
al-asma’iyyah wa sifatiyyah*)*.*

The remembrance of the Essence without the veils of .the *ayat,* Names
and Attributes removes all the veils and affords the unobstructed vision
of the Beloved. And this is one of the interpretations of ‘the triple
victories’ (*futuhat al-thalathah*) which make up the highest delight of
the ‘urafa’ and *alwliya’*: *fath al-qar’ib* (the nearer victory), *fath
al-mubin* (the manifest victory), and *fath al-mutlaq* (the absolute
victory), which is *fath al-futuh,* the ultimate victory.

In the same way as the threefold remembrance removes the threefold
veils, mutual love for the sake of God also leads to God’s love, and the
result of this love is also the removal of veils, as pointed out by the
illustrious *urafa*.

Obviously, this love (God’s love) has also various degrees, for the love
for the sake of God has also many levels in respect of sincerity and
vitiation. Complete sincerity is that which is free even from the flaw
of the plurality of the Names and Attributes (*kathrat al-asma i wa
sifati*)*,* and it results in complete love. The absolute lover will not
be deprived of communion in the code of love, and there will remain no
obstruction between the lover and the Beloved. With this exposition, we
may establish a relation between the two questions of Moses (A).

For after hearing God Almighty declare that He is the companion
(*jalis*) of one who remembers Him, and after hearing from the Beloved
Himself the promise which he coveted in his heart, of the union with the
Beauty, he wanted to discover the identity of those who shall achieve
the union, so that he may fulfill his duty in all its aspects. Hence he
asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ فِي سِتْرِكَ يَوْمَ لا سِتْرَ إلا سِتْرَكَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Who are they that shall be in Thy refuge on the day when there shall be
no refuge except Thy refuge?

That is, who are they who, in Thy refuge, have attained emancipation
from all attachments and freedom from obstructive barriers, attaining
communion with Thy supreme beauty? He is told: ‘They are the two groups:
those who are in My remembrance, and those who love one another
mutually, who are also in My remembrance in respect of the complete
manifestation of My beauty, that is man. They are in My refuge, being My
companions and I theirs.’ This shows that these two groups possess one
great quality, which results in another great characteristic.

Because God Almighty remembers them and makes them His beloved ones, the
result is that they obtain His refuge on the day when there is no
refuge, their companion being God in the place of absolute seclusion.
The other characteristic is that God Almighty spares His creatures of
chastisement for the sake of their nobility. That is, as long as they
are in the midst of the creatures, He does not send chastisement and
calamities upon them for the sake of them.

The Difference Between Tafakkur And Tadhakkur
---------------------------------------------

Let it be known to you that *tadhakkur* (remembrance) is the result of
*tafakkur* (contemplation). Hence the station of *tafakkur* has been
considered to precede that of *tadhakkur.* Khwajah ‘Abd Allah al-’Ansari
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّذَكُّرُ فَوْقَ التَّفَكُّرِ. فَإنَّ التَّفّكُّرَ طَلَبٌ
وَالتَّذَكُّرَ وُجُودٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tadhakkur stands above tafakkur, for verily tafakkur is the search (of
the Beloved) and tadhakkur is the attainment (of the Beloved).

As long as man is on the path of search, he is separate from the
searched object. With the finding of the searched beloved, he is
relieved of the labor of search. The strength and the perfection of
*tadhakkur* is dependent on the strength and perfection of *tafakkur.*
The *tafakkur* whose result is complete *tadhakkur* of the Worshipped
One does not compare with other actions in regard to merit. Accordingly,
in the noble traditions, an hour of *tafakkur* is considered to be
better than the *‘ibadah* (worship) of a year, or even that of sixty or
seventy years.

It is obvious that the ultimate goal and fruit of the *‘ibadat* is the
attainment of the knowledge and remembrance of God, and this is better
attainable through valid contemplation. Perhaps, an hour’s contemplation
may open to the wayfarer the door to mystic knowledge, which may not be
opened even by seventy years of *‘ibadah,* or it may make a human being
so mindful of the Beloved that not even the austerities of several years
can be able to achieve such a result.

And my dear, let it be known to you, the remembrance of the Beloved and
keeping the heart engaged in the memory of the Adored One have many
results for all the classes of people. As to the perfect ones, the
*awliya’* and the ‘urafa’, it is the ultimate goal of their hopes, under
whose shadow they receive communion with the Beloved’s splendor—may it
do them much good! As to the ordinary people and the *mutawassitun,* it
is the noblest of the formative agents of morality and conduct, in
outward as well as inward life.

If man remain in the remembrance of God Almighty in all conditions and
states, and see himself as present in the court of that Sacred Essence,
he would of course refrain from the matters which are contrary to His
good pleasure, and check the self from rebelliousness. All the
calamities and afflictions brought about by the carnal self and the
accursed Satan are due to forgetting God and His chastisement. The
forgetting of God increases the darkness of the heart and allows the
carnal self and Satan to dominate the human being, thus multiplying his
afflictions day by day.

The remembrance of God gives polish and burnish to the heart and makes
it a reflector of the Beloved’s beauty. It purifies the soul and
liberates the self of the human being from bondages. The love of the
world, which is the source of all error and the fountainhead of all sin,
is purged from the heart. All the anxieties and concerns are replaced by
the sole concern of purifying the dwelling of the heart for the sake of
the entry of the Dweller.

Therefore, my dear, whatever pains and hardships that you bear in. the
path of the *dhikr* and remembrance of the Beloved are little. Accustom
your heart to the remembrance of the Beloved, so that, God willing, the
heart itself takes on the form of *dhikr, so* that the immaculate
pronouncement *la ilaha illa* *Allah* becomes the ultimate form and the
furthest limit of perfection of the self. There is no better provision
for the wayfarer in his journey toward God, no better reformer for the
defects of the soul, and no better guide to the Divine teachings.

Hence, if you are a seeker of the formal and spiritual excellences, if
you are a wayfarer of the Hereafter’s path, a traveler and emigrant
towards Allah, habituate the heart to the Beloved’s *dhikr* and knead it
with the remembrance of God.

The Complete Dhikr
------------------

Although the remembrance of God and the *dhikr* of that Sacred Essence
is a quality of the heart, and if the heart is immersed in *dhikr* all
the benefits that accrue from it are obtained by the heart, it is better
that the remembrance in the heart be followed by oral *dhikr.* The most
perfect and meritorious of the degrees of *dhikr* is that it should be
present in all levels of a man’s existence, that its domain should
extend to the outward and the inward, the manifest and the concealed
realms of his being.

Thereat God, the Supreme and the Glorious, becomes manifest in the core
of his being. The inward form of the heart and the soul take the form of
the Beloved’s remembrance, and the actions of the heart and the body
take on the form of remembrance. The seven realms of corporeal being, as
well as the inward domains, are conquered by the Divine *dhikr* and made
subject to the remembrance of the Absolute Beauty.

Rather, if the inward form of the heart assumes the reality of *dhikr,*
and the realm of the heart is conquered by it, its sovereignty extends
to all the other domains. The movements and pauses of the eyes, the
tongue, the hands and the feet, and the actions of all other members and
faculties, are accompanied with the remembrance of God, making no move
against their duties. Thereupon, their movements and pauses begin and
end with the *dhikr* of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿بِاِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَجْرَاهَا وَمُرْسَاهَا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah shall be its course and its berthing.***
(***11:41***)

Its influence penetrates into all the realms, which are moulded as a
result in accordance with the reality of the Names and the Attributes.
Rather, they assume the form of the Greatest of the Names of Allah (*ism
Allah al-’a’zam*)*,* becoming its manifestation (*mazhar*)*.* And this
is the ultimate limit of human perfection and the ultimate goal of the
hopes of the elect of Allah (*ahl Allah*)*.* To the same degree that
there is an inadequacy in this regard and a shortcoming in the influence
of *dhikr,* to the same extent does the degree of human excellence falls
short of perfection, for the inadequacies of the inward and the outward
interpenetrate each other.

This is because the various spheres of human existence are interrelated
and subject to mutual influence. It is from here that it is known that
oral remembrance (*dhikr al-nutqi wa zabani*)*,* which is the lowest
level of *dhikr,* is also beneficial. For it means, firstly, that the
tongue carries out its obligation, although its movement is only formal,
devoid of spirit. Secondly, there is the possibility that persistence in
this *dhikr,* with due regard to its conditions, may become a means of
opening the tongue of the heart too.

Our Shaykh, the perfect *arif* Shahabadi—may my soul be his ransom,
would say: “The *dhakir* (one who performs *dhikr*)*,* during *dhikr,*
must be like one teaching words to a little child that has not yet
learnt to speak. He repeats the word until the child’s tongue is opened
and the latter utters the word. After that the child has articulated it,
the teacher follows the child and his fatigue caused by repetition is
removed, as if he has received an encouraging assistance from the child.
In the same way, one who engages in *dhikr* must teach *dhikr* to his
heart, which has not learnt to articulate.

The point that is concealed in the repetition of the *adhkar* is that
thereby the tongue of the heart is opened, and its sign is that
thereafter the tongue follows the heart and the hardship and strain of
repetition is removed. First, it is the tongue which is *dhakir* and
following it the heart also becomes *dhakir* with the tongue’s aid and
instruction. After that the heart’s tongue has learnt to articulate, the
tongue follows it and becomes *dhakir* with the aid of the heart or
God’s concealed assistance.”

And it should be known that the outward and formal actions don’t have
the capacity of life in the world of the *ghayb* or *malakut* except
when they received assistance from the inward realm of the spirit and
the heart’s core, which bestows on them a spiritual life (*hayat
al-malakuti*). That spiritual breath, which is the form of the sincerity
of intention and sincere intention, is like the inward soul, following
which the body too is resurrected in the realm of *malakut* and
permitted entry into the Divine court.

Therefore, it is stated in the noble traditions that the acceptability
of (physical) deeds is in accordance with the measure of the heart’s
receptivity and responsiveness (*iqbal al-qalb*)*.* In spite of it oral
*dhikr* is desirable, and it ultimately leads man to reach the Truth.
Accordingly, in the traditions and reports, oral *dhikr* has been
greatly extolled and there are few topics regarding which there is as
much a great number of traditions as the topic of *dhikr.* It has also
been greatly extolled in the noble verses of the Glorious Book, although
most of them pertain to inward *dhikr* (*dhikr al-qalbi*)*,* or the
*dhikr* possessing soul. The remembrance of God is lovable on whatever
level that it takes place. At this stage we conclude this discourse by
mentioning some noble traditions at the end for the sake of *tabarruk*
and *tayammun*.

Some Traditions Concerning Dhikr
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِسَنَدٍ صَحِيحٍ عَنِ الفُضَيْلِ بْنِ يَسَارٍ قَالَ: قَالَ
أَبُو عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: مَا مِنْ مَجْلِسٍ يَجْتَمِعُ
فِيهِ أَبْرَارٌ وَفُجَّارٌ فَيَقُومُونَ عَلَى غَيْرِ ذِكْرِ اللهِ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إلا كَانَ حَسْرَةً عَلَيْهِمْ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, it is reported with a sahih chain of transmission from
al-Fudayl ibn Yasir that Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (A) said, “There is no
gathering in which the virtuous and the sinful come together and
thereafter stand up to leave without mentioning God Almighty except that
it would be a cause of regret to them on the Day of Resurrection.”[^3]

It is obvious that when man discovers the great results of the *dhikr*
of God on the Day of Resurrection and finds himself deprived of them, he
will realize the irreparable loss of the bounties and delights incurred
by him. As a result he will be seized with regret and remorse. Hence, as
long as there is opportunity, a human being must take advantage of his
gatherings and assemblies, letting them not remain empty of God’s
remembrance.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِسَنَدٍ مَوْثُوقٍ عَنْ أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ:
مَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يَكْتَالَ بِالمِكْيَالِ الأَوْفَى فَلْيَقُلْ إذَا
أَرَادَ أنْ يَقُومَ مِنْ مَجْلِسِهِ: ﴿سُبْحَانَ رَبِّكَ رَبِّ
الْعِزَّةِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ. وَسَلَامٌ عَلَى الْمُرْسَلِينَ.
وَالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, it is reported with a muwaththaq chain of transmission from
Imam al-Baqir (A) that he said, “Whoever desires to receive the full
measure (of God’s blessing) should say while standing up after a
gathering: ‘Free is thy Lord, the Lord of Glory, from what they
describe. And peace be upon the Messengers; and praise belongs to God,
the Lord of all being.’[^4]

And it is narrated from Imam al-Sadiq that Amir al-Mu’minin (A) said:

Whoever wants to receive the full measure of recompense on the Day of
Resurrection should read these noble verses following every salat.[^5]

Also it is reported in a *mursal* tradition from Imam al-Sadiq (A) that
recitation of these verses at the time of the end of a gathering is an
atonement for sins.[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ ابْنِ فَضَالٍ رَفَعَهُ قَالَ: قَالَ اللهُ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لِعِيسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: يَا عِيسَى اذْكُرْنِي فِي
نَفْسِكَ أَذْكُرْكَ فِي نَفْسِي، وَاذْكُرْنِي فِي مَلَإ[كَ] أَذْكُرْكَ
فِي مَلَإٍ خَيْرٍ مِنْ مَلَإ الآدَمِيِّينِ. يَا عِيسَى أَلِنْ لِي
قَلْبَكَ وَأَكْثِرْ ذِكْرِي فِي الخَلَوَاتِ وَاعْلَمْ أنَّ سُرُورِي
أَنْ تُبَصْبِصَ إلّيَّ وَكُنْ فِي ذَلِكَ حَيّاً وَلا تَكُنْ مَيِّتاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kafi, in a marfu’ hadith, narrates with its chain of transmission
from Ibn Faddal, from one of the Imams (A) that he said, “God Almighty
said to Jesus (A), ‘O Jesus, remember Me in thy self, so that I may
remember thee within My self. Mention Me in thy assembly so that I may
mention thee in an assembly better than the assembly of men. O Jesus,
soften thy heart for Me and remember Me much in thy solitude. Know that
My delight lies in thy doing tabasbus toward Me. And be alive in that
and don’t be dead.’[^7]

*Tabasbus* means the dog’s wagging of its tail, out of fear or hope, and
this alludes to the intensity of eagerness and humility. By ‘life’ in
remembrance is meant the presence and attention of the heart.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَقُولُ: مَنْ شُغِلَ بِذِكْرِي عَنْ
مَسْأَلَتِي أَعْطَيْتُهُ أَفْضَلَ مَا أُعْطِي مَنْ سَأَلَنِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (A) said: Verily God Almighty has said, “One who is kept
by My remembrance from asking something of Me, I bestow upon him the
best of what I have bestowed upon any petitioner that has asked anything
of Me.”[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ فَهْدٍ فِي عُدَّةِ الدَّاعِي عَنْ رَسُولِ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ قَالَ: إعْلَمُوا أَنَّ خَيْرَ
أَعْمَالِكُمُ عِنْدَ مَلِيكِكُمْ وَأَزْكَاهَا وَأَرْفَعَهَا فِي
دَرَجَاتِكُمْ وَخَيْرَ مَا طَلَعَتْ عَلَيْهِ الشَّمْسُ ذِكْرُ اللهِ
سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى. فَإنَّهُ أَخْبَرَ عَنْ نَفْسِهِ فَقَالَ: أَنَا
جَلِيسُ مَنْ ذَكَرَنِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad ibn Fahd narrates in ‘Uddat al-Dai from the Messenger of Allah (S)
that he said, “The best of your acts near God and the purest and
sublimest of them in degree and the best thing upon which the sun has
shone is the remembrance of God Almighty. Verily He has informed you,
saying, ‘I am the companion of him who remembers Me.’”[^9]

The traditions concerning the excellence of *dhikr,* its manner,
etiquette and conditions are so many that to mention them is beyond the
capacity of these pages.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالحَمْدُ للهِ أَوَّلاً وَآخِراً وَظَاهِراً وَبَاطِناً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And praise is God’s at the beginning and the end, inwardly and
outwardly.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, ii, kitab al-du’a’, bab ma yajib min dhikr
Allah fi kulli majlis, hadith No.4.

[^2]: Ahmad ibn Fahd, ‘Uddat al-dai, 242.

[^3]: Al-Kafi, ii, kitab at-du’a’, bab ma yajib min dhikr Allah fi kulli
majlis, hadith No. 1.

[^4]: Al-Kafi, ii, kitab at-du’a’, bab ma yajib min dhikr Allah fi kulli
majlis, hadith No. 3.

[^5]: Jami’ al-’ahadith, kitab al-salat, hadith No. 3487.

[^6]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, xv, hadith No. 28901.

[^7]: Al-Kafi, ii, kitab al-du’a’, bab dhikr Allah fi al-sirr, hadith
No.3.

[^8]: . Ibid., bab al-’ishtighal bi dhikr Allah, hadith No.l.

[^9]: ‘Uddat al-da’i, 238.


