Nineteenth Hadith: Backbiting (Ghibah)
======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسَنَدي المُتَّصِلِ إِلى ثِقَةِ الإِسْلامِ وَالمُسْلِمِينَ مُحَمَّدِ
بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ، عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ
إبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، عَنِ النَّوْفَلِي، عَنِ السُّكُونِيِّ، عَنْ
أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: الغَيْبَةُ أَسْرَعُ فِي دِينِ الرَّجُلِ
المُسْلِمِ مِنَ الأكْلَةِ فِي جَوْفِهِ. قَالَ: وَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: الجُلُوسُ فِي المَسْجِدِ انْتِظَارَ
الصَّلاةِ عِبَادُةٌ مَا لَمْ يُحْدِثْ. قِيلَ: يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ وِمَا
يُحْدِثُ؟ قَالَ: الاغْتِيَابُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my isnad going back to Thiqat al-Islam wa al-Muslimin Muhammad ibn
Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from his father, from
al-Nawfali, from al-Sakkuni, from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said: The
Messenger of Allah (S) said, “The havoc wrought by ghibah (backbiting)
on the believer’s faith is swifter than the one wrought by the disease
of aklah in the side of his body.” The Imam (A) said: The Messenger of
Allah (S) said, “To sit in the mosque waiting for the (time of) prayer
is worship, so long as one does not commit a misdeed.” He (S) was asked,
“O Messenger of Allah, what misdeed?” He replied, “Backbiting.[^1]

Exposition
----------

*Ghibah* is the *masdar* (verbal noun) of *ghaba* and also that of
*ightiyab,* as mentioned in the dictionaries. Al-Jawhari says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واغْتَابَهُ اغْتِيَاباً، إذَا وَقَعَ فِيهِ، وَالاسْمُ الغِيبَةُ،
وَهُوَ أنْ يَتَكَلَّمَ خَلْفَ إِنْسَانٍ مَسْتُورٍ بِما يُغِمُّهُ لَوْ
سَمِعَهُ. فإنْ كَانَ صِدْقاً سُمِّيَ غِيبَةً وإنْ كانَ كَذِباً سُمِّيَ
بُهْتاناً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(It is said) “ightabahu ightiyaban” when one falls into it (i.e.
backbiting). The noun is al-ghibah, and it means saying such things
about an absent person as well distress him if he hears them. If it is
true it is called ghibah and if false, buhtan (slander).

The researcher and traditionist al-Majlisi (M) states that this meaning
is a literal one. But, apparently, the author of *al-Sihah* has given
the technical (*istilahi*) meaning, not the literal one, because this is
not the literal meaning of *ghaba, ightaba* and other related
derivatives. Rather, their meaning is of a more general character. The
lexicographers occasionally give the technical or Shar’i meanings in
their works. The author of *al-Qamus* is quoted to have taken *ghaba* to
signify *‘aba.* According to *al-Misbah al-munir:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إغْتَابَهُ إذَا ذَكَرَهُ بِمَا يَكْرَهُهُ مِنَ العُيُوبِ، وَهُوَ
حَقٌّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ightabahu’ means making a mention of someone’s actual defects that he
would find detestable (to be mentioned).

In the view of this author, none of the above-mentioned quotations give
the literal meaning; rather, certain conditions inherent in each of them
have led to the mix-up with the technical sense. In any case, there is
not much benefit in discussing the literal meaning, for the main purpose
here is relevance to the *Shari’ah* and religious duty, and seemingly
there are certain conditions implicit in the special meaning which lie
outside the literal significance of the term (*ghibah* or *ightiyab*)*.*
Later on we will have occasion to discuss this special sense.

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالأكْلَةُ كَفَرْحَة، دَاءٌ في العُضوِ يأتَكِلُ منهُ، كما في القاموسِ
وغيرِهِ. وقَد يُقرأُ بمدِّ الهَمزَةِ على وزن فاعِلَة، أي العِلَّة التي
تأكُلُ اللَّحمَ، والأوَّل أوفق باللغةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Aklah corresponds (in vowelization) to farhah. It is an affliction of a
bodily member that consumes it, as mentioned in al-Qamus and other
dictionaries. It has also been read with a mada on the hamzah,
corresponding in vowelization to fallah, which means a disease that
consumes the flesh, and the first one is more in accordance with
classical usage.

In any case, that which is meant is that in the same way as this disease
on afflicting a bodily organ - especially the subtle ones, such as
pertain to the inner self - consumes it rapidly and destroys it, so does
*ghibah,* rather more rapidly, consume a human being’s faith and destroy
it.

In the phrase *‘malam yuhdith’, ‘yuhdith’* belongs to the verbal form
*if’al* and its concealed pronoun (*damir mustatir*) relates to the
*jalis*, (i.e. the one sitting) implicit in the *julus* mentioned in the
tradition. *Ightiyab* here is in the accusative form (*mansub*) and is
the *maf’ul* (object) of the verb implicit in the questioner’s speech.
In some manuscripts, it is ما الحَدَثُ instead of وما يَحْدُثُ in which
case ightiyab will be in the indicative case due to its being the
predicate (*khabar*).

The Definition Of Ghibah
------------------------

Let it be known to you that the *fuqaha*’ (R) have offered many
definitions of *ghibah,* whose discussion and close scrutiny is not
possible here except with brevity. The blessed martyr and researcher,
the Shaykh (Zayn al-*Din* ‘Ali, known as al-Shahid al-Thani) in his
*kashf al-ribah ‘an ahkam al-ghibah* says, “There are two definitions
for it. The first one, which is famous among the *fuqaha*’, is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ ذِكْرُ الإنْسَانِ حَالَ غَيْبِهِ بِمَا يَكْرَهُ نِسْبَتَهُ
إلَيْهِ مِمَّا يُعَدُّ نُقْصَاناً فِي العُرْفِ بِقَصْدِ الإنْتِقَاصِ
والذَّمِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is the mention of a person in his absence, ascribing to him something
whose ascription he rinds detestable and which is generally considered
as harmful (to one’s reputation), with the intention of impairing (his
reputation) and disparaging him.

The second one is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّنْبِيهُ عَلى مَا يَكْرَهُ نِسْبَتَهُ إلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Informing about something whose ascription to one is regarded as
detestable by him.

The second definition is more general than the first one, if *dhikr* (in
the first definition) be taken to mean oral mention, as it is generally
understood to mean, for *tanbih* has a wider meaning and includes
speech, writing, narration and other forms of communication. But if
*dhikr* were taken to mean something wider than oral speech, as it does
literally signify, the two definitions become similar. The traditions
also suggest these two definitions, such as the one recorded in
al-Shaykh al-Tusi’s *Amali* (*Majalis*) and narrated on the authority of
Abu Basir:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي وَصِيَّةِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لأبِي ذَرٍّ
رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ وَفِيهِ: قُلْتُ يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ، مَا
الغِيبَةُ؟ قَالَ: ذِكْرُكَ أَخَاكَ بِمَا يَكْرَهُ. قُلْتُ: يَا رَسُولَ
اللهِ، فَإنْ كَانَ فِيهِ الَّذِي يُذْكَرُ بِهِ؟ قَالَ: إعْلَمْ أنَّكَ
إذَا ذَكَرْتَهُ بِمَا هُوَ فِيهِ فَقَدِ اغْتَبْتَهُ، وَإذَا ذَكَرْتَهُ
بِمَا لَيْسَ فِيهِ فَقَدْ بَهَتَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In (the tradition about) the counsel that the Messenger of Allah (S)
gave to Abu Dharr (R), Abu Dharr is narrated to have said: I said: “O
Messenger of Allah, what is ghibah?” He replied: “(It is) to mention of
your brother that which he detests.” I said: “O Messenger of Allah, what
if that which is mentioned of him should actually be in him?” He
replied: “Know that when you mention that which is in him, you have
committed his ghibah, and when you mention that which is not in him,
then you have slandered him.”[^2]

In a famous tradition of the Prophet (S) it is reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ تَدْرُونَ مَا الغِيبَةُ؟ فَقَالوا: اللهُ وَرَسُولُهُ أعْلَمُ.
فَقَالَ: ذِكْرُكَ أَخَاكَ بِمَا يَكْرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(The Prophet (S) asked his companions:) “Do you know what is ghibah?”
They said: “God and His Messenger know best.” He (S) said: “It is to
mention about your brother that which he detests.”[^3]

These traditions correspond to the first definition if we take the
generally understood meaning of *dhikr* and to the second one if a
meaning wider than oral speech is ascribed to it. No mention was made in
the traditions of absence, for it was implicit in the meaning of
*ghibah* and so was not necessary. It is evident that ‘brother’ here
means a brother in-faith not a brother by kinship. ‘*Ma* *yakrahu’*
signifies the mention of things which are ordinarily regarded as
damaging.

As to the intention to harm and disparage, although it is not mentioned
either in the noble tradition narrated by Abu Dharr or the famous
prophetic tradition, it can be understood from the context. Rather, the
opening of Abu Dharr’s narration indicates it, and there was no need of
an explicit mention. The narration opens in this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الغِيبَةُ أشَدُّ مِنَ الزِّنَا. قُلْتُ: وَلِمَ ذَاكَ يَا رَسُولَ
اللهِ؟ قَالَ: لأنَّ الرَّجُلَ يَزْنِي فَيَتُوبُ إلى اللهِ فَيَتُوبُ
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ، وَالغِيبَةُ لا تُغْفَرُ حَتَّى يَغْفِرَهُا
صَاحِبُهُا... وَأَكْلُ لحَمْهِ ِمِنْ مَعَاصِي اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(The Prophet [S] said:) “Ghibah is a graver sin than adultery.” I said,
“How is that, O Messenger of Allah?” “That is because a man commits
adultery and repents to God and God accepts his repentance. But ghibah
is not forgiven (by God) until it is forgiven by its victim.” Then he
(S) said, “The eating of his flesh is a sin vis-a-vis God.”[^4]

These two sentences reveal that the intention to injure is implicit,
otherwise if someone is mentioned with kindness and compassion, it is
not an offence against him so as to require his forgiveness, nor it
amounts to eating his flesh.

The general character of *ghibah* is also understandable from the
following narration of ‘A’ishah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَخَلَتْ عَلَيْنا امْرَأَةٌ، فَلَمَّا خَرَجَتْ أَوْمَأْتُ بِيَدِي
أَنَّهَا قَصِيرَةٌ. فَقَالَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: لَقَدِ
اغْتَبْتِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(‘A’ishah says:) A woman came to visit us, and when she turned to go
away I made a gesture by my hand to indicate that she is short of
height. Thereupon, he (S) said, “You have committed her ghibah.”[^5]

It may be said that the import of the traditions concerning *ghibah,* as
understood in accordance with usage, does not limit it to linguistic
expression. Rather, it extends the prohibition to apply to any such kind
of communication. That is, the specific mention of linguistic expression
is due to its being the more common form in which, *ghibah* is
committed, not because it is limited to it.

Another thing is that the general import of many traditions indicates
that it is *haram* to reveal the secrets of the faithful (*mu’minun*)*.*
That is, it is forbidden to divulge and uncover their concealed defects,
whether of a bodily, moral or behavioral nature, regardless of whether
the person to whom they pertain is willing or not, and irrespective of
whether a malicious intent is involved or not.

However, an overall examination of the traditions shows that malicious
intent underlies the prohibition, except when the act *per se* should be
such that its mention and its publicity are proscribed by the
*Shari’ah* - such as sins against God, which not even the sinner may
proclaim and whose admission amounts to publication of indecency - and
this does not relate to the prohibition (*hurmah*) on *ghibah.* It is
not improbable that the revelation of the secrets of the faithful even
in case of their willingness should be *haram,* even when there is no
malicious motive involved. In any case, further elaboration in this
aspect is outside the scope of our discussion.

You should know that there is consensus about the *hurmah* of *ghibah.*
Rather, it is one of the essentials of *fiqh*, being a major and mortal
sin. Discussion of its *fiqhi* aspect and the exceptions that relate to
it is outside the scope of these pages. That which is necessary here is
to inform about the viciousness of this fatal vice and its consequences,
so that, God willing, by reflecting upon them we may abstain from it,
and if, God forbid, we commit it, we may desist immediately from it and
repent, purify ourselves of its abomination, and not permit ourselves to
remain in this filth and the affliction of this faith-consuming mortal
sin while departing from this world. This is because this major mortal
sin has an ugly, deformed form in the spiritual world hidden behind the
veils of the corporeal. In addition to its evil, it is the cause of
disgrace in front of the Sublime Company (*al-mala’ al-’ala*) and in the
presence of the apostles, prophets and the archangels. Its spiritual
form is the same as what God, the Blessed and the Exalted, has indicated
in His noble book and which has been pointed out explicitly and
implicitly in the noble traditions. Allah, the Glorious and the Exalted,
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَا يَغْتَبْ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ
لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ مَيْتًا فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Neither backbite one another; would any of you like to eat the flesh
of his dead brother? You would abominate it.*** (***49:12***)

We are neglectful of the fact that our deeds return to us in the other
world as objectified entities, with forms appropriate to their
character. We do not know that this act (i.e. *ghibah*) has the form of
cadaver eating. It will return to its perpetrator in the hell in its
other-worldly (*malakut*) form, for he, like a ferocious dog, has torn
other people’s honor to shreds and devoured their (moral) flesh.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي رِوَايَةٍ أنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ لَمَّا رَجَمَ الرَّجُلَ فِي
الزِّنَا قَالَ رَجُلٌ لِصَاحِبِهِ: هَذَا أُقْعِصَ كَمَا يُقْعَصُ
الكَلْبُ. فَمَرَّ النَّبِيُّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ مَعَهُمَا
بِجِيفَةٍ فَقَالَ: إنْهَشَا مِنْهَا. فَقَالا: يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ،
نَنْهَشُ جِيفَةً؟ فَقَالَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: مَا
أَصَبْتُمَا مِنْ أَخِيكُمَا أَنْتَنُ مِنْ هَذِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In a tradition, it is narrated that once the Messenger of Allah (S)
stoned a man for commission of adultery. One of the persons present
remarked to his companion, “This one was finished where he stood, like a
dog.” Thereafter, the Prophet, accompanied by the two men, passed by a
carcass and he (S) said to them, “Now take a bite of it, you two,” They
said, “O Messenger of Allah, should we take a bite of a carcass?!” The
Prophet replied, “That which you have taken of your brother was more
putrid than this.”[^6]

Yes, the Noble Messenger (S) with the light of his powerful insight saw
the greater putridness of their action, greater than that of a
decomposed carcass, and the more abominable and repulsive character of
its form. It is mentioned in another tradition that the perpetrator of
*ghibah* would devour his own flesh on the Day of Resurrection. In a
tradition of *al-Wasa’il,* cited from the *Majalis* (*Amali*) of
al-Saduq (R), Amir al-Mu’minin (A) is reported to have said the
following in the course of his advice to Nawf al-Bakali:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَلْتُ: زِدْنِي. قَالَ: إجْتَنِبِ الغِيبَةَ فَإنَّهَا إدَامُ كِلابِ
النَّارِ. ثُمَّ قَالَ: يَا نَوْفُ، كَذَبَ مَنْ زَعَمَ أنَّهُ وُلِدَ
مِنْ حَلالٍ وَهُوَ يَأكُلُ لحُُُومَ النَّاسِ بِالغِيبَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Nawf al-Bakali says: I said: Tell me something more. He (A) said,
“Abstain from ghibah, for it is the food of the dogs of hellfire.” Then
he added, “O Nawf, untrue is the one who claims to be of legitimate
birth and yet devours the flesh of people through backbiting.”[^7]

There is no contradiction between these noble traditions, and all these
things are possible. It is possible that the backbiter shall eat the
flesh of carcasses, devour his own flesh, have the form of a
carcass-eating dog, and, simultaneously, be a carcass that is devoured
by the hounds of hell. There, the forms are subject to the efficient
dimensions and a being may possess several outward forms - something the
proof of which has been given in its appropriate place.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْ عِقَابِ الأَعْمَالِ بَإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ في حَدِيثٍ: مَنْ مَشِي َفِي غِيبَةِ أخِيهِ وَكَشْفِ
عَوْرَتِهِ كَانَتْ أوَّلُ خُطْوَةٍ خَطَاهَا وَضَعَهَا فِي جَهَنَّمَ
وَكَشَفَ اللهُ عَوْرَتَهُ عَلَى رُؤُوسِ الخَلائِقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Saduq) in ‘Iqab al-’a’mal, narrates with his isnad from the
Messenger of Allah (S) that he said in a tradition, “One who walks on
the path of the ghibah of his brother and the divulging of his defects,
the first step that he takes will be into hell and God shall divulge his
defects in front of all the creatures.”[^8]

Such is his state on the Day of Resurrection and in hell and that is how
God, the Exalted, shall disgrace him amongst the creatures and in the
presence of the inhabitants of the celestial realms. In *al-Wasa’il,*
with a chain of transmission reaching Imam al-Sadiq (A) the Prophet (S)
is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: مَنِ اغْتَابَ امْرَءاً
مُسْلِماَ بَطُلَ صَوْمُهُ وَنَقَضَ وُضُوءَهُ وَجَاءَ يَوْمَ
القِيَامَةِ تَفُوحُ مِنْهُ رَائِحَةٌ أَنْتَنُ مِنَ الجِيفَةِ
يَتَأَذَّى بِهِ أَهْلُ المَوْقِفِ، فَإنْ مَاتَ قَبْلَ أنْ يَتُوبَ
مَاتَ مُسْتَحِلّاً لِمَا حَرَّمَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Noble Messenger (S) said, “whoever backbites a Muslim spoils his
fasts and breaks his wudu’ and shall come on the Day of Resurrection
with his mouth stanching more putridly than a carcass and it shall irk
those who are with him in his station (mawqif). If he dies before
repenting, his death is like that of one who dies while considering the
things prohibited by God, the Exalted and the Glorious, as
permissible.”[^9]

This is his state before his entry into hell, so that he is disgraced in
front of the people of his *mawqif* and is reckoned among the *kuffar,*
for the *mustahill* (one who considers *haram* as *halal*) of God’s
*maharramat* (that which has been forbidden by God) is a *kafir.* The
backbiter (*mughtab*) is, in effect, like him according to this noble
tradition. Another tradition has been narrated from the Messenger of God
(S) regarding the state of such a one in the Barzakh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَنَسٍ قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
وَسَلَّمَ: مَرَرْتُ لَيْلَةَ أُسْرِيَ بِي عَلَى قَوْمٍ يَخْمِشُونَ
وُجُوهَهُمْ بِأظَافِيرِهِمْ، فَقُلْتُ: يَا جِبْرَائِيلُ، مَنْ
هَؤُلاءِ؟ قَالَ: هَؤُلاءِ الَّذِينَ يَغْتَابُونَ النَّاسَ وَيَقَعُونَ
فِي أعْرَاضِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Anas ibn Malik says: The Messenger of Allah (S) said: On the night of my
celestial journey (mi’raj) I passed by a people scratching their faces
with their finger nails. I said, “O Gabriel, who are these?” He replied,
“These are those who perpetrated the people’s ghibah and slandered their
reputation.”[^10]

This shows that the backbiter suffers disgrace and infamy in the Barzakh
and faces humiliation in front of the people of his *mawqif.* He will
dwell in disgrace and dishonor in the hell too. Rather, some of its
degrees will bring him disrepute in this world also, as is mentioned in
the following noble tradition of *al-Kafi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ إسْحَاقَ بْنِ عَمَّارٍ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ:
يَا مَعْشَرَ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ بِلِسَانِهِ وَلَمْ يُخْلِصِ الإيمَانَ إلَى
قَلْبِهِ! لا تَذُمُّوا المُسْلِمِينَ وَلا تَتَّبِعُوا عَوُرَاتِهِمْ
فَإنَّهُ مَنْ تَتَبَّعَ عَوْرَاتِهِمْ تَتَبَّعَ اللهُ عَوْرَتَهُ،
وَمَنْ تَتَبَّعَ اللهُ تَعَالَى عَوْرَتَهُ يَفْضَحْهُ وَلَوْ فِي
بَيْتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ishaq ibn ‘Ammir reports on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq (A) that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said, “O you who have embraced Islam with their
tongues but faith has not entered whose hearts, don’t disparage Muslims
and don’t be after their defects. Verily, God will be after the defects
of him who is after their defects, and one who has God after his defects
will be humiliated even in his own house.”[^11]

God, the Blessed and the Exalted, is *ghayur* (i.e. sensitive about His
honor) and the exposing of the secrets and defects of the faithful is
tantamount to violation of His honor. If a man surpasses all limits in
his shamelessness and violates Divine sanctities, God, the Honorable,
exposes his secrets, which He had concealed before out of His concealing
grace. Such a man is then disgraced in this world before the people and
in that world in front of the angels, the prophets and the *awliya’*
(A). In a noble tradition of *al-Kafi* whose *isnad* goes back to Imam
al-Baqir (A) it is stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا أُسْرِيَ بِالنَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ قَالَ: يَا
رَبِّ، مَا حَالُ المُؤْمِنِ عَنْدَكَ؟ قَالَ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ، مَنْ
أَهَانَ لِي وَلِيّاً فَقَدْ بَارَزَنِي بِالمُحَارَبَةِ، وَأَنَا
أَسْرَعُ شَيْءٍ إلَى نُصْرَةِ أَوْلِيَائِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Baqir (A) said: During his celestial journey, the Prophet (S)
said to God, “My Lord, what is the status of the mu’min before Thee?” He
replied, “O Muhammad, whoever insults a friend of mine, has declared
open war against Me, and I am the quickest of all in rallying to the aid
of My friends.”[^12]

There are many traditions in this regard. In a tradition whose *isnad*
goes back to Imam al-Sadiq (A), al-Shaykh al-Saduq reports the Imam as
having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنِ اغْتَابَهُ بِمَا هُوَ فِيهِ فَهُوَ خَارِجٌ مِنْ وَلايَةِ اللهِ
تَعَالى دَاخِلٌ فِي وَلايَةِ الشَّيْطَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever perpetrates the ghibah of such a person (i.e. of one who
conceals his defects and is just in outward conduct, though he should be
a sinner in his own eyes) will go out of the wilayah of Allah, the Most
Exalted, and enter the wilayah of Satan.[^13]

It is obvious that one who leaves the *wilayah* of God will enter the
*wilayah* of Satan and will not be characterized with faith and
salvation. As mentioned in the tradition of Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar, the Islam
of the backbiter is merely oral, not having entered his heart. It is
also obvious that one who has faith in God and believes in the Day of
Judgment and in encounter with the forms of deeds and the reality of
sins, such a person will not commit such a major mortal sin which brings
disgrace in the apparent and the hidden worlds, in the life of this
world as well as in the *barzakh* and the Hereafter, leads to the evil
affliction of hell, and expels him from the *wilayah* of God and makes
him enter the *wilayah* of Satan.

If we perpetrate such a major sin, then we must know that it arises from
a polluted source, that the reality of faith has not entered our hearts.
Should faith enter the heart, things will undergo a reform and its
effects will percolate to all the hidden and the manifest, the outward
and the inward realms of one’s being.

Hence, we must cure the ills of the hearts and the inner self. The
traditions reveal that in the same manner as the weakness of faith and
lack of its sincerity results in moral and behavioral vices, so do these
vices in their turn lead to further deterioration or rather destruction
of faith. This is in accordance with rational proofs, as demonstrated in
its proper place.

And let it be known to you that this sin is graver and of greater evil
consequences than other sins from another aspect. It lies in this that
in addition to violating the right of God (*haqq Allah*) it violates the
rights of people (*haqq al-nas*)*,* and God does not forgive the
backbiter unless the victim is propitiated by him. This theme is
mentioned in the noble *hadith* through several chains of transmission.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ الحَسَنِ فِي المَجَالِسِ وَالأخْبَارِ بإسْنَادِهِ
عَنْ أبِي ذَرٍّ عَنِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فِي
وَصِيَّةٍ لَهُ قَالَ: الغِيبَةُ أشَدُّ مِنَ الزِّنَا. قُلْتُ: وَلِمَ
ذَاكَ يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ؟ قَالَ: لأنَّ الرَّجُلَ يَزْنِي فَيَتُوبُ إلى
اللهِ فَيَتُوبُ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ، وَالغِيبَةُ لا تُغْفَرُ حَتَّى
يَغْفِرَهُا صَاحِبُهُا... وَأَكْلُ لحَمْهِ ِمِنْ مَعَاصِي اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated in al-Majalis wa al-‘akhbar with isnad on the authority
of Muhammad ibn al-Hasan from Abu Dharr from the Prophet (S) that, in a
counsel that he (S) gave to him, he (S) said, “O Abu Dharr, beware of
backbiting, for backbiting is graver than adultery.” (Abu Dharr says) I
said: “Why is that so, O Messenger of Allah?” He replied: “That is
because when a man commits adultery and then repents to God, God accepts
his repentance. But backbiting is not forgiven until forgiven by its
victim.”[^14]

In the traditions narrated in *‘Ilal al-sharayi’, al-Khisal, Majma’
al-bayan* and *Kitab al-‘ikhwan* the same or a similar point has been
made. If, God forbid, one were to depart from the world with people’s
rights on his neck, his task would be very difficult. As to the rights
of God, one has to deal therein with the Noblest and the Most Merciful,
Whose sacred being is free from hatred, enmity, vengefulness, and the
urge to satisfy the thirst for revenge. But if one had to deal with
creatures, it is quite possible that one will get entangled with someone
with such traits, who will not easily forgive anyone or will not be
placated at all.

Hence it is necessary for man to be careful of himself and pay due
attention to these matters, for the danger of it is very great and the
matter is of supreme difficulty. The traditions concerning the serious
nature of *ghibah* are more than can be quoted here and we shall confine
ourselves to a few of them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُوِيَ عَنْ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ أَنَّهُ خَطَبَ
يَوْماً فَذَكَرَ الرِّبَا وَعَظَّمَ شَأْنَهُ فَقَالَ: إنَّ الدِّرْهَمَ
يُصِيبُهُ الرَّجُلُ مِنَ الرِّبَا أَعْظَمُ عِنْدَ اللهِ فِي
الخَطِيئَةِ مِنْ سِتٍّ وَثَلاثِينَ زِنْيَةً يُزْنِيهَا الرَّجُلُ.
وَإنَّ أَرْبَى الرِّبَا عِرْضُ الرَّجُلِ المُسْلِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In a sermon, the Prophet (S) spoke about usury and its great evil. Then
he said, “Verily, a single dirham earned by a man through usury is
greater (in sinfulness) than thirty-six counts of adultery. And verily,
more heinous than usury is (violating) the honor of a Muslim.[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُوِيَ عَنْ النَّبِيِّ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، أَنَّهُ قَالَ:
مَا النَّارُ فِي اليَبْسِ بِأَسْرَعَ مِنَ الغِيبَةِ فِي حَسَنَاتِ
العَبْدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) said, “No fire is faster in consuming dry wood than
ghibah consuming a devotee’s virtues.”[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْ النَّبِيِّ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: يُؤْتَى بِأَحَدٍ
يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ فَيُوقَفُ بَيْنَ يَدَيِ الرَّبِّ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
وَيُدْفَعُ إلَيْهِ كِتَابُهُ فَلا يَرَى حَسَنَاتِهِ فِيهِ فَيَقُولُ:
إلَهِي لَيْسَ هَذَا كِتَابِي، لا أَرَى فِيهِ حَسَنَاتِي! فَيُقَالُ
لَهُ: إنَّ رَبَّكَ لا يَضِلُّ وَلا يَنْسَى، ذَهَبَ عَمَلُكَ
بِاغْتِيَابِ النَّاسِ. ثُمَّ يُؤْتَى بِآخَرَ وَيُدْفَعُ إلَيْهِ
كِتَابُهُ فَيَرَى فِيهِ طَاعَاتٍ كَثِيرَةً فَيَقُولُ: إلَهِي مَا هَذَا
كِتَابِي، فَإنِّي مَا عَمِلْتُ هَذِهِ الطَّاعَاتِ! فَيُقَالُ لَهُ:
إنَّ فُلاناً اغْتَابَكَ فَدُفِعَ حَسَنَاتُهُ إلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) said: A person shall be made to halt in front of the
Glorious and Exalted Lord on the Day of Resurrection and handed over his
book. On not seeing his good deeds therein he shall say, “My God, this
is not my book, for I don’t see my virtues in it.” He shall be told,
“Verily, your Lord neither errs nor forgets. Your deeds are gone for
your backbiting of the people.” Then another person shall be brought and
handed over his book. He will see in it many deeds of obedience (ta’at)
and he will say, “My God, this is not my book, for I have not performed
these deeds of obedience.” He shall be told, “So and so committed your
ghibah and so his good deeds have been awarded to you.”[^17]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْ النَّبِيِّ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: أَدَنَى الكُفْرِ أنْ
يَسْمَعَ الرَّجُلُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ كَلِمَةً يَحْفَظُهَا عَلَيْهِ يُرِيدُ
أنْ يَفْضَحَهُ بِهَا. أُولَئِكَ لا خَلاقَ لَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) said, “A lower degree of kufr is for a man to hear
something from his brother and to commit it to his memory intending
thereby to cause him humiliation. Such persons shall have no share (in
the Hereafter.)”[^18]

The traditions cited here relate specifically to the subject at hand.
But in case the backbiter were guilty of other sins and vices
besides -such as the insult, humiliation, contempt and disparaging of a
believer (mu’min), the revelation and counting of his failings, and his
defamation, each of which is an independent cause of one’s destruction-
the traditions condemning each of them are overwhelming and shattering.
We abstain from citing them here for brevity’s sake.

The Social Harms Of Ghibah
--------------------------

This greatly heinous vice and highly fatal sin, which is a destroyer of
faith and morality, of the outward and the inward, which brings man
disgrace and ignominy in the world and the Hereafter as alluded to in
the preceding section, has also social evils and in this respect its
ugliness and evil are greater than those of many other sins.

One of the great objectives of the teachings of the great prophets (A)
apart from being an independent goal in itself and a means for
forwarding great goals, as well as being completely essential for the
formation of a perfect society (*al-madinat al fadilah*) is unity of
belief and creed and solidarity in regard to all important matters, and
resistance to the unjust aggressions of oppressors, which cause the
corruption of humanity and ruin the foundations of wholesome society.

This great objective, on which the reform of individual and society
depends, cannot be achieved except in the shadow of unity, solidarity,
mutual love and brotherhood amongst the individuals of society and the
sincerity of their hearts and their inner and outward purity, so that
the human race and its members come to constitute a single person and
personality with individuals as its parts and members. All their efforts
and endeavors have revolved around this ogle great divine objective and
this momentous rational goal, wherein lies the good of individual and
society.

Should such love and brotherhood be born in a race or tribe, it would
dominate all other tribes and nations that do not possess this quality.
The truth of this matter comes to light if we study history, especially
that of the battles and great victories of Islam. At the advent of this
divine faith, since there was a measure of this unity and solidarity
amongst Muslims and their efforts were accompanied by sincerity of
intention, they could achieve great victories in a short period.

In a brief span of time they overwhelmed the great empires of that age,
namely Iran and Rome. Smaller in number, they could defeat heavily armed
armies with an endless number of soldiers. The Prophet of Islam
established the covenant of brotherhood amongst early Muslims and the
relationship of brotherhood came to prevail between all Muslims on the
basis of the Quranic text:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ إِخْوَةٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed, the believers are brethren.*** (***49: 10***)

The following traditions are recorded in the noble *al-Kafi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ العَقَرْقُوفِيِّ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ يَقُولُ لأَصْحَابِهِ: إتَّقُوا اللهَ وَكُونُوا إخْوَةً
بَرَرَةً مُتَحَابِّينَ فِي اللهِ، مُتَوَاصِلِينَ، مُتَرَاحِمِينَ.
تَزَاوَرُوا وَتَلاقوا وَتَذَاكَرُوا أَمْرَنَا وَأَحْيُوهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al Aqarqufi says: I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) say to his companions,
“Fear God and be righteous brethren, loving one another for the sake of
God, mutually interlinked and merciful into one another. Visit one
another, meet one another, remind one another about our affair (i.e.
Imamate), and keep it alive.”[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: يَحِقُّ عَلَى
المُسْلِمِينَ الإجْتِهَادُ فِي التَّوَاصُلِ وَالتَّعَاوُنِ عَلَى
التَّعَاطُفِ وَالمُؤاسَاةُ لأهْلِ الحَاجَةِ وَتَعَاطُفُ بَعْضِهِمْ
عَلَى بَعْضٍ حَتَّى تَكُونُوا كَمَا أَمَرَكُمُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:
﴿رُحَمَاءُ بَيْنَهُمْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) said: It a the duty of all Muslims to strive in
respect of mutual relations, cooperation, kindness and charity to the
needy and mutual affection amongst themselves, until you become as God,
the Almighty and the Glorious, has commanded you to be (saying): They
are merciful unto one another.[^20]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْهُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: تَوَاصَلُوا وَتَبَارُّوا
وَتَرَاحَمُوا وَكُونُوا إخْوَةً بَرَرَةً كَمَا أَمَرَكُمُ اللهُ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (A) also said, “Cultivate mutual relations, be kind and
merciful to one another and be such true brethren as God, the Almighty
and the Glorious, has commanded you to be.”[^21]

It is evident that that which strengthens this mutual love and
brotherhood is desirable, and that which severs this tie of mutual
connection and brotherhood and creates disunity is regarded as
detestable by the Lawgiver and is opposite to His great objectives. It
is quite clear that if this great fatal sin were to become prevalent in
a society, would cause enmity, envy, hatred and hostility amongst its
people and the roots of corruption will spread through it.

Then the tree of hypocrisy and two-facedness will take roots in it,
which shall grow and shatter the unity and solidarity of society,
weakening the foundations of piety, which in turn will increase its
corruption and repulsive character.

Hence, it is obligatory upon every pious and honorable Muslim, in order
to safeguard his own person against corruption, to protect his
coreligionists from hypocrisy, to preserve the Islamic society, to
safeguard its unity, and to strengthen the bonds of brotherhood, to
protect himself from this vice and forbid others from this repulsive
act.

And if, God forbid, he has been guilty of this ugly act, he must repent
and, in case it is possible and there is no chance of vicious
consequences, seek the propitiation of the victim and his forgiveness;
otherwise, he must implore God’s mercy for him. He must get rid of this
vice and water the roots of sincerity, unity and solidarity in his
heart, so as to be amongst one of the sound members of society and one
of the vital spokes of the wheel of Islam. And God is the guide of all
towards the path of righteousness.

The Cure Of This Malady
-----------------------

You should know that the remedy of this great vice, like that of other
vices, is possible by means of beneficial knowledge and action. As to
the knowledge, it lies in this that man should reflect over the benefits
resulting from this deed and compare them with its evil consequences and
ugly fruits. He must weigh them in the balance of reason and seek a
Judgment therefrom. Of course, man is no enemy of himself. All his sins
arise from ignorance, unawareness, and negligence of their basic nature
and consequences.

As to the imagined benefit of this vice, it amounts to a few minutes of
satisfaction of one’s carnal desire arising from the mention of people’s
defects and divulging of their secrets, or an hour spent in convivial
company amid pleasantries and sly gossip inspired by bestial or satanic
nature and aimed to satisfy the thirst of vengeful hearts.

As to its ugly effects, some of them were mentioned in the earlier
sections. Now listen to some more of them, place them in the balance of
Judgment and draw lesson from it, for, of course, this comparison and
reflection shall yield fair results. As to the effects of *ghibah* in
this world, one of these is that it lowers a man in the people’s
estimation and deprives him of their confidence. The people by nature
are endowed with a love of perfection, virtue, and goodness and a hatred
of defectiveness, baseness, and ugliness.

Accordingly, they make a distinction between persons who avoid divulging
hidden defects and refrain from tearing the veils that guard their honor
and safeguard their secrets and others who are not such. Even the
backbiter himself, by virtue of his reason and innate moral nature,
considers one who avoids such vices as superior to himself.

Moreover, should he trespass the bounds in perpetration of this vice and
tear the veils that guard people’s honor, God will disgrace him in this
world itself, as mentioned in the narration of Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar cited
earlier. And man must fear a humiliation brought about by God Almighty,
for it will be irreparable. I take refuge in God from the wrath of the
Forbearing Lord.

Moreover, it is very possible that the slandering of the reputation of
believers and the divulging of their concealed defects’ will result in a
wretched hereafter for man. For when this act becomes a part of man’s
conduct it leaves certain effects on the soul, one of which is
production of enmity and hatred towards the victim, which increase
little by little.

At the time of death, when some realities become revealed to man and he
observes certain supersensible realms, the veils of *malakut* having
been lifted, this hatred and enmity may cause him on beholding the
station of his victims and the honor and blessings granted them by God
Almighty, to hate God Almighty. For it is natural for man to regard his
enemy’s friend as his own enemy and to hate one who loves one he hates.
Thus, he will leave this world with enmity of God and His angels and
depart to everlasting ignominy and wretchedness.

My dear, be friendly to the servants of God who enjoy His mercy and
bounty and who have been adorned with the robes of Islam and *iman*, and
cultivate a heart-felt affection for them. Beware lest you feel enmity
towards the beloved of God, for God Almighty is the enemy of the enemies
of His beloved one and He will throw you out of the gardens of His
mercy. The elect of God are hidden amongst His servants and who knows if
this enmity on your part and your violation of the honor of this man of
faith (*mu’min*) and your divulging of his defects will not be
considered an offence against Divine honor?

The *mu’minun* are the *awliya’* (friends) of God. Their friendship is
the friendship of God; their enmity is the enmity of God. Beware of the
wrath of God and the enmity of the intercessors on the Day of Judgment:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيْلٌ لِمَنْ شُفَعَاؤُهُ خُصَمَاؤُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Woe to him whose intercessors [i.e. those who were supposed to intercede
in his favor] are his enemies.

Meditate for a while about the fruits of this sin in this world and the
Hereafter. Reflect for a while about the fearsome, frightful forms that
will beset you in the grave, in the Barzakh, and on the Day of
Resurrection. Refer to the authentic works of Shi’i scholars (R) and the
traditions narrated from the Immaculate Imams (A); for what they have to
say in this regard is truly overwhelming.

Then compare and weigh a quarter of an hour’s pleasantries, idle gossip
and satisfaction of the imaginative lust with thousands upon thousands
of years of adversity (that, too, when you are amongst those who deserve
salvation and depart from this world in a state of faith) or eternal
damnation in hell and everlasting painful chastisement (and we seek
refuge in God from it).

Furthermore, even if you have enmity with a person whose *ghibah* you
commit, that enmity requires that you should not commit his *ghibah* if
you have faith in the *ahadith*; for it is stated in the *hadith* that
the good deeds of the backbiter are transferred to the book of deeds of
the victim of his *ghibah* and his sins are transferred to the book of
the backbiter. Therefore, your enmity of him boils down to an enmity of
yourself.

Hence, you should know that you cannot fight with God. God has power to
make that person endearing and respectable in the eyes of people by the
very means of your *ghibah* of him and humiliate you in their eyes
through the same means. He can deal with you in the same manner in the
presence of the archangels. He can fill your book of deeds with vices
and humiliate you. He can fill the book of deeds of your victim with
fair deeds and grant him favor and honor.

Hence, understand well the extent of the power of the Omnipotent with
Whom you are at war and beware of His enmity!

As to the action, it lies in this that one should for a period muster
all one’s power and rid his soul of this sin at all cost. He must bring
his tongue under control and be fully watchful of himself, and make a
covenant with himself to abstain from this sin for a certain time, being
vigilant and watchful over himself and calling himself to account. God
willing, it is hoped that after some time he will find himself reformed
and free of its traces. Gradually the task will become easy for him and
after some time he will feel that he has a natural disposition to
dislike and detest it. Thereat, he will come to possess spiritual peace
and delight in achieving freedom from this vice.

The Priority Of Abstinence From Permissible Ghibah
--------------------------------------------------

Let it be known to you that the *ulama* and *fuqaha* (R) have excepted
certain cases from the prohibition of *ghibah,* which, according to the
statements of some of them, number more than ten. Here, we do not intend
to enumerate them, for this is not a place for legal discussions. That
which is essential to be mentioned here is that man should never
consider himself secure from the ruses of his carnal self. He should
conduct himself with total carefulness and caution and should not be
after fabricating excuses in order to plunge into pleasantries and
faultfinding by taking resort in one of the permissible exceptions.

The ruses of the self are most subtle. It may seduce man by fooling him
through the *Shari’ah* and lead him into mortal perils. For instance, it
is permissible to do the *ghibah* of one who does not conceal his
violations of Divine commands (*mutajahir bi al-fisq*), or rather it is
even obligatory in some cases when it can help in restraining him and is
considered one of the stages of *al-’amr bi al-ma’ruf wa al-nahy ‘an
almunkar*. But one must examine whether his own personal motive by this
*ghibah* is a godly and *shari* one, or if it is prompted by a satanic
and selfish motive. If the motive is a godly one, his act would be
reckoned among *‘ibadat.*

 Rather, the *ghibah* of the *mutajahir* and the sinner with the motive
of his reform is one of the most evident cases of expression of kindness
and munificence toward him, although he himself may not understand it to
be so. But if it is tainted with evil and carnal desire, then one must
turn to the purification of his intent and refrain from meddling with
people’s honor without wholesome intention and purpose.

Moreover, to habituate the self to cases of permissible *ghibah* is also
harmful for it, for the self is inclined toward mischief and indecency.
It is possible that the absence of restraint in the permissible cases
gradually leads it to another stage belonging to the prohibited cases.
This is similar to entry into *shubuhat* (cases where doubt exists as to
an act’s permissibility), which is permissible but not desirable for its
proximity to that which has been prohibited (*maharramat*)*.* For it is
possible that man may be led into *maharramat* through entry into them.
Man must restrain his self as far as possible from these matters and
refrain from everything when there is a possibility of its becoming
unruly.

True, one must certainly act in cases where *ghibah* is obligatory, as
in the aforementioned case and some other cases pointed out by the
*ulama*; but one must also purge one’s intention of the desire of the
carnal self and the promptings of Satan. However, in cases of
permissibility, it is better and preferable to abstain from it. Man must
not commit everything that is permissible, especially in such matters as
these where the seductions of the self and Satan are very effective.

It is narrated that Jesus (A) in the company of his disciples once
passed by the carcass of a dog. The disciples said, “How badly does this
carcass smell!” Jesus (A) declared, “What white teeth it has!” Of
course, a teacher of the human species must possess such a purified
self. He did not like that one of God Almighty’s creations should be
mentioned in a disparaging fashion. They saw its defect, and that Hadrat
pointed out to them one of its excellences. I have heard that it is
narrated in *hadith* that Jesus (A) said, “Don’t be like a fly that sits
upon filth. Don’t be such that you notice only the defects of people.”

It is narrated that the Noble Messenger (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبَى لِمَنْ شَغَلَهُ عَيْبُهُ عَنْ عُيُوبِ النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Blessed is the man who has been detained by his own defects from
noticing the defects of other people.[^22]

It would be good if one were as inquisitive about one’s own defects as
he is about the defects of people. How ugly it is of a man with
thousands of defects to neglect his own and attend to those of others
adding them to the heap of his own defects! Should man explore his own
states, conduct and acts and devote himself to their correction, his
affairs would be reformed. But should he regard himself as free of
defect that is the height of his ignorance. For no defect is worse than
this that man should be unaware and negligent of his own defects yet be
attentive to the defects of others, while he himself is a mass of
defects and shortcomings.

On The Prohibition On Listening To Ghibah
-----------------------------------------

In the same manner as *ghibah* is prohibited, so also listening to it,
being its companion, is .also prohibited; rather, as some traditions
show, the listener is like the backbiter in all the evil respects, even
in regard to his act being a major sin and the obligation to propitiate
the victim.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: المُسْتَمِعُ أَحَدُ
المُغْتَابِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) said, “The listener is one of the two backbiters.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: السَّامِعُ أَحَدُ المُغْتَابِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali (A) said, “The listener is one of the two who engage in
backbiting.”[^23]

Hence, one who listens to *ghibah* is also a backbiter. *Sami*’ here
means *mustami’*. Therefore, as many traditions indicate, it is
obligatory to refute *ghibah.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الصَّدُوقِ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ الصَّادِقِ، عَنْ آبَائِهِ عَلَيْهِمُ
السَّلامُ - فِي حَدِيثِ المَنَاهِي - أنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ نَهَى عَنِ الغِيبَةِ والإسْتِمَاعِ إلَيْهَا، إلَى أنْ
قَالَ: وَمَنْ تَطَوَّلَ عَلَى أخِيهِ فِي غِيبَةٍ سَمِعَهَا فِيهِ فِي
مَجْلِسٍ فَرَدَّهَا عَنْهُ رَدَّ اللهُ عَنْهُ أَلْفَ بَابٍ مِنَ
الشَّرِّ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ، فَإنْ هُوَ لَمْ يَرُدَّهَا وَهُوَ
قَادِرٌ عَلَى رَدِّهَا كَانَ عَلَيْهِ كَوِزْرِ مَنِ اغْتَابَهُ
سَبْعِينَ مَرَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In a tradition reported by al-Saduq with his isnad from Imam al-Sadiq
(A), the Noble Messenger (S) is once said to have forbidden ghibah and
listening to it as well. Then he (S) said, “Lo, whoever does a favor to
his brother by refuting his ghibah on hearing it in a gathering, God
shall save him from a thousand kinds of evils in this world and the
Hereafter. And if he doesn’t do so in spite of his ability to refute it
on him shall be the burden of one who commits his ghibah seventy
times.”[^24]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنِ الصَّدُوقِ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ، عَنْ
آبَائِهِ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلامُ - فِي وَصِيَّةِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ لِعَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ -: يَا
عَلِيُّ، مَنِ اغْتِيبُ عِنْدَهُ أَخُوهُ المُسْلِمُ فَاسْتَطَاعَ
نَصْرَهُ فَلَمْ يَنْصُرْهُ خَذَلَهُ اللهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In a tradition reported by al-Saduq with his isnad from Imam al-Sadiq
(A), the Prophet (S) is reported to have said to Amir al-Mu’minin (A) in
the course of a counsel that he gave him: “O ‘Ali! When someone hears
the ghibah of his Muslim brother and it is committed in his presence,
yet he does not rally to his assistance despite being capable of doing
so, God shall humiliate him in the world and the Hereafter.[^25]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْ عِقَابِ الأعْمَالِ بِسَنِدِهِ عَنْ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: مَنْ رَدَّ عَنْ أَخِيهِ غِيبَةً سَمِعَهَا فِي
مَجْلِسٍ رَدَّ اللهُ عَنْهُ ألْفَ بَابٍ مِنَ الشَّرِّ فِي الدُّنْيَا
وَالآخِرَةِ، فَإنْ لَمْ يَرُدَّ عَنْهُ وَأَعْجَبَهُ كَانَ عَلَيْهِ
كَوِزْرِ مَنِ اغْتَابَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In Iqab al-’a’mal, al-Saduq reports with his isnad from the Prophet (S)
that he said, “Whoever refutes the ghibah of his brother that he hears
in a gathering, God shall turn away from him a thousand kinds of evils
in this world and the next. But if he fails to refute it and is even
pleased thereat, his burden of sin is like that of the backbiter.[^26]

The *Allamah* of the latter-day *ulama*, the great researcher and
embodiment of the merits of knowledge and deed, al-Shaykh al-’Ansari (R)
says:

It appears that by ‘refutation’ (radd) here is meant something other
than forbidding ghibah, and it implies defending and offering assistance
to the absent person with something related to the ghibah. For instance,
if the defect mentioned is one related to worldly affairs, he may say in
his defense, “A defect is one which God Almighty has reckoned as such,
such as sin, and the biggest of sins is that which you yourself are
committing by doing ghibah of your brother by ascribing to him something
which God has not considered a defect of his.” And if it is one related
to religion, he may explain it in such a way as not to be counted a sin
on his part. And if it cannot be explained away, he must defend it by
saying, for instance, “A believer is at times guilty of sin, and it is
fitting that we pray to God to forgive him rather than expose his
faults. Perhaps your exposing of his fault is a bigger sin before God
Almighty than his.”

At times the listener, besides abstaining from absolving the absent
person from the *ghibah,* induces the backbiter to commit *ghibah,* or
he may encourage the backbiter by going along willingly with him by such
oft-repeated interjections as “Strange!” Or if he is one of the pious
ones, by uttering some sacred formula such as *‘Astagh firullah’* or
something else, acts which are in fact the Devil’s artifices. It is
probable that the noble tradition which mentions the burden of the
listener as being seventy times that of the backbiter refers to such
persons as these. And we take refuge in God from it!

Al-Shahid Al-Thani’s Discourse
------------------------------

The honorable shaykh, the precious researcher and the blessed martyr
al-Shahid al-Thani (R) has a discourse in this regard and with this
noble discourse, we conclude this section. He says:

Of the filthiest kind of ghibah is that which is committed by some
hypocritical persons in the garb of men of knowledge and understanding,
for they carry out their (evil) intentions in the garb of righteousness
and piety. They commit ghibah and yet pretend to abstain from it. Due to
their ignorance and neglect, they don’t know that they are guilty of two
indecencies at once: riya’ and ghibah. Similar to it is the case of the
person who when somebody is mentioned before him says, “Al-humdulillah,
that we are not afflicted with the love of office,” or “...that we are
not afflicted with the love of the world” or that “we do not possess
such and such a quality.” Or, for instance, he will say, “Na’udhubillah,
from lack of shame,” or “from incapability,” or he will say, “May God
safeguard us” from such and such an act.

Sometimes the praise of God is by itself ghibah if the fault of someone
is understandable from it. However, it is a ghibah expressed in a pious
and self-righteous form. This kind of person wanted to mention the fault
of someone through an utterance that all at once carries ghibah, riya’
and the claim to be free from defect, although he has these defects
which are greater than the one he ascribes to another.

One of the ways of ghibah is that at times he (the backbiter) will
praise the person whose ghibah he wishes to commit. For instance, he
will say, “So and so enjoys elevated spiritual states. He does not fall
short in his worships, but due to lack of endurance, which afflicts us
all, he has become somewhat lethargic in his ritual duties.” In this
wary he himself pretends to be blameworthy while he intends to find
fault with the other person. In fact, his purpose is to extol himself by
simulating to be one of the pious through his apparent self-criticism.
This man has involved himself in three indecencies: ghibah, riya’, and
self-righteousness. He imagines himself to be one of the righteous and
one who refrains from ghibah. This is how Satan plays games with the
ignorant and the unaware who are outwardly involved in the pursuit of
knowledge and righteous action without having attained firmness on the
path. Hence, Satan pursues them and brings their good deeds to nothing
and laughs at them.

And to this category belongs the one who, when someone’s ghibah is done
in a gathering and some of those present have not heard, says “Subhan
Allah, what an amazing thing” in order to call their attention to the
ghibah. This person makes the remembrance (dhikr) of God a means to
realize his corrupt vain purpose. Nevertheless, he imagines having done
a service to God Almighty by this dhikr, and this is nothing but
ignorance and vanity.

Also to this category belongs the one who says that such and such a
thing happened to so and so, or rather, such and such a thing happened
to “our friend” or “our companion” and then adds, “May God forgive him
and us.” This person makes a pretence of sympathy and friendliness and
perpetrates ghibah under the cover of prayer. But God knows the
wickedness of his heart and the viciousness of his intention. He does
not know that God is more wrathful toward him than the ignorant man who
commits ghibah openly.

Among the concealed kinds of ghibah is listening to it with amazement,
for such a person expresses his amazement in order to make the backbiter
more lively in his descriptions and his amazement encourages the latter
in his act of ghibah. For instance, be will say, “This really makes me
amazed!” or “I didn’t know that!” or “I didn’t know he would do such a
thing!” These expressions are meant to affirm the backbiter’s statements
and to encourage him subtly to add something more, whereas to affirm
ghibah is also ghibah; or rather to listen to it or even to keep silent
on hearing it is also ghibah.

At times, other vices are also added to *ghibah,* adding to its
perversity, ugliness and punishment, like the backbiting person who
expresses friendship and intimacy in front of the victim of his *ghibah*
and praises and extols him. This is a kind of hypocrisy (*nifaq*)
double-facedness and double-tonguedness that have been condemned in
unambiguous terms in the traditions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي الكَافِي الشَّرِيفِ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ قَالَ: مَنْ لَقِيَ المُسْلِمِينَ بِوَجْهَيْنِ وَلِسَانَيْنِ
جَاءَ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ وَلَهُ لِسَانَانِ مِنْ نَارٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the noble al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from Imam
al-Sadiq (A) that he said, “Whoever encounters Muslims with two faces
and two tongues, he will come on the Day of Resurrection with two
tongues of fire.”[^27]

Such is the form of this ugly act and the result of such a hypocrisy in
the Hereafter. I seek refuge in God Almighty from the evil of the tongue
and the carnal self. And all praise is God’s, at the beginning and the
end.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab
al-ghibah wa al buht”, hadith no. 1.

[^2]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasai’l al-Shi’ah, viii, hadith no. 16312.

[^3]: Al-Fayd al-Kashani al-Mahajjat al-bayda, v, 266.

[^4]: Wasai’l al-Shi’ah, viii, hadith no. 18312.

[^5]: Al-Naraqi, Jami’ al-sa’adat, ii, 294.

[^6]: Al-Mahajjat al-bayda’, v, 263.

[^7]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, viii, hadith no. 16319.

[^8]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Iqab al-’a’mal, 340.

[^9]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, viii, hadith no. 16316.

[^10]: Al-Mahajjat al-bayda; v, 261.

[^11]: Al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab man talaba
‘atharat al mu’minin”, hadith no. 2.

[^12]: Al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab man adha
al-Muslimin”, hadith no. 8.

[^13]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-’anwar, lxxv, “bab al-ghibah”, hadith no.
12, from al Saduq’s al-’Amali’

[^14]: Wasail al-Shiah, viii, hadith no. 18312.

[^15]: Al-Mahajjat al-bayda’, v, 263.

[^16]: Al-Mahajjat al-bayda’, 264.

[^17]: Jami’ al-’akhbar, 171, with some difference of wording.

[^18]: A similar tradition in al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”,
“bab man talaba’ atharit al-mu’minin.”

[^19]: Al-Kafi, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-tarahum wa
al-ta’atuf”, hadith no. 1.

[^20]: Al-Kafi, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-tarahum wa
al-ta’atuf”, hadith no. 4.

[^21]: Al-Kafi, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-tarahum wa
al-ta’atuf”, hadith no. 3.

[^22]: Sharh Shihab al-’akhbar, 306; al-Mahajjat al-bayda’, v, 264.

[^23]: In Ghurar al-hikam, ii, 12.

[^24]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, viii, hadith no. 16316.

[^25]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, viii, hadith no. 16336.

[^26]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, viii, hadith no. 16340.

[^27]: Al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr”, “bab dhi al-lisanayn”,
hadith no. 1.


