Twentieth Hadith: Pure Intention (Ikhlas)
=========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إِلَى الشَّيْخِ الثِقَةِ الجَلِيلِ مُحَمَّدِ
بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ إبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، عَنِ
القَاسِمِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ، عَنِ المِنْقَرِيِّ، عَنْ سُفْيَانَ بْنِ
عُيَيْنَةَ، عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فِي قَوْلِ اللهِ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: ﴿لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلاً.﴾ قَالَ:
لَيْسَ يَعْنِي أَكْثَرُ عَمَلاً وَلَكِنْ أَصْوَبُكُمْ عَمَلاً.
وَإِنَّمَا الإصَابَةُ خِشْيَةُ اللهِ وَالنِّيَّةُ الصَّادِقَةُ
وَالحَسَنَةُ. ثُمَّ قَالَ: الإبْقَاءُ عَلَى العَمَلِ حَتَّى يَخْلُصَ
أَشَدَّ مِنَ العَمَلِ. وَالعَمَلُ الخَالِصُ: الَّذِي لا تُرِيدُ أَنْ
يَحْمَدَكَ عَلَيْهِ أَحَدٌ إلا اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ. وَالنِّيَّةُ
أَفْضَلُ مِنَ العَمَلِ. ألا وَإنَّ النِّيَّةَ هِيَ العَمَلُ. - ثُمَّ
تَلا قَوْلَهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ - ﴿قُلْ كُلٌّ يَعْمَلُ عَلَى شَاكِلَتِهِ.﴾
يَعْنِي عَلَى نِيَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my isnad reaching back to the venerable and trustworthy shaykh
Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (Q) from Ali ibn Ibrahim, from his
father, from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, from al-Minqari, from Sufyan ibn
‘Uyaynah, from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A), who, explaining the utterance of God
Almighty: That He might try you (to see) which of you is fairest in
works. (67:2), said, “It does not mean one of you whose deeds are more
numerous but one who is more rightful in his conduct, and this rightness
is nothing but the fear of God and sincerity of intention (niyyah) and
fear.” Then he (A) added, “To persevere in an action until it becomes
sincere is more difficult than (performing) the action itself, and
sincerity of action lies in this that you should not desire anyone to
praise you for it except God Almighty, and intention supersedes action.
Lo, verily, intention is action itself.” Then he recited the Qur’anic
verse, “Say, everyone acts in accordance with his character
–shakilatihi- (17:84), adding, “That shakilah means niyyah.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

*Bala*’ (mentioned in verse 67: 2) means ‘test’ and ‘examination’ as
pointed out by *al-Sihah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلَوْتُهُ بَلْواً: جَرَّبتُهُ واختَبَرتُه، وبَلاه اللهُ بلاءً
وأبْلاهُ إبْلاءً حسناً وابْتَلاهُ أي اختَبَرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Balawtuhu balwan’ means ‘I tested him’, ‘I examined him’, and ‘balahu
Allah bala’an’, or ‘ablahu ibla’an hasanan’ or ibtaluhu means ‘He (God)
tested him.’

‘*Ayyukum*’ is the second object (*maf’ul duwwom*) for *li yabluwakum*,
with the sense of knowing being implicit in it, according to al-Majlisi.
But this does not seem to fit, because the interrogative pronoun *ayy*
makes the verb conditional on action (*‘amal*). That which is correct is
that أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلاً is a nominal sentence (*jumleh-ye
mubtada wa khabar*) and is the object of the verb *balwa*. If *ayy* is
taken to be relative pronoun (*mawsulah*), there is a sense for the
statement of al-Majlisi (M). But its interrogative character is more
evident.

Sawab is the opposite of khata’ (error), as mentioned by al-Jawhari. The
second ‘khashyah’ (fear) does not appear in some manuscripts, as
mentioned by al-Majlisi, and should it be there, there are several
probable interpretations for it, the more evident of which is that the
*waw* here is in the sense of *ma’a* (with). And this phrase is narrated
in the *Asrar al-salat* of al-Shahid al-Thani (M) وَالنِّيَّةُ
الصَّادِقَةُ وَالحَسَنَةُ (‘sincere and fair intention’; instead of
وَالنِّيَّةُ الصَّادِقَةُ وَالخِشْيَةُ).

*Ibqa’ ‘ala al-’amal* means observance of action and exercising care
over it, as pointed out by al-Jawhari, who says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبقَيتُ على فُلانٍ إذا أرْعَيتُ علَيهِ ورَحِمْتُه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Shakilah* has (also) the sense of *tariqah* (way), *shakl* (shape), and
*nahiyah* (region), as mentioned in *al-Qamus* and *al-Sihah*.
*Al-Qamus* states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشّاكِلةُ: الشَّكلُ والنّاحِيةُ والنّيَّة والطَّريقَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We will, God willing, explain that which needs explanation in this noble
*hadith* in course of a few sections.

The Meaning Of ‘Test’ In Relation To God
----------------------------------------

The clause, “That He might try you...” (quoted in the tradition) refers
to the utterance of God Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿تَبَارَكَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ الْمُلْكُ وَهُوَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ. الَّذِي خَلَقَ الْمَوْتَ وَالْحَيَاةَ لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ
أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Blessed is He in Whose hand is the Kingdom and Who is powerful over
everything, Who created death and life, that He might try you which of
you is fairest in works.*** (***67: 1-2***)

The *muhaqqiq* al-Majlisi (Q) says, “This noble verse (which refers to
the ‘creation’ of death) indicates that death is something which has
being, and means either death as something that happens to life or
essential non-existence.”

The meaning of the noble verse indicates a sense in which creation
relates to it (death) as a substance; it does not indicate a sense in
which the relation is accidental, as pointed out by the *muhaqqiqun.*
And the possible sense of death as essential non-existence does not
apply here, for ascription of being to something essentially
non-existent involves a contradiction, with the further observation that
to ascribe the sense of essential non-existence to death does not appear
in itself to be something correct.

However, that which is correct is that ‘death’ means transference from
the apparent corporeal realm (*nash’eh-ye zahereh-ye mulkiyyeh*) to the
hidden higher realm (*nash’eh-ye bateneh-ye malakutiyyeh*)*.* Or ‘death’
means the second life in *malakut* (the realm higher to that of physical
nature) following the first life in the realm of *mulk* (physical
nature). Both of these senses involve being, or rather refer to a mode
of being more complete than that of *mulk.*

This is because life in the world or physical nature is adulterated with
lifeless physical materials and their life is an ephemeral accident, as
opposed to the substantial (i.e. inherent in substance) life of the
realm of *malakut* where the souls obtain independence (from all
elements of lifelessness that characterize the physical world). That
realm is the realm of life, life being its essential quality, and the
non-corporeal bodies of *Barzakh* (*abdan al-mithaliye barzakhi*) have
their existential dependence on the souls, as has been demonstrated in
the place proper to it.

Moreover, the life of *malakut -* which is expressed by ‘death’
(*al-mawt,* in the verse) in order not to weigh heavily on the ears of
the listeners - does relate to creation and is under the power of the
Sacred Essence.

The meaning of ‘trial’ and ‘test’ and the character of their ascription
to God, the Exalted and the Glorious, was mentioned during the earlier
exposition of some traditions. It was explained that ignorance (implicit
in the meaning of ‘trial’ and ‘test’) cannot be ascribed to the Sacred
Essence, and there is no need of interpretations and studied
explanations in this regard. Here we shall briefly explain this issue.

At the beginning of their creation, the human souls are nothing but pure
potentialities and are devoid of every kind of actuality inclining
either toward felicity or wretchedness. It is only after their coming
into the ambit of physical, substantial motion and voluntary actuality
that the potentialities and capacities change into actualities and
distinctions. Hence the difference between the felicitous and the
wretched, the fat and the lean, comes into existence in corporeal life
(*hayat al-mulki*)*,* and the purpose of the creation of life is the
distinction and examination of the souls. Thus the relation of trial and
creation becomes clear. As to the creation of death, it has also a role
in these distinctions, or rather it is the last link in the causative
process (of the emergence of distinctions in the realm of actuality).

For the criterion in the realm of actuality is the ultimate forms with
which man makes the migration (from *mulk* to *malakut*)*;* also, the
criterion in the distinctions is the otherworldly *malakuti* forms that
are acquired through the substantial and voluntary movements of the
corporeal world. This also makes clear the relation of testing and trial
to creation of death and life, without involving any ignorance (on the
part of God). An exposition of this issue elaborate enough to dispel all
the doubts surrounding it depends on a discussion of God’s essential
knowledge prior to creation (*‘ilm al-dhati qabl al ijad*) and His
actual knowledge accompanying creation (*‘ilm al-fi’lli* *ma’a
al-’ijad*)*,* which is outside the scope of this exposition. And the
Divine utterance, “(that He might see) which one of you is fairest in
action,” as well as the trial relating to the more righteous of deeds,
relate to the above-mentioned matter, and hence the noble tradition.

This is because the relative fairness of deeds has been interpreted as
their relative rightness, which in turn is made to depend on fear and
sincerity of intention. These are the inward forms of the soul, which
make up the real distinctive features of the souls or are the
manifestations of the hidden distinctions among the essences. And
because of the fact that outward action affects the heart and the inward
self, these distinctions are also brought about by deeds. Hence, the
testing of deeds is also the testing of the essences.

And if the noble verse were interpreted in accordance with its apparent
sense and in independence of the exposition of the Imam (A), even then
the testing will have the above-mentioned sense, because the life in the
present world and the creation of life and death by itself results in
the distinctions that characterize good and evil acts. As to the
creation of life, its significance is clear, and as to death, its
significance in this relation also becomes clear when we know the
ephemeral nature of worldly life and the necessity of transition from
this transitory life which is, of course, accompanied with distinctions
arising from distinctions of deeds.

Fear, Sincere Intention And Rightness Of Action
-----------------------------------------------

You should know that in this noble tradition the rightness and goodness
of action is made to depend on two sublime bases, which also constitute
the criteria of their perfection and wholeness. One of these is the fear
and awe of God Almighty and the other is the sincerity of intention and
purity of purpose. Now we have to explain the relation between these two
principles and the perfection of action and its rightness and rectitude.

The fear and awe of God Almighty leads to the *taqwa* and piety of the
souls and these result in greater effectiveness of deeds. To elaborate,
as mentioned in the course of the exposition of earlier traditions,
every act, good or evil, has an effect upon the soul. Now if the act is
of the category of acts of devotion and worship, its effect is that of
making the physical faculties subservient to the intellectual faculties,
making the *malakuti* aspect of the self-dominant over its *mulki*
aspect.

As a result of it, physical nature is made subject to spirituality,
until the soul reaches the stage of spiritual emotion and attains its
essential goal. Every act that increases this effect and discharges this
service in a better way is more rightful and more effective in attaining
the essential goal. Also, everything that has a role in this
effectiveness has also a role in the rightness of action. Largely, this
is also the criterion of relative merit in acts and the famous following
tradition also refers to this point:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفْضَلُ الأَعْمَالِ أَحْمَزُهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The best of deeds are those which are the most difficult.[^2]

These preliminaries show that *taqwa* purifies the souls from
contaminations and obfuscations, and, obviously, if the tablet of the
soul is free of the coverings of sins and clear of the obfuscations
caused by them, the good actions are more effective- upon it and more
conducive to the realization of the goal, thus better fulfilling the
great secret purpose of devotional rites, which is the taming of
corporeal nature, subjugation of *mulk* to *malakut,* and strengthening
of the soul’s active will power (*iradeh-ye fa’ileh-ye nafs*)*.*

Hence, the fear of God, which has a thorough influence on the soul’s
*taqwa,* is one of the major agents of spiritual reform with an
effective role in the rectitude of action and its beauty and perfection.
This is because *taqwa,* besides being one of the reforming agents of
the soul, also affects the influence of inward and outward human actions
and is the cause of their acceptability, as declared by God Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللَّهُ مِنْ الْمُتَّقِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily God accepts only from the God-fearing.*** (***5:27***)

The second major factor in the rightness and perfection of actions
which, in fact, is tantamount to their efficient force (in the same way
as the awe and *taqwa* acquired from them is equivalent to the condition
of their effectiveness and which, in fact, purify the receptor and
remove the impediments). It is sincere intention and pure purpose on
which depend the perfection and defectiveness of *‘ibadat* (worships)
and their validity and invalidity.

As much as the *‘ibadat* are free from association with non-God and from
adulteration of intention, to the same extent they are sincere and
perfect. And nothing is as important in *‘ibadat* as intention and its
purity, for the relationship of intention to *‘ibadah* is like that of
the soul to the body and the spirit to the corporeal frame.

In the same way as their physical form originates in the physical aspect
of the self and its body, intention and their spirit originate from the
self’s inward aspect and the heart. No worship is acceptable to God
Almighty without sincere intention and unless it is free from the
outward *mulki riya’* (a kind of *riya’* which the *fuqaha*’ (R) have
mentioned) and *shirk,* which invalidate and nullify the outward parts
(of an *ibadah*)*.*

And unless it is free from inward *shirk,* in whose presence although an
*‘ibadah* may be correct from the exoteric aspect of the *Shari’ah* and
*fiqh*i ordinances, it is not valid and acceptable to God Almighty from
the esoteric aspect and from the viewpoint of the reality and secrets of
worship. Hence there is no necessary relation between the (legal)
validity of *‘ibadah* and its acceptability, a point which has often
been mentioned in the traditions.

An exhaustive definition of *‘shirk* in ‘*ibadah’* that encompasses all
its levels is the inclusion of the good pleasure and satisfaction of
anyone other than God, whether it is one’s own self or someone else.’ If
it is for someone else’s satisfaction and for other people, it is
outward *shirk* and *fiqh*i *riya’.* If it is for one’s own satisfaction
(*rida*)*,* it is hidden and inward *shirk;* this also invalidates the
*‘ibadah* in view of the *urafa* and makes it unacceptable to God.
Examples of it are offering the nightly prayer for increase in one’s
livelihood, giving *sadaqah* for safety from afflictions, or giving
*zakat* for increase in one’s wealth; that is, when one does these
things for God Almighty in order to seek these things from His grace.

Although those *‘ibadat* are valid, and one who performs them is
considered to have performed his duty and fulfilled the requirements of
the *Shari’ah*, they do not amount to the worship of God Almighty, nor
are they characterized with sincerity of intention and purity of
purpose. Rather, this kind of *‘ibadat* are aimed to achieve mundane
purposes and to seek the objects of carnal, mundane desires. Hence, the
acts of such a person are not rightful.

Similarly, if *‘ibadah* is for the sake of the fear of hell and yearning
for paradise, it is not sincerely for God and is devoid of sincere
intention. Rather, it may be said that such acts of worship are purely
for the sake of Satan and the carnal self. The good pleasure of God does
not enter the intentions of a person performing such a kind of *ibadah*
in order to be considered even *shirk.*

 Rather he has worshipped solely the great idol, the mother of all
idols, the idol of one’s carnal desire. However, God Almighty has
accepted this kind of *ibadah* from us out of His expansive mercy and on
account of our weakness, by allowing a degree of leniency; that is, He
has bestowed upon it certain effects and attached certain favors to it
so that if man should fulfill the outward conditions of its acceptance,
and perform it with the presence of the heart, all those effects will
follow and all the related promises of reward shall be carried out.

Such is the condition of the *‘ibadat* of the slaves and mercenaries.
But as to the *‘ibadah* of free men (*ahrar*)*,* performed for the love
of God Almighty and to seek the attention given by that Sacred Essence
to Its worshippers, the motive of fear of hell and yearning for paradise
being absent in it, it is the first station of the *awliya’* and
*ahrar.*

There are other stations and degrees for them, which escape description
and lie outside the scope of this discourse. As long as the soul’s
attention is fixed on worship, worshipper, and the worshipped one,
worship is not sincere. The heart must be vacated of every other thing
and there should be nothing in it except God in order for worship to be
sincere, as mentioned in a noble tradition of *al-Kafi*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: سَأَلْتُهُ عَنْ قَوْلِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: ﴿إلا مَنْ أَتَى
اللهَ بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ.﴾ قَالَ: القَلْبُ السَّلِيمُ الَّذِي يَلْقَى
رَبَّهُ وَلَيْسَ فِيهِ أَحَدٌ سِوَاهُ. وَكُلُّ قَلْبٍ فِيهِ شِرْكٌ
أَوْ شَكٌّ فَهُوَ سَاقِطٌ. وَإنَّمَا أَرَادُوا الزُّهْدَ فِي
الدُّنْيَا لِتَفْرَغَ قُلُوبُهُمْ لِلآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sufyan ibn ‘Uyaynah (the narrator of the earlier tradition) says, “I
asked Imam al-Sadiq (A) about the utterance of God, the Exalted and the
Glorious, in regard to the Day of Resurrection, ‘The day when neither
wealth nor sons shall profit except he who comes with a pure heart (26:
88-89).’ The Imam (A) replied, ‘A pure heart is one that meets its Lord
in a state in which there is none in it except Him.’ Then he (A) added:
‘Every heart in which there is shirk or doubt shall fail. Indeed, He has
meant by it (the purity of heart) nothing except zuhd in regard to the
world so that their hearts may be made ready for the Hereafter.’[^3]

Of course, the heart which is occupied with non-God and contaminated
with doubt and *shirk -* whether of the manifest (*jali*) or the
concealed (*khafi*) kind - has no credibility in the sacred presence of
the Lord. To the concealed kind of *shirk* pertains reliance on means
and dependence on anything other than God.

It is even mentioned in tradition that changing the position of one’s
ring in order to remind one of something is also concealed *shirk.*[^4]
To allow other-than-God to enter the heart is considered concealed
*shirk*, and sincerity of intention (ikhlas al-niyyat) is expulsion of
other-than God from His sacred abode (i.e. the heart). Similarly, there
are various degrees of doubt (shakk), some of which should be reckoned
as manifest and some as concealed, which are caused by the weakness of
conviction and feebleness of faith.

Similarly, hesitation in matters is also on account of doubt. Of the
stages of concealed doubt is changeability and absence of stability in
tawhid. Therefore, true tawhid means the dropping of relations, limits
and pluralities, even the pluralities relating to the Names and
Attributes, and fixation in it is purity from doubt. The purity of heart
means absolute freedom from *shirk* and doubt.

In the tradition, the phrase “He has meant by it nothing except
*zuhd*...” is a reference to the fact that the ultimate goal of *zuhd*
is that the heart should gradually become detached from the world and
loathful toward it, with its attention turned to the real goal and the
true object of all yearning. From the beginning part of the tradition it
appears that the meaning of ‘Hereafter’ is the ultimate limit of the
circle of existence and the ultimate destination. This is what
‘Hereafter’ means in its absolute sense.

Accordingly, the world constitutes the complete circle of manifestation,
and *zuhd* in regard to it necessarily entails purifying the heart of
other-than-God. Hence even one who has other-than-God in his heart and
is attached to others - whether they be corporeal, *mulki* matters, or
spiritual ones relating to hereafterly forms, excellences and degrees,
and everything other than God - is a man of the world, not *zahid* in
regard to it, being deprived from the true Hereafter and the paradise of
Divine communion, which is the highest of the levels of paradise,
although he may possess other degrees of spiritual excellences and
attain to the sublime levels of paradise in the same way as the people
of the world differ in regard to possession of worldly wealth and status
but whose stations are far remote from those of the men of God.

The Definition Of Ikhlas
------------------------

You should know that various definitions have been suggested for
*ikhlas,* to some of which that are prevalent among the people of the
mystic path we shall briefly refer here. The honorable ‘*arif*’ and the
wise wayfarer, Khwajah ‘Abd Allah al-’Ansari, *quddisa sirruh,* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإخْلاصُ تَصْفِيَةُ العَمَلِ مِنْ كُلِّ شَوْبٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ikhlas means purging action of all impurities.

And the impurity mentioned here is a general one, including both that
which arises from the desire to please oneself and other creatures. It
is narrated from the great Shaykh Baha’i that the people of the heart
have offered various definitions for it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قِيلَ: تَنْزيهُ العَملِ أنْ يكونَ لِغَير اللهِ فيهِ نَصيبٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been said, “(Ikhlas means) keeping action free from
other-than-God having a role in it.”

This definition is close to the former one.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقيلَ: أنْ لا يُريدَ عاملُهُ عليهِ عِوَضاً في الدَّارَينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it has been said, “(Ikhlas means) that the performer of an action
should not desire any reward for it in the world and the Hereafter.”

And it has been narrated from the author of *Ghara’ib al-bayan* that the
*mukhlisun* are those who worship God in such a way that they don’t see
themselves in service nor do they take notice of the world or .its
people, nor transcend the bounds of servitude in their vision of
Lordship.

Hence when the devotee foregoes all gains and stakes in everything from
the earth to the Throne (*‘arsh*)*,* he comes to traverse the path of
*din,* which is the path of service and devotion on which the soul does
not take any notice of the events on account of its vision of the beauty
of the Lord. This is the *Din* that God Almighty has chosen for Himself
and cleared it from the taint of association with other-than-God, and He
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَلَا لِلَّهِ الدِّينُ الْخَالِصُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Lo, to God belongs sincere allegiance —al-din al-khalis—.*** (39:3)

And ‘sincere religion’ is the light of pre-eternity (*qidam*) that
appears after the disappearance of contingency (*huduth*) in the
wilderness of resplendent glory and monism. It is as if God Almighty has
invited His servants by indicating and signaling to them that they
should purify their souls from others and make them turn exclusively
towards Him. And it has been narrated from al-Shaykh al-Muhaqqiq Muhyi
al-*Din* al-’Arabi that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلا للهِ الدّينُ الخالِصُ عَن شَوْبِ الغَيرِيَّةِ وَالأَنانِيَّةِ،
لأنَّكَ لِفَنائِكَ فيهِ بالكُلِّيَّةِ فَلا ذاتَ لَكَ وَلا صِفَةَ وَلا
فِعلَ وَلا دينَ وَإلا لمَا خَلُصَ الدّينُ بِالحَقيقةِ فَلا يَكونُ
للهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Lo, to God belongs sincere allegiance,’ free from the taints of
otherness and egoism. And that your extinction in Him should be total,
the Essence; the Attributes, the Acts and the din should cease to be
relevant for you. Lo, until the allegiance is not purified by Reality,
it will not belong to God.

Until the traces of servitude (‘*ubudiyyah*), otherness (*ghayriyyah*)
and egoism (*ananiyyah*) remain and as long as there is a worshipper and
the worshipped one, worship, sincerity, and *din*, there remain the
taints of otherness and egoism, and this is regarded as *shirk* by the
*urafa*. The worship of the sincere ones is the imprint of the
manifestations (*tajalliyat*) of the Beloved and nothing passes through
their hearts except the Essence of the One God.

And although the horizons of possibility (*imkan*) and necessity
(*wujub*) have been joined for them and they have attained proximity to
the Essence (*tadalli-ye dhati*) and absolute nearness to the Real
(*dunuww al-mutlaq al-haqiqi*) and the traces of otherness have been
completely wiped out, they still perform the duties of servantship. And
their servitude is not through reflection and thought, but through
manifestation - a point indicated by the prayer of the Messenger of
Allah (S) on the night of his heavenly ascent (*mi’raj*).

Ikhlas Is Subsequent To Action
------------------------------

You should know that that which is said in the noble tradition, that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإبْقَاءُ عَلى العَمَلِ حَتَّى يَخْلُصَ أَشَدُّ مِنَ العَمَلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

To persevere in an action until it becomes sincere is more difficult
than the action itself,

is meant to encourage man to exercise care and diligence in that which
he does, both at the time of its performance and after it. For it
sometimes happens that man carries out an action faultlessly and without
any shortcoming and performs it without *riya’* or ‘*ujb*; but after the
action he becomes afflicted with *riya’* through mentioning it, as
pointed out in the following noble *hadith* of al-Kari:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أبي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ أنَّهُ قَالَ: الإبْقَاءُ عَلَى
العَمَلِ أَشَدُّ مِنَ العَمَلِ. قَالَ: وَمَا الإبْقَاءُ عَلَى
العَمَلِ؟ قَالَ: يَصِلُ الرَّجُلُ بِصِلَةٍ وَيُنْفِقُ نَفَقَةً للهِ
وَحْدَهُ لا شَرِيكَ لَهُ فَتُكْتَبُ لَهُ سِرّاً ثُمَّ يَذْكُرُهَا
فَتُمْحَى فَتُكْتَبُ لَهُ عَلانِيَةً، ثُمَّ يَذْكُرُهَا فَتُمْحَى
وَتُكْتَبُ لَهُ رِياءً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Baqir (A) said, “Perseverance in an action is more difficult
than the act itself.” He was asked, “What is meant by perseverance in
action?” He replied, “A man does some kindness to a relative or expends
something for the sake of God, Who is One and has no partner. Thereupon
the reward of a good deed performed secretly is written for him. Later,
he mentions it to someone, and that which was written earlier is wiped
out, and instead the reward of a good deed performed openly is written
for him. Later, when he makes a mention of it again, the vice of riya’
is written for him (instead of the reward written earlier).”[^5]

Man is never secure from the evil of Satan and his self until the end of
his life. He must not imagine that once he has performed an act solely
for the sake of God, without desire for the good pleasure of creatures
having played any role in it, the purity of his act shall remain secure
from the evil of the vicious self. Should he fail to exercise care and
vigilance, the self may prompt him to make a mention of it or, as
sometimes happens, to express it in the way of a subtle hint.

For instance, wishing to impress people about his nightly prayers, the
subtle machinations of the self may prompt him to pass a hint by
speaking about the good or bad weather conditions at daybreak or about
supplications or the call for prayer, thus making his acts invalid and
unworthy. Man must keep a watch over himself, like a kind physician or
nurse, and not let the rebellious self get out of control; for a moment
of neglect may give it the opportunity to break its reins and lead man
into ignominy and perdition. Hence, in all conditions he must take
refuge in God Almighty from the evil of Satan and the carnal self:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ النَّفْسَ لَأَمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ إِلَّا مَا رَحِمَ رَبِّي.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely the self of man incites to evil - except in as much as my Lord
had mercy.*** (***12:53***)

And it should be known to you that purification of intention from all
levels of *shirk, riya’* and other things, constant vigilance over it,
and its perseverance in purity make up a greatly difficult as well as an
important task. Rather, some degrees of it are not attainable by anyone
except the sincere *awliya*’ of Allah. This is because intention is the
efficient motive of action and is subject to other goals. These goals
are in turn subject to the spiritual traits that make up man’s inward
essence and spiritual character. If someone possesses the love of office
and position and this love becomes part of his spiritual makeup and
character, the end of his desires is to reach that goal and the actions
that originate from him are subject to that goal; his motive being the
same sought-after object of his spirit, the actions that originate from
him are directed to reaching the goal sought.

As long as this love remains in his heart, his acts cannot be sincere,
and one whose spiritual character and make-up are characterized by
self-love and egoism his ultimate goal and end is attainment of selfish
satisfactions, which are also the motive of his acts, regardless of
whether his acts are directed to mundane goals or such otherworldly ends
as the houris, palaces, gardens and bounties of the next life. Rather,
as long as egoism, self-seeking and egotism are there, even if he takes
a step for the acquisition of mystic knowledge and spiritual
excellences, these are sought for selfish ends, self-seeking, not
God-seeking, being their aim. And it is obvious that self-seeking and
God-seeking cannot go together. Rather, if God is sought for the sake of
the self, the ultimate end and goal is the self and the ego.

Thus it is evident that the absolute purification of intention from
*shirk* is a great task that cannot be achieved by every one, and the
defectiveness and excellence of deeds is subject to the defectiveness
and perfection of intentions, for intention is the efficient and
*malakuti* form of action, as hinted above. The noble tradition also
refers to this point where it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالنِّيَّةُ أَفْضَلُ مِنَ العَمَلِ. ألا وَإنَّ النِّيَّةَ هِيَ
العَمَلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And intention is superior to action, or, rather, intention is the
complete reality of act itself.

And there is no exaggeration involved in this, as some have suggested;
rather, it is based on fact, for intention is the complete form of
action and its essence itself, the wholesomeness and corruption, the
excellence and defectiveness of acts depending upon it.

Accordingly, a single act may, on account of the intention that
underlies it, at times imply respect and at times insult. Sometimes it
may be perfect and sometimes defective. Sometimes it may belong to the
highest level of spiritual sublimity, possessing a beautiful, blessed
form. Sometimes it may belong to the lower spiritual realm and possess a
frightful and odious form.

The apparent form of the *salat* of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A) does not
differ outwardly in regard to its elements and conditions from that of a
certain hypocrite; but whereas for the former it is a means of spiritual
ascent toward God (*mi’raj ila* *Allah*) and has the highest spiritual
form, for the latter it is a means of descent to hell and its spiritual
form is incomparably black due to the intensity of darkness.

Because of a few loaves of bread of barley given away by the House of
Inerrancy, i.e. The Prophet’s Ahl al-Bayt (A), for the sake of God, God
Almighty sent down several verses in their praise. An ignorant person
may be led to think that two or three days of hunger and giving away
one’s food to the poor is a matter of importance, whereas such kind of
acts may be performed by anybody and are of not much consequence. Their
significance lies in the purity of their (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt’s)
purpose and the sincerity of their intention. It is the power and
elegance of the spirit of their action, coming forth from their pure
hearts that gives their action so much significance.

The outward appearance of the Noble Prophet (S) was not much different
from that of other people. Hence, often when he (S) was sitting with a
group of people and some strangers from among the Arab Bedouins came to
meet him (S), they would ask, “Which one of you is the Messenger?” That
which distinguished the Messenger (S) from others is the power and
elegance of the spirit of that Master, not his blessed body or his noble
frame. In the rational sciences, it is demonstrated that a thing’s
thingness depends on its form, not on its matter.

Rather, a definition based on species is exhaustive, and it is defective
when based on genus and species, because intermingling with that which
is strange and foreign to a thing is inimical to its reality,
definition, and wholeness, and matter and genus are foreign and strange
to its reality, which lies in its form, actuality, and species. Hence,
the total reality of acts is that of their forms and their *malakuti*
dimension, represented by intention.

This discussion shows that that which Imam al-Sadiq (A) says in this
noble tradition is, firstly, in view of the form of action and its
matter. What he says is that their formal aspect supersedes their
material aspect and that, therefore, intention supersedes action, in the
same way as spirit is superior to body. And this does not necessitate
the validity of an act devoid of intention and the possibility of a body
devoid of spirit. Rather, it is the association of intention with action
and the attachment of spirit to body that makes action and body what
they are. These two are compounds of intention and action, body and
spirit and the formal, *malakuti* aspect of each is superior to its
material, *mulki* aspect. And this is the meaning of the famous
tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نِيَّةُ المَرْءِ خَيْرٌ مِنْ عَمَلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The intention of the man of faith is better than his act.[^6]

Secondly, that which the Imam (A) says is in view of the dissolution of
action in intention, of the *mulk* in the *malakut,* and manifestation
(*mazhar*) in the manifest (*zahir*)*.* Hence he (A) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا وَإنَّ النِّيَّةَ هِيَ العَمَلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lo, verily intention is act itself.

Apart from intention, there is nothing that is involved and the totality
of act is merged in intention; action has no independent reality of its
own. Thereafter, he (A) cites the utterance of God Almighty as witness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ كُلٌّ يَعْمَلُ عَلَى شَاكِلَتِهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: ‘Everyone acts according to his character’***
(***shakilatihi***) (***17:84***)

Acts are subservient to the soul’s character (*shakilah*) and although
the soul’s character is constituted by its inward form and the traits
(*malakat*) inherent in it, intentions constitute its outward character.

It may be said that spiritual traits constitute the soul’s primary
character and intentions, to which actions are subservient, makeup its
secondary character. Hence, the statement of the Imam (A) that
*shakilah* is *niyyah.*

This shows that the way to the purification of action from all kinds of
*shirk, riya’,* etc., is only through the reform of the soul and its
*malakat,* for it is the fountainhead of all the reforms and the source
of all the excellences and degrees of perfection. Hence if man expels
the love of the world from his heart by means of austerities and
exercises based on knowledge and action, the world will cease to be his
ultimate goal and his acts will be purged of the biggest *shirk,* which
is the desire to attract the attention of the world’s people and to
attain respect in their eyes. When that happens, he will be the same in
solitude and company, inwardly and outwardly.

To the extent that he succeeds in purging his heart of self-love,
through spiritual austerities, the love of God shall enter it to the
same extent and it shall also be purified of latent *shirk.* And as long
as self-love remains in the heart and man remains in the oppressive
habitat of the self, he is not a wayfarer toward God (*musafir ila
Allah*)*;* rather, he is one of those who cling to the earth
(*mukhalladun ila al-’ard*)*.* The first step in the journey toward God
is abandonment of self-love and crushing the head of egoism under one’s
foot. And there are some who say that one of the meanings of the noble
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَنْ يَخْرُجْ مِنْ بَيْتِهِ مُهَاجِرًا إِلَى اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ
ثُمَّ يُدْرِكْهُ الْمَوْتُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoso goes forth from his house an emigrant to God and His Messenger,
and then death overtakes him, his wage will have fallen on God.***
(***4:100***)

is that if someone leaves the habitat of the self to migrate to God and
sets out on a spiritual journey, and thereafter he encounters complete
annihilation (*fana’ al-tamm*)*,* his reward lies with God, the Exalted.
And it is obvious that such a wayfarer deserves no reward except the
vision (*mushahadah*) of that Sacred Essence and entry into His court.
These words express their sentiments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
در ضميرما نمي گنجد غير دوست كس  
 هر دو عالم را به دشمن ده كه ما را دوست بس
  </p>
</blockquote>

*None except the Beloved has a place in our heart, Give both the worlds
to the enemy, for the Beloved suffices us.*

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, ii, kitab al- iman wa al-kufr, bab
al-’ikhlas, hadith No.4.

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. iv, p. 9.

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, op. cit., hadith No. 5.

[^4]: The tradition appears in Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, in the chapter on the
ahkam of dressing (ahkam al-malabis).

[^5]: Al -Kulayni at-Kafi, kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr, bab al-riya’,
hadith No. 16.

[^6]: Al -Kulayni at-Kafi, kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr, bab al-niyyah,
hadith No.2.


