Twenty-Second Hadith: The Aversion For Death
============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى رُكْنِ الإسْلامِ وَثِقَتِهِ مُحَمَّدِ
بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ الكُلَيْنِي عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَحْيَى، عَنْ أَحْمَدَ
بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ، عَنْ بَعْضِ أَصْحَابِهِ، عَنِ الحَسَنِ بْنِ عَلِيِّ
بْنِ أبِي عُثْمَانَ، عَنْ وَاصِلٍ، عَنْ عَبْدِاللهِ بْنِ سِنَانٍ، عَنْ
أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: جَاءَ رَجُلٌ إلَى أبِي
ذَرٍّ فَقَالَ: يَا أبَا ذَرٍّ، مَا لَنَا نَكْرَهُ المَوْتَ؟ فَقَالَ:
لأنَّكُمْ عَمَّرْتُمُ الدُّنْيَا وَأَخْرَبْتُمُ الآخِرَةَ
فَتَكْرَهُونَ أنْ تُنْقَلُوا مِنْ عُمْرانٍ إلى خَرابٍ. فَقِالَ لَهُ:
فَكَيْفَ تَرَى قُدُومَنَا عَلَى اللهِ؟ فَقَالَ: أمَّا المُحْسِنُ
مِنْكُمْ فَكَالغَائِبِ يَقْدِمُ عَلَى أَهْلِهِ، وَأَمَّا المُسِيءُ
مِنْكُمْ فَكَالآبِقِ يُرَدُّ عَلَى مَوْلاهُ. قَالَ: فَكَيْفَ تَرَى
حَالَنَا عِنْدَ اللهِ؟ قَالَ: إعْرِضُوا أَعْمَالَكُمْ عَلَى الكِتَابِ:
إنَّ اللهَ يَقُولُ: ﴿إِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ لَفِي نَعِيمٍ. وَإِنَّ
الْفُجَّارَ لَفِي جَحِيمٍ.﴾ قَالَ: فَقَالَ الرَّجُلُ: فَأَيْنَ
رَحْمَةُ اللهِ؟ قَالَ: ﴿رَحْمَةَ اللَّهِ قَرِيبٌ مِنْ الْمُحْسِنِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أبُو عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّ‍لامُ: وَكَتَبَ رَجُلٌ إلَى أَبِي
ذَرٍّ، رَضِيَ اللهُ عَنْهُ: يَا أَبَا ذَرٍّ، أَطْرِفْنِي بِشَيْءٍ مِنَ
العِلْمِ. فَكَتَبَ إلَيْهِ: العِلْمُ كَثِيرٌ، وَلَكِنْ إنْ قَدِرْتَ
أنْ لا تُسِيءَ إلَى مَنْ تُحِبُّهُ فَافْعَلْ. قَالَ: فَقَالَ لَهُ
الرَّجُلُ: وَهَلْ رَأَيْتَ أَحَداً يُسِيءُ إلَى مَنْ يُحِبُّهُ؟
فَقَالَ لَهُ: نَعَمْ، نَفْسُكَ أَحَبُّ الأنْفُسِ إلَيْكَ، فَإذَا
أَنْتَ عَصَيْتَ اللهَ فَقَدْ أسَأْتَ إلَيْهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my continuous sanad reaching up to the pillar of Islam and its
reliable authority, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni, from Muhammad ibn
Yahya, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad, from some of his teachers, from al-Hasan
ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi ‘Uthman, from Wasil, from ‘Abd Allah ibn Sinan, from
Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said: A man came to Abu Dharr and said to
him, “O Abu Dharr, what is wrong with us that we abhor death?” Abu Dharr
replied, “That is because you have built and cultivated your world and
ruined your Hereafter. So, you hate to be moved from prosperity towards
desolation.” He was asked, “How do you see our entry into God’s
presence?” Abu Dharr replied, “As to the good-doer amongst you, he is
like someone returning to his family after a (long) absence. As to the
evil-doer amongst you, he is like an absconding slave being returned to
his master.” He was asked, “How do you see our situation before God?”
Abu Dharr replied, “Evaluate your deeds in view of the Qur’anic
criterion. Verily God says: Surely, the pious shall be in bliss and the
profane shall he in a fiery furnace (82:12-3). The Imam (A) added:
Thereat, the man said, “Then, where is the mercy of God?” Abu Dharr
replied, “The mercy of God is near to the good-doers.”

Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) continued: A man wrote to Abu Dharr (R), “O Abu
Dharr, teach me something new of knowledge.” Abu Dharr wrote to him,
“Knowledge is vast. However, if you can abstain from wronging someone
that you love, do so.” The man asked him, “Have you seen anyone wrong
someone that he loves?” Abu Dharr replied, “Yes, your own self is the
dearest of all things to you. And when you disobey God you have wronged
it.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

One should know that people differ in their fear and abhorrence of death
and the reasons that underlie their abhorrence. That which Hadrat Abu
Dharr (R) has described, relates to the state of the middle ones
(*mutawassitun*) and we will briefly describe here the condition of the
deficient (*naqisun*) as well as that of the perfect (*kamilun*).

It should be known that the fear and abhorrence of ours, the deficient
(*naqisun*), for death is on account of a cause that was referred to in
the course of exposition of some of the foregoing traditions. It lies in
this that man, in accordance with his original and God-given nature,
loves life and survival and hates death and extinction.

This love is related to absolute survival and immortal, everlasting
life, a survival free from extinction and a life that knows no end. Some
of our honored predecessors used to prove the necessity of Resurrection
on the basis of this human nature, and a description of their arguments
here is outside the aims of our present discourse. Now, since this love
and that hate lie in human nature, man comes to love that which he
reckons to be the enduring realm of life and hates that which he regards
as being contrary to it. Since we have no faith in the realm of the
Hereafter and our hearts have no conviction in immortal life and eternal
survival, we are attached to this world and abhor death in accordance
with that nature.

We have mentioned earlier that rational Judgment and perception is
different from the faith and conviction of the heart. In accordance with
our rational apperception, or Judgment based on traditional belief
(*taqlid*)*,* we affirm that death—which is a transition from the dark,
lowly sphere of corporeal (*mulki*) existence to the radiant world of
immortal life and the everlasting higher sphere of incorporeal
(*malakuti*) existence—is a reality.

However, our hearts do not partake of this knowledge and are oblivious
of it. Rather, our hearts cling to earthly nature and the corporeal
realm and consider life to be exclusively confined to the lower
corporeal mode of animal life. They do not believe in the life and
immortality of the other world, which is the world of Hereafter and the
realm of (pure) life. Hence, we put total reliance in this world and
regard the other world with fear, repulsion, and resentment. All the
misfortunes of ours are on account of this lack of faith and conviction.

Had we even a tenth of what faith we have in this world’s life and
living, its existence and survival, in the world of the Hereafter and
its eternal, everlasting life, our hearts would have been more attached
to it and we would have devoted some effort to building it. But, alas,
the springs of our faith are dry and the edifice of our faith rests on
water. Inevitably, we fear death, extinction, and end. The exclusive and
definite remedy for this malady is cultivation of faith in the heart
through beneficial reflection and remembrance as well as sound knowledge
and works.

However, as to the fear and abhorrence of the *mutawassitun­*—that is,
those who have inadequate faith in Hereafter—that is because the
attention of their hearts is turned to the cultivation of the world and
they are neglectful of cultivating the Hereafter. Therefore, they are
not inclined to move from a well-built and prosperous place to one,
which is a desolation, as pointed out by Hadrat Abu Dharr (R). This
attitude is also on account of inadequate faith and conviction.

Otherwise, with a complete faith it is not possible that one should
confine his efforts to the base mundane affairs to the neglect of the
Hereafter. On the whole, these fears, anxieties, and hatreds arise from
unwholesomeness of deeds, waywardness and opposition to one’s Master
(*Mawla*)*.* Otherwise, had our evaluation been a correct one and had we
critically examined ourselves we would not have been fearful of God’s
reckoning.

For there, the reckoning is just and the judge is a just one. Hence, our
fear of the reckoning is due to our own inequity and our self-deceptive
and fraudulent evaluation of our own selves. In the noble *al-Kafi*, the
following *musnad* tradition of Hadrat Musa ibn Ja’far (A) is recorded:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: لَيْسَ مِنّا مَنْ لَمْ يُحَاسِبْ فِيْ كُلِّ يَوْمٍ نَفْسَهُ،
فَإنْ عَمِلَ حَسَناً اسْتَزَادَ اللهَ مِنْهُ وَحَمِدَ اللهَ عَلَيْهِ،
وَإنْ عَمِلَ شَيْئاً اسْتَغْفَرَ اللهَ مِنْهُ وَتَابَ إلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imam (A) said, “One who does not examine and evaluate himself every
day is not one of us (i.e. he is not a follower of the Prophet and the
Ahl al Bayt). (A person who examines himself every day), if he does a
good deed, he beseeches God to increase him (in virtues and if he has
perpetrated a vice, he seeks God’s forgiveness for it and is penitent
before Him.”[^2]

Hence, if you have been taking account of yourself, you shall have no
fear of the time of reckoning, for the perils and tribulations of that
world are subject to the works performed in this. For instance, had you
walked in this world on the straight path of prophethood and the
straight path of *wilayah* without deviating or swerving from the path
of the *wilayah* of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (M) there will be no fear on you
when passing over the *Sirat*.[^3]

For the reality of the *Sirat* is the inward form of the wilayah, as it
has been mentioned in *ahadith* that Amir al-Mu’minin (A) is the
*Sirat*.[^4] In another tradition, the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt are
reported to have stated, “We are the *Sirat*.” In the blessed
*al-Ziyarat al-jami’ah*, it is stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتُمُ السَّبِيلُ الأَعْظَمُ وَالصِّرَاطُ الأَقْوَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You (the Ahl al-Bayt) are the greatest path (sabil) and the firmest way
(Sirat).[^5]

Whoever moves on this path steadily without stumbling, his feet will not
stagger on that *Sirat* too, and he will pass over it in a moment as
short as the stroke of lightning. Similarly, should his morals and
habits be equitable and radiant, he will be immune from the darkness and
horrors of the grave, of the Barzakh and the Resurrection, and there
will be no fear upon him in those realms. Hence, here, we are ourselves
responsible for the malady, and its remedy is in our own hands, as
pointed out by Hadrat Amir al-Mu’minin in verses ascribed to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَوَاؤُكَ فِيكَ وَمَا تَشْعُرُ وَدَاؤُكَ مِنْكَ وَمَا تُبْصِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The remedy lies in you and you perceive not  
 The malady arises from you and you discern not.[^6]

And the noble *al-Kafi* records the following *musnad* tradition of al’
Imam al-Sadiq (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أبُو عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ لِرَجُلٍ: إنَّكَ قَدْ
جُعِلْتَ طَبِيبَ نَفْسِكَ وَبُيِّنَ لَكَ الدَّاءُ وَعُرِّفْتَ آيَةَ
الصِّحَّةِ وَدُلِلْتَ عَلَى الدَّوَاءِ، فَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ قِيَامُكَ
عَلَى نَفْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imam (A) said to a man, “Verily, you have been made your own doctor.
The malady has been described to you, the sign of health ho also been
made known to you, and the medicine has been shown to you. Hence look
how you attend your own soul.”[^7]

You are afflicted with corrupt beliefs, morals, and behavior. The signs
of health are contained in the prescriptions of the prophets and the
illuminations of (primordial) nature and the intellect. The remedy for
the soul’s sickness lies in taking steps for its removal. This is the
condition of the *mutawassitun.* However, as to the condition of the
perfect and those of convinced faith, they have no abhorrence of death,
although they may regard it with fear and anxiety on account of their
awe of the Majesty of God, the Exalted, and the dignity of that Sacred
Essence. And hence, the Messenger of Allah (S) used to say;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَيْنَ هَوْلُ المُطَّلَعِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

So where is the terror of him who knows?

And Hadrat Amir al-Mu’minin (A) had a terrific fear and horror on the
night of the nineteenth of Ramadan (the night of his assassination),
although he used to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهِ، لابْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ آنَسُ بِالمَوْتِ مِنَ الطِّفْلِ بِثَدْيِ
أُمِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

By God, the son of Abu Talib is more intimate with death than an infant
with its mother’s bosom.

[^8]

Their fear is on account of other matters and is not like the fear of
those like us who are in the chains of desires and hopes and are
enamored to the transitory world. The hearts of the *awliya’,* too,
greatly differ from one another. Their difference cannot be encompassed
by any description or writing, and we will refer briefly to some of
their points of difference.

The hearts of the *awliya’* differ in their capacity to receive the
irradiations (*tajalliyat*) of the Divine Names. The hearts of some of
them are characterized with love and yearning and God Almighty is
manifested in them through the Names of Beauty (*Jamal*)*.* Such an
irradiation brings an awe suffused with yearning, and the fear in their
terror is on account of the manifestation of Divine Majesty and its
vision. The lover’s heart palpitates with fear and anxiety as the time
of meeting the beloved approaches, but this anxiety and terror is
different from the ordinary kinds of fear.

The hearts of some of them are characterized with trepidation and grief
and God Almighty is manifested in them through the Names of Majesty and
Glory. Such a *tajalli* creates an intense yearning suffused with dread
and a wonder and an awe suffused with grief. And it is related in
*hadith* that once Hadrat Yahya –John- (A) noticed Hadrat ‘Isa –Jesus-
(A) laughing. Angrily, he said to the latter, “It appears as if you are
immune of God’s chastisement!” Hadrat ‘Isa retorted, “It appears as if
you have despaired of God’s mercy and beneficence!” God Almighty
revealed to them that, “Whoever of you has a better opinion of Me is the
dearer to Me.”

Since God manifested Himself in the heart of Hadrat Yahya (A) through
the Names of Majesty, he always dwelt in dread and awe and showed his
displeasure to Hadrat ‘Isa (A), who gave him a reply in accordance with
the *tajalliyat* of Divine Mercy and Compassion.

The Reality Of Heaven And Hell
------------------------------

The literal meaning of the *hadith* where it says: عَمَّرْتُمُ
الدُّنْيَا وَأَخْرَبْتُمُ الآخِرَةَ (you have built the world and ruined
the Hereafter) is that the abodes of the Hereafter and paradise are
places already built and flourishing that are turned into ruins by our
works. But it is obvious that the intent is parallelism of expression.
Since the term *ta’mir* (building) was used in relation to the world,
the parallel term *takhrib* (destruction) was used in relation to the
Hereafter. Although the realms of hell and paradise are creations (of
God), the building agency of paradise and the material of hell is
subject to the deeds of their inhabitants.[^9] And this interpretation
is in accordance with demonstrative proof as well as mystic intuition
(kashf). Hence, some of the researchers among the mystics have said:

Let it be known to you - may God preserve you and us from error - that
hell (Jahannam) is one of God’s great creations, and it is God’s prison
in the Hereafter. It is called ‘Jahannam’ because of the remoteness of
its pit. Hence, a well with a deep pit is called bi’r jahnam. It
contains heat and bitter cold. Its coldness reaches the extreme degree
of cold and its heat the extreme degree of hotness. A distance of seven
hundred and fifty years’ journey separates its uppermost and lowermost
parts. The people disagree as to whether it is a creation or not, and
similarly they disagree concerning paradise. However, in our opinion and
that of our companions and the mystics, they are and are not creations.
When we say that they are creations, it is like saying of a man building
a house and who has built only its boundary walls that “he has built a
house.” However, on entering one sees nothing but an area and space
surrounded by a wall. It is only afterwards that its inner quarters
shall be built with rooms, compartments, storerooms, and water tanks in
accordance with the needs of those who shall come to live therein.

And it is mentioned in *hadith* that when the Messenger of Allah (S)
went on his noble ascent (*mi’raj*), he saw certain angels in paradise
who would, for some time, engage in constructing buildings and for some
time stopped their work.

The Prophet (S) asked Gabriel (A), “What is the reason behind this?”
Gabriel (A) replied, ‘The material for this building is made up of the
remembrance of the individuals of the Ummah. Whenever they engage in
remembrance, the material becomes available for building and the angels
too resume their building work. But when they cease in their
remembrance, these angels too stop their work.”‘[^10]

The physical form of heaven and hell is made up of the forms of the good
and evil works and deeds of the Children of Adam, which return to them
in that world. This has also been referred to in the noble verses of the
Qur’an, as in the following utterance of God Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا حَاضِرًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they find all that they did confronting them.*** (***18:49***)

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّمَا هِيَ أَعْمَالُكُمْ تُرَدُّ إِلَيْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed, these are your own works that are being returned to you.[^11]

It is possible that the worlds of heaven and hell are two independent
realms and abodes towards which the Children of Adam journey through
substantial motions (*harakat al-jawhari*) and voluntary spiritual
(*malakuti*) movements derived from their behavior and character, where
they receive their share of the Hereafter in the shape of the forms of
their works.

The heaven is the higher *malakuti* realm, being an independent sphere
by itself towards which the felicitous spirits are directed, and the
hell is the nether *malakuti* realm towards which the spirits of the
wretched make their journey. But that which each of them encounters in
its own sphere are the fair and blessed or painful and dreadful forms of
their own deeds. This description reconciles the literal meanings of the
Book and the traditions -which are apparently contradictory-and is also
in agreement with philosophical proofs as well as the teaching of the
urafa’.

It is obvious that this saying of Hadrat Abu Dharr (R) consists of a
comprehensive and firm command which every human being must observe with
due care. Thereafter Hadrat Abu Dharr says that one should examine his
deeds in the light of the Book of God. And God says: Mankind consist of
two groups: the pious, who are in bliss, and the wayward, who are in
hell. The man (who questioned Abu Dharr) made an attempt to cling to
Divine mercy when he said, “If that is so, then where is the mercy of
God Almighty?” Abu Dharr replied: God’s mercy is not extravagant; it is
near to the good-doers.

You should know that the accursed Satan and the vicious self that
incites man to evil deceive the human being in many ways and drive him
towards eternal damnation. The last arrow in their quiver is to deceive
man through hope in Divine mercy and to keep man from (virtuous) action
by the means of this deception, for this kind of reliance on Divine
mercy is one of Satanic snares and deceits.

The evidence of it is that we never put any trust in the mercy of God,
the Exalted, in our mundane affairs, and we consider natural and
apparent means as being independent and effective, to the extent of
believing that there is no efficient agency in the world except the
apparent causes. However, in matters relating to the Hereafter we
imagine ourselves to be reliant on Divine mercy while we neglect the
commands of God and His Messenger (A) as if God had given us no power to
act and had not shown us the paths of (spiritual) health and sickness.

In the matters of the world we follow the creed of *tafwid* (the belief
that God has delegated complete freedom to man), while in relation to
the matters of the Hereafter we follow the creed of *jabr* (fatalism),
forgetting that both of them are wrong, void and contrary to the
teachings of the prophets (A) and the abiding path of the Imams of
guidance and the *awliya’* near to God, whose faith was greater than all
others and all of whom had convinced faith in Divine mercy.
Notwithstanding it, they did not neglect their duties and did not leave
off effort and endeavor for a single moment.

Brother! Study the book of their works! Read the supplications of Sayyid
al-Sajidin Zayn al-Abidin (A). Look carefully and see how he approaches
God in the station of servantship (*‘Ubudiyyah*)*.* See how he attends
to the duties of slavehood. Despite it all, when he studies the book of
works of the Master of the Pious, Amir al-Mu’minin (A) he expresses his
regret and his incapability!

Does it mean that, *na’udhu billah,* we should question their veracity
and say that they did not, like us, possess faith and conviction in
Divine mercy? Or should we doubt our own veracity and understand once
for all that all that we say are no more than snares of Satan and
deceits of the carnal self, which scheme to deviate us from the straight
path? We take refuge in God, the Exalted, from their malice!

And so, my dear, knowledge is extensive, as remarked by Hadrat Abu Dharr
to that man, but the beneficial piece of knowledge for the likes of us
is to abstain from doing ourselves this extent of wrong. We must
understand that the commands of the prophets and the *awliya’ (A)*
contain certain truths which are concealed from us. They, who know what
kind of forms and consequences these corrupt words and evil acts of ours
possess and what kind of blessed *malakuti* forms the noble morals and
good deeds have, have described all the maladies and their remedies.

You - should you have any love for yourself - should not pass by these
prescriptions. Decide to cure your afflictions and diseases. Should we
move in this condition of ours from this world to the next, God knows
what afflictions, calamities and pains await us! And all praise is God’s
at the beginning and the end.

[^1]: Al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr” “bab muhasabat al-’amal”,
hadith no. 20.

[^2]: Al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr” “bab muhasabat al-’amal”,
hadith no. 2.

[^3]: Tafsir al-burhan, i. 46.

[^4]: Tafsir al-burhan, 51.

[^5]: Man la yahduruhu al-faqih, ii, 613; Mafitih al-jinan, “al-Ziyarat
al-jami’ah al-kabirah.”

[^6]: The Diwan ascribed to Amir al-Mu’minin, 57.

[^7]: Al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr”, “bab muhasabat al-amal,”
hadith no. 6.

[^8]: Nahj al- balaghah, Khutab, No. 5.

[^9]: Al-Saduq, al-’Amali, majlis no. 69, p. 405.

[^10]: Bihar al-’anwar, xviii, 292.

[^11]: Al-Majlisi, ‘Ilm al-yaqin, ii, 884.


