Twenty-Third Hadith: The Seekers Of Knowledge
=============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إِلَى حُجَّةِ الفِرْقَةِ وَثِقَتِهَا مُحَمَّدِ
بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ الكُلَيْنِيِّ رَضِيَ اللهُ عَنْهُ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ
إبْرَاهِيمَ رَفَعَهُ إلَى أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
طَلَبَةُ العِلْمِ ثَلاثَةٌ فَاعْرِفُهُْمْ بِأَعْيَانِهِمْ
وَصِفَاتِهِمْ: صِنْفٌ يَطْلُبُهُ لِلْجَهْلِ وَالمِرَاءِ، وَصِنْفٌ
يَطْلُبُهُ لِلاسْتِطَالَةِ وَالخَتْلِ، وَصِنْفٌ يَطْلُبُهُ لِلْفِقْهِ
وَالعَقْلِ. فَصَاحِبُ الجَهْلِ وَالمِرَاءِ مُوذٍ مُمَارٍ مُتَعَرِّضٌ
لِلْمَقَالِ فِي أَنْدِيَةِ الرِّجَالِ بِتَذَاكُرِ العِلْمِ وَصِفَةِ
الحِلْمِ، قَدْ تَسَرْبَلَ بِالخُشُوعِ وَتَخَلَّى مِنَ الوَرَعِ فَدَقَّ
اللهُ مِنْ هَذَا خَيْشُومَهُ وَقَطَعَ مِنْهُ حَيْزُومَهُ. وَصَاحِبُ
الإسْتِطَالَةِ وَالخَتْلِ ذو خَبٍّ وَمَلَقٍ وَيَسْتَطِيلُ عَلَى
مِثْلِهِ مِنْ أَشْبَاهِهِ وَيَتَواضَعُ لِلأَغْنِيَاءِ مِنْ دُونِهِ،
فَهُوَ لِحَلْوَائِهِمْ هَاضِمٌ وَلِدِينِهِ حَاطِمٌ، فَأَعْمَى اللهُ
عَلَى هَذَا خَبَرَهُ وَقَطَعَ مِنْ آثَارِ العُلَمَاءِ أَثَرَهُ.
وَصَاحِبُ الفِقْهِ وَالعَقْلِ ذو كَآبَةٍ وَحُزْنٍ وَسَهَرٍ؛ قَدْ
تَحَنَّكَ فِي بُرْنُسِهِ وَقَامَ اللَّيْلَ فِي حِنْدِسِهِ يَعْمَلُ
وَيَخْشَى وَجِلاً دَاعِياً مُشْفِقاً مُقْبِلاً عَلَى شَأْنِهِ عَارِفاً
بِأَهْلِ زَمَانِهِ مُسْتَوْحِشاً مِنْ أَوْثَقِ إخْوَانِهِ، فَشَدَّ
اللهُ مِنْ هَذَا أَرْكَانَهُ وَأَعْطَاهُ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ أَمَانَهُ.
وحدَّثَني به محمد بن محمود أبو عبدالله القزويني عن عِدَّة من أصحابنا
منهم جعفر بن محمد الصيقل بقزوين عن أحمد بن عيسى العلوي عن عباد بن صهيب
البصري عن أبي عبدالله عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my chain of transmission reaching up to the proof of the sect and
its authority, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim,
who reports in a marfu’ (i.e. without mentioning intermediary
authorities) tradition from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said, “The
seekers of (sacred) knowledge are of three kinds, so recognize them by
their specific qualities and characteristics. One kind of them seeks it
for the sake of ignorance and dispute. Another kind seeks it for the
sake of domination and deceit. Yet another kind seeks it for the sake of
(improving) understanding and intellect.

The one who seeks it for ignorance and dispute’s sake is injurious and
quarrelsome. He contests opinions in the gatherings of men, speaking of
knowledge and describing forbearance. He puts on the garb of humility,
though he is devoid of piety. As a result, God crushes his nose and
severs his waist.

The one who seeks knowledge for domination and deception is an imposter
and a sycophant. He is domineering with those who are his likes but is
humble in front of the rich, whose sweetmeats he ingests while he
demolishes his own faith. As a result, God blinds his vision and wipes
out his traces from the legacy of the learned.

As to him who seeks knowledge for the sake of understanding and
intellection, he is grief-stricken and awake at nights. Having tied his
cap with the loose end of his turban, he stands up in the dark of
nights. He acts and is in trepidation. A caller overawed, engaged in his
work, and acquainted with the people of his times, he is apprehensive of
his most trusted brother. As a result of it God strengthens his supports
and grants him amnesty on the Day of Resurrection.”

Al-Kulayni (M) says: This tradition was also narrated to me by Muhammad
ibn Mahmud Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Qazwini from several of our companions,
among them Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sayqal at Qazwin, from Ahmad ibn ‘Isa
al-Alawi, from ‘Abbad ibn Suhayb al-Basri, from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A).[^1]

Exposition
----------

بِأَعْيَانِهِمْ is for stress on the pronoun of فَاعْرِفُهُْمْ so what
is meant is: “Know them *themselves,* so that they become determined and
specified and are not mistaken with others.” Similarly, it is said
رَأَيْتُهُ بِعَيْنِهِ I saw him himself and:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ شَيءٍ فيهِ حَلالٌ وحَرامٌ فهُوَ لكَ حَلالٌ حتَّى تَعرِفَ
الحَرامَ بِعَينِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Everything that contains halal and haram is halal for you so far as you
know that which is haram itself.

The authoritative traditionist al-Majlisi (R) has mentioned various
possible meaning here (i.e. of بِأَعْيَانِهِمْ) which are extremely
far-fetched and do not include this evident and apparent possibility. He
says:

بِأَعْيَانِهِمْ means ‘their kinds and the understanding of their
categories’ or ‘such of their actions are visible and observable…’ Also
it has been said, ‘The meaning of بِأَعْيَانِهِمْ means, ‘their kinds
and the understanding if their categories. Also, it has been said, “The
meaning of بِأَعْيَانِهِمْ is their look, appearance and postures, such
as their putting on the garb of humility.’

Then he suggests other and as remote possibilities. وَصِفَاتِهِمْ means
‘their characteristics’, that is, those conditions which are subject to
the personal traits and purposes of these three categories, such as
injuriousness, disputatiousness and so on. Hence, these characteristics
depict their condition by which they are specifically recognized.

*Jahl* (ignorance) is the opposite of *‘ilm* (knowledge), and here it
probably means concealing the truth or pretending not to know it or
absence of its acceptance. Later on, we will discuss it in further
detail. Al-Majlisi says in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الجَهل: السَّفاهَةُ وتَركُ الحِلمِ. وقيلَ: ضِدّ العِلمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jahl means foolishness and imprudence. It is also said to be the
opposite of reason.

*Mira’* means *jidal* (controversy) in doctrine and theology (*kalam*)
and is derived from the same verbal root as *jadal* (dialectic) which is
one of the Five Topics (*al-sina’at al-khams*) in logic. Al-Jawhari, in
*al-Sihah,* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُقالُ: مارَيتُ الرجُلَ أُمارِيهِ مِراءً إذا جَادَلتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Although here *kalam* means speech in general but the intended meaning
is apparently that which has been mentioned. There is another possible
meaning involved here which we shall mention in one of the following
sections.

*Istitalah* means seeking loftiness and eminence. *Khatl,* with *fathah*
on *kha’* and *sukun* on *ta’,* means deception and imposture.
Al-Jawhari says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَتَلَهُ وخَاتَلَه أيْ خَدَعَهُ. والتَّخَاتُل التَّخَادُع.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As to the word *mumar,* we will explain later on why one who indulges in
*mira’* is defined as *mumar,* (which being a verbal tautology does not
seem to be a valid definition) and the one who indulges in *istitalah*
and *khatl* as one who seeks to dominate his likes and one who resorts
to *khibb,* for *khibb* (like *khatl*) also means deception.

As to the phrase مُتَعَرّضٌ لِمَقال it means expressing opinions. A
lexicographer gives the following instance of usage:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُقالُ: عَرضتُ له الشَّيءَ؛ إذا أظْهَرتُه لهُ. وَعَرَضَ له أمرُ كذا
ويعرِضُ: أي ظَهَرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Andiyah* is plural of *nadi,* meaning a circle or club where people
assemble for meeting and discussion. From it is derived *dar al-nadwah,*
which was a place in Makkah, which was built for assembly and
consultation. *Nadiyy, nadwah, muntada,* and *mutanadda* have the same
meaning, as pointed out by al-Jawhari.

The phrase *bi tadhdkur al-’ilm* refers to *maqal* or is its
appositional substantive (*badal*)*,* and to it is conjuncted *wa sifat
al-hilm.* What is meant is that ‘they hold scholarly discourses in order
to be reckoned among the learned, and they describe and extol
forbearance to be counted among the forbearing, whereas they are neither
among the learned nor the forbearing. His learning is a kind of
ignorance that resembles knowledge and his forbearance is devoid of the
excellent qualities of forbearance.’ Later on we will have occasion to
discuss this sort.

*Tasarbala* pertains to the derivative formation *tafa’lul,* meaning
putting on a *sirbal-* a garment. According to the lexicographer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُقالُ: سَربَلتُهُ فَتَسربَلَ. أيْ ألبَستُهُ السِّربَالَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Tasarbala bi al-khushu’* means, ‘he has put on the garment of
humility,’ appearing to be associated with it in the way a garment
adheres to and is associated with the body, though he is devoid of it,
since the garment he has put on is a borrowed one.

*Wara’* with a *fathah* on *ra’,* means complete abstinence from that
which is *haram* or suspect.

The sentence *fa-daqqa Allah…* and those resembling it in the following
two sentences, may either imply a curse or may be taken to be indicative
of their condition in the world or the hereafter, or in both. *Daqq*
means knocking, or is a noun denoting sound.

The words *min hadha* mean ‘as a result of this quality.’ *Khayshum* is
the upper part of the nose and that which is connoted by ‘crushing the
nose’ is disgracing and humiliating. That is, God Almighty disgraces and
humiliates them on account of those characteristics, and we will have
occasion to discuss it further later on.

*Hayzum,* with a *fathah* on *ha’* and *dammah* on *za’,* means ‘the
place where the waist band is tied’, or ‘the middle of the breast’, or
‘a circumscribing bone like the one encircling the neck.’ The first
meaning, which suits the idea of severance, fits here.

*Khibb* means deception, wickedness, and imposture. As al-Jawhari says,
رَجُل خِبٌّ means a deceitful man. *Malaq* means flattery and
sycophancy, and implies what al-Jawhari says in *al-Sihah* يُعطي
بِلِسانِه ما لَيسَ في قَلْبِه i.e. one who expresses with his tongue
that which is not in his heart. This interpretation is rather general,
for *malaq* or *tamalluq* means an expression of love and attachment
mixed with a show of humility while these are not in one’s heart.

As to لخَلوائِهِم al-Majlisi points out that there is *nun* (instead of
*hamzah*) in some manuscripts. In that case, it means a middleman’s tip
or a soothsayer’s fee paid him as a bribe, and it means the presents of
money made by the rich to the impostor in return for his services, which
he performs at the cost of his faith.

*Al-hatm* means breaking, and al-Majlisi says that breaking (of faith)
here implies corruption and decadence (*fasad*)*. Khubrahu* here is
probably with a *dammah* on *kha’* and *sukun* on *ba’,* in which case
it means the capacity to cognize and discern. Though it is also probable
that the word is *khabarahu,* with *fathah* on *kha’* and *ba’,* in view
of its consistency with the verb. The first meaning is more fitting,
though the second one is not without relevance.

*Al-Ka’abah* means one’s bad and shattered condition as a result of
intense grief and sadness.

*Tahannaka fi* *burnusihi* means ‘he put the *taht al-hanak* in his
*burnus. Burnus* is a tall cap, which the devout used to wear during the
early Islamic era, as mentioned by al-Jawhari in *Sihah al-lughah.
Al-*Majlisi says, ‘This phrase suggests that *tahannuk* is *mustahabb*
in *salat.* Such an inference is questionable, because given the kind of
dress that was worn by the devout it suggests only the *istihbab* of
*tahannuk* in general, not particularly during *salat.* Yes, had
*burnus* been part of a dress- specified for *salat* such an inference
would have been correct.

*Hindis* means an intensely dark night, as pointed out by al-Jawhari.
*Hindis* here is substitute for night (*layl*) and that which is
probably implied here is the dark of the night.

In *fa-shadda Allah arkanahu, shadd* means providing strength and power:
شَدَّ عَضُدَه: أي قَوَّاهُ *Rukn* means something on which a thing
stands and by which it is sustained. Al-Jawhari says, رُكنُ الشَّيء
جانِبُه الأقْوى i.e. the *rukn* of a thing is its strongest side.

Now, with our trust in God, we shall explain that which is essential and
fitting in the course of a few sections.

Section 1
---------

You should know that the premises of a syllogism in relation to its
conclusion, or the arguments and theoretical proofs in any discipline in
relation to the proved result and inferred conclusion, have the position
of preparatory preliminaries. They are neither totally independent of
the conclusions nor totally unrelated to them. In this regard both the
followers of predestination (*jabr*) as well as the adherents of freedom
(*tafwid*) have gone astray and departed from the path of moderation,
each of them adopting an approach consistent with their doctrine.

One of them (i.e. those who believe in *tafwid*) says that the
preliminaries are independent and if the door of the World of the Hidden
(*‘alam al ghayb*) were to close and the emanations of the world of
*malakut* to be shut off, man can derive conclusions unaided from the
preliminaries themselves. The other (i.e. the believers in *jabr*)
claims that the preliminaries are totally unrelated to the conclusions
and the Divine tradition has been established to inspire the human mind
with the conclusions. The preliminaries are only superficially connected
to the conclusions and are absolutely unconnected in reality. Both of
the views of these groups, like their basic doctrines, are false in the
view of those who are acquainted with the true teaching and real
knowledge.

The truth, in conformity with the view of those who know it, is that the
preliminaries have a preparatory relation with the conclusions and they
prepare the soul for receiving knowledge through inspiration from its
higher hidden sources (*mabadi-ye* *‘aliyeh-yeghaybiyyeh*)*.* Here we
don’t intend to expound or refute these doctrines of these two groups,
for that lies beyond the scope of our aim, and the purpose of mentioning
them is only subsidiary to the exposition of another issue, which is as
follows.

Having known that the knowledge and teachings are inspired by the
invisible spheres and that inspiration is subject to the soul’s
connection (with these spheres), you should know that, as pointed out by
the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيسَ العِلمُ بكَثرَةِ التَّعليمِ، بلْ هو نورٌ يقذِفُهُ بِقَلبِ منْ
يَشَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Knowledge is not extensive learning. Rather, it is a light that God
casts in the heart of whomever He wills.[^2]

Every soul that establishes a connection with the higher realm of
*malakut* and the angelic sphere, receives such inspirations as are
angelic in character and the knowledge that is cast into it is true
knowledge from the angelic realm. Also, every soul that establishes a
connection with the lower *malakuti* realm, the realm of the *jinn,*
Satan, and evil spirits, receives inspirations that are satanic in
character of the order of compound ignorance and obscuring veils.

This is why the *urafa* and the people of true knowledge consider
spiritual purification, the purgation of intentions and motives and the
rectification of one’s goals to be the first step in the path of
acquisition of sciences, especially the Divine teachings and the
sciences of the *Shari’ah*. Accordingly, they give the relevant advice
and warnings to the students, for the link with the higher sources is
strengthened through the purification of the soul. And that which the
holy Lord, Exalted and Glorious, says in the noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَيُعَلِّمُكُمْ اللَّهُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And fear God, and God shall teach you.*** (***2:282***)

linking the Divine teaching to *taqwa* (God-fearing) is for this reason
that *taqwa* purifies the soul and connects it to the invisible sacred
realm. This is followed by Divine teaching and the *rahmani*
inspirations, for there is no niggardliness in the higher realms, which
are bounteous by necessity, in the same way as the
Necessary-Being-by-Essence is Necessary in all aspects.

However, if the soul engages in acquiring the sciences due to attention
to selfish motives, for better food and drink and for egoistic reasons,
its goal becomes non-divine and the inspirations it receives are satanic
in character. This is one of the foolproof criteria, which I think has
not been mentioned by the *urafa*, for differentiating between *rahmani*
and *shaytani* inspirations and most of the times one is aware of this
fact.

The inspirations received by the impious soul full of impurities and
obfuscations belong to the category of compound ignorance (i.e. to be
ignorant and be ignorant of one’s ignorance), which is the incurable
malady of the souls and the main impediment on their path. That is
because the criterion in knowledge is not acquaintance with general
concepts and scientific terms. Rather, the criterion is the removal of
veils from the soul’s eye and opening of the door of the knowledge of
God. The real knowledge is the guiding spiritual lamp that shows the
straight path of nearness to God and to the abode of His bliss.

Everything other than this is vanity, though in the world of *mulk* and
prior to the removal of the veils of carnal nature those conversant with
it should be reckoned as scholars, gnostics and jurisprudents by those
used to learned controversies and disputes. But once the blinds are
removed from the eyes of the heart, once the curtains of the world of
*malakut* are raised and once one wakes up from the heavy slumber of
*mulk* and corporeal nature that (which once appeared to be knowledge
and learning) will be found to be the darkest of veils. It will be found
that all those branches of formal learning were all in all thick
spiritual curtains each of them separated from the other by vast
distances and we were ignorant of this fact.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّاسُ نَيامٌ، فإذا مَاتُوا انْتَبَهُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The people are asleep and they wake up on death.[^3]

It is then that the real nature of our learned preoccupations is
revealed to us. But that which is shameful and scandalous is that even
after fifty years, or more or less, of learning and study we remain
mistaken about ourselves, at times imagining that our studies are for
the sake of God.

We remain unaware of the ruses of Satan and the self, for self-love is a
thick veil that conceals our defects from ourselves. Hence the chaste
*awliya’* and the noble Imams (A) have mentioned certain signs and marks
of identification so that we may know and evaluate ourselves by their
means without entertaining a baseless good opinion about ourselves.
Later on in this exposition, we will refer to the signs and marks
mentioned in this noble tradition.

We came to know that in a primarily classification the seekers of
knowledge fall into two groups: those who have a divine aim and those
who have a mundane one. It may be said that the ultimate goal of the
latter group is ignorance (*jahl*)*,* for the seeming knowledge that
they acquire is compound ignorance in reality and a spiritual veil. The
two groups mentioned by Imam al-Sadiq (A) in the tradition that we are
expounding both belong to this class, for the seekers of domination as
well as the impostors dwell in ignorance and misguidance.

Hence, it may be said that the ignorance mentioned by the Imam as a sign
of the first group is something different from the ordinary meaning of
ignorance. Rather, it either means muddling up issues and keeping people
ignorant or it means the ignorance of one who pretends to be ignorant of
the truth or is not ready to accept it. Both of these characteristics
are also present in the group afflicted with *mira’* and *jidal.* They
deny facts and well-established truths and adhere to ignorance for the
sake of promoting their own opinions and marketing their spurious and
little in demand merchandise.

Although in one classification the seekers of knowledge do not
constitute more than two groups- that is, on the basis of a preliminary
classification based on an affirmation or negation of the divine goal of
knowledge - a further classification will show them to be more than
three groups. As to their division into three groups by the Imam, it may
be said that he wished to mention two major groups consisting of most of
the victims of ignorance and misguidance. Thus in another tradition, we
find that he considers the seekers of knowledge as constituting two
groups:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
مَنْ أَرَادَ الحَدِيثَ لِمَنْفَعَةِ الدُّنْيَا لَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ فِي
الآخِرَةِ نَصِيبٌ، وَمَنْ أَرَادَ بِهِ خَيْرَ الآخِرَةِ أَعْطَاهُ
اللهُ خَيْرَ الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A)
that he said, “He who seeks (to learn) hadith for worldly benefit has no
share in the Hereafter, and he who seeks it for a benefit in the
Hereafter, God grants him benefit both in the world and the
Hereafter.”[^4]

Section 2
---------

We have mentioned the evils of *mira’* and *jidal* earlier in the
exposition of one of the holy traditions. However, it is also proper
here that we mention some relevant traditions and describe a little of
their evil effects. In the noble *al-Kafi*, al-Kulayni reports with his
*isnad* the following tradition on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَمِيرُ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: إِيَّاكُمْ وَالمِرَاءَ
وَالخُصُومَةَ فَإنَّهُمَا يُمْرِضاَنِ القُلُوبَ عَلَى الإِخْوَانِ
وَيَنْبُتُ عَلَيْهِمَا النِّفَاقُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Amir al-Mu’minin (A) said, “Beware of dispute and controversy, for they
infect with enmity the hearts of brethren. They are the roots of
hypocrisy (nifaq), out of which hypocrisy grows.”[^5]

There are other traditions in *al-Kafi* narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: إيَّاكُمْ
وَالخُصُومَةَ فَإنَّهَا تُشْغِلُ القَلْبَ وَتُورِثُ النِّفَاقَ
وَتُكْسِبُ الضَّغَائِنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) said, “Beware of controversy, because it discomfits
the heart, gives rise to hypocrisy, and creates ill will within the
heart.”[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ جِبْرَئِيلُ
لِلنَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: إيَّاكَ وَمُلاحَاةَ
الرِّجَالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) said: Gabriel said to the Prophet (S): “Beware of
getting entangled in dispute and acrimonious debate with people.”[^7]

Now let us take up the explanation of the fact that dispute and acrimony
in talk sicken the heart, create ill feeling between friends, and make
hypocrisy grow within the heart. It was mentioned earlier that outward
actions leave certain effects on the inner self and the heart that are
in accordance with their character.

Here we must say that vicious actions have a more immediate and stronger
impact on the heart. That is so because man is the offspring of the
world of nature and the faculties of lust (*shahwah*)*,* anger
(*ghadhab*) and diabolism (*shaytanah*) accompany him and are active in
him, as has been mentioned in a tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ يَجْرِي مَجْرَى الدَّم ِمِنْ بَنِي آدَمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Satan circulates in mankind like the blood in veins.[^8]

Hence, the heart is directly confronted with corrupting elements and
matters acclimatized to physical nature. Even a slight external
assistance, either from one of the bodily organs or in the shape of an
immoral and vicious companion, produces a strong effect on the heart.
Therefore, there are warnings in the noble traditions against keeping
company with such persons:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي: عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ
أَمِيرُ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: لا يَنْبَغِي لِلْمَرْءِ
المُسْلِمِ أنْ يُوَاخِيَ الفَاجِرَ فَإنَّهُ يُزَيِّنُ لَهُ فِعْلَهُ
وَيُحِبُّ أنْ يَكُونَ مِثْلَهُ وَلا يُعِينُهُ عَلَى أَمْرِ دُنْيَاهُ
وَلا أَمْرِ مَعَادِهِ، وَمَدْخَلُهُ إلَيْهِ وَمَخْرَجُهُ مِنْ عِنْدِهِ
شَيْنٌ عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kafi reports on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq (A) from Amir
al-Mu’minin (A) that he said, “It does not behoove a Muslim to be on
fraternal terms with an immoral person, for he makes his own acts appear
fair to one and likes one to become like himself. He is of no assistance
to one either in the matters of the world or the Hereafter and it is a
matter of disgrace for one to have social intercourse with such a
person.”[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: لا يَنْبَغِي لِلْمَرْءِ
المُسْلِمِ أنْ يُوَاخِيَ الفَاجِرَ وَلا الأَحْمَقَ وَلا الكَذَّابَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (A) said, “It is not proper for a Muslim to fraternize
with an immoral person, a fool, or a liar.”[^10]

An important point behind the prohibition on keeping company with sinful
persons, or on presence in a gathering where God is sinned against, or
on befriending and mixing with the enemies of God, is the influence of
their morals, states and acts on a person. More important from the
viewpoint of such influence are one’s own acts and their effect upon the
heart, so that the perpetration of vicious acts even for a brief period
produces a strong influence on the heart, freedom and relief from which
is not possible or attainable even after many long years.

This indicates that should one indulge in dispute and hostile debate,
not much time would pass before a terrible darkness and obfuscation
appears in the heart, the outward verbal hostility soon leading to an
inward hostility that is itself the greatest cause of hypocrisy,
two-facedness and duplicity. Hence the evils of hypocrisy may be
recognized through a recognition of the evils of *mira*’ and *jidal.*
Earlier, in the course of exposition of one of the traditions, we have
described the evils of hypocrisy and two-facedness and there is no need
to repeat that here.

Imam al-Sadiq (A) mentions certain signs and symptoms of the victims of
ignorance and disputatiousness, one of which is causing harm to the
people and being a vicious presence, which by itself is a vice and evil
that is sufficient as an independent cause of one’s destruction. It is
mentioned in a noble tradition of *al-Kafi:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ آذَى لِي وَلِيّاً فَقَدْ بَارَزَنِي بِالمُحَارَبَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(God Almighty says) Whoever torments a friend of Mine has challenged Me
to battle.[^11]

The causing of harm and tormenting of the faithful has here been equated
to declaration of war against God and hostility against His Sacred
Being. The traditions relating to this topic are too many to be included
in this brief exposition.

Another of the signs of this group has been mentioned to be *mira’*,
contesting of opinions and engagement in learned debates for the sake of
domination and proving one’s merit. As to making *mira’* the consequence
of *mira’* in the tradition, it is possible that the first *mira’* is an
inner quality and a vicious trait of the heart and the *mira’* that has
been mentioned as its consequence is its outward manifestation and
symptom.

Another of the symptoms of this group is its pretence of being
forbearing while it is devoid of this quality. This is itself hypocrisy
and two-facedness and involves *riya’* and *shirk.* Similarly, the
pretence of humility (*khushu’*) while being devoid of piety (*wara’*)
is also another clear manifestation of *shirk, riya’,* hypocrisy and
two-facedness.

This shows that this characteristic is possessed of great vices each of
which is fatal and destructive. It is necessary that we undertake any
kind of effort and hardship to deliver ourselves from this shameful,
faith-killing and destructive malady of the heart and purge it of its
darkness and filth, purifying it and burnishing it with the sincerity of
intention and inner truthfulness. In this regard there is a point here
which is enough to shatter one when one reflects upon it for a while. It
is that which Imam al-Sadiq (A) mentions after describing the signs of
this group. The Imam (A) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَدَقَّ اللهُ مِنْ هَذَا خَيْشُومَهُ وَقَطَعَ مِنْهُ حَيْزُومَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As a result, God crushes his nose and severs his waist (it may also be
translated to mean: Hence, may God crush his nose and sever his waist.)

This is either a *du’a* (prayer or curse) or an indicative sentence
(*ikhbar*)*.* Whatever it should be, it is bound to take place. For
should it be an indicative sentence, the reporter is a truthful speaker
of attested veracity (*sadiq al-musaddaq*)*.* Should it be a *du’a’,* it
is the *du’a’* of a *Ma’sum* and a *wali* of Allah and is certain to be
granted.

Hence it is indicative of the certain humiliation and disgrace to befall
such a man, and perhaps in both the worlds: in this world in front of
those whose respect he wished to earn through ostentation and pretence
of merit and which produce an opposite result by bringing him disgrace,
reducing his worth, and earning him the contempt of those whom he sought
to dominate and impress; and in the next world were he shall be
humiliated and brought to shame in the presence of the archangels,
prophets, apostles, the infallible *awliya’* and God’s righteous
servants.

So, woe to us: the victims of *mira’* and *jidal,* of carnal desires and
hostilities! How great is our affliction at the hands of this vicious,
heartless self which would not leave us alone unless it has brought us
damnation in all the stages of life and existence, and yet we never
bother to reform it! Our ears are closed with the stoppers of neglect!

We refuse to awake from the heavy sleep of nature! O God, Thou art the
reformer of Thy servants and the Master of their hearts. The being of
all the existents lies in Thy power and the hearts of Thy creatures lie
under the total influence of Thy will. We are not our own masters and
have no power over our own benefit or harm, life or death. Do illuminate
our dark hearts with the light of Thy grace and correct our vices with
Thy magnanimity and mercy and help these powerless and weak creatures of
Thine!

Section 3
---------

We said concerning the mention of *mira’* in the first part of the noble
*hadith* that *mira’* has an inner spiritual being as well as is an
outward phenomenon that is the product, sign and symptom of the first
kind of *mira’*. Similarly, we may say concerning the second part of the
description given by the Imam (A) that *istitalah* and *khatl* have an
inner existence as a spiritual habit and quality, as well as an outward
manifestation, which is the result of that habit.

Similarly, in most of the activities of the heart there are various
levels: the level of enduring trait (*malakah*)*,* the level of state
(*hal*)*,* and the level of outward behavior, which is the product of
the inner trait. Thus those who have in them the trait of *istitalah,*
the urge for domination and ambition, as well as that for deception and
imposture, they also carry its outward signs and symptoms, some of which
have been mentioned in the tradition by Imam al-Sadiq (A).

One of them is deceit and imposture which make one present himself as
pious and righteous while he is not such inwardly. This group of people
are wolves in the garb of sheep and devils in the form of men. They are
the worst of God’s creatures and their harm to the people’s faith is
more than that of armies of opponents.

Another of the characteristics of this group is that they behave with
humility and in a sycophantic manner with those who are the object of
their greed. They spread their nets of imposture, sycophancy, and false
humility to trap poor, weak people, to benefit from the sweetmeats of
their love, admiration, and worldly respect.

For this purpose, they exploit their own religion, sell their faith, and
make use of the mundane benefits that are available. This is the group
of people about whom a tradition says that when some people in paradise
see them they will say, “How is it that we came to paradise as a result
of your teaching while you yourselves have been confined to hell?” They
will answer, “We did not act according to what we spoke.”[^12]

Another of their signs is that they behave haughtily with their likes
who do not attract their greed and whom they consider as impediments in
the way of their own advancement. They treat them with vanity and try as
far as they can to humiliate them through words and deeds, for they are
afraid that anyone of them can cause him trouble, which can lead to a
slump in their credibility.

One should know that it is a most difficult thing to remain pious when
one is in the formal dress of learning, *zuhd,* and *taqwa* and to
preserve the purity of one’s heart in the clerical profession. That is
why if someone from this class should act according to his duties and go
through its phases with sincerity, correct himself, and after reforming
himself engage in reforming others, and protect the orphans in the
descent of the Messenger (S), such a man is reckoned among the
Outstrippers and the Near Ones (*muqarrabun wa sabiqun*)*.* Such a thing
has been said of four disciples of Imam al-Baqir (A) by Imam al-Sadiq
(A). The following tradition is reported in *al-Wasa’il* from *Rijal
al-Kashshi* with an isnad reaching up to Abu ‘Ubaydah al-Hadhdha’:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ، عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ، يَقُولُ:
زُرَارَةُ وَمُحَمَّدُ بْنُ مُسْلِمٍ وَأَبُو بَصِيرٍ وَبُرَيْدٌ مِنَ
الَّذِينَ قَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى فِيهِمْ: ﴿وَالسَّابِقُونَ
السَّابِقُونَ. أُوْلَئِكَ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Ubaydah says: I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) say: Zurarah, Muhammad ibn
Muslim, Abu Basir, and Burayd (ibn Mu’awiyah) are amongst those
concerning whom God, the Exalted, said: “The Outstrippers, the
Outstrippers- they are the Near Ones.”[^13]

There are many traditions relating to this topic and the excellences of
the learned (*ahl al-’ilm*) are more than can be expressed. It suffices
to cite the following tradition of the Noble Prophet (S) about them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ جَاءَهُ المَوْتُ وَهُوَ يَطْلُبُ العِلْمَ لِيُحْيِيَ بِهِ
الإسْلامَ كَانَ بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ الأنْبِيَاءِ دَرَجَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ فِي
الجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When death comes to one who is seeking knowledge to revive thereby
Islam, there will be only one degree between him and the prophets in
Paradise.[^14]

Later on, insha’ Allah, there will be occasion to describe their
excellence. However, if, God forbid, should the seeker of knowledge
depart from the path of sincerity and take the road of unrighteousness,
he will be reckoned among the worst of God’s creatures about whom there
are strong and strange (condemning) expressions in the traditions.-

The first thing that the learned in religious sciences and the seekers
of this perilous road must take into consideration is self-reform during
the period of studies, counting it as far as possible to be the foremost
of their duties, for this is harder and more obligatory than all the
duties and obligations dictated by *Shari’ah* and reason.

O seekers of knowledge and spiritual excellences and teachings! Rise
from your sleep and know that you have lesser room for excuse before
God, and God Almighty shall call you to a tougher account. The level of
your knowledge and works is very different from that of other people.

Your path (*Sirat*) is sharper and narrower and there will be a great
scrutiny of the record of your life. Woe to the student and seeker of
knowledge in whose heart learning creates darkness and obscurity! And we
see in ourselves that if we have learnt some inadequate concepts and
some futile terms, it has kept us from treading the divine path. Satan
and the self have dominated our being and turned us away from the path
of humanity and guidance. These absurd and senseless concepts became our
biggest hindrance and there is no remedy except to seek refuge in the
Sacred Being of God Almighty.

O God, we confess to our shortcomings and plead guilty to our sins! We
did not take even a single step in the path of Thy good-pleasure nor did
we perform a single act of worship and obedience with sincerity. Yet
treat us with Thine all-inclusive mercy and Thine unbounded grace. In
the same way as Thou concealed our inadequacies in this world, do cover
them with Thy forgiveness and covering grace in the other world, where
we need it more!

Here, too, it is essential to remember the point that we mentioned while
expounding the earlier part of the noble tradition. That point concerns
this utterance of the Imam (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَعْمَى اللهُ عَلَى هَذَا خَبَرَهُ وَقَطَعَ مِنْ آثَارِ العُلَمَاءِ
أَثَرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As a result, God blinds his vision and wipes out his traces from the
record of the learned.

That which is denoted by this statement, whether it be *du’a’* or
*ikhbar,* is certain to happen. One must be very fearful of this inner
blindness of vision which is the main source of all kinds of darkness
and wretchedness. The blindness of the heart is the source of all
misfortunes. Similarly, to be purged from the effects of the learned and
to be deprived of their merits and gifts, apart from this deprivation
itself, will be followed by an unimaginable humiliation and disgrace in
the presence of God’s elect on the Day of Resurrection.

Section 4
---------

As to the men of understanding and intellect—that is those for whom the
goal of seeking knowledge is to become learned in *Din* and to know its
truths—there are certain signs of which the main ones have been
mentioned in the tradition. One of them is that knowledge creates grief,
pain, and dejection. To be sure, this grief and dejection is not for the
sake of the base and transitory worldly matters, but from the fear of
the Return and the terror of falling short in the performance of duties
and service.

This grief and dejection, besides illumining the heart, gives. it a
purity and burnish. It becomes the original impulse for self-reform and
commitment to the duties of servitude and creaturehood. The light of
knowledge takes away quiet from the heart of the devotee introducing him
to God and the abode of His bounties. He derives great pleasure from
praying to God Almighty and spends his nights in wakefulness and in
performing the duties of devotion. Hence, the Imam (A) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ تَحَنَّكَ فِي بُرْنُسِهِ وَقَامَ اللَّيْلَ فِي حِنْدِسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The first sentence apparently indicates engagement in worship. Another
sign of this divine man of knowledge is that though fully attentive to
the duties of servitude he is still in a state of trepidation. The light
of knowledge reveals this to him that however much he may attend to his
duties his efforts are still inadequate and wanting, that he cannot
entirely fulfill the requirements of gratitude and true worship. This
realization fills his heart with terror and it is about such people that
God has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاءُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Even so only those of His servants fear God who have knowledge.***
(***35:28***)

The light of knowledge brings trepidation and grief, and though such a
person is cognizant of his commitment to self-reform, the fear of the
Return does not let him rest. He beseeches God to reform him and is
afraid of becoming preoccupied with other-than-God. He shuns the people,
fearing lest they should keep him from the path of God and the journey
towards the world of the Hereafter, by making the world and its
pleasures appear alluring to him. Thereupon God confirms such a person
and strengthens the supports that sustain his being, and grants him
amnesty on the Day of Resurrection.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَا لَيْتَنَا كُنَّا مَعَكُمْ فَنَفُوزَ فَوْزاً عَظِيماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Oh, would that we had been with them, then should we have achieved a
great success!

And all praise is ultimately God’s, at the beginning and the end, and
may God’s benedictions be upon Muhammad and the Pure Ones of his
progeny.

[^1]: Al-Kafi, “kitab fadl al-’ilm”, “bab al-nawadir”, hadith 5.

[^2]: Bihar al-’anwar, i, 225.

[^3]: Ibn Maytham al-Bahrani, Sharh al-sad kalimeh-ye qisar, 54.

[^4]: Al-Kafi, i, “kitab fadl al-ilm”, “bab al-musta’kil bi- ilmih”,
hadith 2.

[^5]: Al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-mira’ wa
al-khusumah”, hadith 1.

[^6]: Al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-mira’ wa
al-khusumah”, hadith 8.

[^7]: Al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-mira’ wa
al-khusumah”, hadith 6.

[^8]: Sunan al-Darimi, ii, 320.

[^9]: Al-Kafi, “kitab al-’ishrah”, “bab man tukrahu mujalasatuh”, hadith
2.

[^10]: Al-Kafi, “kitab al-’ishrah”, “bab man tukrahu mujalasatuh”,
hadith 3.

[^11]: Al-Kafi, “kitab al-imnan wa al-kufr”, “bab man adha al-Muslimin”,
hadith 8.

[^12]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, xi, 420.

[^13]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, xviii, 105.

[^14]: Sunan al-Darimi, i, 100.


