Twenty Fourth Hadith: The Classification Of Sciences
====================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى أَفْضَلِ المُحَدِّثِينَ وَأَقْدَمِهِمْ
مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
الحَسَنِ وَعَلِيِّ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنْ سَهْلِ بْنِ زِيَادٍ عَنْ
مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عِيسَى عَنْ عُبَيْدِاللهِ بْنِ عَبْدِاللهِ الدَّهْقَانِ
عَنْ دُرُسْتَ الوَاسِطِيِّ عَنْ إبْرَاهِيمَ بْنِ عَبْدِالحَمِيدِ عَنْ
أبِي الحَسَنِ مُوسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: دَخَلَ رَسُولُ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ المَسْجِدَ فَإذَا جَمَاعَةٌ قَدْ
أَطَافُوا بِرَجُلٍ فَقَالَ: مَا هَذَا؟ فَقِيلَ: عَلَّامَةٌ. فَقَالَ:
وَمَا العَلّامَةُ؟ فَقَالوا لَهُ: أَعْلَمُ النَّاسِ بِأَنْسَابِ
العَرَبِ وَوَقَائِعِهَا وَأَيَّامِ الجَاهِلِيَّةِ وَالأَشْعَارِ
العَرَبِيَّةِ. فَقَال النَّبِيُّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: ذَاكَ
عِلْمٌ لا يَضُرُّ مَنْ جَهِلَهُ وَلا يَنْفَعُ مَنْ عَلِمَهُ. ثُمَّ
قَالَ النَّبِيُّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: إنَّمَا العِلْمُ
ثَلاثَةٌ: آيَةٌ مُحْكَمَةٌ أَوْ فَرِيضَةٌ عَادِلَةٌ أَوْ سُنَّةٌ
قَائِمَةٌ، وَمَا خَلاهُنَّ فَهُوَ فَضْلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my chain of transmission reaching up to the best and the earliest
of traditionists, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan and ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, from Sahl ibn Ziyad, from Muhammad ibn
‘Isa-, from ‘Ubayd Allah ibn ‘Abd Allah al Dihqan, from Durust
al-Wasiti, from Ibrahim ibn ‘Abd al-Hamid, from Abu al-Hasan Musa (A)
that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) once entered the mosque where
there were a group of people surrounding a man. “Who is that?” inquired
the Prophet (S). He was told, “He is an Allamah, (i.e. a very learned
man).” “What is an Allamah?” asked the Prophet (S). They told him, “He
is the most learned of men regarding Arab genealogies, past episodes,
the days of the Jahiliyyah and Arabic poetry.” The Prophet (S) said,
“That is a knowledge whose ignorance does not harm one nor is its
possession of any benefit to one.” Then the Prophet (S) declared,
“Verily, knowledge consists of these three: the firm sign, the just duty
and the established sunnah. All else is superfluous.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

There is مَن هَذَا (Who is he?) instead of مَا هَذَا (Who is that?) in
some manuscripts. مَا هَذَا might have been said to express contempt.
*Allamah* is a derivative (*sighah*) that expresses extremeness
(*mubalaghah*) and its *ta* is for the sake of (further) exaggeration.
It means ‘very very knowledgeable’.

You should know that in logic the word مَنْ (who) is used for
questioning concerning a person and the word ما (what) for questioning
concerning a given reality or for explaining an abstract noun. Since
they told the Noble Messenger (S) that this man is an *Allamah,* that
master questioned them concerning the meaning of *Allamah* in relation
to the character and content of the knowledge that they attributed to
him. Hence, he put the question with the word ما. Epithets are at times
made a means for questioning concerning essence, for instance, where the
meaning of an attribute is known but not the person to whom the
attribute relates.

In that case, the question is nut by using the word مَنْ and it becomes
مَن العَلََّامَةُ. But if the person be known and the attribute be
unknown, or when the purpose be only to know the attribute, the question
is put with the word ما and the question then relates to finding out the
attribute, not the person attributed with it, nor the attribute and the
person attributed with it as well. In this noble tradition, since it was
remarked that this man is an ‘*Allamah*, the Prophet’s purpose behind
the question was to find out the meaning of the attribute that they
ascribed to the man. Hence, he asked, ‘What is an *Allamah*?’ and not,
‘Who is an ‘*Allamah*?’ or ‘Why and for what reason is this man an
‘*Allamah*?’

The explanation given above is clearer than what the authority
(*muhaqqiq*) among the philosophers and the philosopher among the
authorities, Sadr al-Muta’allihin (Q) says in his exposition of this
noble tradition, which we shall refrain from citing due to fear of
prolixity and for its being outside the scope of our discussion.

Section 1
---------

We have mentioned earlier that man, to put it briefly, is confronted
with three worlds, stations and phases of life: first, the world of the
Hereafter, which is the hidden world (*‘alam al-ghayb*) of spirituality
and the intellect; second, the phase of Barzakh, which is the world of
*khayal* lying between the other two worlds; third, the phase of this
world, the domain of *mulk* (corporeality) and the world of appearance
(*‘alam al-shahadat*)*.*

Each of these phases has its own special perfection and training and
requires action appropriate to it. The prophets (A) have been encharged
to instruct the people concerning those actions. Hence all beneficial
sciences are divisible into these three *‘ulum* (sciences): the *‘ilm*
(science) that relates to the excellences (*kamalat*) of the intellect
and spiritual duties, the science that relates to the acts of the heart
and its duties, and the science that relates to bodily acts and the
duties of the self’s outward life.

As to the sciences that play a strengthening and educative role in the
sphere of the spirit and immaterial intellect, they consist of the
knowledge of the sacred Essence of God and that of His attributes of
Beauty and Majesty, as well as the knowledge of the immaterial hidden
spheres, including the angels of all kinds, from those of the higher
levels of the higher *jabarut* and higher *malakut* to the lower levels
of the lower *malakut* and the earthly angels and the armies of God,
Glorious and Exalted, in addition to the knowledge of the prophets and
the *awliya’* and their stations and degrees, the knowledge of the
revealed scriptures, the character of the descent of revelation
(*wahy*)*,* angels and the Spirit, as well as the knowledge of the world
of the Hereafter and the character of the Return of the creatures to the
world of *ghayb,* the reality of the world of Barzakh and Resurrection
with their details, and, in a word, the knowledge of the origin
(*mabda’*) of existence, its reality and degrees, with its expansion
(*bast*) and contraction (*qabd*)*,* and its manifestation (*zuhur*) and
return (*ruju’*)*.* The bearers of this knowledge, after the prophets
and the *awliya’* (A) are the philosophers and the masters among the
*hukama’,* the ‘urafa’ and the mystics.

The sciences that deal with the discipline and education of the heart
and its esoteric actions consist of the knowledge of moral dispositions
that lead to salvation (*munjiyat*) or perdition (*muhlikat*)*.* That is
the knowledge of moral virtues, such as forbearance (*sabr*)*,*
gratefulness (*shukr*)*,* shame (*haya’*)*,* humility (*tawadu’*)*,*
resignation (*rida*)*,* courage (*shuja’ah*)*,* generosity
(*sakhawah*)*,* piety (*wara’*) God-fearing (*taqwa*) and other moral
excellences and the knowledge of the ways and means of acquiring them
and their related causes and conditions, as well as the knowledge of
moral vices, such as envy (*hasad*)*,* pride (*kibr*)*,* enmity
(*hiqd*)*,* deceptiveness (*ghishsh*)*,* the love of position, the love
of the world and the self, etc., and the knowledge of their causes and
the ways of obtaining freedom from them. The bearers of this knowledge,
too, after the prophets and their designated successors (*awliya’*)
*(A)* are the experts in the science of ethics and the learned in the
spiritual disciplines and mystic teachings.

The science that deals with the education of the exoteric being and its
disciplining consists of the science of *fiqh*, its preliminaries, and
the science of etiquette (*adab*)*,* social intercourse
(*mu’asharat*)*,* management of home (*tadbir al-manzil*)*,* and
politics or civic administration (*siyasat al-mudun*)*.* The bearers of
this knowledge are the learned in the exoteric (*ulama’ al-zahir,*) the
*fuqaha*’ (legists) and the *muhaddithun* (traditionists), after the
prophets and the awsiya’ (A).

You should know that each of these threefold human spheres mentioned are
interrelated in such a manner that the influence of each of them-whether
it is positive or negative-percolates to the others. For instance, if
one takes upon himself the performance of the duties of worship and
exoteric rites as one should perform them in accordance with the
prescriptions of the prophets that will produce effects in his spirit
and his heart, improving his moral character and perfecting his beliefs
and convictions.

Similarly, if one should engage in his moral improvement and the
beautification of his inward being (*batin*)*,* that will produce a
positive effect in the other two spheres. 5o also the development of
one’s faith and the strengthening of beliefs is effective in the other
two stations. This is on account of the very intimate connection between
these different stations. In fact (they are so closely related that) the
word ‘connection’ also fails to express it fully. Hence one must say
that they are a single reality with (different) manifestations and
aspects.

Thus, development and perfection in each of the three stations is
interlinked. Hence no one should imagine that he can acquire a perfect
faith and a refined moral character without performing exoteric works
and bodily worship, or that when his moral character (*khulq*) is
defective and unrefined his conduct can be complete and whole and his
faith perfect, or that without faith in his heart his exoteric acts can
be complete and his moral excellences can be perfect.

When one’s bodily (exoteric) actions are defective and not in conformity
with the prescriptions of the prophets, that gives rise to obfuscations
within the heart and obscurities in the soul, which obstruct the light
of faith and conviction. Similarly, if one has base moral dispositions
in the heart, they obstruct the light of faith from entering it.

Hence, it is essential for the wayfarer of Hereafter and the straight
path of humanity to pay an acute care and attention to each of these
three aspects and to reform and exercise himself in their regard and not
to neglect any of the theoretical and practical excellences. He should
not imagine that sole refinement of moral character or sole
strengthening of beliefs or sole conformity to the exoteric aspect is
sufficient for him, as believed by some experts of each of these three
disciplines.

For instance, the Shaykh al-Ishraq, at the beginning of his work *Hikmat
al-’ishraq,* divides the perfect into these three categories: those who
are perfect in knowledge and action, those who are perfect in action,
and those who are perfect in knowledge. This suggests as if perfection
of knowledge can coexist with inadequacy of action or *vice versa.*
Moreover, he considers those who are perfect in knowledge to be the
felicitous sincere linked with the world of *ghayb* and immateriality,
treading the path of the highest heavens (*‘Illiyyun*) and associating
with the archangels.

There are some scholars of morals and esoteric science who consider the
attainment of moral moderation and the refinement of the heart and
esoteric acts as the source of all excellences and attach no worth to
intellectual truths and exoteric rules. On the contrary, they even
consider them as thorns on the wayfarer’s path. There are some scholars
of the esoteric aspect who consider the intellectual and the esoteric
sciences and mystic teachings as perfidy and infidelity and are hostile
to their scholars and students.

Each of these three groups, who hold these false beliefs, are withheld
from each of the three spiritual stages and all the three spheres of
genuine human existence. They have not rightly reflected concerning the
sciences of the prophets and the *awliya*’ and hence there has always
been antagonism between them. Hence, each of them attacks the others
considering them as pursuing falsehood, although it is incorrect to
separate the stages. In a sense, each one of them is right in
repudiating the others, not because their learning or action is wholly
invalid, but because the limits set by them for the various human levels
and their confining of human knowledge and excellences exclusively to
their own discipline is contrary to fact.

The Noble Messenger (S) has in this noble tradition divided the sciences
into these three parts, and there is no doubt that these threefold
sciences pertain to these threefold planes. This claim is testified to
by the divine scriptures, the traditions of the prophets and the
Infallible Imams (A) for their teachings are classifiable into these
three classes. One of them consists of the knowledge of God, angels,
scriptures, the Messengers and the Last Day, and the heavenly
scriptures-especially the all-inclusive divine scripture, the Lord’s
Holy Qur’an-are all full of it.

Rather, it may be said that that which the Book of God teaches more than
anything else is this class of knowledge. It consists of the call to God
as the origin and end (*mabda’ wa ma’ad*) of all creation through valid
rational arguments and with perfect cl*arif*ication, as pointed out by
the authorities. In fact the other two aspects occupy a somewhat lesser
position in the Book of God in comparison to this aspect, and the
*ahadith* of the Imams (A), too, are full of it and beyond enumeration,
as will become clear by a reference to reliable books which are accepted
by all the Imams (R) such as the noble *al-Kafi* and al-Saduq’s *Kitab
al-Tawhid*.

Similarly, the attention given to spiritual refinement and moral reform
and moderation in the Book of God and the traditions narrated from the
Ahl al-Bayt (A) is beyond what one would expect. However, these books
and these chapters have remained in oblivion, without receiving the due
attention and credence by us, unfortunate ones in the bondage of futile
hopes and expectations! The day will come when God Almighty will
question us and establish His accusation against us on the basis of
their evidence and the Immaculate Imams (A) -may God be our refuge- will
dissociate themselves from us due to our abandoning their traditions and
sciences. I seek refuge in God, the Exalted, from wretchedness of the
ultimate outcome and an evil end.

As to the traditions relating to *fiqh* and exoteric rites, it need not
be said that all our books are full of them. Thus, we come to know that
the sciences of the *Shari’ah* are confined to these three kinds in
accordance with the needs of man and the threefold human aspects. None
of the scholars of any one of these sciences has a right to find fault
with the others. It is not right to repudiate a science if one is
ignorant of one of these sciences and to be irreverent towards one who
is learned in it. In the same way as a sound intellect considers the
affirmation of something that one does not know as an ethical vice, so
also is the denial of something one has no conception of; rather the
latter attitude is worse and more vicious.

If God, Blessed and Exalted, should ask, for instance, “You did not know
the meaning of the unity of being (*wahdat al-wujud*) in accordance with
the doctrine of the *hukama’* and neither did you receive instruction
concerning it from those adept in it, nor did you study that science and
its preliminaries. Then why did you blindly accuse them of unbelief and
insult them?” What answer shall one have to give in God’s sacred
presence except bending down one’s head in shame? Of course, a pretext
such as “I thought it to be so” will not be acceptable. Every discipline
has certain essentials and preliminaries, without whose knowledge it is
not possible to understand its conclusions. This is especially true of
such a subtle issue as this whose actual reality and meaning is not well
understood even after a lifetime of effort, and here you are who want to
apprehend with your inadequate intellect after reading, for instance, a
book or two or some verses out of *al-Rumi’s Mathnawi* something the
philosophers and the *hukama’* have been discussing for several thousand
years and dissecting its issues. Obviously, you will not make anything
out of it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحِمَ اللهُ امْرَءاً عَرَفَ قَدْرَهُ وَلَمْ يَتَعَدَّ طَوْرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

May God have mercy upon the man who knows his own worth and does not
transgress his limits.[^2]

Similarly, if a pseudo-philosopher or mystic were to be asked, ‘On what
religious basis did you call the *fuqaha*’ superficial and extroversive,
finding fault with them or, rather, with a branch of religious sciences
brought by the prophets (A) from the Lord of all lords for the
perfection of human souls, denying its worth and insulting them? On what
rational and shar’i grounds did you consider affront towards a group of
scholars and legists as permissible?” What answer will he offer in the
presence of God, Blessed and Exalted, except bowing his head in shame
and discredit? In any case let us leave this irksome part to pass on to
the rest of the discourse.

Section 2
---------

Having known that the threefold sciences referred to by the Noble
Messenger (S) are the same as the three mentioned above, the question
remains as to how each of these expressions corresponds with each of
these sciences. Although this matter is not of much importance -for that
which is important in this regard is the understanding of the principles
of these sciences themselves and the effort to learn them but it is
essential for the exposition of the noble tradition.

The eminent *ulama* (R) who have undertaken the exposition of this noble
tradition have differed among themselves, and to preoccupy ourselves
with the differences of their opinions and their examination will
needlessly prolong our discussion. Hence, I will confine myself in this
regard to what appears to me, with all my inadequacy, to be correct,
citing such supporting evidence as has not been mentioned (by anyone).
Thereafter I will mention an important point mentioned by our revered
shaykh, the perfect ‘*arif*, Shahabadi, may his shadow over our heads
endure forever.

You should know that the expression ‘firm sign’ (*ayatun muhkamah*)
implies the rational sciences and the true doctrines and divine
teachings. ‘Just duty’ (*faridatun ‘adilah*) implies the science of
ethics and self-purification. ‘Established *sunnah*’ (*sunnatun
qa’imah*) refers to the science of the exoteric aspect and the bodily
conduct (i.e. involving some kind of physical activity). The reason for
this correlation is that the word *‘ayah’* means ‘sign’ and is
appropriate for the rational and doctrinal sciences, for they deal with
the signs of the Divine Essence, Names, Attributes and other matters,
and there is no precedent of the use of the word *ayah* for other
sciences.

For example, in the Book of God, in many cases, after offering proofs
for the sacred existence of the Creator or the Names and Attributes of
His sacred Essence, or for the existence of Resurrection and its
characteristics, or the world of *Ghayb* and Barzakh, such a statement
as this follows as a reminder: “This is a sign” or “These are signs for
those who think” or “These are signs for those who have intellects”.
*Ayah* is a word whose use in relation to these sciences and teachings
is quite common. But should the sentence “This is a sign” be mentioned
following the mention of a legal or ritual issue or after an ethical
principle, that would obviously not be devoid of impropriety.

Hence, we learn that *ayah,* sign and mark is something that is
appropriate for and special to the (intellectual and spiritual) sciences
related to doctrine (*‘ulum al-ma’arif*)*.* Similarly, the
characterization of *ayah* as *muhkam* (firm, unambiguous, precise) is
also in conformity with these sciences, for these sciences are subject
to intellectual criteria and based on firm rational proofs (*burhan
al-muhkam* ). However, the other sciences, in accordance with their
character, do not possess firm and steady rational proofs.

The reason for considering the expression *faridatun ‘adilah* (just
duty) as referring to the science of ethics is the characterization of
duty as *‘adilah* (lit. just, moderate, balanced). That is because
virtue (*khulq al-hasan*)*,* as established in that science, consists of
keeping distance from either of the two extremes of excess and neglect
(*ifrat* and *tafrit*) and each of the two extremes of excess and
neglect is blameworthy, and justice (*‘adalah*)*,* which signifies the
golden mean and the point of moderation between them, is praiseworthy.

For example, courage (*shuja’ah*)*,* which is one of the principal
virtues and a moral excellence, is represented by the middle point and
moderate position between the extremes of rashness (*tahawwur,* which is
absence of fear in situations where fear is proper) and timidity
(*jubn*)*,* which amounts to being afraid in situations where fear is
improper.

So, also, wisdom (*hikmah*)*,* which is also a principal moral virtue,
consists of the middle point between the vice of cunning (*jurbuzah*)*,*
which is the use of the thinking faculty in matters it is improper to
use it, and the vice of stupidity, which is suspension of the thinking
faculty in matters where it should be used. Similarly, continence
(*‘iffah*) and generosity (*sakhawah*) are virtues represented by the
middle position between the vices of covetousness (*sharah*) and apathy
(*khumud*) and between prodigality (*israf*) and stinginess (*bukhl*)
respectively.

Thus the attachment of the adjective *‘adilah* to *faridah* indicates
that the expression *faridatun ‘adilah* corresponds to the science of
ethics (*akhlaq*)*.* Moreover, the term *faridah* by itself affirms such
a connotation, for since *faridah* here-which has been put here in
opposition to *sunnah,* signifying the third part of knowledge-is
something which can be known by the means of the intellect, as is the
actual case in the science of ethics (*‘ilm al-’akhlaq*)*,* contrary to
*sunnah* which refers to matters where the criterion is pure obedience
(*ta’abbud*) and which the intellect is incapable of apprehending. And
that is why we have said that the expression *sunnatun qa’imah* refers
to the science, which deals with the acts of obedience and the rites of
the *Shari’ah*, which have been called *‘sunnah’* here.

Their general nature is such that the intellect is incapable of
apprehending their rationale and the *Sunnah* is the only means of
proving and apprehending them. So, also, the use of the adjective
*qa’imah* in characterizing *sunnah* here is also congenial to the
obligations (*wajibat*) of the *Shari’ah*, for it is common, as well as
correct, to speak of the *iqamah* (establishment) of *wajibat* and the
*iqamah* of *salat, zakat* and so on. This word (i.e. *iqamah*) is not
used in the other two sciences and its usage therein would be incorrect.
This is all that can be said in regard to correlation on the basis of
congenialities.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالعِلْمُ عِنْدَ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And all knowledge is with God.

Section 3
---------

Now we shall mention the point that we promised to discuss. It is this
that in the noble tradition the science of doctrines and *ma’arif* has
been referred to as *ayah* and *ayah* means sign, symbol, and mark. The
point that relates to this term is that if the doctrinal sciences and
doctrinal truths are studied for their own sake and if all the related
concepts, terms, high-sounding expressions, and embellished
juxtapositions of terms be learned for the sake of showing off to feeble
minds and for the sake of obtaining worldly status, then they cannot be
called *ayat muhkamat;* rather they must be named obscuring veils and
hollow fantasies.

That is because if one’s purpose in learning the sciences should not be
to reach God, the Exalted, and to realize the Names and Attributes and
to mould one’s self in accordance with the Divine character (*takhalluq
bi akhlaq Allah*)*,* each of such acquisitions of his is a dungeon of
hell and a black veil that darkens his heart and blinds his insight,
making him one of those to whom this noble verse applies:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَنْ أَعْرَضَ عَنْ ذِكْرِي فَإِنَّ لَهُ مَعِيشَةً ضَنكًا
وَنَحْشُرُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَعْمَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But whosoever turns away from My remembrance, his shall be a life of
narrowness, and on the Resurrection Day We shall raise him blind.***
(***20:124***)

Then he will find himself blind in that world and will complain to God
saying, “O my Lord, why hast thou raised me blind, while I was blessed
with sight in that world?” The answer will come: “You were blind in that
world too, for you did not see Our signs and you neglected them.” The
criterion for sight in the world of the Hereafter is the vision and
insight of the heart; the body as well as its faculties there are
totally subject to the heart and the intellect (*lubb*). (The body being
an image of the soul in that world), the conformity of an image to its
object shall be complete and the image of something deaf, blind and dumb
is such.

Hence, one should not imagine that those who are well-versed in
concepts, terms and expressions and have books and writings by heart are
those who have the knowledge of God, the angels and the Last Day! If
their learning is a sign and mark, why has it not produced its luminous
effect in their own hearts? Why has it even increased the darkness of
their heart and the corruption of their morals and conduct? The Noble
Qur’an has mentioned the criterion for identifying the genuine Mama’
when it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاءُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Even so only those of His servants fear God who have knowledge.***
(***35:28***)

The fear of God is the specific characteristic of the *ulama* (the
learned) and every one who does not possess the fear of God, the
Exalted, is outside the ranks of the *ulama*. Now let us consider
ourselves. Is there any trace of that fear in us? If there is, why does
it not show any effect in our outward personality?

In the noble *al-Kafi*, al-Kulayni reports with his *isnad* the
following tradition on the authority of Abu Basir:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ (أوْ أبَا
جَعْفَرٍ) يَقُولُ: كَانَ أَمِيرُ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
يَقُولُ: يَا طَالِبَ العِلْمِ، إنَّ العِلْمَ ذُو فَضَائِلَ كَثِيرَةٍ:
فَرَأْسُهُ التَّوَاضُعُ، وَعَيْنُهُ البَرَاءَةُ مِنَ الحَسَدِ،
وَأُذُنُهُ الفَهْمُ، وَلِسَانُهُ الصِّدْقُ، وَحِفْظُهُ الفَحْصُ،
وَقَلْبُهُ حُسْنُ النِّيَّةِ، وَعَقْلُهُ مَعْرِفُةُ الأشْيَاءِ
وَالأُمُورِ، وَيَدُهُ الرَّحْمَةُ، وَرِجْلُهُ زِيَارَةُ العُلَمَاءِ،
وَهِمَّتُهُ السَّلامَةُ، وَحِكْمَتُهُ الوَرَعُ، وَمُسْتَقَرُّهُ
النَّجَاةُ، وَقَائِدُهُ العَافِيَةُ، وَمَرْكَبُهُ الوَفَاءُ،
وَسِلاحُهُ لِينُ الكَلِمَةِ، وَسَيْفُهُ الرِّضَا، وَقَوْسُهُ
المُدَارَاةُ، وَجَيْشُهُ مُحَاوَرَةُ العُلَمَاءِ، وَمَالُهُ الأَدَبُ،
وَذَخِيرَتُهُ اجْتِنَابُ الذُّنُوبِ، وَزَادُهُ المَعْرُوفُ، وَمَاؤُهُ
المُوَادَعَةُ، وَدَلِيلُهُ الهُدَى، وَرَفِيقُهُ مَحَبَّةُ الأَخْيَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Abu Basir) says: I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) —Abu Ja’far, according to
another manuscript— say: Amir al-Mu’minin (A) used to say: “O seeker of
knowledge, knowledge has many merits. (If you imagine it to be a human
being then) its head is humility, its eye is freedom from envy, its ear
is understanding, its tongue is truthfulness, its memory is research,
its heart is good intention, its intellect is the knowledge (ma’rifah)
of things and matters, its hand is compassion, its foot is visiting the
learned, its resolution is integrity, its wisdom is piety, its abode is
salvation, its helmsman is well-being, its mount is faithfulness, its
weapon is softness of speech, its sword is satisfaction (rida), its bow
is tolerance, its army is discussion with the learned, its wealth are
refined manners, its stock is abstinence from sins, its provision for
journey is virtue, its drinking water is gentleness, its guide is Divine
guidance, and its companion is the love of the elect.”[^3]

These are the signs of the *ulama* and the effects of *‘ilm* mentioned
by Amir al-Mu’minin (A). Hence, if one is learned in the traditional
sciences but is devoid of these things, he must know that he has not
partaken of knowledge. Rather he is one of the ignorant and lost ones
and in the other world his concepts and his wares of learning, each of
which embodies compound ignorance, will become darkening blinders for
him and his regret on the Day of Resurrection shall be the greatest of
regrets.

Hence the criterion in knowledge is that it should be sign, symbol and
mark (of the Divine), and there should be no ego or egoism in it. Egoism
gets dissolved and obliterated in knowledge, instead of it itself
becoming a cause for vanity, narcissism, ostentation and arrogance. The
noble tradition further characterizes the *ayah* as *muhkamah,* because
true knowledge with its light and luminosity creates conviction in the
heart and wipes away doubt and uncertainty.

It may happen that a man spends all his life in the study of the
preliminaries and proofs and commits to mind several proofs and numerous
arguments in support of each of the divine doctrines and overwhelms his
associates in debates and controversies, without that knowledge
producing any effect in his heart. Such a man not only does not achieve
conviction, even his learning multiplies his doubts, uncertainties, and
ambiguities. Hence, the mere collection of concepts and abundance of
terms has no benefit. Rather it makes the heart preoccupied with non-God
and the learned man forgetful and negligent of God’s Sacred Being.

My dear, the remedy-or rather the complete remedy-is that if one wants
his learning to be divine he should purify his intention and purpose
with all the seriousness and effort that he can muster while entering
upon the study of any branch of knowledge. The capital of salvation and
the fountainhead of all grace lies in the purification of intent and the
sincerity of purpose:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَخْلَصَ للهِ أَرْبَعِينَ صَبَاحاً جَرَتْ يَنَابِيعُ الحِكْمَةِ
مِنْ قَلْبِهِ عَلَى لِسَانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever devotes himself in sincerity to God for forty days, the springs
of wisdom flow out from his heart to his tongue.[^4]

Such are the effects and benefits of forty day’s sincerity (*ikhlas*)!
But here we are with forty years or more spent in the effort at
collecting terms and concepts related to every discipline. You consider
yourself to be an *Allamah* in the sciences and count yourself among the
army of God, yet you do not find any trace of wisdom in your own heart
nor a drop of it on your tongue. You should know that your learning and
labor have not been with a sincerity of intention.

Rather, you have labored for the sake of Satan and selfish desire. Now
that you see that these sciences have not produced any spiritual quality
or state in you, make an effort to cultivate sincerity of intention and
purify your heart from obscurities and vices. If you see any result, go
on. And even though the mere motive of experimenting is inimical to
sincerity, it is possible that the effort may open a window and the
incoming light may guide you.

In any case, my dear, you stand in need of the true divine doctrines and
the veritable sciences as well as good morals and righteous works. At
whatever level you may stand, endeavor to increase your sincerity and
purge the egoistic fancies and satanic insinuations from the heart. Of
course, that will produce results for you and you will find the way to
the reality, and the path of guidance will open for you. May God,
Blessed and Exalted, succor you. (‘rod knows, if we should depart from
this world with this false and futile learning, these degenerate fancies
and depraved morals of ours to the next world, what tribulations and
calamities will await us and what narrow passages and what dungeons of
hell we shall have to encounter and what darkness, what terrors and
flames this learning and morals of ours shall prepare for us!

Section 4
---------

The authority amongst philosopher, Sadr al-*Hukama*’ al-Muta’allihin
(Head of the philosophers and theosophists, viz. Mullah Sadra) —may God
sanctify his soul and reward him abundantly— in *Sharh Usul* *al-Kafi*
gives a long quotation from Shaykh Ghastly in which the latter has
classified the sciences into ‘worldly’ and ‘Hereafterly’ ones, putting
the science of *fiqh* amongst the ‘worldly’ sciences and dividing the
sciences of Hereafter into the sciences of *mukashafah* (mystic
intuition and apprehension) and *mu’amalah* (social intercourse,
conduct, transactions; in Ghastly, the science of moral purification and
spiritual cultivation).

He considers the science of *mu’amalah* as the knowledge of the states
of the heart and the science of *mukashafah* as a light that is attained
in the heart after it is purified from blameworthy characteristics.
Through that light realities are discovered, to the extent that true
knowledge of the Divine Being, Names and Attributes as well as Acts and
the wisdom underlying them is acquired and other truths are known.

Now since this authority (i.e. Mullah Sadra) accepted this
classification, he says in the exegesis of the *hadith* under exposition
that, “Apparently this classification and limitation made by the Noble
Messenger (S) pertains to the sciences of *mu’amalat.* For it is these
sciences that most of the people derive benefit from. But the sciences
of *mukashafah* are attained by a small number of people and they are
rarer than the philosopher’s stone (*kibrit al-ahmar*)*,* as is also
indicated by the *ahadith* of *“Kitab al-’iman wa al-ku’fr* that will
come hereafter.” This was a condensed translation of his statements.

This writer says: There is an ambiguity in Shaykh Ghazali’s statements,
and if they be presumed to be admissible then there remains another
thing objectionable in the statements of the Akhund, i.e. Mullah Sadra,
(M). As to the objection pertaining to his statement-on the basis of
assumption of validity of Ghazali’s statements-it lies in this that
Ghastly has considered the science of *mu’amalat* as pertaining to the
states of the heart; that is, those qualities which result in
redemption, such as patience, gratitude, fear, hope and so on, as well
as those which lead to perdition, such as malice, envy, deceptiveness,
imposture and so on.

Accordingly, the threefold sciences mentioned by the Messenger of God
(S) cannot all pertain to the sciences of *mu’amalat;* rather only one
of them, i.e. *faridatun ‘adilah,* as explained in detail earlier,
corresponds to them. However, there are two objectionable things in
Shaykh Ghazali’s statements.

Firstly, he has considered *‘ilm al-fiqh* as belonging to worldly
sciences and the *fuqaha*’ as worldly scholars, whereas it is one of the
most valuable sciences of the Hereafter. And this ambiguity arises from
self-love and the love of the discipline one of whose experts he
imagines himself to be, i.e. the science of ethics, in the commonly used
sense.

Accordingly, he has repudiated the other disciplines, including the
rational sciences (such as philosophy). Secondly, he conceives
*mukashafat* as forming a part of the *‘ulum* and includes them in his
classification of them. This is contrary to fact, for that which is
right is to consider as ‘ilm that which is subject to inquiry, thought
and proof and wherein ratiocination has a role.

The *mukashafat* and *mushahadat* are at times the result of the study
of the sciences of doctrines (*‘ulum al-haqiqiyyah*) and at times the
consequence of spiritual acts (*a’mal al-qalbiyyah*)*.* To be brief,
*mushahadat, mukashafat* and realization of the realities of the Names
and the Attributes should not be included in the classification of
science. These and the *‘ulum* are separate things, and this is quite
plain.

Section 5
---------

You should know that many of the sciences, from a certain aspect, fall
under one of the categories mentioned by the Noble Messenger (S). For
instance, the sciences of medicine, anatomy, astronomy, astrology and
the like, when looked upon as Divine signs and symbols, and the science
of history and the like, when looked upon as a means for drawing lesson,
are included in *ayatun* *mukhamah,* for by their means the knowledge of
God or the knowledge of Resurrection is attained or confirmed. At times,
the learning of the sciences falls under *faridatun ‘adilah* and at
times under *sunnatun qa’imah.* But if their pursuit should be for their
own sake or for other purposes and if they should lead us to neglect the
*‘ulum* of the Hereafter, they become blame worthy by accident (*madhmum
bi al-’arad*) on account of this neglect.

Otherwise, (in themselves) they are neither beneficial nor harmful, as
pointed out by the Noble Messenger (S). Thus, all the sciences are
divisible into three kinds: first, those sciences, which are beneficial
to man in view of the other stages of existence, success wherein is the
ultimate purpose of creation. This is the category, which the ultimate
Prophet has considered as *‘ilm,* dividing it into three parts. The
second kind consists of those which are harmful for man and lead him to
neglect his essential duties. This kind consists of the blameworthy
sciences-such as magic, jugglery, alchemy and the like- and one must
refrain from their pursuit.

Thirdly, there are those which are neither harmful nor beneficial, like
those which one pursues in his hours of leisure for amusement’s sake,
such as mathematics, geometry, astronomy and the like. It would be much
better if one could relate the pursuit of these sciences to the
threefold *‘ulum* (mentioned by the Prophet), otherwise it is better to
refrain from, them as far as is possible.

That is because when a sensible person knows that he cannot acquire all
the sciences and achieve all the excellences due to shortness of life,
scarcity of time and abundance of obstacles and accidents, he would
reflect about the sciences and devote himself to the acquisition of.
those which are more beneficial for him. Of course, amongst the sciences
that which is better than all the rest is that which is beneficial for
man’s eternal and everlasting life and that is the science which the
prophets (A) have commanded and encouraged man to seek. That science
consists of the threefold *‘ulum,* as mentioned. And all praise belongs
to Allah, the Exalted.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, i, “kitab fadl al-’ilm”, “bab sifat al-’ilm
wa fadluh”, hadith no. 1.

[^2]: Al-’Amili, Ghurar al-hikam, “bab al-ra’.”

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, op. cit., “bab al-nawadir”, hadith no. 3.

[^4]: See ‘Allamah Bahr al-’ulum’s Risalah f’i al-sayr wa al-suluk,
22-23, footnote.


