Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ العَالَمِينَ وَالصَّلاةُ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ
أَجْمَعِينَ وَلَعْنَةُ اللهِ عَلَى أَعْدَائِهِمْ إِلى يَوْمِ الدِّينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lord! Grant brightness of sincerity to the mirror of the heart, Cleanse
the rust of hypocrisy from the tablet of the heart, and show the path of
virtue and salvation to the helpless wanderers in the mazes of the
bewilderment and error and confusion. Endow us with the nobleness and
generosity of character. Reveal to us your glory and splendor that you
have reserved only for your chosen servants.

Expel the legions of Satan and ignorance from the realms of our heart;
implant the divine hosts of knowledge and wisdom in their stead. Enrich
our hearts with the profusion of your love and that of your Chosen in
this transitory world, this ephemeral lodging place. And shower Your
choicest blessing upon us at the time of death and thereafter. Extend to
us your mercy, and grant us proximity to the Highest Good.

Purpose of Writing the Book
---------------------------

I, a humble servant of God, was contemplating for some time, to select
forty *hadith* from among the *ahadith* of the members of the Household
of the Prophet (S) from the authentic books of the *sahabah*, and
scholars, and was trying to compile them with an appropriate explanation
of each of them that can be applied to the general conditions of the
people. I chose to write them in Persian, so that the Persian knowing
people may also be benefited from them. God willing, this compilation
would be an attempt to serve the command of the Prophet (S) who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ حَفِظَ عَلَى أُمَّتِي أَرْبَعِينَ حَدِيثاً يَنْتَفِعُونَ بِهَا
بَعَثَهُ اللهُ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ فَقِيهاً عَالِماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From among my followers, one who shall preserve and protect my forty
ahadith, so that my people may be benefited from them, God Almighty will
treat him on the Day of Resurrection with great men of wisdom and
learning (jurisprudence).


