Twenty-Seventh Hadith: Prayer And Concentration
===============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى الشَّيْخِ الأَجَلِّ والثِقَةِ الجَلِيلِ
مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ الكُلَيْنِي، رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ، عَنْ
عِدَّةٍ مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنِ ابْنِ
مَحْبُوبٍ عَنْ عُمَرَ بْنِ يَزِيدَ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ قَالَ: فِي التَّوْرَاةِ مَكْتُوبٌ: يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ،
تَفَرَّغْ لِعِبَادَتِي أَمْلَأْ قَلْبَكَ غِنىً وَلا أَكِلْكَ إلَى
طَلَبِكَ وَعَلَيَّ أنْ أَسُدَّ فَاقَتَكَ وَأَمْلَأَ قَلْبَكَ خَوْفاً
مِنِّي. وَإنْ لا تَفْرَغْ لِعِبَادَتِي أَمْلَأْ قَلْبَكَ شُغْلاً
بِالدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ لا أَسُدَّ فَاقَتَكَ وَأَكِلْكَ إلَى طَلَبِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my chain of transmitters reaching up to the most venerable shaykh
and the trustworthy authority Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) who
reports from a group of our companions, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad, from
Ibn Mahbub, from ‘Umar ibn Yazid, from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A)that he said,
“It is written in the Torah: O son of Man, if you ‘empty’ yourself (i.e.
disengage yourself from all other preoccupations to make yourself
available) for My worship, I will fill your heart with richness and I
will not abandon you to what you seek and long for. And it will be upon
Me to close the door of poverty upon you and to fill your heart with awe
for Me. And if you don’t ‘empty’ yourself for My worship, I will fill
your heart with preoccupation with the world and I will not close upon
you the door of poverty and will abandon you to what you seek.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

*Tafarrugh* belongs to the verbal form *tafa’ul,* and *tafarragha li
kadha* means ‘he has devoted all his time to such and such a thing
without being occupied with anything else.’ The *tafarrugh* of the heart
for the sake of worship (*‘ibadah*) means ‘emptying’ it for the sake of
worship of attention to anything else. The lexicographers explain the
verb *mala’a* (filled) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَلأَ الإنَاءَ ماءً ومِنَ الماءِ وبالماءِ: وضعَ فيهِ بقَدرِ ما
يأخُذُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He ‘filled’ the vessel with water, i.e. he put in it a quantity that it
can hold.

*Akilu* is a variant in the first person of *yakilu.* The lexicographers
explain its usage as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكلَ إليهِ الأمرَ: أيْ سلَّمَهُ وفَوَّضهُ وترَكه ُإلَيه واكتَفَى به.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He ‘entrusted’ him with the matter, means, he turned it over to him,
delegated it to him, left it to him, and put it completely in his
charge.

*Asuddu,* a verb in the first person derived from *sadda, yasuddu
saddan,* means closing, and is the opposite of *al-fath,* opening.
*Faqah* means *hajah* and *faqr,* i.e. poverty and need. As to,
وَأَمْلَأَ قَلْبَكَ خَوْفاً مِنِّي apparently it (i.e. the verb أملأ )
represents the first person in the imperfect tense and its being in the
imperative case in conjunction with the first clause is unlikely. We
shall, God willing, expound that which needs explanation in the noble
tradition in the course of a few sections.

The Significance Of Prayer
--------------------------

Know that freedom from other preoccupations for the sake of absorption
in worship (*‘ibadah*) is obtainable through possessing unoccupied time
and an unoccupied heart. And this is one of the most important points
regarding worship, without which the presence of heart cannot be
realized, and a worship performed without an attentive heart is devoid
of value. That which brings about attentiveness of the heart consists of
two matters.

The first of these lies in possessing unoccupied time and an unoccupied
heart, and the second lies in making one’s heart understand the
importance of worship. That which is meant by ‘unoccupied time’ is that
one should set aside a certain time out of his day and night hours
exclusively for the sake of worship wherein he should devote himself
solely to worship without engaging in any other preoccupation. If one
were to understand that worship is an important thing whose significance
is greater than any other activity, or, rather, that it is something of
incomparable significance, he would allocate a certain time to it and be
careful to observe its timings. In the following, we shall try to cast
some light on this matter.

A devout person should be observant of the times of his worship under
every circumstance. Of course, he should observe the timings of *salat,*
which is the most important of the acts of worship, and carry it out in
the most meritorious part of its time, refraining from engaging in any
other work during those times. In the same way as he assigns a certain
time to making an earning and for study and debate, he should do the
same in respect of these acts of worship, in whose time he must be free
from other preoccupations, so that he can achieve concentration of the
heart, which makes up the quintessence and kernel of *‘ibadah.*

But should he, like this author, offer his prayers out of compulsion and
consider the performance of the worship of the Lord as a superfluous
matter, he would, of course, delay it as long as it can be delayed and
when he offers it offer it in a perfunctory manner, considering it as an
impediment in the way of what he imagines to be important tasks.
However, such a worship has not only no spiritual brilliance, it
deserves Divine wrath, and such a person is one who makes light of
*salat* and neglects it as something trivial. I seek refuge in God from
making light of *salat* and not giving it its due importance. These
pages cannot contain all the traditions that exist in this context, and
sere we will mention a few of them for the sake of lesson.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: لا تَتَهَاوَنْ بِصَلاتِكَ فَإنَّ النَّبِيَّ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ قَالَ عِنْدَ مَوْتِهِ: لَيْسَ مِنِّي
مَنِ اسْتَخَفَّ بِصَلاتِهِ، لَيْسَ مِنِّي مَنْ شَرِبَ مُسْكِراً، لا
يَرِدُ عَلَيَّ الحَوْضَ لا وَاللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni) reports with his isnad from Abu Ja’far
(A) that he said to Zurarah (R): Don’t be negligent in regard to your
prayers. Verily, the Prophet (S) said on his death-bed, “The one who
makes light of his prayers does not belong to me, nor the one who takes
intoxicating drinks, and, by God, he will not return to me at the Pond
(of al-Kawthar).”[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي بَصِيرٍقاَلَ: قَالَ أَبُو الحَسَنِ الأَوَّلُ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: لَمَّا حَضَرَتْ أَبِي الوَفَاةُ قَالَ لِي: يَا
بُنَيَّ، لا يَنَالُ شَفَاعَتَنَا مَنِ اسْتَخَفَّ بِالصَّلاةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from Abu Basir that Abu al-Hasan
al-Awwal (Imam al-Kazim) (A) said: At the time of his death my father
said to me, “My son, the one who makes light of salat will not receive
our intercession.”[^3]

There are a large number of traditions concerning this matter, but these
that have been cited are sufficient for those who will take a lesson.
God knows what a great calamity it is to be separated from the Noble
Messenger (S) and to be deprived of the support of that master! What a
great humiliation is it that is entailed by deprival from the
intercession of that master and his majestic Household! Don’t imagine
that anyone will receive Divine forgiveness and enter the promised
Paradise without the intercession and protection of that noble
personage.

Now see for yourself whether preferring every trivial matter, or rather
something which is of imaginary benefit, to prayer, which is the apple
of the eye of the Noble Messenger (S) and a great means of Divine mercy,
and treating it with negligence, delaying it without any excuse until
the end of its time and not observing its prerequisites is not equal
to-slighting it and making light of it. If it is, know that you have, in
accordance with the testimony of the Noble Messenger (S) and that of the
immaculate Imams (A) gone out of their *wilayah* and will not attain to
their intercession.

Now if you stand in need of their intercession and wish to belong to the
ummah of the Noble Messenger (S) then treasure this divine trust and
give it importance, or face the consequences of your neglect. God, the
Most Exalted, and His *awliya’* have no need of the works of yours and
mine, but it is feared that if you fail to give it its due importance,
it will lead you to abandon it altogether and that will ultimately lead
you to deny it as duty, bringing you to certain damnation and
everlasting wretchedness.

More important than finding free and unoccupied time for *salat* is
possessing a free and unoccupied heart. Rather, the former is a
prerequisite for obtaining the latter. Having an unoccupied heart means
that at the time of worship one must disengage himself from mundane
engagements and cares and turn his heart away from all kinds of matters
and cares and make it entirely empty and unencumbered for attending to
worship and supplication with God Almighty. As long as one cannot purge
his heart of these matters, he cannot obtain the necessary state of
extrication for himself and his worship.

But our misfortune is that we store up all the various kinds of stray
thoughts and cares for the time of worship. As soon as we say the
*takbirat al’ihram* of *salat,* it is as if we have opened a shop or a
ledger of accounts or an album. Our heart wanders away to other matters
and we become totally oblivious of worship. When we come to ourselves,
it is when we have reached the moment of *salam,* having passed through
the *salat* as a matter of habit! Truly, this kind of worship is a
disgrace and this mode of supplicating with the Lord is shameful.

My dear, consider the prayers you offer to God by comparing them with
talk and conversation with one of His insignificant creatures. When
talking to a stranger-to say nothing of a friend you attend to him with
all your attention and are oblivious of anyone else as long as you are
engaged in conversation with him. But why is it that while engaging in
communication and prayer with your Provider and the Lord and Sustainer
of the worlds you are totally heedless of Him and attentive to other
matters? Is the station and worth of creatures greater than that of the
Sacred Essence of the Lord?

Is conversation with them more valuable than supplication with the
Fulfiller of needs. Yes, I and you do not know the significance of
supplication with God. We consider these divine duties as a cumbersome
burden, and, of course, a matter that is a cumbrous weight on one will
not be significant for him.

Hence, that which needs correction is the source of this stream. We must
obtain faith in God and the exhortations of the prophets so as to reform
our sorry state. All our misfortunes arise from the weakness of our
faith and the shaky character of our conviction. The faith of Sayyid ibn
Tawus (R)had brought him to such a point that he used to celebrate every
year the anniversary of the day of his becoming *mukallaf,* for on that
day God had bestowed upon him the permission to engage in His worship
and had dressed him in the robes of *taklif.* Really, just imagine, what
purity and brilliance that heart of his had!

And if the practice of that glorious Sayyid is ‘tot it binding proof
(*hujjah*) for you, the practice of the Master of Monotheists (*Sayyid
al-Muwahhidin,* i.e. the Prophet [S]) and his infallible descendants is,
of course, a *hujjah* for you. Study the condition of those noble souls
and the character of their worship and prayers. At the time of *salat*
the color of their blessed faces would pale and their bodies would
tremble with the fear lest there should occur some lapse in the course
of this divine observance, although they were infallible.

It is well-known concerning the *Mawla* (‘Ali) that ail arrow that had
pierced his blessed foot and removing which was intolerably painful for
him, was taken out when he was engaged in *salat* and he did not even
notice its removal.

My dear, such a thing is not impossible. Such things occur quite often
for people in the ordinary course of life. At times, a man becomes
totally oblivious of everything in the state of anger or love. One of
our reliable friends used to narrate that “Once during a fight with a
group of ruffians in Isfahan, I noticed that some of them struck me with
their fists and I did not know what kind of blows they were. Later when
the fight was over and I came to myself, I realized that. I had several
wounds made by a knife with which they had struck me. I was bedridden
for several days before I recovered from those wounds.”

Of course, the reason behind it is obvious: when the total attention of
the soul is concentrated on a certain matter, it becomes totally
oblivious of the body and insensitive to its feelings. All its attention
is absorbed by that single thing. In our own fights, encounters or
heated debates in a gathering—may God be our refuge from these—we have
often noticed that we become totally heedless of everything else that
takes place around us. However, regrettably, everything absorbs our
total attention except the worship of the Lord, and that is why we tend
to regard such episodes (as that of Imam ‘Ali) as improbable.

In any case, detachment of the heart from everything except God is an
important matter and one must try to attain it at all costs. The means
of achieving it is also possible and attainable. It can be achieved with
the exercise of some care and vigilance. One should make effort for some
time to bring the flights of the bird of his thought under control and
restrain it whenever it wishes to fly from one branch to another. After
a period of watchfulness, the mind becomes tractable and docile and
refrains from engaging in random thoughts. In accord with the aphorism
وَالخَيرُ عادَةٌ -goodness becomes a habit with it and, attaining
detachment from other preoccupations, it becomes attentive to God and
His worship.

Of foremost importance amongst the prerequisites of worship is the
attention of the heart, on which depends the soul and essence of worship
and without which it has no value and acceptability near God, the
Exalted, as mentioned in sacred traditions.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أِبِي جَعْفَرٍ وَأَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ
عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ أَنَّهُمَا قَالا: إِنَّمَا لَكَ مِنْ صَلاتِكَ
مَا أَقْبَلْتَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْهَا، فَإنْ أَوْهَمَهَا كُلَّهَا أَوْ
غَفِلَ عَنْ آدَابِهَا لُفَّتْ فَضُرِبَ بِهَا وَجْهُ صَاحِبِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from Abu Ja’far and Abu
‘Abd Allah (A) that they said to Fudayl ibn Yasar: The reward that you
derive from your salat is limited to the extent that you offer it with
an attentive heart. And if someone should vitiate all of it or neglect
its etiquette, it is wound up and thrown at the face of its offerer.[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَوَى الشَّيْخُ الأَقْدَمُ مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ الحَسَنِ رِضْوَانُ اللهِ
عَلَيْهِ فِي التَّهْذِيبِ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ الثُّمَالِيِّ قَالَ:
رَأَيْتُ عَلِيَّ بْنَ الحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ يُصَلِّي
فَسَقَطَ رِدَاؤُهُ عَنْ مَنْكِبِهِ فَلَمْ يُسَوِّهِ حَتَّى فَرَغَ مِنْ
صَلاتِهِ. قَالَ: فَسَأَلْتُهُ عَنْ ذَلِكَ، فَقَالَ: وَيْحَكَ!
أَتَدْرِي بَيْنَ يَدَيْ مَنْ كُنْتُ؟ إنَّ العَبْدَ لا يُقْبَلُ مِنْهُ
صَلاةٌ إلا مَا أَقْبَلَ مِنْهَا. فَقُلْتُ: جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ،
هَلَكْنَا! قَالَ: كَلا، إنَّ اللهَ مُتَمِّمٌ ذَلِكَ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
بِالنَّوَافِلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Shaykh Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Tusi (R) reports in al-Tahdhib with
his isnad from Abu Hamzah al-Thumali that he said, “I saw ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn, Imam al-Sajjad (A), offering prayer, when the cloak slipped
from his shoulders. The Imam did not arrange it until he had finished
his prayer. When I questioned him about it, he said, “Woe to you, don’t
you know before whom I stood? Nothing is accepted of a devotee’s prayer
except what he offers with the proper attention of his heart.”
Thereupon, I said to him, “May I be ransomed for you, (if that is so)
then we (i.e. the like of us) are doomed!” He replied, “No indeed.
Verily God compensates for that for the faithful by the means of
supererogatory prayers.”[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنِ الخِصَالِ: بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ عِلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فِي
حَدِيثِ الأرْبَعْمِائَةِ قَالَ: لا يَقُومَنَّ أَحَدُكُمْ فِي الصَّلاةِ
مُتَكاسِلاً وَلا نَاعِساً، وَلا يُفَكِّرَنَّ فِي نَفْسِهِ فَإنَّهُ
بَيْنَ يَدَيْ رَبِّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، وَإنَّمَا لِلْعَبْدِ مِنْ
صَلاتِهِ مَا أقْبَلَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْهَا بِقَلْبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Khisal, (al-Shaykh al-Saduq) reports with his isnad from ‘Ali (A)
that he said, “None of you should ever stand for salat in a lazy or
drowsy state, nor should you let (random) thoughts pass through your
mind (in the state of salat). For, in that state, you stand before your
Glorious and Almighty Lord. Verily, the reward a devotee derives from
prayer is equal to the extent of it that he offers with an attentive
heart.”[^6]

There are many traditions on this theme and concerning the merit of
attentiveness. Here we will cite some of them, which are sufficient for
those who will take lesson.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عَلِيِّ بْنِ الحُسَيْنِ صَدُوقِ الطَّائِفَةِ
بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ عَبْدِاللهِ بْنِ يَعْفُورَ قَالَ: قَالَ أَبُو
عَبْدِاللهِ الصَّادِقُ جَعْفَرُ بْنُ مُحَمَّدٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: يَا
عَبْدَاللهِ، إذَا صَلَّيْتَ صَلاةَ فَرِيضَةٍ فَصَلِّهَا لِوَقْتِهَا
صَلاةَ مُوَدِّعٍ يَخَافُ أنْ لا يَعُودَ إِلَيْهَا، ثُمَّ اصْرِفْ
بِبَصَرِكَ إلَى مَوْضِعِ سُجُودِكَ، فَلَوْ تَعْلَمُ مَنْ عَنْ
يَمِينِكَ وَعَنْ شَمَالِكَ لأحْسَنْتَ صَلاتَكَ، وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّكَ
بَيْنَ يَدَيْ مَنْ يَرَاكَ وَلا تَرَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, the saduq of the community, reports
with his isnad from ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi Ya’fur that Imam al-Sadiq (A)
said to him, “O ‘Abd Allah, when you offer salat, pray like someone who
bids farewell and fears that he will never return (i.e. pray in such a
manner as if it were the last prayer of your life). Then fix your gaze
on the point of your prostration. If you know that there is someone on
your left or right, you take more care in offering your salat; then know
that you stand in front of Someone Who sees you and you don’t see
Him.”[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فِي حَدِيثٍ
أنَّهُ قَالَ: إنِّي لأُحِبُّ الرَّجُلَ المُؤْمِنَ مِنْكُمْ إذَا قَامَ
فِي صَلاةِ فَرِيضَةٍ أنْ يُقْبِلَ بِقَلْبِهِ إلَى اللهِ تَعَالَى وَلا
يُشْغِلَ قَلْبَهُ بِأَمْرِ الدُّنْيَا فَلَيْسَ مِنْ عَبْدٍ يُقْبِلُ
بِقَلْبِهِ فِي صَلاتِهِ إلَى اللهِ تَعَالَى إلا أَقْبَلَ اللهُ إلَيْهِ
بِوَجْهِهِ وَأَقْبَلَ بِقُلُوبِ المُؤْمِنِينَ إلَيْهِ بِالمَحَبَّةِ
بَعْدَ حُبِّ اللهِ إيَّاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (A) said, “Dear to me is the believer from among you who
attends to God with his heart at the time of prayer and does not
preoccupy his heart with any mundane matter. For whenever a devotee
turns with his heart to God, the Exalted, during prayer, God turns His
face towards him, and turns towards him the hearts of the faithful who
regard him with affection, following God’s love of him. “[^8]

Just reflect what kind of good news is this that the Truthful One
(al-Sadiq) of the Family of Muhammad (A) gives to the faithful! Alas,
we, poor folk, who dwell in nescience and are devoid of attentiveness to
God, the Exalted, unaware of His friendship, and liken His love to that
of His creatures! Those who possess gnosis (*ma’rifah*) state that God,
the Exalted, removes blindfolds from the sight of those whom He loves,
and God knows what nobilities lie in freedom from such a blindness. The
ultimate hope and goal of the *awliya’* has lain in this freedom from
nescience. And the Commander of the Faithful (A) and his noble
descendants say in the supplications known as the *Munajat
al-Sha’baniyyah:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِلَهِي هَبْ لِي كَمَالَ الانْقِطَاعِ إلَيْكَ وَأَنِرْ أَبْصَارَ
قُلُوبِنَا بِضِيَاءِ نَظَرِهَا إلَيْكَ حَتَّى تَخْرِقَ أَبْصَارُ
القُلُوبِ حُجُبَ النُّورِ فَتَصِلَ إلَى مَعْدِنِ العَظَمَةِ وَتَصِيرَ
أَرْوَاحُنَا مُعَلَّقَةً بِعِزِّ قُدْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

My God, grant me the utmost absorption in Thee and illuminate the vision
of our hearts with the light of Thy Vision, until the sight of the
hearts can penetrate the curtains of light and reach the source of
Greatness and until our spirits get anchored to the threshold of Thy
Sanctity.[^9]

My God! What is this illumination of the heart’s vision that Your
*awliya’* beseech of You and seek to attain? O Lord, what are those
concealing curtains of light that our Infallible Imams spoke about? What
is that source of Greatness, Glory, Sanctity, and Perfection, reaching
which is the cherished goal of those sacred souls and which for always
lie beyond the ken of even our theoretical knowledge, to say nothing of
our experiencing and witnessing it? O God, be gracious to us, wretched
and fallen creatures that we are, who neither know anything beyond
gluttony and slumber, hatred and lust, nor seek to discover anything
beyond them! Awaken us from this waking slumber and this stupefied
sanity.

In any case, this single *hadith* is sufficient to induce those who are
worthy of it and receptive to spend all their lives for attaining to
God’s love and to seek His Face. But as to the like of us, who don’t
belong to this field and valley, we would do better to stick to other
traditions like the following ones:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ ثَوَابِ الأَعْمَالِ: بِإسْنَادِهِ عَمَّنْ سَمِعَ أَبَا
عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: مَنْ صَلَّى رَكْعَتَيْنِ
يَعْلَمُ مَا يَقُولُ فِيهِمَا انْصَرَفَ وَلَيْسَ بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ
اللهِ ذَنْبٌ إلا غُفِرَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Thawab al-a’mal, al-Shaykh al-Saduq reports with his chain of
transmitters from someone who heard Imam al-Sadiq (A) that he used to
say: “One who offers two rak’ahs of salat with the knowledge of what he
says therein, he does not finish them without God forgiving him every
sin that there is between him and God.”[^10]

The Various Levels Of Concentration
-----------------------------------

Having known that an attentive heart is the soul and heart of worship
and that its luminosity and degree of excellence depend on the
attentiveness of the heart and its degree, it should be known that there
are different levels of the heart’s attention. Some of these levels are
special to the *awliya*’ of God and others are incapable of climbing to
those heights; but some of its levels are attainable for the common
people. And it should be known that attention in worship is generally
divisible into two main kinds: one of these is attention of the heart to
worship and the other is attention of the heart to God.

Before explaining this issue, we are forced to mention one preliminary
matter, which is this. The gnostics say that worship is, absolutely,
glorification of the Lord. However, each of the various kinds of worship
is a praise of God in accordance with one of His Names and Attributes,
excepting *salat*, which is glorification of God with all of His Names
and Attributes. Earlier it was mentioned in the exposition of some
traditions that praise of the Worshipped One is a proclivity ingrained
in all human beings.

It is a necessity demanded by nature that makes man submit in humility
to the absolutely Perfect One, the absolutely Beautiful One, the
absolute Provider and the absolutely Great. And since no one can
discover the real significance of the praise of the Sacred Essence-for
that depends upon the knowledge of the Essence and its Attributes and
the reality of the relation between the Manifest and the Hidden it is
impossible except through the means of revelation and divine
inspiration.

Accordingly, the acts of worship are absolutely prescriptive and laid
down by God, and no one has the right to legislate in this regard and
innovate some rite of worship. The kind of ceremonies of homage and
reverence that are in vogue in the courts of kings and princes have no
worth or value before His Sacred Essence. Hence, man should sit up and
take notice, and learn the manner of worship or devotion through the
agency of revelation and prophethood and refrain from making any kind of
unauthorized dispensations in this regard.

Having known that worship is glorification of the Worshipped One, one
should note, as pointed out earlier, that attention of the heart is of
two main kinds: attention to worship and attention to the Worshipped
One.

Attention To Worship
--------------------

There are various degrees of this kind of attention, which are divisible
into two main levels. One of these is attention of an incomplete and
summary character. In this kind of attention, while performing an act of
worship—whatever that may be, whether related to *taharah,* such as
*wudu’* or *ghusl*, or to prayer, fasting, or Hajj pilgrimage or
something else-one is attentive in a general way that he is magnifying
the Lord, though he himself does not know the nature of his own
glorification nor understands the significance of any of the Divine
Names. Our shaykh, the perfect *‘arif* that he was, and may my soul be
his ransom, used to mention an analogy comparing this kind of worship to
the recital of a child who is asked to recite a panegyric in the praise
of someone.

The child, who himself does not understand the panegyric, is told that
it is meant to eulogize the person in whose presence it is read. As he
recites it, the child knows summarily that he is eulogizing the person
praised without knowing the character of the praise. We, too, who are
children singing the praise of God, do not know the secrets that lie in
these acts of worship. Neither do we understand the character of
relation that each of these divine forms has to some Divine Name, nor do
we know in what way it is glorification of God.

However, we should at least be cognizant of the fact that each of those
acts of worship is magnification of the absolutely Perfect One, of the
One Who is absolutely worthy of all praise and worship, a form that the
Sacred Essence Itself has prescribed for Its glorification and commanded
us to magnify It through its means in Its sacred presence.

Another of the levels of attentiveness of the heart is its detailed
attention to worship; its complete attainment is not possible for anyone
except the sincere *awliya’* and the gnostics. However, some of its
lower degrees are attainable for others, the first stage wherein is
concentration on the meaning of the words during *salat* and prayer. The
tradition cited earlier from the *Thawab al-’a’mal* refers to this
stage.

Another stage of it is that one should understand to the extent of his
capacity the mysteries of worship and the character of glorification of
the Worshipped One underlying each of the ritual forms. The gnostics
have, to a certain extent, described the mysteries of *salat* and other
forms of worship and have benefited to the extent of their capacity from
the statements contained in the traditions of the Infallible Ones (A).
Although an understanding of the reality of the matter is rarely
attained by anyone, whatever extent of it that has been mentioned is a
free gift for those who have an aptitude for it.

Attention To The Worshipped One
-------------------------------

As to the heart’s attention to the Worshipped One, that also consists of
various degrees that fall into three main levels. One of them pertains
to concentrating the heart, on revelations (*tajalliyat*) of Divine
Acts. Another of them relates to concentrating the heart on revelations
of Names and Attributes. The third consists of concentrating with the
heart on revelations of the Essence. Each of these levels consists of
four planes that may be generally put as the plane of knowledge, the
plane of faith, the plane of direct experience, and the plane of
absorption (or annihilation, *fana’*)*.*

That which is meant by concentrating the heart on revelations of Acts on
the plane of knowledge is that in it the wayfaring devotee knows on the
level of theoretical knowledge and metaphysical proof that all the
levels of existence and all the visible and unseen domains of being are
manifestation of the effusion of the Most Sacred Essence, and that all
of them, right from the lower levels of the world of nature to the
fountainhead of the higher *malakut* and the greater *jabarut,* are
equally and uniformly present before His Sanctity. They are all
manifestations of His unfolding Will, as mentioned in the following
sacred tradition from *al-Kafi*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: خَلَقَ اللهُ المَشِيَّةَ
بِنَفْسِهَا ثُمَّ خَلَقَ الأَشْيَاءَ بِالمَشِيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (A) said, “God created the Will by itself. Then He brought
all things into existence through the agency of the Will.”[^11]

Hence, the Will by itself is manifestation of the Essence and other
existents have been created through its means. We don’t however intend
to give here the proof of this sublime matter. The devotee who
understands this matter on the plane of theory and metaphysical proof,
knows that his own being, as well as his worship, knowledge, will,
heart, the actions of his heart, and his inward and outward being all of
them are present before His Sanctity or, rather, they are presence
itself. Should the pen of his intellect inscribe this truth on the
tablet of his heart and should the heart attain conviction in this
certain, axiomatic premise by the means of theoretical and practical
exercises, he will obtain attention of the heart to the revelations on
the plane of faith.

After the perfection of this faith and following the exercises and
austerities and attainment of the perfect piety of the heart, the
wayfarer is afforded by Divine guidance to partake of the *tajalliyat*
of Acts, directly experiencing them with his heart, until his heart
becomes the complete mirror of those *tajalliyat* and he achieves the
state of swoon (*sa’q*) and annihilation (*fana’*)*.* This is the
ultimate stage of attention that ultimately leads the attentive one to
be absorbed in the *tajalliyat* of Acts. Many of the wayfarers of the
path of gnosis remain forever immersed in this state of swoon and do not
come to themselves.

And should the wayfarer’s heart have a greater capacity than this as a
result of the light of the Most Sacred Effusion (*fayd al-aqdas*) in
pre-eternity, he will recover from this swoon, resume his sociability
(*uns*) and return to his domain and receive the *tajalliyat* of Names
and, traversing similar stages, reach annihilation in Attributes (*fana’
al-sifati*) in proportion to his permanent prototype (*‘ayn al-thabit*),
becoming annihilated in one of the Divine Names. Many wayfarers of the
mystic path remain in the state of annihilation in Names (*fana’
al-asmai*) and do not come to themselves. Perhaps the following sacred
tradition is a reference to this group of *awliya’:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ أَوْلِيائِي تَحْتَ قِبابِي لا يَعْرِفُهُمْ غَيْرِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, My awliya’, under My vault (i.e. the sky), are known to none
except Me.[^12]

And should his capacity, endowed to him by manifestation of the Most
Sacred Effusion (in pre-eternity), be of a greater extent than this, he
will recover from this swoon and annihilation, regain sociability, come
to himself and receive the *tajalliyat* of the Essence, until, on
reaching the last stage of annihilation in Essence and total swoon, his
journey ends and complete annihilation is attained. Some have said that
the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَنْ يَخْرُجْ مِنْ بَيْتِهِ مُهَاجِرًا إِلَى اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ
ثُمَّ يُدْرِكْهُ الْمَوْتُ فَقَدْ وَقَعَ أَجْرُهُ عَلَى اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoso goes forth from his house an emigrant to God and His Messenger,
and then death overtakes him, his wage shall have fallen on God.(4:100)*

And sometimes the wayfarer may recover from this station, whereupon, by
virtue of his capacity and in accordance with the scope of his permanent
prototype, he devotes himself to the guidance of the creatures:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ. قُمْ فَأَنذِرْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O thou shrouded in thy mantle, arise, and warn!*** (***74:1-2***)

And should his permanent prototype be subject to the Greatest Divine
Name, he would be the completing arc of the circle of prophethood, such
as was the case with the Noble Messenger and the Great Seal of the
Prophets (S). For the permanent prototype of none among the creatures,
from the first to the last one, or that of any of the prophets and
messengers, conformed to the Greatest Divine Name nor did it reveal the
Divine Essence in all its aspects.

Hence, the Essential Reality of the Messenger manifests all the aspects
of the Essence and this manifestation culminated in guidance, intuiting
the total span of Reality and bringing prophethood to its culmination by
his sacred existence. And if, supposedly, any of the *awliya’* were to
reach this station by following the sacred essence (of the Prophet) and
through his guidance, his intuition (*kashf*) would be identical to it
and repetition in legislation would not be permissible. Thus, the circle
of prophethood was completed by his sacred being and the last brick was
laid in the circle of prophethood, as mentioned in *hadith*.

It should be known that the worship and spiritual states of those who
stand on each of the stations mentioned, are very different and
extremely various. Each of them partakes of prayer a portion that is not
possessed by one who has not reached that station. Of course, that which
was experienced by Imam al-Sadiq (A) during the course of *‘ibadah* is
something that is not possible for others. It is narrated from Sayyid
Ibn Tawus (Q) as mentioned in the *Falah al-sa’il,* that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَدْ رُوِيَ أنَّ مَوْلانَا جَعْفَرَ بْنَ مُحَمَّدٍ الصَّادِقَ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ كَانَ يَتْلُو القُرْآنَ فِي صَلاتِهِ فَغُشِيَ
عَلَيْهِ. فَلَمَّا أَفَاقَ سُئِلَ: مَا الَّذِي أَوْجَبَ مَا انْتَهَتْ
حَالُكَ إلَيْهِ؟ فَقَالَ مَا مَعْنَاهُ: مَا زِلْتُ أُكَرِّرُ آيَاتِ
القُرْآنِ حَتَّى بَلَغْتُ إلَى حَالٍ كَأَنَّنِي سَمِعْتُهَا
مُشَافَهَةً مِمَّنْ أَنْزَلَهَا عَلَى المُكَاشَفَةِ وَالعِيَانِ.
فَلَمْ تَقُمِ القُوَّةُ البَشَرِيَّةُ بِمُكَاشَفَةِ الجَلالَةِ
الإلَهِيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated that our master, Ja’far ibn Muhammad al Sadiq (A)
was once reciting the Qur’an in his *salat*. He went into a swoon, and
when he emerged from it he was asked, “What was that that led you into
that state?” He gave a reply, which meant, “I continued repeating verses
of the Qur’an until I reached a state wherein it was as if I heard them
directly from Him Who had sent them down. And it is beyond human power
to witness Divine glory.”[^13]

The states that occurred to the Noble Messenger (S) were such that the
like of them have not been experienced by any other creature, as
mentioned in this famous tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِي مَعَ اللهِ حَالٌ لا يَسَعُهُ مَلَكٌ مُقَرَّبٌ وَلا نَبِيٌّ
مُرْسَلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I experience a state with God for which neither an archangel nor an
apostolic prophet has the capacity.[^14]

Let us leave this discourse here for we do not partake of it anything
except words. That which is important for the like of us is that, now
that we are incapable of attaining to the stations of the *awliya’*, we
must refrain from negating their truth. Rather, we must acquiesce to
them, for acquiescence to the affair of the *awliya’* is very beneficial
and its negation—may God be our refuge—is greatly harmful.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إنِّي مُسَلِّمٌ لأَمْرِهِمْ صَلَوَاتُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِمْ
أَجْمَعِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O God, I acquiesce in their affair, may God’s benedictions be upon them
all.

The Incarnation Of Works In The Hereafter
-----------------------------------------

Know that concentration of the heart in worship cannot be obtained
without making it understand the significance of the acts of worship,
and that is not possible without understanding their mysteries and
realities. Although such a thing is beyond our ken, I will, to the
extent of the capacity of someone like me, mention here that which can
be inferred from the traditions of the infallible Ahl al-Bayt (A)and the
statements of the gnostics, to the extent that is appropriate for these
pages.

You should know-as has been repeatedly mentioned earlier-that every one
of virtuous actions and acts of worship has an esoteric and *malakuti*
form and makes an effect on the devotee’s heart. As to the esoteric and
inward form, they are what go into the building of the worlds of
*Barzakh* and the physical Paradise, for the grounds of Paradise are
empty plains as mentioned in traditions. Our prayers and works are the
material for their building, as mentioned in *hadith*, and there are
many verses in the Sacred Book of God that indicate the incarnation of
works, like these statements of God Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَه. وَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ
مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَه.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoso doth good an atom’s weight will see it, and whoso doth ill
an atom’s weight will see it.*** (***99:7-8***)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا حَاضِرًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they find all that they did confronting them.*** (***18:49***)

The traditions that indicate the incarnation of works and their
possession of hidden *malakuti* forms are many and scattered throughout
the various chapters and here we will confine ourselves to a few of
them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَوَى الصَّدُوقُ قُدِّسَ سِرُّهُ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ
جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ الصَّادِقُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: مَنْ
صَلَّى الصَّلَوَاتِ المَفْرُوضَاتِ فِي أَوَّلِ وَقْتِهَا فَأَقَامَ
حُدُودَهَا، رَفَعَهَا المَلَكُ إلَى السَّمَاءِ بَيْضَاءَ نَقِيَّةً
وَهِيَ تَهْتِفُ بِهِ: حَفِظَكَ اللهُ كَمَا حَفِظْتَنِي وَاسْتَوْدَعَكَ
اللهُ كَمَا اسْتَوْدَعْتَنِي مَلَكاً كَرِيماً. وَمَنْ صَلاّهَا بَعْدَ
وَقْتِهَا مِنْ غَيْرِ عِلَّةٍ فَلَمْ يُقِمْ حُدُودَهَا رَفَعَهَا
المَلَكُ سَوْدَاءَ مُظْلِمَةً وَهِيَ تَهْتِفُ بِهِ: ضَيَّعْتَنِي
ضَيَّعَكَ اللهُ كَمَا ضَيَّعْتَنِي وَلا رَعَاكَ اللهُ كَمَا لَمْ
تَرْعَنِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Shaykh al-Saduq (Q) reports with his isnad from Imam al-Sadiq (A)
that he said: When someone offers an obligatory salat at the beginning
of its time and observes its prerequisites, an angel takes it up to the
heaven. White and pure, it (i.e. the salat) says, “May God take care of
you as you took care of me. I have been delivered into the custody of a
noble angel.” But when someone offers it without any excuse after its
time has elapsed and does not observe its requisite manners, black and
dark, it is taken up by an angel, while it calls out to him (i.e. its
offerer), “You neglected me. May God neglect you in the same manner that
you neglected me. May God not take care of you in the same way that you
did not take care of me.”[^15]

Aside from the *malakuti* forms of works, that which can be inferred
from this noble tradition is that they possess life and its properties.
This is also inferable from a certain metaphysical proof and the
traditions indicate that all existents have a *malakuti* life, or rather
the world of *malakut* is Life and consciousness through and through, as
spelled out by this Qur’anic verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِنَّ الدَّارَ الْآخِرَةَ لَهِيَ الْحَيَوَانُ لَوْ كَانُوا
يَعْلَمُونَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely, the abode of the Hereafter is life, did they but know.***
(***29:64***)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
فِي حَدِيثٍ طَوِيلٍ: إذَا بَعَثَ اللهُ المُؤْمِنَ مِنْ قَبْرِهِ خَرَجَ
مَعَهُ مِثَالٌ يَقْدِمُ أَمَامَهُ. كُلَّمَا رَأَى المُؤْمِنُ هَوْلاً
مِنْ أَهْوَالِ يَوْمِ القِيَامَةِ قَالَ لَهُ المِثَالُ: لا تَفْزَعْ
وَلا تَحْزَنْ وَأَبْشِرْ بِالسُّرُورِ وَالكَرَامَةِ مِنَ اللهِ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ، حَتَّى يَقِفَ بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فَيُحَاسِبُهُ
حِسَاباً يَسِيراً وَيَأْمُرُ بِهِ إلَى الجَنَّةِ، وَالمِثَالُ
أَمَامَهُ، فَيَقُولُ لَهُ المُؤْمِنُ: يَرْحَمُكَ اللهَ، نِعْمَ
الخَارِجُ! خَرَجْتَ مَعِيَ مِنْ قَبْرِي وَمَا زِلْتَ تُبَشِّرُنِي
بِالسُّرُورِ وَالكَرَامَةِ مِنَ اللهِ حَتَّى رَأَيْتُ ذَلِكَ.
فَيَقُولُ مَنْ أَنْتَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: أَنَا السُّرُورُ الَّذِي كُنْتَ
أَدْخَلْتَ عَلَى أَخِيكَ المُؤْمِنِ فِي الدُّنْيَا، خَلَقَنِيَ اللهُ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مِنْهُ لأُبَشِّرَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from Imam al-Sadiq (A)
that he said in the course of a long tradition: When the man of faith is
resurrected from his grave by God, an ethereal form emerges with him
that walks in front of him. Every time the man of faith beholds any
horror from among the horrors of the Day of Resurrection, that form says
to him, “Don’t fear and don’t grieve, and receive the good news of joy
and dignity from God, Almighty and Glorious.” Until he stops before God,
Almighty and Glorious, Who makes a lenient reckoning of his deeds and
orders him to enter Paradise, (and he enters it) with the form walking
ahead of him. Thereupon the believer will say to it, “May God be
gracious to you, you were a good companion to come out with me from my
grave. You have continued to give me the glad tidings of joy and dignity
from God until I saw them for myself.” Then he will ask it, “Who are
you?” The form will reply, “I am the joy that you used to bring to your
brother in faith in the world. God, Almighty and Glorious, created me
from it in order to give you the good news.”[^16]

This noble tradition also clearly indicates the possession of body and
form by works in the life of the Hereafter. The most venerated Shaykh
Baha’ al-*Din* (Q) also remarks in his commentary on this noble
tradition, “Some traditions indicate the incarnation of beliefs as well.
Hence righteous actions and beliefs will appear in bright and
fair-looking forms, causing extreme joy and delight to their owners.
Evil deeds and beliefs will appear in dark and ugly forms, causing
extreme grief and agony to their owners, as stated by a group of
exegetes under this noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُحْضَرًا وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِنْ سُوءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَدًا
بَعِيدًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The day every soul shall find what it has done of good brought
forward, and what it has done n f evil; it will wish if there were only
a far span between itself and that,*** (***3:30***)

And we are led to the same interpretation by this statement of God, the
Exalted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَوْمَئِذٍ يَصْدُرُ النَّاسُ أَشْتَاتًا لِيُرَوْا أَعْمَالَهُمْ.
فَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَه. وَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ
مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَه.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Upon that day men shall issue in scatterings to see their works, and
whoso has done an atom’s weight of good shall see it, and whoso has done
an atom’s weight of evil shall see it.*** (***99:6-8***)

And those who believe that there is an assumed omission in this noble
verse and argue that what is meant is لِيُرَوا جَزَاءَ أَعْمالِهِم i.e.
to see the *reward* of their works), not considering the pronoun in
يَرَهُ to refer to works, have missed the point.”[^17] Here ends the
translation of his statements, may God elevate his noble station.

Here some eminent traditionists have expressed certain views, which
better remain unsaid. These views arise from their surmise that belief
in the incarnation of works contradicts the belief in bodily
resurrection, although the former supports the latter and the word
*tamaththul* (assumption of bodily form) in this noble tradition has a
similar signification to what it has in this statement of God, the
Exalted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَأَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْهَا رُوحَنَا فَتَمَثَّلَ لَهَا بَشَرًا سَوِيًّا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

(***Then We sent unto her [i.e. Mary***) ***Our Spirit,***) ***that
presented itself to her in the form of a man without fault.***
(***19:17***)

Here the spirit did really assume a bodily form, which was not something
imaginary, like the form that appears in dreams. In any case, divesting
such verses as these and traditions of their literal meanings and that
despite their conformity to firm metaphysical proofs which are
established in their own proper place-solely because they do not fit in
with our intelligence and are in conformity with the creed of the
philosophers and metaphysicians is not a commendable thing. The best
approach is to adopt acquiescence before the Sacred Lord and the
infallible *awliya’.*

‘Thus, it is known that every work that receives acceptance in the
sacred Divine court has a fair and beautiful form in accordance with its
nature-such as the houris, palaces, the high gardens and the flowing
stream of Paradise. No being comes into existence arbitrarily and
extravagantly. Rather, there are certain rational relationships that are
involved, whose discovery is not possible for anyone except the perfect
*awliya’*. The matter, to put it in a nutshell, is subject to rational
and metaphysical criteria.

Now that it is known that the life of the Hereafter and its joys depend
on works, whose consummate forms are transferred to that world, those
works are acts of worship that this community has come to know about
through the consummate intuition of Muhammad (S). The excellence and
beauty of these works depend on one’s intentions and attention of one’s
heart as well as the observance of its requisite manners.

Should a work be devoid of all or some of these conditions, it would be
devoid of validity or, rather, would possess an ugly and distorted form
which he will encounter in the other world, as we came to know through
the traditions.

Hence it is incumbent upon every person who believes in the unseen world
and the traditions of the prophets, the *awliya’* and the gnostics, and
cares about eternal and immortal life, to improve his works through
every possible effort and austerity. And after that their outward aspect
and form is brought into conformity with the rules of *ijtihad* or the
opinion of the *fuqaha’* (R), he should endeavor to reform their inner
character, taking all the care that he can to perform at least the
*wajibat* with the due attention of the heart and try to remove their
shortcomings and, then, those of the *nawafil*, for as mentioned in the
noble traditions the *nawafil* compensate for the defects of the
*fara’id* and cause them to be accepted.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي العِلَلِ: بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
قَالَ: إنَّمَا جُعِلَتِ النَّافِلَةُ لِيَتُمَّ بِهَا مَا يَفْسُدُ مِنَ
الفَرِيضَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the ‘Ilal al-shara’i, (al-Shaykh al-Saduq) reports with his isnad
from Abu Ja’far (A)that he said; “Verily the supererogatory acts of
worship have been laid down in order to compensate for that which is
vitiated out of the obligatory acts.”[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَوَى الشَّيْخُ قُدِّسَ سِرُّهُ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي بَصِيرٍ
قَالَ: قَالَ أبُو عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: يُرْفَعُ لِلرَّجُلِ
مِنَ الصَّلاةِ رُبُعُهَا أَوْ ثُُمْنُهَا أَوْ نِصْفُهَا أَوْ أَكْثَرُ
بِقَدَرِ مَا سَهَا. وَلَكِنَّ اللهَ يُتِمُّ ذَلِكَ بِالنَّوَافِلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Shaykh al-Tusi (Q) reports with his isnad from Abu Basir that Imam
al-Sadiq (A) said, “Out of the salat offered by a man only .a half of it
or a one-fourth or a one-eighth rises to heaven in accordance with the
extent of his lapses therein (بِقَدَرِ مَا سَهَا)[^19] However, God the
Exalted, compensates for it through the means of the supererogatory
prayers.”[^20]

There are many other traditions of this kind, and it is obvious that we
are not free from lapses, forgetfulness, absentmindedness and other
matters that vitiate prayer or its perfection. God, the Exalted, with
His consummate grace, has appointed the *nawafil* to enable us to
compensate for such shortcomings. Of course, it is essential to avoid,
as far as possible, any kind of negligence in this matter and not to
neglect the *nawafil.*

In any case, my dear, do come out a bit from this state of neglect;
reflect about your affair and examine the record of your deeds. Beware
lest the works that you imagine to be righteous deeds, such as prayers,
fasts, Hajj and the like, should themselves become the means of your
wretchedness and disgrace in the other world.

Hence, so long its the opportunity remains, examine your own conduct and
place your acts in the balance of scrutiny and in the scales of the
*Shari’ah* and the *wilayah* of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) and find out the
extent of their soundness and viciousness, their perfection and
defectiveness, and make amends as long as there remains time and
opportunity. And should you fail to examine your own account here and to
put it straight, your account-taking will be carried out there and your
deeds will be placed in the Balance of Works and there great calamities
may lie in wait for you.

Be fearful of the scales of Divine justice, never be proud of anything,
and don’t leave off serious effort. For a while observe the book of
works of the Messenger’s Ahl al-Bayt (A) who were inerrant and
infallible, and contemplate regarding them. See what a tremendous
difficulty lies ahead of us, and how narrow and dark is the path! Now
consider the following tradition and guess the enormousness of the
matter from this brief *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ ذُخْرِ الطَّائِفَةِ وَفَخْرِهَا وَعِمَادِهَا مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ النُّعْمَانِ المُفِيدِ، رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ، فِي
الإرْشَادِ: عَنْ سَعِيدِ بْنِ كُلْثُومٍ قَالَ: كُنْتُ عِنْدَ
الصَّادِقِ جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ فَذَكَرَ
أَمِيرَ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلِيَّ بْنَ أَبِي طَالِبٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
فَأَطْرَاهُ وَمَدَحَهُ بِمَا هُوَ أَهْلُهُ، ثُمَّ قَالَ: وِاللهِ، مَا
أَكَلَ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا
حَرَاماً قَطُّ حَتَّى مَضَى لِسَبِيلِهِ. وَمَا عُرِضَ لَهُ أَمْرَانِ
قَطُّ هُمَا للهِ رِضىً إلا أَخَذَ بِأَشَدِّهِمَا عَلَيْهِ فِي دِينِهِ.
وَمَا نَزَلَتْ بِرَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ نَازِلَةٌ
إلاّ دَعَاهُ فَقَدَّمَهُ ثِقَةً بِهِ. وَمَا أَطَاقَ أَحَدٌ عَمَلَ
رَسُولِ اللهِ مِنْ هَذِهِ الأُمَّةِ غَيْرُهُ. وَإنْ كَانَ لَيَعْمَلُ
عَمَلِ رَجُلٍ كَأَنَّ وَجْهَهُ بَيْنَ الجَنَّةِ وَالنَّارِ؛ يَرْجُو
ثَوَابَ هَذِهِ وَيَخَافُ عِقَابَ هَذِهِ. وَلَقَدْ أَعْتَقَ مِنْ
مَالِهِ أَلْفَ مَمْلُوكٍ فِي طَلَبِ وَجْهِ اللهِ وَالنَّجَاةِ مِنَ
النَّارِ مِمَّا كَدَّ بِيَدَيْهِ وَرَشَحَ مِنْهُ جَبِينُهُ. وَإنْ
كَانَ لَيُقَوِّتُ أَهْلَهُ بِالزَّيْتِ وَالخَلِّ وَالعَجْوَةِ. وَمَا
كَانَ لِبَاسُهُ إلاّ الكَرَابِيسُ. إذَا فَضَلَ شَيْءٌ عَنْ يَدِهِ مِنْ
كُمِّهِ دَعَا بالجَلَمِ فَقَصَّهُ. وَمَا أَشْبَهَهُ مِنْ وُلْدِهِ وَلا
أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ أَحَدٌ أَقْرَبُ شُبْهاً بِهِ فِي لِبَاسِهِ وَفِقْهِهِ
مِنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ الحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ. وَلَقَدْ دَخَلَ
أَبُو جَعْفَرٍ - ابْنُهُ - عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ عَلَيْهِ فَإذَا هُوَ
قَدْ بَلَغَ مِنَ العِبَادَةِ مَا لَمْ يَبْلُغْهُ أَحَدٌ فَرَآهُ قَدِ
اصْفَرَّ لَوْنُهُ مِنَ السَّهَرِ وَرَمَصَتْ عَيْنَاهُ مِنَ البُكَاءِ
وَدَبِرَتْ جَبْهَتُهُ وَانْخَرَمَ أَنْفُهُ مِنَ السُّجُودِ وَوَرُمَتْ
سَاقَاهُ وَقَدَمَاهُ مِنَ القِيَامِ فِي الصَّلاةِ، فَقَالَ أبُو
جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: فَلَمْ أَمْلِكْ حِينَ رَأَيْتُهُ بِتِلْكَ
الحَالِ البُكَاءَ، فَبَكَيْتُ رَحْمَةً لَهُ. وَإذَا هُوَ يُفَكِّرُ،
فَالْتَفَتَ إلَيَّ بَعْدَ هُنَيْهَةٍ مِنْ دُخُولِي فَقَالَ: يَا
بُنَيَّ، أَعْطِنِي بَعْضَ تِلْكَ الصُّحُفِ الَّتِي فِيهَا عِبَادَةُ
عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ. فَأَعْطَيْتُهُ،
فَقَرَأَ فِيهَا شَيْئاً يَسِيراً ثُمَّ تَرَكَهَا مِنْ يَدِهِ
تَضَجُّراً وَقَالَ: مَنْ يَقْوَى عَلَى عِبَادَةِ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

The pride of the community and its authority, its treasure and pillar,
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man al-Mufid (R) reports in al-Irshad
from Sa’id ibn Kulthum that Imam Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (R) said,
“By God, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A)never ate anything forbidden as long as
he lived in the world, and never were two things wherein lay God’s good
pleasure presented to him without his choosing that which was more
taxing of the two for his body, And never did the Messenger of Allah (S)
face any hardship without calling out to ‘Ali (A), out of his trust in
him, and none out of this Ummah except him has possessed the capacity,
endurance and strength of the Messenger of Allah (S). In his conduct, he
would act like someone in trepidation whose face was between heaven and
hell and who looked forward to the reward of heaven and was frightful of
the punishment of hell.

Indeed, he set free in the way of God and for sake of deliverance from
Fire a thousand slaves out of his own money, earned with the toil of his
hands and the sweat of his brow. The food of his household consisted of
oil, vinegar, and dates, and his dress was never made of anything but
coarse cotton, and if his blessed sleeves were too long he would ask for
a scissors and cut them short.

Among his descendants and family no one ever came closer to resembling
him in his learning and dress than ‘Ali’ ibn al-Husayn (A). His son Abu
Ja’far—Imam al-Baqir (A), once, entered upon him and saw that he had
reached an unprecedented state in worship. His complexion had paled due
to keeping awake at nights; his eyes were sore from weeping; his
forehead and nose were bruised due to prolonged prostrations; and hiss
feet and ankles were swollen as a result of standing in prayer.”

Abu Ja’far (A) said: ‘When I saw him in this condition I could not stop
myself from breaking into tears. So I wept out of compassion that I felt
for him, while he was sunk in contemplation. Some time passed after I
had entered. Then noticing me, he said to me, “My son, give me one of
those books which describes the worship of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A).” I
gave it to him. He read a little from it and then set it aside in
exasperation. Then he declared, “Who has the strength to worship like
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A)!”[^21]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: كَانَ عَلِيُّ بْنُ
الحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ يُصَلِّي فِي اليَوْمِ وَاللَّيْلَةِ
أَلْفَ رَكْعَةٍ، وَكَانَتِ الرِّيحُ تُمَيِّلُهُ مِثْلَ السُّنْبُلَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Baqir (A) said, “Ali ibn al-Husayn (A) used to offer one
thousand rak’ahs of salat in every day and night. The wind would sway
him like an ear of corn.”[^22]

My dear! Give some thought to these noble traditions. See how Imam
al-Baqir (A)who was an infallible Imam fell weeping on observing the
austerities of the worship of his father and on observing his state in
worship. Observe how Imam al-Sajjad (A)despite the severe care and total
dedication that he exercised in worship, expressed his weakness on
reading a little from the book -of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A). Of course,
all are incapable of worshipping like the Master of Masters (*Mawla
al-Mawali*) and the common lot are incapable of the worship offered by
the Infallible Ones. However, when one is incapable of attaining to a
high station he should not give up altogether.

We must understand that this worship of theirs was not—may God be our
refuge—a feigned performance. Rather, the path is so perilous, and the
way is so narrow, and the passes of death and Resurrection are so
difficult that it impelled those who have the knowledge of the reality
to implore and admit their weakness. This nonchalance of ours arises
from the weakness of our faith and the insufficiency of conviction, from
our ignorance and nescience.

O Lord! You are aware of the character of Your servants and know our
deficiencies and shortcomings, our weakness and impotence. You immersed
us in Your mercy even before our asking for it. Your bounties are given
unasked and Your favors are prior to requests of help. Now we confess to
our shortcomings and our ingratitude in the face of Your unlimited
bounties. We confess that we deserve painful punishment and are worthy
of being confined to Hell. We have no excuse and no means of seeking
Your pardon except what You have said through the tongues of Your
prophets, concerning Yourself and Your mercifulness, Your compassion,
pity, grace and generosity. We know You through these attributes of
Yours and to the extent of our capacity. How will You deal with this
handful of dust? Will it be with anything except compassion and
magnanimity?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْنَ رَحْمَتُكَ الوَاسِعَةُ؟ أيْنَ أيَادِيكَ الشَّامِلَةُ؟ أيْنَ
فَضْلُكَ العَمِيمُ؟ أَيْنَ كَرَمُكَ يَا كَرِيمُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Where is Your all-inclusive compassion? Where is Your all-inclusive
help? Where is Your universal magnanimity? Where is Your generosity, O
Generous One?

Worship And Freedom From Need
-----------------------------

It should be known that *ghina* (self-sufficiency, richness,
independence, and being without need of others) is a virtue of the soul
or, rather, a virtue of being qua being. Hence, *ghina* is an Essential
Attribute of the Sacred Essence of God, Glorious and Exalted. Wealth and
riches do not bring spiritual self-sufficiency. Rather, it may be said
that those who lack spiritual self-sufficiency are made more greedy and
avaricious due to the possession of property, riches and wealth, and
their need becomes greater. True richness is unattainable except through
God, Glorious and Exalted, Who is Self-sufficient-by-Essence, and all
other existents, from humble dust to the topmost heaven and from primal
matter to the higher *jabarut*, all are ‘poor’ and needy.

Hence the more the heart’s attention is turned to other-than-God and the
more is one’s inner self attentive to the cultivation of the mundane and
the corporeal world (*mulk*), the more one’s poverty and need become day
by day.

The spiritual aspect of this poverty is quite obvious, because
attachment and love is need by itself. The external aspect of this
poverty, which reinforces spiritual poverty, also becomes stronger; for
one who is not independent in managing his own affairs inevitably stands
in need of others. Even if the rich and the wealthy should outwardly
appear to be without need, a closer look will reveal that their need
increases in proportion to the amount of their wealth. Hence, the
wealthy are the poor in the garb of rich and needy in the garb of
self-sufficient.

The more is the attention of the heart and its attachment to mundane
matters and cultivation of the world, the more does it get covered with
the dust of abasement and poverty and the greater become its need and
darkness of abasement. Conversely, if someone should turn his back upon
attachment to the world and orient the heart toward absolute richness
and self-sufficiency, convinced in the essential poverty of all beings,
understanding that no existent possesses anything of itself and that
there is no power, honor or authority except through God, and listens to
the voice of the *malakuti* caller and the call from the Unseen that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ أَنْتُمْ الْفُقَرَاءُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ
هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ الْحَمِيدُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O mankind, you have the ones that have need of God; He is the
All-sufficient, the All-laudable,*** (***35:15***)

he would attain freedom from need of both the worlds and his heart would
become so free from need that the kingdom of Solomon would have no worth
in his eyes. If the keys of the earth’s treasures be offered to him, he
would be indifferent to that offer, as narrated in tradition that when
Gabriel brought from God, the Exalted, the key to the world’s treasures
to the Seal of the Prophets (S)he declined them out of humility,
considering his poverty to be his pride. The Commander of the Faithful
(A) said to Ibn ‘Abbas, “This world of yours has lesser worth in my eyes
than this old shoe of mine which is full of patches.” The Imam ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn (A)says, “It is a matter of disdain for me to ask the world’s
Creator to do me a mundane favor, to say nothing of asking it of other
creatures like myself.”

Out of the common lot, Najm al-*Din* Kubra, after swearing some
formidable oaths, declares: “If the world’s wealth as well as the other
world’s Paradise with its houries and palaces be offered to me on
condition that I should associate only with the rich and wealthy, and if
the world’s adversities and those of the Hereafter be offered to me
together with association with the poor-given this choice I will select
the company of the poor and will not surrender myself to the disgrace of
associating with the rich and:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النّارُ خَيرٌ منَ العَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Fire is better than dishonor.

Yes, they know well the nature of the darkness and rust formed in the
heart as a result of attachment to worldly treasures and riches and due
to the company and association with those who possess these. They know
how these weaken the will and afflict the heart with need and poverty,
making it inattentive to the Centre of absolute perfection. But when you
surrender the heart to its Owner and this house to its Master,
abstaining from making any dispensation in it, turning away from it all
strangers, and refraining from handing it over to an usurper, the Master
of the house will reveal Himself therein. The presence in it of the
absolutely All-sufficient will bring absolute self-sufficiency,
immersing the heart in the ocean of honor and contentment and filling it
with freedom from need:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ وَلِرَسُولِهِ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Yet honor belongs to God, arid to His Messenger and the faithful.***
(***63:8***)

Then, the affairs of the house are managed by its Master and one is not
left to one’s own devices. He takes care of all the matters of Isis
servant, or, rather, He becomes his hearing, vision, and limbs, and this
nearness is the outcome of the *nawafil* as mentioned in this tradition
of *al-Kafi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي: بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فِي
حَدِيثٍ: وَإنَّهُ لَيَتَقَرَّبُ إلَيَّ بِالنَّافِلَةِ حَتَّى
أُحِبُّهُ، فَإذَا أَحْبَبْتُهُ كُنْتُ سَمْعَهُ الَّذِي يَسْمَعُ بِهِ
وَبَصَرَهُ الَّذِي يُبْصِرُ بِهِ وَلِسَانَهُ الَّذِي يَنْطِقُ بِهِ
وَيَدَهُ الَّتِي يَبْطِشُ بِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, (al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Abu Ja’far (A) that
in a hadith qudsi God says, “...And verily he seeks nearness to Me
through the .means of the nawafil, until I love him. And when I love
him, I become the hearing with which he hears and the vision with which
he beholds, and the tongue with which he speaks, and the hand by which
he grasps…”[^23]

Thus, the servant’s poverty is totally removed and he becomes free from
the need of both the worlds. Of course, in this revelation of the Divine
(within the heart), the fear of all the existents is removed from him,
giving its place to the fear of God, the Exalted, Whose Greatness and
Majesty fills the entire heart of the devotee, who no longer sees any
greatness, majesty or efficiency in anything other than God, having
perceived in his heart the fact signified by this statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا مُؤَثِّرَ فِي الوُجُودِ إَلا اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

No one is effective in the realm of existence except God.

There is a reference to this point in the *hadith* under exposition,
where it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَفَرَّغْ لِعِبَادَتِي أَمْلَأْ قَلْبَكَ غِنىً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Empty yourself for My worship so that I may fill your heart with ghina.

This ‘emptying’ of the heart for the sake of worship may gradually lead
one to the higher degrees of heart’s concentration in worship.

These are the effects, some of which have been mentioned. Should the
heart turn away from attention to God and fail to achieve the detachment
necessary for paying attention to Him, such a neglect would be the
source of all forms of wretchedness, defects and diseases of the heart.
If that happens, a darkness and obscurity will grip the heart on account
of this neglect, and thick curtains through which the light of guidance
cannot pass will become an obstruction between it and God, depriving it
of Divine succor and making the heart totally absorbed in the world and
the pursuit of corporeal pleasures. Then he will be enveloped by the
walls of egoism and egotism. The soul will become self-willed and its
movements will become subject to its egoism.

Thereupon, its essential baseness and its real poverty will become
manifest; all its movements and pauses will lead it further away from
God, and total failure and defeat will be its lot. The noble tradition
refers to some of these consequences where it declares, ‘I will fill
your heart with preoccupation with the world and I will not block the
entry of poverty and need into it, and I will leave you to your own
devices.’

A Last Point
------------

It should be known that that which is meant by leaving a creature to its
own devices does not mean delegation of its affairs to itself, for such
a thing is impossible from the viewpoint of the mystical creed and the
metaphysical doctrine, in addition to being contrary to the true
religious doctrine. No existent can dissociate itself from the realm of
Divine power and dispensation, and neither can it have (total) freedom
to direct its own affairs.

When a creature turns away from God and becomes absorbed in the world,
carnal nature begins to rule over it and it is dominated by egoism, and
autistic, self-seeking and narcissistic tendencies direct his conduct.
And this is what is meant by leaving it to its own devices. However, a
servant whose heart is turned towards God and the higher *malakut* and
is totally submerged in the Divine light, all its dispensations assume a
godly character or, rather, at certain levels, his entire being becomes
divine, as alluded to in the noble tradition of *al-Kafi* that refers to
some of these stations while hinting at the nearness attained through
supererogatory acts of worship. And God is All-knowing

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa a1-kufr’, “bab
al-’ibadah”, hadith no. 1.

[^2]: Furu’ al-Kafi, iii, 269.

[^3]: Furu’ al-Kafi, iii, 270.

[^4]: Furu’ al-Kafi, iii, 363.

[^5]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, iv, 688.

[^6]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, iv, 687.

[^7]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, iv, 685.

[^8]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, iv, 686.

[^9]: Mafatih al-jinan, “al-Munajat al-Sha’baniyyah.”

[^10]: Mafatih al-jinan, iv, 688.

[^11]: Usul al-Kafi, “kitab al-tawhid”, “bab al-’iradah, annaha min
sifat al-fi’l’ hadith no. 4.

[^12]: Ahadith qudsi. Source untraced.

[^13]: Falah al-sa’il, 107.

[^14]: See Furuzanfar, Ahadith al-Mathnawi. 39.

[^15]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, iii, 90, with a slight difference of wording.

[^16]: Usul al-Kafi, ii, “Kitab al-’imam wa al-kufr” “bab idkhal
al-surur ‘ala al -mu’minin”hadith no. 8.

[^17]: Al-Shaykh al-Bahai, al- Arba’in, p. 202, see the commentary on
the thirty third hadith.

[^18]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, ii, 54.

[^19]: Author’s note: As to the words of the Imam بقدر ما سها that which
is meant by the noble tradition is that, as mentioned in other
traditions, the amount of a prayer that ascends to God and is accepted
by Him is that which is offered with an attentive heart. Hence the words
بقدر ما سها refer to the ratio, not to the amount that ascends. It is
probable that by سهو here is meant tranquillity and softness of the
heart, as remarked by al-Jawhari.

[^20]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, iii, 54.

[^21]: Al-Shaykh al-Mufid, al-’Irshad, 255-256.

[^22]: Al-Shaykh al-Mufid, al-’Irshad, 256.

[^23]: Usul al-Kafi, ii, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr” “bab man adha
al-muslimin” hadith no. 8.


