Twenty-Eighth Hadith: Meeting God
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى ثِقَةِ الإسْلامِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ
الكُلَيْنِي رَحِمَهُ اللهُ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَحْيَى عَنْ أَحْمَدَ
بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ خَالِدٍ وَالحُسَيْنِ بْنِ سَعِيدٍ
جَمِيعاً عَنِ القَاسِمِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنْ عَبْدِالصَّمَدِ بْنِ
بَشِيرٍ عَنْ بَعْضِ أَصْحَابِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ قَالَ: قُلْتُ: أَصْلَحَكَ اللهُ، مَنْ أَحَبَّ لِقَاءَ اللهِ
أَحَبَّ اللهُ لِقَاءَهُ وَمَنْ أَبْغَضَ لِقَاءَ اللهِ أَبْغَضَ اللهُ
لِقَاءَهُ؟ قَالَ: نَعَمْ. قُلْتُ: فَوَاللهِ إنَّا لَنَكْرَهُ المَوْتَ.
فَقَالَ: لَيْسَ ذَلِكَ حَيْثُ تَذْهَبُ، إنَّمَا ذَلِكَ عِنْدَ
المُعَايَنَةِ إذَا رَأَى مَا يُحِبُّ فَلَيْسَ شَيْءٌ أَحَبَّ إلَيْهِ
مَنْ أنْ يَتَقَدَّمَ عَلَى اللهِ، وَاللهُ تَعَالَى يُحِبُّ لِقَاءَهُ
وَهُوَ يُحِبُّ لِقَاءَ اللهِ حِينَئِذٍ. وَإذَا رَأَى مَا يَكْرَهُ
فَلَيْسَ شَيْءٌ أَبْغَضَ إلَيْهِ مِنْ لِقَاءِ اللهِ، وَاللهُ يَبْغُضُ
لِقَاءَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my chain of transmission reaching up to the Thiqat al-Islam
Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (M) from Muhammad ibn Yahya, from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad, from Muhammad ibn Khalid and al-Husayn ibn Sa’id, and both
of them from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, from ‘Abd al-Samad ibn Bashir, from
someone from among his companions, who reports from Abu ‘Abd Allah
(A)stating: I said to him (i.e., Imam al-Sadiq), “Aslahakallah! (May God
set you right) (Is it true that) if anyone loves meeting God (liqa’
Allah,) God too loves to meet him, and if someone should dislike the
meeting with God, God too dislikes to meet him?” “Yes,” replied the
Imam. I said, “Indeed, by God, we detest death.” The Imam said, “It is
not as you imagine. That refers to the time of confrontation with death.
At that moment when he sees (as lying in store for him) what he loves,
there is nothing dearer to him than to go forth towards God. Coil, the
Exalted, loves to meet him and he, too, loves to meet God. But if he
sees (as lying in store for him) what he detests, nothing is more
abominable to him than meeting God, and God too loathes to meet
him.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

*Aslahakallah* is a prayer of blessing, and in a benediction it is not
necessary that the addressee be devoid of the blessing wished for him.
Rather, such benedictive expressions are quite customary, even if what
is invoked be already there. Hence, to pray for Imam al-Sadiq (A)wishing
his welfare and betterment is not something contrary to common custom.
Thus it is also correct to say ‘May God forgive you*’* (*ghafarallahu
lak*) and ‘May God pardon you’ (*‘afallahu ‘ank*) in regard to those
sacred personages. Some (exegetes) have interpreted the noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…that God may forgive thee thy former and thy latter sins.***
(***48:2***)

in the same sense, stating that it is like saying to someone ‘May God
forgive you’, and it is not necessary in such benedictive expressions to
take into consideration that the addressee already possesses the
blessing invoked in the prayer.

Although such an interpretation seems farfetched in relation to this
noble verse-and we have already discussed it under one of the earlier
traditions’[^2] -it is basically right that mostly the actual possession
of that which is invoked in such precative expressions is not taken into
consideration.

لقاء (with *fathah* on *lam*, or *kasrah*) is the verbal noun (*masdar*)
of لقي vowelized like رضي ); so also are لقاءة، لقاية، لقياً، لقياناً،
لقيانة all with *kasrah* of *lam*) and لقياً، لقى، لقياناً، لقيانة (all
with *dammah* on *lam*) are its verbal nouns and signify sight and
vision. Later on in this exposition we will explain the meaning of
*liqa’ Allah,* to an extent that is appropriate for these pages.

أبغض pertains to the nominal form إفعال . And بَغُضَ like كَرُمَ،
نَصَرَ، فَرِحَ (is its trilateral root). (The lexicographers explain)
بغض بغاضة فهو بغيض *Bughd* (hate) is the antonym of *hubb* (love) and
بغضة and بغضاء signify its stronger degrees. Briefly, love and hate are
qualities of the soul (*sifat al-nafsaniyyah*) and are opposite to each
other.

Their reality, as revealed by self-examination, is evident, like all
other directly experienced and psychic qualities, whose essential
reality is more evident than what any description of their meaning (i.e.
of the words that stand for them) can divulge. However, an explanation
of the signification of the ascription of ‘love’ and ‘hate’ to God’s
Sacred Essence will be given later on, *insha’ Allah*.

As to the narrator’s statement, “Indeed, we detest death,” he said that
because he imagined death to involve *liqa’ Allah,* or because he
thought that death was *liqa’ Allah* itself. So he imagined revulsion
for death to be aversion for *liqa’ Allah,* and hence his question. The
Imam answered him that the general dislike of death is not a criterion;
rather, the criterion is the actual moment of death when one observes
the signs of the *malakut* and the other realms.

As to the words of the Imam (A): لَيْسَ ذَلِكَ حَيْثُ تَذْهَبُ this
sentence does not have an exact equivalent expression in Persian. The
import of this expression here may be conveyed by such Persian
expressions as گمانم رفت وگمان كردم or ذهنم رفت and so on, and the
Arabic expression also implies a ‘going’ (*dhahab*) of the imagination
(*wahm*)*.* Arabic is replete with such expressions. Rather the common
usage of *‘dhahab’* and expressions derived from it implies a *dhahab*
of *wahm, ‘aqidah* ( belief ) and the like, and the word *‘madhhab’*
(going, trend, opinion, religion, creed, ideology, school of law or
thought) denotes a similar meaning, which is based on metaphor, for it
is derived from external and outward *dhahab.*

As to the statement of the Imam (A) عند المعاينة *mu’ayanah* is a verbal
noun pertaining to the form مفاعلة (The lexicographers explain its
meaning as follows:)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عايَنتُ الشَّيءَ عَياناً إذا رَأيتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The time of death is called *mu’ayanah* (viewing, examination,
observation), because the dying person views the signs of the other
world clearly. His hidden spiritual eye opens and a little of the
reality of the *malakut* is revealed to him. Then he sees glimpses of
his own attainments, works and (spiritual) condition. We shall explain
in the course of a few sections that which needs exposition in the
sacred tradition, putting our reliance in God.

Liqa’ Allah And Its Character
-----------------------------

Know that the number of verses and traditions which refer to *liqa’
Allah,* either explicitly or implicitly, is quite large and their full
details cannot be contained in this brief exposition. However, we shall
briefly refer to some of them, and anyone seeking further details should
refer to the *Risaleh-ye liqa’ Allah* of the *marhum* gnostic of God,
al-Hajj Mirza Jawad Tabrizi (Q) wherein traditions concerning this theme
have been gathered to a certain extent.

Know that some *ulama* and exegetes have totally blocked the path of
*liqa’ Allah* and denied (die possibility of) direct experience of the
revelations (*tajalliyat*) of the Divine Names and Essence. Imagining
that they were affirming the transcendence of the Sacred Essence as
lying beyond all anthropomorphic and physical qualities, they have
interpreted all the verses and traditions mentioning *liqa’ Allah* as
the encounter with the Last Day and Judgment, its reward and punishment.

Although such an interpretation of the general import of *liqa’* is not
very far-fetched in relation to certain verses and traditions, it is
certainly an implausible and far-fetched interpretation in relation to
some reliable supplications and traditions mentioned in trustworthy
books as well as in relation to some well-accepted (*mashhur*)
traditions which have been relied upon by great *ulama*.

One should know that the intent of those who have kept open the path of
*liqa’ Allah* and the beatific vision (*mushahadah*) of Divine Glory and
Beauty, is not that it is permissible to fathom the mystery of the
Divine Essence or that it is possible to encompass in direct knowledge
(*‘ilm huduri*) and in immediate spiritual experience the Essence, which
encompasses absolutely everything.

Rather, the impossibility of fathoming the Divine mystery through
universal knowledge (*‘ilm* al-*kulli*) and by the means of rational
thought and the impossibility of encompassing It in mystic experience
(*irfan al-shuhudi*) and by the means of esoteric insight is an
established matter, to which all people of the intellect (i.e.
philosophers) as well as those of mystic knowledge and experience
(*arbab al-ma’arif wa qulub*) are unanimous in agreeing. However, those
who claim the possibility of such a station state:

Following the attainment of a complete and consummate state of
God-fearing (*taqwa*)*,* a total turning away of the heart from all the
worlds and repudiation of both the realms of life (i.e. the pleasures of
the world as well as that of the Hereafter), after trampling the heads
of egoism and egocentrism under one’s feet, and following complete
attention and total absorption in God and the Names and Attributes of
that Sacred Essence, after immersion in the love and passion for the
Sacred Essence, and following austerities of the heart, a purity and
burnish is attained by the wayfarer’s heart, which receives the
revelations of the Names and the Attributes.

Thereupon the thick veils that lie between the devotee and the Names and
the Attributes are removed and he becomes annihilated in the Names and
the Attributes, becoming “attached to the Mightiness of Sanctity and
Glory” and attaining complete nearness (*tadall’i*) to the Essence. In
this state, there is no veil between the consecrated soul of the
wayfarer and the Truth except the Names and the Attributes.

For some of the wayfarers of the Path, the luminous veil of the Names
and the Attributes may also be removed, whereupon they attain to the
Hidden *tajalliyat* of the Essence, beholding themselves attached and
close to the Sacred Essence, and, in this vision, they perceive the
sustaining encompassment of the Truth (*ihateh-ye qayyumi-ye Haqq*) and
their own essential annihilation (*fana’ al-dhati*)*.* Then, he clearly
views his own being, as well as that of all other existents, as a shadow
of the Divine Being.

As-in accordance with metaphysical proof-there is no veil between God
and the First Creature, which is non-material and free from all forms of
matter and attachments (rather, according to metaphysical proofs there
is no veil for non-material beings in general), so is die heart that in
its expansive and encompassing character has been elevated to the plane
of non-material beings. Rather, it walks on the heads of those beings
and there is no veil for it, as mentioned in this sacred tradition
reported in *al-Kafi* and *al-Tawhid:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ رُوحَ المُؤمِنِ لأَشَدُّ اتِّصالاً بِروحِ اللهِ مِن اتِّصالِ
الشَّمسِ بشُعاعِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, the spirit of the possessor of faith is more firmly attached to
the Spirit of Allah than the sun’s ray is attached to it.[^3]

In the *Munajat Sha’baniyyah,* which are accepted as authentic by the
*ulama* and whose very contents bear witness to the authenticity of
their origin in those sacred personages, i.e. the Imam of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A), this is how they supplicate:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِلَهِي هَبْ لِي كَمَالَ الانْقِطَاعِ إلَيْكَ وَأَنِرْ أَبْصَارَ
قُلُوبِنَا بِضِيَاءِ نَظَرِهَا إلَيْكَ حَتَّى تَخْرِقَ أَبْصَارُ
القُلُوبِ حُجُبَ النُّورِ فَتَصِلَ إلَى مَعْدِنِ العَظَمَةِ وَتَصِيرَ
أَرْوَاحُنَا مُعَلَّقَةً بِعِزِّ قُدْسِكَ. إلَهِي وَاجْعَلْنِي مِمَّنْ
نَادَيْتَهُ فَأَجَابَكَ وَلاحَظْتَهُ فَصُعِقَ بِجَلالِكَ فَنَاجَيْتَهُ
سِرّاً وَعَمِلَ لَكَ جَهْراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

My God, grant me the utmost absorption in Thee and illuminate the vision
of our hearts with the light of Thy Vision, until the sight of the
hearts can penetrate the curtains of light and reach the source of
Greatness and until our spirits get anchored to the threshold of Thy
Sanctity. My God, make me one of those whom Thou callest and who respond
to Thee, whom Thou regardest and who swoon with awe before Thy Glory,
and to whom Thou whisperest secretly and who act for Thy sake
openly.[^4]

And while recounting the heavenly ascension (*miraj*) of the Noble
Messenger (S) God declares in the Noble Divine Scripture:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ثُمَّ دَنَا فَتَدَلَّى. فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then drew near and suspended hung, two bows’ length away or
nearer.*** (***53:8-9***)

This direct experience of extinction (*fana’*) is not contrary to the
impossibility of fathoming and encompassing (the Divine Essence), nor
does it conflict with the verses and traditions that assert Divine
transcendence. Rather, it supports and conforms them.

Now see if there is any need to take resort in such far-fetched and
insipid interpretations. Can one interpret this statement of Amir
al-Mu’minin (A) when he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَبْنِي، يَا إلَهِي وَسَيِّدِي وَمَوْلايَ، صَبَرْتُ عَلَى عَذَابِكَ،
فَكَيْفَ أَصْبِرُ عَلَى فِرَاقِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my God, my Master and my Lord! Even if I were able to endure Thy
chastisement, how shall I bear Thy separation?[^5]

and those lamentations and wailings of the *awliya’* as being for the
sake of houris and palaces? Shall we explain the laments of separation
of those who used to declare that “we don’t worship God for the fear of
hell, nor for the desire of paradise, but we worship him as free men
should purely because God is worthy of worship” as being on account of
separation from paradise and its foods, drinks and pleasures?

Alas! What a preposterous thing to say, and what a most unseemly
interpretation! Is it possible to say that the revelations of Divine
Beauty on the Night of the Ascent, in the meeting wherein no other
creature was present and of whose secrets even Gabriel, the one
entrusted with the Revelation, was kept out, were represented by
Paradise and its raised-up mansions? That these constituted ‘the lights
of Divine Majesty and Glory’ and the disclosure of God’s favors? Were
the *tajalliyat* experienced by the prophets (A) as mentioned in
reliable supplications, bounties of the order of foods, drinks, gardens
and castles?

Alas! We, wretches entrapped in the dark veils of corporeal nature and
entangled in the chains of petty hopes and expectations, understand
nothing except food, drink, sex and the like. And should we come across
a man of vision and someone with a heart who attempts to lift the
curtain from these veils, we consider it an error and affront.

As long as we remain imprisoned in the dark pit of the world of mulk, we
would not be able to apprehend anything of the gnostic teachings
(*ma’arif*) and the experiences of those adept in them. So, my dear,
don’t compare the *awliya’* to yourself and don’t imagine the hearts of
the prophets and those of the people of the *ma’arif* to be like these
dismal hearts of ours. Our hearts are covered with the dusts of
attachment to the world and its mundane lusts.

The impurity resulting from immersion in lusts does not allow them to
become the mirror of Divine revelations wherein the beauty of the
Beloved is reflected. Of course, with this egoism, this self-seeking and
narcissism of ours, we shouldn’t be able to make out anything of the
*tajalliyat* of God, the Most Exalted, and His Beauty and Glory.

Given this state of ours, we should be such ones as refute the words of
the *awliya’* and the people of *marifah*, and even if we should refrain
outwardly from denouncing them as false, we would still consider them
false in our hearts. And should there be no way for negating their
truth-as when one is convinced of the truth of the statements of the
Messenger and the Infallible Imams (A)-we would open the door of
*ta’wil* and interpretation and, in a word, block the door to the
knowledge (*marifah*) of God. Thus, we interpret this (saying of ‘Ali):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا رَأَيْتُ شَيْئاً إلاّ وَرَأَيْتُ اللهَ مَعَهُ وَقَبْلَهُ وَفِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I did not see a thing without beholding God with it, before it, and in
it,

as implying the vision of the effects (of God’s omnipotence). We explain
these words of ‘Ali (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ أَعْبُدْ رَبّاً لَمْ أَرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I did not worship a Lord that I did not see,[^6]

as implying the knowledge of universals, similar in nature to our own
knowledge. We interpret the verses mentioning *liqa’ Allah* as
signifying the encounter with the Day of Judgment, and take the
tradition of the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِي مَعَ اللهِ حَالَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have a state with God,

as signifying a tender feeling of the heart, and the words of the
supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَارْزُقْنِي النَّظَرَ إلَى وَجْهِكَ الكَرِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And bestow upon me the vision of Thy Noble Face,

and all the lamentations of the *awliya’* and their wails of separation
as arising from the pain of separation froth the houris of paradise and
its fowl! And the reason behind all these interpretations is that we are
not champions of this field; we understand nothing except bestial and
bodily pleasures, and our nescience prompts us to repudiate all the ma
*arif.*

This denial is the worst of all calamities, which locks upon us the door
to all the higher teachings, keeps us from seeking, and make us remain
satisfied at the level of bestial and beastly existence, depriving us of
entry into the hidden realms and obstructing us from Divine lights. It
keeps us, wretched ones that we are, totally deprived from experiencing
the *tajalliyat*-even from faith in the reality of these spiritual
states, a faith which by itself constitutes a degree of spiritual merit
and which might have taken us somewhere.

We even evade the (theoretical) knowledge, which might have served as
the seed of (mystic) experience, and completely close our eyes and ears,
stuffing the cotton of neglect into our ears lest a word of truth should
enter them. If we hear any of the truths from the mouth of a passionate
*‘arif* or a heart-broken wayfarer, or a theosopher (*Hakim
al-muta’allih*), immediately we make him the target of all kinds of
curses and insults, calling him an apostate and a profligate, refraining
not from any kind of slander and backbiting in regard to him, because
our ears cannot bear to hear his words and self-love prevents us from
realizing our own inadequacies.

Alas, we bequeath a book as *waqf,* binding its user with the condition
that he should curse, hundred times a day, the *mathum* Mullah Muhsin
Fayd (Kashani)! We call Sadr al-Muta’allihin (Mullah Sadra), who is the
foremost of the adherents of *tawhid,* a heretic (*zindiq*) and do not
stop at any insult in regard to him. There is no trace of any
inclination towards Sufism in all of his books. Rather, he has written a
book entitled *Kasr asnam al jahiliyyah fi* *al-radd ‘ala al-Sufiyyah*
(“Demolition of the idols of the *Jahiliyyah,* on the refutation of the
Sufis”); yet we call him “a Sufi through and through.”

We leave those who are of a known character and have been cursed by the
tongues of God and His Messenger (S) and call down curses upon those who
loudly proclaim their faith in God, in the Messenger and the Imams of
guidance (A). I know that these curses and insults do not harm their
station in the least, or, rather, perhaps, increase their fair reward
with God and cause the elevation of their degrees. But these things are
injurious for ourselves and may result in depriving us of Divine
assistance and bring about our failure.

Our shaykh, an accomplished ‘*arif* that he was (i.e. Shahabadi), may my
soul be his ransom, used to say: “Never call down curses (*la’n*) on
anybody, though he be a *kafir* concerning whom you do not know how he
made the transit from this world to the next, and unless an infallible
*wali* informs you concerning his condition after death. For it is
possible that he may have attained faith before the time of death. Hence
let your curse be of a general character.”

Here is one who has such a sacred spirit that he would not permit anyone
who has died an apparent unbeliever to be insulted, for the probability
that he might have acquired faith at the time of death, and there are
the like of us! And only to God do I take my complaint ( وإلى الله
المشتكى)that the preacher of a certain city, though a man of learning
and merit, used to say in the presence of scholars and the learned that
so and so “used to read the Qur’an despite being a metaphysician.” It is
like saying, “So and so believed in God and Resurrection despite being a
prophet”! I, too, do not put much of a store by mere knowledge, and a
learning that does not bring faith with it is the greatest of veils.
However, one has to approach a veil in order to tear it into shreds.

The sciences are seeds of (spiritual) experience. Although it is
possible, at times, that one may attain to higher spiritual stations
without encountering the veils of learned jargon and the sciences, but
such a thing is unusual, contrary to the wont of natural law and happens
only rarely. Hence, the way to God-seeking is that one should at the
outset devote his time to the remembrance of God and acquire the
knowledge of God and the Names and Attributes of that Sacred Essence,
the usual way from the adept (*mashayikh*) of that science.

Then, by the means of theoretical and practical exercises and
austerities, he should open his heart to the *ma’arif,* and this will
undoubtedly yield results. If he is not one of those familiar with the
learned jargon, he can obtain results through the remembrance of the
Beloved and by preoccupying his heart and mind with that Sacred Essence.

Of certain, this preoccupation of the heart and inward attention will
become the means of his guidance, and God, the Exalted, will assist him.
The concealing curtains will rise from before his eyes and he will
somewhat retreat, from those vulgar forms of skepticism. And, perhaps,
he may find his way to the *ma’arif* with the special grace of God
Almighty. Indeed, He is the Lord of bounties (وإلى الله المشتكى).

Death-The Moment Of Truth
-------------------------

This sacred tradition indicates that at the time of confronting death
some of his stations and conditions become revealed to man. This matter
is in conformity with a kind of metaphysical proof and in agreement with
the experience of mystics as well as with traditions and other reports.
As long as man is preoccupied with the cultivation of this mundane realm
and the face of his heart is turned towards this habitat and the
intoxicant of carnal nature has made him unconscious and the opiates of
lust and power stupefy him, he remains totally in the dark concerning
the (*malakuti*) forms of his conduct and morals and blind to their
effects in the *malakut* of the heart.

But when the reelings of death and its pressures seize him, he attains a
measure of detachment from this world. And if he is a man of faith and
of conviction whose heart has been turned towards these realms, at the
last moments his heart naturally turns towards that world and the
spiritual inductors and the angels of God assigned over it (i.e. the
heart) also induct him towards that world. After this induction and that
detachment, a part of the world of *barzakh* is revealed to him and a
window to the world of the Hidden is opened upon him. Then his own state
and station is disclosed to him to some extent, as is narrated from Amir
al-Mu’minin (A) that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَرَامٌ عَلى نَفسٍ أنْ تخرُجَ مِن الدّنيَا حتَّى تعْلَمَ أنَّه مِن
أهْلِ الجَنَّة هَيَ أمْ مِن أهْلِ النّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is prohibited that any soul should leave this world without, knowing
whether it belongs to the people of paradise or the people of hell?[^7]

In this context, there is a sacred tradition which we will mention in
its entirety despite its length because it contains good news for the
adherents of the *wilayah* of the Master of the Masters (*Mawla
al-mawali,* i.e. ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib) and those holding on to the skirts
of the magnanimity of the Infallible Ahl al-Bayt (A). This *hadith* has
been narrated by the venerable Fayd Kashani in his book *Ilm al-yaqin:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: وَفِي كِتَابِ الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ سَعِيدٍ الأَهْوَازِيِّ عَنْ
عَبَّادِ بْنِ مَرْوَانَ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: مِنْكُمْ وَاللهِ يُقْبَلُ وَلَكُمْ وَاللهِ
يُغْفَرُ. إنَّهُ لَيْسَ بَيْنَ أَحَدِكُمْ وَبَيْنَ أنْ يَغْتَبِطَ
وَيَرَى السُّرُورَ وَقُرَّةَ العَيْنِ إلاّ أنْ تَبْلُغَ نَفْسُهُ هَا
هُنَا – وَأَوْمَأَ بِيَدِهِ إلَى حَلْقِهِ – ثُمَّ قَالَ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ: إنَّهُ إذَا كَانَ ذَلِكَ وَاحْتَضَرَ حَضَرَهُ رَسُولُ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَعَلِيٌّ وَالأَئِمَّةُ وَجِبْرَئِيلُ
وَمِيكَائِيلُ وَمَلَكُ المَوْتِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ. فَيَدْنُو مِنْهُ
جِبْرَئِيلُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فَيَقُولُ لِرَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: إنَّ هَذَا كَانَ يُحِبُّكُمْ أَهْلَ البَيْتِ
فَأَحِبَّهُ. فَيَقُولُ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ:
يَا جِبْرَئِيلُ، إنَّ هَذَا كَانَ يُحِبُّ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَأَهْلَ
بَيْتِهِ فَأَحِبَّهُ. فَيَقُولُ جِبْرَئِيلُ: يَا مَلَكَ المَوْتِ، إنَّ
هَذَا كَانَ يُحِبُّ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَآلَ رَسُولِهِ فَأَحِبَّهُ
وَارْفِقْ بِهِ. فَيَدْنُو مِنْهُ مَلَكُ المَوْتِ فَيَقُولُ لَهُ: يَا
عَبْدَ اللهِ، أَخَذْتَ فِكَاكَ رَقَبَتِكَ؟ أَخَذْتَ أَمَانَ
بَرَائَتِكَ؟ تَمَسَّكْتَ بِالعِصْمَةِ الكُبْرَى فِي الحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيا؟ قَالَ: فَيُوَفِّقُهُ (فَيَرْفَعُهُ) اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
فَيَقُولُ: نَعَمْ. فَيَقُولُ (لَهُ): وَمَا ذَاكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: وَلايَةُ
عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ. فَيَقُولُ: صَدَقْتَ! أمَّا الَّذِي كُنْتَ
تَحْذَرُهُ فَقَدْ آمَنَكَ اللهُ مِنْهُ، وَأَمَّا الَّذِي كُنْتَ تَرجُو
فَقَدْ أَدْرَكْتَهُ. أَبْشِرْ بِالسَّلَفِ الصَّالِحِ مُرَافَقَةَ
رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَعِلِيٍّ وَالأَئِمَّةَ
مِنْ وُلْدِهِ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلامُ. ثُمَّ يَسِلُّ نَفْسَهُ سَلاًّ
رَفِيقاً، ثُمَّ يَنْزِلُ بِكَفَنِهِ مِنَ الجَنَّةِ وَحَنُوطِهِ حَنُوطٍ
كَالمِسْكِ الأَذْفَرِ، فَيُكَفَّنُ بِذَلِكَ الكَفَنِ وَيُحَنَّطُ
بِذَلِكَ الحَنُوطِ، ثُمَّ يُكْسَى حُلَّةً صَفْرَاءَ مِنْ حُلَلِ
الجَنَّةِ. فَإذَا وُضِعَ فِي قَبْرِهِ فَتَحَ اللهُ لَهُ بَاباً مِنْ
أَبْوَابِ الجَنَّةِ يَدْخُلُ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ رَوْحِهَا وَرَيْحَانِهَا.
ثُمَّ يُقَالُ لَهُ: نَمْ نَوْمَةَ العَرُوسِ عَلَى فِرَاشِهَا، أَبْشِرْ
بِرَوْحٍ وَرَيْحَانٍ وَجَنَّةِ نَعِيمٍ وَرَبٍّ غَيْرِ غَضْبَانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإذَا حَضَرَ الكَافِرَ الوَفاَةُ حَضَرَهُ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَعَلِيٌّ وَالأئِمَّةُ وَجِبْرَئِيلُ وَمِيكَائِيلُ
وَمَلَكُ المَوْتِ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلامُ. فَيَدْنُو مِنْهُ جِبْرَئِيلُ
فَيَقُولُ: يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ، إنَّ هَذَا كَانَ مُبْغِضاً لَكُمْ أَهْلَ
البَيْتِ فَأَبْغِضْهُ. فَيَقُولُ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ: يَا جِبْرَئِيلُ، إنَّ هَذَا كَانَ يُبْغِضُ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ
وَأَهْلَ بَيْتِ رَسُولِهِ فَأبْغِضْهُ. وَيَقُولُ جِبْرَئِيلُ: يَا
مَلَكَ المَوْتِ، إنَّ هَذَا كَانَ يُبْغِضُ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَأَهْلَ
بَيْتِ رَسُولِهِ فَأَبْغِضْهُ وَاعْنُفْ عَلَيْهِ. فَيَدْنُو مِنْهُ
مَلَكُ المَوْتِ فَيَقُولُ: يَا عَبْدَ اللهِ، أَخَذْتَ فِكَاكَ
رَقَبَتِكَ؟ أَخَذْتَ أَمَانَ بَرَائَتِكَ؟ تَمَسَّكْتَ بِالعِصْمَةِ
الكُبْرَى فِي الحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيا؟ فَيَقُولُ: لا. فَيَقُولُ: أَبْشِرْ
يَا عَدُوَّ اللهِ بِسَخَطِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَعَذَابِهِ وَالنَّارِ.
أَمَّا الَّذِي كُنْتُ تَرْجُو فَقَدْ فَاتَكَ، وَأَمَّا الَّذِي كُنْتَ
تَحْذَرُ فَقَدْ نَزَلَ بِكَ. ثُمَّ يَسِلُّ نَفْسَهُ سَلّاً عَنِيفاً،
ثُمَّ يُوكِلُ بِرُوحِهِ ثَلاثَمِائَةِ شَيْطَانٍ يَبْزُقُونَ فِي
وَجْهِهِ، وَيَتَأَذَّى بِرِيحِهِ. فَإذَا وُضِعَ فِي قَبْرِهِ فُتِحَ
لَهُ بَابٌ مِنْ أَبْوَابِ النَّارِ فَيَدْخُلُ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ قَيْحِ
رِيحِهَا وَلَهَبِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated in the Book of al-Husayn ibn Said al-Ahwazi, from ‘Abbad
ibn Marwan that he said: I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) say, “By God, your
works will be accepted and your sins will be forgiven. There is nothing
that intervenes between anyone of you and his becoming the object of
envy and his seeing the delight and experiencing the comfort of your
eyes except the moment when your soul reaches this point.” And saying
this, he pointed with his hand to his throat. Then he (A) said, “And
when that moment arrives, at the time of death, the Messenger of Allah
(S) ‘Ali, the Imams, Gabriel, Michael and the Angel of Death (A) become
present before him. Then Gabriel[^8] (A) approaches him and says to the
Messenger of Allah (S), ‘This one used to love you, Ahl al-Bayt, so hold
him dear.’ Whereupon the Messenger of Allah (S) says, ‘O Gabriel, indeed
this one used to love God, His Messenger and his Household, and I (too)
hold him dear.’ Then Gabriel says (to the Angel of Death): ‘O Angel of
Death, this one used to love Allah, His Messenger and the Household of
the Messenger, so hold him dear and be gentle to him.’

Then the Angel of Death (A) says (to the dying person), ‘O creature of
God, have you secured your release and your security and amnesty? Did
you hold on to the great handhold in the life of the world, whereupon,
with God’s succor, he declares, “Yes.’ ‘What is it?’ the Angel of Death
asks him. ‘(It is) the wilayah of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A),’ he replies.
The Angel says, ‘You have told the truth. God has granted you security
from what you were frightened of and you have attained what you used to
hope for. Receive the good news of the companionship of the righteous
predecessors and of the Messenger of Allah (S) and the Imams of his
progeny (A).’

Then he gently withdraws his soul and brings down his shroud from
paradise, and his balm (hunut) is that of fragrant musk. Then he wraps
him in that shroud and embalms him with that hunut and clothes him in a
yellow dress from among the garments of paradise. Then, when he is laid
in his grave, a door from among the doors of paradise is opened for him
and its freshness and fragrance enters upon him. Then he is told,
‘Sleep, like the sleep of a bride on her bed. Receive the glad news of
the freshness and fragrance of the Garden of bounties and of an
unwrathful Lord.’

(Imam al-Sadiq (A) continued) And when an unbeliever encounters the
moment of death, the Messenger of Allah (S) ‘Ali, the Imams, Gabriel,
Michael and the Angel of Death (A) become present before him. Then
Gabriel approaches him and says, ‘O Messenger of Allah, verily this one
used to detest you, Ahl al-Bayt, so hold him in resentment.’ Thereupon
the Messenger of Allah (S) says, ‘O Gabriel, indeed this one used to
hate God, His Messenger and the Messenger’s Household, so you too be
resentful towards him.’ Thereat Gabriel declares, ‘O Angel of Death,
indeed this one used to hate God, His Messenger, and the Household of
His Messenger (A) so you too be resentful of him and be harsh towards
him.’

Then the Angel of Death approaches the dying person and says, ‘O
creature of God, did you secure your release and your security and
amnesty? Did you hold on to the great handhold in the life of the
world?’ He answers, ‘No.’ Whereupon the Angel of Death tells him, ‘O
enemy of God! Receive the tiding of God’s wrath and of His punishment
and fire. You have lost what you hoped for and that which you used to be
afraid of has descended upon you.’ Then the Angel draws his soul
violently and hands it over to three hundred devils who throw their
spittle on his face and he is tormented with its stench. And when he is
laid in his grave, a door from among the doors of hell is opened for him
and its blaze and flames enter upon him.”[^9]

It should be known that the *barzakh* of everyone is representative of
his condition on the Day of Resurrection and that the world of *barzakh*
is an intermediate world between this world and the world of
Resurrection, where there is a window opening towards paradise or hell,
as mentioned in this noble tradition. The famous prophetic tradition:

It should be known that the *barzakh* of everyone is representative of
his condition on the Day of Resurrection and that the world of *barzakh*
is an intermediate world between this world and the world of
Resurrection, where there is a window opening towards paradise or hell,
as mentioned in this noble tradition. The famous prophetic tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القَبْرُ إمَّا رَوْضَةٌ مِنْ رِيَاضِ الجِنَانِ أَوْ حُفْرَةٌ مِنْ
حُفَرِ النِّيرَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The grave is either a garden from among the gardens of paradise or a pit
from among the pits of the Fire,[^10]

refers to the same matter. Hence, at the time of death and confrontation
with it, man observes the effects and forms of his works and hears the
news of paradise or hell from the Angel of Death. And when these things
become revealed to him, he also observes the effects produced by his
works and deeds in his heart, such as luminosity and expansiveness and
openness of the breast, or their opposites such as darkness and
constriction of the breast and its narrowness. Then, when confronted
with *barzakh,* the heart becomes prepared to experience the subtle
breezes of Divine Grace and Beauty in it.

Therein emerge the signs of the *tajalliyat* of Divine Grace and Beauty
if he is a man of faith and felicity. Then the desire for *liqa’ Allah*
emerges in his heart and the fire of yearning for the Beloved’s Beauty
is lit in it, if he had partaken of virtuous conduct, love and Divine
passion, and none except God knows what delights and beneficences lie in
this *tajalli* and desire.

If he had been one of the faithful and the righteous, he will be
bestowed of the beneficence of God, the Exalted, in proportion to his
faith and good works and he will get an immediate glimpse of it at the
time of death. ‘Thereupon, the eagerness for death and encounter with
Divine beneficence arise in him and he leaves this world with delight
and ecstasy and in relief and freshness. The corporeal eyes and the
earthly organs of taste do not have the strength to bear the pleasures
of this ecstasy and delight.

But if he should be one of the wretched, an infidel, an unbeliever or a
hypocrite, and perpetrator of ugly and evil deeds, he will, in
accordance with the measure of his evil share and misconduct in the
world, discover the effects of Divine Wrath and Might and see the abode
of die wretched. Such terror and convulsions will seize him that nothing
will be more hateful for him than the revelations of Divine Glory and
Might. As a result of this hate and hostility, he will experience such
an affliction, anguish, darkness and pain that none except God’s Sacred
Essence can know the extent of its intensity.

This is for persons who have in this world repudiated the truth and been
hypocrites and enemies of God and His *awliya’.* A representative part
of the hell becomes revealed also to the sinners and those guilty of
major sins in proportion to the evil character of their misconduct, and
in this state there is nothing more loathsome for them than to leave
this world. And so they are transferred from it violently and harshly,
with hardship and pain, and such a regret grips their hearts that it
knows no measure.

This description shows that at the time of death man beholds that which
had been in him and of which he was unaware. At that time the tips of
the concealed part of his being become visible to him. The life of the
world was a concealing curtain that hid our defects and was a veil for
the people of the *ma’arif*.

Now that this curtain has been lifted and this veil has been removed,
man observes a representative part of that which lay in him and that
which he himself had prepared. In the other realms, man will not face
any punishment or chastisement except on account of that which he earns
in this world. He will have a direct vision of the (*malakuti*) forms of
the righteous works and virtuous conduct that he had performed and the
right convictions that he had held in this world, together with the
gifts that God will bestow upon him out of His own favor and
munificence. Under the noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَه. وَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ
مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَه.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoso doth good an atom’s weight will see it, and whoso doth ill
an atom’s weight will see it.*** (***99:7-8***)

the following statement (of Ibn Mas’ud) is quoted in *Tafsir al-Safi*
from *Majma’al-bayan:*[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هِيَ أَحْكَمُ آيَةٍ فِي القُرْآنِ، وَكَانَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يُسَمِّيهَا الجَامِعَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is the ‘firmest’ of the verses of the Qur’an, and the Messenger of
Allah (S) -used to call it “al-jami’ah.”

Hence we should know that if we cultivate the love of God, the Exalted,
and His *awliya’* in this world and put on the collar of obedience to
that Sacred Essence around our necks and receive the burnish of Divine
light in our hearts, at the time of death this inward reality will be
revealed to us in its beautiful (*malakuti*) form.

Contrarily, if our hearts take on a mundane aspect and turn away from
God, the seed of the enmity of God and the *awliya’* may come to be
gradually sown in them. Then, at the sight of death, this enmity will
reveal its intensity and divulge its terrible and strange qualities, as
you have seen.

Hence one of the most important things for man is to take care to
cultivate a Divine state in the heart and orient its face toward God,
His *awliya’,* and the abode of His favor. This can be attained by
contemplating the bounties and favors of the Sacred Essence and devoting
oneself to His obedience and worship. But one should not rely upon
oneself and one’s works.

At all times, especially in moments of solitude, one must tearfully and
humbly implore God to put His love in his heart and to illuminate his
heart with the light of His knowledge and love, purging it of the love
of the world and of everything other than Him.

Of course, this prayer is a substanceless and verbal exercise in the
beginning, for it is very difficult to desire the removal of the world’s
love from one’s heart when it is full of intense love for it. But after
a period of contemplation, perseverance, and making the heart understand
the fair results of the love of God and the evil results of the love of
the world, it is hoped that it will be realized, God willing.

The Significance Of ‘Love’ And ‘Hate’ When Ascribed To God
----------------------------------------------------------

Know that love, hate and the like, which in the language of the Qur’an
and noble traditions have been ascribed to God-exalted is His Glory-are
not to be taken in their ordinary sense. For such qualities signify
psychic affections (*infi’al al-nafsani*)*,* and God, the Exalted, is
above and free of them. Since an elaborate discussion of this issue is
outside the scope of this brief exposition, we will confine ourselves to
a passing reference.

It should be known that there are in man qualities and states which on
descent from the Hidden and non-material realms and on reaching the
realm of corporeal nature-which is the realm of differentiation
(*farq*), or rather that of differentiation within differentiation
(*farq al-farq*)-assume a form which is different from that of the
Hidden immaterial forms in its effects and properties. Thus, the
Platonists consider all material existents to be manifestations of
Hidden spirits and to be reflections of celestial realities and
analogies of the Platonic Ideas. They hold that the essential archetypes
of the accidents and qualities, which have a non-substantial existence
in this world, exist by themselves in that world (as independent
substances).

On this basis, we may say that the archetypes of these qualities and
states, which in the corporeal world are accompanied with an affective
and variable character, have an ideal form free of all inadequacies in
the Hidden immaterial realms, especially in the world of Divine Names
and the station of Unity. The meanings of the terms when referred to the
immaterial realm, or the Divine plane, is different from those in this
world.

For instance, should the *tajalliyat* of Beneficence (*rahmaniyyah*)*,*
Mercy (*rahimiyyah*)*,* which are also called *tajalliyat* of Beauty
(*jamal*), Gentleness (*lutf*), Love (*hubb*) and Intimacy (*uns*), be
manifested in this world, they would take the form of love, mercy and
gentleness that are accompanied by affection (*infi’al*), and this is
due to the extremely narrow character of this world. It is mentioned in
a *hadith* that out of hundred portions of Divine Mercy (*rahmah*) only
one portion has been sent down in this world that comprises all the
manifestations of compassion that find actualization in this world, such
as the compassion between children and parents and the like. Similarly,
the *tajalliyat* of Divine Compulsion (*qahriyyah*) and Mastership
(*malikiyyah*), which belong to the *tajalliyat* of Glory (*jalal*), are
manifested in this world in the form of hatred (*bughd*) and rage
(*ghadhab*)*.*

To sum up, the inward aspect of love, hatred, and anger is Divine
Compassion and Omnipotence and the *tajalliyat* of Beauty and Glory,
which exist by themselves and in which change, affection, and
multiplicity do not find any way. Thus the loves and antipathies that
exist in this world are manifestations of Divine Compassion and
Omnipotence, and since a manifestation (*mazhar*) depends on that which
it manifests (*zahir*) and since the *zahir* is revealed in the
*mazhar,* it is not improper to apply the same terms to the two of them.
On this basis, the hatred of God, the Exalted, towards a creature is
manifestation of Omnipotence and Vengeance, and His love manifestation
of Compassion and Munificence. And God is the All-knowing.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Furu’ al-Kafi; iii, 134.

[^2]: See the exposition of the twenty-first hadith.

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi, ii, “Kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab ukhuwwat
al-mu’minin”, hadith no. 4.

[^4]: Mafatih al-jinan, “al-Munajat al-Sha’baniyyah.”

[^5]: Mafatih al-jinan, “Du’a’ Kumayl”.

[^6]: Al -Shaykh al-Saduq, Kitab al-Tawhid, 305.

[^7]: Fayd al-Kashani, Ilm al yaqin, ii, 853.

[^8]: This sentence of the tradition is narrated in the following form
in its version of Furu ‘al-Kafi, iii, p. 131: “Then ‘Ali (A)approaches
him and says: “O Messenger of Allah, this one used to love us, Ahl
al-Bayt, so hold him dear,” and the Messenger of Allah (S)says: O
Gabriel… “Later in this narration-which is more reliable and precise-it
is ‘Ali who says to the Prophet, “O Messenger of Allah, this one used to
hate us, Ahl al-Bayt, so hold him in resentment.” (Trans.)

[^9]: ‘Ilm al-yaqin, ii, pp. 854, 856.

[^10]: Sunan al-Tirmidhi, iv, 640, “Kitab sifat al-Qiyamah”; al-Jami’
al-saghir, i, 63.

[^11]: Al-Tabrisi, Majma ‘al-bayan (Qumm 1403), v, 527.


