Twenty-Ninth Hadith: The Prophet’s Counsel To ‘Ali
==================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى أَفْضَلِ المُحَدِّثِينَ وَأَقْدَمِهِمْ
مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ، عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
يَحْيَى، عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عِيسَى، عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ
النُّعْمَانِ، عَنْ مُعَاوِيَةَ بْنِ عَمَّارٍ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أبَا
عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: كَانَ فِي وَصِيَّةِ النَّبِيِّ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لِعَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ أنْ قَالَ:
يَا عَلِيُّ، أُوصِيكَ فِي نَفْسِكَ بِخِصَالٍ فَاحْفَظْهَا عَنِّي.
ثُمَّ قَالَ: اللَّهُمَّ أَعِنْهُ، أَمَّا الأُولَى فَالصِّدْقُ، وَلا
تَخْرُجَنَّ مِنْ فِيكَ كِذْبَةٌ أَبَداً. وَالثَّانِيَةُ الوَرَعُ، وَلا
تَجْتَرِئْ عَلَى خِيَانَةٍ أَبَداً. وَالثَّالِثَةُ الخَوْفُ مِنَ اللهِ
عَزَّ ذِكْرُهُ كَأَنَّكَ تَرَاهُ. وَالرَّابِعَةُ كَثْرَةُ البُكَاءِ
مِنْ خَشْيَةِ اللهِ يُبْنَى لَكَ بِكُلِّ دَمْعَةٍ أَلْفُ بَيْتٍ فِي
الجَنَّةِ. وَالخَامِسَةُ بَذْلُكَ مَالَكَ وَدَمَكَ دُونَ دِينِكَ.
وَالسَّادِسَةُ الأَخْذُ بِسُنَّتِي فِي صَلاتِي وَصَوْمِي وَصَدَقَتِي.
أَمَّا الصَّلاةُ فَالخَمْسُونَ رَكْعَةً، وَأَمَّا الصِّيَامُ
فَثَلاثَةُ أَيَّامٍ فِي الشَّهْرِ؛ الخَمِيسُ فِي أَوَّلِهِ
وَالأَرْبُعَاءُ فِي وَسَطِهِ وَالخَمِيسُ فِي آخِرِهِ، وَأَمَّا
الصَّدَقَةُ فَجُهْدُكَ حَتَّى تَقُولَ: قَدْ أَسْرَفْتُ، وَلَمْ
تُسْرِفْ. وَعَلَيْكَ بِصَلاةِ اللَّيْلِ، وَعَلَيْكَ بِصَلاةِ
اللَّيْلِ، وَعَلَيْكَ بِصَلاةِ اللَّيْلِ، وَعَلَيْكَ بِصَلاةِ
الزَّوَالِ، وَعَلَيْكَ بِصَلاةِ الزَّوَالِ، وَعَلَيْكَ بِصَلاةِ
الزَّوَالِ. وَعَلَيْكَ بِتِلاوَةِ القُرْآنِ عَلَى كُلِّ حَالٍ،
وَعَلَيْكَ بِرَفْعِ يَدَيْكَ فِي صَلاتِكَ وَتَقْليبِهِمَا. وَعَلَيْكَ
بِالسِّوَاكِ عِنْدَ كُلِّ وُضُوءٍ. وَعَلَيْكَ بِمَحَاسِنِ الأَخْلاقِ
فَارْكَبْهَا، وَمَسَاوِئَ الأَخْلاقِ فَاجْتَنِبْهَا. فَإنْ لَمْ
تَفْعَلْ فَلا تَلُومَنَّ إلاّ نَفْسَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my continuous chain of transmission reaching up to the best of the
traditionists and the foremost of them, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni
(R) from Muhammad ibn Yahya, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa, from ‘Ali
ibn al-Nu’man, from Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Ammar, who says, “I heard Abu ‘Abd
Allah (A) say: In a counsel that the Prophet (S) gave to ‘Ali (A), he
said, “O ‘Ali, I exhort you concerning certain characteristics (khisal)
which you must preserve in yourself (as a trust) from me.”

Then he prayed, “O God, help him.” (Then he continued) “As to the first
of them, it is truthfulness: never should a falsehood come out of your
mouth. The second is piety (wara’), and never venture upon a treachery.
The third is to fear God-sublime is His remembrance-as if you see Him.
The fourth is to weep a lot out of the fear of God, the Exalted, and a
thousand mansions shall be built for you in the Garden for every tear.
The fifth is to offer your property and your blood for the sake of your
religion. The sixth is to follow my sunnah in respect of my salat, my
fasting, and my charity (sadaqah). As to the salat, it consists of fifty
rak’ahs. As to the fasts, they are to be kept on three days in a month:
on the first Thursday, on the Wednesday at its middle, and on the last
Thursday. As to the charity, that consists of the utmost that you can
give, so much so that you say to yourself, ‘I have been immoderate,’
whereas you will not have been immoderate.

““Commit yourself to the nightly prayer (salat al-layl)! Commit yourself
to the nightly prayer! Commit yourself to the nightly prayer! Stick to
the (supererogatory) noon prayer! Stick to the noon prayer! Stick to the
noon prayer! Accustom yourself to reciting the Qur’an at all times. Make
it your practice to raise your hands during prayer and to turn them.
Take care to brush your teeth every time that you perform wudu.” Commit
yourself to ethical virtues, practice them, and refrain from moral
vices, and if you don’t, don’t blame anyone except yourself.”[^1]

*Khisal* is the plural of *khaslah,* meaning *khui* (i.e. trait,
characteristic, disposition) as mentioned in the *Surah.* Accordingly,
its usage to denote the generality of dispositions as well as acts, as
in this noble tradition and other places, is a figurative one. Or,
perhaps, *khaslah* has a wider meaning than trait, in which case this
kind of usage will be a literal one.

As to the word *al-wara’* (with *fathah* on the *ra’*)*,* which occurs
in the narration of the Imam (A) that and *ri’ah* are verbal nouns of
*wari’a* and *yari’u* (with *kasrah* on *ra’* in both the cases) meaning
God-fearing (*taqwa*) or intensity of God-fearing and piety. Probably it
is derived from ورعته توريعاً meaning كففته [I restrained it], for
*wara’* is, in reality, restraining of the soul and making it refrain
from transgressing the limits of the *Shari’ah* and reason.

Or, it might have been derived from *warra’a* in the sense of *radda*
(meaning dissuasion). Thus, it is said وَرَّعتُ الإبِلَ عنِ الماءِ i.e.
‘I turned back (*radadtuhu*) the camel from water. That is because, in
*wara’,* one dissuades the soul from what it covets and seeks to indulge
in.

As to his words (A) لا تجترئ it pertains to the verbal form إفتعال and
means temerity, daring, and boldness of action in matters. *Al-Sihah,*
quoting Abu Zayd, states الجرأة مثال. الجرأة: الشجاعة. Also, it is
mentioned in al-Sihah that: الجرئ: المقدام.

As to the word فَجُهدُكَ in the statement of the Imam (A) الجهد with
*dammah* or *fathah* on the *jim*, it means strength and hardship
(الطاقة والمشقة). It is said جهد دابته وأجهدها when one makes one’s
mount run with all its power. *Jahd* is also used in the sense of effort
and exertion and this meaning seems [more] more appropriate for this
tradition.

As to his statement (A): عَلَيكَ بِصَلاةِ اللَّيلِ, here عليك is an
*ism* *al-fi’l* (verbal noun) which is used in the sense of a transitive
verb or as its substitute. عليكم أنفسكمmeans ألزموا أنفسكم (i.e. ‘Look
after your own souls’)[^2] Accordingly this ba’ (in بصلاة ) is for the
sake of stress and emphasis and not for making the verb transitive.

In the Majma’ al-bahrayn it is stated that if the ba’ be transitive it
gives the sense of استمسك (i.e. stick to). This kind of expression does
not exist in Persian, and in Arabic it is used for intensive emphasis
upon a certain matter. Probably, a close Persian expression for it would
beبچسب به فلان كار. However, its translation as something like بر تو باد
به فلان does not accord with common usage. God willing, we will expound
the relevant themes of the tradition in the course of a preface and
several sections.

Preface
-------

In this noble tradition, there are several aspects which reveal that
these exhortations made by the Noble Messenger (S) to the Commander of
the Faithful, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A), were very important in his blessed
eyes. One of them is that these were addressed to the Commander of the
Faithful (A) though that master stood above any possibility of
negligence in regard to the laws of the *Shari’ah* and Divine
commandments.

However, since the matter was itself of supreme significance in the
blessed eyes of the Noble Messenger of Allah (S) he did not refrain from
exhorting him, and it is quite usual to find him exhorting someone
concerning a matter that he considers as important and is concerned
about, though he may know that that person will carry it out without
fail.

As to the possibility that this counsel given to that holy personage was
really aimed at others, being of the kind referred to in the proverb
إياكِ أعني واسمعي يا جارةُ (i.e. ‘I tell you in order that the neighbor
may hear’), such a possibility is remote. That is because the very
context of the tradition bears witness that it was addressed to him and
aimed independently at that holy personage, as indicated by the words في
نفسك (in yourself) and the order to cherish and safeguard them, as yell
as the invocation for Divine assistance.

These kind of exhortations were customary amongst the Ahl al-Bayt and it
was usual for the Infallible Imams (A) to make them to one another. The
very context of every one of these exhortations clearly shows that they
were addressed by those holy personages to one another. Hence, in one of
these counsels the Commander of the Faithful (A)says to Imam al-Hasan
and Imam al-Husayn (A): “This is my counsel to the two of you and the
other members of my household, as well as anyone whom this letter of
mine should reach…”‘[^3]

It is clear that the Hasanayn (A) were included in this counsel and
these exhortations reveal the supreme importance of the matter and the
intensity of the love that those holy personages had for one another. In
fine, the very fact that the Commander of the Faithful (A) should be the
addressee of these exhortations reveals the great importance of the
matter.

Another point is that although it was addressed to Hadrat Amir (i.e.
Imam ‘Ali), who would never have done anything against the Messenger’s
exhortations or treated them with laxity or negligence, the Prophet
considered it essential to stress the matter with such a great force.

Another point is that after saying “I exhort you,” he added, “you must
safeguard them as a trust from me” in order to bring to his attention
the importance of these exhortations. Thereafter, on account of his
desire that Hadrat Amir should fulfill these important duties, he
supplicated saying, “O God, help him.” In addition, there are other
scattered points of stress in a number of the sentences, as indicated by
the *nun* of emphasis (as in لا يخرجن), the use of repetition, and so
on, which need not be mentioned. All this shows the importance of these
matters.

Of course, it is obvious that the Prophet’s sacred personage had no
imaginable self-interest in any of these matters and his sole concern
was to benefit his addressee. And although Hadrat Amir (A), was the one
to whom these exhortations were originally addressed, but since these
duties are of a universal nature, we should do our utmost so that the
exhortations of the Messenger of God (S) do not go unheeded. We should
know that the greatness of the love that the Noble Messenger (S) had for
Hadrat Amir (A) requires that there be a very great benefit in these
matters and that they be so much important that he should have mentioned
them in this manner. And God knows best.

The Evils Of Lying
------------------

One of the exhortations of the Noble Messenger (S) enjoins truthfulness
and requires abstention from falsehood. The fact that it is mentioned
foremost amongst his exhortations shows that its importance was greater
in his venerable opinion than all the other things. We shall mention the
evils of lying before the benefits and virtues of truthfulness. Hence,
know that this vice is one about whose ugly and vicious character there
is agreement between reason and revelation. In itself, it is one of the
major sins and indecencies, as indicated by many traditions.

Moreover, at times it leads to other vices whose ugliness and
viciousness is no lesser than this fatal sin. Sometimes it happens that
due to the discovery of a single lie a man so loses his credibility in
the eyes of the people that its loss cannot be compensated for until the
end of his life. God forbid that one should ever become known for being
a liar, for; perhaps, there is nothing that can do a greater injury to
one’s repute.

In addition to this, the religious harms and otherworldly punishments
associated with it are also numerous. Here we will confine ourselves to
mentioning some of the noble traditions relating to this topic and
refrain from undue elaboration, for the matter is of a clear and
well-known character.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُوِيَ فِي الوَسَائِلِ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ
أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ جَعَلَ
لِلشَّرِّ أَقْفالاً وَجَعَلَ مَفَاتِيحَ تِلْكَ الأَقْفَالِ الشَّرَابَ.
وَالكَذِبُ شَرٌّ مِنَ الشَّرَابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Wasa’il, it is narrated from Muhammad ibn Ya’qub, who reports with
his isnad from Abu Ja’far (Imam al-Baqir) (A) that he said, “Verily,
God, Almighty and Glorious, has assigned certain locks for evil and made
wine the key to these locks. Yet falsehood is more evil than wine.”[^4]

Now reflect a little on this sacred tradition, whose source is the
Learned One of the Prophet’s Household (*‘Alim* Al *Muhammad*) and which
is recorded in a book which serves as a source book for all the *ulama*
of the Ummah (R)and which is accepted by all of them, and see if there
remains any room for any excuse. Can a lax attitude in regard to lying
have any cause other than weakness of faith in the traditions of the
infallible Ahl al-Bayt (A)?

We do not know the Hidden forms of our deeds and are unaware of the
spiritual links between the realms of *mulk* and *malakut. As* a result,
we regard this kind of traditions as far-fetched and consider those like
them as overstatements. This is itself an erroneous approach arising
from nescience and feeble faith. If, supposedly, we consider this noble
tradition as an hyperbole, shouldn’t there be some grounds for the
exaggeration to be proper to the occasion? Can it be said of anything
that it is worse than wine? Isn’t it that the evil of that thing should
be so great that one may hyperbolize it by stating that it is worse than
wine?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: الكَذِبُ
هُوَ خَرَابُ الإيمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hadrat Baqir al-‘Ulum, i.e. Imam al-Baqir (A), said, “Lying is the ruin
of faith.”[^5]

Truly, such traditions as this make one’s heart tremble and give one
cold feet. I think lying is one of those behavioral vices, which are so
prevalent that their ugliness has totally disappeared. We only become
aware [of its evil character] at a time when we wake up to find our
faith, which is the most vital asset of the life of the Hereafter,
forfeited as a result of this fatal sin without our knowing it.

It has been narrated from the Eighth Imam (A)that he said, “The Seal of
the Prophets was asked if a believer could possibly be cowardly and
timid. ‘Yes,’ he replied. Then they asked him if he could be stingy.
‘Yes,’ he said. ‘Can ale be a liar?’ they asked him. ‘No!’ came the
Prophet’s reply.”

It has been narrated from the Truthful of the Sect (*Saduq* al-Ta’fah,
i.e. al-Shaykh al-Suduq) that he said, “Amongst the sayings of the
Messenger of God is the statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرْبَى الرِّبَا الكَذِبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lying exceeds usury [in its evil].[^6]

Such is the matter, whereas the severity of the banality of usury has
been so much emphasized as to make one amazed.

Of the things that one should note is that telling an untruth even in
jest and for humor’s sake has been considered lying and regarded with
severity. The *ulama* have also prohibited it in their fatwas. Thus, the
author of *al-Wasa’il* (M) has given the following title to a chapter
[in his compilation] -a title that accords with his *fatwa*:

“Chapter on the prohibition of lying, in small and big matters, in
serious talk and in jest, to the exclusion of what has been excepted.”

In the noble *al-Kafi*, it is reported through a chain of transmission
reaching up to Imam al-Baqir (A) that the said, “ ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn
(A)used to tell his sons: ‘Refrain from falsehood in your speech,
whether it is a small or big matter, whether it is said in serious talk
or in jest. That is because lying in trivial matters produces the
temerity to lie in big matters. Don’t you know that the Messenger of
Allah (S) said, “There is a servant of God who so perseveres in
truthfulness that God writes his name amongst the truthful ones, and
there is a servant who makes lying his wont until God, the Exalted,
styles him a liar?”[^7]

Again *al-Kafi* reports with its *isnad* reaching up to the venerated
Asbagh ibn Nubatah that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَمِيرُ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: لا يَجِدُ عَبْدٌ
طَعْمَ الإيمَانِ حَتَّى يَتْرُكَ الكَذِبَ هَزْلَهُ وَجِدَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Commander of the Faithful (A) said, “One does not taste the flavor
of faith until he refrains from lying, in serious speech and in
jest.”[^8]

In a counsel given by the Noble Messenger (S) to Hadrat Abu Dharr
al-Ghifari, the Prophet is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا ذَرٍّ، وَيْلٌ لِلَّذِي يُحَدِّثُ فَيَكْذِبُ لِيُضْحِكَ بِهِ
القَوْمَ! وَيْلٌ لَهُ! وَيْلٌ لَهُ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Abu Dharr, woe to the man who tells lies in order to make other people
laugh. Woe to him! Woe to him!

Now, with all these traditions and severe warnings of the Messenger of
God and the Imams of guidance (A), it needs great audacity and
wretchedness for one to perpetrate this enormity and commit this serious
vice.

In the same way as lying has been considered as one of the most serious
vices, truthfulness of speech has been commended as one of the most
significant of virtues. It has been highly praised in the traditions of
the Ahl al-Bayt, and here we will confine ourselves to mentioning some
of them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ يَعْقُوبَ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ قَالَ: كُونُوا دُعَاةً لِلنَّاسِ بِالخَيْرِ بِغَيْرِ
أَلْسِنَتِكُمْ لِيَرَوا مِنْكُمُ الإجْتِهَادَ وَالصِّدْقَ وَالوَرَعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub reports with his isnad from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that
he said, “Call people to righteousness through means other than your
tongues, that they may observe diligence, truthfulness and piety in
you.’[^9]

The venerated Saduq reports with his *isnad* from the Messenger of God
(S) that he said, “The nearest of you to me on the Day of Resurrection
and the worthiest of my intercession will be the one who is the most
truthful amongst you, the most reliable amongst you in regard to his
trusts, the most genial of you in disposition, and the closest amongst
you to the common people.”

The Meaning Of Wara’ And Its Levels
-----------------------------------

*Wara’* has been reckoned as one of the stages of the wayfarer’s
journey. In accordance with the definition of it given by the well-known
gnostic, the venerable Khwajah ‘Abd Allah Ansari, it is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ تَوْقٌ مُسْتَقْصىً عَلَى حَذَرٍ أَوْ تَحَرُّجٍ عَلَى تَعْظِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It means that *wara’* is the utmost of restraint and the ultimate of
self-vigilance accompanied with the fear of stumbling; or it means
subjecting the soul to a rigorous discipline for the sake of God’s
glorification. And this includes all its levels, because there are many
degrees of *wara.* Thus the *wara’* of the common people consists of
abstaining from major sins, whereas the *wara’* of the elect (*khassah*)
consists of refraining from suspect things for the fear of falling into
what is unlawful (*muharramat*)*,* as indicated by the noble *hadith
al-tathlith.*[^10]

The *wara’* of the *zahid* (ascetic) consists of abstaining from lawful
things for the sake of avoiding the burden (of answerability) that they
entail. The wara’ of the wayfarers of the path of gnosis is abstaining
from beholding the world for the sake of attaining to the stations
(maqamat). The wara’ of those captivated by the Divine Being (majdhubun)
is to relinquish the stations for reaching the Threshold of Allah and
witnessing His Beauty. The wara’ of the awliya’ is to refrain from
paying attention to ends (ghayat). Each of these has an elaborate
description, engaging wherein is not beneficial for our state.

However, that which we should know in this connection is that the
exercising of wara’ or piety in relation to what Allah has made unlawful
(*haram*) is the root of all spiritual excellences and Hereafterly
stations, and none can attain any station whatsoever except by
abstaining from the muharramat.

A heart that does not possess this wara’ becomes so covered with rust
and obfuscations that there ceases to be any hope of its deliverance.
The purity of the souls and their burnish comes through wara’. This is
the most important of the stages for the common people, and reaching it
is one of the most essential goals of the wayfarer of the path of the
Hereafter. Its excellence, as described in the traditions of the
infallible Ahl al-Bayt (A) is more than what can be mentioned in these
pages. We will confine ourselves to mentioning some of these traditions,
and anyone seeking further details should refer to the compilations of
*hadith*.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
أُوصِيكَ بِتَقْوَى اللهِ وَالوَرَعِ وَالإجْتِهَادِ، وَاعْلَمْ إنَّهُ
لا يَنْفَعُ اجْتِهَادٌ لا وَرَعَ فِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi of, al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A)
that he said, “I exhort you concerning God-fearing, wara’, and diligence
in worship, and know that a diligence that is devoid of wara’ is of no
benefit.”[^11]

There are still other traditions containing this theme. They indicate
that a worship that is devoid of *wara’* is devoid of worth. It is
obvious that the main purpose of the acts of worship is self-discipline
and restraint, and its aim is the domination of *malakut* over the realm
of *mulk* and physical nature, which cannot be perfectly realized
without intense *wara’* and piety.

The souls, which are afflicted with sinfulness and disobedience to God
are unreceptive to the spiritual forms. Any effort to impress these
forms on the tablet of the soul is futile unless the tablet’s surface is
first cleared from the obfuscations of rust. Thus worship, which is the
form of the perfection of the soul, remains futile without purifying the
soul from the rust of sinfulness. Without the soul’s burnish, it remains
an empty form devoid of meaning, and a body without spirit.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ يَزِيدَ بْنِ خَلِيفَةَ قَالَ: وَعَظَنَا أَبُو
عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فَأَمرَ وَزَهَّدَ ثُمَّ قَالَ:
عَلَيْكُمْ بِالوَرَعِ فَإنَّهُ لا يُنَالُ مَا عِنْدَ اللهِ إلاّ
بِالوَرَعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yazid ibn Khalifah says: Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) sermoned us, exhorting and
directing us to adopt zuhd. Then he said, “Commit yourselves to wara’,
for, verily, that which is with God cannot be attained by anything
except wara’.”[^12]

Thus, in accordance with this sacred tradition a man who is devoid of
*wara’* is deprived from the bounties that God, the Exalted, has
promised His servants, and this is the height of wretchedness and
failure.

The following tradition is reported with *isnad* from Imam al-Baqir (A):

The Imam said, “Our wilayah cannot be attained except with works (of
righteousness) and piety.”

In another tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (A) says:

“One who lives in a city of a hundred thousand wherein there are other
people more pious than him, such a one is not one of our followers
(shi’ah).”‘[^13]

The same assertion is made in a tradition recorded in the noble
*al-Kafi*.[^14]

It should be known that, in accordance with the noble traditions, the
criterion of perfection in *wara’* is abstention from that which has
been forbidden by God, and anyone who refrains from what God has made
unlawful is considered the most pious of men. So do not let Satan make
this matter appear as greatly difficult in your eyes, and make you
despairing and despondent. For it is the habit of that accursed one to
lead man into everlasting wretchedness by the way of despair.

For instance, in this regard he will tell you: “How is it possible to
the most pious person in a city of hundred thousand people or more?”
This is one of the tricks of that damned creature and the insinuations
of the carnal ego. The answer to this is that, in accordance with the
traditions, everyone who refrains from what God has decreed as unlawful
stands in the ranks of the most pious of men referred to in these
traditions. Refraining from the Divine *muharramat* is not a very
difficult task. Rather, with a measure of spiritual training and
practical effort one can avoid all the *muharramat*.

Of course, if one desires to be one of the felicitous and one of those
who attain salvation, and if one aspires for the protection of the
*wilayah* of the Ahl al-Bayt and the mercy of God, the Exalted, without
possessing at least this much of forbearance in regard to sin, that
cannot be. Certainly, a measure of resistance, forbearance, and
austerity is essential.

The Evils Of Treachery And The Meaning Of Trustworthiness
---------------------------------------------------------

There is a point here that needs some elucidation, which is that the
Noble Messenger (S) refers to the avoidance of betrayal of trust as a
matter subsidiary to his exhortation regarding *wara’*. That, despite
the fact that *wara’* relates to the generality of *muharramat* or, as
said, is something still more inclusive. Hence ‘treachery’ here must
either be taken in a wider sense corresponding to *wara’*, than the
customary sense of it, in which case it would include the generality of
sins and perpetration of anything that is an obstacle in the Godward
wayfaring and which amounts to a betrayal of trust. That is because the
Divine duties are Divine trusts, as pointed out in this noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا عَرَضْنَا الْأَمَانَةَ عَلَى السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ
وَالْجِبَالِ فَأَبَيْنَ أَنْ يَحْمِلْنَهَا وَأَشْفَقْنَ مِنْهَا
وَحَمَلَهَا الْإِنْسَانُ إِنَّهُ كَانَ ظَلُومًا جَهُولًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We offered the Trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains,
but they refused to carry it and were afraid of it; and man carried it.
Surely, he is unjust, ignorant.*** (***33:72***)

Some exegetes have interpreted [the ‘Trust’ in this verse] as the Divine
duties. Rather, all the bodily members, organs, and faculties are God’s
trusts and their use in a manner contrary to God’s good pleasure is a
betrayal of trust. Similarly, turning the heart’s attention to anything
other than God is a treachery:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين جان عاريت كه به حافظ سپرده دوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روزي رخش ببينم وتسليم وي كنم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This soul that the Friend had lent to Hafiz as a trust,*

*I’ll restore to Him one day when I see His face.*

Or, what is meant by ‘treachery’ here is its usual sense, and that it
has been singled out here for mention due to its great importance, as if
the totality of *wara’* lay in refraining from betrayal of trust. If one
were to make a study of the traditions of the Infallible Ones (A)
concerning the delivery of trust and abstention from treachery, one
would understand how important this matter is in the view of the Holy
Lawgiver.

Moreover, its innate viciousness is not hidden from any sensible person.
The perfidious person is to be reckoned as standing outside the fold of
humanity and counted among the vilest of devils. It is obvious that if
someone becomes notorious among the people for his treacherous and
villainous character, his life will be greatly miserable in this world
itself.

Mankind can lead a prosperous life in this world only through mutual
help and cooperation. It is not feasible for anyone to lead an isolated
existence, which is possible only if he leaves the society of men to
join the fold of wild beasts. The great wheel of social life revolves on
the axis of mutual confidence amongst the people. If, God forbid, mutual
confidence were to depart from the life of mankind, it would not be
possible for them to lead a satisfactory life. The great pillar of
mutual confidence rests on trustworthiness and abstention from
treachery.

Hence, the treacherous person does not enjoy the confidence of others
and is an outcast from civil life and the membership of human society.
His membership is not accepted in the walks of civic existence and such
a person, obviously, lives a life of hardship and misery. In order that
the benefit of this section be complete, we shall cite some traditions
of the infallible Ahl al-Bayt concerning this theme, and these suffice
wakeful hearts and open eyes.

**  
**

مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ يَعْقُوبَ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ قَالَ: لا تَنْظُرُوا إلَى طُولِ رُكُوعِ الرَّجُلِ وَسُجُودِهِ
فَإنَّ ذَلِكَ شَيْءٌ اعْتَادَهُ وَلَوْ تَرَكَهُ اسْتَوْحَشَ لِذَلِكَ.
وَلَكِنِ انْظُرُوا إلَى صِدْقِ حَدِيثِهِ وَأَدَاءِ أَمَانَتِهِ.

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni) narrates with his isnad from Abu ‘Abd
Allah (A) that he said, “Don’t look at the protracted kneelings and
prostrations of a man, for that is something which he does out of habit
and would be upset if he were to neglect them. But look at the
truthfulness of his speech and his fulfillment of trusts.[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي كَهْمَسَ قَالَ: قُلْتُ لأَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: عَبْدُاللهِ بْنُ أَبِي يَعْفُورَ يُقْرِئُكَ
السَّلامَ. قَالَ: عَلَيْكَ وَعَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ، إذَا أَتَيْتَ
عَبْدَاللهِ فَأَقْرِئْهُ السَّلامَ وَقُلْ لَهُ: إنَّ جَعْفَرَ بْنَ
مُحَمَّدٍ يَقُولُ لَكَ انْظُرْ مَا بَلَغَ بِهِ عَلِيٌّ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ
اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَالْزَمْهُ فَإنَّ عَلِيّاً
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ إنَّمَا بَلَغَ مَا بَلَغَ بِهِ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللهِ
بِصِدْقِ الحَدِيثِ وَأَدَاءِ الأَمَانَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Abu Kahmas that he said: I said
to Abu ‘Abd Allah (A): “Abd Allah ibn Abi Ya’fur conveys his salam to
you.” The Imam replied: “May peace be upon you and upon him. When you
see ‘Abd Allah convey my greetings and tell him that Ja’far ibn Muhammad
says to you: Consider what made ‘Ali attain the standing that he
attained with the Messenger of God (S) and stick to it, for, verily,
‘Ali (A) attained the standing that he attained with the Messenger of
Allah through truthfulness of speech and fulfillment of trust.”[^16]

And you, my dear, reflect upon this sacred tradition and behold how
sublime is the station of truthfulness and trustworthiness, which
brought ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A) to that lofty station of his! This
tradition shows that the Messenger of God loved these two
characteristics more than anything else, and amongst the attributes of
perfection of *Mawla*- ‘Ali (A)it were these two which had brought him
so close to the Prophet and raised him to that distinguished station.

Also Imam al-Sadiq (A) recommends these two, from among all kinds of
deeds and characteristics, to Ibn Abi Ya’fur, who was a dedicated and
self-effacing follower of the Imam, and sends him a message asking him
to cling to them, because they were very important in his blessed eyes.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ
أَبُو ذَرٍّ رَضِيَ اللهُ عَنْهُ: سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يَقُولُ: حَافَّتَا الصِّرَاطِ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ
الرَّحِمُ وَأَدَاءُ الأَمَانَةِ. فَإذَا مَرَّ الوَصُولُ لِلرَّحِمِ
المُؤَدِّي لِلأَمَانَةِ نَفَذَ إلَى الجَنَّةِ. وَإذَا مَرَّ الخَائِنُ
لِلأَمَانَةِ القَطُوعُ لِلرَّحِمِ لَمْ يَنْفَعْهُ مَعَهُمَا عَمَلٌ
وَتَكَفَّأَ بِهِ الصِّرَاطُ فِي النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Abu Ja’far (A) that he said:
Abu Dharr (R) said: I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say: “On the Day
of Resurrection the Womb and the Trust shall stand on the two sides of
the Sirat. When one who has fulfilled the duties of kinship and
discharged his trusts passes over (the Sirat), he will cross over to
paradise. But when the betrayer of trust or the violator of the rights
of kinship passes over it, no work of his will benefit him by the side
of these (vices), and the Sirat will turn him over into hell.”[^17]

This indicates that the [otherworldly] forms of the Womb and the Trust
shall stand on the two sides of the *Sirat* in that world and they will
assist one who has fulfilled the duties of blood relationship and
discharged his trusts. No work will benefit him if he has violated these
two, and they will cast him into hell.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ
أَمِيرُ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: أَدُّوا الأَمَانَةَ وَلَوْ
إلَى قَاتِلِ وُلْدِ الأَنْبِيَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said:
Amir al-Mu’minin (A) said, “Discharge your trusts, even if they pertain
to a murderer of the offspring of the Prophets.”[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فِي وَصِيَّةٍ
لَهُ: إعْلَمْ أنَّ ضَارِبَ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ بِالسَّيْفِ
وَقَاتِلَهُ لَوِ ائْتَمَنَنِي وَاسْتَنْصَحَنِي وَاسْتَشَارَنِي ثُمَّ
قَبِلْتُ ذَلِكَ مِنْهُ لأَدَّيْتُ إلَيْهِ الأَمَانَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said
in one of his exhortations, “Know shat even if the assassin of ‘Ali (A)
who struck him with the sword, were to entrust me with something and
were he to seek my advice and counsel, and were I to accept his request,
I would not betray his trust.”[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عَلِيِّ بْنِ الحُسَيْنِ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي
حَمْزَةَ الثُّمَالِيِّ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ سَيِّدَ العَابِدِينَ عَلِيَّ
بْنَ الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
يَقُولُ لِشِيعَتِهِ: عَلَيْكُمْ بِأَدَاءِ الأَمَانَةِ، فَوَالَّذِي
بَعَثَ مُحَمَّداً صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ بِالحَقِّ نَبِيّاً
لَوْ أنَّ قَاتِلَ أَبِي الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ
ائْتَمَنَنِي عَلَى السَّيْفِ الَّذِي قَتَلَهُ بِهِ لأَدَّيْتُهُ
إلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reports with his isnad from Abu Hamzah
al-Thumali that he said: I heard the Master of the Devout, ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A)say to his followers (shi’ah),
“Commit yourself to trustworthiness; for, by Him Who sent Muhammad (S)
with the Truth as a Prophet, even if the killer of my father, al-Husayn
ibn ‘Ali (A) were to entrust me with the sword with which he had killed
him, I would not betray his trust.”[^20]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وِبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ الصَّادِقِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ عَنْ آبَائِهِ
عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلامُ عَنِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فِي
حَدِيثِ المَنَاهِي أنَّهُ نَهَى عَنِ الخِيَانَةِ وَقَالَ: مَنْ خَانَ
أَمَانَةً فِي الدُّنْيَا وَلَمْ يَرُدَّهَا إلَى أَهْلِهَا ثُمَّ
أَدْرَكَهُ المَوْتُ مَاتَ عَلَى غَيْرِ مِلَّتِي وَيَلْقَى اللهَ وَهُوَ
عَلَيْهِ غَضْبَانَ. وَمَنِ اشْتَرَى خِيَانَةً وَهُوَ يَعْلَمُ فَهُوَ
كَالَّذِي خَانَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Saduq reports) with his isnad from Imam al-Sadiq (A)that he narrated
from his ancestors from the Prophet (S) that, in a tradition concerning
certain proscribed acts, he forbade the betrayal of trust and said,
“Whoever betrays a trust in the life of the world, not delivering it to
those to whom it belongs, and then dies, such a person doesn’t die upon
my creed and he shall meet God in a state wherein He will be wrathful
with him. And whoever knowingly purchases the despoils of treachery is
like the traitor.”[^21]

There are other traditions of this kind, and it is obvious what
consequences will result from the wrath of God’s Sacred Being upon a
servant. Of course, the venerable intercessors, too, will not intercede
on behalf of someone who is the object of God’s wrath, especially since
the betrayer of trust is out of the pale of the creed of the Messenger
of Allah (S). It is stated in a (prophetic) tradition that:

Whoever commits a breach of trust in regard to a believer does not
belong to me.”[^22]

It is mentioned in another tradition that such a man “is outside the
faith of Islam and he will be cast into the abyss of hell for ever and
ever.”[^23] I seek refuge in God from the evil of this vice.

It is obvious that the breach of a believer’s trust includes dishonesty
of a financial nature as well as other breaches of trust that are of a
more serious nature. Hence, one should be very vigilant of the carnal
self, which may make one turn a blind eye to certain matters and make
their vicious character appear as something trivial and simple, though
they be the cause of everlasting wretchedness and perpetual ignominy.
This is the state of those who commit treachery against God’s creatures,
and from this, we come to know the state of treachery in relation to the
trust of God, the Exalted.

Concerning Some Divine Trusts
-----------------------------

It should be known that God, the Blessed and the Exalted, has bestowed
upon us all our outward and inward faculties and bodily members and
organs. He has spread out the table of bounties and beneficence
throughout the inner and outer realms of our being, subjecting all of
them to our power. He delivered them to us as trusts in a form wherein
all of them were pure, immaculate, and free from formal and spiritual
impurities. Everything that He sent down for us from the world of the
Hidden, was pure and free from any kind of contamination.

Therefore, if while meeting that Sacred Being we return these trusts to
Him in the condition of purity from the contaminations of the corporeal
sphere and the impurities of the mundane world and mulk, we shall be
reckoned as trustworthy; otherwise we shall be held guilty of betrayal
of trust and cast outside the pale of genuine Islam and the creed of the
Noble Messenger (S).

It is mentioned in a famous *hadith* that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَلْبُ المُؤْمِنِ عَرْشُ الرَّحْمَنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The heart of the believer is the throne of the All-Beneficent.

And it is said in a well-known *hadith qudsi*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَسَعُنِي أَرْضِي وَلا سَمَائِي، بَلْ يَسَعُنِي قَلْبُ عَبْدِيَ
المُؤْمِنُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Neither [the vastness of] My earth, nor [that of] My heaven can contain
Me. Indeed it is the heart of the man of faith which can contain
Me.[^24]

The believer’s heart is the throne and seat of Godhead and the abode of
that Sacred Being. That Sacred Being is the owner of the heart. Riveting
the heart’s attention on other than God, the Exalted, is a breach of His
trust. The love of anything other than that of the Holy Being and His
elect, loving whom is the same as loving Him, is considered a treachery
in the creed of gnosis. The *wilayah* of the Household of Purity and
Infallibility and the friendship of the Family of the Messenger (A) and
the gnosis of their holy station is a Divine trust.

Accordingly, in many noble traditions the word ‘Trust’ (in verse 33:72)
has been interpreted as the *wilayah* of the Commander of the Faithful,
‘Ali (A). In the same way as the usurpation of the authority and office
of that personage is a treason, so also the failure to follow that
sacred personage is one of the degrees of treachery. And it is mentioned
in the sacred traditions that “A *shi’ah* is one who follows [the
Ahl-al-Bayt] in a complete manner. Otherwise, the mere claim of being a
*shi’ah* will not be considered as *tashayyu’* (shi’i hood).”

Many of our fancies belong to the category of fake longings. At the mere
feeling of love for Hadrat Amir (A) in our hearts, we become proud of
this love and imagine that this love will survive even if we don’t
continue to follow him. But what surety is there that this attachment
will survive if we fail to take care of it and if we neglect the
attendant qualities of this love’’

It is possible that during the pangs of death, which are experienced by
all except the Faithful (*mu’minun*) and the Sincere (*mukhlasun*)*,*
one may forget ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A) as a result of the panic and
terror of the last agony. It is mentioned in a tradition that a group of
sinners facing punishment in hell will forget the name of the Noble
Messenger (S). When their term of punishment draws to its close and they
are purged of and purified from the filth of sin, the blessed name of
the Prophet shall come to their memory, or they will be reminded of it.

Thereupon, they will raise the cry of ‘*Wa Muhammada!’* O Muhammad! (S).
Thereat, they will receive mercy and release. We imagine that the
encounter with death and the last agony is something similar to the
experiences of this world. My dear! A short attack of fever is
sufficient to make you forget everything that you know. Think what will
happen when those calamities, agonies, terrors, and panics hold you in
their grip! If one loves and fulfills the requisites of that love,
remembering the beloved and following him, of course, such a love of the
absolute friend and the absolute beloved of God shall enjoy Divine
favor.

But if one makes merely a claim unaccompanied by action, or, rather,
accompanied by defiance, it is possible that before he departs from this
world its diversions, vicissitudes, and shifting scenes may lead one to
forsake the love of that Master, or, *na’udhubilldh,* turn one into his
enemy. We have seen persons who claimed to befriend God and the
Messenger (S) but who, after moving about in degenerate company and
adopting evil conduct, became hostile to the Prophet and his Family (A).

And even if, supposedly, one were to depart from this world with that
love, though he will ultimately attain salvation and felicity in
accordance with certain noble traditions and sacred verses, yet he will
still have to suffer the afflictions of Barzakh and the terrors of death
and resurrection in accordance with this tradition: “We shall intercede
in your favor on the Day of Resurrection. But it is up to yourselves to
do something for the life of Barzakh.”[^25]

I seek God’s refuge from the punishment and pressures of the grave and
the hardships and tortures of Barzakh, which have no resemblance to
anything in this world. That door of hell which opens into the grave,
should it be opened upon this world, it will destroy all its creatures.
God be our refuge from such horrors.

The Fear Of God Almighty
------------------------

Know that the fear of God, the Exalted, is one of the stages that is
hardly equaled by any other in respect of the common people. Aside from
the fact that this fear is itself one of spiritual excellences, it is
the source of many virtues of the spirit and one of the important
reforming agents of the soul. Rather, it may be reckoned as the
mainspring of all reform and the healing source of all spiritual
ailments.

A human being with faith in God and a wayfarer and emigrant towards
Allah should give utmost importance to this stage and pay great
attention to everything that increases it in the heart and strengthens
its roots, such as the remembrance of chastisement and punishment,
recalling the severity of the perilous passes of death, and, after
death, those of Barzakh and resurrection, the terrors of the *Sirat,*
the Balance, the scrutinies of the Reckoning, and the various
punishments of hell, as well, as the remembrance of the Might, Glory,
Irresistibility, and Sovereignty of God and the remembrance of the
gradualness of deviation (*istidraj*)*,* the Divine stratagems, the
possible evil of one’s ultimate end and the like. Since we have in these
pages described all these stages to some extent, we shall confine
ourselves here to citing some traditions concerning the merits of the
fear of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ يَعْقُوبَ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ إسْحَاقَ بْنِ عَمَّارٍ
قَالَ: قَالَ أَبُو عَبْدِاللهِ الصَّادِقِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: «خَفِ
اللّهَ كَأَنَّكَ تَرَاهُ، وَإنْ كُنْتَ لا تَرَاهُ فَإنَّهُ يَرَاكَ،
وَإنْ كُنْتَ تَرَى أنَّهُ لا يَرَاكَ فَقَدْ كَفَرْتَ، وَإنْ كُنْتَ
تَعْلَمُ أنَّهُ يَرَاكَ ثُمَّ بَرَزْتَ لَهُ بِالمَعْصِيَةِ، فَقَدْ
جَعَلْتَهُ مِنْ أَهْوَنِ النَّاظِرِينَ إلَيْكَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub reports with his isnad from Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar that he
said: Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) said, “O Ishaq, fear God as if you see Him. For
if you don’t see Him, indeed He sees you. And if you imagine that He
does not see you, you have disbelieved. And if you know that indeed He
sees you and yet go forth to disobey Him, then you have made Him the
least of onlookers who behold you.”[^26]

Know that if someone should understand the character of the
manifestation of the Divine in mulk and malakut and the revelation of
that Sacred Essence in the heavens and the earths, either through
unmediated (*huduri*) experience, or epiphany, or through real faith,
and should he apprehend the relation of God to creation and the relation
of creation to God as it really is, and should he have the knowledge of
the character of the manifestation of the Divine Will in determinate
things and their dissolution *fana’in* it, as it really is, he would
know that God, the Exalted, is present in all places and realms, and he
would observe Him with unmediated knowledge (*‘ilm* *huduri*) in all
existents, as stated by Imam al-Sadiq (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا رَأَيْتُ شَيْئاً إلاّ وَرَأَيْتُ اللهَ مَعَهُ أَوْ فِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I don’t see a thing without seeing God with it or in it.

In the intimacy of the *nawafil* (supererogatory prayers) the true
meaning of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنْتُ سَمْعَهُ وَبَصَرَهُ وَيَدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I will be his hearing, his sight and his hand,

and other than that will become disclosed to him. Then, he will see, in
accordance with his own station, the Divine Presence in all the levels
of being, knowledgewise or faithwise or through direct experience and
epiphany.

Of course, at this stage, the wayfarer-whatever his rank-would observe
the etiquette of the Divine Presence and refrain from the defiance of
that Sacred Essence. That is because the observance of presence and its
etiquette is something innate in human beings, and no matter how
shameless a person might be, absence and presence [of someone are not
the same for him, especially when the presence is that of the All-mighty
and the All-perfect Provider, which is independently impressed in the
presence-observing nature of everyone.

The Disparity Of People In Observing The Divine Presence
--------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that every believer, wayfarer, gnostic, and *wali*
observes the etiquette of the Divine Presence in a manner that is
special to him. Hence, the faithful and the God-fearing consider
observance of the presence to lie in abstaining from unlawful things and
in observing the precepts. The *majdhubun* consider it to lie in
refraining from attending to other-than-God and in directing one’s
perfect and complete attention to God. The *awliya’* and the Perfect
consider it to lie in the negation of otherness, as well as the negation
of the ego.

In fine, one of the sublime stations of the gnostics and the people of
the heart is the experience of Divine Presence and its observance.
Hence, with the apprehension of the character of God’s active knowledge
and the dissolution of all things in His Sacred Essence and the presence
of all beings before Him, and with the understanding that the realm of
being is present before the Lord, each of them, whatever his station,
observes the requisites of presence. Also, this is an innate
characteristic of the human nature.

The Noble Messenger (S) has referred to the first station in the
spiritual counsel that he gave to Hadrat Amir (A) and which we are now
engaged in expounding. The same station is referred to in the noble
tradition narrated by Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar, wherein the Imam (A) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالثَّالِثَةُ الخَوْفُ مِنَ اللهِ عَزَّ ذِكْرُهُ كَأَنَّكَ تَرَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the third thing is to fear God-sublime is His remembrance-as if you
see Him.

And where he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَفِ اللهَ كَأَنَّكَ تَرَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fear God as if you see Him.

Imam al-Sadiq (A) refers to the second station where he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإنْ كُنْتَ لا تَرَاهُ فَإنَّهُ يَرَاكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

For if you don’t see Him, verily He sees you.

Imam al-Sadiq (A) refers to the natural proclivity to observe presence
in his statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإنْ كُنْتَ تَعْلَمُ أنَّهُ يَرَاكَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

And if you know that He indeed sees you

…

Further, there are various levels of the fear in accordance with the
different levels of the faithful, the wayfarers, and the people of
austerities and gnosis, and one of its higher levels is the fear of the
Greatness of God and the manifestations of Divine Might and Glory. It is
possible not to reckon this station as a level of ‘fear’, as stated by
the famous ‘*arif* in *Manazil al-sa’irin:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيْسَ فِي مَقَامِ أَهْلِ الخُصُوصِ وَحْشَةٌ إلاّ هَيْبَةَ
الإجْلالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, there exists no fear for the people of the heart and the
mysteries of *wilayah* except the awe of Divine Majesty, Magnificence,
Greatness, and Glory.

The Virtues Of Lamentation
--------------------------

There are many virtues in weeping and lamenting for the tear of God. As
mentioned in this noble *hadith*, God shall build a thousand mansions in
paradise for every tear that is shed in fear of Him. The venerable
Shaykh Saduq (R) narrates with his unbroken chain of transmission from
Imam al-Sadiq (A)from his forefathers, from the Noblest Messenger (S)
that he said in a tradition relating to certain things that one should
refrain from: “One whose eyes weep from the fear of God shall be
bestowed for every tear that he sheds a palace ornamented with jewels
and pearls every paradise the like of which no eye has ever seen, no ear
has ever heard, and no heart has ever imagined.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ ثَوَابِ الأَعْمَالِ: بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: لَيْسَ شَيْءٌ
إلاّ وَلَهُ شَيْءٌ يَعْدِلُهُ إلاّ اللهُ، فَإنَّهُ لا يَعْدِلُهُ
شَيْءٌ، وَلا إلَهَ إلاّ اللهُ لا يَعْدِلُهُ شَيْءٌ، وَدَمْعَةٌ مِنْ
خَوْفِ اللهِ فَإنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهَا مِثْقَالٌ، فَإنْ سَالَتْ عَلَى
وَجْهِهِ لَمْ يَرْهَقْهُ قَتَرٌ وَلا ذِلَّةٌ بَعْدَهَا أَبَداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Thawab al-‘a’mal (al-Shaykh al-Saduq reports) with his isnad from
Abu Ja’far (A)that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “Except
God, there is nothing that doesn’t have an equal, for, verily, nothing
equals Him. And there is nothing, which equals [the statement], “There
is no god except God.” And [the worth of] a tear shed in fear of God
cannot be weighed by anything, for the face on which it flows shall
never ever he covered with abasement and humiliation thereafter.”

In *al-Kafi,* it is narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (A) that “Everything has
a weight and measure except tears, for a tear is sufficient to
extinguish seas of fire.” And he said, “If there is a single person who
weeps [out of fear of God] in a community (*ummah*), all of its members
receive Divine mercy.” There is a large number of traditions containing
this theme.[^27]

Doubts Regarding Disproportionate Award
---------------------------------------

That which is essential to point out here is that some feeble souls
lacking conviction question the possibility of such great rewards for
trivial matters. They are ignorant of the fact than if something appears
small to us in this world that does not prove that its Hidden and
*malakuti* form be trivial and insignificant as well. For it is often
the case that a minute creature has an inward and *malakuti* being that
is extremely great and magnificent.

Thus the holy frame and physical form of the last and the noblest of
Messengers, the honored and the venerable Prophet (S) was one of the
small existents of this world, whereas his holy spirit encompassed the
realms of *mulk* and *malakut* and was the mediating means for the
creation of the heavens and the earths.

Therefore, to judge the inward and *malakuti* form of something as
trivial and small, presumes the knowledge of the world of *malakut* and
the inward reality of things. Hence the like of us have no right to make
such a Judgment. Rather, we should open our ears to the pronouncements
of those who have the knowledge of the world of Hereafter, that is, the
prophets and the *awliya’* (A).

Another point is that the basis of that world rests on the expansive
bounteousness and the infinite mercy of God, Glorious and Exalted. There
is no limit or hound to the munificence of God, the Exalted, arid it is
the height of ignorance and nescience to doubt the generosity of the
Absolutely Generous and the infinite mercy of the All-merciful.

All these bounties that He has bestowed upon His creatures, which minds
cannot encompass, or, rather, even the comprehension of whose general
features confounds the intellects, have been awarded without asking and
without any background of deservedness. So why should it appear
incredible if He, out of His sheer generosity and without any prior
deservedness, gives a manifold reward to His servants? A world whose
very basis has been decreed in accordance with [the principle of] the
influence of the human will, and regarding which He has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَفِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِيهِ الْأَنفُسُ وَتَلَذُّ الْأَعْيُنُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Therein being whatever the souls desire, and the eyes delight in.***
(***43:71***)

is it possible to regard it as tar-fetched and improbable, although that
which the human soul desires is without limit and boundless? God,
Blessed and Exalted, has so determined that world and has so fashioned
the human will that anything that it wills would come into existence by
the sheer act of the will.

My dear! The number of the noble traditions and narrations relating to
this kind of rewards is not one or two so that there should remain any
room for denial. Rather, their number exceeds the limit of *tawatur*.
All the reliable and trustworthy works of *hadith* are replete with this
kind of traditions. They are such as if we have heard them directly from
the Infallible Ones themselves (A).

Their character is not such as to allow one to take resort in
interpretation (*ta’wil*). Therefore, to deny the truth of this matter
without any grounds-a matter that is in accordance with *mutawatir*
texts and is not contrary to any discursive proof, or rather agrees with
a certain kind of proof-such a denial springs from weakness of faith and
extreme ignorance. Man should submit to the statements of the prophets
and the *awliya’* (A).

Nothing is better for human perfection than submission to the *awliya’*
of God, especially in matters which human reason cannot fathom and there
is no way to whose understanding except the way of revelation and
prophethood. Should man try to butt in his inadequate intellect and his
fancies and presumptions on matters of the Hidden and the Hereafter and
those relating to worship and religious law, that would ultimately lead
him, little by little and in gradual stages, to deny even the
self-evident necessities of the faith.

Even if, supposedly, you should doubt the authenticity of the traditions
and their chains of transmission-though there is no room for such a
doubt-you cannot question the authority of the Noble Scripture of God,
the Glorious and the Celestial Qur’an. The likes of such rewards are
also mentioned there, as in the following statements of God, the
Exalted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَيْلَةُ الْقَدْرِ خَيْرٌ مِنْ أَلْفِ شَهْرٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Night of al-Qadr is better than a thousand months.***
(***97:3***)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿مَثَلُ الَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ
كَمَثَلِ حَبَّةٍ أَنْبَتَتْ سَبْعَ سَنَابِلَ فِي كُلِّ سُنْبُلَةٍ
مِائَةُ حَبَّةٍ وَاللَّهُ يُضَاعِفُ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The likeness of those who expend their wealth in the way of God is as
the likeness of a grain of corn that sprouts seven ears, in every ear a
hundred grains. So God multiplies unto whom He will, God is
All-embracing, All-Knowing.*** (***2:261***)

My conjecture is that one of the factors responsible for the tendency to
regard such rewards as far-fetched and unlikely and to deny their truth
is the exaggerated sense of the worth of our works and pride in them.
For instance, if someone fasts on a day and spends a whole night in
prayer and later on hears that such acts have a very great reward, he
does not regard such a thing as unlikely, although such a thing is
far-fetched if one were to go by (the proportionality of) wages and
work. But since he considers this act of his as something big and takes
pride in it, he affirms the otherworldly reward of that act.

My dear! This entire duration of our lives, which is some fifty or sixty
years. Even if, supposedly, we carry out therein all our religious
duties and leave the world with a sound faith, with righteous deeds, and
a valid repentance, what measure of reward, do you think, do this
measure of works and this faith of ours deserve? Yet, in accordance with
the Book and the *Sunnah* and the consensus of all religious creeds,
such a person receives Divine mercy and goes to paradise, a paradise
where he will enjoy everlasting gifts and comfort and dwell in eternal
mercy, bliss and fragrance. Is there any room for denying the truth of
this?

And if one were to go by the idea of compensation for work-that is, if
we make the invalid assumption that our works deserve compensation-it
could not be so disproportionate, quality- as well as quantity-wise, to
be beyond the comprehension of human reason. This shows that the matter
is based on another foundation and revolves around some other axis. If
we understand this, there no longer remains any ground for denying this
truth or considering it unlikely and far-fetched.

Raising The Hands In Prayer And Turning Them
--------------------------------------------

Apparently, the statement of the noble tradition, “Make it your practice
to raise your hands during prayer and to turn them,” refers to lifting
them at the time of *takbirat* [i.e. pronouncing “*Allahu* *akbar”*]
*By* ‘turning’ them (*taqlib*) is probably meant the turning of the
palms in the direction of the *kiblah.* Raising the hands at the time of
saying the *takbirat* is one of the *mustahabbat.*

Or, perhaps, that which is meant in the *hadith* is the raising of hands
at the time of *qunut,* and that which is meant by turning them is
turning the palms upwards towards the sky, in accordance with the
*fatwa* of the *fuqaha’ (R)* who have considered it *mustahabb,*
although they disagree concerning its basis in the sources (*dalil*)*,*
even though no other basis is needed after the definite practice of the
devout who know no other manner of saying the *qunut,* and the mere
raising of hands in whatever manner is not sufficient. In any case, that
which is more evident (*azhar*) is that that which is meant in this
sacred tradition is the first probability mentioned.

One should know that the predominant (*mashhur*) opinion amongst the
*fuqaha’* (R) is that it is *mustahabb* to raise one’s hands while
saying the *takbirat* and some of them have held it to be obligatory on
the basis of the apparent import (*zahir*) of certain prescriptions and
traditions that have been narrated in regard to the interpretation of
the sacred verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَصَلِّ لِرَبِّكَ وَانْحَرْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

that the word *nahr* in the command of God, the Exalted, means the
raising of the hands at the time of *takbirat.*[^28] But there are many
indications in the traditions, which imply its *istihbab,* such as the
reasons that are mentioned therein, especially in the tradition narrated
by al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Imam al-Rida (A).

In addition to this, the sahih tradition of ‘Ali ibn Ja’far[^29] is
explicit (nass) on its not being obligatory, and the apparent import
(zahir) of these traditions, without taking into account the indications
to the contrary, is that it is obligatory. The way to reconcile them is
by considering them to imply istihbab by overruling the zahir in the
favor of the nass.

And that riwayah, although it exempts others than the imam from raising
the hands-and one may claim that apparently it applies to both the imam
and the *ma’mumun* and that it is silent about the prayer offered singly
by an individual (*furada*)-it does not preclude the possibility that
the raising of hands be obligatory for all, and the imam’s raising them
exempts the ma’mumun from it, in the same way as the qira’ah of the imam
exempts others from doing their own qira’ah. On the .basis of this
probability, which is the more evident of the probable meanings of the
tradition, the objection of some later authorities, which requires
taking of the general in a particular sense, is also avoided.

However, the absence of any opinion to this effect and the predominant
opinion among early and latter day legists, as well as the inner and
external indications leave no room for a debate, and even this much of
detail was outside the scope of these pages. In any case, the raising of
hands is supererogatory and it is not appropriate for one to omit it as
far as possible, especially in a case such as this wherein there are
some amongst the *ulama* who hold it to be obligatory. Accordingly, it
is also required by caution in religious matters that one should not
omit it.

The Secret Behind The Raising Of The Hands
------------------------------------------

In any case, the raising of the hands during prayer at the time of every
*takbirah* gives elegance to it, and this is the manner of the prayer of
Gabriel (A) and the angels of the seven heavens, as reported in a
narration by Asbagh ibn Nubatah from Amir al-Mu’minin,[^30] (A).
According to a certain citation from the ‘*Ilal* and the *‘Uyun akhbar
al-Rida (A),* Imam al-Rida (A) has said, “The reason for raising the
hands at *takbirah* is that it carries a kind of absorption
(*inqita’*)*,* sincere dedication (*takhlis*)*,* and humility
(*tadarru’*).

Hence God, the Exalted, likes His servant to be totally attentive
towards Him at the time of remembering Him and to be humble and sincere.
And it is for the reason that one’s attention be focused by the raising
of the hands, thereby becoming alert in one’s intent, with a receptive
heart,”[^31]

This statement accords with that which some gnostics say, that the
‘other’ [than God] is rejected behind one’s back by means of the raising
of the hands and the thorns in the path of access to Him are removed,
cutting one off from everything else and making one pure and sincere,
without a trace of attention towards another, which is *shirk* in the
creed of love, whereat one proceeds to the real spiritual ascent
(*mi’raj*) and commences the voyage towards Allah. This voyage and
ascent are not possible without the rejection of the ‘other’ and
‘otherness’ and without freedom from the ego and egoism. Hence, with the
sevenfold opening *takbirat,* all the seven curtains (*hujub*) of *mulk*
and *malakut* are removed.

Thus the prayer of the *awliya’* is such that they remove a curtain with
every *takbirah,* abandoning the realms associated with these veils,
leaving behind the inmates of these habitats, whereafter another curtain
is removed for them and their hearts receive yet another conditioned
epiphany (*tajalli taqyidi*)*.* But that does not become an obstacle in
their way and it does not engage their attention or preoccupy their
hearts. They remove it with yet another *takbirah,* as if from the inner
core of their hearts there arises the song:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهُ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ أَنْ يَتَجَلَّى تَجَلِّياً تَقْلِيدِيّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah is greater than that He should manifest Himself with a conditioned
manifestation (tajjali),

as declared by the mentor and shaykh of the *awliya’* and the
*mukhlasun,* the dedicated friend of the All-Beneficent [the *Khalil
al-Rahman, i.e.* the Prophet Abraham (A)] during that journey of gnosis,
epiphany and conditioned *tajalliyat.* Thus the wayfarer towards Allah,
the traveler of the path of love, and the dedicated traveler of the road
of communion removes one veil after another until he reaches the last
*takbirah* with which he removes the seventh veil and rejects every
‘other’ and ‘otherness,’ declaring,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِي لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I have turned my face to Him who originated the heavens and the
earth.*** (***6:79***)

with Abraham, the *Khalil.* Thereafter, the door is opened for him and
lie experiences the majesties of Divine Glory. Thereat he seeks refuge
with God and enters in the Name of God, the Exalted. To this refers the
noble tradition of Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (R) who reports with
his *isnad* from Abu al-Hasan (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي الحَسَنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ أَنَّهُ رَوَى
لِذَلِكَ عِلَّةً أُخْرَى وَهِيَ: أنَّ النَّبِيَّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ لَمَّا أُسْرِيَ بِهِ إلَى السَّمَاءِ قَطَعَ سَبْعَ حُجُبٍ
فَكَبَّرَ عِنْدَ كُلِّ حِجَابٍ تَكْبِيرَةً فَأَوْصَلَهُ اللهُ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ بِذَلِكَ إلَى مُنْتَهَى الكَرَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Shaykh al-Saduq reports) with his isnad from Abu al-Hasan (A) that
he has narrated another reason for it and that is that when the Prophet
(S) was carried on his celestial journey, he pierced seven veils
(hijab), pronouncing the takbirah at every hi jab, whereby Allah,
Almighty and Glorious, enabled him to attain to the ultimate nobility
(muntaha al-karamah).[^32]

In another *hadith* nearly the same thing has been narrated from Imam
Musa ibn Ja’far[^33] (A) except that it is mentioned there that the
Messenger of God (S) pronounced the *takbirat* after the removal of
every *hijab.* This is more in agreement from the viewpoint of gnostic
teaching and the mystic way, for a *hijab* and curtain is removed at
every raising of the hands, and a *takbirah* is pronounced on the
manifestation of each of the lights of nobility. And since that is a
conditioned light from among the *hijabs* of light, it is removed with
the raising of the two hands and cast away until the *tajalli* becomes
absolute and. the ultimate nobility (*muntaha al-karamah*)*,* which is
the ultimate goal. of the *awliya’*, is attained. Hence, the earlier
tradition can be interpreted in the light of the second one.

Whatever the case may be, we are unable to understand these things, to
say nothing of epiphany (*shuhud*) and communion (*wasul*)*.* But what
is worse and more unfortunate for us is that we also deny all spiritual
stations and degrees and consider the celestial ascensions (*mi’raj*) of
the *awliya’* and the prayers of the pure ones like those of our own,
regarding their perfection as similar, though of a superior degree, to
our own performances.

The limit of our imagination, beyond which we are unable to apprehend
anything, is to imagine that their *salat* is good in its *qira’ah* and
other points of etiquette and free from *shirk,* ostentation, and love
of fame, or that their worship was not for the sake of the fear of hell
or on account of the craving for paradise. These, of course, are one of
their ordinary stations, and their *salat,* this spiritual ascension,
has other stations that lie beyond our imagination.

A Warning Concerning One Of The Satanic Ruses
---------------------------------------------

A warning is essential at this point and that is that the worst obstacle
in the path of perfection and attainment of spiritual stations, which is
also one of the major masterpieces of Satan, the highwayman, is the
negation of the Hidden spiritual stations and degrees. This negation and
denial is the root cause of all kinds of misguidance and ignorance and
the cause of spiritual stagnation and torpor. It kills the spirit of
eagerness, which is the heavenly stead (*buraq*) for ascending to
spiritual excellences. It extinguishes the fires of love, which
represents the angelic wings for undertaking the heavenward spiritual
journey towards perfection, stopping man from making his spiritual
quest.

On the contrary, if one has sincere faith in spiritual stations and the
lofty ascents of gnosis, perchance this might help in rekindling the
innate fire of love buried under the dust and ashes of carnal desires
and illuminate the torch of yearning in the depths of the heart, thus
gradually prompting one to seek and to undertake the labors of the quest
so that one becomes worthy of Divine guidance and the assistance of that
Sacred Essence. And all praise belongs to God.

The Merit Of Brushing The Teeth
-------------------------------

It should be known that brushing the teeth, which has been enjoined by
the Noblest Messenger (S) in this noble tradition, is absolutely one of
the recommended etiquettes of the *Shari’ah* and has been stressed for
certain particular occasions, such as before *wudu’* and prayer, at the
time of reciting the Qur’an, at daybreak, and on waking up from sleep.
It has been highly recommended and greatly emphasized in the sacred
traditions, and many a fruitful quality and profitable result is
ascribed to it. Here, in these pages, we shall cite some of them for the
sake of *tabarruk*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
فِي السِّوَاكِ اثْنَتَا عَشْرَةَ خِصْلَةً: هُوَ مِنَ السُّنَّةِ
وَمُطَهِّرَةٌ لِلْفَمِ وَمَجْلاةٌ لِلْبَصَرِ وَيُرْضِي الرَّبَّ
وَيُذْهِبُ البَلْغَمَ وَيَزِيدُ فِي الحِفْظِ وَيُبَيِّضُ الأَسْنَانَ
وَيُضَاعِفُ الحَسَنَاتِ وَيُذْهِبُ بِالحَفْرِ وَيَشُدُّ اللَّثَّةَ
وَيُشَهِّي الطَّعَامَ وَيَفْرَحُ بِهِ المَلائِكَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi (al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A)
that he said, “There are twelve qualities associated with the brushing
of teeth: it is part of the Prophet’s sunnah (it is mentioned in many
traditions that brushing the teeth is one of the sunnah of the
prophets.[^34] it purifies the mouth, strengthens eyesight, is pleasing
to the Lord, takes away the phlegm, sharpens the memory, whitens the
teeth, doubles the merit of good acts, stops tooth decay, strengthen the
gums, increases appetite and is delightful to the angels.”[^35]

Nearly the same thing is mentioned in another tradition. The tooth decay
mentioned in this noble tradition consists of cavities and pustules
formed at the root of the teeth, which produce a white and bad-smelling
pus and burst at the time of chewing the food. This pus gets mixed with
the food and causes many ailments such as indigestion, etc. Present-day
physicians call it pyorrhea and consider it a serious condition whose
remedy may require even pulling out of the teeth.

Hence, aside from the inward Hidden aspects, the most significant of
which is the good pleasure of God, it is good for one to make it a
regular practice for the sake of physical health and cleanliness and to
perform this perpetual *sunnah* of the prophets. It is mentioned in a
tradition that the Noblest Messenger (S) said, “So much did Gabriel
recommend the brushing of teeth to me that I became concerned for my
teeth…”[^36] And he said, “If it were not for the fear of hardship I
would have made the brushing of the teeth obligatory on my ummah before
every *wudu’* and every *salat*.”[^37]

The Noblest Messenger (S) used to keep the *miswak* [the stick used for
brushing the teeth] and the water for *wudu’* at the head of his bed at
night and he would cover up the vessel containing water. On waking from
his sweet sleep he would brush his teeth, perform *wudu’*, and then
offer four rak’ahs of prayer and go to sleep again. Again he would wake
up, brush his teeth, perform *wudu’* and offer prayer. After mentioning
this practice of the Prophet in a *hadith*, Imam al-Sadiq (A) declares,
“You have a good example to emulate in the Messenger of God (S).”[^38]

It is stated in *hadith* that two rak’ahs of prayer performed after
brushing the teeth is superior to seventy rak’ahs performed without it.
It is stated that if one forgets to brush his teeth before *wudu’*, it
is mustahabb to do so after it and to rinse the mouth thrice with
water.[^39] The number of traditions on this topic is quite large and
anyone who wants to study them should refer to the works of our
companions.[^40]

Moral Virtues And Vices
-----------------------

Although we have discussed a number of times-in detail and in several
relevant places in these pages, to an extent that appeared appropriate
and within easy reach-the soul’s moral dispositions and the method of
acquiring ethical virtues and avoiding vices, here we will give a
concise and comprehensive explanation.

It should be known that ‘disposition’ (*khulq*) is a state of the soul
that inclines it to action without the need of thought or reflection.
For instance, someone who has the disposition of generosity is induced
by it to give and expend generously without any preliminary thoughts and
without reflecting on the preponderants on each side. He acts as if it
were one of his natural acts, like seeing and hearing.

In the same way, a soul that is chaste, for which the attribute of
chastity has become a disposition, preserves itself with such ease as if
that were part of its natural behavior. Until the soul does not attain
to this station through self-discipline, reflection, and repeated
action, it cannot attain a disposition and the spiritual perfection
associated with it. Otherwise, the danger always remains, if the trait
be one of moral perfections, that it be eroded and overwhelmed by
vicious dispositions.

However, if it were to become like one of the natural activities and
should one’s faculties and organs be brought under control and were the
rule and sovereignty of God to manifest itself within the soul, its
decline would be difficult, and such a thing happens only rarely.

The ethicians have stated that this state and disposition of the soul is
at times innate in human beings. Whether good or evil, felicitous or
wretched, it is based on the original nature and related to temperament.
As is well known, some persons are disposed towards goodness from
infancy and some are inclined towards evil. Some are enraged at the
smallest annoyance or are alarmed by a trivial matter, or panic at the
slightest cause. Others are quite the opposite.

At other times these psychic dispositions are acquired through habit,
social intercourse, thought and reflection. Sometimes they are first
acquired by means of thought and reflection until they become habitual.
In this regard there is a difference of opinion amongst them, to discuss
which and to engage with whose details would take us beyond the scope of
these pages and divert us from our main aim. We shall mention here only
that which is appropriate and beneficial in this regard.

It should be known that when it is said that a disposition is natural or
innate it does not mean that it is essential (*dhati*) and unchangeable.
Rather, all habits (*malikat*) and psychic dispositions are capable of
change. As long as the soul remains in this world of change and
transition, it is subject to time and renewal; and as long as it is
associated with matter (*hayula*) and potentiality (*quwwah*)*,* the
human being can change all its dispositions and transform them into
their opposites. This claim is affirmed, besides metaphysical proof
(*burhan*)*,* by experience, as well as by the summons of the prophets
and the true religions to noble dispositions and their restraining
people from the opposite qualities.

It should be known that the experts of ethics have divided all virtues
of the soul under four heads, which are: wisdom (*hikmah*)*,* chastity
(*‘iffah*)*,* courage (*shaja’ah*)*,* and justice (*‘adalah*)*.* Wisdom
is regarded as the virtue of the rational discerning soul (*nafs
al-natiqah-ye mumayyizah*)*;* courage as a virtue of the irascible soul
(*nafs al-ghadabiyyah*)*;* chastity as a virtue of the appetitive soul
(*nafs al-shahwiyyah*)*,* and justice as a state of moderation of these
threefold virtues.

All other virtues are considered derived from these four. However, the
definition and details of each one of them lie outside the scope of
these pages and are not that useful for the likes of us. That which must
be known is that in accordance with this tradition narrated from the
Noblest Messenger (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُعِثْتُ لِأُتَمِّمَ مَكَارِمِ الأَخْلاقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have been sent to perfect noble dispositions,[^41]

the purpose and result of the summons of the Seal of the Prophets (S) is
the perfection of morality. In the noble traditions, both that are brief
and those which are elaborate, moral excellences have been given more
importance than anything else after doctrinal teachings (*ma’arif*).
Hereafter, we will cite some of them, God willing.

Their importance is greater than what we are capable of explaining
adequately, but that which we know for certain is that the asset of the
everlasting life of the hereafter and the capital asset of the life of
that abode is the acquisition of noble dispositions and the possession
of moral excellences. The paradise which is given to man for the sake of
moral excellence, is the paradise of Attributes, incomparable to the
physical paradise of Act, wherein the greatest and the fairest of
physical bounties and delights are present. Similarly, the darkness and
the terrors that seize man due to evil deeds are more terrible than any
torture.

As long as man is in this world, he can liberate himself from this
darkness and attain those lights. Yes, he can do that, but not with this
half -heartedness, slackness, torpor, feebleness, and negligence of
ours, who, as we see ourselves, retain every ugly disposition and
undesirable trait with which we have grown up since our childhood days
or have acquired in improper company and friendship. Rather, we keep on
adding to this burden every day, as if we didn’t believe that there is
another world and another phase of lasting existence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واى اگر از پس امروز بود فردايى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Woe, if there be a tomorrow after this![^42]

As if the summons of the prophets and the *awliya’* (A) have nothing to
do with us. Who knows, where these dispositions and conduct of us will
take us and in what form we shall be resurrected? We would wake up at a
time when we could do nothing and regret and shame would be our lot, and
we shall have none to reproach except ourselves.

The prophets (A) have shown the path of felicity and the learned and the
wise have expounded their statements for us and described the method of
curing inner diseases, translating these teachings into every language
and disseminating them in various forms. But these things did not enter
our ears, and we closed our eyes, ears, and our hearts to them.
Therefore, all blame rests on our own shoulders, as stated by the
Messenger of God (S) in the present tradition in whose exposition we are
engaged. So replete with exhortation for acquisition of moral virtues
and abstention from vices are the traditions and reports that its extent
is incalculable, yet we neglect even to refer to their books.

And you, my dear! If you are used to traditions and narrations, refer to
the sacred works of tradition, especially the noble *al-Kafi.* If you
are used to scientific discourse and the jargon of scholars, refer to
such ethical texts as the *Taharat al-a’raq,*[^43] and the books of
marhum al-Fayd al-Kashani, al-Majlisi and the two Naraqis.[^44] And if
you do not consider yourself to be in need of acquiring [the knowledge
of ethical principles] or do not consider the acquisition of noble
dispositions and abstention from vicious dispositions as essential, then
find a remedy for your ignorance which is the mother of all diseases.

We conclude this topic with the mention of some noble traditions related
to this theme for *tabarruk’s* sake:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفَقِيهُ: بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
قَالَ: إنَّ اللهَ خَصَّ رَسُولَهُ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
بِمَكَارِمِ الأَخْلاقِ فَامْتَحِنُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ، فَإنْ كَانَتْ
فِيكُمْ فَاحْمِدُوا اللهَ وَارْغَبُوا إلَيْهِ فِي الزِّيَادَةِ
مِنْهَا؛ فَذَكَرَهَا عَشْرَةً: اليَقِينُ وَالقَنَاعَةُ وَالصَّبْرُ
وَالشُّكْرُ وَالحِلْمُ وَحُسْنُ الخَلْقِ وَالسَّخَاءِ وَالغِيرَةُ
وَالشَّجَاعَةُ وَالمُرُوءَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In Man La yahduruh al-faqih, (al-Shaykh al-Saduq reports) with his isnad
from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said, “Verily, God favored His Messenger
(S) with noble dispositions. So test yourselves and if you find them in
yourselves, thank God and turn to Him that He may increase you therein.”
Then he mentioned ten of them: conviction (yaqin), contentment
(qina’ah), patience (sabr), gratitude (shukr), mildness (hilm),
geniality (husn al-khulq), generosity (sakha’), sense of honor
(ghayrah), courage (shajaah), magnanimity (muru’ah).[^45]

This tradition has been transmitted through several chains (*turuq*)*,*
except that *rida* (satisfaction), instead of *hilm*,[^46] occurs in the
citation from the Ma’ani al-’akhbar. In al-Wafi, this tradition has been
cited with a slightly different wording from *al-Kafi*.[^47]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ المَجَالِسِ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ الصَّادِقِ جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ
عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ أنَّهُ قَالَ: عَلَيْكُمْ بِمَكَارِمِ الأخْلاقِ
فَإنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يُحِبُّهُمَا وَإيَّاكُمْ وَمَذَامَّ
الأَفْعَالِ فَإنَّ اللهَ يَبْغُضُهَا إلَى أَنْ قَالَ: وَعَلَيْكُمْ
بِحُسْنِ الخُلُقِ فَإنَّهُ يَبْلُغُ بِصَاحِبِهِ دَرَجَةَ الصَّائِمِ
القَائِمِ... الحديث.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Majalis (al-Shaykh al-Saduq reports) with his isnad from Ja’far
ibn Muhammad (A) that he said, “Acquire moral virtues, for, verily, God
loves them, and beware of blameworthy conduct for God hates it”
“Accustom yourselves to fairness of disposition, for it raises one who
possesses it to the rank of those who fast (perpetually) and stand in
prayer (through the night, constantly)”[^48]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
إنَّ أَكْمَلَ المُؤْمِنِينَ أيمَاناً أَحْسَنُهُمْ أخْلاقاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi (al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Abu Ja’far (A) that
he said, “Among believers the most perfect in faith is the one who is
the most fairly disposed amongst them.”[^49]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ الحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ
قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: مَا يُوضَعُ
فِي مِيزَانِ امْرِئٍ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ حُسْنِ الخُلُقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (A) that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “There will be nothing superior
to fairness of disposition in the balance of a person’s works on the Day
of Resurrection.”[^50]

Also, the Prophet (S) has said:

(Of all qualities) that which will take most of my ummah to paradise is
God-fearing (taqwa) and a fair disposition.[^51]

And Imam al-Sadiq (A) said:

Verily, virtuousness and fairness of disposition make homes flourish and
extend the spans of lives.[^52]

He also said:

Verily, God, the Exalted and the Blessed, rewards a servant for his fair
disposition in a measure equal to what He grants to someone who fights
day and night in the way of God.[^53]

There are many traditions on this subject. In the same way as good
nature and fairness of disposition lead to the perfection of faith, add
to the weight of one’s deeds in the Balance, and take one into paradise,
so also ill- naturedness, on the contrary, corrupts one’s faith and
subjects one to Divine chastisement, as pointed out in the sacred
traditions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
إنَّ سُوءَ الخُلُقِ لَيُفْسِدُ الإيمَانَ كَمَا يُفْسِدُ الخَلُّ
العَسَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi (al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A)
that he said, “Verily, ill-naturedness destroys one’s faith in the same
way as vinegar destroys honey (on being mixed with it).”[^54]

It is mentioned in another tradition that ill-naturedness destroys one’s
works in the way vinegar destroys honey.[^55] It is narrated from the
Messenger of God (S) that God does not accept the repentance of an
ill-natured person. When asked about its reason, he replied, “That is
because as soon as he repents for a sin, he falls into a sin worse than
the earlier one.”[^56]

It is stated in a tradition that one who becomes ill-natured subjects
himself thereby to Divine chastisement.[^57] It is evident that
ill-nature continually torments one who possesses it and is the cause of
hardship, darkness, and adversity in the next phases of life, as
mentioned in some of the traditions cited. And all praise is God’s, at
every beginning and end.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Rawdat al-Kafi , p. 79, hadith no. 33.

[^2]: Al-Qur’an, Surat al-Ma’idah: 105.

[^3]: Nahj al-balaghah, ed. Fayd al-Islam, Kutub, no. 47.

[^4]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, “kitab al iman wa al-kufr”,
“bab al-kidhb” hadith no. 3.

[^5]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, “kitab al iman wa al-kufr”,
“bab al-kidhb” hadith no. 4.

[^6]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. viii, p. 574.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-kidhb”, hadith
no. 2.

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-kidhb”, hadith
no. 11.

[^9]: None given.

[^10]: See the exposition of the twenty-fifth hadith on waswas, note no.
6.

[^11]: Usu al-Kafi “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-wara”‘, hadith
no. 11.

[^12]: Usu al-Kafi “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-wara”‘, hadith
no. 3.

[^13]: Wasa’i! al-Shi’ah., vol. xi, p. 196

[^14]: Wasa’i! al-Shi’ah., vol. xi, p. 194.

[^15]: Usul al-Kafi, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-sidq wa ada’
l-’amanah”, hadith no. 12.

[^16]: Usul al-Kafi, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-sidq wa ada’
l-’amanah”, hadith no. 5.

[^17]: Usul al-Kafi, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab silat al-rahm”,
hadith no. 11.

[^18]: Al-Kulayni, Furu’ al-Kafi vol. v, p. 133.

[^19]: Al-Kulayni, Furu’ al-Kafi vol. v, p. 133.

[^20]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. xiii, p. 225, cited from al-Saduq,
al-Majalis, majlis” no. 43.

[^21]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. xiii, p. 225, cited from al-Saduq,
al-Majalis, majlis” no. 43., cited from al-Saduq, Man la yuhduruhu
al-faqih vol. ii, p.198.

[^22]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. xiii, p. 225, cited from al-Saduq,
al-Majalis, majlis” no. 43. p. 226.

[^23]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. xiii, p. 225, cited from al-Saduq,
al-Majalis, majlis” no. 43.

[^24]: Ithaf al-sadat al-muttaqin, vol. vii, p. 234.

[^25]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. iv, p. 688.

[^26]: Usul al-Kafi, “kitab al-’iman wa al-kufr”, “bab al-khawf wa
al-raja’,” hadith no. 2.

[^27]: For the traditions cited in this section, see Wasa’il al-Shi’ah,
vol. xi, pp. 175-179.

[^28]: Tafsir Nur al-Thaqalayn, vol. v, pp. 683-684, the exegesis of
Surat al-Kawthar, hadith 17-19.

[^29]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. iv, p. 726, “kitab al-salat” bab 9.

[^30]: Majma’ al-bayan, the exegesis of Surat al-Kawthar.

[^31]: Wasail al-Shi’ah, vol. iv, p. 727, “kitab al-salat,” “abwab
takbirat al-ihram,” bab 9, hadith 11.

[^32]: Wasail al-Shi’ah, vol. iv, p. 727, “kitab al-salat,” “abwab
takbirat al-ihram,” bab 7, hadith 5.

[^33]: Wasail al-Shi’ah, vol. iv, p. 727, “kitab al-salat,” “abwab
takbirat al-ihram,” bab 7, pp. 722-723, hadith 7.

[^34]: Al-Khisal, vol. ii, p. 449, bab 10, hadith 51.

[^35]: Furu’ al-Kafi, vol. vi, pp. 495-496, “kitab al-zayy wa
al-tajammul,” “bab al-siwak,” hadith 6.

[^36]: Furu’ al-Kafi, vol. vi, p. 496, hadith 8.

[^37]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. i, p. 355, “kitab al-taharah,” “abwab
al-siwak,” bab 5, hadith 3.

[^38]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. i, p. 355, “kitab al-taharah,” “abwab
al-siwak,” p. 356, bab 6, hadith 1.

[^39]: Bihar al-’anwar, vol. 73, pp. 132-133, “kitab al-adab wa
al-sunan,” “bab al-siwak wa al-hathth ‘alayh,” hadith 32-34.

[^40]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. i, pp. 353, 355-356, “kitab al-taharah,”
bab 3, 5-6.

[^41]: Majma’ al-bayan, exegesis of verse 4 of Surat al-Qalam.

[^42]: Adapted from the following couplet of Hafiz: گر مسلماني از اين
است كه حافظ دارد آه اگر از پي امروز بود فردايي

[^43]: By Miskawayh, ethical philosopher and historian of the 5th/11th
century.

[^44]: Among these works are Muhajjat al-bayda’, al-Kalimat al-maknunah,
and al-Ilayal al-jawid by al-Fayd al-Kashani, Haqq al-yaqin by
al-Allamah al-Majlisi, Jami’ al-sa’adat by Mulla Mahdi al-Naraqi and
Mi’raj al-sa’adah by Mulla Ahmad al-Naraqi.

[^45]: Al-Khisal, vol. ii, p. 431, bab 10, hadith 12.

[^46]: Ma’ani al-’akhbar, p. 191, “bab fi makarim al-akhlaq,” hadith 3.

[^47]: Al-Wafi, vol. iv, p. 264, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
jawami’ al-makarim,” hadith 2.

[^48]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, al-Amali, majlis 57; Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.
xi, p. 156, “kitab al-jihad,” “abwab jihad al-nafs,” bab 6, hadith 8.

[^49]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 99, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
husn al-khulq,” hadith 1.

[^50]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 99, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
husn al-khulq,” hadith 2.

[^51]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 99, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
husn al-khulq,” hadith 6.

[^52]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 99, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
husn al-khulq,” hadith 8.

[^53]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 99, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
husn al-khulq,” hadith 12.

[^54]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 99, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
husn al-khulq,” hadith 3.

[^55]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 99, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
husn al-khulq,” hadith 1.

[^56]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 99, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
husn al-khulq,” hadith 2.

[^57]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 99, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab
husn al-khulq,” hadith 4.


