Thirtieth Hadith: The Kinds of Hearts
=====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسَنَدي المُتَّصِلِ إِلى ثِقَةِ الإسْلامِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ
الْكُلَيْنِي عَنْ عِدَّةٍ مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ
مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ خَالِدٍ عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنْ هَارُونَ بْنِ الجَهْمِ عَنِ
المُفَضَّلِ عَنْ سَعْدٍ عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
إنَّ القُلُوبَ أَرْبَعَةٌ: قَلْبٌ فِيهِ نِفَاقٌ وَإيمَانٌ، وَقَلْبٌ
مَنْكُوسٌ، وَقَلْبٌ مَطْبُوعٌ، وَقَلْبٌ أَزْهَرُ أَجْرَدُ. فَقُلْتُ:
مَا الأَزْهَرُ؟ قَالَ: فِيهِ كَهَيْئَةِ السِّرَاجِ. فَأَمَّا
المَطْبُوعُ فَقَلْبُ المُنَافِقِ، وَأَمَّا الأَزْهَرُ فَقَلْبُ
المُؤْمِنِ إنْ أَعْطَاهُ شَكَرَ وَإنِ ابْتَلاهُ صَبَرَ. وَأَمَّا
المَنْكُوسُ فَقَلْبُ المُشْرِكِ. ثُمَّ قَرَأَ هَذِهِ الآيَةَ:
﴿أَفَمَنْ يَمْشِي مُكِبًّا عَلَى وَجْهِهِ أَهْدَى أَمَّنْ يَمْشِي
سَوِيًّا عَلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ.﴾ فَأمَّا القَلْبُ الَّذِي فِيهِ
إيمَانٌ وَنِفَاقٌ فَهُمْ قَوْمٌ كَانُوا بِالطَّائِفِ فَإنْ أَدْرَكَ
أَحَدَهُمْ أَجَلُهُ عَلَى نِفَاقِهِ هَلَكَ، وَإنْ أَدْرَكَهُ عَلَى
إيمَانِهِ نَجَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my continuous chain of transmission reaching up to the Thiqat al-
Islam Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from a group of our companions,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, from his father, from Harun ibn
al-Jahm, from al-Mufaddal, from Sa’d, from Abu Ja’far (A) that he said,
“Verily, the hearts are [of] four (kinds) the heart that has [both]
faith and hypocrisy in it, the heart that is inverted and upside down,
the heart that has been sealed and is darkened, the heart that is clear
and luminous (al-azhar).” [Sa’d], the narrator, says, “I asked him,
“What is meant by ‘al-azhar’?”

He replied, “it is a heart that has the likeness of a lamp. As to the
heart that has been sealed, it is the heart of a hypocrite. The heart
that is luminous is that of the believer, who is thankful when God gives
him and is patient when subjected to tribulation. As to the heart that
is inverted, it is the heart of the polytheist.” Then he recited this
verse: ***What, is he who walks prone upon his face better guided or he
who walks upright on a straight path? (67:22)*** [Then he added]; “As to
the heart wherein is faith and hypocrisy-they were a people who lived in
Ta’if; so if one of them should die in the state of hypocrisy, he would
perish, and should he die in the state of faith he would attain
salvation.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

*Mankus* means ‘inverted’ (*maqlub*)*.* [The lexicographers] explain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَكَستُ الشَّيءَ أنْكُسهُ نَكساً: قَلَبتُه عَلى رأسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(i.e. ‘I inverted something’ or ‘I put it means upside down’). According
to *al-Sihah,* الولد المنكوس means a baby whose feet (at birth) come out
before its head (الذي يخرج رجلاه قبل رأسه). Closely associated is the
meaning of مكباً على وجهه in the noble verse cited by the Imam, for
*ikbab* means falling on one’s face, and therein is a figurative
indication of the fact that the hearts of the polytheists (mushrikun)
are inverted and their course of spiritual movement is other than the
Straight Path, as will be elaborated later on, God willing.

*Matbu’* means ‘sealed’ (*makhtum*)*,* and *tab’* with *sukun* (of the
*ba’*)*,* means ‘sealing’ (*khatm*)*,* and with its *harakah* (i.e.
*taba’*) means impurity (*danas, wasakh*)*.* If it be taken in the sense
of ‘sealed,’ it would figuratively mean that the word of truth and
Divine truths do not enter such a heart and it does not accept them-not
that God, the Exalted, deprives it of His special grace, although this
sense is also true. However the aforementioned sense is more
appropriate.

‘*Azhar’* means ‘white’ (*abyad*) and ‘luminous’ (*mustanir*)*,* as
mentioned in *al-Nihayah.*[^2] According to a!-Sihah ‘azhar’ means
‘bright’ (*nayyir*), and the moon is called *azhar*. Ibn al-Sikkit says:
*al-azharan* means the sun and the moon. *Azhar* [when spoken of a man]
means a white man, of a bright face, and such a woman is Zahra’. To sum
up, azhar means luminous and white; hence the sun and moon are called
azharan; a white and luminous man is called azhar and a white and
luminous women is Zahra’.

*‘Ajrad’* is someone who has no hair on his body, and according to
*al-Sihah, al-jurd* means a treeless (open) space. And this figuratively
implies the absence of attachment to the world, or freedom from impurity
and defilement. We shall expound that which needs explication in this
noble tradition in the course of a preface and a few sections.

Reforming The Heart
-------------------

It should be known that the term ‘heart’ has various meanings in the
terminology of the *Shari’ah*, and that of philosophy and *‘irfan.* To
discuss that and the related terminological differences, as well as the
ranks and degrees of the hearts, is outside the scope of this discourse
and is not very beneficial for us. Therefore, it would be better to take
the matter in its unexplicated simplicity, as is done in the noble
tradition, and discuss that which is important and essential for us.

It should be known that the endeavor to reform the ‘heart,’ on whose
wholesomeness and corruption depends one’s felicity and wretchedness, is
more essential than an inquiry into its meanings and delving into the
technical jargon.[^3] In fact, it often happens that intense attention
to terms and preoccupation with words and that which relates to them
make one totally oblivious of the heart and its reform.

[As a result] one may acquire complete mastery in expounding the meaning
and essence of the heart and the terminology of the metaphysicians
(*hukama’*) and the mystics (*‘urafa*) while one’s heart,
*na’udhubillah,* is one that is either inverted or sealed, like someone
who knows well the beneficial and harmful properties of medicines and is
able to describe them with expertise without himself refraining from
poisonous medicines or making use of the beneficial ones. Such a person
perishes despite all his knowledge of pharmacology, which is unable to
rescue him.

We said earlier[^4] that all the sciences are absolutely practical and
even the transcendental sciences have a practical aspect in them. Here
that which we have to say is that the science of the states of the heart
and that which relates to their health and sickness, reform and
corruption, is something which is purely a preliminary step to action
and the way of its reform and remedy. Its mere knowledge and
understanding is not considered a human perfection. Hence one’s main
attention and goal should be the reform and refinement of the heart so
that one may attain to ultimate spiritual felicity and to the higher
transcendent stations.

And even if one were well adept in the sciences, the subtleties and the
realities, during the course of his journey through *‘the horizons and
the souls’,* his main concern should be the discovery of his own
spiritual states, so that if it were ruinous he should try to remedy it,
and if oriented towards salvation, try to make it complete and perfect.

The Basis for The Classification Of The Hearts
----------------------------------------------

One should know that this classification of the hearts made in this
noble tradition is one that is non-detailed and general. Every heart has
a different rank and degree, whether it is from the viewpoint of *shirk*
and hypocrisy or that of faith and perfection. Apparently, this
classification of the hearts is subsequent to acquisition and spiritual
conduct, not one based on the nature and constitution of different
souls, so as to conflict with traditions concerning *fitrah,* which
state that all people are born with the nature of *tawhid* and that
*shirk* and hypocrisy are accidental [and not innate in human nature].

However, even if it were on the basis of nature, that would be correct
in accordance with one explanation which removes the contradiction and
does not lead to predestination, which is something impossible.

Nevertheless, that which is closer to metaphysical proof and more
conducive to education is the first probability. And we said earlier[^5]
that as long as man remains in this world, which is the source of the
tree of primal matter with its substantial, formal, and accidental
changes and transformations, he can deliver himself from all levels of
deficiency, wretchedness, *shirk,* and hypocrisy and attain to the
higher levels of perfection and spiritual felicity. And this is not
contrary to the famous *hadith* that states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشَّقِيُّ شَقِيٌّ فِي بَطْنِ أُمِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The wretched one is wretched in his mother’s womb.[^6]

for the meaning of the tradition is not that felicity and wretchedness
are innate and incapable of change. Rather, this tradition accords with
metaphysical proof, which has been set forth in clarity in its proper
place, that wretchedness is derived from deficiency and non-being, and
that felicity derives from being and its perfection.

That which belongs to the immaculate tree of being is the sacred Divine
Being in accordance with the ranks of causes and means-which is the way
of the best of the latter generations and the most perfect of the early
ones, the *Nasir* of the *millah* and *din*, i.e. Khwajah Nasir al-*Din*
al-Tusi (Q) or on the basis of manifesting and being manifested
(*zahiriyyah* and *mazhariyyah*)*,* unity and multiplicity-which is the
way of the greatest of philosophers, Hadrat Sadr al-Muta’allihin. And
that which derives from deficiency and non-being pertains to the vicious
tree of quiddity, which is not the object of creation because of its
being below creation (*ja’l*)*.*

It may be said that the when the noble tradition says that felicity and
wretchedness accompany one in the ‘mother’s womb’ that which is meant is
the world of corporeal nature (*‘alam al-tabiyyat*) which is the
absolute mother, the womb and the cradle wherein nature nurtures its
offsprings. That is, the expression ‘mother’s womb’ is not to be taken
in its ordinary sense, because felicity, being perfection and actuality,
cannot belong to the primal souls (*nafus al-hayuliyyah*) except
potentially.

Since the literal import is that the felicitous are felicitous in act in
the mother’s womb, the contrary of the literal meaning has to be
adopted. And since that which has been said is in accordance with
metaphysical proofs, the noble tradition has to be interpreted solely in
this sense or something equivalent to it. In any case any elaboration of
this matter and discussion of its proof is outside the scope of this
discourse, though at times the pen rebels and runs contrary to the set
aim.

The Reason Why the Kinds of Hearts Are Confined To the Four
-----------------------------------------------------------

Some [scholars] have said that the reason for confining the kinds of
hearts to four is that the hearts either possess faith or they don’t. In
the first case, the faith possessed pertains to all that the Messenger
has brought or only to a part of that. The first is the heart of the
believer (*mu’min*) and the second is a heart wherein faith and
hypocrisy are both present. In the second case, there is either an
outward confession of faith or there isn’t. The first is the heart of
the hypocrite and the second that of a polytheist (*mushrik*)*.*

This interpretation does not accord with the noble tradition, which
implies that at times there is real faith in all that the Prophet (S)
has brought and at times there is hypocrisy. Hence, if one were forced
to interpret, it would be better to say that the heart either has faith
in all that the Prophet (S) has brought or it doesn’t.

In the second case, there is either a pretence of faith or there isn’t.
In the first case, the faith is either stable and established in it or
[it is unstable], believing at one time and disbelieving at other times,
making a pretense of belief in the state of disbelief also. The
concluding part of the tradition shows that the repentance of those who
apostatize after belief, to revert to unbelief and hypocrisy, is
accepted, even if it should occur repeatedly.

In another tradition of the noble *al-Kafi,* Imam Baqir (A) divides the
hearts into three kinds: (1) the inverted heart (*qalb al-mankus*)*,*
wherein there is no good; that is an unbeliever’s heart; (2) the heart
wherein there is a black spot, in which there is a conflict between good
and evil, each of which seek to overcome the other; (3) the ‘open heart’
(*qalb al-maftuh*) wherein are lamps whose lights will not go out until
the Day of Resurrection; that is the heart of the believer.[^7]

This [division] does not conflict with the noble tradition [under
exposition], for the first category mentioned in the above tradition
includes the two kinds mentioned by the *hadith*, that is, the hearts of
the polytheist and the hypocrite. That is because the hearts of all
those three groups (i.e. unbelievers, polytheists and hypocrites) are
inverted, and no inconsistency would be involved if inversion be
[considered] the salient characteristic of the hearts of an unbeliever
and polytheist and being seated the salient characteristic of the
hypocrite’s heart, and accordingly each of them is ascribed to either of
them in the tradition.

The States of The Hearts
------------------------

We shall begin with the believer’s heart so that the state of the other
hearts be known in contrast. It should be known that in the
transcendental sciences and the true teachings it has been clearly
established that the reality of ‘being’ is the reality of ‘light.’ These
two terms signify one simple reality without being attributable to any
separate multiple aspects. It is also known that that which pertains to
perfection and completion derives from being itself.

This is one of the noble principles, and to anyone who has the honor to
apprehend it the door to the higher teaching is opened. Our feeble
spirits are unable to apprehend the reality of that Being without a help
from the Hidden and a success predestined from eternity. It is also
known that faith in God belongs to the category of knowledge and is one
of the absolute perfections. Hence, being a perfection, it belongs to
being itself and the reality of light and manifestation. And that which
is other than faith and all that relates to it, is outside the category
of the perfections of the human spirit, belonging to the darkness of
non-being and quiddity.

The Luminosity of the Believer’s Heart
--------------------------------------

Hence it is known that the ‘believer’s heart is luminous. It is narrated
in the noble *al-Kafi* from Imam al-Sadiq (A) that he said, “You see
some people who are so perfect in eloquence that they don’t err in [the
use of a single letter like] *lam* or *waw,* while their hearts are
darker than a gloomy night, and there are some people who cannot express
what is in their hearts, yet their heart is radiant like a lamp.”[^8]
Further, the believer’s heart is on the Straight Path and his spiritual
movement is on the middle path of humanity. That is because, firstly, he
has not deserted his primal divine nature, fashioned in forty days by
God, the Exalted, with the hands of His Beauty and Glory.

Thus, he walks on the path of the nature of tawhid, oriented towards
absolute perfection and consummate beauty. Inevitably, this spiritual
movement from the plane of innate nature to the ultimate point of
absolute perfection is without any crookedness, being as it is the path
of spiritual rectitude and the middle inner way. However, all other
hearts deviate from nature and the straight path. It is narrated of the
Noblest Messenger (S) that he drew a straight line on the ground drawing
other lines on its either side. Then he said, “This one, the straight
and middlemost line, is my path.”[^9]

Explanation of the Believer’s Being on the Straight Path
--------------------------------------------------------

Secondly, the believer is the follower of the Perfect Man, and since the
Perfect Man is the manifestation of all the Names and the Attributes and
subject to the Lordship of the Truth, the Exalted, by virtue of the All
inclusive Name (*ism al-jami*)*,* his being is not monopolized by anyone
of the Names.

Like his Lord, he is an all-inclusive being and in him, the
manifestation of any of the Names is not overshadowed by that of any
other Name. He possesses the station of middleness (*maqam
al-wasafiyyat*) and the major mediation (*barzakhiyyat al-kubra*)*.*
Hence, his movement is along the straight and middlemost path of the
All-inclusive Name.

All other beings are dominated by one of the encompassing or non-
encompassing Names of which they are manifestations. Their origin and
return is from and to that Name. The Name opposite to it is latent in it
and plays no active role in it except from the aspect of the unity of
all the Names-something whose explanation is not appropriate here. Hence
God, the Exalted, at the station of the All-inclusive Name and the Lord
of Man (*rabb al-insan*)*,* is on the Straight Path, as He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ رَبِّي عَلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily my Lord is on the Straight Path.*** (***11:56***)

That means the station of middleness and all-inclusiveness
(*jami’iyyat*) without the predominance of an Attribute over another and
without the manifestation of one Name rather than that of another. A
being subject to the Lordship of that Sacred Being at this station is
also on the Straight Path, without any station or aspect overshadowing
another station or aspect.

Hence [the believer] in the course of his real upward ascension [i.e.
prayer] and the ultimate point of proximity [to the Divine], after
making an admission of servitude, after referring every worship and
service by every worshipper to that Sacred Essence and ascribing all
help in all stations of expansiveness and straits (*qabd wa bast*)
exclusively to that Sacred Being, by declaring:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِيَّاكَ نَعْبُدُ وَإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Thee only we worship and Thee only we ask for help.* (*1:5*)

says:

**  
**
﴿اهْدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ الْمُسْتَقِيمَ

**  
**
.﴾

***Guide us to the Straight Path.*** (***1:6***)

This is the same path as that of the Lord of the Perfect Man, the former
from the [active] aspect of manifesting (*zahirriyyat*) and Lordship
(*rububiyyat*) and the latter from the [passive] aspect of being
manifested *[mazhariyyat]* and creaturehood [*marbubiyyat*]*.* None of
the other existents and beings in movement towards Allah are on the
Straight Path, but are deviant, inclining either towards (Divine) Grace
and Beauty or towards Might and Glory.

The faithful (*mu’minin*)*,* since they are followers of the Perfect Man
and walk in his footsteps, they journey by the light of his guidance and
the lamp of his knowledge (*ma’rifah*) in submission to the sacred being
of the Perfect Man.

They don’t take any step by themselves and do not allow their intellect
to meddle with the character of the spiritual journey towards Allah. For
this reason, their path is also straight, and in the company of the
Perfect Man their fulfillment (*wusal*) is subordinate to the
fulfillment of the Perfect Man, provided that they protect their clear
hearts from the workings of the devils, the ego, and egoism, and submit
themselves totally in the journey to the Perfect Man and the station of
ultimate prophecy.

Some Stratagems Of Satan
------------------------

One of the evil workings of Satan is to make man turn the face of his
heart away from the Straight Path and towards some coquettish person
(*shukh*) or guru (*shaykh*)*.* One of the great masterpieces of Satan,
who whispers into the hearts of men, is that he, with gay and nonchalant
discourse and deceptive manipulations, makes some spiritual gurus
(*shuyukh*) enamored to some coquette, justifying this major sin, or an
act of spiritual polytheism, on the pretext that if the heart were to
have a singular attachment one can succeed faster in curtailing worldly
attachments.

At [other] times he turns some mindless coquette towards some demonic
guru, one who seduces people or is rather a satanic highwayman. The
pretext offered for this act of explicit polytheism (*shirk al-jali*) is
that the guru is a Perfect Man and that only through the Perfect Man,
one can attain to the realm of absolute transcendence, which is not
manifested except in the mirror of the guru.

At the end of their lives, the two of them-that one with the memory of
his favorite’s cheek and this one with the inverted face of his
guru-join the world of demons and Satans, and neither the former gets
rid of his bestial attachment nor the latter reaches the goal through
this blind alley.

It should be known that since the believer’s journey is on a Straight
Path and his heart is upright, his orientation is towards Allah and his
way is the middle path. As a result, in that world too his path is clear
and straight, his posture upright, and his appearance and character, his
inward and outward, have a human form and shape.

One can understand the character of the heart of the polytheists in
contrast to this. As his heart deviates from the Divine nature, and
strays from the central point of perfection and the hub of light and
beauty, departing from submission to the absolute Guide and Guardian
(*Wali*) and preoccupied with its own ego and egoism, the world and its
ornaments, consequently in the other worlds also it is not resurrected
with the straight human character and form but in the form of an animal
with a head turned about.

That is so because, in that world, form and shape are subject to the
character of the heart and the outward reflects the inward and the shell
is the image of the kernel. The matter of that realm is not averse to
accepting the inward *malakuti* forms as in this world, and this thesis
has been established in its proper place.

Hence the hearts which are averse to the Truth and Reality and deviate
from straight nature, oriented and directed as they are towards the
world, their image too, like themselves, deviates from straightness,
being inverted, facing the world and physical nature (*tabi’at*)*,*
which is *the lowest of the low.* Perhaps, in that world some would walk
on their faces with their feet upwards, some on their bellies, and some
on their hands and feet, like animals, the way they in fact walked in
this world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَفَمَنْ يَمْشِي مُكِبًّا عَلَى وَجْهِهِ أَهْدَى أَمَّنْ يَمْشِي
سَوِيًّا عَلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Is he who goes inverted on his face more rightly guided or he who walks
upright on a straight path?*[^10]

It is possible that this metaphor in the metaphoric world becomes a
reality in the realm of reality and manifestation of spirituality. In
some noble traditions relating to the exegesis of this noble verse, the
‘Straight Path’ is interpreted as referring to Hadrat Amir al-Mu’minin
and the Infallible Imams (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبي الحسن الماضي عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
قَالَ: قُلْتُ: ﴿أَفَمَنْ يَمْشِي مُكِبًّا عَلَى وَجْهِهِ أَهْدَى
أَمَّنْ يَمْشِي سَوِيًّا عَلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ.﴾ قَالَ: إنَّ اللهَ
ضَرَبَ مَثَلاً مَنْ حَادَ عَنْ وِلايَةِ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
كَمَنْ يَمْشِي عَلَى وَجْهِهِ لا يَهْتَدِي لأَمْرِهِ. وَجَعَلَ مَنْ
تَبِعَهُ سَوِيّاً عَلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ. وَالصِّرَاطُ
المُسْتَقِيمُ أَمِيرُ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from Abu al-Hasan al-Madhi
(Imam Musa al-Kazim) that Muhammad bin al-Fudayl says: When asked
concerning the meaning of the verse, “Is he who goes inverted on his
face more rightly guided or he who walks upright on a straight path?”
the Imam replied, “Verily, God has struck a similitude [in this verse]:
one who deviates from the wilayah of ‘Ali (A) is like one who walks on
his face and is not guided, and He has made one who follows him as one
who walks upright on a straight path, and ‘the Straight Path’ is Amir
al-Mu’minin (A).”[^11]

In another tradition, the ‘Straight Path’ is explained as meaning ‘Ali
(A) and the rest of the Imams (A).[^12]

Also, it is narrated in the noble *al-Kafi* from Fudayl that he said, “I
entered the Holy Mosque (of Makkah) with Imam al-Baqir (A) and he was
leaning upon me. Then he threw his blessed glance upon the people as we
stood at the Door of Bani Shaybah. Then he said, ‘O Fudayl, they used to
circumambulate in this manner [even] during the days of the
*Jahiliyyah!*

They neither recognized any truth nor followed any creed. O Fudayl, look
at them, they walk inverted on their faces! May God damn them, they are
a disfigured creation walking on their faces.” Then he recited the noble
verse, *Is* *he who goes inverted on his face more rightly guided or he
who walks upright on a straight path.* Then he added, “By God, that
means ‘Ali (A) and his *awsiya’ (A)*.”[^13]

In the foregoing, we have explained how the journey and the movement of
the Perfect Man are on the Straight Path. However, the exposition of the
matter that the Perfect Man is the Straight Path itself is beyond our
purpose in this discourse.

The Hypocrite’s Heart And The Difference Between It And The Believer’s Heart
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The states of the heart of the believer and the polytheist-and even that
of the unbeliever-became known from the exposition in the foregoing
section. A comparison also discloses the state of the hypocrite’s heart.
That is because the believer’s heart has nor departed from its original
innocent and clear nature and it naturally accepts any truths relating
to faith and the true teaching. The harmony and compatibility between
the nourishment-which consists of the truths and the teachings-and the
nourished one-which is the heart in its state of original nature-is
preserved.

Hence in another tradition of the noble *al-Kafi,* the believer’s heart
has been said to be ‘open’ (*maftuh*)*,* and although this ‘opening’ may
refer to one of the ‘threefold openings’ (*futhat al-thalathah*)*,*[^14]
this meaning is also appropriate.

However, as the hypocrite’s heart has obscurities and darkness formed in
it contrary to the human nature, such as ignorant prejudices
(*ta’assubhaye jahiliyyat*)*,* blameworthy moral traits, vanity,
ambition, and other qualities contrary to the [primal] nature, it is
closed and sealed. It is not at all receptive to the word of truth and
its tablet is like a page of paper that is totally blackened, on which
nothing can be inscribed. Its pretense of religiosity, arising from its
satanic character, is a means to secure worldly benefit and advancement
in mundane matters.

It should be known that the hearts of the polytheist and the hypocrite
are both inverted and sealed, as is clear and evident. But the
attribution of one of these qualities to each of them in particular is
for the reason that, as the hearts of the polytheists are turned in
worship towards other than That which is Absolute Perfection, they have
two properties and characteristics: one is sincere humility [in front of
the object of worship] and another is the deficiency and obfuscation
created by this humility, which is diverted towards imperfect beings and
creatures.

Hence, their hearts are inverted and this is their predominant
characteristic. As to the hypocrite, he is either a polytheist in
reality -and in this respect he shares equally with the polytheists the
quality of inversion of the heart- besides possessing an additional
quality [i.e. hypocrisy], or he is an unbeliever in reality and
possesses no religiosity.

Although his heart too is inverted, it has another quality, which is
predominant. That additional quality is his outward pretense of
following the truth. He enters the congregation of the followers of the
Truth and hears all the truthful preaching that is heard by the
believers. Yet, while the believer absorbs them due to his inner purity
and open heart, the hypocrite fails to receive them due to the darkness
and obscurities of his heart, which is closed and sealed.

The reason for singling out for mention from among the attributes of the
believer the two characteristics, of gratitude on being favored with
gifts and patience in trials is the salient character of these two among
the believer’s qualities. These are two of the major virtues from which
other virtues branch out, and we have alluded to this in the exposition
of some of the earlier traditions.[^15]

Further, the tradition refers to two of the Divine Attributes, of Glory
and Beauty, or Might and Grace, each of which is manifested in the
condition of tribulation and the condition of being well provided. And
although tribulation belongs to the Attributes of Grace, but since it
manifests through Might, it is reckoned as belonging to it, as mentioned
in the discussions on Divine Names and Attributes. The believer always
observes the duties of servitude between the two manifestations.

Neglect Of The Truth Results In The Inversion Of The Heart
----------------------------------------------------------

From the foregoing discussion it is known that the souls, though they
should have belief in God and Resurrection, become inverted if they are
totally absorbed by attention towards the world and preoccupied with
mundane advancements while being neglectful of God. The criterion in
respect of the inversion of the heart is the neglect of God and
attention to the world and its cultivation.

Such belief is either not faith, as mentioned in the exposition of some
of the earlier traditions,[^16] or is an insignificant and inadequate
faith that is not inconsistent with the inversion of the heart. In fact,
one who makes a pretense of belief in transcendence and Resurrection but
has no trepidation arising from such a belief and whom this belief does
not lead to act with his bodily members, such a one is to be considered
as belonging to the hypocrites, not as one of the believers. Possibly
this sort of apparent believers, like the people of Ta’if, who in the
noble tradition are mentioned as being typical of those who are
believers at one time and hypocrites at another time, may altogether
lose this hollow faith which has no sovereignty in the realm of their
physical, bodily existence (*mulk*).

They might leave this world in a state of complete hypocrisy to be
resurrected amongst the hypocrites. This is one of the crucial matters
to which our weak spirits must attach great importance, taking care that
the effects of faith become established in our manifest and hidden,
inner, and outer, being. In the same way as we claim to possess faith in
the heart, we should make our outward being also subject to its
authority, so that the roots of faith become established in our hearts,
not to be destroyed by any kind of obstacle or hindrance, transformation
and change, so that this Divine trust of a celestial and pure heart,
fashioned with its Divine nature, is returned to the Sacred Being
unaffected and unsoiled by the workings of Satan and hands of treachery.
And to Allah belongs all praise, at every beginning and end. ‘

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. II, p. 422, “kitab al-Iman wa al-kufr” “bab fi
Zulmah qalb al-munafiq” hadith 2.

[^2]: Al-Nihayah, vol. ii, p. 321, under z.h.r.

[^3]: Author’s Note. It should be known that that which is meant here is
not that the science of ethics and the things which lead to the
salvation and damnation of the soul are not necessary. Rather, what is
meant it that that science is to considered as a mere preliminary to
action, not as something of independent worth is whose pursuit and in
collecting whose technical jargon one should spend a lifetime and be
kept from one’s real goal.

[^4]: See under the exposition of Twenty-sixth Hadith.

[^5]: See Seventeenth Hadith.

[^6]: Bihar al-anwar, vol. v, p. 153, “kitab al adl wa al-ma’ad’ “bab
al-sa’adah wa al shaqawah” hadith 1, with a slight difference in
wording.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 423, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr” “bab
Zulmah qalb al-munafiq” hadith 3.

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. ii, p. 422, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr” “bab
Zulmah qalb al-munafiq” hadith 1: عَنْ عَمْرٍو عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ لَنَا ذَاتَ يَوْمٍ: يَجِدُ الرَّجُلَ لا
يُخْطِئُ بِلامٍ وَلا وَاوٍ، خَطِيباً مُصْقِعاً، لَقَلْبُهُ أَشَدُّ
ظُلْمَةً مِنَ اللَّيْلِ المُظْلِمِ. وَتَجِدُ الرَّجُلَ لا يَسْتَطِيعُ
يُعَبِّرُ عَمَّا فِي قَلْبِهِ وَلِسَانِهِ، وَقَلْبُهُ يَزْهَرُ كَمَا
يَزْهَرُ المِصْبَاحُ.

[^9]: Sadr al-Muta’allihin, Tafsir al-Quran al-Karim, vol. iv, p. 52,
exegesis of 2:256 (ayat al-Kursi); See also al-Majlisi, ‘Ilm al-yaqin,
vol. ii, p. 967.

[^10]: 67:22

[^11]: Al-Kafi, vol. i, p. 432, “Kitab al-hujjah” “bab fihi nukat wa
nutaf min al-tamzil fi al-Wilayah” hadith 91.

[^12]: Bihar al-anwar, vol. XXIV, p. 15, “kitab Imamah” bab 24, hadith
17: عَنْ حَمْرَانَ قَالَ سَمِعْتُ أَبَا جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
يَقُولُ (عَنْ) قَوْلِ اللهِ تَعَالَى: ﴿وَأَنَّ هَذَا صِرَاطِي
مُسْتَقِيمًا فَاتَّبِعُوهُ وَلَا تَتَّبِعُوا السُّبُلَ فَتَفَرَّقَ
بِكُمْ عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ.﴾ قَالَ: عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ وَالأَئِمَّةُ
مِنْ وِلْدِ فَاطِمَةَ هُمْ صِرَاطُ اللهِ. فَمَنْ أَبَاهُمْ سَلَكَ
السُّبُلَ.

[^13]: Rawdat al-Kafi, p. 288, hadith 434: عَنِ الفُضَيْلِ قَالَ:
دَخَلْتُ مَعَ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ المَسْجِدَ الحَرَامَ
وَمْتَّكىً عَلَيَّ فَنَظَرَ إلَى النَّاسِ وَنَحْنُ عَلَى بَابِ بَنِي
شَيْبَةَ فَقَالَ: يَا فُضَيْلُ، هَكَذَا كَانَ يَطَّوَّفُونَ فِي
الجَاهِلِيَّةِ! لا يَعْرِفُونَ حَقّاً وَلا يَدِينُونَ دِيناً! يَا
فُضَيْلُ، أنْظُرْ إلَيْهِمْ مُكِبِّينَ عَلَى وُجُوهِهِمْ، لَعَنَهُمُ
اللهُ مِنْ خَلْقٍ مَسْخُورٍ بِهِمْ مُكِبِّينَ عَلَى وُجُوهِهِمْ. ثُمَّ
تَلا هَذِهِ الآيَةَ: ﴿أَفَمَنْ يَمْشِي مُكِبًّا عَلَى وَجْهِهِ أَهْدَى
أَمَّنْ يَمْشِي سَوِيًّا عَلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ.﴾ يَعْنِي وَاللهِ
عِلِيّاً عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ وَالأوْصِيَاءَ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلامُ.

[^14]: These are; al-fath al-qarib, al-fath al-mubin, and al-fath
al-mutlaq.

[^15]: See Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Twenty-first Hadith.

[^16]: See Ninth, Twentieth and Twenty-sixth Hadith.


