Thirty-First Hadith: The Indescribability of God, The Prophet, And The Imams
============================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إِلَى الشَّيْخِ الجَلِيلِ أَفْضَلِ
المُحَدِّثِينَ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ الْكُلَيْنِيِّ عَنْ عَلِيِّ
بْنِ إبْرَاهِيمَ عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنْ حَمَّادٍ عَنْ رَبْعِيٍّ عَنْ
زُرَارَةَ عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُهُ
يَقُولُ: إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لا يُوصَفُ وَكَيْفَ يُوصَفُ وَقَالَ
فِي كِتَابِهِ: ﴿وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ.﴾ فَلا يُوصَفُ
بِقَدَرٍ إلاّ كَانَ أَعْظَمَ مِنْ ذَلِكَ. وَإنَّ النَّبِيَّ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لا يُوصَفُ وَكَيْفَ يُوصَفُ عَبْدٌ احْتَجَبَ
اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِسَبْعٍ وَجَعَلَ طَاعَتَهُ فِي الأَرْضِ
كَطَاعَتِهِ [فِي السَّمَاءِ] فَقَالَ: ﴿وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ
فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا.﴾ وَمَنْ أَطَاعَ هَذَا
فَقَدْ أَطَاعَنِي وَمَنْ عَصَاهُ فَقَدْ عَصَانِي، وَفَوَّضَ إلَيْهِ.
وَإنَّا لا نُوصَفُ وَكَيْفَ يُوصَفُ قَوْمٌ رَفَعَ اللهُ عَنْهُمُ
الرِّجْسَ، وَهُوُ الشَّكُّ. وَالمُؤْمِنُ لا يُوصَفُ وَإنَّ المُؤْمِنَ
لَيَلْقَى أَخَاهُ فَيُصَافِحُهُ فَلا يَزَالُ اللهُ يَنْظُرُ إلَيْهِمَا
وَالذُّنُوبُ تَتَحّاتُّ عَنْ وُجُوهِهِمَا كَمَا يَتَحَاتُّ الوَرَقُ
عَنِ الشَّجَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my continuous chain of transmission reaching the august shaykh, the
best of the traditionists, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni, from ‘Ali ibn
Ibrahim, from his father, from Hammed, from Rib’i, from Zurarah, from
Abu Ja’far (A), [Zurarah] says: I heard him say, “Verily, God, the
Almighty and the Glorious, cannot be described, and how could He be
described when He declares in His Book. ‘And they measure not God with
His true measure.’[^1] Hence, He cannot be described by any measure, and
if described He would transcend it. And, verily, the Prophet (S) cannot
be described, and how could be described a servant whom God, the
Almighty and the Glorious, has concealed with seven veils and made
obedience to him in the earth like obedience to him in the heavens,
declaring, ‘And whatsoever the Messenger giveth you, take it. And
whatsoever be forbiddeth, abstain from it.’[^2] And [He has declared]
‘Whoever obeys him assuredly obeys Me, and whoever disobeys him disobeys
Me.’[^3] Hence, He has delegated authority to him. And we (Imams of the
Ahl al-Bayt) cannot be described, and how could a people be described
whom God has kept free from impurity, which is doubt. And neither can
the believer be described. And indeed, when the believer takes his
brother with the hand on meeting him, God looks at them and sins are
shed from their faces in the way leaves fall from a tree.”[^4]

Exposition
----------

To take up the explication of the phrase... وما قدروا (*and they measure
not God...’*)*,* al-Jawhari says in this regard: *“qadr* means
‘measure’. And قدر both with *fathah* on the *dal* (i.e. *qadar*) and
*sukun* on it (i.e. *qadr*) has the same meaning. It is a verbal noun
(*masdar*). God, the Exalted, says: which means وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللهَ
حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ which means مَا عَظَّمُوا اللهَ حَقَّ تَعظِيمِه (‘they do
not venerate God in the way He aught to be venerated’).”

In the opinion of this writer qadr apparently means ‘measure,’ and has
been used figuratively to indicate the incapacity to describe and
venerate adequately. Description (tawsif) itself is a kind of
measurement of the object described in the apparel of characterization,
and this-as shall be pointed out later, God willing-is neither possible
nor permissible for anyone else to do in relation to that Sacred Being.

As to the phrase فلا يوصف بقدر there is بِقُدْرَةٍ, with a *ta*, in the
version of marhum al-Majlisi (M) and he has considered it to signify
comparison. Also, he is of the opinion that the singling out of Power
(*qudrah*) from among the Attributes is due to its being closer to
understanding. Then, affirming the possibility of error in the
manuscript, he says, “Possibly, it may be read with *fathah* (i.e.
*qadar*), as in some other traditions.”

The version of al-Wafi accords with his guess[^5] and perhaps it may be
قَدَرِهِ with ha’, in some manuscripts. But it is probable, or rather
certain, that بِقُدْرَةٍ with *ta’*, is an error in the manuscript, for
it is neither eloquent from the viewpoint of meaning nor proper on the
basis of wording, for a masculine pronoun is referred to it, and to
explain it away will be contrary to the rule.

The context offered little room for a maneuver and hence this
explanation of *marhum* al-Majlisi, even though there is no reason for
asserting that while it is possible to conceive the attribute of Power
it is impossible to conceive other Attributes, thus distinguishing it
from other Attributes. Accordingly this explanation did carry much
weight in his own blessed opinion.

As to the word تَتَحاتُّ as Jawhari says in the *Sihah*: الحتّ: حكّ
الورق من الغصنِ i.e. *hatt* means the falling of leaves from the branch
of a tree. He further says: تَحاتَّ الشّيءُ: تَناثَرَ which (i.e.
*tanathur*) also gives the meaning of falling and scattering. Now we
shall explain the relevant points of the noble tradition in a number of
sections.

The Indescribability Of God
---------------------------

It should be known that the indescribability of God, the Exalted,
mentioned in this tradition refers to the characteristics of God given
by some victims of ignorance and disputation from among the theologians
(*mutakallimun*) and others, whose statements implied finitude
(*tahdid*) and anthropomorphism (*tashbih*) or rather the very denial of
the Divine Attributes (*tatil*)*.* That such is the case is indicated by
this phrase in the noble tradition, وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ.
Some traditions of the noble *al-Kafi*, in the chapter concerning
prohibition on characterization (*nahy ‘an al tawsif*), also affirm
this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ عَبْدِالرَّحِيمِ بْنِ عَيْتَكَ القَصِيرِ قَالَ:
كَتَبْتُ عَلَى يَدَيْ عَبْدِالمَلِكَ بْنِ أَعْيُنَ إلَى أَبِي
عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: أنَّ قَوْماً بِالعِرَاقِ يَصِفُونَ
اللهَ بِالصُّورَةِ وَبِالتَّخْطِيطِ، فَإنْ رَأَيْت - جَعَلَنِيَ اللهُ
فِدَاكَ - أنْ تَكْتُبَ إلَيَّ بِالمَذْهَبِ الصَّحِيحِ مِنَ
التَّوْحِيدِ؟ فَكَتَبَ إلَيَّ: سَأَلْتَ، رَحِمَكَ اللهُ، عَنِ
التَّوْحِيدِ وَمَا ذَهَبَ إلَيْهِ مَنْ قِبَلَكَ فَتَعَالَى اللهُ
الَّذِي لَيْسَ كَمِثْلِهِ شَيْءٌ وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ البَصِيرُ، تَعَالَى
عَمَّا يَصِفُهُ الوَاصِفُونَ المُشَبِّهُونَ اللهَ بِخَلْقِهِ
المُفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللهِ، فَاعْلَمْ، رَحِمَكَ اللهُ، أنَّ المَذْهَبَ
الصَّحِيحَ فِي التَّوْحِيدِ مَا نَزَلَ بِهِ القُرْآنُ مِنْ صِفَاتِ
اللهِ جَلَّ وَعَزَّ فَانْفِ عَنِ اللهِ تَعَالَى البُطْلانَ
وَالتَّشْبِيهَ. فَلا نَفْيَ وَلا تَشْبِيهَ. هُوَ اللهُ الثَّابِتُ
المَوْجودُ، تَعَالَى اللهُ عَمَّا يَصِفُهُ الوَاصِفُونُ، وَلا تَعْدُوا
القُرْآنَ فَتَضِلُّوا بَعْدَ البَيَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi (al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from ‘Abd al-Rahim ibn
‘Atik aIl-Qasir that he said: I wrote a letter to Abu ‘Abd Allah (A)
which I sent through ‘Abd al-Malik ibn A’yan, informing him that there
are some people in Iraq who characterize God with form and features
(takhtit). I wrote: May God make me your ransom, if you consider it fit,
write to me the correct doctrine of Divine Unity. He wrote back to me,
“May God be merciful to you, you have questioned me concerning tawhid
and the belief held by a group of people over there. Exalted is God, and
there is nothing like Him, and He is the All-hearing and the All-seeing.
He is above the descriptions of the anthropomorphists (mushabbihah) who
liken God to His creation and ascribe falsehoods to Him. May God have
mercy upon you, know that the right doctrine of tawhid is that which has
been revealed in the Qur’an concerning the Attributes of God, the
Almighty and the Glorious. Negate ta’til (the negation of Attributes) as
well as tashbih in relation to God, the Exalted. Hence neither the
Attributes are to be negated, nor God is to be likened to anything. He
is God, the Self-Subsisting (al thabit) and the Existent (al-mawjud),
exalted is He above what the describers attribute to Him. Go not beyond
the Qur’an, or you will go astray after the clear exposition [of the
truth).”[^6]

If one reflects properly on the contents of this noble tradition and its
earlier and latter parts one comes to know that the prohibition
concerning the characterization of God does not mean, as stated by some
eminent traditionists,[^7] that one should refrain absolutely from
reflecting on the Attributes or describing the Attributes of God,
because this tradition, like some others,[^8] directs one to negate
*ta’til* and *tashbih*-something which is not possible without
reflection on the Attributes and a complete knowledge of them. That
which the Imam wants to say is that one should not attribute to God, the
Exalted, anything that is not worthy of His sacred Essence, such as the
attribution of form, features, and other characteristics of the
creatures, which entail imperfection and contingency (*imkan*)*,* and
God is above these.

However, as to describing God, the Exalted, by attributes that suit Him,
it has a sound discursive basis in the transcendental sciences (*‘ulum
al-‘aliyah*). Hence, it is something desirable, and the Book of God, the
*Sunnah* of the Messenger (S) and the traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt are
replete with it. The Imam himself has made a brief reference in this
noble tradition to that right discursive approach, though any
elaboration of it is outside the scope of our discussion.

As to the statement of Imam al-Sadiq (A) that one should not go beyond
the Divine Scripture in one’s descriptions of God, it is a prescription
for those who are ignorant of the criterion concerning [metaphysical
speculation about] the Attributes. It does not mean that it is
impermissible to ascribe an attribute that is not mentioned in the Book
of God. Accordingly that master, despite prescribing this for his
addressee, mentions two Attributes and Names of God, “Self-subsisting”
(*al-thabit*) and “Existent” (*al-mawjud*)*,* which as such do not occur
in the Divine Scripture.

True, if someone with an undeveloped intellect, full of conjectures and
imaginings and unilluminated with the light of gnosis (*ma’rifah*) and
hidden Divine assistance, were to describe God with some attribute, he
would inevitably fall either into the error of *ta’til* and negation [of
the Attributes] or into the perdition of *tashbih.* Hence it is
essential for persons like us whose hearts are covered with thick veils
of ignorance and self-love and perverse habits and dispositions to
refrain from reaching out toward the world of the Hidden and abstain
from carving out deities for ourselves, for whatever we may conceive in
our imagination would be no more than our own creation.

However, it should not remain unsaid that when we say that such persons
should not extend their hand towards the world of the Hidden we do not
mean to recommend that they continue to remain in ignorance and egoism,
nor, *na’udhubillah,* we call them to blaspheme His names, [regarding
which it has been said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَذَرُوا الَّذِينَ يُلْحِدُونَ فِي أَسْمَائِهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And leave those who blaspheme His Names.*** (***7:180***)

Nor do we stop them from learning the transcendental teachings
(*ma’arif*) which are the apple of the eye of the *awliya*’ of God and
the basis and foundation of religion. Rather, this is itself a call for
the removal of these dark curtains, and a warning that as long as man
remains a victim of self-attention and the love of the world, a captive
of mundane ambition, love of wealth and the self, and, like this author,
a prisoner within the walls of nescience, error, egoism and narcissism,
which are the thickest of all darkening veils, he would remain deprived
from knowing the true teachings (*ma’arif*) and attaining to his real
goal.

If, God forbid, there were no hidden succor from God, the Exalted, and
His perfect *awliya*’, one would not know where his matter would
ultimately end and to what destination his movement and journey would
lead him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إلَيْكَ المُشْتَكَى وَأَنْتَ المُسْتَعَانُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

My God, I address my complaint to Thee and seek Thy help![^9]

We, wanderers of the realm of ignorance, lost in the wilderness of
error, and self-seeking and self-centered amusements, who came into the
dark world of *mulk* and nature and, like bats, did not open the eye of
real vision to behold the fair reflection of Thy Beauty in the mirror of
things, big and small, nor the manifestations of Thy Light throughout
the levels of the heavens and the earths! Blind of eyes and insensate of
heart, we have passed our days and spent a lifetime in ignorance and
self forgetfulness.

Should Thy unbounded grace and Thy infinite and effulgent mercy assist
us not by lighting a spark within the heart and infusing a passion
within the soul, we would languish forever in this perplexity of ours
and get nowhere! But مَا هَكَذَا الظَّنُ بِكَ -such is not what we
expect of Thee!! Thy favors preceded any worthiness [on our behalf) and
Thy mercy is [ever] unearned. O God, out of Thy kindness succor us and
guide us to the lights of Thy Beauty and Majesty and illuminate our
hearts with the radiance of Thy Names and Attributes!

Impossibility Of Knowing The Reality Of The Names And The Attributes
--------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be noted that the knowledge of the reality of the Divine
Attributes and their encompassment as well as their nature is something
whose summits lie beyond the reach of metaphysical proof (*burhan*) and
whose kernel is beyond access to the yearning of the gnostics. That
which has been said from the viewpoint of metaphysical proof in the
speculative thought of scholars of formal metaphysics or in the
discussions of the adept in the terminology of gnosis concerning the
Names and the Attributes is correct and well-reasoned in accordance with
their approach.

However, learning (‘*ilm*) itself is a thick veil, and as long as it is
not pierced with the succor of the All-Glorious and in the shadow of
perfect piety, intense mortification, complete dedication and sincere
supplications to the Lord, the lights of Divine Beauty and Glory do not
appear in the wayfarer’s heart, and the heart of the emigrant towards
Allah does not succeed in attaining to the witness of the Unseen
(*mushahedeh-ye ghaybiyyeh*) and the manifest presence (*hudur-e’ayani*)
of the manifestation of the Names and the Attributes, to say nothing of
the manifestations of the Essence.

These statements should not deter one from research and study, which are
themselves reminders of the Truth, for it happens only rarely that the
sacred plant of *ma’rifah* grows and reaches fruition in the heart
without the seed of the true sciences and their customary conditions.
Hence one should not abstain at the outset from the pursuit of the
sciences with due observance of all its prerequisites and auxiliaries,
for it has been said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العُلُومُ بَذْرُ المُشَاهَداتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The sciences are the seed of (gnostic) disclosures.[^10]

And should the sciences fail to produce for one a complete result in
this world on account of certain obstacles, they would inevitably bring
the desired fruits in the other worlds. But the main thing is the
observance of their prerequisites and conditions, some of which were
discussed in the exposition of certain foregoing traditions.

Knowledge Of The Spiritual Reality Of The Prophets And The Awliya’ Is Unattainable Through Rational Thought
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that the knowledge of the spirituality and the
station of perfection of the major prophetic figures and the infallible
*awliya’* (A) in general, and those of the Seal of the Prophets (S) in
particular, is not attainable by means of thought or journey through the
*‘horizons and the souls’* (*afaq wa anfus;* 41:53).

That, because those venerable personages belong to the Divine lights of
the Unseen and are the complete manifestation and the manifest signs of
Divine glory and beauty, having reached, in the spiritual journey
towards God, the ultimate extremity of self-annihilation (*fana’
al-dhati*) and the ultimacy of ascent, to the point of *‘two bows length
or nearer’* (*qaba qawsayn aw adna;* 53:9)*,* though the latter station
belongs [specifically] to the Seal of the Prophets and other wayfarers
in their ascension are followers of his sacred being.

Here we do not intend to describe the nature of the journey of that
sacred personage and the difference between his spiritual ascent
(*mi’raj*) and the ascents of other prophets and *awliya’ (A)*. For the
sake of the present discourse we shall confine ourselves to mentioning
one tradition pertaining to their luminosity, for the perception of
their luminosity also requires an inner light and a divine gravitation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ جَابِرٍ عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ قَالَ: سَأَلْتُهُ عَنْ عِلْمِ العَالِمِ فَقَالَ لِي: يَا
جَابِرُ، إنَّ فِي الأَنْبِيَاءِ وَالأَوْصِيَاءِ خَمْسَةَ أَرْوَاحٍ:
رُوحَ القُدُسِ وَرُوحَ الإيمَانِ وَرُوحَ الحَيَاةِ وَرُوحَ القُوَّةِ
وَرُوحَ الشَّهْوَةِ. فَبِرُوحِ القُدُسِ يَا جَابِرُ عَرَفُوا مَا
تَحْتَ العَرْشِ إلَى مَا تَحْتَ الثَّرَى. ثُمَّ قَالَ: يَا جَابِرُ
إنَّ هَذِهِ الأرْبَعَةِ أَرْوَاحٌ يُصِيبُهَا الحِدْثَانُ إلاّ رُوحَ
القُدُسِ فَإنَّهَا لا تَلْهُو وَلا تَلْعَبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[In al-Kafi (al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Jabir, from Abu
Ja’far (A). Jabir says: I asked him concerning the knowledge of the
Knowing One (al-’Alim, i.e. an Imam.) He replied saying, “O Jabir,
verily, there are five spirits in the prophets and the awsiya’ the Holy
Spirit, the Spirit of Faith, the Spirit of Life, the Spirit of Power,
and the Spirit of Appetite. By the means of the Holy Spirit, O Jabir,
they know everything from the Throne to underneath the earth.” Then he
added, “O Jabir, all the four spirits are subject to vicissitudes, but
not the Holy Spirit, which does not engage in diversion or play.”[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي بَصِيرٍ قَالَ: سَأَلْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ عَنْ قَوْلِ اللهِ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى: ﴿وَكَذَلِكَ
أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ رُوحًا مِنْ أَمْرِنَا مَا كُنْتَ تَدْرِي مَا
الْكِتَابُ وَلَا الْإِيمَانُ.﴾ قَالَ: خَلْقٌ مِنْ خَلْقِ اللهِ
تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى أَعْظَمُ مِنْ جِبْرَئِيلَ وَمِيكَائِيلَ، كَانَ
مَعَ رَسُولِ الله صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يُخْبِرُهُ
وَيُسَدِّدُهُ. وَهُوَ مَعَ الأَئِمَّةِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ صَلَوَاتُ اللهِ
عَلَيْهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from Abu Basir that he
said: I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) concerning the statement of God, the
Blessed and the Exalted, “And thus have We inspired in thee (O Muhammad)
a Spirit of Our Command. Thou knewest not what the Scripture was, nor
what the Faith’ (42:52).” He replied, “(The Spirit mentioned in the
verse) is one of the creatures of God, the Blessed and the Exalted,
greater than Gabriel and Michael, that was with the Messenger of God (S)
and which used to inform and guide him, and after him it is with the
Imams (A).”[^12]

From the first tradition one comes to know that the prophets and the
*awsiya’ (A)* possess a sublime spiritual station which is called the
Holy Spirit (*ruh al-qudus;* lit, ‘the Spirit of Holiness’). By the
means of that station they encompass all the particles of the universe
epistemically and ontologically (*ihateh-ye ‘ilmi qayyumi*)*.* In that
spirit, there is no negligence, sleep, error, forgetfulness and other
vicissitudes associated with contingency or any of the changes and
deficiencies pertaining to the realm of *mulk.*

Rather, it belongs to the world of the immaterial Unseen and the greater
*Jabarut.* From the second tradition, one comes to know that that spirit
is perfectly non-material and greater than Gabriel and Michael, who are
the greatest inhabitants of the station of proximity of the *Jabarut.*

Yes, the *awliya’,* whose natural form (*tinah*) has been fashioned by
God, the Exalted, with the mighty hands of His own Beauty and Majesty,
and manifested Himself, in the first manifestation of the Essence
(*tajalliye dhati-ye awwali*)*,* with all the Names, Attributes and the
all-inclusive station of Unity (*maqam al-ahadiyyat-a jam’*) in their
perfect mirror, and initiated them into the reality of the Names and the
Attributes in the Unseen privacy (*khalwatgah al-ghayb*) of the Divine
Ipseity-the majesty of their glory and beauty is beyond the reach of the
aspirations of the gnostics, and the summit of their perfection is
beyond access to the gnostic endeavors of the people of the heart. And
it is mentioned in a tradition of the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلِيٌّ مَمْسُوسٌ فِي ذَاتِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is immersed in the Essence of God, the Exalted.[^13]

In former days, this author, like a bat describing the
world-illuminating sun, has described a modicum of the station of
prophethood and *wilayah* in a separate treatise named *Misbah
al-hidayah.*[^14]

The Waiting Of ‘The Seven Hijabs’ Mentioned In Relation To The Prophet
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Several probable meanings have been suggested for these words of the
noble tradition: كَيْفَ يُوصَفُ عَبْدٌ احْتَجَبَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
بِسَبْعٍ and here we shall mention some of them.

First is the one suggested by the perfect gnostic and traditionist, the
*marhum* Fayd (M). It is narrated in a tradition that there are seventy
thousand veils of light and darkness for God, the Exalted; were He to
remove them, the lights of Divine Beauty will burn down everything that
His sight falls upon. Accordingly, it is probable that كَيْفَ يُوصَفُ
عَبْدٌ احْتَجَبَ اللهُ بِسَبْعٍ means that [for the Prophet, most of]
all those veils have been removed so that out of the seventy-thousand
only seven remain.[^15] According to this interpretation, the phrase
involves an ellipsis and means احتجب الله عنه بسبع with God, the
Glorious, as the active subject [of the verb احتجب ].

Although this interpretation is perhaps more appropriate than the other
probable meanings, it is not indisputable. From the viewpoint of
wording, a more appropriate expression for the description to convey
such a sense would be: ما احتجب الله عنه إلا بسبع or ما احتجب عن الله
إلا بسبع . As in accordance with this interpretation, the perfection of
the Messenger and the impermissibility of describing him relates not to
the presence of the seven veils but to the absence of the other veils,
it would have been more appropriate to mention them.

Moreover, from the viewpoint of meaning, since, apparently, these veils
of light and darkness that belong to God, the Exalted, pertain to
creation and not to the Names and the Attributes, it entails that there
is a creature nearer [to the Divine Essence] than the sacred light of
the Noble Messenger (S) whereas it has been established that his being
is the nearest veil and the first creature and there are not even any
veils of Names and Attributes for that master, as has been proved in its
own proper place, and the sevenfold stations and mysteries of that
master are also not a veil for himself.

A second interpretation is the one proffered by the erudite
traditionist, the marhum Majlisi, may God elevate his station in the
realm of sanctity, which he also narrates from some others. According to
this interpretation, this sentence is mentioned in the way of
introduction and intended to describe the Prophet through later
sentences.[^16]

That is, it means to say: ‘How could be described a servant, for whom
God, Who is concealed from the creatures with seven veils, has made
obedience in the earth like obedience to him in the heaven-like a king
who is situated beyond seven curtains for his subjects, who cannot have
access to him except through the mediation of a vizier appointed for
them, and who sends a decree declaring that his command is mine.’

And that which is meant by the sevenfold veils are the seven heavens
from beyond which the revelations of God reach us through the Messenger.
He has also mentioned another possible interpretation close to this one
wherein the sevenfold veils are identified as the luminous veils of the
Names.[^17] Although this interpretation, like the former, is not
contestable from the viewpoint of meaning, it is inadequate or rather
more farfetched from the viewpoint of wording and description.

There is another probable interpretation of it which is much sounder and
convincing and more appropriate to the occasion. However, the
correctness of this interpretation depends on one of two things: either
that احتجب has been used in a transitive sense in the sense of حَجَبَ or
that it be permissible to make it transitive with a ba; and in both the
cases there be an ellipsis involving the object (*maf’ul*).

Assuming the propriety of one of these two matters mentioned, this is
what is meant in accordance with this interpretation: ‘How could a
creature be described whom God, the Exalted, has concealed with seven
veils, and for whose beauty and spirituality, which are on a par with
the Divine will (*mashiyyah*), He has assigned seven veils extending
from the plane of corporeal nature to the plane of the absolute
mashiyyah, or from the plane of the corporeal realm of mulk of that
master to the Unseen station (*maqam al-ghayb*) of his ipseity
(*huwiyyah*). I could not find any instance in the lexicon and usage for
the transitive meaning of although some scholars state that there is no
impediment to making it transitive with a *ba’*.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالعِلْمُ عِنْدَ اللهِ، وَلَعَلَّ اللهَ يُحْدِثُ بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ
أَمْراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And all knowledge is with God, and perchance He may make something to
come about hereafter.

The Delegation (Tafwid) Of The Affair To The Messenger Of God (S), As Indicated By This And Many Other Traditions
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that the term *tafwid* is used in a special sense in
discussions on *jabr* and *tafwid* (predestination and total human
freedom).

According to this sense of *tafwid,* it means that God, the Exalted, has
*na’udhubillah,* dissociated Himself in some respect from making any
kind of dispositions in the world, right from the remotest extremity of
creation pertaining to the Unseen immaterial spheres to the other end of
the realm of creation and [corporeal] existence and delegated its
administration to a being which is either a perfectly and completely
spiritual and immaterial being possessing will and freedom of action, or
a physical existent devoid of will and consciousness, which has a
complete freedom of independent action therein.

*Tafwid* in this sense of delegation of Divine functions to someone,
either in the matter of creation (*takwin*) or that of legislation
(*tashri’*) or on the plane of administration of the affairs of the
creatures and their instruction (*ta’dib*)*,* is impossible, and it
implies the affirmation of deficiency and contingency in relation to the
Necessary Being and negation of contingency and need in relation to
contingent being.

Opposed to it is *jabr,* which means negation of causal efficiency in
relation to the various planes of existence and an outright negation of
the entire system of causes and effects. This notion is also absolutely
false and contrary to firm metaphysical proofs. This is not restricted
to the acts of legally responsible persons (*mukallafun*) as is
generally known. Rather, the negation of *jabr* and *tafwid* in this
sense is the operating *sunnah* of God in all the planes of being and in
all the spheres of the Seen and the Unseen. However, the proof of this
matter lies outside the scope of these pages.

The traditions negating *jabr* and *tajwid* are to be taken to apply to
these meanings of the terms. [The term *tafwid*] has some other meaning
in those traditions which do affirm *tafwid* [such as the following
tradition of *al-Kafi* from Imam al-Baqir concerning the legislation of
certain laws by the Prophet himself], or those which mention the
delegation of all the affairs of the creatures [to the prophet], like
the [second] tradition of *al-Kafi* given below.

In the first noble tradition of *al-Kafi* it is narrated with *isnad*
from Imam al-Baqir (A) that he said, “The Messenger of God (S)
prescribed the damages (*diyah*) for loss of an eye and life, and he
forbade *nabidh* and every intoxicant.” Someone asked him, “Was that
without anything being revealed to him?” The Imam replied, “Yes. That
was in order [that God may] know those who obey the Messenger of God (S)
and those who disobeyed him.”[^18]

In other such instances, the Prophet (S) added a number of *rak’ahs* to
the daily prayers[^19] and made fasting during the month of Sha’ban and
on three days of every month *mustahabb.*[^20]

The second tradition is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ زُرَارَةَ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أَبَا جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ وَأَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولانِ: إنَّ اللهَ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فَوَّضَ إلَى نَبِيِّهِ أَمْرَ خَلْقِهِ لِيَنْظُرَ كَيْفَ
طَاعَتُهُمْ. ثُمَّ تَلا: ﴿وَمَا آتَاكُمْ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا
نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Kulayni reports) with his isnad from Zurarah that he said: I heard
Abu Ja’far and Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) say, “Verily, God, the Almighty and
the Glorious, has delegated the affair of His creatures to His Prophet,
to see how they obey him.” Then he recited this verse: Take whatever the
Messenger brings you and refrain from whatever he forbids you.[^21]

Eminent scholars have mentioned certain probable meanings and
interpretations. One of them is that which the erudite traditionist al
Majlisi (M), relates from Thiqat al-Islam al-Kulayni and most of the
traditionists and which he himself favors. The gist of it is that God,
the Exalted, after that He made the Messenger so perfect that he would
not opt for anything that is not in conformity with what is true and
correct and nothing would enter his blessed mind which is opposed to
God’s will, delegated to him the determination of some matters, such as
adding to the number of rak’ahs in obligatory prayers, the determination
of supererogatory matters relating to prayer and fasting and so on.

This delegation (*tafwid*) was to make manifest the dignity and majesty
of the station of that Master near God, the Glorious. However, his
determinations and choices are not without inspiration and revelation,
and after that Master prescribed something, the matter was affirmed by
revelation?[^22] Marhum Majlisi, may God elevate his station, also
mentions other matters similar to this one, such as the matter of
teaching, instructing, and administering the creatures, which has been
delegated to him, or that of proclaiming and expositing of the *ahkam*,
or refraining from that, in accordance with the exigencies of time-such
as while observing *taqiyyah*-which have been delegated to him and the
other Ma’sumun?[^23]

However, in any of the two interpretations offered by these revered
scholars the scope of tafwid has not been explained as a rational
principle consistent with established principles. Moreover, the
distinction between this *tafwid* and the *tafwid* which is impossible
remains unexplained. Rather, that which is implied by their
statements-especially those of marhum Majlisi (M) is that it would be
[affirmation of impermissible] *tafwid* to believe that someone other
than God, the Exalted, can create, cause death, provide sustenance and
give life, that one who holds such a belief is an unbeliever (*kafir*)
and no rational person would doubt its being tantamount to apostasy.

Moreover, they have considered the matter of miracles (*mu’jazat*) and
miraculous *feats* (*karamat*) *as* being totally a result of answered
prayer, wherein God is the agent of the occurrences. However, the
*tafwid* of the teaching and instruction of creatures and the bestowal
and withholding of *anfal* and *khums* and the laying down of certain
laws is considered correct and proper. This topic is one of those which
have rarely been cl*arif*ied and hardly ever brought under a correct
criterion.

Mostly what they have done is to take an aspect of the matter and
discuss it. This author, too, with his inadequate capacity and
ineptitude and the poverty of his equipment and means cannot enter this
perplexing valley by starting from the preliminaries. However, he is
compelled to make a brief allusion in the way of a metaphysical
conclusion, for the disclosure of truth is unavoidable.

Brief Allusion To The Meaning Of Tafwid
---------------------------------------

It should be known that there is no difference whatsoever between big
and small matters in regard to the impossible *tafwid,* in the sense of
total suspension of Divine Activity (*maghluliyyat al-yaddullah*) and
independence of the efficiency of any creature’s will and power. In the
same way as the giving of life, the causing of death, creation,
annihilation, and the transformation of one element into another cannot
be delegated to any being, so also the delegation of the movement of a
piece of straw to any creature is impossible, though it be an archangel,
an apostle, or any other being from the non-material intellects and
inhabitants of the highest *jabarut* to the realm of primal matter. All
the particles of the universe are subject to the perfect Divine will and
have no independence whatsoever of their own in any respect.

All of them are needy and poor in their being, as well as in their ontic
perfections, movements and pauses, power and will, and all their
functions. Rather, they are sheer poverty and absolute need. Similarly,
there is no distinction between major and insignificant matters in
respect of God’s sustaining power over being and the negation of
independence of creatures and the manifestation and influence of the
Divine will and its all-pervasiveness. In the same way as such weak
creatures as we have the power to carry out feeble actions, such as our
[bodily] movements and pauses and all the other activities, the elect of
God and the non-material angels are capable of performing such great
acts as giving life, causing death, providing sustenance, creation, and
annihilation.

The Angel of Death is encharged with taking life and his taking of life
is not something like the fulfillment of prayer, and Israfil is
encharged with the giving of life, which is not of the nature of a
prayer answered, and these actions do not fall under invalid *tafwid.*
In the same way, if a perfect wali and a potent pure soul-such as the
spirits of the prophets and the *awliya’* are-were to have the power to
annihilate and create, to cause death and give life, a power given to
them by God, the Exalted, it would not be an instance of impossible
*tafwid* and should not be considered invalid. The delegation of the
affair of the creatures to a perfect spirit whose intention is
annihilated in the Divine intent and whose will is an image of the
Divine will, and which does not will anything except what God wills and
makes no move except that which is in accordance with the best system
(*nizam al-aslah*)*,* whether in creation and bringing into being or in
legislation and instruction, that is not only not impossible but quite
proper. In fact, this is not *tafwid,* as pointed out in the tradition
narrated by Ibn Sinan to be cited in the next section.

In fine, *tafwid* in the first sense is not permissible in any matter
and is contradictory to firm metaphysical proof. In its second sense, it
is permissible in all matters. Rather, the system of the universe is not
realized without the order of causes and effects:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبَى اللهُ أَنْ يُجْرِيَ الأُمُورَ إلاّ بِأَسْبَابِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

God does not make things happen except through their means and
causes.[^24]

It should be known that that which has been said here briefly is
rational and in accordance with sound metaphysical proof and mystic
teaching as well as in conformity with tradition. And God is the guide.

The Station Of The Imams (A)
----------------------------

Know that the pure and infallible Ahl al-Bayt (A) have certain lofty
spiritual stations on the spiritual journey towards Allah whose
epistemic apprehension is beyond human capacity and above the intellects
of the people of reason and the intuitions (*shuhud*) of the gnostics.
As is apparent from the noble traditions, they share the spiritual
station of the Noble Messenger (S) and their immaculate lights were
engaged in the glorification and praise of the Sacred Essence before the
creation of the worlds.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ سِنَانٍ قَالَ: كُنْتُ
عِنْدَ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ الثَّانِي عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فَأَجْرَيْتُ
اخْتِلافَ الشِّيعَةِ. فَقَالَ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ، إنَّ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ
وَتَعَالَى لَمْ يَزَلْ مُتَفَرِّداً بِوَحْدَانِيَّتِهِ، ثُمَّ خَلَقَ
مُحَمَّداً وَعَلِيّاً وَفَاطِمَةَ، فَمَكَثُوا أَلْفَ دَهْرٍ، ثُمَّ
خَلَقَ جَمِيعَ الأَشْيَاءِ فَأَشْهَدَهُمْ خَلْقَهَا وَأَجْرَى
طَاعَتَهُمْ عَلَيْهَا وَفَوَّضَ أُمُورَهَا إلَيْهِمْ. فَهُمْ
يُحِلُّونَ مَا يَشَاؤُونَ وَيْحَرِّمُونَ مَا يَشَاؤُونَ. وَلَنْ
يَشَاؤُوا إلاّ أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللهُ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى. ثُمَّ قَالَ:
يَا مُحَمَّدُ، هَذِهِ الدِّيَانَةُ الَّتِي مَنْ تَقَدَّمَهَا مَرَقَ
وَمَنْ تَخَلَّفَ عَنْهَا مُحِقَ وَمَنْ لَزِمَهَا لحَقَ. خُذْهَا
إلَيْكَ يَا مُحَمَّدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi [al-Kulayni reports] with his isnad from Muhammad ibn Sinan
that he said: I was with Abu Ja’far, the Second (A) when I mentioned
before him the disagreement amongst the Shi’ah. Thereat he said, “O
Muhammad, verily God, the Blessed and the Exalted, is ever unique in His
Unity. Then He created Muhammad, ‘Ali and Fatima. They remained for a
thousand eons, then, He created all the things and made them witness
their creation and decreed them to obey them, delegating their affairs
(i.e. of the creatures) to them. Hence they permit whatever they will
and forbid whatever they will and they will not anything except what
God, the Exalted, wills.’ Then he said, ‘O Muhammad, whoever goes beyond
this creed transgresses the bounds of right doctrine and whoever lags
behind perishes, and whoever adheres to it attains to the truth. So hold
on to it, O Muhammad!”[^25]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ المُفَضَّلِ قَالَ: قُلْتُ لأبِي عَبْدِاللهِ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: كَيْفَ كُنْتُمْ حَيْثُ كُنْتُمْ فِي الأظِلَّةِ؟
فَقَالَ: يَا مُفَضَّلُ، كُنَّا عِنْدَ رَبِّنَا، لَيْسَ عِنْدَهُ أَحَدٌ
غَيْرُنَا، فِي ظِلَّةٍ خَضْرَاءَ نُسَبِّحُهُ وَنُقَدِّسُهُ
وَنُهَلِّلُهُ وَنُمَجِّدُهُ، وَمَا مِنْ مَلَكٍ مُقَرَّبٍ ولا ذِي رُوحٍ
غَيْرُنَا حَتَّى بَدا لَهُ فِي خَلْقِ الأَشْيَاءِ. فَخَلَقَ مَا شَاءَ
كَيْفَ شَاءَ مِنَ المَلائِكَةِ وَغَيْرِهِمْ. ثُمَّ أَنْهَى عِلْمَ
ذَلِكَ إلَيْنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from al-Mufaddal that he
said: I said to Abu ‘Abd Allah (A), “How was your state when you were in
the Shadows?” He replied, “O Mufaddal, we were with our Lord and there
was none else except us in the Green Shadow: we glorified Him, called
Him Holy and One and extolled Him. Besides us, there was neither any
archangel nor any spirit, until when it appeared to God to originate the
creation. Thereupon, He created whatever He will and howsoever He will
of the angels and the other creatures. Then He gave the knowledge of
that to us.”[^26]

The traditions relating to the nature (*tinah*) of their bodies and the
creation of their spirits and hearts, and those which speak of their
having been given [the knowledge of] the Greatest Name (*ism al-a’zam*)
and the sciences-bestowed upon them from the Unseen divine stores-of the
prophets and the angels and what is above that and that which does not
enter into the imagination of you and me, and that which is mentioned of
their other excellences in the various chapters of reliable works of our
associates, especially in the *Usul al-Kafi,* are such as to confound
the intellect.

No one can apprehend their mysteries and realities except their own
sacred beings. In this noble tradition in whose exposition we are
presently engaged, there is a reference to one of their excellences,
which is the Verse of the Purification (*al-ayat al-tathir;* 33:33),
which, in accordance with *mutawatir* traditions narrated through Sunni
and Shi’i chains of transmission, was revealed concerning the Infallible
Ahl al-Bayt.

Those who are meant by *“ahl al-bayt”* in the noble verse, as affirmed
by the consensus of the Shi’ah and abundant or *mutawatir* traditions
narrated through non-Shi’i (*‘ammah*) chains of transmission, are the
Household of infallibility (*‘ismah*) and purity (*taharah*)*.* This is
a point whose elaboration would be explanation of what is evident.

Reality Of ‘Ismah
-----------------

In this, as well as other noble traditions, *rijs* [in verse 33:33] has
been interpreted as doubt (*shakk*)*,* and in some traditions, it is
interpreted as freedom from all defects. A study of the exposition of
some of the earlier traditions shows that the negation of doubt implies
the negation of all inward and outward defects and, in fact, implies
infallibility (*‘ismah*)*.* That is because infallibility is not
something contrary to free will, as in the case of matters relating to
nature and instinct.

Rather it is a spiritual state and a light acquired by means of the
perfect light of certainty (*yaqin*) and total tranquility
(*itminan*)*.* The errors and sins that are committed by human beings
are due to inadequate conviction and faith. The degrees of conviction
and faith are so various as to be beyond description. The perfect
certainty of the prophets and their complete tranquility, acquired
through unmediated knowledge (*mushahedeh-ye hudariyyah*)*,* makes them
immune to error. The conviction of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A) had brought
him to the station that he declared: “Even if I were to be given the
whole world in order to unjustly deprive an ant of a grain, I would not
do it. “[^27]

In any case, by God’s pre-eternal design, they have been cleansed of
*shirk* and doubt, purified from the impurities and defilements of the
world of physical nature (*‘alam al-tabiat*) and the darkness of
attachment to other than God, the Exalted, freed from the obfuscations
of the ego and the thick sheaths of egoism and attention to other [than
of God], becoming sacred divine lights and complete signs of the Lord,
Who has made them purely and sheerly His own. Hence their stations are
such as cannot be properly described and explained and, like the phoenix
of the *ghayb* of Divine Ipseity, the peaks of their glory are beyond
the reach of [gnostic] aspirations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عنقا شكار كسي نشود دام بازگير
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Take thy net away for none can ever catch the phoenix.*[^28]

The Indescribability of Faith
-----------------------------

It should be known that iman (faith) is also one of the spiritual
perfections whose radiant reality can rarely be known by anyone. Even
the faithful, so long as they remain in the world and in the darkness of
nature, are unaware of the radiance of their faith and the dignity they
have before God.

As long as man remains in this world, he becomes so accustomed to its
conditions and habits that when he hears anything about the nobilities
and bounties of the other world and its punishments and disappointments,
he immediately compares them to a similar form in the realm of mulk. For
instance, he compares the nobilities promised by God, the Exalted, to
the faithful and the bounties He has prepared for them, and whose news
has been conveyed by the prophets (A) to the gifts and honors received
by men from princes and suzerains or something better and higher. He
assumes the bounties of that world to be like those of this world,
though somewhat more refined and superior.

Such a comparison is altogether invalid. The bounties of that world, its
delights, and fragrance cannot be truly imagined by us, and anything
like them does not enter our minds. We cannot conceive how a drink of
the water of Paradise can possess all the imaginable and possible
pleasures, each of which is distinct from the other, for the quality of
any delight [of that world] has no similarity to the pleasures of this
world.

In this noble tradition, there is a mention of one of the nobilities of
the faithful which, in view of the people of gnosis and the people of
the heart, are incomparable to anything and cannot be measured by any
measure, and that is the statement of the tradition where it says,
“Indeed, when the believer takes his brother with the hand on meeting
him, God looks at them and sins are shed from their faces in the manner
leaves fall from a tree.” The same theme recurs in many other
traditions, such as the following one:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
إنَّ المُؤْمِنَيْنِ إذَا الْتَقَيَا فَتَصَافَحَا أَقْبَلَ اللهُ
تَعَالَى عَلَيْهِمَا بِوَجْهِهِ وَتَسَاقَطَتْ عَنْهُمَا الذُّنُوبُ
كَمَا يَتَسَاقَطُ الوَرَقُ مِنَ الشَّجَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports with his isnad from Abu Ja’far (A) that
he said, “When the faithful meet and take one another by the hand, God,
the Exalted, turns to them with His face, and their sins fall from them
in the manner leaves fall from a tree.”[^29]

God only knows what inner luminosity and nobility is associated with
this look of God, the Exalted, and this attention of His with His noble
face, and what veils are removed from between the faithful servant and
the lights of the Beauty of the Sacred Essence and what succor it
provides to the faithful. However, one should know the reality and
actual secret behind these nobilities and one should not be heedless of
it.

The heart’s attention should be turned so that the act attains its
perfect luminosity and a divine breath is blown into the act’s body.
That reality and secret truth lies in strengthening the bond of love and
cordiality and renewal of the covenant of love and brotherhood for the
sake of God. A great significance is attached to this point in the noble
traditions and is also hinted at in traditions relating to this topic:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
إنَّ المُؤْمِنَيْنِ إذَا الْتَقَيَا وَتَصَافَحَا أَدْخَلَ اللهُ يَدَهُ
بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمَا فَصَافَحَ أَشَدَّهُمَا حُبّاً لِصَاحِبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi [al-Kulayni reports] with his isnad from Abu Ja’far (A) that
he said, “When the faithful meet and take one another by the hand, God
places His hand between their hands and shakes hand with the one who has
greater love for his companion.”[^30]

It is stated in another tradition that when the faithful meet and shake
hands, God, the Exalted, sends His mercy down upon them; nine-tenths of
it belong to the one who has greater love for his companion, and if they
should be equal [in love], the mercy envelopes them.[^31] There are many
traditions on this topic and that which have been cited will suffice.
And all praise is God’s, at the beginning and the end.

[^1]: The Qur’an, 6:91; 22:74; 39:68.

[^2]: The Qur’an, 59:7.

[^3]: This is a reference to verse 4:80 of the Qur’an: “Whoso obeyeth
the Messenger, obeyeth God.”

[^4]: Al-Majlisi, Mir’at al-’uqul, vol. ix, p. 71, “kitab al-iman wa
al-kufr” “bab al mussfahah” hadith 16.

[^5]: Al-Fayd al-Kashani, al-Wafi, vol, v, p. 613.

[^6]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. i, p. 100, “kitab al-tawhid”, “bab al-nahy ‘an
al-sifah bi ghayr ma wasafah bihi nafsahu ta’ala” hadith 1.

[^7]: See al-Majlisi, Mirat al-’uqul, vol. i, p. 346, “kitab al-tawhid”,
“bab nahy ‘an al tawsif” hadith 1.

[^8]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, Kitab al-tawhid, p. 31 ff., bab 2, in
particular hadith 37.

[^9]: Al-Shaykh al-Tusi, Misbah al-mutahajjid, “Du’a Kumayl,” p. 587.

[^10]: Sadr al-Muta’allihin, al-Asfar al-arba’ah, vol ix, p. 123; see
also his Tafsir al-Quran, the exegesis of 87:17.

[^11]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, vol. i, p. 272, “kitab al-hujjah” “bab
fihi dhikr al-arwah al-lati fi al-A’immah” hadith 2.

[^12]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, vol. i, p. 273, “kitab al-hujjah” “bab
al-ruh al-lati yusaddidu Allah biha alA’immah” hadith 1.

[^13]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol. xxxix, p. 313, “Ta’rikh Amir
al-Mu’minin” bab 88, hadith 5.

[^14]: Misbah al-hidayah ila al-khilafah wa al-wilayah, written in 1349
H.

[^15]: Al-Fayd al-Kashani, al-Wafi, vol. v, p. 614, “kitab al-iman wa
al-kufr” “bab al musafahah” hadith 16.

[^16]: Al-Majlisi, Mir’at al-’uqul, vol. ix, p. 71, “kitab al-iman wa
al-kufr” “bab al musafahah” hadith 16.

[^17]: Al-Majlisi, Mir’at al-’uqul, vol. ix, p. 71, “kitab al-iman wa
al-kufr” “bab al musafahah” hadith 16.

[^18]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, “kitab al-hujjah” “bab al-tafwid ila
Rasulillah (S) wa ila al-A’immah fi amr al-din” hadith 7. عَنْ زُرَارَةَ
عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: وَضَعَ رَسُولُ الله صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ دِيَةَ العَيْنِ وَدِيَةَ النَّفْسِ وَحَرَّمَ
النَّبِيذَ وَكُلَّ مُسْكِرٍ. فَقَالَ لَهُ رَجُلٌ: وَضَعَ رَسُولُ الله
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ مِنْ غَيْرِ أنْ يَكُونَ جَاءَ فِيهِ
شَيْءٌ؟ قَالَ: نَعَمْ، لِيُعْلَمَ مَنْ يُطِيعُ الرَّسُولَ مِمَّن
يَعْصِيهِ.

[^19]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vo4 iii, “kitab al-salat” “abwab a’dad
al-farid” bab 13, hadith 12, 14.

[^20]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol vii, p. 361, “abwab al-sawm al-mandub” bab
28, hadith 5: وَسَنَّ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ صَوْمَ
شَعْبَانَ وَثَلاثَةِ أَيَّامٍ فِي كُلِّ شَهْرٍ مِثْلَيِ الفِرَيضَةِ،
فَأَجَازَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَهُ ذَلِكَ.

[^21]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. i, p. 266, “kitab al-hujjah”bab al-tafwid ila
Rasulillah wa alA’immah fi amr al-din” hadith 3.

[^22]: Mir’at al-’uqul, vol iii, p. 144, “kitab al-hujjah”bab al-tafwid
ila Rasulillah (S)” hadith 1.

[^23]: Mir’at al-’uqul, vol iii, p. 144, “kitab al-hujjah”bab al-tafwid
ila Rasulillah (S)” hadith 1.

[^24]: Usul al Kafi, vol. i, p: 183, “kitab al-hujjah” “bab ma’rifat
Imam wa al-radd ilayh”: أَبَى اللهُ أَنْ يُجْرِيَ الأَشْيَاءَ إلاّ
بِالأَسْبَابِ. See also al-’Saffar, Basa’iral-darajat, p. 26, juz’ 1,
bab 4, hadith 2.

[^25]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. i, p. 441, “kitab al-hujjah” “bab mawlid
al-Nabi (S) wa wafatuh” hadith 5.

[^26]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. i, p. 441, “kitab al-hujjah” “bab mawlid
al-Nabi (S) wa wafatuh” hadith 7.

[^27]: Nahj al-balaghah, Khutbah 215. وَاللهِ لَوْ أُعْطِيتُ
الأَقَالِيمَ السَّبْعَةَ بِمَا تَحْتَ أَفْلاكِهَا عَلَى أَنْ أَعْصِيَ
اللهَ فِي أَنْمُلَةٍ أَسْلُبُهَا جُلْبَ شَعِيرَةٍ مَا فَعَلْتُهُ.

[^28]: Hafiz: عنقا شكار كسي نشود دام بازگير كانجا هميشه باد به دست است
دام را

[^29]: Usul al Kafi, vol. ii, p. 180, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr” “bab
al-musafahah” hadith 4.

[^30]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. i, p. 441, “kitab al-hujjah” “bab mawlid
al-Nabi (S) wa wafatuh” p. 179, hadith 2.

[^31]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. i, p. 441, “kitab al-hujjah” “bab mawlid
al-Nabi (S) wa wafatuh” p. 181, hadith 14: أَوَمَا عَلِمْتَ أَنَّ
المُؤْمِنَيْنِ إذَا الْتَقَيَا فَتَصَافَحَا أَنْزَلَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
الرَّحْمَةَ عَلَيْهِمَا؟ فَكَانَتْ تِسْعَةً وَتِسْعِينَ لأَشَدِّهِمَا
حُبّاً لِصَاحِبِهِ. فَإذَا تَوَافَقَا غَمَرَتْهُمَا الرَّحْمَةُ.


