Thirty-Second Hadith:  Conviction In Faith
==========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ الكُلَيْنِي عَنِ
الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنِ المُعَلَّى بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنِ الحَسَنِ
بْنِ عَلِيٍّ الوَشَّاءِ عَن عَبْدِاللهِ بْنِ سِنَانٍ عَنْ أَبِي
عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: مِنْ صِحَّةِ يَقِينِ المَرْءِ
المُسْلِمِ أنْ لا يُرْضِيَ النَّاسَ بِسَخَطِ اللهِ وَلا يَلْومَهُمْ
عَلَى مَا لَمْ يُؤْتِهِ اللهُ. فَإنَّ الرِّزْقَ لا يَسُوقُهُ حِرْصُ
حَرِيصٍ وَلا يَرُدُّهُ كَرَاهِيَةُ كَارِهٍ. وَلَوْ أنَّ أَحَدَكُمْ
فَرَّ مِنْ رِزْقِهِ كَمَا يَفِرُّ مِنَ المَوْتِ لأَدْرَكَهُ رِزْقُهُ
كَمَا يُدْرِكُهُ المَوْتُ. ثُمَّ قَالَ: إنَّ اللهَ بِعَدْلِهِ
وَقِسْطِهِ جَعَلَ الرَّوْحَ وَالرَّاحَةَ فِي اليَقِينِ وَالرِّضَا،
وَجَعَلَ الهَمَّ وَالحُزْنَ فِي الشَّكِّ وَالسَّخَطِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my continuous chain of transmission reaching up to Muhammad ibn
Ya’qub al-Kulayni, from al-Husayn ibn Muhammad, from al-Mu’alla ibn
Muhammad, from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Washsha’, from ‘Abd Allah ibn Sinan,
from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said, “Among the things pertaining to
the soundness of a Muslim’s certitude [in faith] is that he would not
please people while displeasing God, nor blame them for something that
God has not given him. For, verily, [God’s] rizq (provision, sustenance)
is not brought about by anybody’s greed, nor is it withheld by anyone’s
disapproval, and were anyone of you to flee from his rizq like lie flees
death, his rizq would overtake him in the way he is overtaken by death.”
Then he added, “Indeed God, with His justice and fairness, has put joy
and comfort in certainty (yaqin) and satisfaction (al-rida) and He has
put sorrow and grief in doubt and dissatisfaction.[^1]

Exposition
----------

Al-Jawhari says, *sakhal* (vowelized like *faras*) and *sukht*
(vowelized like *qufl*) are the opposite of satisfaction (*rida*)*.*
Hence, *sakhita* means *‘ghadiba’* (i.e. ‘he became angry’ or
‘indignant’) and such a one is *sakil* (angry). *Al-qist,* with *kasrah*
of the *qaf,* mean justice (*‘adl*)*;* hence its mention along with
*‘adl* is for the sake of elucidation.

*Al-rawh* and *al-rahah* are synonymous, meaning comfort, as mentioned
by al-Jawhari. Hence their mention alongside is for the sake of
elucidation. Or that *rawh* means the peace of the heart and *rahah*
signifies the ease of the body, as stated by Majlisi.[^2]

As to *al-hamm* and *al-huzn,* al-Jawhari considers them as synonymous,
on which basis their mention by side of one another would be
elucidatory. And Majlisi says that *hamm* probably means the agitation
felt by the soul at the time of experiencing (doubt and
dissatisfaction), and *huzn* is the sorrow and anxiety felt after its
passing away.[^3]

Section 1
---------

As to the statement وَلا يَلْومَهُمْ عَلَى مَا لَمْ يُؤْتِهِ اللهُ it
has been considered to have two probable interpretations. First, that he
would not blame the people and complain for their refraining from giving
him something, as it is a matter subject to Divine power and providence,
and God, the Exalted, has not decreed that gift as part of his
provision, and one who is a man of conviction knows that it is a an act
of Divine providence and so he would not blame anyone. This
interpretation has been suggested by the *muhaqqiq Fayd*[^4] (M) and the
learned traditionist, Majlisi, has also affirmed it.[^5]

The honorable Fayd (M) has also suggested another interpretation, which
is that one would not blame them for something God, the Exalted, has not
given them, for God, the Exalted, has gifted the people differently and
no one should be blamed for it [i.e. for not possessing something]. And
this is like the tradition, which states that “Had the people known how
God has created men, no one would blame another.”[^6] The honorable
traditionist Majlisi (M) has said, “The improbability of this
interpretation is not hidden, especially on consideration of the
following explanatory phrase:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّ الرِّزْقَ لا يَسُوقُهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

…for, verily, [God’s] provision is not facilitated by…[^7]

In the opinion of this author, the second interpretation is more
appropriate than the first one, especially in view of the aforementioned
explanatory phrase. That is because one may blame people in the state of
need and straitened livelihood only if their livelihood (*rizq*) is
under their own control and one’s effort and endeavor are the
[efficient] means of its increase. Then one may say [to another],
‘[Look] I have tried and made effort, whereas you have not done so, and
therefore you are afflicted with straitened livelihood.” However, the
people of certainty know that livelihood is not obtained by one’s greed
and effort, and so they do not blame others.

### Reconciling Traditions Concerning Livelihood Being Apportioned And Traditions Exhorting Effort

It should be known that the like of these noble traditions whose literal
import is that the *rizq* is apportioned and predetermined-something
which is also indicated by the noble verses of the Qur’an-do not
contradict the traditions which command one to seek livelihood and
exhort one to make effort in one’s occupation and trade, and even
consider the lack of effort as reprehensible and blameworthy. Thus, they
consider one who fails to make an effort to seek livelihood as one whose
prayers are not answered and whom God does not provide with livelihood.
There are many traditions on this topic and it will suffice here to cite
one *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ الحَسَنِ شَيْخِ الطَّائِفَةِ قُدِّسَ سِرُّهُ
بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ عَبْدِالعَزِيزِ قَالَ: قَالَ أَبُو
عَبْدِاللهِ الصَّادِقِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: مَا فَعَلَ عُمَرُ بْنُ
مُسْلِمٍ؟ قُلْتُ: جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ، أَقْبَلَ عَلَى العِبَادَةِ
وَتَرَكَ التِّجَارَةَ. فَقَالَ: وَيْحَهُ! أَمَا عَلِمَ أنَّ تَارِكَ
الطَّلَبِ لا يُسْتَجَابُ لَهُ؟ إنَّ قَوْماً مِنْ أَصْحَابِ رَسُولِ
اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لَمَّا نَزَلَتْ: ﴿وَمَنْ يَتَّقِ
اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا وَيَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا
يَحْتَسِبُ،﴾ أَغْلَقُوا الأَبْوَابَ وَأَقْبَلُوا عَلَى العِبَادَةِ
وَقَالُوا: قَدْ كُفِينَا. فَبَلَغَ ذَلِكَ النَّبِيَّ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَأَرْسَلَ إلَيْهِمْ فَقَالَ: مَا حَمَلَكُمْ عَلَى
مَا صَنَعْتُمْ؟ فَقَالُوا: يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ، تُكُفِّلَ لَنَا بِأَرْزَاقِنَا فَأَقْبَلْنَا عَلَى
العِبَادَةِ. فَقَالَ: إنَّهُ مَنْ فَعَلَ ذَلِكَ لَمْ يُسْتَجَبْ لَهُ.
عَلَيْكُمْ بِالطَّلَبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, the Shaykh al-Ta’ifah al-Tusi (Q) who
narrates with his isnad from ‘Ali ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz that he said, “Abu
‘Abd Allah (A) asked me, “What is ‘Umar ibn Muslim doing?” I said, “May
I be made your ransom, he has devoted himself to worship and he has
abandoned his trade.” He said, “Woe to him! Doesn’t he know that the
prayer of one who abandons the search (of livelihood) is not accepted?
Indeed a group of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah (S) locked
their doors and turned to worship when this verse was revealed, ‘And
whosoever fears God, He will appoint for him a way out, and He will
provide for him whence lie never reckoned (65:3).’ When the Prophet (S)
came to hear about it, he summoned them and asked them, ‘What prompted
you to do what you have done.’ They said, ‘O Messenger of Allah, God has
guaranteed our livelihood and so we have turned to worship.’ He said to
them: The prayer of one who does that would not be accepted. You ought
to seek livelihood.”[^8]

The reason for the absence of contradiction between the traditions is
that livelihood, and all matters for that, are subject to God’s power
even after one’s effort. Our effort is not an independent agent in the
acquisition of livelihood. Rather, to make effort is a duty of the
creatures, and the ordainment of the affairs and all apparent and
non-apparent means, most of which are beyond the control of the
creatures, is by the determination of the Exalted Creator.

Hence a human being of sound conviction and informed of the courses of
matters-while he does not refrain from effort and performs his duties as
prescribed by reason and revealed law, and not closing the door of
effort with false excuses-still considers everything as being derived
from the sacred Divine Being and does not consider anything as having
any efficiency on the plane of being and its perfections. The seeker,
the seeking, and the sought derive from Him. That which this noble
tradition says, that the man of sound conviction does not blame anyone
for the lack of increase in the people’s livelihood, means that if they
make the usual amount of effort they are not to be blamed. Moreover, to
blame those who do not make the effort is preferable in order to induce
them to effort—a point which is asserted in the noble traditions.

In fine, this theme is one of the ramifications of *jabr* and *tafwid*
(predestination and free will) and one who has studied that issue can
discover the underlying fact of the matter, whose elaboration is beyond
the scope of our discussion.

Section 2: The Signs Or Soundness Or Conviction
-----------------------------------------------

In this noble tradition, two things are considered the signs of the
soundness of one’s conviction. First, that one should not seek the
pleasure of the people at the cost of God’s displeasure and wrath.
Second, one should not blame people for what God has not given them.
These two are the fruits of perfect conviction, and their opposite
qualities are due to the weakness of conviction and an ailing faith. In
these pages, whenever appropriate, we have explained faith, and
conviction, and their fruits. Here, too, we shall briefly mention these
two qualities in their state of soundness and health as well as their
opposite condition.

One should know that a man seeks the pleasure and satisfaction of people
and tries to win their hearts and to be in their good graces because he
considers them to be effective in matters that are of his interest. For
example, one who loves money and wealth feels humble before the rich; he
flatters them and is obsequious in front of them.

Those who seek position and outward honor, flatter the subordinates and
obsequiously seek to win their hearts somehow or another. The same thing
goes on in a circle. The subordinates flatter men of position and the
seekers of position flatter the mean subordinates, except those who, on
the either side of the matter, have trained themselves through spiritual
discipline and seek the pleasure of God. The world and its adornments do
not shake them, and they seek the pleasure of God in leading, and seek
God and truth in following.

### The Twofold Classes Of The People

The people of the world are briefly divisible into two classes. They are
either those whom certitude has brought to the point that they see all
the outward means and apparent agents as being subject to the perfect
and eternal will of the Necessary Being. They see and seek nothing
except God, and they believe that lie is the sole Master and Agent in
the world and the Hereafter. Finding a certitude unmarred by deficiency,
doubt, and hesitation, they have true faith in one of the noble verses
of the Qur’an, which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ اللَّهُمَّ مَالِكَ الْمُلْكِ تُؤْتِي الْمُلْكَ مَنْ تَشَاءُ
وَتَنْزِعُ الْمُلْكَ مِمَّنْ تَشَاءُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: O God, Master of all sovereignty, Thou givest sovereignty to
whom Thou wilt, and seizest sovereignty from whom Thou wilt…***
(***3:26***)

They consider God, the Exalted, the Master of the kingdom of being and
all gifts to be from that Sacred Being. They consider all the ebbs and
flows of being and all the existential perfections to be derived from
the Sacred Being in accordance with the [best] order [of existence] and
the [universal] good. Of course, the doors of gnosis are opened for such
persons and their hearts become divine. They do not attach any worth to
the pleasure and displeasure of the people and seek nothing except God’s
good pleasure. Their eager eyes do not seek anything except God and in
their hearts and with their entire being they murmur the melody, “My
God, when You grant us, who can intercept Your favor? And should You
deprive us [of anything], who can restore it to us?”

Hence, they close their eyes to the people, their favors and their
world, opening the eyes of their need on God, glorious is His Majesty.
Such persons would never exchange the displeasure of God, the Exalted,
with the pleasure of the entire order of beings, as stated by the
Commander of Faithful (A). While they attach no significance to anything
except God, the Exalted, and consider all existents to be in need of
Allah, nevertheless, they view all with the eyes of wonder, mercy and
compassion, and do not blame anyone for any matter except in order to
reform and educate him.

Hence such were the prophets (A) who viewed everything as belonging to
God and as manifestations of His Beauty and Glory. They did not view
God’s creatures except with love and compassion, not blaming anyone in
their hearts for any inadequacy and weakness, though they did blame them
outwardly for the sake of the general good and the reform of the human
family. This was among the fruits of the immaculate tree of certitude
and faith and their understanding of the Divine laws.

However, as to the second group, they are those who are oblivious of
God, and if perchance they attend, it is an inadequate attention and an
incomplete faith. As a result, since attention to multiplicity and the
outward causes and means has made them neglectful of the Cause of all
causes, they seek the pleasure of the creatures.

At times, they are such that they seek to acquire the goodwill of the
weakest of creatures while preparing the means of God’s displeasure and
wrath. Thus they are led to accommodate to the sinners, or neglect the
duty of *amr bi al-ma’ruf* and *nahy ‘an al-munkar* when conditions call
for its performance, or they give decrees (*fatwa*) permitting what is
unlawful, or are guilty of false testimony, or backbite and slander the
faithful to please worldly people and men of outward status and
position. All such conduct is due to the weakness of faith, or rather it
constitutes a degree of idol worship (*shirk*)*.* Such a view makes man
prone to many fatal traits, including those mentioned in this noble
tradition. Such a person has a bad opinion of God’s servants and he
treats them with enmity and hostility, blaming them and vilifying them
in matters, and so on.

Section 3: The Views Of The Mu’tazilah And The Asha’irah And The Correct Position
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Majlisi, the traditionist (M) in *Mir’at al-uqul,* has a discussion
under this noble tradition concerning whether the *rizq* apportioned by
God, the Exalted, is confined to what is lawful and whether it includes
the unlawful also. He has cited the conflicting opinions of the
Ash’arites and the Mu’tazilites on this issue and the recourse taken by
the two sides to traditions and narrated texts. He considers the Imami
position to be in accord with the view of the Mu’tazilites that the
apportioned sustenance (*rizq al-maqsum*) does not include the unlawful
and is limited to the lawful. He also cites the arguments of the
*Mu’tazilah* that take recourse to the literal meaning of some verses
and traditions and are based on the literal meaning of ‘*rizq*’-as is
the practice of the Ash’arites and the Mu’tazilites.[^9]

He has approved of the arguments of the *Mu’tazilah* and, apparently,
finds their statements to be in accord with the dominant opinion of the
Imamiyyah. However, it should be noted of that this issue is one of the
corollaries of the problem of *jabr* and *tafwid,* and the Imami
position in this regard neither conforms to that of the *Asha’irah* nor
to that of the *Mu’tazilah.* Rather, the *Mu’tazili* position is more
worthless and degenerate than that of the Ash’arites, and if some Imami
theologians (R) have inclined towards it, that has been due to the
neglect of the truth of the matter.

As referred to earlier, the issue of *jabr* and *tafwid* has remained
much vague in the discussions of most of the scholars of the two sects,
and the controversy has not been resolved on the basis of right
criteria. Hence, the relation of this issue to the problem of *jabr* and
*tafwid* has gone mostly unnoticed, although it is one of its major
ramifications.

Briefly, the Ash’arite belief that the lawful and the unlawful form part
of the apportioned sustenance implies *jabr,* and the Mu’tazilite belief
that the unlawful does not form part of the apportioned sustenance
implies *tafwid.* Both of them (*jabr* and *tafwid*) are invalid and
their falsity has been made evident in its appropriate place.

We, in accordance with established and demonstrable principles, consider
the lawful and the unlawful as apportioned by God, in the same way as we
consider sins to be by Divine determination (*taqdir*) and decree
(*qada’*)*,* though it does not lead to *jabr* and invalidity. These
pages are not appropriate for setting forth the proof and I have set a
condition with myself not to discuss technical matters, myself being
ignorant of their core reality.[^10] Accordingly, we shall confine
ourselves to this passing reference, and God is the Guide.

*Marhum* Majlisi has opened another discussion under this noble
tradition, as to whether it is absolutely obligatory upon God, the
Exalted, to provide the sustenance of His creatures or only in the case
of effort on their part.[^11]

This is a topic which is more appropriate to the principles of the
theologians and one must proceed in these discussions, in general, with
another approach based on metaphysical criteria and definite principles.
What is preferable is to abstain right away from this kind of
discussions, which are not entirely fruitful, and we have pointed out
earlier that the apportioning of sustenances in accordance with Divine
ordainment does not contradict with the making of effort and endeavor in
seeking it.

Last Section
------------

This section pertains to the explanation of the statement that God, the
Exalted, has placed joy and comfort in certitude and satisfaction and
sorrow and grief in doubt and displeasure and that this is in accordance
with Divine justice. On should know that the joy and comfort (*rawh* and
*rahah*) mentioned in this noble tradition, and so also the grief and
sorrow mentioned therein, as they are mentioned in relation to the
determination and apportionment of sustenances, pertain to worldly
affairs and the search and acquisition of livelihood, though in
accordance with a certain interpretation their relation to affairs of
the Hereafter is also correct.

Here, we intend to expound this [part of the] noble tradition. One
should know that a human being possessing convinced faith in God and His
ordainments and reliant on the firm pillar of the Absolutely Omnipotent,
Who determines all the matters in accordance with what is best for the
creatures (*masalih*) and possesses absolute and perfect mercy and is
absolutely All-compassionate and All-munificent, will of course find all
difficulties become easy for him by virtue of such a conviction and to
him all hardships become easy to bear. His effort in search of
livelihood is very different from the quest of the worldly people and
those who are afflicted with doubt and *shirk.* Those who rely on the
apparent causes and means are continuously shaky and anxious in their
pursuits. And if they face any adversity they find it very unpleasant,
for they do not consider them to be accompanied with hidden benefits.

Also, one who considers his felicity to lie in the attainment of the
world is afflicted with pain and misery in its pursuit, losing comfort
and happiness. All his attention and care is spent in that pursuit.
Thus, we see that worldly people are perpetually in a state of anguish
and they do not possess the peace of mind or of the body. Similarly, if
the world and its ornaments are taken away from them, they become
subject to endless sorrow and grief. Should an affliction visit them,
they lose all forbearance and strength and they have no fortitude in the
face of events. The reason for it is nothing except their doubt and
shaky belief in Divine ordainment and its justice, and its fruits are
such matters as these. We have offered an explanation earlier in this
regard and so it will be inappropriate to repeat it.

As to the explanation of the dependence of these effects on certitude
and satisfaction, and of those effects on doubt and anger, of their
being such by Divine ordainment, and that this ordainment is just, that
depends on the explanation of the sway of the efficiency (*fa’iliyyah*)
of God, the Exalted, throughout the planes of being, without its leading
to *jabr,* which is invalid as well as impossible. It also depends on
the causative explanation of the perfection of the order of being, and
both of these theses lie outside the scope of these pages. And all
praise refers to God, at every beginning and end.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, ii, p. 57, “Kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,”
“bab fadl al-yaqin,” hadith 2.

[^2]: Al-Majlisi, Mirat al-’uqul, vii, 359, “Kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,”
“bab fadl al-yaqin,” hadith 2.

[^3]: Al-Majlisi, Mirat al-’uqul, vii, 359, “Kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,”
“bab fadl al-yaqin,” hadith 2.

[^4]: Al-Fayd al-Kashani, al-Wafi, iv, 269.

[^5]: Mir’at al-’uqul, vii, 356, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab fadl
al-yaqin,” hadith 2.

[^6]: Al-Wafi, iv, 270.

[^7]: Mir’at al-’uqul, vii, 357, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr;” “bab fadl
al-yaqin,” hadith 2.

[^8]: Al-Hurr al-Amili, Wasa’il al-Shiah, xii, 15, “kitab al-tijarah,”
“abwab muqiddimat al-tijarah,” hadith 7.

[^9]: Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, al-Tafsir al-kabir, ii, 30.

[^10]: Author’s Note: However, as the hand is subject to His power, we
have briefly offered a study of this problem in the exposition of the
thirty-ninth tradition. [As stated by Imam ‘Ali, may peace be upon him]:
عَرَفتُ اللهَ بفَتحِ العَزائِمِ ونَقضِ الهِمَم. I knew God [i.e. His
omnipotence] through the annulment of decisions and the breaking up of
resolves.

[^11]: Mirat al-’uqul, vii, 358 “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab fadl
al-yaqin,” hadith 2.


