Thirty-Third Hadith: Wilayah And Works
======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إِلَى الشَّيْخِ الأَقْدَمِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
يَعْقُوبَ الْكُلَيْنِيِّ رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ
مُحَمَّدٍ عَنِ الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ سَعِيدٍ عَمَّنْ ذَكَرَهُ عَنْ عُبَيْدِ
بْنِ زُرَارَةَ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ مَارِدٍ قَالَ: قُلتُ لأبي عبدِاللهِ
عليهِ السلامُ: حَديثٌ رُوِيَ لنا أنّك قُلتَ “إذا عَرفْتَ فَاعمَلْ ما
شِئتَ؟” فقالَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: قدْ قُلتُ ذلكَ. قلتُ: وإِنْ زَنوا أو
سَرقوا أو شرِبوا الخَمرَ؟ فقالَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ لي: إِنا للهِ وإِنا
إليهِ راجِعونَ! واللهِ ما أنصَفونا أَنْ نكُونَ أخَذنَا بالعَملِ
ووُضِعَ عنهُم. إنمَا قلتُ إذا عرِفتَ فاعملْ ما شِئتَ من قَليلِ الخَيرِ
وكثيرِه فإنّه يُقبلُ مِنكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my chain of authorities reaching up to the pioneering shaykh,
Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from Ahmad ibn Muhammad, from
al-Husayn ibn Said, from someone who narrated it from ‘Ubayd ibn
Zurarah, from Muhammad ibn Marid that he said: I said to Abu ‘Abd Allah
(A): A hadith has been narrated to us from you that you said, “When you
have acquired the ma’rifah, i.e. of the rights of the Imam’s (A), then
do whatever you want.” He replied, “I have indeed said that.” I said to
him, “Even if one were to commit adultery and theft and drink wine?” He
said, “Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji’un! By God, they (i.e. those who
have interpreted our statements in such a manner) have not been just to
us. (Is it fair for them to believe that) they would get away with
whatever they do whereas we ourselves will be answerable for our acts?
What I said was that when you have acquired ma’rifah perform any works
you want, whether its good be great or small, for they will be accepted
of you.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

[In the sentence ‘*hadithun ruwiyah*.. .’], *hadith* is *mubtada* and
*ruwiyah* is its *khabar*. *Annaka*, with *fathah* (on the *alif*) is
the *khabar* of an elliptic *mubtada* (أي هو أنك). In the statement إذا
عرفتَ the *ma’rifah* (knowledge) meant in this tradition is the
*ma’rifah* of the Imam (A). In the expression ...قلتُ، قالَ قلتُ may be
either in the first or the third person. In وإن زنَوا , the إنْ is
*wasliyyah,* and the phrase means, ‘if they acquire *ma’rifah,* they may
do whatever they want, even if it is a major sin.’

The phrase إنا للهِ وإنا إلَيه راجعونَ is an expression of *istirja’*
and is said at the time of a severe and great calamity, and since this
slander or misunderstanding was a great calamity, the Hadrat uttered it
in order to dissociate and absolve himself totally from it.

The phrase أنْ تكونَ means في أن تكونَ , that is, ‘they have not been
fair to us in [believing] that they would be quit of all accountability
for their actions due to their belief in us (i.e. our imamate) while we
ourselves would be accountable and answerable (for our acts): The Imam
then cl*arif*ies what he had meant, that [belief in] *wilayah* is a
prerequisite for the acceptability of works [before God], as will be
discussed hereafter, God the Exalted willing.

Explanation Of Absence Of Contradiction Between Traditions That Exhort One To Perform
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ‘Ibadah And Abstain From Sins And Other Traditions Which Apparently Conflict With Them

It should be known that if one were to refer to traditions that have
been narrated concerning the states of the Noblest Messenger (S) and the
Imams (A) of guidance, and study the character of their devotion
(*‘ubudiyyah*)*,* their painstaking diligence, their lamentations and
entreaties, their humility and sense of indigence, their fear and sorrow
before the sacred station of the Lord of Majesty, and if one were to
study the character of their intimate supplications before the Fulfiller
of Needs-traditions whose number far exceeds what is required to
establish *tawatur*-and similarly, if one were to refer to the counsels
given by the Noble Messenger (S) to the Commander of the Faithful (A)
and also the counsels given by the Imams to one another, as well as to
the elect of the *Shi’ah* and their sincere followers, the greatly
eloquent and emphatic exhortations that they would make warning them
against disobedience to God, the Exalted-a theme with which the books of
tradition and chapters relating to doctrinal and legal duties are
replete-he would be convinced that certain other traditions whose
apparent and literal import contradicts with these traditions are not to
be taken literally.

Therefore, if possible, they must be interpreted in a way that they do
not conflict with those explicit and definitive traditions, which
constitute the essentials of the faith, or they must be reconciled.
Otherwise, they must be referred back to their authors. In these pages,
we cannot possibly reconcile all the relevant traditions or mention even
a hundredth part of them and explain them. However, it is unavoidable
that we mention some of these narrations so that the truth is disclosed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
شِيعَتُنَا (هُمُ) الشَّاحِبُونَ الذَّابِلُونَ النَّاحِلُونَ الَّذِينَ
إذَا جَنَّهُمُ اللَّيْلُ اسْتَقْبَلُوهُ بِحْزْنٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kulayni reports in al-Kafi with his isnad from Abu ‘Abd Allah—Imam
al-Sadiq (A), that he said, “Our Shi’ah (followers) arc those whose
hearts are informed with sorrow and grief and who are lean as a result
of intense sorrow and worship. They are those who at the fall of the
darkness of the night turn to it with sadness?”[^2]

There are many narrations on this topic describing the characteristics
of the *Shi’ah*.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْهُ عَنِ المُفَضَّلِ قَالَ: قَالَ أَبُو عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ: إيَّاكَ وَالسَّفِلَةَ، فَإنَّمَا شِيعَةُ جَعْفَرٍ مَنْ
عَفَّ بَطْنَهُ وَفَرْجَهُ وَاشْتَدَّ جِهَادُهُ وَعَمِلَ لِخَالِقِهِ
وَرَجَا ثَوَابَهُ وَخَافَ عِقَابَهُ. فَإذَا رَأَيْتَ اُولَئِكَ،
فَاُولَئِكَ شِيعَةُ جَعْفَرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From him, froth al-Mufaddal, who narrates from Abu ‘Abd Allah—Ja’far ibn
Muhammad al-Sadiq (A), that he said, “Beware of these base people who
claim to be Shi’is. Verily, the Shi’ah of ‘Ali (A) is none except one
who is chaste in his manner of earning his livelihood and sexual
conduct. It is one whose diligence is intense, who works for his
Creator, hoping for His reward and fearing His punishment. When you see
such people know that they are the followers (Shi’ah) of Ja’far.”[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنِ الأَمَالِي لِلْحَسَنِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ الطُّوسِيِّ شَيْخِ
الطَّائِفَةِ رَحِمَهُ اللهُ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنِ الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَن جَدِّهِ عَنِ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ أَنَّهُ قَالَ لِخَيْثَمَةَ: أَبْلِغْ شِيعَتَنَا أَنَّا لا
نُغْنِي مِنَ اللهِ شَيْئاً. وَأَبْلِغْ شِيعَتَنَا أَنَّهُ لا يُنَالُ
مَا عِنْدَ اللهِ إلاّ بِالعَمَلِ وَأَبْلَغِ شِيعَتَنَا أَنَّ أَعْظَمَ
النَّاسِ حَسْرَةً يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ مَنْ وَصَفَ عَدْلاً ثُمَّ
خَالَفَهُ إلَى غَيْرِهِ. وَأَبْلِغْ شِيعَتَنَا أَنَّهُمْ إذَا قَامُوا
بِمَا أُمِرُوا أَنَّهُمْ هُمُ الْفَائِزُونَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Tusi, the Shaykh at-Ta’ifah (M) narrates with
his chain of authorities from Imam al-Rida (A) from his father, from his
grandfather from Abu Ja’far—Imam al-Baqir (A) that he said to
Khaythamah, “Convey this message to our followers (Shi’ah) that we do
not avail them against God that is, do not neglect works for reliance
upon us. Tell them that that which is with God cannot be attained except
with works. Tell them that, of all people, the greatest regret on the
Day of Resurrection will be of those who speak about some aspect of
justice but violate it in practice to do something else. ‘Tell our
followers that if they observe what they have been asked to, they will
be triumphant on the Day of Resurrection.”[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: لا
تَذْهَبْ بِكُمُ المَذَاهِبَ. فَوَاللهِ، مَا شِيعَتُنَا إلاّ مَنْ
أَطَاعَ اللهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni narrates with his chain of authorities, from Abu
Ja’far (A) that he said, “Do not be carried away by false doctrines. By
God, Our follower (Shi’ah) is none except one who obeys God.”[^5]

This means, “Do not invent [doctrinal] excuses to justify disobedience
to God and do not adopt any false notion that ‘We are *Shi’ah* and our
attachment to the Ahl al-Bayt is the means of our salvation.’ By God Our
*Shi’ah* is none except him who obeys God, the Exalted.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ جَابِرٍ عن أبي جعفر عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: «يَا
جَابِرُ، أَيَكْتَفِي مَنِ انْتَحَلَ التَّشَيُّعَ أنْ يَقُولَ
بِحُبِّنَا أَهْلَ البَيْتِ؟! فَوَاللّهِ مَا شِيعَتُنَا إلاّ مَنِ
اتَّقَى اللّهَ وَأَطَاعَهُ. إلَى أنْ قَالَ: فَاتَقُوا اللّهَ
وَاعْمَلُوا لِمَا عِنْدَ اللّهِ. لَيْسَ بَيْنَ اللّهِ وَبَيْنَ أَحَدٍ
قَرَابَةٌ. أَحَبُّ العِبَادِ إلَى اللّهِ تَعَالَى وَأكَرَمُهُمْ
عَلَيْهِ أَتْقَاهُمْ وَأَعْلَمُهُمْ بِطَاعَتِهِ. يَا جَابِرُ، وَاللّهِ
مَا يُتَقَرَّبُ إلَى اللّهِ إلّا بِالطَّاعَةِ. مَا مَعَنَا بَرَاءَةٌ
مِنَ النَّارِ، وَلا عَلَى اللّه‏ِ لِأَحَدٍ مِنْ حُجَّةٍ، مَنْ كَانَ
للّهِ مُطِيعاً فَهُوَ لَنَا وَلِيٌّ، وَمَنْ كَانَ للّهِ عَاصِياً
فَهُوَ لَنَا عَدُوٌّ، وَمَا تُنَالُ وَلايَتُنَا إلّا بِالعَمَلِ
وَالوَرَعِ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Kafi, al-Kulayni reports with his chain of authorities from Jabir,
form Abu Ja’far (A) that he— Jabir said: He said to me, “O Jabir, is it
sufficient for one who follows Shi’ism to claim that he loves us, the
Ahl al-Bayt? By God, our follower (Shi’ah) is none except him who is
wary of God and obeys him… So fear God and work for the sake of that
which is with God. There is no kinship between God and anyone. The most
preferred and honored of creatures before God, the Exalted, are those
who are most Godwary amongst them and arc most obedient to His commands
in their conduct.

O Jabir, by God, one cannot attain nearness to God except through
obedience. We do not possess any guarantees of bara’ah (acquittal) from
hellfire and none has an argument against God. Whoever is obedient to
God is our friend (wali) and whoever is disobedient to God is our enemy,
Our wilayah cannot be attained except through works and piety.”[^6]

Also, in the noble *al-Kafi* it is reported with a chain of authorities
from Imam al-Baqir, Baqir al-Ulum, (A) that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: يَا مَعْشَرَ الشِّيعَةِ
شِيعَةِ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ، كُونُوا النَّمْرَقَةَ الوُسْطَى يَرْجِعُ
إلَيْكُمُ الغَالِي وَيَلْحَقُ بِكُمُ التَّالِي. فَقَالَ لَهُ رَجُلٌ
مِنَ الأَنْصَارِ، يُقَالُ لَهُ سَعْدٌ: جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ، مَا الغَالِي؟
قَالَ: قَوْمٌ يَقُولُونَ فِينَا مَا لا نَقُولُهُ فِي أَنْفُسِنَا،
فَلَيْسَ أُولَئِكَ مِنَّا وَلَسْنَا مِنْهُمْ. قَالَ: فَمَا التَّالِي؟
قَالَ: المُرْتَادُ يُرِيدُ الخَيْرَ، يُبَلِّغُهُ الخَيْرَ يُوجَرُ
عَلَيْهِ. ثُمَّ أَقْبَلَ عَلَيْنَا فَقَالَ: وَاللهِ مَا مَعَنَا مِنَ
اللهِ بَرَاءَةٌ وَلا بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَ اللهِ قَرَابَةٌ وَلا لَنَا
عَلَى اللهِ حُجَّةٌ وَلا نَتَقَرَّبُ إلَى اللهِ إلاّ بِالطَّاعَةِ.
فَمَنْ كَانَ مِنْكُمْ مُطِيعاً للهِ تَنْفَعُهُ وَلايَتُنَا، وَمَنْ
كَانَ مِنْكُمْ عَاصِياً للهِ لَمْ تَنْفَعْهُ وَلايَتُنَا. وَيْحَكُمْ
لا تَغْتَرُّوا، وَيْحَكُمْ لا تَغْتَرُّوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O community of the followers of the Household of Muhammad (S)! You
should be those who represent the golden mean, to whom the extremists
(ghali) must return and to whom those who lag behind (tali) must catch
up.”

A man named Sa’d belonging to the Ansar said to him, “My I be your
ransom, what is an extremist (ghali)?” The Imam replied, “They are a
group who say things about us that we do not claim for ourselves.
Therefore, they do not belong to us and we do not belong to them.”

Then he asked, “What is a tali?” The imam replied, “It is one who seeks
guidance but does not know its way, though he wants to work and attain
goodness.” Then the Imam, turning to his followers (Shi’is) said, “By
God, we do not have any warrant (bara’ah) to save you from God’s (wrath
and punishment) and there is no kinship between God and us. We do not
have any arguments before God and we do not attain nearness to Him
except though obedience and compliance (to His commands). Anyone of you
who obeys God will be benefited by our wilayah and friendship, but our
wilayah will be of no avail to anyone among you who is disobedient to
God. Woe to you, should you be conceited. Woe to you, should you be
conceited.”[^7]

It is also narrated in the noble *al-Kafi* that Imam al-Baqir (A) said,

“The Messenger of Allah (S) once stood on the rock of Safa and
addressing his kinsman said, “O descendents of Hashim! O children of
‘Abd al-Muttalib! I am the Apostle of Allah sent to you, and I having
loving concern for you. Verily, my works belong to me and the works of
each of you belong to him. Do not say that ‘Muhammad is our kinsman and
soon we will be let in wherever he enters.’ No, by God, O sons of ‘Abd
al-Muttalib! My friends, from amongst you and the others, are none
except the pious. Let it be known to you that I will not recognize you
on the Day of Resurrection [as one of my Ummah] when you come carrying
the world [i.e. the works done by you for the love of the world) on your
backs while other people come to the bearing the Hereafter [i.e. the
works done by them in faith and for the life of the Hereafter).”[^8]

And it is also mentioned in the foregoing narration of Jabir that Imam
al-Baqir (A) said:

O Jabir, do not let false doctrines and opinions deceive you into
imagining that the love of ‘Ali (A) is sufficient for you. Can it be
sufficient for a man to declare, “I befriend ‘Ali (A) and am an adherent
of his wilayah,” without being diligent and without working much (good)
works? Truly, were he to say that I love the Messenger of Allah (and the
Messenger of Allah was better than ‘Ali) while neglecting to follow him
in his conduct (sirah) and failing to act in accordance with his sunnah,
his love would not be of any avail to him.[^9]

There is a famous episode that once Tawus (a companion of the Fourth
Imam) heard someone crying, lamenting, and pleading. The cries continued
until they ceased and it appeared as if the one who was lamenting had
fallen unconscious. On approaching, he saw that it was Imam ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn (A). He took the Imam’s head into his arms, and said to him:
“You are the son of the Messenger of Allah and the beloved of Fatima
Zahra’. After all the paradise belongs to you!” He said these words in
order to console the Imam. That master replied, “God has created
paradise for one who worships Him and obeys him, even if it were an
Ethiopian slave, and He has created the hell for those who disobey him
even if it were a Qurayshite” (or the chief of the Quraysh)![^10]

These were solve of the sacred traditions, clear and explicit,
suggesting the falsity and wrongness of these false hopes of ours, as
sinners and lovers of the world-hopes which derive from satanic longings
and are contrary to reason and revelation (*naql*).

Add to these the noble Qur’anic verses, such as these statements of God,
the Exalted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿كُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Every sold is pledged for what it has earned.*** (***74:38***)

And such statements of God, the Exalted, as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَه. وَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ
مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَه.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoso doth good an atom’s weight will see it, and whoso doth ill
an atom’s weight will see it.*** (***99:7-8***)

And such other statements as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***For it*** (***the soul***) ***is what it has earned and against it is
what it has merited.*** (***2:286***)

And there are other noble verses besides, present on every page of the
Divine Scripture, and to explain them away or to meddle with their
meaning is contrary to (logical) necessity.

As against these, there are other traditions which are also recorded in
authentic books but which are, as a rule, capable of reconciliation
[with the above mentioned traditions]. And even if a reconciliation
should appear to be unsatisfactory and were they not susceptible to
reinterpretation (*ta’wil*)*,* it is neither in accordance with sound
reason or the interest (*darurah*) of Muslims to go against all these
authentic (*sahih*)*,* explicit, and *muttawatir* traditions which are
confirmed by the literal meanings of the Qur’an and the unambiguous
texts of the *Furqan.*

Among these traditions is that which has been narrated by the Thiqat
al-Islam al-Kulayni with his chain of authorities from Yusuf ibn Thabit
ibn Abi Said from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإيمَانُ لا يَضُرُّ مَعَهُ عَمَلٌ وَكَذَلِكَ الكُفْرُ لا يَنْفَعُ
مَعَهُ عَمَلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Nothing can harm one by the side of faith, and nothing call benefit one
by the side of unbelief. (kufr)[^11]

There are several other traditions bearing this theme,[^12] The honored
traditionist Majlisi (M) has interpreted this group of traditions with
the suggestion that the ‘harm’ [in the above tradition] means ‘entry
into hellfire’ or ‘remaining in hell for ever.’[^13]

This interpretation-that what is meant by ‘harm’ is entry into hell-does
not preclude (that it might be accompanied with) other torments in
*Barzakh* (Purgatory) and in the halts of the Day of Resurrection.

This writer thinks that these traditions may be interpreted as implying
that faith illumines the heart is such a manner that if supposedly an
error or sin is committed by man it is compensated, by the means of the
light and faculty of faith, with repentance and penitent return to God,
and the person possessing faith in God and the Hereafter does not leave
his works unattended until the Day of Reckoning.

On this basis, these traditions, in fact, exhort one to hold on to faith
and to remain in the state of faith, like a similar tradition narrated
in the noble *al-Kafi* from Imam al-Sadiq (A) that Moses (A) said to
Khidr (A) “I have been honored by your company. Give me some counsel.”
Khidr said to him, “Hold on to that with which nothing would harm you
and without which nothing will be of any benefit to you.”[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ مُوسَى
لِلْخَضِرِ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ: قَدْ تَحَرَّمْتُ بِصُحْبَتِكَ
فَأَوْصِنِي. قَالَ لَهُ: إلْزَمْ مَا لا يَضُرُّكَ مَعَهُ شَيْءٌ كَمَا
لا يَنْفَعُكَ مَعَ غَيْرِهِ شَيْءٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And among these is this tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ الرَّيَّانِ بْنِ الصَّلْتِ رَفَعَهُ
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: كَانَ أَمِيرُ
المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ كَثِيراً مَا يَقُولُ فِي خِطْبَتِهِ:
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، دِينَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ! فَإنَّ السَّيِّئَةَ فِيهِ
خَيْرٌ مِنَ الحَسَنَةِ فِي غَيْرِهِ, وَالسَّيِّئَةُ فِيهِ تُغْفَرُ
وَالحَسَنَةُ فِي غَيْرِهِ لا تُقْبَلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kulayni reports with his chain of authorities from Muhammad ibn al
Rayyan ibn al-Salt, who narrates in a marfu’ tradition from Abu ‘Abd
Allah (A) that he said: The Commander of the Faithful (A) often used to
say in his sermons, “O people! Take care of your creed (din)! Take care
of your creed! For a vice committed in it is better than a virtue
performed outside it. The vice committed in it is forgiven, and the
virtue performed without it is not accepted.”[^15]

This noble tradition and others like it, whose aim is to exhort people
to follow the right religion, imply that the vices of the faithful and
the followers of the true religion are ultimately pardoned, as God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ جَمِيعًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, God would pardon all sins.*** (***39: 53***)

It is on this basis that it may be said that their vices are better than
the virtues of others, which are never accepted (by God). Perhaps, acts
of virtue which lack the conditions of acceptance, such as faith
(*iman*) and *wilayah,* possess a greater darkness. In brief, this
tradition does not imply that the faithful are quit of their vices.

One of them is the famous tradition which is said to be welt-known
(*mashhur*) amongst both the groups (i.e. the *Shi’ah* and the Sunnis):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُبُّ عَلِيٍّ حَسَنَةٌ لا تَضُرُّ مَعَهَا سَيِّئَةٌ وَبُغْضُهُ
سَيِّئَةٌ لا تَنْفَعُ مَعَهَا حَسَنَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The love of ‘Ali is a virtue by whose side no sin is harmful, and his
enmity is a vice with which no virtue is of any benefit.[^16]

This noble tradition is similar to the *hadith* mentioned earlier
concerning faith (*iman*)*.* Its meaning is either in accordance with
the probability suggested by *marhum* Majlisi, that the meaning of
‘harm’ is eternal confinement in hell or entry into it.

That is, the love of that master is the essence of faith, its perfection
and completion, which results in one’s being rescued from hell with the
means of the intercession of the Intercessors. This interpretation, as
pointed our earlier, does not preclude one’s having to undergo the
various torments of the Purgatory (*Barzakh*)*,* as stated in a *hadith*
where [the Imam] has said, “We shall intercede for you on the Day of
Resurrection, but the care of your life in the Purgatory is up to
yourselves.”[^17]

Or it means what we have mentioned, that the love of that master results
in the emergence of a luminosity and faculty [of faith] in the heart
that prompt one to refrain from sins. And should one become afflicted
with sin on occasion, he would remedy it through repentance and
penitence, not allowing the matter to get out of hand and not permitting
the carnal self to break loose its reins.

Moreover, there is a group of traditions that are cited under the
following noble verse of the *Surat al-Furqan:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَدْعُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَهًا آخَرَ وَلَا
يَقْتُلُونَ النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا
يَزْنُونَ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ يَلْقَ أَثَامًا. يُضَاعَفْ لَهُ
الْعَذَابُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَيَخْلُدْ فِيهِ مُهَانًا. إِلَّا مَنْ
تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ عَمَلًا صَالِحًا فَأُوْلَئِكَ يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ
سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَاتٍ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[The servants of the All-merciful are those... ] who call not upon
another god with God, nor slay the soul God has forbidden except by
right, neither fornicate for whosoever does that shall meet the price of
sin doubled shall be the chastisement for him on the Resurrection Day,
and he shall dwell therein humbled, save him who repents, and believes,
and does righteous work those, God shall change their evil deeds into
good deeds, for God is ever All-forgiving, All-compassionate.***
(***25:68-70***)

There are numerous traditions that are cited (in exegeses) under this
verse and we shall confine ourselves to citing only one of them, for
they are quite close to one another in meaning and content:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الشَّيْخِ فِي أَمَالِيهِ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
مُسْلِمٍ الثَّقَفِيِّ قَالَ: سَأَلْتُ أَبَا جَعْفَرٍ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلامُ عَنْ قَوْلِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: ﴿
فَأُوْلَئِكَ يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَاتٍ وَكَانَ
اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا.﴾ فَقَالَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: يُؤْتَى
بِالمُؤْمِنِ المُذْنِبِ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ حَتَّى يُقَامَ بِمَوْقِفِ
الحِسَابِ، فَيَكُونُ اللهُ تَعَالَى هُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَلَّى حِسَابَهُ
لا يُطْلِعُ عَلَى حِسَابِهِ أَحَداً مِنَ النَّاسِ. فَيُعَرِّفُهُ
ذُنُوبَهُ حَتَّى إذَا أَقَرَّ بِسَيِّئَاتِهِ قَالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
لِلْكَتَبَةِ: بَدِّلُوهَا حَسَنَاتٍ وَأَظْهِرُوهَا لِلنَّاسِ.
فَيَقُولُ النَّاسُ حِينَئِذٍ: أَمَا كَانَ لِهَذَا الْعَبْدِ سَيِّئَةٌ
وَاحِدَةٌ؟ ثُمَّ يَأْمُرُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِهِ إلَى الجَنَّةِ.
فَهَذَا تَأْوِيلُ الآيَةِ. وَهِيَ فِي المُذْنِبِينَ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا
خَاصَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Shaykh al-Tusi, in his Amali, reports with his chain of authorities
from the highly regarded traditionist Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Thaqafi (R)
that he narrated: I asked Abu Ja’far, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali (A) concerning
the statement of God, Almighty and Glorious, “Those, God will change
their evil deeds into good deeds, and God is All-forgiving,
All-compassionate.” He replied: The sinful believer will be brought on
the Day of Resurrection until he is made to stand in the halt of
reckoning. The God, the Exalted, Himself would take charge of his
reckoning and none of mankind will come to know about his account of
deeds. Then He will inform the believer of his sins that he may
confesses to his sins. God, the Almighty and the Glorious, shall say to
the scribes the angels who write men’s deeds, “Change them into good
deeds and disclose them to the people.” Thereat people will say, “This
servant did not perpetrate a single sin!” Then God shall order him to be
escorted into paradise. This is the interpretation (ta’wil) of the
verse, and that relates particularly to the sinners from amongst our
followers (Shi’ah).[^18]

The reason for citing the above noble verse completely and prolonging
the discussion is that the topic is of a major importance and many of
the sermonizers (*ahl al-minbar*) interpret such traditions in a
misleading manner for the people. Their connection with the noble verse
would not have been revealed without the citation of the noble verse. On
this basis, I am compelled to protract the discussion, even if it should
be tiresome.

If one were to study the latter part of the verse, one would know that
all people are absolutely responsible for their deeds and accountable
for their ugly actions, excepting those who attain faith and repent for
their sins and perform righteous deeds. This is how Imam al-Baqir (A)
has explained the verse, describing the character of the reckoning of
such persons, which, however, is special to the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt and other people do not partake of it.

That is because [true] faith is not realized except with the *wilayah*
of ‘Ali and his infallible and pure successors, *awsiya’* (A). Rather,
faith in God and the Messenger would not be accepted without *wilayah,*
as will be mentioned in the next section, God willing. Hence this noble
verse and the traditions relating to its interpretation must be
considered as belonging to the primary proofs, for they imply that if a
person should possess faith and should he compensate for his sins with
repentance and righteous deeds, he would not be covered by this verse.

Hence, my dear, let not Satan delude you and let not carnal appetites
deceive you. Of course, a lazy person afflicted with lusts and the love
of the world, property, and position-such as this author-is always after
finding some pretext in order to justify his laziness. He turns to
anything that agrees with his appetites and affirms his carnal lusts and
satanic imaginings, opening his eyes and ears to it without delving into
its real meaning and without considering that which contradicts it and
is opposite to it.

Poor man, he imagines that he is, God forbid, permitted every unlawful
act and is untouched by the pen of accountability, *na’udubillah,* at
the mere claim of being a *Shi’ah* and attached to the Household of
Purity and Infallibility. Wretched man! he does not know that Satan has
made him blind. There is always the danger that this hollow and futile
love would also slip out of his hands at the end of his life and he
would be resurrected empty-handed within the ranks of the enemies
(*nawasib*) of the Ahl al-Bayt. The claim of love is not acceptable from
someone who has no proof to substantiate it. It is not possible that I
may love you and be sincerely attached to you while my conduct is
contrary to all your goals and objectives. The fruit of true love is
deeds that are in harmony with that love. And should it lack this fruit,
one must know that it was not [real] love but only an imaginary fancy.

The Noble Messenger and his honored Household (A) spent all their lives
in disseminating the law, morality and doctrines [of Islam] and their
sole objective was to communicate the commands of God and to reform and
refine human beings. They willingly bore hardships when they were
killed, plundered, and insulted in the way of these goals and did not
flinch from marching ahead. Hence their follower (*Shi’ah*) and lover
(*mu’hibb*) is one who shares their objectives, moves in their
footsteps, and follows their traditions.

The fact that verbal confession and practical action have been
considered as essential elements (*muqawwimat*) of faith in the noble
traditions is a natural secret and a prevailing law of God, because the
reality of faith is essentially associated with expression and action.
It is intrinsic in the nature of the lover to express his love and
passionate yearning (*taghazzul*) for the Beloved, and to act as
required by faith and the love of God and His *awliya’.* If someone does
not act, he does not have faith and love. And his apparent faith and his
hollow and soulless love would be wiped out by some slight accident,
including the pressures [of the deathbed and the grave] and one would
enter the abode of retribution empty-handed.

### Wilayah Of The Ahl Al-Bayt, The Condition For Acceptability Of Works

That which is implied by the latter part of the noble tradition [being
expounded]-that *wilayah* and *ma’rifah* are prerequisites for the
acceptance of works-is a matter that is one of the definite, or rather
necessary, doctrines of the sacred Shi’i religion. The traditions on
this topic are too numerous to be cited in these brief expositions and
their number exceeds the limits of *tawatur*. However, we shall cite
some of them in these pages for *tabarruk’s* sake:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكَافِِي بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ:
ذَرْوَةُ الأمْرِ وَسَنَامُهُ وَمِفْتَاحُهُ وَبَابُ الأَشْيَاءِ وَرِضَا
الرَّحْمَنِ الطَّاعَةُ لْلإمَامِ بَعْدَ مَعْرِفَتِهِ… أَمَا لَوْ أَنَّ
رَجُلاً قَامَ لَيْلَهُ وَصَامَ نَهَارَهُ وَتَصَدَّقَ بِجَمِيعِ مَالِهِ
وَحَجَّ جَمِيعَ دَهْرِهِ وَلَمْ يَعْرِفْ وِلايَةَ وَلِيِّ اللهِ
فَيُوَالِيَهُ وَيَكُونَ جَمِيعَ أَعْمَالِهِ بِدَلالَتِهِ إلَيْهِ، مَا
كَانَ لَهُ عَلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ حَقٌّ فِي ثَوَابِهِ وَلا كَانَ
مِنْ أَهْلِ الإيمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kulayni in al-Kafi reports with his isnad from Abu Ja’far (A) that he
said: The crux of the matter, and its key, the door of things and the
pleasure of the Beneficent—all lie in obedience to the Imam after having
known him… Be aware that the man who spends his nights in prayer and his
days in fasting and gives as all his property as charity (sadaqah) and
performs hajj throughout his life without knowing the wilayah of the
Wali of God and without following him, and without conducting himself,
in all his actions, according to his guidance—such a person has no right
to any reward from God and is not one of the faithful.[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: مَنْ
لَمْ يَأْتِ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ بِمَا أَنْتُمْ
عَلَيْهِ لَمْ يُتَقَبَّلُ مِنْهُ حَسَنَةٌ وَلَمْ يُتَجَاوَزْ عَنْهُ
سَيِّئَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In Wasa’il al-Shi’ah it is recorded with a chain of authorities from Abu
‘Abd Allah (A) that he said, “Whoever does not come to God, the Almighty
and the Glorious, on the Day of Resurrection with a creed that you
follow, no virtue of his will be accepted nor will any sin of his be
overlooked.”[^20]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ – فِي حَدِيثٍ-
قَالَ: وَاللهِ لَوْ أَنَّ إبْلِيسَ سَجَدَ للهِ بَعْدَ المَعْصِيَةِ
وَالتَّكَبُّرِ عُمُرَ الدُّنْيَا مَا نَفَعَهُ ذَلِكَ وَلا قَبِلَهُ
اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مَا لَمْ يَسْجُدْ لآدَمَ كَمَا أَمَرَهُ اللهُ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أنْ يَسْجُدَ لَهُ. وَكَذَلِكَ هَذِهِ الأُمَّةُ
العَاصِيَةُ المَفْتُونَةُ بَعْدَ تَرْكِهِمُ الإمَامَ الَّذِي نَصَبَهُ
نَبِيُّهُمْ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ لَهُمْ: فَلَنْ
يَقْبَلَ اللهُ لَهُمْ عَمَلاً وَلَنْ يَرْفَعَ لَهُمْ حَسَنَةً حَتَّى
يَأْتُوا اللهَ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَمَرَهُمْ وَيَتَوَلَّوا الإمَامَ الَّذِي
أُمِرُوا بِوِلايَتِهِ وَيَدْخُلُوا مِنَ البَابِ الَّذِي فَتَحَهُ اللهُ
وَرَسُولُهُ لَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In Wasa’il al-Shi’ah it is reported, in a hadith, with a chain of
authorities from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) that he said, “By God, were
Iblis -may God damn him- to prostrate to God for as long as the world
lasts after his disobedience and pride, that would not benefit him, and
God would not accept it as long as he does not prostrate to Adam as
commanded by God, the Almighty and the Glorious. The same applies to
this disobedient and misguided Ummah after its abandoning the Imam
appointed for them by their Prophet. Hence God will not accept any of
their acts nor elevate any of their good works unless they carry out
what God has commanded them and follow the Imam, to whose authority
(wilayah) they have been commanded by God to submit, and enter through
the door that God and His Messenger have opened for them…”[^21]

There are many traditions bearing this theme and it may be inferred from
all of them that the recognition of *wilayah* is a condition for the
acceptability of works, or, rather, that it is the condition for the
acceptability of faith in God and the prophethood of the honored Prophet
(S). However, as to its being a condition for the validity of the works,
as stated by some scholars, that is not certain. Rather, that which is
apparent is that it is not a condition, as is suggested by many
traditions, such as the tradition concerning the non-necessity of the
repetition (*qada’*) of his acts of worship by a convert to Shi’ism
(*mustabsir*)*.*

Excepting the *zakat,* which he had given during the period of his error
to those who did not deserve it, he is not required to perform the
*qada* of his other acts of worship and God would reward him for
them.[^22] It is mentioned in another tradition that “other acts such as
prayer, fasts, hajj, and *sadaqah* would join you and follow you
excepting the *zakat*, which was paid earlier to those who had no right
to receive it and has to be paid to its deserving recipients.”[^23] And
it is mentioned in some traditions that the acts [of the Ummah] are
presented to the Messenger of God (S) on Thursdays, and God, the
Exalted, reviews them on the Day of ‘Arafah and makes them all like dust
scattered. The Imam was asked as to who are the persons whose acts are
thus treated. The Imam replied that they are the acts of those who are
hostile to its and hostile to our followers.[^24]

And this tradition, as is clear, implies the (legal) validity and
non-acceptability of the acts. In any case, the pursuit of this matter
is beyond our present purpose. And all praise belongs to God, firstly
and lastly.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, ii, 464, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr;”‘bib
anna al-iman la yadurru ma’ahu sayyi’ah,” hadith 5.

[^2]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, ii, 233, “kitab-al-iman wa al-kufr,”
“bab al-mu’min wa ‘alamatuh,” hadith 7.

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, ii, 233, hadith 9.

[^4]: Al-Amali, p. 380, juz’ 13.

[^5]: Usul al-Kaf i, ii, 73, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab al-ta’ah
wa al-taqwa,” hadith 1.

[^6]: Usul al-Kaf i, ii, 74, hadith 3.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, ii, 75, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab al-ta’ah wa
al-taqwa,” hadith 6.

[^8]: Rawdat al-Kafi, viii, 182, hadith 205.

[^9]: Usul al-Kafi, ii, 74, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab al-ta’ah wa
al-taqwa,” hadith 3.

[^10]: Bihar al-anwar, vol. 46. pp. 81-82, “Ta’rikh ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn
(A),” bab 5, hadith 75.

[^11]: Usul al-Kafi, ii, 464 “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab anna
al-iman la yadurru ma’ahu sayyi’ah,” hadith 4.

[^12]: Usul al-Kaf i, hadith 3, 5-6.

[^13]: Al-Majlisi, Mir’at al-uqul, xi, 396, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,”
“bab anna al-iman la yadurru ma’ahu sayyi’ah,” hadith 2.

[^14]: Usul al-Kafi, ii, 464, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” bab anna
al-iman la yadurru ma’ahu sayyi’ah,” hadith 2.

[^15]: Usul al-Kaf i, ii, 464, hadith 6.

[^16]: Al-Manaqib, iii, 197.

[^17]: Al-Manaqib, hadith 4, footnote No. 33.

[^18]: Al-Amali, p. 70, juz’ 3.

[^19]: Usul al-Kafi, ii, 19, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bib da’aim
al-Islam,” hadith 5.

[^20]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, i, 91, “kitab al-taharah,” “abwab muqaddimat
al-ibadat,” hadith 3.

[^21]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, i, 91, “kitab al-taharah,” “abwab muqaddimat
al-ibadat,” p. 92, hadith 5.

[^22]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, i, 91, “kitab al-taharah,” “abwab muqaddimat
al-ibadat,” p. 97, bab 31, hadith 1.

[^23]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, i, 91, “kitab al-taharah,” “abwab muqaddimat
al-ibadat:” أمَّا الصَّلاةُ وَالصَّوْمُ وَالصَّدَقَةُ فَإنَّ اللهَ
يَتْبَعُكُمَا ذَلِكَ وَيَلْحَقُ بِكُمَا. وَأمّا الزَّكَاةُ فَلا،
لأَنَّكُمَا أَبْعَدْتُمَا حَقَّ امْرِئٍ مُسْلِمٍ وَأَعْطَيْتُمَاهُ
غَيْرَهُ.

[^24]: Bihar al-anwar, xxiii, 345, “kitab Imamah,” bab 20, hadith 37.
…إنَّ أعْمَالَ العِبَادِ تُعْرَضُ كُلَّ خَمِيسٍ عَلَى رَسُولِ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، فَإذَا كَانَ يَوْمُ عَرَفَةَ هَبَطَ
الرَّبُّ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى؛ وَهُوَ قَوْلُ اللهِ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى:
﴿وَقَدِمْنَا إِلَى مَا عَمِلُوا مِنْ عَمَلٍ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ هَبَاءً
مَنْثُورًا.﴾ فَقُلْتُ: جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ؛ أَعْمَالُ مَنْ هَذِهِ؟ قَالَ:
أَعْمَالُ مُبْغِضِينَا وَمُبْغِضِي شِيعَتِنَا.


