Thirty-Fourth Hadith: The Station of The Faithful Before God
============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى ثِقَةِ الإسْلامِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ
الكُلَيْنِي قُدِّسَ سِرُّهُ عَنْ عِدَّةٍ مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا عَنْ
أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ خَالِدٍ عَنْ إسْمَاعِيلَ بْنِ مَهْرَانَ
عَنْ أَبِي سَعِيدٍ القَمَّاطِ عَنْ أَبَانَ بْنِ تَغْلُبَ عَنْ أَبِي
جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: لَمَّا أُسْرِيَ بِالنَّبِيِّ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ قَالَ: يَا رَبِّ، مَا حَالُ المُؤْمِنِ
عِنْدَكَ؟ قَالَ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ، مَنْ أَهَانَ لِي وَلِيّاً فَقَدْ
بَارَزَنِي بِالمُحَارَبَةِ وَأَنَا أَسْرَعُ شَيْءٍ إلَى نُصْرَةِ
أَوْلِيَائِي. وَمَا تَرَدَّدْتُ عَنْ شَيْءٍ أَنَا فَاعِلُهُ
كَتَرَدُّدِي عَنْ وَفَاةِ المُؤْمِنِ؛ يَكْرَهُ المَوْتَ وَأَكْرَهُ
مَسَاءَتَهُ. وَإنَّ مِنْ عِبَادِي المُؤْمِنِينَ مَنْ لا يُصْلِحُهُ
إلاّ الغِنَى، وَلَوْ صَرَفْتُهُ إلَى غَيْرِ ذَلِكَ لَهَلَكَ. وَإنَّ
مِنْ عِبَادِي المُؤْمِنِينَ مَنْ لا يُصْلِحُهُ إلاّ الفَقْرُ وَلَوْ
صَرَفْتُهُ إلَى غَيْرِ ذَلِكَ لَهَلَكَ. وَمَا يَتَقَرَّبُ إلَيَّ
عَبْدٌ مِنْ عِبَادِي بَشَيْءٍ أَحَبُّ إلَيَّ مِمَّا افْتَرَضْتُ
عَلَيْهِ. وَإنَّهُ لَيَتَقَرَّبُ إلَيَّ بِالنَّافِلَةِ حَتَّى
أُحِبُّهُ فَإذَا أَحْبَبْتُهُ كُنْتُ إذاً سَمْعَهُ الَّذِي يَسْمَعُ
بِهِ وَبَصَرَهُ الَّذِي يُبْصِرُ بِهِ وَلِسَانَهُ الَّذِي يَنْطِقُ
بِهِ وَيَدَهُ الَّتِي يَبْطِشُ بِهَا؛ إنْ دَعَانِي أَجَبْتُهُ وَإنْ
سَأَلَنِي أَعْطَيْتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With a chain of authorities reaching up to the Thiqat al-Islam Muhammad
ibn Ya’qub at-Kulayni (Q) from several of our companions, from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Khalid, from Isma’il ibn Mihran, from Abu Said al-Qummat,
from Aban ibn Taghlib, from Abu Ja’far (A) that he said, “When the
Prophet (S) was taken on his [celestial] journey, he said to God: My
Lord, what is the state of the believer before Thee? He replied: O
Muhammad, indeed whoever humiliates a friend of mine declares a war
against me and I am the swiftest of all in the aid of My friends. And I
am not so hesitant in any thing that I do as when taking the life of the
faithful person who hates death, and I hate to vex him. And indeed there
are those amongst My faithful servants whom nothing can reform except
wealth, and should I turn them towards something other than that they
would perish. And indeed there are those amongst my faithful servants
whom nothing would reform except poverty, and if I were to change their
state from what it is they would perish. And there is nothing dearer
among things that bring a servant of Mine near to Me than the
obligations that I have assigned to him. And indeed he draws nearer to
Me gradually through supererogatory acts until I love him, and when I
love him, I become the hearing with which he hears, the sight wherewith
he sees, the tongue wherewith he speaks, and the hand wherewith he
holds, and if he calls Me, I answer him, and if he asks Me I grant
him.[^1]

Exposition
----------

The verb أُسْرِيَ is in the passive sense and means being taken on a
night of a journey. Al-Jawhari says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَريتُ سُرىً ومَسرًى وَأسرَيتُ بمعنى إذا سِرتُ ليلاً، وبالألف لغةُ
أهلِ الحِجازِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hence, a journey by night is called إسراء (*isra’*). The descriptive
[expression by night,’ *laylan,* used with the verb *asra*] in the noble
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرَى بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Glorified is He who took His servant on a night journey.***
(***17:1***)

is either, as stated by Shaykh Baha’i,[^2] for the purpose of indicating
the short period of the night journey by the means of the indefinite
(*tankir*) *laylan,* because the journey between the Masjid al-*Haram*
and the Masjid al-Aqsa takes forty nights. Or it is based on abstraction
(*tajrid*) meant for the purpose of conveying the same sense. In the
phrase لَمَّا أُسْرِيَ بِالنَّبِيِّ (‘when the Prophet was taken on the
nightly journey’) the related explanatory phrases-’towards the station
of Divine proximity for instance’-have been omitted due to their being
understood.

The expression ما حال المؤمن means, ‘what station and worth does the
believer have before Thee?’ In the expression أهانه، من أهان لي ولياً
conveys the sense of despising, making light of, scorning, vilifying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أهَانَهُ: أي استَخفَّ به واسْتَهانَ به. وتهَاونَ به أي استَحقَره.
يُقال: رجُلٌ فيه مَهانَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Apparently the prefix لـ in (لي) refers to the verb, in which case it
would mean making light of a believer for his faith in God and for the
sake of God, the Exalted. It is also possible that it relates to *wali;*
in which case, that which is meant is ‘making light of in the absolute
sense, for any reason whatsoever. *Wali* here means friend and intimate.

In the expression بارز، بارزنيmeans to go out:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَرزَ الرَّجُل يبرزُ بُروزاً، أي خَرجَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And here it means to commence hostility and to go to war or to declare
it.

The expression مساءته is the verbal noun (*masdar mimi*) of ساء, meaning
causing distress and vexation.

In regard to the statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ مِنْ عِبَادِي المُؤْمِنِينَ مَنْ لا يُصْلِحُهُ إلاّ الغِنَى: أي
ذُلٌّ وضَعفٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

the authoritative Shaykh Baha’i (M) says: The rules of grammar require
that the relative pronoun (*mawsul,* i.e. مَن) should be the subject
(*ism*) and the genitive proposition and the genitive clause (*jarr wa
majrur*, i.e. مِن عبادي) its predicate (*khabar*); but it is obvious
that the intent is not to say that those whom nothing but poverty can
reform are some of the servants, but rather the contrary.

Therefore, it is better to consider the adverbial clause as the subject
and the relative pronoun as the predicate. And although this is contrary
to general usage, the like of it has been considered permissible by
some, as in the statement of God, the Exalted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمِنْ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَقُولُ آمَنَّا…﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Here ends his statement.)[^3] Perhaps in such cases the subject
(*mubtada’*) is elliptical and the genitive proposition is indicative of
the elision. In such a case it would also not be contrary to the rules
of grammar. And it is narrated from the author of *al-Kashshaf* [i.e.
al-Zamakhshari][^4] that [in such cases] the genitive pronoun and the
clause in the genitive case are interpreted to be the subject. On the
basis of that which has been said, there is also no need of any
interpretation.

We should know that this statement, here, is meant to dispel a doubt and
to answer a question that might arise in the minds of some people who do
not have the understanding of the perfect divine order [of creation] and
the concealed Divine providence. That [doubt and question] is that if
the faithful have such a worth and station before God, the Exalted, why
do they fall into poverty and destitution? And if the world does not
have any worth, why do some of them become rich and wealthy. It answers
by saying that the states of My servants and the conditions of their
hearts are different.

There are some whom nothing except poverty would reform, and I make him
poor to reform their state. And there are some whom nothing would reform
except wealth and self-sufficiency, and so I make them rich. Both of
these states signify the nobility, honor, and dignity that the man of
faith has in the sacred presence of God, the Blessed and the Exalted.

The sentence وَمَا يَتَقَرَّبُ إلَيَّ عَبْدٌ مِنْ عِبَادِي… (‘and there
is nothing dearer among things that bring a servant of Mine nearer to Me
. . . ‘) and the following sentence describe the station of nearness of
the Perfect in faith.

It is as if this *hadith*, wherein the state of the faithful is
described for the Noble Messenger (S), first begins by giving a brief
description of the state of the faithful in general, that whoever
despises them declares war against God. Then, it divides the faithful
into two classes, or rather three, in accordance with the way of the
gnostics.

One of them referred to is the generality of the faithful, from the
phrase ‘And I am not so hesitant…,’ up to where He says: ‘And there is
nothing dearer among things…’ That is because they detest death, and
wealth and poverty causes their hearts to swerve. These two are not the
characteristics of the Perfect (*kummal*) but refer to the ordinary
among the faithful.

Accordingly, the literal import of the tradition poses no problem and it
does not conflict with other noble traditions which state that the
Sincere amongst the faithful do not have aversion for death. Hence,
there is no need for the answer cited by Shaykh Bahai from the Shaykh
al-Shahid (R). Anyone interested in it should refer to Shaykh Baha’i’s
*Arba’in.*[^5]

Secondly, the tradition describes the state of the Perfect from where it
says, “There is nothing among the things that bring a servant of Mine
near to Me… (وَمَا يَتَقَرَّبُ إلَيَّ عَبْدٌ مِنْ عِبَادِي…), up to the
end of the *hadith*. In the view of the gnostics, these sentences relate
to two different groups. One of them consists of those who obtain the
nearness relating to obligatory duties (*fara’idh*) and the other
consists of those who obtain the nearness associated with the
supererogatory acts of worship (*nawafil*),[^6] and the closing part of
the tradition refers to their station and the result of their nearness.
Later, God willing, we will briefly refer to each of these two stations.

As to the word يبطش, al-Jawhari says that *batshah* means domination and
taking by force:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
البَطشَةُ، السَّطوةُ والأخذُ بالعُنف، وقد بَطَشَ به يبطَشُ ويبطُشُ
بطشاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Here, however, that which is meant is taking hold of (*akhdh*)*,* in
general, and, apparently, the general sense of ‘taking hold of is that
which is meant by the word in common usage.

A Noteworthy Point
------------------

The learned Shaykh Baha’i (M) says, “The Chain of authorities of this
*hadith* is *sahih* [authentic], and it is a tradition ‘well-known
(*mashhur*) among the Shi’is (*khassah*) as well as the generality
*Ammah,* i.e. the Sunnis], who have narrated it in their *sihah* with a
slight ‘variation.” Thereafter, he cites the tradition with a slight
difference [of Wording] from their *sihah.* In the gloss on the
*Arba’in,* he remarks, “One of ‘the ‘several’ mentioned in the chain of
authorities of the tradition is ‘Ali ibn ‘Ibrahim, and for this reason,
this narration is *sahih.* The ‘Ammah have also transmitted it through a
*sahih* chain of authorities, and this is a tradition that is *mashhur*
and considered authentic by the consensus (*muttafaq ‘alayh*) of all
followers of Islam.’[^7]

Interpretation Of The ‘Hesitation’ Ascribed To God
--------------------------------------------------

We have already explained matters relating to the contempt of the
faithful: earlier while expounding one of the traditions,[^8] and there
is no need to repeat it here. Here we will explain some other
expressions relating to the tradition.

It should be known that that which is mentioned in this noble tradition
concerning the ascription of hesitation (*tardid, tarddud*) to God, the
Exalted, and similar other matters that are mentioned in *sahih*
traditions, or rather even in the wise Divine scripture-such as the
attribution of change of intent (*bada*) or testing (*imtihan*) to God,
the Exalted-have been interpreted by the *ulama* in accordance with
their own approach and creed. The august Shaykh Baha’i (R) has given
three interpretations of it in his book *Arba’in,* to which we will
refer briefly.

First, that there is a concealed condition (*idmar*) in the statement,
meaning ‘if it were possible for Me to hesitate.’ Second, since it is
common among people to hesitate in offending those whom they respect, a
hesitation which they do not show for others, it is valid to mention
hesitation as a metaphorical substitute for respect. What is meant is,
‘None of the creatures have such worth and respect before Me as a
faithful person has.’

The third interpretation is that God, the Exalted, as mentioned in
traditions, reveals the favors and the good news to the faithful servant
at the time of death to remove his aversion towards death and to awaken
in him a desire for the abode of permanence. Hence He has likened this
state to the state of one who wants to subject his friend to a pain
which is followed by a great benefit. Such a one hesitates as to how to
inflict this pain so that the friend suffers the least. Thus he
continues to appeal and allure until he obtains acceptance.[^9]

An ‘Irfani Explanation
----------------------

The way of the philosophers and the gnostics in this and similar issues
is a different one. We shall refrain from elaborating it due to its
being remote from [ordinary] understanding and will not discuss its
[metaphysical] premises. We shall mention only as much as can be
educative and accords with spirituality.

It should be known that all the planes of existence, from the ultimate
heights of *Malakut* and the last peaks of *Jabarut* to the lowest
depths of the world of darkness and prime matter, are manifestation of
Divine Beauty and Glory (*jamal wa jalal*) and the degrees of the
manifestations of God’s Lordship. No being has any independence of its
own and everything is sheer dependence, relation, poverty, and
attachment to the sacred being of the Absolute Real. All of them are
absolutely subject to the sovereignty of God and submissive to the
Divine commands. Accordingly, there are many references to this matter
in the Qur’anic verses. God, the Exalted, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا رَمَيْتَ إِذْ رَمَيْتَ وَلَكِنَّ اللَّهَ رَمَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when thou threwest, it was not thou that threw, but God threw.***
(***8:17***)

This affirmation and negation refers to the position of *amr bayn
al-amrayn.*[^10] It means that you have indeed thrown (the lance), but
at the same time it was not your ego that performed the act of throwing
independently. Rather, it was with the manifestation of the power of God
in the mirror of thy existence and through the influence of His Power in
the *Mulk* and the *Malakut* of thy being that the throwing occurred.

Hence you are the thrower, and at the same time it is God, Glorious and
Exalted, Who is the thrower. An example of it are the noble verses of
the blessed *Surat al-Kahf,* in the story of Moses and Khidr (A) where
Hadrat Khidr explains the mystery behind his actions. In one case
involving a defect [i.e. where Khidr makes a hole in the boat], he
ascribes it to himself.

In one case, which involved perfection, he ascribes it to God. In
another case, he ascribes the act to both himself and to God. In one
place he says أردتُ (I wished), in another place أرادَ ربُّك (Thy Lord
wished), and in yet another place أردْنا (We wished), and all of these
[ascriptions] were correct.[^11]

Of the same kind is the statement of God, the Exalted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّى الْأَنْفُسَ حِينَ مَوْتِهَا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***God takes the souls at tire time of their death,*** (***39:42***)

Although it is the Angel of Death who is charged with, according to
another Qur’anic verse, the taking of the souls.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يُضِلُّ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He leads astray whoever He will and guides whoever He will.***
(***16:93***)

it is God, the Exalted, who is the guide (*al-hadi*) and it is He who
leads astray (*al-mudill*), although the guides are Gabriel (Jibra’il)
and the Noble Messenger (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Thou are only a warner and a guide to every people.*[^12]

and it is Satan who misleads.

Similarly, it is the Divine breath that sounds the trumpet of Hadrat
Israfil through the blowing of Israfil.

From one viewpoint, what are Israfil, ‘Izra’il and Jibra’il and Muhammad
(S) as well as other prophets and the entire realm of being in
comparison to the kingdom of the Absolute Sovereign and the irresistible
Divine will that anything may be ascribed to them? All of them are
manifestations of the Divine Power and Will:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَهُوَ الَّذِي فِي السَّمَاءِ إِلَهٌ وَفِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَهٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And it is He who in heaven is God and in earth is God.***
(***43:84***)

From another viewpoint, that is, from the aspect of multiplicity and the
order of causes and means, all the means are appropriate in their own
place and the perfect order of creation is regulated through a system
and hierarchy of means, causes and effects.

And if the smallest of causes and means is withheld from doing its work
the entire wheel of existence will come to a halt. And were it not for
the relation of the temporal to the eternal, through the determined
means and intermediaries, the path of Divine effusion (*fayd*) would be
intercepted and the stream of Divine mercy would be cut off.

If someone were to attain to this refreshing fountainhead of faith
through the study of the fundamentals and the preliminaries, established
in their own place, especially in the ‘*irfan*i books of the eminent
[‘urafa’] and the books of the Chief of Philosophers and the Best of
Islamic Philosophers (*Sadr al-hukama’ wa al-falasifah wa afdal
al-hukama’ al-Islamiyyah*, i.e. Sadr al-Muta’allihin, known as Mullah
Sadra), and should this teaching enter his heart, these doors would be
opened for him and he would find that at the plane of gnostic discovery
all these ascription are valid and there is not the slightest trace of
the metaphorical in them.

Since some of the angels, charged with the souls of the faithful and the
taking of their sacred souls, behold the stations that the faithful
possess in the sacred presence of God, the Exalted, and, on the other
hand, when they observe the aversion of the faithful [towards death],
they get into a state of hesitation and indecision. It is this very
state that God, the Exalted, hay attributed to Himself, in the same way
that He has ascribed the taking of souls, the guidance and the
misleading to Himself.

In the same way as those are correct on the basis of the mystic creed,
this one is also valid. However, attaining to this fountain requires a
fairness of talent and a sound and subtle taste. And God is the
All-knowing and He is the Guide.

This point should not remain unmentioned that since the reality of
existence is the very reality of perfection and completion, that which
is defective and ugly is not attributable to God, the Exalted, and is
not the object of creation (*maj’ul*)*,* as is established in its own
place. Hence the closer the effusion (*fayd*) to the horizon of
perfection and the more devoid it is of weakness and deficiency, its
relation to God is more complete and its ascription to the Sacred Being
truer.

Conversely, the more predominant is the darkness of finitude and
non-existence, and the more numerous the limits and inadequacies, the
weaker is a thing’s relation to God and the more remote its attribution.
That is why the acts of origination and creation have been more often
ascribed to God in the language of the *Shari’ah* and the transient
*mulki* acts less often. Should an open eye and an awakened heart be
able to distinguish inadequacy from perfection, the ugly from the fair,
and the good from the evil, it would then understand that although the
entire realm of being is the manifestation of Divine efficiency and
related to God, all the Divine acts are perfect and beautiful and none
of the defects and evils are attributable to His Sacred Being.

That which is called ‘attribution by accident’ (*intisab bi al-arad*) in
the jargon of the philosophers (*hukama’*) *(R)* is a rumor at the plane
of preliminary teaching and philosophy. This notion, in the present
context, contains certain fallacies, and it is better to refrain from
discussing them here.

Our main purpose in discussing this point was, firstly, to dispel
certain false doubts that may arise in the mind of the ignorant person
devoid of the knowledge of the higher teaching.

Secondly, the aim was to explain that the hesitation and conflicting
motives [mentioned in the tradition], as they happen to some beings of
the *Malakut,* are more validly ascribed to God, than the events that
occur in this [corporeal] world.

Thirdly, the aim was that a person possessing the gnosis of the
realities should again distinguish between the aspect of perfection and
deficiency in this hesitation and vacillation of motives, and attribute
the aspect of perfection to God and negate the aspect of deficiency in
relation to Him.

Another Interpretation Of The Tradition Of Hesitation
-----------------------------------------------------

There is another interpretation of the noble tradition relevant to this
context, which had come to the mind of this incapable author. And that
is that the servants of God are either the gnostics and the *awliya’*
who are engaged in the journey towards God and on the path of the people
of the heart. This group of servants are absorbed in the Divine and in
love with the unique Divine Beauty. The Sacred Essence of God is the
*kiblah* of their attention and yearning, and apart from Him they do not
behold any of the worlds, even themselves and their own perfection.

Or they are those who are immersed in the adornments of the world and
sunk in the darkness of the love of glory and wealth, and the faces of
their hearts are turned towards their own ego and egohood, without
paying any attention to the world of the sacred and the celestial
company of intimacy and love. These-they are the ones who have turned
away from the Names of God (وهم الملحدون في أسماء الله).

And the third group are the believers who attend to the world of the
sacred in accordance with the light of their faith and they abhor death
in proportion to their attention to this world. God has referred to
these opposing attractions towards the *Mulk* and the *Malakut,* towards
the Divine and the creation, towards the Hereafter and the world, as
hesitation as attraction towards two opposite sides is present in
hesitation. It is as if He were saying that this *Mulki* and *Malakuti*
attraction is not present in any existent the way it is present in the
faithful servant.

On the one hand he is averse to death due to his attention towards the
realm of *Mulk,* and on the other hand the Divine gravity draws him
towards Itself in order to bring him to, his perfection. Hence God, the
Exalted, is averse to do him offence which is equal to his remaining in
the world of *Mulk,* and he himself is averse to death. However, other
people are not such, because the *awliya’* do not have any *Mulki*
attraction, and those immersed in the world do not possess any
*Malakuti* attraction.

The meaning of attribution of these opposing attractions to God is the
same as mentioned in the former interpretation. In this context the
great researcher and the majestic Sayyid, Mir Damad,[^13] and his
honored disciple have made certain disclosures whose mention will
further prolong this discourse.

God’s Reforming Of The State Of The Faithful Through Poverty And Wealth
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

From that which is stated in this noble tradition, that nothing will
reform some of My servants except poverty and should I deprive them of
it they would perish, and similarly there are some who will be reformed
by wealth and sufficiency and will perish without it, it is known that
whatever God, the Exalted, bestows upon the faithful, whether it is
wealth or poverty, health or malady, safety or trepidation, and other
such things, is for the reform of the state of the faithful and the
purification of the state of their hearts.

And this noble tradition is not contrary to the many traditions that
have been narrated pertaining to the intensity of the afflictions of the
faithful through maladies and pains, poverty, destitution and other
tribulations. For God, the Exalted, with His expansive mercy and
all-encompassing grace, is like a physician and a kind nurse Who makes
everyone refrain from the world in some particular way.

At times, He gives wealth to someone and at the same time involves him
in other afflictions in accordance with the strength and weakness,
perfection and inadequacy of his faith. Rather, He surrounds wealth and
riches with afflictions in such it manner as to turn him away from the
world and the love for it. The temperament of this person is such that
were he to be made poor, perhaps due to his seeing felicity in wealth
and property and considering the worldly people its felicitous, he would
turn to the world and perish for ever in its pursuit.

But when it is made accessible to him and, for the sake of restraining
him from falling in love with it, it is surrounded by troubles and inner
and outer distresses, he would turn away from the world. One of our
great masters (D) used to say concerning having several wives that one
imagines it to be for the sake of the world and attention towards it;
but when one is afflicted with it one finds out that it is one of the
great masterpieces (of legislation), which makes one leave the world and
abandon it in the very course of entry into it.

Thus God, the Exalted, afflicts the faithful at times with poverty,
reforming them and turning their hearts away from the world and giving
them consolation. At times He afflicts them with wealth and riches, and
while one imagines them to be enjoying the world’s bounties and having a
good time, they are really afflicted with distress, tension, visitations
and tribulations. At the same time, the tradition does not conflict with
the fact that the poor among the faithful have a great merit before God,
the Exalted, as is known from the traditions. We have explained some of
the things pertaining to this topic under one of the earlier
traditions.[^14]

The Nearness Relating To Obligatory And Supererogatory Acts And Their Result, In Accordance With The Approach Of The Wayfarers
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that for the wayfarer on the path of God and the
emigrant from the dark house of the self to the real Ka’bah, there is a
spiritual journey and a gnostic wayfaring whose origin is the habitat of
the self and egoism and whose stages are the planes of finitude
pertaining to *‘the horizons and the souls’* and the *Mulk* and the
*Malakut,* which have been referred to as ‘the veils of darkness and
lights.’

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ للهِ سَبْعينَ ألْفَ حِجَابٍ مِنْ نُورٍ وَظُلْمَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, for God there are a seventy thousand veils of light and
darkness.[^15]

These are the lights of being and the darkness of finitude, or the
lights of *Malakut* and the darknesses of *Mulk,* or the darkening
pollutions of carnal attachments and the pure lights of the attachment
of the heart. These seventy thousand veils of light and darkness are at
times summarily referred to as the seven veils, as narrated in relation
to the opening *takbirat* from the Pure Imams, that they remove a veil
with every *takbirah,*[^16] and as is also narrated concerning the
subject of prostration on the earth of the shrine of al-Husayn, may my
soul be ransomed for him, that prostration on it removes the sevenfold
veils.[^17]

And a famous gnostic says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هفت شهر عشق را عطار گشت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما هنوز اندر خم يك كوچه ايم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Attar has roamed through the sevenfold cites of love, While we are
still in the bend of a lane.*[^18]

These in the microcosmic Man have been referred to as the sevenfold
subtleties (*lata’if*)[^19] and sometimes their number is reduced to
three inclusive veils, referred to as the ‘threefold realms’ of ‘the
horizons’ (*afaq*) and ‘the threefold planes’ of the souls
(*anfus*)*,*[^20] and at times to the thousand fold stages well known
among the wayfarers. At times they have been divided, in one
consideration, to a hundred and, in another consideration, to ten
stages.

The perfect ‘*arif* Shaykh Shahabadi (D) used to assign ten stations for
every stage from among the stages of the wayfarers, and in this new and
original division there would be in all a thousand stations. And Hadrat
Ibrahim, the Friend of the Beneficent (A) has expressed his spiritual
journey, as reported by God, the Exalted, [in the Qur’an] as consisting
of threefold stages, one of which is called ‘the Star,’ another ‘the
Moon,’ and the third ‘the Sun.’[^21]

In fine, the origin of the spiritual journey is the dark house of the
self, and its stages are the planes and levels of the *horizons and the
souls.* Its destination is the sacred Being of God with all the Names
and the Attributes, at first, for the Perfect Man, and lastly as that
wherein all the Names and the Attributes dissolve, and every name,
attribute, and definition belongs to something else.

After that, the wayfaring human being overcomes his ego and egoism and
leaves the house of the ego and passes through the stages and planes of
finitude in his search of the real goal and his quest of the Divine, by
transcending each of these and piercing through the veils of darkness
and light, tearing his heart away from all beings and existences, and
purging the Ka’bah of the heart of its idols with his Wall-like hand,
and, when all the stars and the moons and the suns set and disappear
from the horizon of his heart and the orientation of his heart,
undisturbed by attachment to any other, becomes single, unified, and
divine, and the state of his heart [like that of Abraham, as described
in this verse]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إنِّي وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِي لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I have turned my face towards Him no created the heavens and the
earth.*** (***6:79***)

to become annihilated in the Names, the Essence and the Acts, then, in
this state, he would become lost to himself, attaining total
obliteration and absolute swoon. Then the Divine takes charge of his
being, and he hears with the Divine hearing, sees through the Divine
vision, holds with the hand of Divine power, and speaks with the Divine
tongue. He beholds through the Divine and sees nothing except God. He
speaks through the Divine and says nothing but the Truth, becoming
blind, deaf and dumb to the non-Divine, his eye and ear are open to
nothing except the Truth.

This station is not attained except through the gravity of the Divine
and the spark of the fire of love, the flame of eternal love, which
brings him close to the threshold of proximity to the Divine. Through
that pulse of Divine attraction, which follows from [the Divine]
self-love, he is helped so as not to stumble in this valley of
bewilderment and so as not to fall victim to *shath* and the like, which
are remnants of egoism. And in this tradition there is a reference to
these two, in His words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإنَّهُ لَيَتَقَرَّبُ إلَيَّ بِالنَّافِلَةِ حَتَّى أُحِبُّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And he gradually draws nearer to Me through the nawafil, until I love
him.

The drawing near of the servant is through the spark of yearning
(*‘ishq*)*,* and the pulse of Divine gravity from love (*hubb*)*:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تاكه از جانب معشوق نباشد كششي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كوشش عاشق بيچاره جايي نرسد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Until there is not an attraction from the Beloved’s quarter, The
efforts of the poor lover do not get anywhere.*[^22]

*S*

Hence the ultimate of nearness through the *nawafil* is total *fana’,*
absolute dissolution and complete obliteration, and its result is ‘I
become the hearing wherewith he hears…’ And after this complete *fana’,*
total obliteration, absolute annihilation, and complete swoon
(*sa’q*)*,* at times the eternal grace comes to his aid, bringing him to
himself and returning him to the domain of his own self, whereat he
finds himself in the state of awakening (*sahw*) and the state of
intimacy (*uns*) and serenity (*tumaninah*) comes upon him, whereat the
glories of Beauty and Majesty dawn upon him.

In this state of consciousness, to him are revealed the Attributes in
the mirror of the Essence (*dhat*)*,* and in them the fixed archetypes
(*a’yan thabitah*) and their requisites. The state of the people of the
path of gnosis at this station is also like their first station, in that
its fixed archetype is subject to a certain Name. Its annihilation is in
the same Name as well as its survival. In the state of *sahw* also the
same Name is disclosed to him and the disclosure of the fixed archetype
subject to the same Name is obtained by him.

The Secret Of The Variance Among The Prophets In Respect Of Prophethood
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Hence for the Perfect Man (*insan al-kamil*)*,* who is subject to the
Greatest All-inclusive Name, the absolute disclosure of the fixed
archetypes and their accompanying requisites is obtained from eternity
to eternity. Revealed also to him are the states and potentialities of
all the existents and the character of their wayfaring as well as the
pattern of their fulfillment (*wusul*).

The robes of the seal of prophethood and ultimate prophecy, which is the
consequence of absolute disclosure, fit his fair and upright stature.
Each of the other prophets, in accordance with the Name they manifest
and in proportion to the capacity and vastness of its domain, obtain the
disclosure of the archetype subject to that Name. The degree of the
perfection and deficiency of their ministry, its degree of nobility, and
its vastness and narrowness, derive therefrom and are subject to their
respective Divine Names, as discussed in detail by us in the treatise
*Misbah al-hidayah.*[^23]

In fine, after that the state of recovery occurs following the
obliteration, his being becomes divine and God, the Exalted, observes
other existents in the mirror of his beauty, or, rather, it occupies the
same plane as that of the Divine Will (*mashiyyah*)*.* For the Perfect
Man, is on the same plane as the Absolute Will (*mashiyyah*) and his
spirituality becomes the same as the manifestation of Divine efficiency.

In such a state God, the Exalted, sees through him, hears through him,
and holds by his means, and he himself is the irresistible Divine Will,
the perfect intent, and knowledge-in-act (*‘ilm fili*)*.* Hence God
hears by him, sees by him,.. . and so on and so forth to the end of the
*hadith*. [The same matter is referred to in the following tradition]
and others like it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلِيٌّ عَيْنُ اللهِ وَسَمْعُ اللهِ وَجَنْبُ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is the eye of God, the hearing of God, and the Divine
proximity.[^24]

Hence the nearness of the obligations of *sahw* is consequent to the
obliteration, and its result is that which you have heard. The *Sahw*
consequent to obliteration is a state other than this state of
negligence of ours. That plurality, consequent to absolute *fana’,* is
different from the plurality in which we are immersed. That is because
plurality is a veil for us that hides the Divine Face, while for them it
is a mirror of epiphany, [as stated by ‘Ali:]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا رَأَيْتُ شَيْئاً إلاّ وَرَأَيْتُ اللهَ مَعَهُ وَفِيهِ وَقَبْلَهُ
وَبَعْدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I did not see a thing without beholding God with it, in it, before it,
and after it.[^25]

The nearness of the *nawafil* may be considered as obliteration in the
Names (*fana’ asma’i*) and the nearness of *fara’id,* as obliteration in
the Essence. Accordingly, the result of the nearness of *fara’id*
becomes absolute obliteration, and its further elaboration is not
appropriate to this place. Even this much was beyond the scope of these
pages.

A Citation From The Most August Shaykh Baha’i
---------------------------------------------

The august shaykh and gnostic, Baha’i (R) in commenting on this noble
tradition in his *Arba’in,* states: “In this regard there are certain
sublime statements made by the people of the heart, containing subtle
points and spiritual hints which fill the olfactory sense of the spirit
with their aroma and quicken the decaying bones of the specters.

None is guided to the their meaning and knows their reality except
someone who has given lip his comforts through austerities until he
comes to get a taste of them and reaches their meaning. But one who is
ignorant of their secrets and deprived of the treasure of their
teachings, due to his immersion in base carnal joys and being drowned in
physical pleasures, is exposed to a great danger on hearing these words,
and it is feared that he would fall into blasphemy and come to believe
in incarnation (*hulul* and *ittihad*)*.* And Exalted is God greatly
above that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعَالَى اللهُ عَمَّا يَقُولُونَ عُلُوًّا كَبِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Here at this point we will state the matter simply and accessibly so
that it is near to understanding. Hence, we may say, these words
represent the extreme in nearness, describing the domination of love’s
Sovereign on the outward and inward being of the servant. Therefore,
what is meant-and God knows best-is this:

When I love a servant, I draw him to the point of intimacy and turn him
towards the world of sanctity, immersing his mind in the mysteries of
*Malakut* and confining his senses to perceiving the lights of
*Jabarut.* In this state his feet remain steady at the station of
proximity, and love so mingles with his flesh and blood that he becomes
unconscious of himself. Thereat, everything else disappears from his
sight until I become like his sight and hearing, as has been said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جُــنوني فِيكَ لا يخْفى ونَارِي مِنكَ لا يخْبُو
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأنتَ السَّمعُ والأبْصارُ والأركانُ والقَلبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*That I’m mad of Thee, is no secret, My fire, lit by Thee, won’t go
out,*

*Thus Thou art my hearing and my sight, My body, and my heart?*[^26]

Here end his words, may God elevate his station.

A Citation From Khwajah Tusi
----------------------------

His Excellency, the best of the later scholars and the most perfect
among the predecessors, Khwajah Nasir Tusi (Q) says, “When the gnostic
is cut off from himself and joined to God, he sees all powers as
vanishing in Divine power and all sciences as drowned in Divine
knowledge and all wills as vanishing in His will. Then he sees all the
existents and their perfections as having originated and emanated from
Him. At this time God, the Exalted, becomes his hearing and sight,
power, knowledge and existence. Thereupon the character of the gnostic
becomes divine.”[^27] Here end his words, may God increase the sublimity
of his station.

The honored Majlisi has also made certain remarks on the issue. Their
summary is that if man uses his faculties and energies in the way of
Satan and carnal appetites, nothing remains of them except regret and
shame. But if he spends them in the way of obedience to God, He
transforms them into spiritual faculties. Then his hearing and sight
become spiritual hearing and spiritual vision.

With that hearing he hears the speech of the angels, and this sight and
vision are not weakened even by death. It is with this spiritual hearing
and sight that he encounters the interrogation of the grave. On the
contrary, those who do not possess this sight and hearing are raised
blind and deaf from the dead. It is concerning this gift that God, the
Exalted, has said, “I become the hearing wherewith he hears…”[^28] These
words, coming as they do from him, are not without a surprise.

Concluding Note
---------------

The august shaykh, Baha’i, says,[^29] “This noble tradition explicitly
indicates that the obligatory duties (*wajibat*) have a greater merit
than the supererogatory ones (*mustahabbat*) and that there is a greater
reward for their performance. And the Shaykh al-Shahid (M) and some
other scholars have regarded certain cases as exceptions to it wherein
the supererogatory (*sunnah*) is superior to that which is obligatory.

One of them is foregoing one’s debt altogether, which is superior to
giving time to the debtor in a condition of hardship, although the first
is supererogatory while the second is obligatory. Another is being the
first to greet someone, which is superior to answering another’s
greeting (*salam*)*.* A third case is repeating a prayer offered
individually with *jama’ah* [which according to traditions is superior
to a prayer offered individually by twenty-seven degrees, whereas the
repeating is supererogatory],” and such other cases. Some have disputed
each of these exceptions, whose mention is not so necessary.

It should be known that the literal import of the noble tradition is
that the obligations are superior to supererogatory acts though they may
not be of the same kind. For instance, the returning of *salam,* which
is obligatory, is superior to a supererogatory *hajj* and the founding
of a great school or the *ziyarah* of the Messenger of God, although
this may appear to be somewhat improbable. Accordingly, *marhum* Majlisi
(M) has said[^30] that possibly that is restricted to acts of the same
category.

However, in the presence of a proof one cannot say such a thing on mere
improbability. And possibly the superiority of the obligations is to be
considered as being applicable to prescribed rituals, such as prayer,
fasting, hajj, *zakat*, and the like, not to other obligations, like
giving time to a debtor in straits, returning salam, and so on, although
this possibility is also not free of doubt. And all Praise belongs to
Allah, at beginning and end.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, ii, 352, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,”
“bab man adha al-muslimin wa ahtaqarahum,” hadith 8.

[^2]: Al-Shaykh al-Baha’i, Arba’in, hadith 35, p. 296.

[^3]: Al-Shaykh al-Baha’i, Arba’in, hadith 35, p. 296,.

[^4]: Al-Zamakhshari, Tafsir al-kashaf, i, 167, exegesis of 2:8.

[^5]: Al-Shaykh al-Baha’i, Arba’in, hadith 35.

[^6]: Author’s Note: Shaykh Baha’i (r) says: “The (term) nawafil refers
to the non-obligatory works that are performed for God’s good pleasure.
Its specific use to refer to prayers became customary later on.” p. 490.

[^7]: Al-Shaykh al-Baha’i, Arba’in, hadith 35, p. 295, Cf. al-Bukhari,
al-Sahih, vol 23, p. 22, “kitab al-ruqaq,” and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad,
vol. 6, p. 256.

[^8]: See the exposition of the Nineteenth Hadith.

[^9]: Al-Shaykh al-Baha’i, Arba’in, hadith 35, p. 3110.

[^10]: This phrase refers to the doctrinal position of the Imams of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in respect of the issue of jabr (predestination) and
tafwid. The phrase, meaning ‘the matter between the two matters,’
implies that neither jabr is true nor tafwid; the truth lies between
these two extremes positions. (Tr.)

[^11]: 18:79-82.

[^12]: 13:7

[^13]: Mir Damad, al-Qabasat, pp. 469-420; Mulla Sadra, al-Asfar, pp.
395. ff., “safar” 3, “mawqif” 4, “fasl” 13.

[^14]: See the exposition of the Fifteenth Hadith.

[^15]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, vol 55, p. 25, “kitab al-sama’ wa
al-alam,” bab 5, hadith 13.

[^16]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol 4, p. 772, “kitab
al-salat,” “abwab takbirat al-ihram;” bab 7, hadith 5: هُشامُ بنُ
الحَكَمِ عَنْ أبِي الحَسَنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ أنَّهُ رُوِيَ لِذَلِكَ
عِلَّةً أُخْرَى، وَهِيَ أنَّ النَّبِيَّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
لَمَّا أُسْرِيَ بِهِ إلَى السَّمَاءِ قَطَعَ سَبْعَ حُجُبٍ فَكَبَّرَ
عِنْدَ كُلِّ حِجَابٍ تَكْبِيرَةً، فَأَوْصَلَهُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
بِذَلِكَ إلَى مُنْتَهَى الكَرَامَةِ.

[^17]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. 3. p. 608, “kitab
al-salat,” “abwab ma yusjad ‘alayh;’ bab 16, hadith 3: مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ
الحَسَنِ، فِي المِصْبَاحِ، بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ مُعَاوِيَةَ بْنِ عَمَّارٍ
قَالَ: كَانَ لأبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ خَرِيطَةُ دِيبَاجٍ
صَفْرَاءُ فِيهَا تُرْبَةُ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ الحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ. فَكَانَ إذَا حَضَرَتْهُ الصَّلاةُ صَبَّهُ عَلَى سَجَّادَتِهِ
وَسَجَدَ عَلَيْهِ ثُمَّ قَالَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: إنَّ السُّجُودَ عَلَى
تُرْبَةِ أبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَخْرِقُ الحُجُبَ
السَّبْعَ.

[^18]: Ascribed to Rumi: some attribute it to Ahd al-Rahman Jami.

[^19]: Shahabadi (r) mention seven subtleties (latifah) of the human
hang as follows: nafs (ego), ‘aql (intellect), qalb (heart), ruh
(spirit), sirr (secret, soul), khafi (hidden) and akhfa (most hidden);
see Rashahat al-bihar, “kitab al-insan wa al-fitrah,” p. 177.

[^20]: The threefold realms are the realm of physical nature (tabi’ah),
the Imaginal realm (mithal), and the realm of the intellect (‘aql),
considered by Mulla Sadra as corresponding to the senses, imagination,
and the intellect. See Shawahid al-rububiyyuh, p. 320.

[^21]: 6:77-79.

[^22]: Dehkhuda, Amthal wa hikam, vol. 1, p- 537.

[^23]: Misbah al-hidayah, pp. 192-195.

[^24]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, Kitab al-Tawhid, p.164, bab 22,hadith 1.

[^25]: Al-Asfar, vol. 1, pp. 117 ;’Ilm al-yaqin, vol. I, p. 49; Kalimat
maknunah. p- 3.

[^26]: ‘Arba’in, hadith 35, p. 299.

[^27]: Sharh al-Isharat, vol. 3, p. 389, namat 9, fasl 19.

[^28]: Al-Majlisi, Mir’at al-’uqul, vol. 10, p. 312, “kitab al-iman wa
al Kufr,” “bab man adha al Muslimin,” hadith 8.

[^29]: Arba’in, hadith 35, p. 302.

[^30]: Mir’at al-’uqul, vol. 10, p. 381, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,”
“bab man adha al-Muslimin,” hadith 7.


