First Hadith: Jihad of The Self
===============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الشَّيْخِ ثِقَةِ الإِسْلامِ مُحَمَّدٍ بنِ يَعْقُوبَ الكُلَيْنِي،
صَاحِبِ الكَافِي، عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنِ
النَّوْفَلِي عَنِ السُّكُونِيِّ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ، عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ، أَنَّ النَّبِيَّ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، بَعَثَ
سَرِيَّةُ فَلَمَّا رَجَعُوا قَالَ: ‹‹مَرْحَباً بِقَوْمٍ قَضَوُا
الجِهَادَ الأَصْغَرَ وَبَقِيَ عَلَيْهِمُ الجِهَادُ الأَكْبَرُ.››
فَقِيلَ يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ، مَا الجِهَادُ الأَكْبَرُ؟ قَالَ: ‹‹جِهَادُ
النَّفْسِ.››
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verbal Translation
------------------

Al-Sukuni relates on the authority of Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Sadiq (A):
Verily on seeing the returning armies from the battlefront, the Prophet
(S) of God said, “Blessed are those who have performed the minor jihad,
and have yet to perform the major one.” When asked, what is the major
jihad? the Prophet replied, “the jihad of the self” (struggle against
self).

Exposition
----------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّرِيَّةُ قِطْعَةٌ مِنَ الجَيْشِ. يُقَالُ: خَيْرُ السَّرَايَا
أَرْبَعُمِائَةِ رَجُلٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sariyyah* is the section (contingent) of a big army, and it has been
said that four hundred is an optimum number for the best *sariyyah.*
According to the wordings of the tradition this can be inferred that man
is a marvel possessing two lives and two worlds within one existence.
That is, apparent life or the outward world, which is this worldly
existence, and is associated with his body, and the other is ‘inner
life’, the inward world, associated with the hidden, invisible, higher
other world, his soul in short, which belongs to the realms of invisible
and celestial world, and consists of several levels and grades.

These levels are generally divided sometimes into seven sections and
sometimes into four. They are sometimes divided into three, and
sometimes into just two sections. For each one of them is specified host
of guardians. The host related with the divine and intellectual powers
attracts him towards the sublime, heavenly spheres, and summons him to
the acts of virtue and goodness. The other host of guardians is the
ignoble and satanic, which attracts man towards the baser realms of
darkness and shame, and invites him to the acts of villainy and
destruction.

There is always a state of conflict and strive between these two forces,
and human existence serves as the battleground of these two bands. When
the divine forces of good become successful, man emerges as a virtuous
and blessed being, and attains the high station of angels, and is
congregated under the category of prophets, saints and the pious.

When the satanic forces of darkness dominate, man becomes a rebellious
and vicious being, and is flocked with the fiendish group of the
infidels and cursed. Since this is not an occasion to discuss it here, I
shall take up this issue of the crusade of the self whenever the self
and causes of its deterioration and perfection would be discussed in the
latter passages.

First Grade
-----------

This grade itself consists of different stages (*fusul*)*.* You have to
know that the lowest of them is the worldly and outward human existence
comprising the initial stages of the self and its apparent
manifestations. The divine spark is blended with the physical to form
man’s earthly existence. It is here in this body that the armies of good
and evil are stationed, and the visible potentialities of body function
as warring forces. It has seven quarters. They are ears, eyes, tongue,
stomach, private parts, and arms and legs. All these diffused faculties
under the control of the self are employed by the self in seven spheres
of life. The seat of imagination also is an important faculty, as the
thought and imagination are sovereign over all visible and invisible
human faculties.

If the faculty of thought resolves to employ all other faculties to move
in the fiendish directions, all of them are converted into satanic
forces and the whole territory (of existence) is turned into a satanic
domain, and the forces of piety, rationality and good are weakened and
subjugated by them. As a result they wind up their business and leave
off the scene, vacating the empire for the possession of Satan. If the
faith and reason take possession of the mind, and they command all human
faculties to work in their own direction, man acts according to the
dictates of reason and faith (*shar*’), thus making the empire (of his
existence) a domain of divine and rational powers, and compel satanic
forces to retreat with all its weaponry accepting defeat.

Thus the *jihad* of the self is the *jihad* of greater importance. This
*jihad* is superior to being killed in the way of God, since this
condition implies overpowering one’s own powers and faculties, and
placing them under the yoke of God’s command, and purging the domain of
our body of satanic elements and their forces.

Contemplation
-------------

The first and foremost condition for one’s strife with his own self, and
hence his movement towards God essentially means introspection and
self-reflection. Some of the moral philosophers have given it the fifth
position in priorities, which is also correct. Here introspection is
used in the sense of devoting some time, however insignificant it is,
contemplating about our duties towards our Master and Creator, Who has
brought us into this world, and Who has bestowed upon us all the means
of pleasure and joys of life, Who has equipped us with a sound body and
faultless faculties and senses, each of whom serves a specific purpose
of its own, and whose functioning bewilders human intellect. In addition
to all these endowments and graces, He has sent so many prophets and His
Holy Book for our guidance and invited us to receive His blessings.

Whether all these things have been granted to us by the Master and
Emperor of all kings merely to serve this animal existence and to
satisfy our appetites and instincts, which we share with other animals,
or whether there is some higher aim? Whether all the prophets of God,
great sages, thinkers and scholars of every nation have invited the
people to follow certain rational principles and Divine legislation, and
asked the people to abstain from all animal tendencies and detach
themselves from this mortal and perishable habitation were their
enemies, or they had conceived an entirely different idea of salvation,
which we ordinary human creatures, blindly obeying the dictates of lust,
could not conceive?

If we reflect in a rational manner for a moment, we shall realize that
the aim of imparting to us all these graces and endowments is something
else, superior to and higher than what is visible. This world is a stage
of action and its aim is a higher and more sublime sphere of existence.
This lower and animal existence is not an end in itself. A rational man
should think of his own self introspectively and should feel pity for
his state of helplessness. With a sense of pity he should address his
own self, saying, “O callous self! Thou has wasted precious years of thy
short life in pursuance of hedonistic and sensuous propensities! And
nothing is gained except regret and sense of loss.

Thou should be regretful before God for thy past deeds, and commence a
new journey in the direction of His prescribed goal, the journey that
leads to the life of eternity and perpetual bliss. Thou should not
bargain short-lived transitory joys, which are hard to obtain for
eternal bliss and felicity. Think for a while, O Callous self!

Thou should think over the conditions of the people from the dawn of
civilization up to the present time that is witnessed by thee. See and
balance their hardships and torments with the comforts and pleasures
they could attain, and thou shall see their pains and sufferings always
overwhelmed and cancelled their joys and pleasures. Joys and pleasures
are not for everyone in this life. One who invites and induces thee to
pursue the worldly joys and material gains, is evidently one of the
satanic hosts in the human form, who undoubtedly is an emissary of the
Satan. ‘He always induces other men to join him in his indulgence in
sensualities, and declares his conviction in material life herewith.

At this juncture, O self, thou should pause for a moment, and think
whether he is satisfied with his own condition, or whether all this
points to one who himself is inflicted, and wants to taint others’ poor
life with the same vice. O self, thou should entreatingly ask God’s
approval of thine acts, and seek His pleasure. Pray to Him that thine
acts be approved by Him. Between Him and thee there is always a spark of
hope. This hope is realized in thy thinking with firm resolution to
fight against the Satan and thine own baser self. This strife with the
self leads thee to a higher stage, and try thy best to attain that
through sincere struggle.”

Will And Resolution
-------------------

The next stage, after the stage of contemplation and ponderance through
which an individual striving to progress on the spiritual path has to
pass, is the stage of resolution. (This is a different thing from
volition, which *al-Shaykh al-Ra’is* Ibn Sina, in *‘al-‘Isharat’*
alludes to as the initial stage of *‘irfan*). Some of our revered
scholars (may God grant them longevity) also state that resolution is
the essence of humanity and criterion of human freedom.

The differences in human gradation are actually indicative of the
discrepancy of the stages of human resolution. The resolution which is
required for this particular stage is synonymous with laying the
foundation of a good life, a resolution to purge life from sin, and to
perform all obligatory (*wajib*) acts, and a resolution to compensate
for the days lost (in sinfulness), and finally resolve to behave as a
rational and religious person ought to.

That is, he should adopt a behavior that is in accordance with the codes
of religious law, which would acknowledge him as a real human being, a
rational man. His gait and manner should be an imitation and copy of the
Prophet’s life. He must, in appearance, follow the Prophet (S) as a
model in his manner and actions, in his abstinences and his choices.
This is quite possible, since it is in the powers of ordinary servants
of God seemingly to act in the way of that great leader of human beings.

You should know that no path for the realization of divine existence can
be undertaken unless one familiarizes himself with the apparent or overt
form of *Shari’ah.* Unless a person fully acquaints himself with the
knowledge of the *Shari’ah* laws and follows them faithfully, the higher
values of morality cannot be attained by him. Without adhering to the
apparent teachings of Islam it is not possible that the light of the
Divine Knowledge could descend upon his heart, and the wisdom of the
invisible, and the mysteries of the holy law be revealed to him.

After attaining this stage, the truth unveiled for him and enlightenment
bestowed upon his heart, a person would act with greater observance of
the manifest forms of religion. This falsifies the claims of pseudo
spiritualists, who say that the inner perfection can only be acquired by
relinquishing outer accomplishments, or, that after acquiring inner
excellences, necessity of observing outward forms does not remain
obligatory. This is a mistaken conception born of ignorance about the
stages of worship and the different grades of human progress. We shall
deal with this subject in the latter chapters, may God grant it so.

Effort And Struggle (Spiritual)
-------------------------------

Dear friend: try to be a man of strong will power and resolution, so
that you may not go from this world as a person without resolution, and
hence rise on the day of resurrection as a brainless-being, not in the
form of human being. For the otherworld is the place where what is
hidden is unveiled and secrets are exposed. One’s audacity to commit
sin, converts him little by little into a man devoid of will power, and
takes away the noble essence of humanity from him. Our respected teacher
used to say that more than anything else, giving the ears to the sounds
of music and songs, steal from men their will power and the power of
resolution.

Hence, my brother, desist from transgression, resolve to return to God,
and acquire a mien similar to that of true human being. Join the
community of the men of religion and in seclusion pray to God, so that
He may assist you in your mission, and pray that the Prophet (S) and the
members of his Household (A) intercede for you. May God bestow His
graces and favors upon you. May He escort you in the coming dangers,
since the path of life is full of great risks and hazards. On the way of
life there are very deep crevices and it is possible that one may
stumble and fall in them in such a manner that none of his efforts could
save him from the coming catastrophe. It is also probable that in some
cases the interceding of an intercessor cannot save him either.

Self-Examination And Stipulation (Musharatah)
---------------------------------------------

Self-conditioning, contemplation and self-examination are essential
pre-requisites for a seeker (*mujahid*) of truth who is battling with
his self. Self-conditioning or stipulation means binding oneself with
the resolve not to do anything against God’s commands. This is called
*musharatah,* such as ‘I will not violate the Law of God today.’ It is
very easy to stick to such condition for one day. Try to resolve, abide
by your own resolve, and experiment, and you will see that how easy this
task is. Satan, the cursed creature, and his legions may magnify the
volume of the task in your eyes, but these are the guiles played by the
cheat. Curse, and drive the Devil and evil thoughts from within the
depths of the heart and the domain of your mind. Experiment for one day
and you will verify how easy this task is.

Guarding Against Evil (Muraqabah)
---------------------------------

After stipulating about his acts, man should enter this stage. It is
essential that throughout the period of stipulation the *mujahid*
struggling against his own self should constantly concentrate upon his
actions. If any time any idea of violating Divine commands occurs to
him, he should know that this idea has been instilled into his mind by
the Satan and his allies, who want to deter him from his good
resolutions.

He ought to curse them, and seek God’s compassionate protection, and
banish those villainous ideas from the realm of his heart, and tell the
Satan that this day also he has to abide by the condition imposed upon
his own self that he would not go against God’s commands, as He is the
One Who has provided him with all the excellences and bounties. It is
He, Who has given him the riches of health, security, and peace year
after year in this world. In recognition of all God’s graces it is not
sufficient even if he serves Him till eternity, let alone a trivial
thing like this.

I hope, that Satan will be driven away, and the Divine forces will
prevail. I assure you that this practice of self-criticism and
self-examination would not hinder your day-to-day activity. I advise you
to remain in the same state of mind till night-the time for
introspection and inner deliberation-and evaluate your deeds of the
whole day. This is the time to see whether you have been honest to the
Giver of all, to whom everybody is accountable. If you have been
faithful to Him, you should be thankful to Him, that He has made you
successful in your intentions. And realize that you have gone a step
forward in His direction and became an object of His attention. God
willing, God will help you in performing all worldly and religious
duties, and will diminish your pains for the next day. If you repeat
this many times, it is imminent that you will be accustomed to the acts
of piety. You will see then that all this does not require you to make
hard efforts.

You will also notice that obedience to God gives ample pleasure. Though
this world is not where one is immediately rewarded, yet faithfulness to
God and abstaining from sins is fruitful in this world also. God never
entrusts His creatures with cumbersome and heavy tasks, which are beyond
their powers, but it is the Satan and his allies who magnify them in
your view. God forbid, if there are any lapses on your part, ask God’s
forgiveness, and beseechingly implore Him that you will be more careful
in future, so that the Almighty may throw open the doors of His grace
and compassion to you, and may guide you in the straight path.

Remembrance (Tadhakkur)
-----------------------

The factors, that fully assist man in his *jihad* with his self and the
Satan, and to which a treader *mujahid* has to pay greater attention is
constant remembrance of God. Though there are many other important
stages, I will be content to discuss this stage here.

Remembrance Of God, Remembering The Graces Bestowed By Him
----------------------------------------------------------

You know that thankfulness is natural and man’s nature commands man to
be grateful to his benefactor. If one tries to read the book of his own
heart, he will see that this law is written there. The sense of
veneration and gratitude for the benefactors increases with the amount
of benefaction, particularly if the benefactor’s generosity has no
selfish motive. Greater the selfless generosity, greater is sense of
gratitude. For example, compare the extent of veneration for one who
presents you a horse with a selfish motive, with the respect you have
for a person, who grants you a village of several hectares, without any
inkling of selfish motives. If a doctor rescues you from the darkness of
blindness, you naturally owe to him a lot of respect, and if someone
saves you from the clutches of death, you owe him a lot more.

You yourselves reflect and estimate the seen and unseen favors bestowed
on us by the Almighty, even a small fraction of which all men and the
*jinn* cannot even provide us with. Take for instance the air we breathe
day and night, upon which our existence as well as that of other living
beings is dependent, nothing can remain alive even if it is taken off
merely for a quarter of an hour. What a marvelous gift it is! If all men
and the *jinn* of the world labor hard to contrive such a thing, they
cannot do that. In the same way, try to recall other gifts of God also,
like external bodily senses viz. sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch,
etc., and inner faculties like thinking, imagination and reason, etc.,
each one of which carries unlimited benefits and which are granted to us
by Our Lord. Besides these valuable gifts, there are several other gifts
also.

Moreover, He has sent His messengers and prophets and His Books as well
to show us which path is right and which one is wrong, which path leads
us to Heaven or Hell. He fulfills all our needs in this world and the
Hereafter, without having any need of our adoration. Observance of His
commands, or transgressing them does not make any difference to Him, it
is for the sake of our own benefit that He has enjoined good and
forbidden indecencies. While remembering all these and various other
favors, whose reckoning is beyond the powers of human beings, do we not
see that respecting and obeying such a Benefactor is essential for us,
or does our reason approve of the acts of violating His commands?

This is an evident fact that we respect great people and those older in
age. This is also true that people respect the wealthy and powerful
persons, and rulers and kings, since they are recognized as great. Can
their greatness be matched with the grandeur and magnificence of that
King of kings, in Whose kingdom this world of us is merely a particle of
dust. He is the Creator and King of this vast cosmos, whose infiniteness
cannot be measured or even conceived by human intellect.

Human being, a creature crawling on one of the smallest planets
miserably fails to grasp the extent of his own small world, whose sun
cannot be compared with far greater suns of innumerable galaxies. Our
solar system is nothing as compared to lesser several other solar
systems, which still elude the keen eyes (and refined telescopes) of
great explorers and investigators of the world. Is that Greatest of the
great, who can know and cover not only minute details of these known
worlds, but of many more unknown worlds, in a twinkling of an eye, is
not venerable according to the dictates of reason, as well as in the
light of the great book of nature?

If any one fails to do this, he ought to be extra watchful and careful,
since God Almighty is present everywhere, and no odd corner of the world
can delude his Omnipresent sight. Every living being is within the range
of His view and all knowledge is in His infinite attendance, so never
forget Him. A speck of penitence in one’s heart would not melt any
person into water, and he would not fall to the ground. Therefore, my
dear friend, remember God and remember all His favors and graces, and
stop disobeying Him.

Overpower and subdue the satanic band in this great war, and convert the
spheres of your mind into divine realm by driving out the satanic
legions and inviting the divine hosts, so that God may succor and
protect you in the dangers threatening to befall you in this battle. The
battlefield, which is more immense than this one, is the scene of the
battle (*jihad*) against thine own self, the invisible world of within
and the second stage of this *jihad.* We shall deal with this subject
afterwards. By the time, I remind you not to have any expectations from
anyone but God. Except Him, the Almighty, nobody can help you. With all
humility and with all the tears your eyes can offer (to wash your sins),
pray to God and seek His assistance to emerge victorious in this crucial
battle. *wa innahu wali al-tawfiq*

The Second Stage
----------------

The second stage also consists of several steps:

The human soul inhabits another realm and another territory also, which
is the world of the hidden and the sphere of the sublime world. In that
world, the role of the sensual forces assumes graver dimensions. This is
the place, where the struggle and conflict between the divine forces and
the fiendish ones is more severe and also more significant. Everything
that exists in the external or visible world drifts to this hidden
world, and is manifested there. Whichever of the forces whether godly or
devilish, is victorious here is essentially triumphant there also.

So, the *jihad al-nafs* or the internal struggle is of great
significance for all great religious thinkers, mystics, and moralists.
It can be rather considered as the origin and the source of all
felicities or woes, and of promotion and sublimation or debasement and
degradation of self. One should be extremely self-conscious while
undertaking this *jihad.* Because, it is possible that, God forbid, due
to the defeat of heavenly forces, the self is left vacant for the unholy
occupation of the vicious and unworthy satanic legions, and hence
causing an eternal loss to the human being that cannot be retrieved.

Even the intercession of an intercessor cannot save him from becoming an
object of the wrath and indignation of the Most Merciful of the
merciful. It is also possible that man’s intercessor may become his
adversary. It is a pity that such a thing should happen to anyone that
one who pleads for him should become his opponent. God alone knows that
what misfortunes, what perils and what hardships are to follow Divine
wrath and antagonism of God’s friends, compared to which all the
infernal fires, plagues, evils, serpents and scorpions are insignificant
and mild. God forbid, whatever sufferings of hell have been described by
saints, ascetics, and mystics, compared to them all the imaginable pains
and sufferings of this world are very mild. All of the torments about
which we have heard, are trifle and insignificant when compared to the
miseries one has to undergo in the Hereafter. Heaven and hell whose
account has been given in the Book and in the traditions of prophets of
God are certainly the heaven and hell of wicked actions, and are
prepared for rewarding or punishing good and bad human deeds.

There is a subtle allusion also to the heaven and hell of morality,
which is more significant than even the *Bihisht al-liqa,* the heaven of
beatific vision, and the *Jahannam al-firaq,* the hell of separation
from Him. This is considered to be of great significance but is hidden
from our eyes and is opened to them alone who deserve it. You and me who
do not deserve it should not doubt it. We should have faith in it, since
God and His friends have told us that this non-detailed (*ijmali*) faith
also is beneficial for us. Sometimes, it is also possible that unbelief
arising out of ignorance, and unreasonable rejection, without any
knowledge and understanding of the truth may bring great harm to us, the
extent of which is unthinkable. In this world we cannot understand those
harms.

If you hear something, which has been, reported from any thinker, mystic
or ascetic, do not refute it or consider it invalid just because it is
not in accordance with your taste, or does not fit in your mode of
thinking. This idea may have its origin in a higher source, inaccessible
to you like the Qur’an, *hadith,* or reason. How strange it will be that
a *faqih* issues a *fatwa* (a religious or legal opinion) regarding a
certain *ayah* (a pecuniary compensation for any offence against a
person) of which you are ignorant, and you reject it without checking
the relevant evidences. Or, when a holy person or a mystic speaks
something concerning religious learning, or he refers to the conditions
of heaven or hell, it is easy for you to refute him or even dare to
insult him. For it does not need much thinking or knowledge.

But do not forget that it is possible that the person, who is an
authority on that subject and a master in that field, might have traced
it back to the Holy Book, or has access to some traditions transmitted
from infallible Imams (AS), and you may not have come across it. In that
case, you would be guilty of rejecting God and His Prophet (S) without
any plausible excuse. You have no justification to say later that your
judgment was not correct, your knowledge was limited, or that you had
heard a certain person speaking otherwise on the *minbar* (pulpit); such
excuses are unfounded, and in any case let not your objective be
blurred.

Whatever has been related about the paradise of good morals and deeds
and about the inferno of bad morals and deeds refers to the states,
which we cannot experience here. Thus, my friend ! take great care,
search for remedy, and try to discover the ways and means of deliverance
for yourself. Seek refuge in God, the Most Merciful, and Beneficent, and
beseech His mercy with humble supplications and lamentation, so that He
may help you in this holy war against your carnal self and you may be
victorious and the domain of your heart may be liberated from evil
influences.

The fiendish legions may be turned out of the place so that it may be
given in the possession of its rightful Owner, and the felicities,
honors and joys may be granted to you by God. All the praises that you
have heard of the Heaven, its hours and its mansions, are nothing
compared to Divine Bliss, nothing can be estimated higher. That domain
is absolutely a divine sphere, which has been described by the friends
of God from this rightly guided luminous ummah (*millat al-bayda*)*.*
This is a world of pleasures, which no ear has ever heard of, and no
human heart has ever experienced.

Hidden Or Inner Powers (Quwwa al-Batini)
----------------------------------------

You should know that with His Wisdom and Authority, God Almighty has
created certain powers and faculties in the invisible world of the inner
self. They are of enormous benefits for us. Here we shall mention three
of them: they are, *al-quwwah al-wahmiyyah-*the power of invention or
imagination, *al-quwwah al-ghadabiyyah*-the power of passion or anger,
and *al-quwwah al-shahwiyyah-*the power of lust or sensuality.

Each of these powers is of great benefit to the mankind, like the
preservation of the human individual and species, advancement of human
interests in this world as well as in the Hereafter, of which religious
scholars have given elaborate accounts and I need not repeat them. What
is essential to state here is that these three powers are the source and
origin of all virtuous and vicious deeds, and the source of all
invisible and sublime forms.

Briefly speaking, as man possesses a physical and a terrestrial form in
this world, which is devised and contrived by the Almighty in such a
wonderful manner that all great philosophers and scientists are puzzled,
and the science of anatomy is not fully equipped to discover and
understand its functioning rightly even to this day. God has made man
superior to other living beings by endowing him a superb constitution
and a beautiful appearance. Yet there is another form and a different
face of him, which is heavenly and invisible, which is determined by the
qualities of his soul and his inner nature.

In the Hereafter, whether it is in the *Barzakh* (an interval of time
between the death of man and his resurrection) or whether on the Last
Day, if one’s inner nature, his deeds, and his inner self are really
human, his heavenly visage also will be man-like. But if his deeds are
inhuman, he will not possess human form; it will be rather subject to
the state of his inner self and his psyche. For instance, if his inner
self is dominated by the power of lust or sensuality (*al-quwwah
al-shahwiyyah*) and animality and brutality overwhelm and govern his
inner self, his otherworldly visage will be of a brute and the reign of
his inner world would be under the control of one of the beasts,
corresponding to that quality of his soul.

If the power of passion or anger conquers one’s inner self and his
psyche, his otherworldly appearance will resemble one of the bestial
forms, corresponding to that attribute of his nature. And if the power
of imagination and invention is governed by fiendish forces and his
inner self is made vicious, governed by the vices like deceit,
dishonesty, slandering, backbiting, which are the attributes of Satan,
he may undergo a metamorphosis and assume one of the forms of Satan.
Sometimes it is also possible that he would have an appearance that
symbolizes two or several vices. In that case, a form which does not
resemble any of the brutes, but an unusual and queer form, with which
cannot be compared the most terrible and ugliest monster in the world,
will be acquired by him.

It has been recorded from the Prophet (S) of God that some persons will
be raised on the Last Day in such a mien that even monkeys and dog flies
will appear better looking than that. It is also possible that several
forms may be prescribed for one individual in that world. Because that
world is not like this world, where one individual cannot acquire more
than one form. This account itself is logical as well as self-evident.
Because, the criterion of those different forms (of which human form is
one) would be the state of soul at the time of death the state in which
the soul departs from the body. It is in this very state and form that
man’s soul enters the realm of *Barzakh.* At the time of entering the
other world, that is, the domain of the Hereafter, the first stage of
which is *Barzakh,* in whichever state one’s soul departs from the body,
it assumes a form suited to it in the next world also.

It is the same form in which he is perceived by the inhabitants of
*Barzakh* and by himself, when he first opens his eyes there, if he has
not lost his sight to do so. Because, it is not necessary that man may
enter the next world in the same physical state as he had in this world.
God Himself says that on the Last Day some of the persons will ask God
that why has He raised them as blind while they possessed eyes in the
world. God will answer them that as they disregarded His clear signs in
the world, they are forgotten and disregarded by God today.

O poor fellow! You had only external sight and were blind inwardly. You
are realizing your blindness now, while you were already blind from the
very beginning. You did not possess the inner vision, which could
perceive His clear signs. You, the poor creature, who was endowed with a
perfect earthly body and proportionate form, alas you did not know that
the measures of the hidden and sublime world are different from this
world. You should strive for inner uprightness, so that you may be
upright on the Last Day. Your spirit should be a human spirit, so that
your form in the *Barzakh* and the Hereafter may be a human form.

You are mistaken to consider the world of the hidden realities, where
the secrets of this world are to be unveiled and your deeds are to be
disclosed, as similar to this world of appearances, where one can
deceive others and can create chaos, confusion, and misjudgment. Your
eyes and ears, your hands and feet, and other parts of your body will
bear witness against your deeds in this world with their supernatural
tongues. Some of them may also appear in their celestial forms.

So, my friend, it is necessary to keep open the ears of your heart. Be
brave, and have mercy on your own self, so that you may leave this world
in a human form, and may be counted as redeemed and virtuous. Mind you,
these words repeatedly occur in the speeches and teachings of great
thinkers, in the inspirations of mystics and in the transmissions of the
truthful and infallible servants of God.

How To Regulate Human Instincts
-------------------------------

It is possible that *wahm,* the power of imagination and invention,
*ghadhab*-the power of passion and anger, and *shahwah*-the power of
lust or sensuality, also possess divine aspect, and may bring about
felicity and good luck to man, if these powers are subjected to the
dictates of reason and good sense and the teachings of prophets of God.
They may become satanic forces if they are unleashed and the power of
invention and imagination is allowed to rule and lead other two powers.
It is not a secret that none of the prophets of God ever tried to
eradicate the powers of passion, sensuality or imagination completely.

None of the messengers of God have ever demanded to completely kill
sensuality and desire or to extinguish the fire of passion or anger and
ignore the inventions of imagination. But they have rather advocated for
controlling and bridling them and making them function under the command
of reason and Divine Laws. For each one of these powers struggles to
dominate others and win its goal, whatever mischief, chaos, and
confusion may be stirred up.

For instance, the obstinate bestial self is determined to reach its goal
even if it is resolved on committing adultery with married women in the
Holy *Ka’bah.* Intractable power of passion arouses the self to win its
objective even if it is contemplating to kill prophets and the friends
of God. And the power of imagination, while devising satanic
instruments, wants to go its own way, to cause corruption of the whole
climate on earth, and to create chaos and disorder in the world.

The great prophets of God were sent to this world with the light of
Divine Laws. God revealed to them heavenly books, so that they may
prevent people from indulging into extravagances and immoderations, and
bring the human self under the control of reason and the law of
*Shari’ah.* To bridle the human self is essential so that it may not
exceed the measures of reason and *Shari’ah.* Hence, every individual
who subordinates himself to the Divine Laws and principles of good sense
is fortunate, and it is he who attains salvation.

He finds refuge in God, the Most Exalted and the Most High, from the
dangers and misfortunes, which might befall him, and thus is saved from
the disgrace of assuming those beastly and hideous forms that may
accompany him in the *Barzakh,* in the grave and on the Last Day, as the
result of his vicious deeds and corrupt practices.

How To Bridle Fancy And Imagination
-----------------------------------

The first condition for a *mujahid* in his struggle that he has to
observe and abide by, at this juncture and at all other stages, is to
control the flight of one’s imagination, so that he can subjugate the
Devil and his armies. Imagination is like a bird restless to fly, and
sit on any tree it reaches. This flight may bring about many great
misfortunes. Fancy is one of the tools of the Devil, with which he
enslaves man and renders him helpless. With the help of fancy, he
entices men to committing villainies and indecencies.

A *mujahid* who is determined on self-rectification, and who has made up
his mind to purify his inner self and banish satanic forces from there,
should firmly hold the bridle of his imagination and let not it soar and
wander about wherever it likes. He should try to prevent his mind from
nursing corrupt and sinful thoughts, and always divert it to high and
noble ideals. In the beginning, it appears to be a little difficult,
since Satan and his forces may glorify bad things in your eyes. But with
little concentration and attention everything becomes easy.

It is possible that as an experiment you may just think for a while, and
will not be able to concentrate upon an object. Whenever you see that
your thoughts are stooping to lowly and mean things, turn your attention
aside from them and think about the worthier and nobler things. If you
have been successful in your attempts, thank God Almighty for His help,
and pursue these matters further. May God, out of His mercy, open the
path of spiritual progress for you, and may you be invisibly guided in
the straight path. May human deeds and right conduct be made easy for
you. Be careful that vicious thoughts and vain fancies are induced by
Satan, who wishes to fortify its forces in the domain of your inner
self.

You, who are at war with Satan and his legions, and want to make the
realm of your inner self a heavenly domain, are expected to be on guard
against the guiles of the cursed villain. You should drive away those
thoughts that counter Divine command. God willing, you will be able to
recapture this significant fortification from the unholy occupation of
Satan and his allies, in this internal war. This fortification serves as
a boundary (between good and evil). If you are victorious here you may
hope for greater and nobler victories.

My dear friend, seek for God’s help at every moment. Pray and beg humbly
in the court of your Lord.

O God Almighty! Satan is a great enemy, who has enticed your great
friends and prophets. O God! help this weak and entrapped servant of
yours, and guard him against these vain ideas and these infirm thoughts
that inflict me, so that he may succeed in his war against this strong
enemy, who is threatening to destroy my felicity and humanity. O God!
please accompany Thy servant and guide him so that he may drive the
Satan’s armies from Your seat, and may clip the hands of this usurper.

Estimation And Appraisal
------------------------

The thing, which is to be strictly followed during this process, is the
estimation and evaluation (of vices and virtues). An intelligent person
should carefully examine the effects and demerits of each one of moral
vices and bad deeds, which are the product of sensuality, passion and
imagination, and are under the control of Satan. He has to compare them
with the benefits and blessings of good deeds and moral and spiritual
excellences, which are under the guidance of reason and religious law
(*Shari’ah*) and then decide which way is better to act. For instance,
the advantages of obeying the dictates of uninhibited sensuality that
gets hold of the human soul and firmly takes its roots there, and gives
rise to many vices to flourish, may be taken into consideration.

In the course of time the sensual aptitudes develop, and a person does
not hesitate to commit any of the vices, and tries all means and ways to
obtain the sensual pleasure at any cost, and does not fail to perpetrate
any crime, which he desires to commit, even if it results in something
extremely vicious. As a result of letting loose one’s passions several
other vices are born and become his second nature. And he is more than
ready to maltreat and subdue everyone who comes in his way. Those who
react against oppressive activities and try to defend themselves, or
show any signs of disagreement or hostility are crushed and oppressed by
him.

He tries to repel all oppositions by all means, although it may lead to
an outbreak of corruption in the world. In the same way, the person, who
has surrendered himself to the demoniac power of imagination and lets it
to be firmly rooted in his soul, does not hesitate to indulge in a fit
of excessive passion and sensuality with all his satanic designs and
treacheries and rule over the creatures of God by all kinds of unjust
means, even if it is to dispossess a family of their belongings or
stripping a city or a country of its resources.

These are the achievements of these faculties, while they are active
under the ignoble supervision of Satan. If we think about it, and
examine the plight of such people, we shall notice that every one of
them, despite the enormous strength they possess, and most of their
wishes being fulfilled, they still nurture thousands of new desires that
are yet to be fulfilled. It is not possible in this world that all the
desires and ambitions that we cherish be fulfilled here, since this
world is the abode of obstacles.

The elements of this world dispirit our wishes. Our desires are also not
limited. For instance, the power of sensuality and lust acts in man in
such a way that if he is given one woman, he is attracted to other
women. If he is given an empire, he will hanker after some other empire.
Man always desires for what he does not possess. In spite of this vanity
of imagination and futility of human desire, the kiln of sensuality is
always hot, and its heat ever increasing, and our desires are never
cooled down.

Similarly, the forces of passion are implanted in human nature in such a
way that even if he is made an absolute monarch of a state, he will be
attracted towards another state, which he cannot get, and he will try to
pounce on it with all the force he can muster. This power is also ever
increasing. Anyone who has any doubt is advised to examine his own self
and other human beings belonging to the classes of poor, rich and
powerful; he will agree with me. It is obvious that man is always
allured by something, which he does not own. This is the human nature as
conceived by various great Islamic thinkers and holy men, especially one
should refer to a great master of divinity, Mirza Muhammad ‘Ali
Shahabadi.

Anyhow, even if man attains his goals, for how long can he be benefited
from them? How long his youthful years are to continue? When the spring
of youth fades out and the autumn of his life sets in, his heart has no
more a zest for mirth and joy, his organs lose their vitality and those
activities lose their relish. His eyes dim, his hearing is impaired, his
sense of touch and other senses and faculties weaken. Ability to get
pleasure declines or is completely lost. Then hosts of ailments make him
an easy prey. His digestive, assimilative and excretory system fails,
and his respiratory system cannot perform it: function properly. Nothing
but deep sighs, displeasure, regret and remorse are left to accompany
him.

Thus, the duration of our exploitation of these bodily powers, from the
days when one gains consciousness of good and bad till the process of
decline sets in, is not more than thirty or forty years, even for a
person of very strong constitution. That too, if one does not happen to
come across all sorts of diseases and afflictions, which we witness
every day and forget about. If, for the time being, we take it for
granted (although it has no reality), that a man can attain the age of
one hundred and fifty years, with all opportunities of involving oneself
fully in all the three indulgences-sensuality, passion and imagination,
excluding all the chances of coming across any adversities and
misfortunes, even this period of time would prove short, and pass soon
like the winds and what would be in store for you for the next world?
What benefit will you derive from all these treasures of amusements for
your eternal life? What will save you from the horrors of the day of
doom, helplessness, desolation and loneliness? What will you present on
the Day of Judgment, and how would you face God, His angels, and His
chosen servants and prophets?

Of course, nothing will accompany you except your wicked and sinful
deeds, which will metamorphose you in such a form that would not be
known to anybody except God. Everything that you have heard and
conceived about the infernal fire, torments of the grave and agonies of
the Doomsday, etc., you measured them with the worldly fire and worldly
pains. What a gross error you committed. Fire of this world is
relatively an accident, and all the horrors are easy to bear. Your
estimation of the other world on the basis of this one is imperfect and
faulty. Even if the fire burning throughout the world is accumulated at
one place, it will not be hot enough to burn the human soul. In the next
world, besides burning and roasting the body it will burn the soul and
incinerate the heart also. Whatever you have been listening about till
now, is actually the hell of one’s actions, which you will see in the
Hereafter as a reality, for God Almighty has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا حَاضِرًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they find all that they did confronting them.*** (***18:49***)

You will have to face whatever you did in this world. If you thrived on
the property of orphans, God alone knows in what state you will appear
in hell and what comforts you will have to enjoy there as your reward.
If here your harsh words have injured the hearts of people, this pain
and discomfort caused to the hearts of the creatures of God, God alone
knows, what punishment it will incur upon you in the Hereafter. You will
know it only when you experience it what sort of pain and torture you
have procured for yourselves. Because of your detractions, the other
worldly and sublime form that was conceived for you is denied to you and
you will. have to undergo the pains of chastisement.

This will be the hell of one’s actions, which is comparatively milder,
cooler and tolerable, and is reserved for those who committed sins in
this world. But for those who have acquired the viciousness of character
and villainy of conduct like, greed, lust, hoarding, avarice,
contentiousness, love of wealth, power and corporeal things, rapacity,
ravenousness and other vices, the hell is their place, a place beyond
human apprehension, a state and form which can never be anticipated by
any stretch of the imagination, and emanates from within the soul
itself.

The inhabitants of that hell will be so distressed that they will try to
escape from it, (but in vain). In some of the authentic narrations, it
occurs that there is a valley in hell, which is reserved for the proud,
and which is named as *saqar* once it complained to God about the
intensity of its heat, and asked Almighty for a relief, so that it might
take a breath. After the relief was granted, when it breathed, its
breath filled the hell with fire.

Sometimes one’s vices may cause a human being to become a permanent
dweller of hell. Because they take away from him his faith and belief.
For instance, a vice like jealousy, according to authentic traditions,
eats away faith as the fire consumes wood. Another example is that of
the love of the world, worldly power and riches, which, according to
authentic narrations, consume the faith of a believer more rapidly than
two wolves let loose on a sheep herd without a shepherd, one attacking
from the front and the other from the back.

Adoration for the worldly things and lust for power deprives a believer
of his belief, and God forbid, this sinfulness results in dark and ugly
deeds, which finally leads to the loss of faith and one’s end as an
infidel, and the hell of the false beliefs and erroneous faith is
severer, hotter and darker than those two other hells, mentioned above.

My friend, the higher knowledge has proved that the grades of intensity
are infinite. The punishment is severer than what you imagine or what
others imagine. If you do not believe in the arguments advanced by
philosophers, or the revelations made to mystics, thanks to God, being a
true believer, you have faith in the teachings of the prophets of God,
and you consider all the reports recorded in the authentic books of the
traditions which are accepted by all the Imamiyyah scholars as true and
authentic. I hope that you believe in the prayers of infallible Imams,
and have read the prayers and sermons uttered by Imam ‘Ali (A), and the
invocation by Imam Sayyid al-Sajidin (A) uttered in the prayer of Abu
Hamzah al-Thumali.

My friend, reflect a little upon their subject matter and think for a
while on their wordings. It is nowhere required to make a rapid reading
of the lengthy prayer in a hurry without pondering over its meaning. You
and I are not blessed with the spiritual state of Imam Sayyid al-Sajidin
(A) to recite that lengthy prayer in a state of sustained ecstasy at one
time. Try to read one third or one fourth of it every night with
feeling, and meditate upon its words. You may feel ecstatic while
reading it. Apart from this, pay a little more attention to the meaning
of Quranic verses, and see what punishment has been prescribed for the
inhabitants of hell, to escape which they will pray to the Lord for
death, and alas death also will not help, as God Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَنْ تَقُولَ نَفْسٌ يَا حَسْرَتَا عَلَى مَا فَرَّطْتُ فِي جَنْبِ
اللَّهِ وَإِنْ كُنْتُ لَمِنْ السَّاخِرِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Alas, my grief that I was unmindful of Allah, and I was indeed among
the scoffers!*** (***39:56***)

What kind of regret it will be, of which Almighty is making an emphatic
mention. Do not pass quickly, without pausing and meditating upon such
verses of the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَوْمَ تَرَوْنَهَا تَذْهَلُ كُلُّ مُرْضِعَةٍ عَمَّا أَرْضَعَتْ
وَتَضَعُ كُلُّ ذَاتِ حَمْلٍ حَمْلَهَا وَتَرَى النَّاسَ سُكَارَى وَمَا
هُمْ بِسُكَارَى وَلَكِنَّ عَذَابَ اللَّهِ شَدِيدٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day when ye behold it, every nursing mother will forget her
nursling and every pregnant will be delivered of her burden, and thou***
(***Muhammad***) ***will see mankind as drunken, yet they will not be
drunken, but the Doom of Allah will be strong upon them.*** (***22:2***)

Here God Almighty is depicting the Doomsday. My friend, think yourself
that, God forbid (*na’udhu billah*)*,* the Quran is neither a story
book, nor is it making jokes with you. What sort of condemnation it will
be that will make people abandon their dear ones, and relieve pregnant
women of their burden? What a great calamity it will be about which God
Almighty, Whose greatness knows no extent, Whose supremacy and authority
has no limits and bounds, is commenting upon in such solemn terms. What
is going to happen God alone knows.

Our intellect is insufficient to measure the extent of its magnanimity.
If we study the transmissions and writings of the infallible Members of
the Holy Household, and think over them, we shall see that the sight of
misery and agony in that world will be quite different from this world,
and cannot be equated with the misfortunes of this world.

Here I would like to quote a tradition from the great Shaykh of the
Imamiyyah, al-Saduq, for you to demonstrate the meaning and extent of
the misery, mentioned above. Nevertheless, this tradition narrated by
him refers to the hell of the evil deeds and is comparatively a cooler
place than other severer hells. I consider it essential to point out
that al-Shaykh al-Saduq is the person who is held in great esteem and
respect by all great religious scholars of *rijal*. He was born as the
result of the prayer of the Imam (A), and was the object of great favor
of Imam Mahdi (AF), and was among great writers of Shiite religious
books.

I quote this tradition with reference to a chain of great Imamiyyah
scholars, all of whom are considered as authentic narrators of *hadith.*
Hence, if you are a true believer, you should have faith in the
following tradition. The gist of the *hadith* is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَوَى الصَّدُوقُ بِإِسْنَادِهِ عَنْ مَوْلانَا الصَّادِقِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ، قَالَ: بَيْنَا رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ، ذَاتَ يَوْمٍ قَاعِداً إِذْ أَتَاهُ جِبْرِيلُ، وَهُوَ كَئِيبٌ،
حَزِينٌ، مُتَغَيِّرُ اللَّوْنِ، فَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: يَا جِبْرِيلُ، مَا لِي أَرَاكَ كَئِيباً حَزِيناً؟
فَقَالَ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ، فَكَيْفَ لا أَكُونُ كَذَلِكَ وَإِنَّمَا
وُضِعَتْ مَنَافِيخُ جَهَنَّمَ اليَوْمَ. فَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ: وَمَا
مَنَافِيخُ جَهَنَّمَ يَا جِبْرِيلُ؟ فَقَالَ: إِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى
أَمَرَ بِالنَّارِ فَأَوْقَدَ عَلَيْهَا أَلْفَ عَامٍ، حَتَّى
احْمَرَّتْ. ثُمَّ أَمَرَ بِهَا فَأَوْقَدَ عَلَيْهَا أَلْفَ عَامٍ
حَتَّى ابْيَضَّتْ. ثُمَّ أَمَرَ فَأَوْقَدَ عَلَيْهَا أَلْفَ عَامٍ
حَتَّى اسْوَدَّتْ وَهِيَ سَوْدَاءُ مُظْلِمَةٌ، فَلَوْ أَنَّ حَلَقَةً
مِنَ السَّلْسَلَةِ الَّتِي طُولُهَا سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعاً وُضِعَتْ عَلَى
الدُّنْيَا لَذَابَتِ الدُّنْيَا مِنْ حَرِّهَا. وَلَوْ أَنَّ قَطْرَةً
مِنَ الزُّقُّومِ وَالضَّرِيعِ قَطَرَتْ فِي شَرَابِ أَهْلِ الدُّنْيَا
لَمَاتَ أَهْلُ الدُّنْيَا مِنْ نَتَنِهَا. قَالَ: فَبَكَى رَسُولُ
اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَبَكَى جِبْرَئِيلُ، عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ، فَبَعَثَ اللهُ إِلَيْهِمَا مَلَكاً فَقَالَ: إِنَّ
رَبَّكُمَا يُقْرِؤُكُمَا السَّلامَ وَيَقُولُ لَكُمَا إِنِّي قَدْ
أَمِنْتُكُمَا مِنْ أَنْ تُذْنِبَا ذَنْباً أُعَذِّبُكُما عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

One day the Prophet (S) of God was seated when Gabriel came into his
presence, with a sad face and changed complexion. The Prophet (S) asked
as to why he was looking so sad and grieved. Gabriel answered, ‘O
Muhammad (S), why should I be not grieved, while today I saw the bellows
of hell being set in. The Prophet (S) asked him what the bellows of hell
were. Gabriel told him that it referred to the hell-fire, which
according to the Commandments of God Almighty was ablaze for one
thousand years. After it became red hot He ordered it to burn for
another one thousand years till it was white-hot. Then He commanded it
to burn for one thousand years more till it turned black. Now that it
was black and dark, if a slice of seventy cubits of it was to drop on
this world, verily its heat would be sufficient to melt the whole world
into fluid. If a single drop of its Zaqqum (an infernal tree, mentioned
in the Quran proverbial for its extreme bitterness) and dari (something
in hell more bitter than aloe, more fetid than carrion, and hotter than
fire, which will be the food of the condemned) trickles down in the
water reservoirs of the earth, everybody therein would die due to its
stench. Thereupon the Prophet (S) wept and Gabriel also wept with him.
On seeing this, God sent His angel, who came to them and said that God
sent salaams to them along with the message that He exempted them both
from the committing of sins and the consequent punishments.

My friend, there are a number of *ahadith* in this regard. Existence of
hell and its horrible chastisements are among the essentials of all the
religions of the world, which bring forward many arguments in favor of
their necessity. And the great, mystics and saints have envisioned it
even in this world. Try to imagine sincerely and contemplate the
disheartening account of hell given in the tradition. If you consider it
as probable only, even then should it not be sufficient to drive us to
woods like the mad? What is the reason for our complacence and
ignorance? Have the angels of God given us the tidings of being exempted
from this punishment as they had given one to the Prophet (S) and
Gabriel?

Whereas the Prophet (S) and the friends of God could not be oblivious of
the fear of God till the ends of their lives. They could not eat and
sleep properly because of that fear. Look at the life of Imam ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn (A), whose weeping and moanings, lamentations and
supplications melted human hearts. What is wrong with us that we do not
feel ashamed? Even in our supplications to God, we so much violate and
insult Divine principles, that a thousand pities on our thoughtlessness!
Have pity on yourself and the extremity of the pangs of death. Again a
thousand pities on our condition in *Barzakh*, the agonies of the
Hereafter, and the Doomsday and its darkness! How pitiable are we who
have to face the horrors of hell and its chastisement!

How To Cure Moral Maladies
--------------------------

My friend! arise, awake from the slumber, be aware of your negligence
and make an effort till there is time to repent. Consider this
opportunity as valuable, until you are alive, your faculties and your
powers are still under control, and you are young. Think about a cure
before it is too late, and before moral maladies overpower your
existence, and evils take deep roots in your existence and take you in
the grips of their tentacles. Drive them away, find out a way of
extinguishing the fire of your sensuality and passion.

The best remedy prescribed by mystics and moralists is to concentrate
upon each one of the evil habits that you detect in yourself, and offer
an effective resistance against them. Fight bravely against your carnal
self. Act unceasingly all the time against those vicious yearnings. Pray
Almighty to assist you in this battle. Undoubtedly after sometime
hideous habits would leave you, and Satan and his legions would vacate
the fortress, and the battalions of heavenly armies would be installed
in their stead.

One of the moral maladies, which may destroy one, cause torment of the
grave, and plague man in this world, is the maltreatment of the people
of his household, his neighbors, his colleagues and others around him.
It is the product of passion and sensuality. If the mujahid is
determined on correcting himself, he can counter those impulses of
indignation, resentment and vituperation with gentleness and kindness,
remembering the Hereafter and the chastisements therein. He should curse
the Devil in his heart and take refuge in God.

I give you word that if you behave persistently like this, after some
time you will realize that your nature is totally transformed and good
habits have taken the place of the bad ones. But if you behave according
to the propensities of your nature, it is possible that they consume you
in this world itself. I seek refuge in God from the anger, which when
present in an individual destroys him in both the worlds. At the same
time it kills his spirit also, because possibly one may use some
indecent words against Divine principles in a fit of anger, as so many
times we hear people uttering words of heresy and being guilty of
apostasy thus.

Philosophers say that the chances of being saved in a ship without a
captain from the stormy waves of ocean are brighter than those of a man
being saved in an outburst of wild passion. God forbid, that we should
ever belong to that category of people who become aggressive during
academic discussions, as some of our students suffer from this
intemperance. You have to resist against this bad tendency. Act against
it, especially on the occasions of formal functions, which are attended
by a great number of scholars and common men.

During the discussions, if you see that the other party is justified in
its argument, you are expected to admit your fault and confirm what
opponents say. God willing, these meannesses will be eliminated in a
short time. God forbid, that the words of some scholars, who claimed to
be divinely inspired and said that it was revealed that the quarrel
among the inhabitants of hell, mentioned by God, is that of the scholars
and transmitters of *ahadith*, should ever be true. Even if you do not
believe in the authenticity of this tradition, even then you should
carefully try to get rid of this habit. See the following account:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُوِيَ عَنْ عِدَّةٍ مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا أَنَّهُمْ قَالُوا: خَرَجَ
عَلَيْنَا رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، يَوْماً
وَنَحْنُ نَتَمَارَى فِي شَيْءٍ مِنْ أَمْرِ الدِّينِ فَغَضِبَ غَضَباً
شَدِيداً وَقَالَ: إِنَّ المُمَارِي قَدْ تَمَّتْ خَسَارَتُهُ. ذَرُوا
المِرَاءَ فَإنَّ المُمَارِي لا أَشْفَعُ لَهُ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ.
ذَرُوا المِرَاءَ فَإنِّي زَعِيمٌ بِثَلاثِ أبْيَاتٍ فِي الجَنَّةِ؛ فِي
رِيَاضِهَا وَأَوْسَطِهَا وَأَعْلاهَا، لِمَنْ تَرَكَ المِرَاءَ وَهُوَ
صَادِقٌ. ذَرُوا المِرَاءَ، فَإِنَّ أَوَّلَ مَا نَهَانِي عَنْهُ رَبِّي،
بَعْدَ عِبَادَةِ الأَوْثَانِ، المِرَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَنْهُ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: مَِنْ لَقِيَ اللهَ، عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ، بِهِنَّ دَخَلَ الجَنَّةَ فِي أَيِّ بَابٍ شَاءَ: مَنْ حَسُنَ
خُلُقُهُ وَخَشِيَ اللهَ فِي المَغِيبِ وَالمَحْضَرِ وَتَرَكَ المِرَاءَ
وَإِنْ كَانَ مُحِقّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated from many companions of the Prophet (S) that once as the
Prophet (S) came to them they were engaged in wrangling over a religious
issue. The Prophet (S) of Islam was greatly displeased and was indignant
to this extent that they had never seen him before in such an anger. The
Prophet (S) told them it was because of this habit of wrangling that
their precursors were destroyed, and he added that a true believer would
never wrangle. The Prophet (S) asked them to stop wrangling and told
them that he would not act as an intercessor to any wrangler. Wrangling
occupies the second place after idolatry among the things forbidden by
God Almighty.

The Prophet (S) is reported to have also said that unless a believer
refrains from wrangling and altercation he cannot know the truth, in
spite of his position being correct.

There are various traditions in this regard. How abominable it will be
if we deprive ourselves of the intercession of the Prophet (S) for the
sake of merely a trivial thing, which has no value, no merit whatsoever.
Intellectual discussions, which would otherwise be the highest order of
service and worship if undertaken with sincere motives, end in such a
catastrophe and wipe out all his good deeds and acts of worship. In all
circumstances, man should focus his attention on each of his vices
individually, and eradicate them from the domain of his soul by
restraining his carnal self. Once the trespasser is driven out, the
rightful owner of the house can readily come to take possession.

Conclusion
----------

Since the struggle of the self concludes here and man succeeds in
driving off the legions of satanic armies from the empire of his soul,
this land becomes the abode of angels of God and a place of worship of
truthful servants of God. Thus, the task of pursuing the journey towards
God becomes easier, and the road to humanism is illuminated.

The doors of blessings from heaven and their ascending steps are opened
to him, and the doors of hell and the descending steps thereof are
closed on him. God Almighty views him with mercy and benevolence and
unites him with His faithful and His blessed servants. The path to
divine knowledge, which is the ultimate purpose of creation of mankind
and *jinn,* is opened to him. God Almighty guards him through this
hazardous path.

I wished to refer to the third stage of self (*nafs*)*,* wherein another
struggle against the deceptions and temptations of Satan takes place.
But, on later thought, this description seems to be out of place here,
so I left it undiscussed.


