Thirty-Seventh Hadith: The Knowledge Of God
===========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إِلى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ عَنْ عَلِيِّ
بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَمَّنْ ذَكَرَهُ عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
عِيسَى عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ حَمْرَانَ عَنِ الفَضْلِ بْنِ السَّكَنِ عَنْ
أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ أَمِيرُ
المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: إعْرِفُوا اللهَ بِاللهِ وَالرَّسُولَ
بِالرِّسَالَةِ وَأُولِي الأَمْرِ بِالأَمْرِ بِالمَعْرُوفِ وَالعَدْلِ
وَالإحْسَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With a continuous chain of authorities reaching up to Muhammad ibn
Ya’qub al-Kulayni, from ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, from someone who reported it,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa, from Muhammad ibn Humran, from al-Fadl
ibn al-Sakn, from Abu ‘Abd Allah (A) who said: The Commander of the
Faithful (A) said, “Know God through God, the Messenger through the
Messengership, and the wali al-amr by his commanding to what is right
(amr bil-ma’ruf), his justice and kindness.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

There is an evident difference between the terms *‘irfan* and ‘*ilm*,
recognition and knowledge. It is said that *‘ilm* (knowledge) in its
original sense specifically relates to the universals, and *ma’rifah*
(recognition, gnosis) is specific for that which relates to particulars
and persons. They say that an ‘*arif billah* (a gnostic of God) is
someone who knows God through direct witnessing (*mushahadah
huduriyyah*) and an *‘alim billah* is someone who attains the knowledge
of God through philosophical proofs.

Some say that *‘ilm* and *‘irfan* differ in two respects; first, in
respect of the related object (of cognition), as mentioned above, and
secondly, a prior state of forgetfulness is assumed in *ma’rifah.* Hence
when something becomes the object of cognition for the first time, one
is said to acquire its *‘ilm*, and when something was known and
forgotten to be known for a second time, one is said to obtain its
*ma’rifah.* And the *‘ari f* is called *‘arif* because of his
recollection of his existence and stages of life preceding his natural
and *mulki* existence, and some of the people of the path of wayfaring
claim to have remembered the world of *dharr.*[^2]

They say that if the veil of physical nature, which causes forgetfulness
and negligence, were to be removed from the wayfarer’s eyes, he would
recall the previous worlds through which he has passed. And someone from
among the people of spirituality (*dhawq*) would say that the reality of
the spiritual ascent (*mi’raj*) is the recollection of the past days.
When one tries to go back into the past to recall one’s earlier states,
each of us, in accordance with the difference among individuals, can
recollect things when he was seven, five, or three years old.

It is rare to find someone who has recollections from earlier years. It
is said of the Shaykh al-Ra’is (Ibn Sina) that he claimed to have
memories from the first moments of his birth. he would say that it was
possible for one to have recollections which go back to earlier times,
for instance, when one has been in one’s mother’s womb or in one’s
father’s loins, and remember all the developments that one has undergone
in the realm of *mulk*, going back to the previous realms until the
higher *malakut,* the realm of the *jabarut,* the higher *jabarut,*
culminating in the recollection of his state in Divine knowledge, and
this recollection is the reality of *mi’raj* and the ultimate height of
spiritual ascent. (Here end his words).

Although this matter may be true in itself, but interpreting the reality
of *mi’raj* as the regressive return into the past does not fit with.
the exquisite teaching of gnosis and the creed of the people of the
heart. Rather, the reality of spiritual ascent is the curvilinear
spiritual movement with which is completed the circle of existence,
culminating in the return to the reality of the *ghayb* of all that
which is in the chain of *shuhud.*

This takes place in the form of a curvilinear movement along all
ascending arc, whereas this regressive returning movement is contrary to
the Divine law (*sunnah*) active in the realm of being, especially in
respect of the prophets, particularly their Seal (S). This kind of
coursing is like the absorption in the love of the Essence of the
Glorious One of one kind of angels, who are bewildered and absorbed, and
totally oblivious of multiplicity, not knowing that any man or world has
been created.

The perfect gnostic Shaykh Shahabadi, may my spirit be his ransom, would
say that the spiritual state of Hadrat Adam, play peace be upon him, was
such that he was oblivious of his own physical nature (*mulk*) and was
totally absorbed in the world of *ghayb* and the realm of the Divine,
and this movement of Adam (A) negated his humanity (*adamiyyat*)*.* Then
God, the Exalted, gave Satan power over him in order to turn him towards
the tree of nature, to deflect him from the gravity of the *malakut*
towards the realm of *mulk.*

As to the phrase, والعدل والإحسان (justice and kindness), apparently
these two are in conjunction with الأمر بالمعروفِ commanding to what is
right) meaning: إعرفوهم بِالأَمْرِ بِالمَعْرُوفِ وَالعَدْلِ
وَالإحْسَانِ. Or it is probably a conjunct of the phrase إعرفوا الله
بالله meaning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إعرفوهم بِالأَمْرِ بِالمَعْرُوفِ وَالعَدْلِ وَالإحْسَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Meaning Of The Phrase ‘Know God By God’
-------------------------------------------

It should he known that eminent scholars have given different
explanations in expounding the phrase المعروف in the noble tradition,
each in accordance with the character of his scholarship and
philosophical approach. Here we will briefly mention some of their views
for the sake of benefiting from the *barzakah* of the speech of the
great ones.

First is that which has been stated by the Thiqat al-Islam Kulayni (R),
which, to put it briefly, is that God, the Exalted, has created the
bodies, the spirits, and the lights, and He is their sole creator,
without anyone sharing their creation with Him, nor is He is like any of
them. Hence whoever likens God to any of them, does not know God; but
should he negate God’s similarity to them he would he knowing God by God
(Here end his words).[^3] It is strange that Hadrat Sadr al-Muta’allihin
(Q) has imagined these words (of Kulayni) to he part of the tradition
and offered elaborate interpretations of it in accordance with his own
philosophical approach.[^4]

Second is the statement of Shaykh Saduq (R) whose gist is that knowing
God through God means that should we know God with our intellects, God,
the Exalted, is the one who has bestowed there; and should we know Him
through the prophets and God’s Proof, *hujaj* (A), then God has raised
them and made them His Proofs; and should we know Him through our souls,
God is their creator.[^5]

Third is that which has been indicated by Sadr al-Muta’allihin,
according to which the way to the *ma’rifah* of God is of two kinds. One
of them is through epiphany and direct gnosis, and the second is through
negation of His likeness to anything (*tanzih*) and assertion of Ibis
transcendence (*taqdis*). As the first way is not possible except for
the prophets and the perfect ones, the second path has been mentioned in
the tradition (here ends his statement).[^6] This interpretation of his
is based on his taking the statements of Shaykh Kulayni as part of the
noble tradition and as the exposition of the words of Hadrat Amir
al-Mu’minin by Hadrat Sadiq (A).

Fourth is the interpretation of the *muhaqqiq* Fayd (M). The gist of it
is that every being has an essence (*mahiyyah*) and an existence
(*wujud*)*.* The essences of things consist of their own particular
delimitations and their essential aspect, whereas their existence
consists of their Godward aspect, by virtue of which their entities
subsist and their effects, potency, and efficiency become manifest.

Hence if one were to take the essences of things into view and their
delimitations, and try to know God through their aspect of contingency
and their dependence on God, he would be knowing God by things not by
God. Moreover, this knowledge and gnosis is innate and not acquired. But
if one were to know God through the existential aspect of things, which
is their Godward aspect, he would be knowing God by God, and it is this
Godward aspect of things which is referred to in these noble verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَهُوَ مَعَكُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He is with you where you may be.*** (***57:4***)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلَّا وَجْهَهُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Everything is fated to perish save His Face.*** (***28:88***)

Fifth is the probability that has occurred to the mind of this author,
and that will be understood after an introduction relating to the
science of the Names and Attributes, which is as follows. There are
several considerations for the Sacred Essence of God, Almighty and
Exalted, each of which has been designated by a term.

One of them is the Essence when considered as such. In accordance with
this consideration, the Divine Essence is absolutely unknowable, beyond
any name or description, and beyond the reach of the aspirations of the
gnostics and the yearnings of the people of the heart and the *awliya’.*
At times it is expressed as the ‘inaccessible phoenix’ (*‘anqa
al-mughrib*) in the idiom of the gnostics:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عنقا شكار كسي نشود دام بازگير
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Take thy net away for none can ever catch the phoenix.*[^7]

and at times referred to as *‘ama’* or *‘amd:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُوِيَ أنَّهُ قِيلَ لِلنَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: أَيْنَ
كَانَ رَبُّكَ قَبْلَ أنْ يَخْلُقَ الخَلَقَ؟ قَالَ: فِي عَمَاءٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated that the Prophet (S) was asked, “Where was your
Lord before He created the creation!” He replied, “In an ama
(cloud).”[^8]

And at times, it is referred to as the ‘Occult of the Occult’ (*ghayb
al-ghuyub*) or the Absolute Occult (*ghayb al-mutlaq*) as well as with
other terms, although all such terms fail to express it. In accordance
with the gnostic approach and according to a kind of metaphysical proof,
the terms *‘anqa, ‘ama’* and other terms do not apply to this station.

Another consideration is that of the Essence at the plane of occult
conditioning (*ta’ayyun ghaybi*) and the non-existence of absolute
manifestation (*‘adam al-zuhur al-mutlaq*)*,* which is called the
station of *ahadiyyah* (unity at the plane of unity), and it is with
this station that most of those [aforementioned] terms are consistent.

At this station, the Names of Essence, in accordance with the
terminology of the adept in the Science of the Names, are considered,
such as the Absolute Inward (*Batin al-mutlaq*)*,* the Absolute First
(*Awwal al-mutlaq*)*,* the Most Exalted (*al-’Ali*)*,* and the Greatest
(*al-’Azim*)*,* as can be inferred from the tradition of *al-Kafi* that
the first Names that God assumed for Himself were *al-’Ali* and
*al-’Azim.*[^9]

Another of the considerations of the Essence is in accordance with the
station of *wahidiyyah* (unity at the plane of multiplicity) and the
inclusion of the Names and the Attributes. This station is referred to
by such terms as ‘the station of *wahidiyyah,’* ‘the all-inclusive
station of *ahadiyyah* of the Names’ (*ahadiyyat al-jam’ al-asma*) and
‘the inclusive inclusiveness’ (*jam’ al-* *jam’*)*,* and so on. This
station, in consideration of the inclusive *ahadiyyah* (*ahadiyyat
al-jam’*) is called the station of the Greatest Name (*ism al-a’zam*)
and the station of *Allah,* the All-inclusive Divine Name (*ism al-jami’
Allah*)*.*

Another consideration is that of the Essence at the plane of the Sacred
Emanation (*fayd al-muqaddas*) and the station of the manifestation of
the Names and the Attributes in the mirror of the Archetypes
(*a’yan*)*,* as the station of *wahidiyyah* is through manifestation of
the Most Sacred Emanation (*fayd al-aqdas*)*.* This station of
manifestation of Names is also called ‘the station of absolute
manifestation’ (*zuhur itlaqi*) and ‘the station of divinity’ (*maqam
al-uluhiyyah*) and ‘the station of *Allah’* in accordance with the
considerations relating to the Names and the Attributes, as explained by
this author in *Misbah al-hidayah.*[^10]

It should be known that these considerations, which exist in the
terminology of the gnostics and the people of the heart, are indicative
of the (hierarchic) scheme of manifestation (*tajalliyat*) of the Truth
as reflected in their clear hearts, and those *tajalliyat,* in
accordance with the stations and ranks of the wayfaring of the *awliya’*
and the stages and phases of the journey of Godward wayfarers, begin at
the plane of the manifestation (*zuhur*) of Names and Attributes, which,
as said, is also called the station of divinity or ‘the station of
*Allah’,* and the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***God is the Light of the heavens and the earth.*** (***24:35***)

is considered by them to refer to it. And they terminate at the plane of
the *ghayb* of *altadiyyah* and end at the plane of the Names of the
Essence (*asma’ dhatiyyah*) and the Exclusive Name (*ism musta’thar*)*,*
which is the ultimate goal and end of wayfaring. And it may be said that
the aforementioned plane is the one referred to in these words of God,
the Exalted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***A bow’s length away or nearer.*** (***53:9***)

Now, after this introduction, we say that as long as man seeks the Truth
and journeys towards God with the feet of thought and philosophical
argumentation, his wayfaring is rational and epistemic (*‘aqli
‘ilmi*)*,* and he is not one of the people of *ma’rifah* and gnosis.

Rather, his vision is obstructed by the greatest and the biggest of
veils, whether he seeks the Truth through viewing the essences
(*mahiyyat*) of things, which constitute the curtains of darkness, or he
seeks It through their existences, which constitute the curtains of
light, as indicated in the statements of *marhum* Fayd.

The first condition for the realization of wayfaring towards God is to
abandon the dark abode of the self and self-seeking. In the same way as,
in external and sensible journeying, as long as one remains in one’s
house and dwelling, one’s journey is not actualized no matter however
one may imagine oneself to be traveling and regard oneself as a
traveler, in the *Shari’ah*, too, one is not considered a traveler
without leaving one’s home and hometown and traversing a distance from
where the traces of one’s town become invisible.

Similarly, the gnostic journey towards God and the spiritual migration
does not take place without leaving the dark house of the self and the
disappearance, of its traces. So long as the walls of particularity are
visible and the inviting call (*adhan*) of multiplicity can be heard,
one is not a traveler, though one may imagine oneself to be in journey
and claim to be wayfaring. God, the Exalted, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَنْ يَخْرُجْ مِنْ بَيْتِهِ مُهَاجِرًا إِلَى اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ
ثُمَّ يُدْرِكْهُ الْمَوْتُ فَقَدْ وَقَعَ أَجْرُهُ عَلَى اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever leaves his home as an emigrant towards God and His Messenger,
then depth overtakes him, his reward has indeed fallen on God.***
(***4:100***)

After that the Godward wayfarer leaves his house with the feet of
spiritual exercise (*riyadah*) and complete Godwariness (*taqwa*)*,*
without taking along with him the burden of attachments and
particularity, and the Godward journey is realized, the first
manifestation (*tajalli*) of the Exalted Truth that appears in his
sacred heart is the manifestation at the plane of Divinity and the plane
of manifestation (*zuhur*) of the Names and Attributes.

This *tajalli* is also in a graded order, from the partial to the
inclusive Names, in accordance with the strength and weakness of the
wayfarer’s heart and his wayfaring-whose details cannot be contained in
this brief discourse.-until it culminates in the detachment from all
finite expressions (*ta’yyunat*) of the world of existence, whether
pertaining to himself or others, which in the subsequent stages and
phases also derive from the self. And after absolute detachment, there
occurs the *tajalli* at the station of Divinity and the station of
Allah, which is the station of *ahadiyyah* of inclusion of all
manifesting Names, and here the wayfarer attains to the preliminary and
lower degree of [gnosis represented by the phrase] إعْرِفُوا اللهَ
بِاللهِ (Know God by God).

At the outset of the gnostic’s attainment to this station and stage, he
becomes annihilated (*fani*) in that *tajalli,* and if eternal grace
were to embrace him, he obtains a recovery (*uns*) and the toil and
forlornness of the journey is cast away. He returns to himself, and not
being content with this station starts on the journey with the feet of
love. In this journey, the love of the Truth is the origin and end of
wayfaring, as well as the journey itself.

He walks in the lights of the *tajalliyat* and hears the call of ‘Come
on!’ (*taqaddam*)*,*[^11] until, at the station of wahidiyyah, the Names
and Attributes shine on his heart in a graded order until there
manifests the station of inclusive *ahadiyyah* and the station of the
Greatest Name, which is the Name ‘Allah’ and at this stage the words
إعْرِفُوا اللهَ بِاللهِ are fulfilled at an exalted plane. And after
this there is another station which is now beyond our present purpose.

In accordance with what has been mentioned, the station of the knowledge
of the Messenger by Messengership and of [the knowledge of] the *Uli*
*al-amr by amr bil-maruf, ‘adl* and *ihsan,* has a subtle gnostic
explanation which requires an elaborate discussion of the stations of
Messengership (*risalah*) and sainthood (*wilayah*)*,* though it is
outside the scope of these pages, having been treated in the
aforementioned treatise (*Misbah al-hidayah*)*.*

Traditions Dealing With The Higher Teachings Should Not Be Interpreted In A Plebeian Sense
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It should not be imagined that these expositions of ours of the noble
tradition on the basis of the approach of the gnostics are meant to
confine the meaning of the tradition to them, or that they are
conjectures about the realm of the occult or interpretation based on
subjective opinion. ‘The purpose, rather, is to dispel the notion that
the meanings of traditions relating to the *ma’arif* (the higher
teachings) are limited to common plebeian meanings.

Those who are familiar with the style of speech of the Imams (A) know
that the traditions relating to the *ma’arif* and sacred doctrine do not
correspond to ordinary plebeian understanding of these teachings and
that they contain the most subtle of philosophical conceptions and the
most profound teachings of gnosis. Anyone who refers to the *Usul
al-Kafi* or the *Tawhid* of Shaykh Saduq (M) will confirm this matter.
And this does not preclude the point that these Imams of the gnostics
and knowers of God should have made their noble statements in such a
comprehensive manner that every group profits from them in accordance
with it own creed and approach, and none of then has a right to confine
their meanings to what they have understood from them. For instance,
this noble tradition can be given a common-sense interpretation in
accordance with ordinary language and literal meanings.

For example the statement إعْرِفُوا اللهَ بِاللهِ can be said to mean
that one should know God through the effects of His craftsmanship and
their perfect design, which are the works of the Divine. Similarly, it
may be said, the Messenger is to be known through his Messengership and
the consummate effects of his call. The Uli al-amr is to be known by the
quality of his actions, such as commanding to what is right and his
implementing justice. Hence each of them is to be known through his
effects.

This does not preclude that the tradition should have a subtler meaning
which may be said to be its inward sense (*batn*), and beyond this
meaning there might be another subtler layer of meaning which may be
referred to as the inward of the inward (*batn al-batn*). In fine, one
should not liken the speech of the awliya’ to the likes of oneself, in
the same way as it is wrong and improper to compare oneself to them, and
we cannot elaborate here this point which has been stated concisely
here.

An amazing thing is what certain persons say by the way of objection and
challenge, that the statements of the Imams of guidance (A) were made
for the guidance of the people and that they should be in accordance
with the understanding of the common people, and beyond that nothing
that has any profound philosophical or gnostic meaning should emerge
from them. This is an atrocious and a most ugly slander whose cause, in
addition to some other matters, is a lack of reflection on the
traditions of the Prophetic Household (A) and neglect of their close
study.

Strange! If the prophets and the *awliya’* do not teach the people the
subtleties of *tawhid* and the higher teachings, then who is to do that?
Is it the case that there are no subtleties involved in *tawhid* and the
other teachings and that all people are equal in respect of their
understanding of the *ma’arif?* Is the understanding of the Commander of
the Faithful (A) the is same as ours and that it consists of the
ordinary plebeian notions? Or is it the case that it is different, but
it is not necessary, or even desirable, to teach them to others? Or is
it that it is neither necessary nor desirable, and that the Imams (A)
did not give them any importance? Did they, who did not ignore or omit
even the details of the etiquette and manners of sleeping, dining, and
going to the toilet, have neglected the Divine teachings, which are the
ultimate aspiration of the *awliya*’?

What is more amazing is that some of these same people who deny this
matter resort to such hairsplitting discussions on traditions relating
to *fiqh* tradition wherein common usage and understanding are
definitely the criterion of meaning and interpretation-that even Reason
itself is incapable of understanding them, to say nothing of
commonsense, and yet they subscribe to the spontaneity of normal usage!

Whoever has any doubt in this regard should refer to the discussions
[mentioned in the works of *fiqh*] relating to the topic of *‘ala
al-yad* and similar general juristic rules, especially those which
pertain to transactions (*mu’amalat*)?[^12] This was a digression from
the topic and an act of defiance of the pen. And God, the Blessed and
Exalted, is witness that this author has in view no purpose by this
discourse other than to familiarize his brothers-in-faith with the
Divine teachings.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَسْتَغْفِرُ اللهَ مِنَ الزَّلَلِ وَالفَشَلِ وَالكَسَلِ. وَالحَمْدُ
للهِ أَوَّلاً وَآخِراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I beseech God’s forgiveness from lapses and front lethargy and laziness,
and all praise is God’s, firstly and lastly.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi, i, 4, “kitab al-tawhid,” “bab annahu la yu’arafu
illa bih,” hadith 1.

[^2]: This is referred to in the following Qur’anic verse: And when thy
Lord took from the Children of Adam, from their backs, their .seed
(dhurriyyah), and made them testify touching themselves, ‘Am I not your
Lord?’ They said, ‘Yes, we testify-[this], lest you should say on the
Day of Resurrection, ‘As for us, we were unaware of this.’ (7:172)

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi, i, 85, “kitab al-tawhid;” “bab annalhu la yurafu
illa bih,” under hadith 1.

[^4]: Sharh Usul al-Kafi, pp. 233-234.

[^5]: Tawhid, p. 290 bab 41.

[^6]: Sharh Usul al-Kafi, pp. 233-234.

[^7]: Hafiz: عنقا شكار كسي نشود دام بازگير كانجا هميشه باد به دست است
دام را

[^8]: ‘Awali al-li’ali, i, 54; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, iv, 12, with a
small difference of wording.

[^9]: This is a reference to the following tradition of Usul al-Kafi, i,
113, “kitab al-tawhid,” “bab huduth al-asma’,” hadith 2: عَنِ ابْنِ
سِنَانٍ قَالَ: سَأَلْتُ أَبَا الحَسَنِ الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: هَلْ
كَانَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَارِفاً بِنَفْسِهِ قَبْلَ أنْ يَخْلُقَ
الخَلَقَ؟ قَالَ: نَعَمْ. قُلْتُ: يَرَاهَا وَيَسْمَعُهَا؟ قَالَ: مَا
كَانَ مُحْتَاجاً إلَى ذَلِكَ لأَنَّهُ لَمْ يَكُنْ يَسْأَلُهَا وَلا
يَطْلُبُ مِنْهَا. هُوَ نَفْسُهُ وَنَفْسُهُ هُوَ. قُدْرَتُهُ نَافِذَةٌ
فَلَيْسَ يَحْتَاجُ أنْ يُسَمِّيَ نَفْسَهُ، وَلَكِنَّهُ اخْتَارَ
لِنَفْسِهِ أَسْمَاءً لِغَيْرِهِ يَدْعُوهُ بِهَا لأَنَّهُ إذَا لَمْ
يُدْعَ بِاسْمِهِ لَمْ يُعْرَفْ. فَأَوَّلُ مَا اخْتَارَ لِنَفْسِهِ:
العَلِيَّ العَظِيمَ، لأَنَّهُ أَعْلَى الأَشْيَاءِ كُلِّهَا. فَمَعْنَاهُ:
اللهُ، وَاسْمُهُ: العَلِيُّ العَظِيمُ، هُوَ أَوَّلُ أَسْمَائِهِ؛ عَلا
عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ. It is narrated on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Sinan that he said, “I asked Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (A), ‘Did God,
Almighty and Exalted, know Himself before He created the creation?’
‘Yes,’ he replied. I said, ‘Did He see it and hear it?’ He said, “He had
no need for that, for He neither required anything of it nor sought from
it. He was His Self and His Self was He. His power was all-pervasive, so
He had no need to name Himself. But He chose for Himself Names for
others to call Him by their means, for if He were not called by His Name
He would not have been known. So the first that He chose for Himself
was: ‘The Most Exalted, the Greatest’ (al-Ali al ‘Azim), for He is
exalted above all things. Its meaning is Allah and His name is al-’Ali
al-’Azim. It is the first of His names, exalted is He above everything.”

[^10]: Misbah al-hidayah ila al-khilafah wa al-wilayah, pp. 33-38.

[^11]: “Taqaddam,” said by, God to the Prophet during his cosmic
journey, the mi’raj.

[^12]: This is a reference to a well-known fiqhi rule which states:
عَلَى اليَدِ مَا أَخَذَتْ حَتَّى تُؤَدِّيَهُ.


