Thirty-Eighth Hadith: The Meaning Of God’s Creation Of Adam In His Image
========================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى الشَّيْخِ الجَلِيلِ عِمَادِ الإسْلامِ
مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ الكُلَيْنِي، رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ، عَنْ
عِدَّةٍ مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ خَالِدٍ
عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنْ عَبْدِاللهِ بْنِ بَحْرٍ عَنْ أَبِي أَيُّوبَ
الخَزَّازِ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ مُسْلِمٍ قَالَ: سَأَلْتُ أبَا جَعْفَرٍ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ عَمَّا يَرْوُونَ أنَّ اللهَ خَلَقَ آدَمَ عَلَى
صُورَتِهِ، فَقَالَ: هِيَ صُورَةٌ مُحْدَثَةٌ مَخْلُوقَةٌ. وَاصْطَفَاهَا
اللهُ وَاخْتَارَهَا عَلَى سَائِرِ الصُّوَرِ المُخْتَلِفَةِ،
فَأَضَافَهَا إلَى نَفْسِهِ كَمَا أَضَافَ الكَعْبَةَ إلَى نَفْسِهِ
وَالرُّوحَ إلَى نَفْسِهِ فَقَالَ: ﴿بَيْتِي﴾ ﴿وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ
رُوحِي.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my chain of authorities reaching up to the august shaykh, the
Pillar of Islam, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from a group of our
Companions, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, from his father, from
‘Abd Allah ibn Bahr, from Abu Ayyub al-Khazzaz, from Muhammad ibn
Muslim, who said: I asked Abu Ja’far (A) concerning that which is
narrated, that God created Adam (A) in His form (surah literally, form,
image). He replied, “It is a form that was originated and created. He
elected it and chose it over all the other different forms and
attributed it to Himself, in the same way that He has attributed the
Ka’bah and the Spirit (ruh) to Himself, saying: ‘My House (2:125,
22:26),’ and ‘I breathed into Him of My Spirit. (15:29, 38:72)’[^1]

Exposition
----------

The tradition mentioned in the first part of this noble tradition was
one which has been well-known all along since the times of the Imams (A)
to our own times, and its has been continually cited in the books of the
Shi’ah and the Ahl al-*Sunnah*. Hadrat Baqir (A) has confirmed the
authenticity of its origin while explaining its meaning.

However, there is a tradition reported by Shaykh Saduq in *‘Uyun akhbar
al-Rida* with his chain of authorities from the Eighth of the Imams (A)
whose meaning is as follows:

Husayn ibn Khalid says, “I said to Hadrat Rida (A), ‘O Son of the
Messenger of God, the people narrate that the Messenger of God (A) said,
“God created Adam in His own image.” ‘The Imam said, ‘God damn them!
They have omitted the first part of the tradition. The Messenger of God
(S) passed by two men who were abusing each other. The Prophet heard one
of them say to his companion, “May God disfigure your face and of
everyone who looks like you!” Thereat the Messenger of God (S) said, “O
servant of God! Don’t say that to your brother, for God, Almighty and
Glorious, created Adam in his (His) image.”‘[^2]

On this basis, *marhum* Majlisi has ascribed the tradition of Imam Baqir
(A) to *taqiyyah* (dissemblance), and he has also suggested the
probability that this statement of the Imam might be based on the
presumption of acceptance [of the authenticity or the apparent import of
the tradition][^3] Such a probability is very remote. That which is
probable is that the tradition of Hadrat Rida (A) refers to the first
tradition, where the meaning of “Adam” in the last part of the tradition
where it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ خَلَقَ آدَمَ عَلَى صُورَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, God created Adam in His image.

may be that of the human species and the pronoun in على صورته refers to
God, the Exalted. And Hadrat Rida (A) considering that the narrator was
incapable of understanding the meaning of the *hadith*, related the
opening part of the tradition so that that person may imagine that
‘Adam’- means the father of the human race, with the pronoun in على
صورته referring to that man; so take note.

And perhaps both the traditions are genuine in their origin and import,
and the Messenger of God (S) might have stated the noble tradition
without any previous background-and that is the tradition whose
explanation is given by Hadrat Baqir (A) and, on another occasion, he
might have made the statement with that background and Imam Rida (A)
diverted the discussion to the other *hadith* with a background due to
the incapacity of the narrator in understanding its meaning. An evidence
that supports this suggestion is that in some traditions there occur the
word: على صورة الرحمان (in the image of the All-beneficent)[^4] instead
of على صورته and This is not consistent with the tradition of the
*‘Uyun*.

Moreover, even if it be assumed that this noble tradition is not
authentic (in its import), its meaning is implicit in the noble
traditions, as will be explained, God willing. Now we shall turn to
explaining the meanings of the words of the noble tradition.

As to the word *‘Adam,’* the *Sihah* states, “Originally it is with two
*hamzah’s,* for it pertains to the form *af’al,* and the second *hamzah*
has been altered into an *alif,* and when it is to be given a vowel
sound it is changed into *waw,* whereat its plural is *awadim.”*

The reason that Adam, the father of the human race (*abu al-bashar*) wag
given this name is perhaps because he was had a brown complexion (*asmar
al-lawn*)*,* as according to the lexicons *al-adama min al-nas* means
someone who is brownish (*al-asmar*)*.* And according to some traditions
Adam was named so because he came from the *adim* of the earth[^5]
*adim* being in the sense of ‘face’ and adim al-ard means the surface of
the earth.

As to the expression *‘ala Suratih, Surah* in the lexicon is in the
sense of picture and form, and it may be said that it has a general
meaning common to different notions in which the commonality consists of
the thingness of a thing and its actuality (*fi’liyyat*)*.* However,
everything has an actuality in respect of which it is said to possess a
form (*dhu al-Surah*) and that actuality is called form (*Surah*)*.*

The application of the term ‘form’ in the terminology of the
philosophers to matters that are inclusive of a thing’s actuality and
thingness is not contrary to its lexical meaning, and is not a technical
or special term. Shaykh Abu ‘Ali Sina, the chief of the Islamic
philosophers, in the part on metaphysics of his book *al-Shifa’,* says,
“At times *Surah* is applied to any configuration and act that is in a
single or composite recipient so that its movements and accidents are
called *surah. Surah* (form) is also applied to something by virtue of
which matter is sustained in actuality; hence, the intellectual
substances (*jawahir ‘aqliyyah*) and accidents cannot be called *suwar*
(forms).

And *surah* is applied to something by means of which matter becomes
perfect, though it should not be sustained by it in actuality, such as
health and that towards which a thing moves by its own nature
(*tab’*)*.* Also, *surah* is applied to the species (*naw’*)*,* genus,
and differentia of a thing, or to all of them. And the universality of
the universal in the particulars is also *surah.”*

Reflection on all the instances of the usage of *surah* shows that in
all of them the criterion is actuality and it is used univocally in all
the cases of its use, to the extent that even God, the Exalted, is
called *surat al-suwar* (the actuality of all actualities).

As to the word *istafaha, safwah* means something pure and purged from
impurity (*kudurat*) and *istifa’* has the sense of taking that which is
clear and pure (*safi*) and is implied in its meaning. However, Jawhari
and others have considered it to mean *ikhtiyar* (choosing), and so they
have also considered *ikhtiyar* to mean *isitifa’* in the lexicons. This
is, however, an explanation in terms of that which is implied, as
*ikhtiyar* also means taking that which is good (*khayr*) and
meritorious, and in this respect coincides with *istifa’* in external
reality, though it is not synonymous with it.

As to the word *al-Ka’bah,* it is the name of the House of the God. Some
have said that it has been called Ka’bah due to its resemblance to a
cube (*muka’ab*) or due to its square shape,[^6] and *muka’ab* in the
terminology of mathematicians is a body with six equal planes
perpendicular to one another.

As to the word *al-ruh,* in the terminology of men of traditional
medicine *ruh* (spirit) is described as “a subtle vapor formed in an
animal’s heart due to the heat of the blood.” They state that “the heart
has two sides. One of them is on the right, wherein blood is drawn from
the lever and there it releases a vapor due to the heart’s heat: Those
vapors flow through the left side of the heart becoming refined there
due to the actions of the heart, and from it the animal spirit is
constituted.”

Then it flows through the blood vessels due to the expansion and
contraction of the heart, in the manner mentioned in the related works.
Thus, the source of this animal spirit is the heart and its channels are
the blood vessels. At times the term spirit (*ruh*) is applied to the
blood centered in the lever, and its channels are the jugular veins, and
that is called the ‘natural spirit’ (*ruh al-tabi’i*). So also, in the
terminology of the philosophers ‘spirit’ is often applied to the psychic
spirit (*ruh al-nafsani*)*,* which originates in the brain and its
channel are the nerves, and that is a manifestation and lower form of
the immaterial spirit pertaining to [the realm of Divine] command
(*amr*)*,* which is a Divine mystery (*sir al-subhani*) and the ‘spirit
of God’ (*ruhullah*)*,* referred to in His words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And I breathed into him*** (***i.e. Adam***) ***of My spirit.***[^7]

Hereafter, God willing, we will explain that this spirit is the one
breathed by the Divine breath and that it is that which is the chosen
and elect (*mustafa wa mukhtar*) of the Real, Glorious and Exalted.

Adam Is The Complete Manifestation Of God And The Greatest Name Of God
----------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that the people of gnosis (*ma’rifah*) and the
companions of the heart say that for each of the Divine Names there is a
Form (*farah*) at the plane of *wahidiyyah,* which is subject to the
*tajalli* (revelation) pertaining to the Most Sacred Effusion (*al-fayd
al-aqdas*) at the plane of Divine knowledge (*hadrat al-‘ilmiyyah*)*,*
by virtue of the Divine Self-love and seeking the Keys of the Hidden,
which no one knows except Him.[^8]

And that Form is called the preexisting essence (*‘ayn al-thabit*) in
the terminology of the People of God (*ahl Allah*)*.* And with this
*tajalli,* by virtue of the Most Sacred Effusion are realized, first,
the *ta’ayyunat* (determinations) of the Names, and, by virtue of this
very *ta’yyun* of the Names are realized the Forms of the Names, which
are the essences (*a’yan al-thabitah*)*.*

The first Name manifested with the *tajaili* of *ahadiyyah* and the Most
Sacred Effusion at the epistemic plane of *wahidiyyah* (*hadrat
al-‘ilmiyyah-ye wahidiyyah*) and which becomes the mirror of that
*tajalli,* is the Greatest All-inclusive Divine Name (*ism al-a’zam
al-jami’ al-ilahi*) and the station of the named of ‘Allah,’ which, from
the aspect of the Hidden, is the very *tajalli* through the Most Sacred
Effusion, and in the *tajalli* of manifestation of perfect clarity and
luminosity is the same as the all-inclusive station of *wahidiyyah* from
one viewpoint, and the plurality of Names from another viewpoint. The
*ta’ayyun* of the all-inclusive Name and its Form consists of the
essence of the Perfect Man and the Muhammadan Reality, *haqiqat
al-Muhammadiyyah* (S).

Hence the Sacred Effusion is the manifestation of the objectifying
*tajalli* of the Most Sacred Effusion, and the station of Divinity is
the manifestation of the *tajalli* of the station of *wahidiyyah,* and
the Greatest Spirit (*ruh al-azam*) is the manifestation of the
*tajalli* of the ideal essence of the Perfect Man, and all other
existents pertaining to the Names, Knowledge and objective reality are
the universal and particular manifestations of these realities and
subtleties, in accordance with an exquisite explanation that cannot be
contained in this brief discourse and whose details we have mentioned in
the treatise *Misbah al-hidayah.*[^9]

From here, it is known that the Perfect Man is the manifestation of the
all-inclusive Name and the mirror of *tajalli* of the Greatest Name, and
to this matter these are many references in the Qur’an and *Sunnah*.
God, Exalted, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَعَلَّمَ آدَمَ الْأَسْمَاءَ كُلَّهَا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He taught Adam the Names, all of them.*** (***2:31***)

This Divine instruction took place in respect to the inmost being of
Adam through his Hidden, all-inclusive fashioning with the Hands of
Beauty and Majesty (*jamal wa jalal*) at the plane of *wahidiyyah.*
Similarly, the fashioning of his form and appearance in the visible
world (*‘alam al-shahadat*) took place through the manifestation of the
Hands of Majesty and Beauty in the mirror of physical nature
(*tabi’at*)*.* And God, the Exalted, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا عَرَضْنَا الْأَمَانَةَ عَلَى السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ…﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We offered the Trust to the heavens and the earth***. (***33:72***)

and the ‘Trust’ (*amanah*) in the creed of the gnostics is the absolute
*wilayah,* of which no being except man is worthy. This absolute
*wilayah* is the same as the station of Sacred Effusion to which
reference is made in the Noble Scripture in His statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلَّا وَجْهَهُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Everything is fated to perish save His Face.*** (***28:88***)

And in a tradition of the noble *al-Kafi,* Imam Muhammad Baqir (A) is
cited as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ وَجْهُ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We are the face of God.[^10]

And it is mentioned is the *Du’a al-nudbah:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْنَ وَجْهُ اللهِ الَّذِي إلَيْهِ يَتَوَجَّهُ الأَوْلِيَاءُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Where is the Face of God towards which the friends of God turn?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْنَ السَّبَبُ المُتَّصِلُ بَيْنَ الأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاءِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Where is the link that connects the Earth’s people with the Heaven?[^11]

And in the *Ziyarat al-jami’ah* they are referred to as theوالمَثَلُ
الأعلى, (the highest similitude, or metaphor).” This similitude and the
attribute of being the Face is the same as the image (*surah*) mentioned
in this Noble tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ خَلَقَ آدَمَ عَلَى صُورَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed, God created Adam in His image.[^12]

That is, Adam is the highest similitude (*al-mathal al-a’la*) of God,
His greatest sign, and the most complete manifestation and mirror of the
*tajalliyat* of the Names and the Attributes, the Face of God (*wajh
Allah*)*,* the Eye of God (*‘ayn Allah*)*,* the Hand of God (*yad
Allah*) and the side or proximity of God (*janb Allah*).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ يَسْمَعُ وَيُبْصِرُ وَيَبْطِشُ بِاللهِ؛ وَاللهُ يُبْصِرُ
وَيَسْمَعُ وَيَبْطِشُ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He hears, sees, and holds by God, and God sees, hears and holds by
him.[^13]

This *wajh Allah* is the same ‘Light’ mentioned in the noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***God is the Light of the heavens and the earth.*** (***24:35***)

And Imam Baqir (A) said to Abu Khalid Kabuli in a tradition of the noble
*Kafi:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمْ (أيْ الأَئِمَّةَ) وَاللهِ نُورُ اللهِ الَّذِي أَنْزَلَ، وَهُمْ
وَاللهِ نُورُ اللهِ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

They (i.e. the Imams) are, by God, the Light that He has sent down
(64:8; 61:8;

39:69)*,* and they, by God, are the Light of God in the heavens and the
earth (24:36).[^14]

And the noble *Kafi* narrates a tradition of Imam Baqir—may my soul be
sacrificed for the dust of his feet that while expounding the noble
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿عَمَّ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ. عَنْ النَّبَإِ الْعَظِيمِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Of what do they question? Of the great tiding?*** (***78:1-2***)

he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هِيَ فِي أَمِيرِ المُؤْمِنِينَ. كَانَ أَمِيرُ المُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: مَا للهِ تَعَالَى آيَةٌ هِيَ أَكْبَرُ مِنِّي وَلا
للهِ مِنْ نَبَإٍ أَعْظَمُ مِنِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It refers to the Commander of the Faithful (‘Ali). And the Commander of
the Faithful (A) used to say: “There isn’t a greater sign of God than
me, and there isn’t a greater tiding of God than me![^15]

Hence, the Perfect Man, one of whose instances is Adam, the father of
Men, is the greatest sign, manifestation, Name and Attribute of the
Real, and he is the metaphor and sign of God, the Exalted. God, the
Blessed and the Exalted, is above having a like (*mithl*) and a peer,
but one should not negate the existence of a metaphor for His sacred
Essence, as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَهُ المَثَلُ الأَعْلَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And to Him belongs the highest metaphor*** (***mathal***)***.***[^16]

All the particles of the realm of being are the signs and mirrors of the
revelations (*tajalliyat*) of the Beauty of the Beautiful One, Almighty
and Exalted, though each one of them is such only to the extent of it
existential capacity. But none of them is the sign of the greatest
all-inclusive Name, that is, ‘Allah,’ except the all-inclusive being
(*kawn al-jami’*) and the sacred station of the greatest mediation
(*maqam al-muqaddas al-barzakhiyyat al-kubra*)*,* glorious is his
greatness with the Greatness of his Maker (جَلَّتْ عَظَمَتُهُ بِعَظَمَةِ
بَارِيهِ.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاللهُ تَعَالَى خَلَقَ الإنْسَانَ الكَامِلَ وَالآدَمَ الأوَّلَ عَلى
صُورَتِهِ الجَامِعَةِ وَجَعَلهُ مِرْآةَ أسْمائِهِ وَصِفَاتِهِ. قَالَ
الشَّيخُ الكَبيرُ: فَظَهرَ جَميعُ ما في الصُّورةِ الإلهِيَّةِ مِن
الأسماءِ في هذِهِ النَّشأةِ الإنسانيَّةِ، فَحازَتْ رُتبةَ الإحاطَةِ
وَالجَمعِ بِهذا الوُجودِ وبهِ قَامَتِ الحُجَّةُ للهِ على المَلائكَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hence, God, the Exalted, created the Perfect Man and the First Man in
His all-inclusive Image, and He made him the mirror of His Names and
Attributes. The Great Shaykh (Muhyi al-Din Ibn ‘Arabi) has said, “Hence
all that which was in the Divine Form of the Names was manifested in
this human existent, and so it acquired the station of all-inclusiveness
(al-ihatah wa al-jam’) with this existence and with it was established
God’s argument against the angels:’

From this discussion is known the reason for God’s choosing and electing
the all-inclusive human form from among the various forms of other
entities, and the secret of God’s giving precedence to Adam (A) over the
angels and His giving him a dignity over all other existents and His
attributing his spirit to Himself, in the Noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And I breathed into him*** (***i.e. Adam***) ***of My spirit.***
(***15:29, 38:72***)

As our intent in these pages is observance of brevity, we shall refrain
from explaining the reality of the Divine breath and its character in
Adam, and His singling him out for it from among all the existents. And
all Praise belongs to God, firstly and lastly.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالحَمْدُ للهِ أَوَّلاً وَآخِراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi i, 134 “kitab al-tawhid,” “bab al-ruh,”
hadith 4.

[^2]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Uyun akhbar al-Rida, i, 119, bab 11, hadith
12. The text of the tradition is as follows: عَنِ الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ
خَالِدٍ قَالَ: قُلْتُ لِلرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: يَا بْنَ رَسُولِ
اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: إنَّ النَّاسَ يَرْوُونَ أَنَّ
رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ قَالَ: (إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ خَلَقَ آدَمَ عَلَى صُورَتِهِ.) فَقَالَ: قَاتَلَهُمُ اللهُ!
لَقَدْ حَذَفُوا أَوَّلَ الحَدِيثِ: إنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ مَرَّ بِرَجُلَيْنِ يَتَسَابَّانِ، فَسَمِعَ أحَدَهُمَا
يَقُولُ لِصَاحِبِهِ: قَبَّحَ اللهُ وَجْهَكَ وَوَجْهَ مَنْ يُشْبِهُكَ.
فَقَالَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لَهُ: يَا عَبْدَ اللهِ، لا تَقُلْ
هَذَا لأَخِيكَ فَإنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ خَلَقَ آدَمَ عَلَى صُورَتِهِ.

[^3]: Al-Majlisi, Mirat al-’uqul, ii, 84, “kitab al-tawhid,” bab al-ruh,
hadith 4.

[^4]: Sadr al-Muta’allihin, Tafsir al-Qur’an al-Karim, ii, 235; Ibn
‘Arabi, Futuhat al-Makkiyyah, ed.’Uthman Yahya, i, 78.

[^5]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Ilal al-sharayi’, i, 26. The text of the
tradition is as follows: عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
قَالَ: إنَّمَا سُمِّيَ آدَمُ آدَمَ لأَنَّهُ خُلِقَ مِنْ أَدِيمِ
الأَرْضِ.

[^6]: Al-Tabrisi, Majma’ al-bayan, exegesis of 5:97; Qamus al-lughah,
under k-’-b, Ka’bah.

[^7]: 15:29, 38:72.

[^8]: A reference to verse 6:59. ﴿وَعِنْدَهُ مَفَاتِحُ الْغَيْبِ لَا
يَعْلَمُهَا إِلَّا هُوَ.﴾ And with Him are the keys of the Unseen, none
knows them but He. (6:59)

[^9]: Imam Khumayni, Misbah al-hidayah ila al-khilafah wa al-wilayah,
pp. 28-42, 54-56.

[^10]: Al-Saduq, Kitab al-tawhid, 150.

[^11]: Zad al-ma’ad, bab 11, p. 399; Mafatih al-janan, 537.

[^12]: Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, Man la yahduruh al-faqih, ii, 370, “bab
al-ziyarat al-jami’ah;” ‘Uyun akhbar al Rida, bab 68, hadith 1.

[^13]: Usul al-Kafi, “kitab al-iman wa al-kufr,” “bab man adha
al-muslimin,” hadith 7.

[^14]: Usul al-Kafi, i, 194, “kitab al-hujjah,” “bab anna al-a’immah nur
Allah,” hadith 1.

[^15]: Usul al-Kafi, i, 207, “kitab al-hujjah,” “bab anna al-ayat
al-lati dhakaraha Allahu fi kitabih…” hadith 3.

[^16]: 30:27


