Thirty-Ninth Hadith: Good And Evil
==================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلَى رُكْنِ الإسْلامِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ
الكُلَيْنِي رِضْوَانُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ عَنْ عِدَّةٍ مِنْ أَصْحَابِنَا
عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ خَالِدٍ عَنِ ابْنِ مَحْبُوبٍ
وَعَلِيِّ بْنِ الحَكَمِ عَنْ مُعَاوِيَةَ بْنِ وَهَبٍ قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ
أبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: إنَّ مِمَّا أَوْحَى اللهُ
إلَى مُوسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ وَأَنْزَلَ عَلَيْهِ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ:
إنِّي أنَا اللهُ لا إلَهَ إلاّ أَنَا، خَلَقْتُ الخَلْقَ وَخَلَقْتُ
الخَيْرَ وَأَجْرَيْتُهُ عَلَى يَدَيْ مَنْ أُحِبُّ. فَطُوبَى لِمَنْ
أَجْرَيْتُهُ عَلَى يَدَيْهِ. وَأَنَا اللهُ لا إلَهَ إلاّ أنَا خَلَقْتُ
الخَلْقَ وَخَلَقْتُ الشَّرَّ وَأَجْرَيْتُهُ عَلَى يَدَيْ مَنْ
أُرِيدُهُ، فَوَيْلٌ لِمَنْ أَجْرَيْتُهُ عَلَى يَدَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

With my chain of authorities reaching up to the august shaykh, the
Pillar of Islam, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al-Kulayni (R) from several of our
Companions, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, from Ibn Mahbub and Ali
ibn al-Hakam, from Mu’awiyah ibn Wahab, who said: I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah
(A) say: “Verily, among that which God had revealed to Moses (A) and
sent it down to him in the Torah was this passage: Verily I am Allah,
and there is no god except I. I originated the creation, and I created
everything that is good, bringing it about by the hands of those that I
love. So happy is he by whose hands I cause it to happen. And I am
Allah, there is no god except I. I created the creation and I created
everything that is evil, and I bring it about by the hands of those that
I will, so woe to him by whose hand I cause it to happen.”[^1]

Exposition
----------

As to the word *ilah*, [whose related derivatives are] *alaha* (with
*fathah* on the *hamzah* and *lam*, meaning ‘he worshiped’) and
*ilahatan*, it is in the sense of *‘abada, ‘ibadatan,* and *ilah*,
vowelized as *fi’al,* is in the sense of the object (*maf’ul* [that is,
the object of worship]), like *imam,* which mean someone who is followed
(*man yu’tammu* *bih*)*, ilah* is the original root of ‘Allah,’ and
after the addition of *alif* and *lam* [i.e. *al-*making it *al-ilah*),
the *hamzah* has been deleted for the sake of ease of pronunciation, and
some have opined that the *alif* and *lam* substitute for the *hamzah.*
Each of these two opinions has grammatical justifications[^2] whose
mention is not necessary

In the terminology of the Divine sages (*ahl Allah*, i.e. the *urafa*),
*ilahiyyat* and *uluhiyyat* are mostly applied to the station of tajalli
at the plane of Act and the station of the Sacred Effusion (*fayd
al-muqaddas*). ‘Allah’ is the Name of the Glorious One, applied mostly
to the station of the Essence as encompassing all the Attributes.

At other times, the usage is reversed. In this noble tradition, it is
probable that it is used in its common lexical sense-meaning, ‘I am the
Worshipped One, and there is no object of worship except Me.’ And if
this should be what is meant, the limitation of worship either implies
that no other being is worthy of worship [besides God], though it should
be worshipped mistakenly as a result of the error of men, or that-on the
basis of the belief of the people of heart and the ‘urafa - worship of
every manifestation is the worship of the Absolutely Perfect Being and
that man is a seeker of absolute beauty in accordance with his God-given
*fitrat* (innate nature):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

(***It is***) ***the nature*** (***framed***) ***of Allah in which He
hath created man.*** (***30:30***)

And this remains true despite man’s alienation from this *fitrah* and
his imagining himself to be attached to finitude and things finite. Or,
perhaps, the meaning intended for *ilah* is the station of Divinity
itself, in accordance with the last part of the tradition wherein He
attributes good and evil to Himself. On this basis, this would be a
reference to Divine Unity at the plane of Act (*tawhid al-af’ali*)*,*
which has been expressed on the tongue of the great sages by their
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا مُؤَثِّرَ فِي الوُجُودِ إَلا اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

No one is effective in the realm of existence except God.

Further reference to this matter will be made later on, God willing. As
to *al-khayr,* the authority of the traditionists, Majlisi (M) states in
his commentary under this tradition:

Good and evil are applied to obedience and disobedience and to their
causes and motives, and applied as well to the beneficial creatures,
such as grains and fruits and the edible animals, and to the harmful
creatures, such as poisons, serpents and scorpions, and to blessings and
scourges. The Ash’arites say that all of these are the works of God. The
Mu’tazilah and the Imamiyyah contradict them in relation to the works of
men and they have reinterpreted the texts which state that God, the
Exalted, is the Creator of good and evil as applying to things other
than the deeds of the people.”

After that, he says:

As to the philosophers, most of then say “Nothing except God has
efficiency in the realm of being (لا مُؤَثِّرَ فِي الوُجُودِ إَلا
اللهُ.), and that the will of the creatures is the preparatory cause for
God, the Exalted, to create the deeds at their hands.” This is in
accordance with the creed of the philosophers and the Ash’arites. And
these traditions can also be ascribed possibly to taqiyyah.[^3] (Here
end his comments, may God elevate his station.)

The Reality Of Good And Evil
----------------------------

The attributes ‘good’ and ‘evil’ are applied, in all instances, to
perfection and deficiency [respectively] in the essence or attributes of
things or to their existence and perfections of existence. All that is
essentially good derives from the Reality of Being, and when ascribed to
other thugs it is in consideration of their mode of existence. Also,
that which is essentially evil (*sharr bi al-dhat*)*,* derives from
non-being (*‘adam al-wujud*) or from the absence of the perfection of
existence. Its application to other thugs, such as harmful animals and
troublesome insects, is accidental. This, on consideration of all the
sides, should be considered as self-evident, though there are also
strong arguments in its favor.

Let us rake up the statement [of Majlisi that the position of the
Imamiyyah and the Mu’tazilah concerning the creation of the deeds of
people being opposed to that of the Ash’arites, and his explaining away
the verses and traditions that attribute good and evil to God. As to the
said opposition to the Ash’arite viewpoint-who subscribe to a creed
based on *jabr* (compulsion), which is contrary to reason, philosophical
proofs and intuition-that is correct. But the verses and traditions do
not affirm the creed of the Mu’tazilites, who believe in *tafwid*
(delegation) and their creed is more invalid, disgraceful, and
scandalous than the creed of the Ash’arites.

As to the Imamiyyah (R) they have adopted the true creed in the light of
the guidance of the great Imams of the Prophet’s family and with the
blessings of the Household of Revelation and infallibility (A). It is
also in agreement with the noble verses and sound metaphysical proofs,
in addition to being in consonance with the creed of the illustrious
‘*urafa*-’ and the gnosis of the people of the heart. Hence they have no
need to do *ta’wil* of the many traditions and verses which cannot be
interpreted in the sense understood by the said traditionist (M). In
fact, the Imamiyyah and their Imams do not consider the will of God to
be inoperative in any of the deeds of the creatures and they do not
consider the matter of any thing as having been delegated (*mufawwad*)
to the creatures.

As to his statement in the latter part of his remarks, that most
philosophers believe that “Nothing except God has efficiency in the
realm of being.” (لا مُؤَثِّرَ فِي الوُجُودِ إَلا اللهُ) and that this
belief is in consonance with their own creed as well as that of the
Ash’arites, [that is partly true and partly false]. As to the statement
that the words “Nothing except God has efficiency in the realm of’
being” constitute the creed of most of the philosophers and the people
of gnosis, that is true. In fact, they say that should any philosopher
fail to affirm this matter, it means that the light of wisdom has not
entered his Heart and gnosis has not touched his inner being.

But it does not imply that the creature’s will is a preparatory cause
for the creation of God, as is clear to those who are in the know of the
matter. That this statement is consonant with the creed of the
Ash’arites is also invalid, and what is more amazing is his putting the
Ash’arite creed in the same basket as that of the philosophers! This,
despite the great distance that exists between them, and there has
rarely been a genuine philosopher who has not opposed the creed of the
Ash’arites and considered it as invalid.

As to his statement that these traditions might possibly be ascribed to
*taqiyyah,* firstly there is no justifications for such an ascription,
because the literal import of these traditions is in consonance with the
true creed and in agreement with metaphysical proof. Secondly, these
traditions are in agreement with many of the verses of the noble
scripture.

Therefore, there is no sense in ascribing *taqiyyah* to the verses and
likewise to the traditions that are in consonance with them. Thirdly,
these traditions are not contradicted by others so that one might be led
by the contradiction to ascribe them to *taqiyyah,* which is one of the
grounds for preferring one group of traditions to another, and they can
be reconciled with those which indicate that man is the doer of good and
evil.

Fourthly; according to his own statements, these traditions agree with
the creed of the Ash’arites which, apparently, was not the prevailing
creed in that period, and in such a circumstance there are no grounds
for ascribing then to *taqiyyah.* Fifthly, this topic and the like of it
relate to issues of doctrine, which are not subject to the rules of
preference applicable to contradictory traditions (in the area of
*ahkam*)*,* as is evident.

As to the word *tuba,* Jawhiri says, “*Tuba,* vowelized as *fu’la*, is
derived from *tayyib* and its *ya* has been changed to *waw* due to the
*dammah* on the previous letter (i.e. *ta*)*.”* According to the
*Majma’, “tuba lahum*” means ‘there is good (*tayyib*) life for them.’
And it has been said that *tuba* means *summum* *bonum* and the ultimate
[object of] desire; and some have said that *tuba* is the name of a tree
in Paradise. It has also been said that *tuba* also means ‘paradise’ in
the language of the Indians. And *tuba laka* and *tubaka* are used as
phrases involving genitive construction (*idafah*). It is mentioned in a
tradition of the Noblest Messenger (S) that “Tuba is a tree in Paradise.
Its trunk (*asl*) is in my house and its branch is the house of
‘Ali.”[^4]

As to the expression “*waylun*,” Jawhari says, *“Wayh* is an expression
of mercy and *‘’wayl’’* expresses disapproval, and Yazidi states that
they have the same meaning. *Waylun li zaydin wa wayhun li zaydin* can
be pronounced with *raf* on the assumption that *wayl* and *wayh* form
subjects of a nominative sentence, and also with *nasb,* on the
supposition of an elliptical verb, assuming the underlying form:
*Alzamahu Allahu al-wayl.* And some say that *wayl* is a valley in hell
[so intensely hot] that if a mountain were cast into it will melt due to
the intensity of its heat.[^5] And some say that it is the name of a pit
in hell.[^6]

The Relation Of Good And Evil To Creation And The Occurrence Of Evil In The Divine Ordainments (Qada)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that it has clearly been established in the higher
sciences that the order of being possesses the highest degree of
perfection and goodness and the ultimate degree of beauty This is
demonstrable, summarily, in accordance with one kind of argument that
infers the effect from the cause as well in accordance with a detailed
exposition, although the knowledge of its detail is exclusive to the
Being of its Originator, hallowed be His Names, or available through
revelation and Divine teaching.

That which is appropriate for these pages at this stage, as mentioned
earlier, is that all that which belongs to the categories of perfection,
beauty and goodness does not derive except from the Reality of
Existence, because there is nothing that has reality except It and,
obviously; that which stands in opposition to the Reality of Existence
is either note-existence or essence (*mahiyyah*)**,** which are in
themselves nothing and have no value, being sheer vacuity or pure fancy,
and basically they have no subsistence until they are illumined with the
light of Being or are manifested through its manifestation, neither a
subsistence in respect of essence (*dhat*) nor in respect of attributes
and effects.

Each of them (i.e. essences) come to possess manifestation, properties
and effects only in the shadow of existence and only when they are
touched by the hand of expansive mercy Hence all perfections are rays of
the beauty of Absolute Beauty and reflections of the sacred light of the
Absolutely Perfect One. Other existents are nothing in themselves, being
steer poverty and absolute nothingness. Hence all perfections derive
from Min and belong to Him.[^7]

Also, it is established in its own place that that which emanates from
that Sacred Being is the real substance of being and the sheer content
of existence without its being limited by limits pertaining to non-being
and essence, because non-being and essence do not derive from the Source
of Being and limitation in grace (*fayd*) derives from the limitations
of the receiver of grace. Anyone who understands the character of the
effusion and grace as explained the people of gnosis will affirm that no
kind of limitation or restriction is conceivable in the Divine effusion
of grace.

Hence in the same way that the Sacred Divine Essence (*dhat*) is to be
considered free from deficiency, contingency; and limitation, so also
His Sacred Effusion (*fayd al-muqaddas*) must be considered to be devoid
and free from all limits of contingency; as well as contingent aspects
that derive from essence and the limitations that derive from finitude
and deficiency. Hence the effusion of His grace, which is the reflection
of the Absolutely Beautiful One, is absolute and complete beauty and
perfection. Hence He is Beautiful ill His Essence (*dhat*)*,*
Attributes, and Acts, and nothing except that which is sheer being
pertains to His making and creation.[^8]

Also it is established ii its own place that all the evils,
catastrophes, death, disease and destructive events and troublesome
creatures and other such things which are in this world of nature and
this narrow pit of darkness arise from the interferences and conflicts
between existents, not from the aspects pertaining to Being but on
account of the deficiency of their ambiance and the narrowness of their
abode. And these derive from limitations and deficiencies which are
totally outside the ambit of the light of creation and are in reality
below making (*ja’l*). The true reality is the Light which is quit of
all evil, defect and deficiency

However, these defects and evils and harmful and troublesome things, in
respect of their defectiveness and harmfulness, are not essential
objects of creation, but they arc accidental objects of creation in
accordance with the metaphysical viewpoint. Because, if the world of
nature itself were not to exist and were it not to possess the
existential aspects relating to creation [its defects and evils would
have been nonexistent] and similarly its benefit and good would not have
been realized in it, because they do not belong to the category of
absolute non-existence but are relative non-existences which have an
accidental existence sub-ordinate to the dispositions [of things]. The
proposition that is derived therefrom is a modified proposition
(*qadiyyah ma’dulah*) or an affirmative proposition with a negative
predicate (*mujibah salibat al-mahmul*)*,* not a negative existential
proposition (*salibah muhasslah*)*.*[^9]

In conclusion, that which essentially derives from creation and the
Divine making is good and excellence, and the presence of evil, harm,
and other things in relation to Divine providence leas the position of
something that is subordinate and a by-product. To the first position
refers God’s statement in the noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿مَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ حَسَنَةٍ فَمِنْ اللَّهِ وَمَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ
سَيِّئَةٍ فَمِنْ نَفْسِكَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whatever of good befalleth thee*** (***O man***)***, it is from
Allah, and whatever or ill befalleth thee it is from thyself.*** (***4:
79***)

And the second position is referred to in the noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ كُلٌّ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say*** (***O Muhammad***)***: Everything is from God.*** (***4:78***)

And to these two considerations, there are many references in the
traditions of the Infallible *Ahl al-Bayt (A)* including the sacred
tradition cited here which states that good and evil both derive from
God’s creation.

God’s Carrying Out Good And Evil Acts At The Hands Of The Servants
------------------------------------------------------------------

Reflection on the points mentioned leads one to understand the character
of God’s carrying out good and evil acts at the hands of creatures
without its leading to the dangers of compulsion (*jabr*)*.* To
investigate this matter in such a way as to make it clear and to remove
the doubts requires a detailed study of various theological creeds with
its multifarious preliminaries whose mention is not possible in these
pages. However, a brief reference, to the extent appropriate for this
discussion, is unavoidable.

It should be known that it is not possible for any existent to be
independent in any of its actions, unless the agent or the cause can
block all the ways to non-existence facing an effect, so that if there
were a hundred conditions for an existent to come into being and the
cause blocks ninety-nine ways to non-existence facing the effect and one
of the conditions remains un fulfilled, it is not possible for the cause
to be independent in bringing about its effect. Hence independence in
causality depends on the ability of the cause to block all the possible
ways to non-being facing the effect so that it may reach the frontiers
of necessity and brought into existence.

It is known, on the basis of logical necessity that all beings of the
contingent realms, from the beings of the highest *jabarut* and the
highest *malakut* to the inmates of the world of nature and *mulk,* with
all their outer and inner powers, lack such a station. For the very
first non-being facing an effect is the non-being arising from the
absence of the efficient cause, and there is no existent in the realm of
being which can overcome the non-being facing the effect in this
respect, for that would imply a transformation of that which is
contingent by essence into that which is necessary by essence and the
departure of the contingent from the limits of the realm of contingency
and this is impossible on the basis of rational self-evidence.

Hence it is known that independence in causality requires independence
in existence and this is absent among contingents. This explanation
reveals that the delegation of creation to any existence in any of the
respects pertaining to existence is impossible. This is not limited to
those who are religiously responsible for their actions (*mukallaf*) and
their deeds, though such a limitation may be suggested by the usual
statements of the theologians (*mutakallimim*)*.*

However the generality of the issue at debate can be understood from a
variety of topics. But due to the importance of the discussion
concerning the acts of the *mukallafs* the debate is confined to this
context in the discussions of the theologians. In any case, the debates
of the theologians are of no concern to us and our purpose is to seek
and establish the truth, and the impossibility of *tafwid* to and, of
the creatures in any matter whatsoever is obvious and known.

The Refutation Of Compulsion (Jabr)
-----------------------------------

The invalidity, of the creed of *jabr* becomes also known on study. It
consists of the belief that none of the ontological intermediaries have
a role in the creation of existents although one imagines them to
possess such a role. [It means], for instance, that fire has no role in
producing heat and it has been a habit of God to create heat following
the creation of the form of fire without the form of fire possessing any
role in producing heat. Had the habit of God been to create cold
following the creation of fire it would not have had a form different
from the present one in which it occurs.

In summary, [they claim that] the Sacred Essence is the direct agent of
the acts of all *mukallafs* without the intervention of any intermediate
means.[^10] In their own fancy they have adopted this creed for the sake
of Hallowing God by negating limitations in respect to Him and so as not
to consider His hands as tied. *‘Tied be their hands’* (5:70) and cursed
be they for this kind of hallowing, which implies deficiency and
resemblance to creatures (*tashbih*) from the viewpoint of metaphysics
and the creed of gnosis.

As indicated in the preceding section, God, the Exalted, is absolute
perfection and sheer existence, and limits and deficiency arc
inconceivable in His Essence and Attributes. That which derives from
Divine creation and making is absolute being and the absoluteness of the
Sacred Effusion, and it is not possible that a deficient and limited
existent should emanate from that Sacred Essence. There is no kind of
deficiency whatsoever in creation, as imagined by the theologians, and
all limitations and deficiencies derive from the deficiency of the
receiver of Divine effusion and the effect, and this stands proved in
its own place.[^11]

Hence, that which relates directly to the Sacred Essence of God, the
Exalted, is absolute being and sheer existence, and that is either the
Sacred Effusion according to the way of the gnostics, or the First
Immaterial Intellect and the First Noble Light, according to the creed
of the metaphysicians.

To explain this in other words, there is no doubt that the existents are
different in their receptivity to existence. There are some existents,
which receive existence directly and independently; such as substances,
for example, and some existents do not receive existence without the
existence of something else and without subordination to another
existent, such as accidents and things possessing a weak existence.

For instance, the speech of Zayd is something which in order to exist
does not receive existence except in subordination [to the existence of
Zayd], and accidents and attributes can have no existence without the
existence of substances and the objects of which they are attributes,
and they cannot exist without them. This deficiency is essential to
these existents and their existential inadequacy; it is not due to
deficiency in the agency and creativity of God, Exalted is His station.
Hence it is known that *jabr* and negation of existential intermediaries
in the realm of being are impossible.

Among firm arguments pertaining to this topic is that the essences
(*mahiyyat*) are in themselves devoid of the capacity to produce or
receive efficiency, and creation does nor relate to them by *essence*
(*bil-dhat*)*,* as it is the Reality of Being which is the source of
efficiency by essence and the negation of efficiency in relation to It
implies that a thing should not be what it is. Hence, the creation of
the planes of existence devoid of efficiency and effect is absolutely
impossible and implies the negation of a thing’s identity with itself.

In conclusion, it is known that both *tafwid* and *jabr* are invalid and
impossible on the basis of metaphysical reasoning and rational criteria.
‘The creed of the middle position’ (*amr bayn al-amrayn*) is one which
is affirmed by the way of the people of gnosis as well as by
transcendental philosophy. However, there is a great divergence of
opinion among the *ulama (R)* concerning its meaning.

That which is the soundest of views and most secure from controversy and
more in consonance with the religion of *tawhid* is the creed of the
illustrious gnostics and the people of the heart. However, this creed,
on every topic pertaining to the Divine teachings, stands in the
category of ‘simple and impossible’ (*sahl wa mumtani*) whose
understanding is not possible through metaphysical argument and study
and is unattainable without complete piety of the heart as well as
Divine succor.

Accordingly, we shall leave it for those who are worthy of it, that is,
the *awliya’* of God, and enter this valley through the road of the
pursuers of rational thought. And that is to reject both *tafwid*-which
means the independence of existents in efficiency-and *jabr*-which is
the negation of their efficiency-and to affirm the middle position
(*manzilah bayn al-manzilatyn*), which consists of affirming their
efficiency and negating their independence and asserting that the
position of the creation is like Being and the attributes of Being.

In the same way that the existents exist, without being independent in
their existence, and have attributes, which are posited of them without
their being independent, they have actions. and effects which are
posited of them and which emanate from them but they are not independent
in their existence and they arc agents and creative causes that are
non-independent in their efficiency and creativity

And it should be known-as reflection on points mentioned in the
preceding section will revealed-that good and evil are attributable both
to God and the creatures and that both these attributions are correct,
and it is for the same reason that it has been stated in this tradition
that it is God who brigs about good and evil through the hands of His
servants. Nevertheless, all that is good is relates to Good essentially
(*bi al-dhat*) while its relation to the servants and the creatures is
accidental (*bi al-’arad*.) The evils, on the contrary; arc related to
other existents essentially and their relation to God, the Exalted, is
accidental. And to this matter refers the *hadith qudsi* which declares.

O son of Adam! I am more worthy of your virtues than yourself and you
are more worthy of your vices than Me.[^12]

Reference was made to this tradition earlier and here we will refrain
from repeating that which has already been mentioned.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالحَمْدُ للهِ أَوَّلاً وَآخِراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Praise is God’s, in the beginning and the end.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, i. 154, “kitab al-tawhid,” “bab al-khayr
wa al-sharr,” hadith 1.

[^2]: For the first opinion sec al-Majlisi, Biha’r al-anwar, iv, 187,
“abwab asma’ihi ta’ala wa haqa’iqiha wa sifatiha wa m’aniha,” bab 3. For
the second one see al-Tabrisi, Majma’ al-bayan , commentary on bismillah
al-rahman ar-rahim (from the Surat al-Hamd.)

[^3]: Al-Majlisi, Mir’at al-Uqul, ii, 171-172, “kitab al-tawhid,” “bab
al-khayr wa al-sharr,” hadith 1.

[^4]: Majma al-bayan, commentary on verse 29 of the Sura al-Ra’d. The
text of the tradition is as follows: وَرَوَى الحَاكِمُ أَبُو القَاسِمِ
الحَسْكَانِيُّ بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ مُوسَى بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنْ آبَائِهِ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلامُ قَالَ: سُئِلَ رَسُولُ
اللهِ عَنْ طُوبَى فَقَالَ: شَجَرَةٌ أَصْلُهَا فِي دَارِي وَفَرْعُهَا
عَلَى أَهْلِ الجَنَّةِ. ثُمَّ سُئِلَ عَنْهَا مَرَّةً أُخْرَى فَقَالَ:
فِي دَارِ عَلِيٍّ.

[^5]: See Majma al-bahrayn and Lisan al-Arab, wide w.y.h.

[^6]: The Qamus al-muhit cites this Prophetic tradition under w.y.l
إنَّهُ وَادٍ فِي جَهَنَّمَ يَهْوِي فِيهِ الكَافِرُ أَرْبَعِينَ خَرِيفاً
قَبْلَ أنْ يَبْلُغَ قَعْرَهُ. (It (i.e. Wayl) is a valley in hell
through which the infidel’s fall will take forty years before he reaches
its bottom.)

[^7]: Al-asfar al-arba’ah, ii, 292ff-.see also ibid., i, the discussion
on the fundamentality of existence (asalat al-wujud).

[^8]: Al-asfar al-arba’ah, ii, 292, fasl 25-29.

[^9]: Al-asfar al-arba’ah, vii, 58-62, safar 3, muqif 8, fasl 2.

[^10]: Kashfal-murad, 239-240; Fi ‘ilm al-kalam, ii, 62, 78, 79.

[^11]: Al-Asfar al-arba’ah, ii, 127ff., safar 2, maqalah 6, the
discussion on cause and effect (‘illat wa ma’lul), fasl 2, 13, 14, 25,
26, 26, 29. See also vi, 320 ff, safar 3, muqif 4, fasl 3.

[^12]: Al-Jawahir al-saniyyah, p. 279. The text of the tradition is as
follows: عِنِ الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ… قَالَ اللهُ: يَا بْنَ آدَمَ،
أَنَا أَوْلَى بِحَسَنَاتِكَ مِنْكَ وَأَنْتَ أَوْلَى بِسَيِّئَاتِكَ
مِنِّي. From al-Rida (A)… He said, “God said: O son of Adam! I am more
worthy of your virtues than yourself and you are more worthy of your
vices than Me.”


