Prayer and Epilogue
===================

O God, Who have illuminated the hearts of the *awliya*’ with the light
of love and cleared the tongues of the lovers of Thy beauty from the
taints of egoism, and have placed Thy majesty beyond the reach of
self-seeking wretches!

Awaken us from the intoxication of worldly delusion and deliver us from
the heavy slumber of nature, and remove with ‘My gesture the thick
curtains and obstructing veils of egotism and self-seeking. Let us into
the assembly of the holy ones of Thy threshold and into the holy company
of the sincere God-seekers. Remove from us these devilish, ugly, and
coarse qualities of ours and our pretensions and waywardness. Inform
with sincerity and love our movements and pauses, our actions and works,
our beginning and end, and our outward and inward being.

O God! Your blessings are given without prior deservedness (Worthiness
is not a condition for the Lord’s gifts)[^1] and Your gifts are
unlimited. The door of Your mercy and favor is wide open and the table
of Your boundless bounties is spread out. Give us a fervent heart and an
arduous passion, a woeful heart and a tearful eye, a restless and
impassioned mind and a breathless and fiery breast. Let the end of our
live be in a state of sincere devotion to You and with the love of the
elect of Your threshold, that is, those who represent the prologue of
the book of being and the epilogue of the scrolls of the manifest and
the Hidden, Muhammad and his immaculate kindred and progeny, may God’s
blessings be upon all of them

And to God belongs all Praise, firstly and lastly, outwardly and
inwardly.

Concluded by the mortal hand of this indigent writer on Friday afternoon
of the fourth of the month of Muharram al-*Haram* of the year 1358 H.
[1939], and in God is my reliance and trust, at every commencement and
conclusion.

[^1]: This is a reference to the following couplet from Rumi’s Mathnawi
(daftar 5, bayt 1537). چاره آن دل عطاري مبدليست داد اورا قابليت شرط نيست


