Third Hadith: Self-Conceit (‘Ujb)
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إلى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَسْبَاطٍ، عَنْ أَحْمَدَ
بْنِ عُمَرَ الحَلاّلِ، عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ سُوَيْدٍ، عَنْ أَبِي الحَسَنِ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: سَأَلْتُهُ عَنِ العُجْبِ الَّذِي يُفْسِدُ
العَمَلَ، فَقَالَ: العُجْبُ دَرَجَاتٌ؛ مِنْهَا أَنْ يُزَيَّنَ
لِلعَبْدِ سُوءُ عَمَلِهِ فَيَرَاهُ حَسَناً فَيُعْجِبُهُ وَيَحْسَبُ
أَنَّهُ يُحْسِنُ صُنْعاً. وَمِنْهَا أَنْ يُؤْمِنَ العَبْدُ بِرَبِّهِ
فَيَمُنُّ عَلَى اللهِ عَز َّوَجَلَّ وَاللهُ عَلَيْهِ فِيهِ المَنُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni) from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from his father,
from ‘Ali ibn Asbat, from Ahmad ibn ‘Umar al-Hallal, from ‘Ali ibn
Suwayd from Abu al-Hasan (Imam al-Rida [A]): Says ‘Ali ibn Suwayd that
he asked Abu al-Hasan (A) about the ‘Ujb (self-conceit, vanity) that
vitiates the quality of human deeds. Said the Imam (A): There are
several levels of ‘ujb, one of them is when one’s bad qualities appear
to him as good; he reckons them as good ones and congratulates himself
imagining that he is performing virtues. Another level of ‘ujb is
represented by a person who believes in God and thinks that he has done
a favor to God; whereas God Almighty has conferred a favor on him (by
endowing him with faith).[^1]

What Is ‘Ujb?
-------------

In the opinion of the *ulama* (R)[^2]*’ujb* is magnification of one’s
virtues and good deeds, their overestimation, and satisfaction with them
accompanied with a feeling of superiority on their account, while one
exonerates and exculpates himself from all failings and faults. But to
feel pleasure and delight on performing virtuous deeds accompanied with
a sense of humility and modesty before God and gratitude to God for His
favors, and to ask Him to increase them, is not *‘ujb,* but is a
praiseworthy (*mamduh*) trait. The great compiler of *hadith*,
al-*Allamah* al-Majlisi, may his grave be filled with fragrance, quotes
the great scholar and thinker al-Shaykh Baha’ al-*Din* al-Amili (R) as
having said,

There is no doubt that when anyone performs good deeds, like fasting,
night vigils, etc., he feels some kind of joy and pleasure within him.
This pleasure and joy, if it is on account of the feeling that God
Almighty has conferred on him favor and grace, which caused him to
perform such acts of piety, while he is afraid of their loss and is
anxious about their disappearance, and asks God Almighty for their
continuity and abundance-this kind of exultation and gladness is not
*‘ujb*.

But if the exultation and pride is felt on account of the belief that he
is the doer of such deeds and that it is he who possesses all such good
qualities, and if he glorifies his own deeds with confidence in his
goodness, considering himself to be free from all faults and vices, it
reaches such a point that one believes that he is conferring some favor
upon God in performing these deeds. This feeling of exultation and pride
is *‘ujb*.

In my opinion, this definition of *‘ujb* is correct, but the deeds and
actions referred to should be considered to include the external as well
as the internal acts, and at the same time to apply both to good and bad
actions. Because, while affecting the bodily or external actions *‘ujb*
also affects one’s inner (mental and spiritual) actions also and
corrupts them. In the same way as a virtuous person may become conceited
and vain about his good deeds, so also the doer of wicked deeds may
think highly of his qualities, and feel proud of himself on their
account. The tradition explicitly mentions both of them, as they are
frequently ignored by a majority of men. We shall discuss them in the
course of our discourse.

This should also be remembered that the delight which is considered to
be different from *‘ujb* and is reckoned among praiseworthy qualities,
is according to its specific nature, as will be explained in the
subsequent discussion.

*‘Ujb* has various degrees, as is also indicated by the *hadith*; the
following are some of them:

*First Degree: ‘Ujb* with regard to faith and belief in true doctrines;
its opposite is the *‘ujb* in *kufr* (infidelity), *shirk* (polytheism),
and fallacious creeds.

*Second Degree:* The *‘ujb* in good traits and qualities, as opposed to
the *‘ujb in* moral vices and ugly qualities.

*Third Degree:* The *‘ujb* in pious deeds and good actions, as opposed
to the *‘ujb* in abominable deeds and repulsive acts.

There are certain other degrees also, but they are not so significant as
to be put in a separate class; we shall, by the help of the Almighty,
discuss these three degrees of *‘ujb,* their causes, the ways of their
remedy and cure.

‘Ujb Of The Faithful
--------------------

Among the above-mentioned states of *‘ujb,* some of them can be clearly
detected if one tries to discover them and pays a little attention and
is vigilant; but some others, being very subtle and concealed, cannot be
detected unless one is carefully critical of oneself and minutely
analyzes one’s deeds and actions. Certain stages are more dangerous and
fatal than the other stages.

The first and foremost stage which is the extreme and most fatal kind of
*‘ujb* is a state in which the person believes to have conferred a favor
on his Supreme Benefactor, the King of kings, by having faith in Him, or
by performing the duties enjoined by Him. He imagines that through his
belief he has caused the boundaries of the kingdom of Heaven to expand,
or he has contributed to the splendor and magnificence of the Religion
of Truth by having faith in Him. He thinks that by propagating and
disseminating His message, preaching His *Shari’ah*, His laws or His
doctrine, or by enjoining good behavior and forbidding evil conduct or
by implementing the *hudud* prescribed by Him, or by his sermons from
the pulpit or his prayers in the niche, he is imparting a certain
splendor and glory to His religion.

Or he also may think that by joining the congregation of Muslims, or by
holding the mourning ceremonies to commemorate the tragedy of Imam
al-Husayn’s martyrdom, he is glorifying the religion and hence doing a
favor to God, to the Martyred Imam (A), and to the Prophet (S). Though
he would not reveal it openly, but in his heart of hearts he may think
in this manner. In the same way, while serving the creatures of God in
matters prescribed or recommended by the religion-like giving of
obligatory and recommended alms, helping and protecting the weak and the
destitute-he thinks that he is putting them under obligation. Sometimes
this feeling of doing a favor to them is so concealed that it is not
known to the person himself (the subject of doing of favor to God by men
and doing of favor to men by God has been discussed in detail in the
second *hadith*).

At the second level is the state in which an individual is exultant in
his heart taking a coquettish air before God. This attitude is different
from the one of conferring a favor on God, though many people see no
difference between these two states. In this state the individual
considers himself as a favorite of God, and includes himself in the clan
of the saintly and among those nearest to God. If he hears the names of
saintly persons, of those near to God or those captivated by Divine
love, he associates himself with them in his heart, although, overtly he
makes a simulation of humility and tries to project an opposite image of
himself.

In order to make credible his assumed role, he may act against his real
belief in such a way, which appears to negate it, but in fact posits it
by its very negation. If any misfortune comes to him, he blows trumpet (
البَلاءُ لِلوَلاءِ) of (lit. ‘misfortune in exchange for friendship’,
which implies that the saintly are beset in hardships). Those people who
claim being guides of others, *urafa*, mystics, and ascetics are
susceptible to its dangers more than other people.

In the next state, the individual considers himself worthy of being
rewarded by God Almighty in return for his faith, good behavior, and
good deeds, and considers it obligatory on God to befriend him in this
world and grant him higher stations in the Hereafter. He counts himself
among the true believers and considers himself to be a pure, innocent,
and pious being. Whenever a pious person is praised in his absence, he
believes that even if God where to adjudge him with justice, he also
would deserve to be rewarded. And sometimes, with utter shamelessness
and brazenness, he dares to speak in such terms emphatically.

If a misfortune befalls him, or he faces any adversities, he complains
about the ways of God in his heart and questions the justness of His
actions that causes sufferings for the pious, the sincere, and the
truthful, and showers His kindness and generosity upon the hypocrites
(*munafiq’un*)*.* He nurses the sentiments of resentment against God
inside his heart, while apparently expressing the sense of gratification
and satisfaction. He shifts the responsibility of his misfortunes to the
Supreme Benefactor, and pretends to be happy and contented with His will
and Judgment outwardly. And when he hears that God smites the believers
in this world, he consoles his heart without knowing the fact that the
*munafiq’un* are also smitten, and that every individual who is smitten
is not a believer.

In the other stage of *‘ujb* the individual considers himself as
superior to others, and regards himself as better than other human
beings. He considers himself to be more pious than others and considers
his own faith to be sounder than that of other believers and immaculate.
He considers himself to be more perfect and unfailing than others in the
observance of the *wajibat* (compulsory duties) and the *‘muhrramat*
(prohibited things). He thinks himself to be more regular than others in
the observance of *mustahabbat* (*recommended* religious precepts) and
more regular in joining the Friday prayer congregation and other
ceremonies and rites.

He considers himself to be superior to others and treats others as
imperfect and insignificant beings. He views them disdainfully in his
heart, or treats them with contempt. He excludes every individual from
Divine grace and mercy, and considers them a right belonging to himself
or to some people like him. The person who has reached this stage comes
to a point when he denies whatever virtue he perceives in others and is
disposed to regard its presence in others as disputable. Somehow he
suspects the sincerity of their virtues in his heart and considers his
own deeds as free from any kind of fault. He underrates others’ good
deeds, but if he himself performs those deeds he magnifies them. He is
sensitive to others’ errors, but overlooks his own faults.

These are some of the signs and symptoms of *‘ujb* though one may be
unaware of their presence in oneself. There are certain other stages of
*‘ujb* also which I did not mention, and there might be some others of
which I am, unavoidably, unaware.

The ‘Ujb Of The Faithless
-------------------------

The bad deeds of unbelievers, hypocrites, polytheists, atheists,
villains, sinners, and transgressors occasionally reach such a point
when they become proud of their evil deeds and think highly of
themselves. They, on account of their vicious beliefs and deeds,
consider themselves to be men of liberal thinking and open minds, free
from all fetters and bonds and free from superstitions. They consider
themselves as men of courage and valor, link the faith and belief in God
with superstition, and consider the observance of religious precepts as
a kind of narrow-mindedness. They consider good character and moral
behavior as signs of weakness of the personality. They look down on the
performance of good deeds and observance of religious duties and rites
as the signs of a weak mind and evidence of the lack of common sense.

They regard themselves as free-men, who, for not believing in
nonsensical superstitions and indifference to religious rules, are
worthy of praise. Wicked and vicious qualities having sunk down their
roots within the deep layers of their hearts, and their eyes and ears
having become accustomed to those acts, and they having gained great
charm and grace in their eyes, they consider them as accomplishments. As
pointed out in the *hadith*, at one stage bad deeds appear to be good to
the evil person and he perceives them as virtues. This is all allusion
to the verse of the Quran, which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَفَمَنْ زُيِّنَ لَهُ سُوءُ عَمَلِهِ فَرَآهُ حَسَنًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And what of him, the evil of whose deeds has been decked out fair to
him, so that he thinks then good?...*** (***35:8***)

The words (وَيَحْسَبُ أَنَّهُ يُحْسِنُ صُنْعاً) (‘and he considers that
he is doing something good’) refer to the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ هَلْ نُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِالْأَخْسَرِينَ أَعْمَالًا. الَّذِينَ ضَلَّ
سَعْيُهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَهُمْ يَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ
يُحْسِنُونَ صُنْعًا. أُولَئِكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ
وَلِقَائِهِ فَحَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فَلَا نُقِيمُ لَهُمْ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ وَزْنًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Shall We inform you who will be the greatest losers in their
works? Those whose striving goes astray in the life of the world, while
they think that they are doing something good. Those are they who
disbelieve in the signs of their Lord and in the encounter with Him.
Therefore their works have failed, and on the Day of Resurrection We
shall not assign to them any weight.*** (***18:103-5***)

Such people, who are ignorant and negligent but consider themselves to
be learned and aware, are the most wretched of human beings, or rather
the most wretched of creatures. Spiritual doctors are incapable of
curing them. No admonition or advice can have any influence on them, but
can even produce opposite results. They do not listen to any argument.
They do not pay any heed to the guidance of the prophets (A), the
arguments of the philosophers, and the teachings of the great sages.

We should seek refuge in God from the mischief of the self, whose wiles
draw men from sinfulness into infidelity and from infidelity into
*‘ujb.* The self and the Devil make people accustomed to a sin by
diminishing the gravity of that sin. When that vice sends out its roots
into the heart, it appears to be a very ordinary and trivial thing to
the person, who commits another sin bigger than the one with which he
has become familiar.

After committing this second sin repeatedly, it also casts away its
gravity in his view and appears to be an ordinary thing, and he does not
hesitate to commit a still bigger sin. In this way, step by step, all
major sins become diminutive in his eyes, and the Divine laws of the
*Shari’ah*, belittled by him, recede into insignificance. His evil deeds
culminate in infidelity, apostasy, and *‘ujb.* We shall take up this
subject later on.

Snares And Wiles Of The Devil
-----------------------------

In the same way as the victims of *‘ujb* (who think highly of
themselves), by advancing step by step in transgression and sinfulness,
ultimately reach the stage of apostasy, in the same way those affected
by *‘ujb* in their devotional activities and worship also advance day by
day from the lower stages of *‘ujb* to its higher levels. The snares and
designs of Satan and the self are not haphazard, but according to a
calculated plan. It is not possible that the Devil would induce a
God-fearing person of a clean character to commit a sin like murder or
fornication, nor would he provoke a person possessing an honest nature
and a pure soul to commit theft or a highway robbery. It is not the case
that from the very first day he will ask you to consider your good deeds
as a favor done to God or to include yourself in the category of the
Divine saints, His favorite servants, and those nearest to Him.

In the beginning he starts at the bottom and in a low key. He steals
into your heart and persuades you to be extremely careful and dedicated
regarding the recommended duties (*mustahabbat*)*,* prayers, and acts of
piety. While you do this, he will turn your attention towards the sins
of a certain sinner and will make you compare his deeds with your own.
Then he will whisper into your ears that you have enough grounds, both
on a rational as well as a religious basis, to consider yourself
superior to that person.

Indeed your deeds will be the source of your redemption and that by the
grace of God you are pious and pure and free from all vices. He achieves
two things through these kind of insinuations: first, it inculcates a
feeling of general distrusts regarding the creatures of God; second, it
makes the person imbued with a feeling of self-satisfied conceit. Both
of these qualities are destructive and the sources of various vices and
evils.

At this juncture, you should tell your self and the Devil that it is
possible that this person who is guilty of committing that sin may
possess other good qualities unknown to you or might have performed
certain good deeds for which God may bless him with His grace and mercy,
and the light of his good deeds and good qualities may guide him and
ultimately lead him to deliverance. Perhaps God Almighty has afflicted
him with this sin, so as to protect him from *‘ujb*, which is worse than
sin. It is said in a *hadith* of *al-Kafi:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: إِنَّ اللهَ عَلِمَ
أَنَّ الذَّنْبَ خَيْرٌ لِلْمُؤْمِنِ مِنَ العُجْبِ، وَلَوْلا ذَلِكَ
لَمَا ابْتُلِيَ مُؤْمِنٌ بِذَنْبٍ أَبَداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (A) said: Verily God Almighty knows that sin is
better for a mu’min (a true believer) than ‘ujb. If it was not thus, He
would not have afflicted any mu’min with sin.[^3]

Maybe on account of the same mistrust in others, my acts will lead me to
a miserable life in the Hereafter. Our great master, the accomplished
*‘arif,* Shahabadi- *r’uhi fidah-* used to say, ‘Do not look down on
even a *kafir* (non-believer) in your heart. It is possible that the
divine light of his inner nature may lead him to faith and your rebuke
and disdain may lead you towards a wretched life in the Hereafter. Of
course to practice *al amr bi* *al-ma’r-uf wa al-nahy ‘an al-munhar*
(enjoining right conduct and forbidding bad behavior) is something
different from the inner feeling of contempt.’

He would even say, ‘Never curse the unbelievers regarding whom it is not
known that they will leave the world in the state of unbelief. If they
leave the world as rightly-guided servants of God, their spiritual
rectitude may prove to be an obstruction in the way of your own
spiritual advancement.’ In any case, beware that the Devil and the
carnal self make man enter the preliminary stages of *‘ujb;* and from
this place, step by step, they slowly take him to higher stages of
*‘ujb,* and in this way, in degrees, they lead man to the wretched state
in which he thinks that he is conferring a favor on God by having faith
in Him and performing virtuous deeds. This is the final stage of *‘ujb.*

The Evil Effects Of ‘Ujb
------------------------

Know that *‘ujb* in itself is a destructive and dangerous vice which
spoils the faith and the deeds. In answer to the question by the
narrator of the tradition about *‘ujb* which corrupts human deeds, the
Imam (A) mentions the *‘ujb* in faith as one of its forms. We have read
in the previous tradition that *‘ujb* is considered by God Almighty to
be something worse than sin, so much so that He makes a believer commit
sin so that he may be saved from *‘ujb.* The Holy Prophet (S) has
reckoned *‘ujb* as one of the greatest of spiritual dangers. In
*al-’Amali* of Al-Shaykh al-Saduq, Imam ‘Ali (A) has been reported to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ دَخَلَهُ العُجْبُ هَلَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The one into whose heart ‘ujb permeates is destined to be destroyed.

After death and in the purgatory (*barzakh*)*,* the possessor of this
evil experiences a dreadful loneliness, which is incomparable and
unimaginable; in an advice given by the Prophet (S) before his death to
Imam ‘Ali (A). he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا وَحْدَةَ أَوْحَشُ مِنَ العُجْبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

No loneliness can be compared in dreadfulness to the one, which is the
result of ‘ujb.

Moses (A) asked Satan to tell him about the sin by means of which he
infiltrates into the hearts of the progeny of Adam (A) and conquers
them. Satan replied, it is the time when they feel *‘ujb* about
themselves, overestimate their good deeds and the gravity of their sins
becomes diminutive in their eyes.

God Almighty commanded David (A) to convey ‘glad tiding to the sinners
and to terrify the pious.’ David (A) asked God as to why he should
convey glad tiding to sinners and frighten the pious. Replied God
Almighty, ‘Give glad tidings to the sinners that verily I accept their
repentance and forgive their sins, and frighten and warn the pious that
they should refrain from *‘ujb.* Verily there is not a single man who
does not stand condemned if I bring him to account.’

I seek refuge in God from the rigors of His reckoning, which if applied
would completely ruin the sincere servants of God and even those
belonging to a higher station.

In his *al-Khisal,* al-Shaykh al-Saduq reports from Imam al-Sadiq (A)
that he said: The Devil says: If I subdue the son of Adam in three
things I do not care for whatever he may do, as his good deeds will not
be accepted: (1) when he overestimates his good deeds, (2) is forgetful
about his sins, and (3) when *‘ujb* permeates him.

Apart from the vices which belong to this vicious tree of *‘ujb,* about
which you have read, there are a number of major sins and evil traits
that are its products. When its roots permeate the human heart, they
lead men to apostasy and *shirk,* and things even worse than these. One
of those vices is the vice of belittling of one’s sins. A person
afflicted with *‘ujb* never cares to rectify himself; rather, he
considers. himself as a pious and virtuous person, and never thinks of
purging himself from sins. The curtain of *‘ujb* and the thick veil of
conceit prevents him from seeing his shortcomings.

It is a great misfortune, which not only precludes him from achieving
all kinds of perfections, but also afflicts him with all sorts of vices,
leading him to eternal damnation. Even the doctors of the psyche are
helpless in curing them. He has so much confidence in himself and in the
deeds he performs that he thinks himself as independent of God Almighty,
and does not care for His grace. In his limited mind, he considers God
obliged to reward him. He imagines that he is worthy of being rewarded
even if God were to reckon his deeds with justice. God willing, we shall
take up this matter again later.

Contempt Of Others
------------------

Among other vices present in the person who is afflicted with *‘ujb* is
that of viewing others with contempt. He considers their deeds as
insignificant, however superior they may be to his own. This is also one
of the ways of human destruction, and a peril on the path of true
humanness.

Temptation To Riya’
-------------------

Another of the evil effects of *‘ujb* is that man becomes inclined
towards *riya’* (ostentation, hypocrisy). Because, when a person
considers his deeds insignificant and regards himself as morally
imperfect and his faith as of no consequence, then, he would not be
proud of himself, or his qualities and deeds.

Considering himself and everything that is done by him as deformed and
unworthy, he will not make a display of them; soiled and ugly goods are
not put up for show in a prestigious market. But, since, he perceives
himself as a perfect human and his own deeds as good and worthy, he is
encouraged to make a show of them, and hence behave so imprudently. The
vices which have been mentioned in the second tradition about *riya’*
are applicable to *‘ujb* also.

The Factor Of Pride
-------------------

Another ill effect of this vice is that it manifests itself in the form
of another fatal disease that is, the sin of pride (of which we shall
have to say more later) and other vices, which are direct or indirect
products of it. A full treatment of all of them would make our
discussion lengthy it is enough to mention it that a person afflicted
with *‘ujb* should know that this vice sows the seeds of many other
vices and serves as the source of such offences, each one of which is
enough for earning everlasting damnation by itself. If one tries to
properly understand these vices, and studies the traditions and
teachings handed down by the Prophet (S), or the Imams of his household
(A), he will realize the necessity of rectifying his self, and will seek
to get rid of this vice before, God forbid, he carries it with him to
the next world.

If this happens, once his eyes are closed on this world and opened to
world of *barzakh* and, thereafter, to the Day of Resurrection, he will
see that the persons who committed major sins are better off than him.
He will see that God Almighty has immersed them in the ocean of His
grace and mercy ‘for the remorse and penitence that they expressed, or
for the sake of the trust and confidence that they had in the grace and
compassion of the Almighty; whereas this poor fellow, since he had
considered himself as not in need of His grace and had believed himself,
in the depth of his being, to be above needing His compassion and mercy,
God Almighty has dealt with him rigorously in regard to his account, and
as he himself wished his account is being examined in the scales of
justice.

God Almighty will show him that he not only did not perform any worship
for His sake, but also that his works of devotion and piety only took
him away from God and have removed him away from his goal. Not only his
faith and deeds have been invalid, but they have also served as the
cause of eternal damnation and painful chastisement in hell. God forbid,
lest God Almighty judges anybody with the criteria of His justice,
because, as mentioned previously, not a single individual, from the
first to the last, will find any way of redemption.

The prayers and supplications of His chosen servants and the infallible
Imams (A) are replete with the confessions of their failure to do
justice to the demands of the worship and the service of Lord. While the
most perfect of all creatures and the man nearest to God (i.e. the
Prophet [S]) utters:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عَرِفْنَاكَ حَقَّ مَعْرِفَتِكَ وَلا عَبَدْنَاكَ حَقَّ عِبَادَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We did not know You as You deserve to be known. We did not worship You
as You deserve to be worshipped.

what will others do? Of course, they were aware of His greatness and
they knew the relation between the contingent and the Necessary Being
perfectly well. They knew that if they spent their lives in His worship,
service, and praise, they would not be able to thank Him for His favors,
let alone paying the proper tribute due to His Essence and Attributes.

They knew that no thing does possess anything of its own. Life, power,
knowledge and other accomplishments are shadows of His attributes. Every
contingent being is absolutely poor in every respect, a dependent shadow
not an independent ‘thing’. What merits does a contingent being possess
that it could seek to market them? What power does it possess to make a
display of it? They (the Prophet and the Imams) possess the knowledge of
God; they have the cognition of His Attributes of beauty and grandeur.

They are the people who have realized, with certainty, their own
abjectness, imperfection, and weakness and the perfection of the
Necessary Being, through immediate knowledge. It is we, wretched
creatures, whose vision is blotted because of the thick veils of
ignorance, folly, neglect, and conceit, and whose faculties of
intellect, hearing, sight, and other senses are shrouded with veils of
inward and outward sins, who behave with pretensions in front of the
Almighty and consider ourselves as independent beings.

O you, ephemeral, contingent being! You, who are forgetful of your own
self and are oblivious of the relation between you and your Creator. O
you unfortunate dependent being! You have forgotten your duty towards
the King of kings! This ignorance and foolishness on our part is
responsible for all our misfortunes and has engulfed us in the midst of
all these woes and disasters. There is a source of all these evils. The
source of contamination is the fountain itself. We have lost our sense
of perception and our hearts have become lifeless. This is the root
cause, of all our afflictions, and yet we are not worried about the cure
either.

God Almighty, grant us the capacity to realize our responsibilities.
Grant us a share of the light of Your knowledge with which You filled
the hearts of Your *urafa* and *awliya*’ Grant us the comprehension of
the realm of Thy power and Thy kingdom, and guide us to discover our
weaknesses and faults. Unfold the mystery of the meaning of (الحَمْدُ
للهِ رَبِّ العَالَمِينَ) —All praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds— to us, wretched beings, who ascribe all the praiseworthy
attributes to the creatures. Make it known to us that none of the
praiseworthy attributes belongs to any created being . Reveal to us the
truth of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿مَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ حَسَنَةٍ فَمِنْ اللَّهِ وَمَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ
سَيِّئَةٍ فَمِنْ نَفْسِكَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whatever of good befalleth thee*** (***O man***)***, it is from
Allah, and whatever or ill befalleth thee it is from thyself.*** (***4:
79***)

Inscribe the principle of tawhid (unity of the Divine Being) on the
crude tablets of our hardened heart. We are the people of dark realms
who languish behind several veils, wavering between apostasy and
hypocrisy. We are conceited and egoistic. Purge away the evil of self-
love and the love of mundane thins from our hearts and convert us into
Your lovers and worshippers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إنَّكَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Thou art able to do all things.*

Self-Love As The Source Of ‘Ujb
-------------------------------

The vice of *‘ujb* is the product of self-love; since the human being is
plagued with the evil of self-love, it is the source of all human faults
and moral vices. It is on account of this self-love that man overvalues
his trivial deeds and hence includes himself in the category of the
saintly and the nearest to God. Because of it, he not only considers
himself applaudable and commendable on the basis of those paltry deeds,
but sometimes even reckons his wicked deeds as good ones. If he
perceives moral goodness and piety in others more than himself, he not
only never gives any importance to them, but tries to project them in
grim colors as far as possible.

He is disposed to see a kind of goodness even in his own wicked deeds,
and tends to paint them in glowing colors. He scorns other creatures of
God in his heart and views them cynically, while he contemplated himself
with optimism, having a-very high opinion of himself. It is on account
of this same self-love that he hopes a trivial act of his, and that too
tainted with one thousand defilements, to be worthy of being rewarded by
God.

It is better if today we reflect upon our good deeds, and rationally
evaluate our worships. We should try to judge them justly, and see
whether we deserve to be rewarded and praised on their basis, or if we
should be reproached, punished, and condemned because of them. And if
God Almighty were to deliver us into the flames of His wrath on account
of these deeds, which are good and virtuous in our own view, is He
justified or not in doing so?

Now I make you arbiter to judge with justice the following matter after
deliberation and profound thinking. My question is that if the Holy
Prophet (S), whose truthfulness is confirmed, were to say to you, ‘It
makes no difference in afterlife whether you worship God throughout your
life, obey His commands, and resist lusts and carnal desires, or if you
lead a life violating His commands and following your wishes and sensual
desires. This behavior of yours will not affect your station in the
Hereafter. In both cases you will attain salvation and will be sent to
Paradise and saved from His chastisement.

It will not make any difference whether you offer prayers or whether you
indulge in fornication and sin. However, the good pleasure of God
Almighty lies in this that you should worship Him, praise Him and thank
Him, and resist your sensual desires in this world, although you will
not be rewarded for it.’ Were you offered this option, would you choose
to be His worshipper or a sinner?

Would you resist your carnal desires and forbid yourself from indulging
in lusts for the sake of His good pleasure, or not? And would you still
adhere to the *mustahabbat,* the Friday and the congregational prayer,
or would you become immersed in luxuries, play, amusements, and lusts? I
request you to answer justly, without any self-assumption and hypocrisy.
As to myself and others like me, let me tell you, we would have been
among the sinners, neglecting our duties towards Him and hankering after
our sensual appetites.

From this, we come to the conclusion that all our deeds serve as the
means for satisfying our desires and gratifying the carnal appetites. We
are the worshippers of our flesh. We give up one pleasure for the sake
of a bigger one. Our desired goal, our relentless hope is to widen the
scope of sensual achievements. *Salat,* which is a means of acquiring
nearness to Him, we perform in the hope of the company of the houris of
Paradise. Our worship is not aimed at acquiring nearness to the
Almighty. It has nothing to do with the obedience of His command either,
and is thousands of miles away from the good pleasure of God.

You, poor fellow, ignorant of the Divine teachings, you who cannot
comprehend anything except your own bestial motives, you who take pride
in your resorting to His remembrance, chanting of His Name, observance
of the obligatory and recommended religious duties, avoidance of
prohibited and abominable things, you who take recourse in refined
morals and abstain from the unlawful and the abominable, put in the
scales of justice all the acts that you have performed for obtaining
sensual ends, and for the purpose of reclining on seats studded with
rubies in the Paradise, in the midst of cheerful and charming rewards of
Paradise, wearing silk and brocade, and occupying magnificent mansions
therein and for realizing your hopes -is it just to think that all these
actions, which are performed for the sake of satisfying our ego and the
fulfillment of the self, are being performed for the sake of God and for
His adulation alone? You, who are performing your deeds in the hope of
receiving fair rewards, are you different in any respect from a laborer
who toils for wages but says that he works solely for the master? Are
you not a liar when you say that you perform prayers for the sake of
God?

Is your *salat* meant for the sake of acquiring nearness to God, or for
the sake of the company of the houris of Paradise and for sensual ends?
Let me state openly without any reservations that all such prayers that
we perform are considered by *urafa* and the friends of God as
equivalent to major sins. You, wretched creature, you act against the
good pleasure of God Almighty in the presence of the archangels, and the
worships that are meant for making an ascension near to Him, you are
misusing them for satisfying your carnal self; yet you do not feel any
sense of shame for the lies uttered in front of the Almighty and His
archangels during your prayers.

And as if this were not enough, you made several accusations, thinking
as if you were obliging God, exulting in your *‘ujb,* and not feeling
any sense of shame or regret while doing all this! What is the
difference between this kind of worship performed by you and me, and the
sinful acts of the sinners, the extreme form of which is *riya’*?

*Riya’* is a kind of *shirk,* and its ugliness and gravity lies in
worship being not for the sake of God, not meant for God. All our
worships and devotional exercises are sheer *shirk,* which does not
contain a speck of sincerity. The aim of earning the good pleasure of
God does not play even a partial role in it, but the only motive is
gratification of lust and service of the stomach.

My friend, beware that the prayer performed for the sake of a feminine
mate, whether this-worldly or other-worldly, is not the prayer performed
for God. The prayer, which is performed for the attainment of worldly
benefits or for acquiring the other-worldly rewards is not for God. If
so, where is the room for self-pride and conceit? What right do you have
for looking down upon the creatures of God and for counting yourself as
someone of consequence in the court of the Almighty? Wretched man, you
deserve punishment for this prayer and devotion of yours and for it you
deserve to be chained by the seventy cubit chain. Why consider yourself
as a person deserving a reward then?

Why procure another chastisement for yourself by continuing in this
absurd expectation and by persisting in *‘ujb?* Perform the duties
assigned to you properly and keep in your mind that your worship is not
purely for the sake of God; and if God Almighty sends you to heaven by
His mercy and compassion, remember that He has given a waiver to His
servants for a certain kind of *shirk* in view of their infirmity. By
means of His forgiving compassion, He covers their sins with a
concealing screen.

Do not let this screen to be ripped off and the curtain of His remission
to be raised from the face of those vices, which we wrongfully call,
worship. God forbid, if that waiver were withdrawn and our deeds are
adjudged according to the standards of justice, remember this that our
false worships are not less fouler than the mortal sins of the sinners.
Earlier we referred to a tradition narrated by Thiqat al-Islam
al-Kulayni, in his book *al-Kafi,* on the authority of Imam al Sadiq
(A); here I am copying a part of it verbatim in order to draw upon its
blessing (*barakah*)*:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: قَالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لِدَاوُدَ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: يَا دَاوُدُ بَشِّرِ المُذْنِبِينَ وَأَنْذِرِ
الصِّدِّيقِينَ. قَالَ: كَيْفَ أُبَشِّرُ المُذْنِبِينَ وَأُنْذِرُ
الصِّدِّيقِينَ؟ قَالَ: يَا دَاوُدُ بَشِّرِ المُذْنِبِينَ بِأَنِّي
أَقْبَلُ التَّوْبَةَ وَأَعْفُو عَنِ الذَّنْبِ، وَأَنْذِرِ
الصِّدِّيقِينَ أَنْ لا يُعْجَبُوا بِأَعْمَالِهِمِ، فَإنَّهُ لَيْسَ
عَبْدٌ يَتَعَجَّبُ بِالحَسَنَاتِ إلا هَلَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ja’far al Sadiq (A) reports from the Prophet (S) that he said: God
Almighty-said to David (A), “O David give good news unto the sinners and
warn the righteous.” Said David (A), “How should I give good news unto
the sinners and warn the righteous?” Said the Almighty, “O David, give
good news to -the sinners that I accept their repentance, and warn the
righteous that they should not have ‘ujb (self admiration) for their
acts, for there is no servant who does not stand doomed when I take an
account of his deeds (and deserve chastisement, since, according to the
requirements of justice, a man with all his worship cannot thank God
properly even for one of His favors).

While the righteous, who are free from sins, deserve to be condemned
after a fair trial, what will be the fate of people like you and me? And
that too if our deeds be pure and free from worldly *riya’;* a verboten
quality, of which there is very little chance. Now be proud if there is
an occasion for being proud and feeling *‘ujb;* but if you realize that
it is an occasion for being ashamed and hanging the head in shame and
making confession of our sin after every worship, then repent before the
Almighty for uttering those solemn lies, and for falsely assigning those
virtues to ourselves. Does it not call for repentance when you make this
declaration in front of God. While standing for prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِي لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ حَنِيفًا
وَمَا أَنَا مِنْ الْمُشْرِكِينَ. إِنَّ صَلَاتِي وَنُسُكِي وَمَحْيَاي
وَمَمَاتِي لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I have turned my face, in sincerity and submission, towards Him who
created the heavens and earth, and I am not of the mushrikun***
(***those who include others while worshipping God, i.e.,
polytheists***)***. Verily, my prayer and my worship, my living and my
dying, are for Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.***

Is your face really turned towards the Creator of the heaven and earth?
Are you really a *‘Muslim’* and free from the dirt of *shirk?* Is your
prayer and worship, your living and dying really for God? Shouldn’t we
feel some shame while uttering; this sentence in our prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ العَالَمِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.*

Do you sincerely consider all laudable qualities to be derived from God,
while you pay tribute not only to His creatures but also to His enemies?
Is it not a lie to apparently admit that God is رَبُّ العَالَمِينَ (The
Lord of the Worlds), while practically you subscribe to the authority
and lordship of the other-than-God?

Is there any inkling of shame and repentance in your heart, while you
utter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِيَّاكَ نَعْبُدُ وَإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Thee alone we worship; Thee alone we ask for help?*

Do you truly worship God, or worship your own flesh? Do you actually
seek God, or aspire for the houris? Do you seek help from God alone? In
your deeds, do you consider God alone? When you go to perform Hajj of
the *Bayt Allah* (the Holy Ka’bah) is God the only goal and end? And is
the Master of the House your only pursuit, as the poet says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا حُبُّ الدِّيَارِ شَغَفْنَ قَلْبِي وَلَكِنْ حُبُّ مَنْ سَكَنَ
الدِّيَارا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is not the dwelling that attracts my heart,  
 But he who dwells in it draws my heart.*

Are you in search of God, and desire for His beatific vision? Do you
hold the *majalis* (mourning ceremonies for Imam al-Husayn [A]) and beat
your head and breast for his sake, or for the sake of the fulfillment of
your wishes and desires? Is it not your selfish desires, which motivate
you to hold *majalis, to* join congregational prayers, and to perform
devotional rituals?

My brother, be cautious regarding the guiles of the self and Satan, who
do not want your pieties to be taintless, and if they might be accepted
by God by His grace, despite their taint, the Devil and the carnal self
do not desire them to reach their final destination. Through misplaced
*‘ujb* and improper pride they bring all your deeds to nothing, and the
little benefit that you aimed at is also not obtained. Having lost His
good pleasure, even the hopes of houris will come to nothing.

Now having lost everything eternal damnation in the flames of hell does
not seem distant. By means of your faulty, rotten actions tainted with
*riya’, sum’ah,* and a thousand other vices, each one of which is enough
for preventing our deeds from being accepted, you imagined to have done
God a favor, having become His beloved servant. Poor fellow, you, who
cannot comprehend the state of His beloved servants and the fire that is
kindled in their hearts, you unlucky wretch with your little knowledge
of their heartfelt sincerity and the bright radiance emanating from
their glorious deeds, do you think that their deeds are similar to yours
and mine?

Do you think that the *salat* of Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (A) differed from
ours only in the manner of uttering (وَلا الضَّالِّينَ) in the correct
pronunciation of some words, or in the prolongation of prostrations and
profusion of raka’at, prayers, and supplication? Do you imagine that my
prayer differs from his only in the number of rak’ah’s-a few hundred
every night? Are the prayers and the supplications of Imam Sayyid
al-Sajidin (A) (the Fourth Imam) are similar to the mutterings of yours
and mine? Do you think he moaned and sobbed for the sake of houris or
pomegranates or pears of Paradise like us?

I swear by him-and indeed it is a great oath-that even if all of us come
together and try to say one (لا إِلَهَ إِلا اللهُ) —There is no god
except God— in the manner of Amir al-Mu’minin (A), we will not be able
to do so. Dust be upon my head, I and my little knowledge of the high
station of Imam ‘Ali (A)! I swear by the station of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib
(A) that even if all the archangels and all the prophets of God, except
the Seal of the Prophets (S), who is the lord of ‘Ali (A) and all
others, if they try to utter a single *takbir* (i.e. Allahu Akbar, ‘God
is very great’) of ‘Ali’s, they will not be able to do it. The inner
state of their hearts is known only to themselves and is unknown to
others .

My friend! do not babble so much about God. Do not exaggerate your love
for God. O *‘arif! O* Sufi! O philosopher! O *mujahid! O* ascetic! O
*faqih! O* believer! O sage! you poor ensnared wretches! You unfortunate
creatures entangled in the snares of the self and its desires! You
helpless creatures bewildered in the perplexities of false hopes,
aspirations and self-love! You, who are all wretched, being thousands of
miles removed from true godliness and love of God. Do not have such a
good opinion of yourselves. Do not be so boastful and proud of
yourselves. Ask your heart whether it is in search of God or whether it
is in love with itself. Is it a monotheist (*muwahhid*) and devotee of
the One, or a *mushrik* (polytheist) or a dualist?

What for this *‘ujb,* then? What does this exultation mean? Even if,
supposedly, these acts of yours fulfill all the conditions and
requirements, and are free from *riya’, shirk, ‘ujb* and other vices,
isn’t their goal acquirement of sensual ends? What merit do they possess
that you consider them to be worthy of being presented before the
angels? These acts are to be concealed from the sights of people. These
acts, which are exercises in impudence and vulgarity, shouldn’t we
shameful of them and think of doing something to cover up these
abominable performances?

God! We seek refuge in Thee from the mischief of Satan and the guiles of
*al-nafs al-’ammarah* (the carnal self). You Yourself protect us from
their wiles for the sake of Muhammad (S) and his Progeny (A).

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. II, p. 313.

[^2]: For maintaining readability, (R) which is an acronym for “Radhiya
allahu anhu(m)” is used throughout the book to denote “May God have
mercy upon him/them.”

[^3]: Al-Kafi, vol. II, p. 313.


