Fourth Hadith: Pride (Kibr)
===========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إِلى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ عَنْ عَلِيٍّ
بْنِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عِيسَى، عَنْ يُونُسَ، عَنْ
أَبَانَ، عَنْ حَكِيمٍ قَالَ: سَأَلْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ عَنْ أَدْنَى الإلْحَادِ، فَقَالَ: إنَّ الكِبَرَ أَدْنَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni) from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from Muhammad
ibn ‘Isa, from Yunus, from Aban, from Hakim; who says: I asked Abu ‘Abd
Allah (Imam al-Sadiq) (A) as to the lowest degree of ilhad (apostasy).
He answered, “Verily kibr (pride) is its lowest degree.”[^1]

What Is Kibr?
-------------

*Kibr* is the name of a psychic state in which a person feels a sense of
superiority and behaves high-handedly with others. Its signs are
discernible in his actions and its symptoms are clearly noticed by
others by which they know that he is proud. *Kibr* is something
different from *‘ujb,* and, as mentioned earlier, this vice is the
offspring and fruit of the tree of *‘ujb. ‘Ujb* consists of self-love
and conceit, and the meaning of *kibr* is to consider oneself superior
to others. When someone perceives a merit in himself and is overcome by
a sense of pleasure, exultation, and vanity, that state is called
*‘ujb.*

And when he considers others to be lacking in the imagined merit within
himself, he perceives himself to be superior. This perception of
superiority and supremacy over others causes in him a state of vanity,
which is pride. *Kibr,* in this sense, is an inner state, and when its
effects are reflected in his behavior and his speech, it is called
*takabbur.* In short, the self-indulgent person becomes self-seeking,
and his self seeking tendency grows into self-love, and when this
self-love is filled to the brim it manifests itself as haughtiness and
high-handed treatment of others.

Here, it is necessary to mention that the psychic traits, whether vices
and infirmities or virtues and accomplishments, are extremely
complicated and complex matters. It becomes extremely difficult to
discern one from the other. On account of this, there is often a great
difference of opinion even among great scholars in precisely defining
them and it may be impossible to give a faultless definition of inner
states. Therefore, it is better for us to leave this matter to the inner
conscience of individuals and not to entangle ourselves in the maze of
finding precise definitions, and turn attention to our main purpose.

Kinds And Degrees Of Kibr
-------------------------

It should be noted that there are different degrees of *kibr,* similar
to the stages and degrees that were mentioned during the discussion
about *‘ujb.* However, there were some stages that could be mentioned
with regard to *‘ujb,* but since they were not so important in that
context we abstained from mentioning them. Yet it is important to
mention those stages in the context of *kibr.* But at first let us note
that the stages of *kibr,* similar to those of *‘ujb,* are six in
number:

1. *Kibr* on account of possessing true faith and belief.

2. As opposed to it is the pride in invalid faith and false belief .

3. Pride on account of good qualities and praiseworthy attributes.

4. Pride in moral vices and undesirable qualities.

5. Pride in one’s righteous deeds and devotional exercises.

6. Pride in sinful and wicked deeds.

It is possible that each one of these stages may be caused by the
equivalent degree of *‘ujb* present in one’s soul, or it may have some
other reason, which we shall discuss afterwards. For the time being, of
our main concern here are the external factors as sources of pride- like
the pride in one’s family, descent, wealth, status, position, and the
like. Following that, God willing, we shall discuss the evils of this
vice and their remedies, according to my ability. And I implore God’s
help and assistance in making it effective upon others as well as my own
self.

There are certain other aspects and levels of *kibr* when considered in
another perspective. They are: (1) *kibr* towards God; (2) *kibr*
towards His prophets, messengers, and *awliya*’ (*3*) *kibr* in regard
to the Divine Commandments, which also amounts to *kibr* towards God;
(4) *kibr* towards the creatures of God, which, too, according to the
*urafa*, amounts to *kibr* towards God.

As to the *kibr* towards God, it is the most abominable, the most
destructive, and the highest degree of pride, and is present in
infidels, those who contest God’s authority, and those who make claims
to divinity. Sometimes its traces are seen among some men of faith as
well (whose description is not appropriate here). This kind of *kibr*
signifies the extreme of ignorance and the absence of knowledge about
one’s limits and the majesty of the Necessary Being.

As to the *kibr* towards the prophets and *awliya*’ of God, it was an
attitude, which was more prevalent during their own days, and the Quran
reports about it in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَنُؤْمِنُ لِبَشَرَيْنِ مِثْلِنَا؟﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Shall we put faith in two mortals like ourselves?*** (***23:47***)

And someone from his people is reported to have said (about the Prophet
[ S ]):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَوْلَا نُزِّلَ هَذَا الْقُرْآنُ عَلَى رَجُلٍ مِنْ الْقَرْيَتَيْنِ
عَظِيمٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If only this Quran had been revealed to some great man of the two
towns. [i.e. Makkah and al-Ta’if]*** (***43:31***)

During the early days of Islam, the instances of such pride towards the
*awliya’* of God were very frequent, examples of which are still
manifested in the behavior of some professors of Islam.

As to the *kibr* towards the commands of God, it is seen among some
sinners, such as those who abstain from performing Hajj as they do not
consider the dress of ihram appropriate for themselves; abstain from
*salat* because they consider the state of prostration as not in
accordance with their position and status. Such kind of pride is
sometimes seen among persons of faith, devotees, and scholars who
abstain from *adhan* on account of it.

Similarly there are those who would not accept a word of truth if it
comes from anybody belonging to the same status as themselves, or lower.
Sometimes it happens that one hears something from his colleagues or
friends, and vehemently rejects it and derides the speaker, but he
readily agrees with it when it is uttered by someone superior to him in
religious or worldly status. It is even possible that he would accept it
with the same seriousness with which he had rejected it earlier.

This person is not a seeker of truth, but his pride has drawn a curtain
over the truth, to which his obsequiousness has blinded and deafened
him. It is the same kind of pride, which prevents a scholar from
teaching a certain subject or a certain text because he considers it
below his dignity, or dissuades him from giving lessons to persons
devoid of any outwardly significant position. Or one may stand away from
a small mosque attended by a small number of persons for the same
reasons despite knowing that the pleasure of God lies in his doing so.
Sometimes the traces of pride are so subtle that the person who is
afflicted by this evil, unless he is careful and serious about
correcting himself, cannot know that his actions testify to the presence
of *kibr* in his character.

As to the *kibr* towards the creatures of God, *kibr* towards men of
divine knowledge and scholars is the worst form of it, and its evil
effects are graver and its harms more serious than of any other type of
*kibr.* Of this category of *kibr* is the pride, which avoids the
company of poor people and seeks out prominence in gatherings and
meetings, and displays itself on the road and in one’s carriage. Yet
this evil is prevalent and inflicts all the classes of society; from the
elite to the class of *ulama* and scholars of *hadith*; from the rich to
the poor and deprived classes; no one can elude it, except for those
whom God Almighty saves.

Sometimes it is so difficult to discern between humbleness and humility
aimed at popularizing oneself, and between pride and self-containedness,
that one should seek refuge in God Almighty, that He may guide us on the
right path. If one is eager to reform oneself and tries to reach one’s
goal, the Holy God guides him with His infinite mercy on the right path
and eases one’s journey on this path.

The Causes Of Kibr
------------------

There are various causes of *kibr,* but all of them derive from the
delusion, which occurs when men imagine themselves to possess some kind
of excellence. This illusion leads to *‘ujb,* which, blending with
self-love, conceals others’ merits and virtues from their eyes. When
that happens, the afflicted individual believes others to be inferior to
himself and begins to cherish a feeling of self-esteem in his heart, as
well as manifesting a similar demeanor.

For instance, one may find an individual among the *ulama* and *urafa*
who considers himself to be a visionary and a man of mystic knowledge
and insight, classing himself in the category of saintly persons with a
high record of good deeds. Such persons make an absurdly ostentatious
show of their superiority over others, dismissing the *hukama’* and
philosophers as nuts, the *fuqaha*’ and muhaddithun as superficial bums,
and all ordinary people as subhuman creatures and beasts.

They scorn and look down on all the creatures of God; while claiming to
follow the dictum of فناء في الله and بقاء في الله they beat the drum of
their truth-seeking, whereas the Divine teachings require of them to
contemplate the creatures of God with goodwill and optimism when the
least knowledge of God demands that he should not scorn these
manifestations of His Glory and Beauty.

He himself would affirm this while speaking about Divine teachings,
pronouncing something, which contradicts his own inner state. Yet this
happens because those teachings have not penetrated his heart. The poor
fellow has not attained even the station of a true believer, yet he
often speaks of ‘*irfan*. Although ‘*irfan* has not touched him, he
claims to have realized the ultimate Truth.

Among philosophers, too, there are such persons who consider themselves
to be in possession of the proofs and knowledge of certain truth. They
class themselves among men of certain knowledge of God who possess
confirmed belief in angels and scriptures; yet they look down on others
in disdain. They dismiss all other sciences as fiction and all human
beings as defective in faith and knowledge, viewing them with haughty
contempt in their hearts as well as their arrogant demeanor, whereas the
knowledge of the majesty of the Lord and the utter destitution of the
ephemeral creature (that he is), necessitates an opposite behavior. The
truly wise (*hukama’*) are those whose knowledge of the secrets of human
origin and end makes them modest and humble-God Almighty had bestowed
upon Luqman the gift of wisdom; yet the Quran reports of him as saying
to his son:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَا تُصَعِّرْ خَدَّكَ لِلنَّاسِ وَلَا تَمْشِ فِي الْأَرْضِ مَرَحًا
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ كُلَّ مُخْتَالٍ فَخُورٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Turn not thy cheek in scorn toward people, nor walk with pertness on
the earth. Verily, God loveth not any braggart boaster.*** (***31:18***)

Sometimes such people are found among those who claim to be mystic
masters and guides of consummate inner purity, yet, they treat the
common people with pride and look down on *fuqaha*’, *ulama* and their
followers, and speak disparagingly of philosophers and *hukama*’. They
consider everyone except themselves and their associates as doomed
creatures. Since they themselves lack in knowledge and learning, they
consider knowledge a thorn in the path of spiritual journey, and those
who possess it are considered by them as devils who mislead the
wayfarers in their inward journey, although their own claims to high
spiritual station would tend to contradict such a viewpoint.

A spiritual guide of people must himself be free from all kinds of
mortal and destructive sins and qualities; one who claims the capacity
to guide the astray should have transcended the narrowness of mundane
existence and its attachments, being absorbed in the beatific vision of
His Glory. He should not be haughty and disdainful towards the creatures
of God.

Also among the class of *fuqaha*’, scholars of *fiqh* and *hadith* and
the students of these sciences sometimes such people are seen who view
other people with scorn and treat them high-handedly, considering
themselves to be worthy of every praise and appreciation. They think
that everybody should obey their commands without any hesitation, and
apply the following criterion to themselves:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَا يُسْأَلُ عَمَّا يَفْعَلُ وَهُمْ يُسْأَلُونَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He*** (***i.e. God***) ***will not be questioned as to that which He
does, but they will be questioned.*** (***21:23***)

Except for themselves and a handful of persons like themselves, they do
not consider anybody to be fit to enter Paradise. Whenever something is
spoken about other field of learning, they dismiss it with scorn. They
unhesitatingly reject every other discipline except their own field- of
which they possess very little knowledge-considering it not only
unworthy of study but destructive. They denounce the scholars of other
sciences due to their own ignorance. They present their own views as if
their religiosity necessitates such a contempt, whereas knowledge and
religion are free from such prejudices.

The *Shari’ah* forbids men from speaking about anything without having
its proper knowledge, and considers it obligatory to respect every
Muslim. This wretched fellow without possessing enough knowledge of
religion or sciences is sinful of doing something, which is against the
scripture of God and the teachings of His Prophet (S).

Yet he moulds his ideas into the form of religion; though the conduct
and behavior of all the great scholars of every generation was unlike
this. Each one of the branches of religious sciences demands the
scholars who are associated with it to be humble, and requires them to
obliterate all signs of pride from their hearts. None of the sciences
gives rise to pride and none of them is against humility. Later I will
explain the causes behind this sharp contrast between their knowledge
and behavior.

Also among the experts of other sciences, like medicine, mathematics,
physics, engineering, industrial crafts, etc., the instances of pride
and arrogance are seen. They underestimate all other sciences however
important they may be, and scorn the scientists belonging to them. Each
one of them believes that whatever he knows is the real knowledge. They
scorn people in their hearts, as well as manifest it in their demeanor;
whereas their knowledge does not require this.

Some others who do not belong to any of the branches of science, like
the people devoted to prayers and other devotional rites, also tend to
behave high-handedly with others. They disdain people and treat them
with contempt, and do not consider even great scholars as worthy of
redemption. Whenever there is a discussion about knowledge, they point
out that knowledge without action is useless. They give great importance
to the little knowledge that they themselves possess and view all others
with *‘ujb* and haughty contempt, forgetting that if their worship were
true and sincere it would have reformed them.

The prayer forbids one from performing indecent deeds and sins and is
considered as the culmination of a Muslim’s attainment (*mi’raj
al-mu’min*). But such a person, even after performing the *salat* for
fifty years and meticulously performing all obligatory (*wajibat*) and
recommended (*mustahabbat*) religious duties, is immersed in the vice of
pride which is a kind of apostasy-from head to toe, and is afflicted
with *‘ujb*-which is uglier than any other indecency-and comes to
resemble Satan and acquires his attributes.

The *salat* that does not forbid one from indecencies and indignities,
the prayer which does not protect the heart, rather whose excessive
performance vitiates the heart, is not worthy of being named as *salat*.
The *salat* about which you were so particular, but on account of which
you come to resemble Satan acquiring pride, his characteristic trait, is
not *salat*; for the *salat* does not result in pride either.

All these are dangers of knowledge and deeds, but pride can also arise
from other causes, all of which relate to a sense of one’s worth and
excellence which others are imagined to lack. For instance, someone who
comes of a noble descent looks down on those who are not like him. Other
reasons relate to personal beauty and charm, one’s tribe, the number of
one’s supporters, followers, or pupils, which cause arrogance and pride
with respect to others who do not possess these advantages. In all
cases, therefore, pride is caused by an illusion of some kind of
perfection in oneself, elation on its account and *‘ujb,* while others
are seen to lack such an imagined merit or advantage.

Even the bad characters and persons of vicious morals, also, sometimes
look down on others with haughty contempt, because they consider
whatever they possess as a kind of merit and asset. Though the person
afflicted with the vice of pride tries to conceal it due to some reason
or other and tries to show no sign of it, but since this evil tree of
pride has run its roots in his heart, its effects nevertheless manifest
themselves. As soon as any change occurs in the natural condition of the
possessor of this vice, as when he loses control over himself due to
anger, he starts boasting of his superiority and enumerating his merits,
whether they belong to the category of knowledge or deeds or whatever.

At other times, a proud person exhibits his pride, not paying any
attention to its outward revelation. The intensity of his pride makes
him lose control over himself. Then, his pride finds expression in his
movements and pauses. In social gatherings he shows his self-importance
by taking a lead over other people while entering and leaving. He
neither allows the poor to join his company, nor does he himself attend
their gatherings. He creates an artificial halo of sacredness around
himself and every action of his, the gait, the manner of looking at
other people, the manner of speaking to them, everything is indicative
of his pride and haughtiness.

One of the researchers, from whom I have borrowed the fundamentals of
this discourse and have translated them, says that the lowest degree of
pride in a scholar is that he should turn his back on other people as if
he wants to avoid them. The lowest degree of pride in a devotee
(*‘abid*) is manifested in his stern attitude towards people and his
frown, as if he wants to avoid them, or as if he is angry with them. The
poor fellow does not know that piety and continence (*wara’*) does not
lie in the frowns on one’s brow or forehead, not in a disdainful look
and a wry face, not in avoiding the people, not in bending the head or
turning the neck, but it lies inside one’s heart. The Prophet (S) once,
pointing at his chest, said, ‘Piety lies here.”

On some occasions, the devotee boasts about himself in his speech; while
expressing the purity of his soul, he makes a display of his devotional
exercises, brags about himself by mentioning his pious deeds, and
denounces others for their shortcomings, thus highlighting the
superiority of his piety. Sometimes he does not say anything explicitly
but makes some gesture, which implicitly exhibits his piety. A scholar
afflicted with *kibr* may brag about his own intellectual achievements,
saying, “What do you know! “ Then he would mention the books read and
written by him, the universities visited by him, the professors and
authorities whom he has met, and his own scholarly endeavors. Therefore,
at all times, it is necessary to seek refuge in God from the mischiefs
of the self and its wiles.

Spiritual And Social Harms Of Pride
-----------------------------------

Whereas there are many vices inherent in pride itself, it generates many
other vices as well. It prevents men from acquiring inward and outward
merits and from enjoying the blessings of this world and the Hereafter.
It causes hatred and rancor in human hearts, disgraces man in the eyes
of his fellow human beings, and brings about humiliation for him. It
forces other people to retaliate against him and despise him and insult
him.

In *al-Kafi*, Imam al-Sadiq (A) is reported to have said, “There is no
person who does not have a harness on his head, and an angel who attends
to it. Whenever he is proud, the angel says, ‘Be humble, lest God should
disgrace you’. Thus, he is the greatest of human beings in his own eyes,
whereas in other people’s eyes he is the smallest of creatures. When he
is humble and modest, God removes the harness from his head and the
angel says to him, ‘Elevate yourself, as God Almighty is elevating you’.
Thus, he is the smallest of persons in his own eyes, while the most
elevated and exalted in the eyes of others.’[^2]

My friend, others also possess a mind similar to yours. If you behave
humbly, other people will be forced to respect you and you will rise in
their estimation. But, if you show arrogance, there is no good for you
in it; they may even disgrace you if they find an opportunity, and treat
you with indifference. And if they cannot find an opportunity of
insulting you, they will despise you in their hearts and you will not
find any respect in their eyes. It is, therefore, better for you to
conquer their hearts with modesty and humility. Everyone with whom you
associate will somehow show the signs of his attitude towards you, and
if their hearts turn against you it will be something, which is against
your desire.

Therefore, even if, presumably, you are interested in obtaining
greatness and respect, you will have to adopt a proper course for it,
which is to cultivate cordial relations with others and to, adopt a
humble demeanor towards them. The result of pride will be against your
aim and purpose. It does not even fulfill your worldly aspirations,
which are easier to be fulfilled, and instead of this what you receive
is its opposite. Besides all these, this habit will bring you disgrace
and shame in the next world. In the same way as you scorned people and
considered yourself to be superior to the creatures of God, and
expressed an inordinate sense of pride and arrogance here, in the other
world this same arrogance and pride will bring you disgrace and
humiliation, as mentioned in a tradition reported in *al-Kafi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِإسْنَادِهِ عَنْ دَاوُدَ بْنِ فَرْقَدٍ، عَنْ أَخِيهِ قَالَ سَمِعْتُ
أَبَا عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَقُولُ: إنَّ المُتَكَبِّرِينَ
يُجْعَلُونَ فِي صُوَرِ الذَّرِّ فَيَتَوَطَّؤُهُمُ النَّاسُ حَتَّى
يَفْرَغُوا مِنَ الحِسَابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From Dawud ibn Farqad, from his brother, who said: I heard Imam al-Sadiq
(A) saying: Verily the proud [on the Judgment Day] will be created in
the form of ants and people will trample them down under their feet
until God is finished with the reckoning.[^3]

In his last will, al Imam al-Sadiq (A) told his companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: وَإيَّاكُمْ وَالعَظَمَةَ وَالكِبَرَ فَإنَّ الكِبَرَ رِدَاءُ
اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، فَمَنْ نَازَعَ اللهَ رِدَاءَهُ قَصَمَهُ اللهُ
وَأَذَلَّهُ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Refrain from pride and self-glorification, since pride is God Almighty’s
mantle, and one who contests with God regarding His cloak, God will
shatter him and disgrace him on the Day of Resurrection.[^4]

What will be the plight of the person whom God Almighty disgraces? For
the things will be different in the Hereafter. Disgrace in the Hereafter
will be an affair different from the disgrace and humiliation in this
world. In the same way as the comforts and torments of that world bear
no similarity with those in this world, and its comforts and bounties
are beyond one’s imaginative power, the torments and tortures in that
world are also far above the reach of our imaginative faculty. Its
honors are beyond the possibilities of what we can think, and its
humiliations also cannot be compared with our ideas of humiliation and
disgrace. And the ultimate abode of the proud person is eternal
damnation and hell. The tradition states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكِبَرُ مَطَايَا النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

i.e. ‘one who rides the mount of pride is taken by it into the
hell-fire.’ He will not get any glimpse of Paradise as long as the
traces of this vice are present in his heart. The Prophet (S) has been
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَنْ يَدْخُلَ الجَنَّةَ مَنْ فِي قَلْبِهِ مِثْقَالُ حَبَّةٍ مِنْ
خَرْدَلٍ مِنْ كِبَرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Never can the person who possesses a speck of pride inside his heart
enter Paradise.[^5]

Imam al-Baqir (A) and Imam al-Sadiq (A) have also said something almost
similar to this statement. In *al-Kafi* Imam al-Baqir (A) is reported to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العِزُّ رِدَاءُ اللهِ وَالكِبَرُ إِزَارُهُ. فَمَنْ تَنَاوَلَ شَيْئاً
مِنْهُ أَكَبَّهُ اللهُ فِي جَهَنَّمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

honor is God’s robe and pride His mantle; one who wants to acquire it
will be thrown into hell by God Almighty.[^6]

And that too, what kind of hell! The hell, which is prepared for the
proud, is different from the hell into which other sinners will go.
Here, I shall again quote the same tradition the translation of which
was given earlier:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ عَنْ عَلِيٍّ بْنِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ،
عَنِ ابْنِ أَبِي عُمَيْرٍ، عَنْ عَبْدِاللهِ بْنِ بُكَيْرٍ، عَنْ أَبِي
عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: إِنَّ فِي جَهَنَّمَ لَوَادِياً
لِلْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ يُقَالُ لَهُ سَقَرٌ. شَكَا (جَهَنَّمُ) إلَى اللهِ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ شِدَّةَ حَرِّهِ وَسَأَلَهُ أَنْ يَتَنَفَّسَ، فَأَذِنَ
لَهُ، فَتَنَفَّسَ فَأَحْرَقَ جَهَنَّمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is a highly trustworthy tradition, and can even be compared to
sahih. Ibn Bukayr reports from al Imam al-Sadiq (A) that he said,
“Verily there is a valley in hell for the proud called Saqar. Once it
complained to the Almighty about the intensity of its heat, and
requested Him to relieve it for some time so that it may take a breath.
As soon as it breathed, its breath filled the entire hell with
fire.”[^7]

I take refuge in God from a place, which in spite of its being a place
of torment complains about its hotness, and the hell starts burning
because of its breath. We cannot comprehend in this world the extent of
the intensity and strength of the fire of the Hereafter, as the
difference between the intensity and weakness of torment is dependent
upon several factors. One is the strength and weakness of perception,
and the second is the dissimilarity of different kinds of material and
their different capacities for tolerating heat. For example, gold and
iron can be exposed to more heat than lead and tin, which can endure
more heat than wood and coal, which are less sensitive than flesh and
skin.

Another factor is the sensitivity of perception; for example the human
brain, which despite being less tolerant to heat is more sensitive to it
than the bones, for its power of perception is stronger. And the
feebleness and intensity of the heat itself is another factor. It is
more painful at a hundred degrees than at fifty. One more factor is the
relative distance between the source of heat and the material exposed to
it; for instance, when fire is very near to the hand it will inflict a
different kind of burn than when it affects the hand from a distance.

All these five above-mentioned factors exist at their weakest degree in
this world, and at their utmost strength and force in the Hereafter. All
our perceptive faculties are imperfect and weak in this world and at the
same time covered with several veils. Today our vision is incapable of
perceiving angels and the hell; our ears cannot hear the queer sounds of
*Barzakh* (the Purgatory) and the cries of its inhabitants, and the
clamor of the Day of Resurrection and the people thereof. Our senses
cannot even perceive the heat of that place. This is on account of their
own infirmity.

The Quranic verses and the traditions of the Imams (A) are full of
explicit and implicit references to this issue, and it is also in
accordance with discursive reason. The human body of this world is
incapable of enduring heat. The cold fire of this world is strong enough
to turn it into ashes in moments. But God Almighty is capable of
recreating it in a form on the Day of Resurrection so that it would not
be consumed by the fire of the Hereafter, a fire of so great intensity
that, according to the testimony of Gabriel (A), if a link of the
seventy-cubit chain of fire prepared for the inhabitants of hell is
thrown into this world it would melt all the mountains due to its
excessive heat.

Therefore, the resistance of the human body will also be incomparably
great in that world. Also the relationship between the body and soul is
very fragile in this world. This world does not allow the soul to
manifest its real faculties and powers. But that world is the world of
the soul’s manifestation and domination. There, the relationship of the
soul with respect to the body is loaded with action and creativity-as
has been established in its proper place-and this relationship is the
most complete and thorough of all relationships.

This worldly fire is a faint and coldish glow and an ephemeral
phenomenon combined with impurities of all kinds; whereas the fire of
hell is a fire free from all impurities, and its substance is
self-subsisting and self-perpetuating. It is a living substance, which
burns its inhabitants with a will and consciousness, and uses all its
strength to overwhelm them. You have heard about its properties from
Gabriel (A), the truthful witness.

The Quran and the traditions of the Imams (A) are full of the
descriptions of hell and the fire therein. However, its similitude
cannot be found in this world. If all the fires of this world were to
surround a human being from all sides, they will envelop only the outer
surface of his body; but the hell-fire will encompass the human being
from within and without and envelop the senses and the perceptive
faculties. It is a fire, which consumes the heart, the soul, and all the
human faculties, pervading them and uniting with them in a fashion,
which is unexemplified in this world.

Hence it is obvious that the requirements of Divine chastisement are not
at all to be found in this world. Neither the material is capable of
enduring its heat, nor is the agent of heat a complete one, nor are the
perceptive faculties at their complete acuteness. The fire the heat of
whose breath fills the hell with flames, we and our perceptive senses
fail to comprehend it, unless, God forbid, we, belonging to the clan of
the proud, leave the world without purifying ourselves from this
abominable vice, and see it face to face:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَلَبِئْسَ مَثْوَى الْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What an evil abode is that of the arrogant!’*

Other Causes Of Pride
---------------------

Besides the above-mentioned factors that cause pride, there are some
others also, such as narrow-mindedness, lack of capacity,
petty-mindedness, baseness, and lack of fortitude. Being a person with a
narrow mentality, as soon as he beholds any merit in himself he imagines
himself to enjoy a kind of superiority. He thinks he has acquired a high
station, whereas, if he justly evaluates it and judges his
accomplishments and merits, he would see that what he imagined to be
perfection and is so proud of is not at all an accomplishment or merit,
and even if it were a merit how insignificant it was when compared to
other persons’ accomplishments.

Poor fellow, he has made his cheeks ruddy with a slap to give an
impression of healthiness. The ‘*arif* who disdains others on account of
his pride in his mystic knowledge, and considers others superciliously
to be superficial and shallow, what knowledge does he possess about God,
except for a handful of concepts and terms that are in reality veils of
realities and hindrances in his religious path? What is this knowledge
except for a number of glamorous and gaudy terms which do not have any
relevance whatsoever to the knowledge of God? How far are they from the
knowledge of God and the knowledge of His Names and Attributes.

Knowledge is a quality of the heart, and in the view of this writer all
these are practical sciences, and consist not of mere acquaintance with
certain abstract concepts or artful juggling of terms. With this short
life and limited knowledge, I have seen certain people among these
so-called mystics and other scholars who, I swear by ‘*irfan* and
knowledge that these terms have not made any mark on their hearts; nay,
they have rather left on them an opposite effect! My friend! the
knowledge of God, in your own words, makes the heart a place where His
Names, Attributes, and Essence are manifested, a stage for the
appearance of the Real Monarch, who obliterates all signs and purges it
of all stains and removes from it all limitations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الْمُلُوكَ إِذَا دَخَلُوا قَرْيَةً أَفْسَدُوهَا وَجَعَلُوا
أَعِزَّةَ أَهْلِهَا أَذِلَّةً.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed, kings, when they enter a township, ruin it and degrade its
men of honor.*** (***27:34***)

It converts your heart into a Unitarian and the one filled with the
praise of the Lord. But why did it make your heart a place of your own
glorification? Why has it added unnecessary colors to it, and
accumulated trappings and accretions that deter you from obtaining
nearness to God Almighty and from beholding the effulgent glory of His
Names? Why, it has made your heart an abode of Satan and so you look
down on the servants of God and His chosen, the signs and reflections of
His Glory and Splendor! Woe unto you for your wretchedness, O ‘*arif*,
whose condition is worse than of anybody else, and all the doors of
defense and pretext are sealed upon him! You are proud towards God and
have assumed a Pharaonic arrogance towards His Names, Attributes, and
all the manifestations of His Essence. O amateurish student of concepts
who has gone astray of the realities! Deliberate over the matter for a
while, and think as to what knowledge you possess of God.

What impact has the knowledge of God and His Attributes made on your
self? Perhaps the study of music and musical rhythms may be more exact
and precise than your knowledge. Astronomy, mechanics, other physical
sciences, and mathematics can match your learning as to the precision of
their terminology. Yet in the same way as they are not concerned with
the knowledge of God, your knowledge also is a thick curtain consisting
of the veils of words, terms, and concepts. They can neither make one
ecstatic nor send anyone into a trance.

Rather, in the eyes of the *Shari’ah*, the physical sciences and
mathematics are better than your knowledge, since they produce some
result, whereas your knowledge not only gives no good results, but gives
opposite ones. An engineer draws results from his calculations, and a
goldsmith is benefited from his craftsmanship; but your knowledge, apart
from not gaining any material benefits, has failed to fulfill any
transcendental ends as well.

Rather, the veil before your eyes is so thick that when you try to
picture the Unity of the Divine Being a world of utter darkness fills
your imagination, and when His Names and Attributes are mentioned an
infinite plurality is pictured by your mind. Therefore, these terms did
not lead you to the path of Truth, but on the contrary they have become
a source of pride and arrogance towards the righteous scholars.

A knowledge, which darkens the heart and increases it in its blindness
is not knowledge. A learning, which ultimately makes its possessor an
heir of the Devil, woe unto such learning! *Kibr* is the property of
Satan’s nature. He was arrogant to your father, Adam, and was expelled
from the Almighty’s court. You who are arrogant towards all human beings
and all the sons of Adam are also worthy of banishment. From this you
can infer the plight of the scholars of other sciences also.

A *Hakim,* a man of wisdom, if he is a real sage, having comprehended
the relationship between God Almighty and His creatures and himself, the
sense of superiority remains no more in his heart. But the unfortunate
seeker of terminology and terms has mistaken them for *hikmah* (wisdom)
and *‘ilm* (knowledge) and imagines himself to be an *‘alim* and
*Hakim.* He even associates himself with the Attributes of the Necessary
Being and says that *hikmah* is one of the Attributes of God Almighty’

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحِكْمَةُ هِيَ التَّشَبُّهُ بِالإلَهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wisdom is what makes [man] similar to God.

At other times he groups himself with the prophets and messengers of
God, and recites the Quranic phrase,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَيُعَلِّمُهُمْ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He teaches them the Book and Wisdom.*

And sometimes reiterates the Prophet’s *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحِكْمَةُ ضَالَّةُ المُؤْمِنِ، وَمَنْ يُؤْتَ الحِكْمَةَ فَقَدْ
أُوتِيَ خَيْراً كَثِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hikmah is the lost property of a mu’min; one who is endowed with hikmah
has been given an immense measure of good.

While his heart is unaware of *hikmah* and several thousand stages away
from all good and he is himself a stranger to *hikmah.* The great Muslim
thinker and philosopher Muhaqqiq Damad (R) states that a *Hakim* is a
person who can discard his body like a dress whenever he wants to. What
does he say and what are we saying! What meaning did they understand
from *hikmah* and how do we conceive it? And you with your pride in your
knowledge of a handful of concepts and a few terms, who treat the
creatures of God with haughty contempt-it becomes quite clear that you
are a petty minded and shallow person.

Those who style themselves as *murshids* (leaders of mystic orders) and
guides of God’s creatures, offering spiritual assistance and pretending
Sufi insight, their state is worse than that of the two former groups,
and their conceit is greater than theirs. They appropriate the
terminology of those two groups, and set out their goods for sale in the
marketplace. They have distracted the attention of the creatures of God
from Him, attracting them towards themselves, having made those
simple-hearted creatures to view the *ulama* and other people with
suspicion. For the sake of some mean profit, they have coined some
attractive terms to deceive credulous people, thinking that titles like
‘Majdhub ‘Ali Shah’ and ‘Mahbub ‘Ali Shah’ will produce love for God or
create some kind of ecstasy or bliss.

O seeker of the world! You thief of concepts and ideas, this activity of
yours does not call for pride and exultation. Poor fellow, he is
befooled by his own petty-mindedness and narrowness of capacity,
considering himself to be a person of high spiritual station. His own
tricks have fooled him. His infatuation with himself, his love of the
world, and his obsession with some stolen ideas and conceptual trappings
and auxiliaries have coalesced to form strangely vicious and perverse
admixture. Yet with all these flaws, the poor fellow imagines himself to
be a murshid, a guide and liberator of mankind, and knower of the
secrets of the *Shari’ah*! No, sometimes this impudence surpasses all
limits and he imagines himself to be at the pinnacle of *wilayah* ! This
situation arises due to the lack of capacity, the poverty of merits, the
narrowness of the mind and the heart, and the suffocating contraction of
the breast.

You too, O student of *fiqh*, *hadith* and other religious sciences, you
also have no share of knowledge except for some terms which have gained
currency in usul and *hadith*. If this learning, which is altogether
related to practice and action, has not brought any improvement in you
and has not rectified you, but instead of this given rise to moral and
practical vices in you, your performance is inferior to that of the
experts of other sciences and incomparable in its worthlessness with the
baser activities of all other people.

All those concepts, verbiage, rivalries, and disputations-most of which
have no relevance to the religion of God and cannot be considered to be
belonging to any sciences either, nor could be regarded as the fruit of
knowledge-that does not call for so much of pride and exultation. I make
God my witness-and suffices He for testimony-if the result of your
knowledge is that it cannot guide you on the right path, nor can it
guard you against vices of morals and deeds, the meanest and basest of
vocations is better than this learning, because it shows some immediate
results and has fewer this-worldly and other-worldly harms.

You, poor fellow, who acquire nothing but a painful burden, hard to
carry, your burden does not bring you anything but corrupt morals and
perverse deeds. Therefore, your knowledge does not call for any pride
and exultation either. Nevertheless, the horizon of your mind is so
narrow that as soon as you prepared a hotchpotch of some terms you
started thinking yourself to be a great scholar, fit to walk over the
plumes of archangels under your feet, and other people as ignorant
creatures. Your arrogant gait restricts the passage for the servants of
God in alleys and your conceit encroaches on the roominess of social
gatherings.

Yet the meanest among the arrogant is the person who is proud of outward
matters like wealth, position, family and descent. This poor fellow is
far from all human excellences and moral sense; his hands are empty of
all learning and knowledge; but since his clothes are made of sheep’s
wool, or since his father is somebody, he is arrogant with the people.
What a petty mind and a dark and narrow heart it is that leaves all
accomplishments and perfections to be content with the niceties of a
robe and hat! For his beautiful cloak and cap, he has given up all other
beauties of character and soul.

Poor fellow, he is satisfied to survive on the plane of beasts and is
happy with bestial pleasures, having forgone the dignity of human
station for what he considers to be some sort of status, choosing a
meaningless and hollow existence, and a blank form devoid of reality and
truth. He is so base and hollow that if he meets someone who is superior
to him in respect of worldly advantages, he behaves with him like a
slave with his master. Of course, one whose goal is nothing but the
world, is a slave of the worldly and the world…

In any case, narrowness of vision, pettiness of mind, and lack of
capaciousness of personality, together, are a strong factor responsible
for pride, which makes its victim to have ‘*ujb* and *kibr* and makes
him highly sensitive to qualities which are neither a kind of perfection
nor any merit of note. And the more one is infatuated with one’s self
and with the world, the more he is likely to be affected by these
things.

How To Cure Pride?
------------------

Now that you have known the viciousness of pride, it is now your duty to
resolve to cure yourself of this disease and to make up your mind to
purge your heart from its taints and remove its traces and its heavy
dust from the mirror of your heart. If you are among the people of
strong will power and an open heart, and the worldly desires have not
driven their tentacles deep into it, and if the worldly allurements and
ornaments have not blinded it by their light, and if you are still
capable of judging and criticizing yourself with justice, the
suggestions given in the previous chapter can be most useful for you in
this regard.

But if you have not reached this level, it is better for you to meditate
upon your state; it is possible that your heart may wake up. O man, who
were initially nothing; who were hidden in the folds of nothingness for
ages and epochs, more insignificant than nothingness itself and absent
from the realms of existence, when God Almighty resolved to create you,
you were the most deficient of the recipients, mean, and insignificant.
You were incapable of receiving the Divine effusion (*fayd*). He created
you from the matter (*hayula*) of the universe, which is absolute
potentiality and pure weakness, and moulded you into an elemental bodily
form, which was the lowest, and the meanest of the existents of the
universe.

After that you were given the form of sperm, which you will loathe to
touch it and will take great pains for cleansing your hands if by chance
they are made dirty by it. Then you were kept in a very narrow and
unclean place, the twin reproductive glands of the father. And after
that through the urinary tract in a terribly ugly state you were brought
into the mother’s womb and you were given such a place to live in, that
description will be disgusting to you. After being placed there, you
were given the form of a fetus and a lump of clotted blood. There you
were nourished with such a food that you will go mad if you are told
about it, and will feel ashamed. But since everyone has to pass through
this tribulation, it abates our shame of it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالبَلِيَّةُ إِذَا عَمَّتْ طَابَتْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A distress, which is common, becomes tolerable.

During all these stages of evolution and change you were the lowest and
meanest of creatures. You lacked in all external and internal perceptive
faculties and devoid of every kind of merit. After that, with His great
kindness and mercy, He made you capable of receiving the gift of life,
the life that was manifested in you was so imperfect and fragile that it
was, even inferior to that of a worm in its biological functions. In
order to improve your deficient capacity, He gradually improved your
functions with His mercy and compassion, until you became fit for
entering this world and facing its climes. Through the meanest of
corridors and in the worst possible condition you were made to enter
this realm. Yet you were still weaker than and inferior to the young
ones of all the animals.

After that, despite acquiring the maximum of your internal and external
powers and abilities, you are still so weak and vulnerable that none of
your own powers is under your full control You can neither safeguard
your health, nor can you guard your own life and energies, nor can you
preserve your beauty and youth. If any calamity of an illness befalls
you, you do not possess enough power to repel it. In short, you don’t
have any control over any aspect of your own being and existence.

If you face starvation for one day, you will not resist from eating any
kind of rotten cadaver. If your thirst were to overwhelm you, you will
be ready to drink from dirty and fetid water. Similarly, in all matters
you are a helpless and abject slave who has no power over anything. If
you compare yourself with the existence and perfection of the existence
and other living beings, you will realize that you and your entire
planet, or even the whole solar system, have no significance whatsoever
in front of the whole physical world, which is the meanest and the
smallest of all other worlds.

My dear, you have not seen anything except yourself, and whatever you
have seen you did not compare it with the world around you. Compare
whatever you possess, from your life to the worldly treasures in your
possession, with your city, your city with your country, and your
country with all the hundreds of the countries of the world, whose names
you might not have even heard of, and all those countries with the whole
solar system and its vast spheres which are not more than tiny fragments
of the sun, and the whole solar system with the Milky Way, of which our
sun along with its planets is one of millions of other stars and a part
of the huge galaxy, and there are several million of such galaxies like
the Milky Way.

All these are a part of the physical world, whose vastness is not known
to anyone except its Creator and the discoveries of the discoverers have
succeeded in revealing only a small fraction of it. Yet this physical
world has no significance whatsoever as compared to the supra-physical
world, whose realms lie beyond the powers of imagination of the human
intellect. In the light of this, let us reexamine the extent and scope
of our lives and the share of our fortune in the realm of existence.

Thereafter, when God Almighty resolves to take you away from this world,
He commands all your powers to deteriorate and your perceptive faculties
to halt their activities. The mechanism of your life is broken down;
your auditory and visual senses, and your energies are taken back from
you and you become an inanimate inorganic substance. After the passage
of a few hours, people will not be able to tolerate the stench emanating
from your body and they will be averse to the view of your body and
face. All your bodily members and organs will decompose and disintegrate
after a few days. Such is the state of your body, and what will happen
to your wealth and glory is also quite obvious.

But as for your life in *Barzakh* (the Purgatory), if you depart, God
forbid, without reforming yourself, God alone knows what conditions and
states will be prescribed for you therein. Perceptions of the
inhabitants of this world are incapable of seeing, hearing, and smelling
the affairs of that world. Whatever you hear of the darkness, the
dreads, and the pressures of the grave, you compare them with
this-worldly dreads and pressures, but you are mistaken. O God, help us,
and rescue us from the calamity of what we ourselves have prepared with
our own hands. The punishment of the grave, which is a model of the
punishment in the Hereafter-and according to some traditions we will not
be able to avail in the *Barzakh* any intercession of the
intercessors-God alone knows what kind of punishment it will be! The
state of affairs on the Day of Resurrection will be worse and more
dreadful than all the past phases. It, will be the day of the revelation
of secrets, the manifestation of truths, and the day of the embodiment
of morals and actions. It will be the day of reckoning and the day of
disgrace. Such is the Day of Resurrection!

The Punishment In The Hereafter
-------------------------------

As to the conditions of the hell after the Day of Resurrection, they are
also known to you. Would you like to know more about the hell? The
punishment of hell will not be confined to the torments of fire alone; a
dreadful door will be opened to your eyes, which if opened to this world
its dread will destroy all of its inhabitants. A similar door will open
to your flesh, another to your nose, each of which will be sufficient to
kill the inhabitants of this world. One of the experts in the knowledge
of the Hereafter says that in the same way as the heat of hell will
reach the climax of its extremity, its coldness will also be at the
highest point of coldness.

God Almighty is capable of bringing together these two extreme
opposites. Such are the dreads of the Hereafter. In the light of all
this, one whose beginning lies in infinite nothingness; one who from the
point he steps into the world of existence, all whose stages of
development are ugly and indecent; all whose states are shameful; whose
conditions in the world, the Purgatory and the Hereafter, each one is
more horrible and disgraceful than the other-what reason has he for
pride?

What merit or glory makes him so boastful? Therefore, those whose
ignorance is more and whose rational faculties are more defective, are
more proud of themselves; and those whose knowledge is greater, whose
souls are more capacious, and whose breasts are spacious-they are
humbler and more modest.

Humility And Modesty Of The Prophet (S)
---------------------------------------

The Prophet (S), whose knowledge was derived from the Divine Revelation,
and whose soul was so great that it could preponderate over the spirits
of millions upon millions of human beings, who rejected all the
practices and customs of the pagan Arabs, who shattered under his feet
all the false creeds, abrogated all the scriptures, and the circle of
prophethood achieved its completion in his noble existence; who was the
ruler of the world and the hereafter, and who was the master of all the
worlds, with the permission of God Almighty; yet his humility towards
the creatures of God was more than of any other human being.

He hated to see his Companions stand up in his respect. Whenever he
entered a gathering, he used to sit in the lowest place He used to dine
on the floor and used to sit on the floor and used to say, “I am a slave
of God; I dine like a slave and sit in the manner proper for a slave.”
It has been reported from Imam al-Sadiq (A) that the Prophet (S)
preferred to ride a donkey without a saddle, preferred to dine in a
lowly place with the slaves, and offered alms to beggars with his two
hands. That holy personage used to ride a donkey and used to sit on the
mount with a slave or some other man.

It is written about him (S) that he used to share with the members of
his household the duties of housework himself used to milk the sheep,
stitch his own clothes and shoes, grind the flour and knead the dough,
and carry his belongings himself. He liked the company of the poor and
the destitutes and used to dine with them. Such, and better than what we
have described, was the character and the modesty of this great
personage, although besides holding his high spiritual station he held
to perfection the authority of a temporal sovereign. Similar was the
life and character of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A), who also followed the
Prophet’s way, and his character was identical to that of the Prophet
(S).

To Cure Pride, One Should Act Against Its Dictates
--------------------------------------------------

Therefore, my friend, if you are proud of your spiritual attainments,
they (i.e. the Prophet and Imam ‘Ali) were over and above all of us in
this respect; and if you have pride in your office and authority, they
possessed true sovereignty. Yet, in spite of it, their humility and
modesty was more than of anybody else. This shows that humility is the
product of knowledge and wisdom, and pride is the outcome of ignorance.

Therefore, free yourself from the ignominy of ignorance and the disgrace
of petty-mindedness; acquire the attributes of the prophets and shed the
qualities of Satan. Do not contend with your God regarding His mantle of
Pride and Glory, as His wrath will subdue the contender and he will fall
on his face into hell-fire. If you make up your mind for rectifying your
self, the way to do so is also easy if you are somewhat persevering. You
will not encounter any peril on this way if you move with manly resolve,
freedom of thought, and high-mindedness. The only way of overpowering
your carnal self and repelling the insinuations of Satan is to act
against their incitements.

No other way is better for crushing the desires of the self as adopting
the traits and qualities of the modest and following their behavior and
character. In whatever stage of pride you may be, and to whatever
scientific or professional field you belong, you are advised to act
against the inclinations and desires of the self. By discovering and
meditating about this-worldly and other-worldly consequences of pride,
it is hoped, your journey will become easier and you will reach the
desired goal. If your self wishes that you should take the seat of
chairmanship of the gathering or to take precedence over your colleagues
and equals, you should act against its desire. If your self incites you
to refrain from joining the company of the poor and indigent, admonish
it severely and resolutely go and sit in their company, dine with them
and travel with them.

It is possible that your inner self would try to prevent you by arguing
that you are a person of a higher position and that it is essential to
keep up your esteem and dignity for the sake of the propagation of the
*Shari’ah*, that sitting with the poor will undermine your respect in
society, that humor with the subordinates will be injurious to your
authority, that occupying a lowly place in gatherings will affect your
status and then you will not be able to perform your religious duties
properly... and so on.

Be certain that all these are guiles of the Devil and wiles of the self.
You have read and heard about the behavior and character of the Holy
Prophet (S), whose worldly position was incomparably superior to you.

A Reminiscence Of A Teacher
---------------------------

Among the scholars of our own times, I have seen a person who enjoyed
great eminence throughout the Shi’ah world and followed the footsteps of
the Holy Prophet (S). The respected teacher and the revered *faqih* Hajj
Shaykh ‘Abd al-Karim Ha’iri Yazdi enjoyed the sole *marji’iyyah* (Shiite
jurisprudential authority) of the Shiite world from 1340/1921 to
1355/1936. We have all seen his simplicity. He used to travel and dine
with his servants. He used to sit on the floor and make all kind of
strange jokes with the most junior of students.

During his last days, when he had taken ill, with slippers on, he used
to walk in the alley after the sunset, without a cloak and turban and
with a piece of cloth wrapped around his head. Regard and respect for
him grew in the hearts of the people, and these acts of him did not
affect his high station either.

There were other great scholars in Qum besides him, for whom these
barriers that are created for you by the Devil did not exist. They used
to buy their foodstuffs and goods by themselves, used to fetch water
from the water tanks and attend to the duties of housework also. They
meted out equal treatment to the senior and the junior and did not
differentiate between the first rankers and others of a subordinate
rank. Their humanity and modesty made people wonder and their respect
was also not lowered; rather it was enhanced in the hearts of the
people. Anyhow, the attributes of the Prophet (S) and Imams (A) do not
derogate people.

But one should be cautious of the guiles of the self while opposing it,
as it may lure you into its snares and use other tactics for defeating
your purpose. For example, you will observe some person occupy an
inconspicuous place in a gathering, but in a fashion, which is meant to
make others understand that his position is superior to all the others
present and that it was but a gesture of humility and modesty on his
part that he has occupied that place.

Or, for instance, if he had declined in favor of a person of uncertain
superiority over himself, he will give priority over himself to someone
who it is certain is of a lower rank, thus immediately making it clear
that he had declined in favor of the first one because of his own
humility. These, and hundreds other like this, are the wiles of self,
which add *riya’* and hypocrisy to pride, and unless one does not
resolve to combat them with a sincere determination one will not succeed
in rectifying one’s self.

All the vices of the soul are rectifiable, but a little diligence is
needed in the beginning. After one has entered the process of
self-correction, everything becomes easier for him. The main thing is to
realize the need for the rectification of the self and to wake up from
the spell of self-negligence,

Yaqzah (Awakening) Is The First Step
------------------------------------

The first stage of humanness is *yaqzah.* It signifies the awakening
from the slumber of obliviousness and the intoxication of physical
nature, and the realization of the fact that man is a traveler and like
any other traveler he also needs some provisions for this journey. His
morality and character are his provisions for this journey.

The only means of undertaking this hazardous and perilous journey on
this dark and narrow path, which is sharper than the sword’s blade and
thinner than a hair, is manly courage. The light of this path is one’s
faith and one’s good qualities. If he is lazy and negligent and gives in
to weakness, he will not be able to cross it with safety and will fall
headlong into the hell of disgrace and into the gorge of perdition. And
one who cannot pass safely over this path will, also, not be able to
pass over the *Sirat* in the Hereafter.

My dear, be brave and tear apart the curtain of ignorance and folly and
deliver yourself from this terrible abyss. ‘Ali (A), the Lord of the
Pious, the unique wayfarer of the paths of heavens and the real guide,
used to cry out in the mosque so loudly that he could be heard in the
neighborhood:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَجَهَّزُوا – رَحِمَكُمُ اللهُ – فَقَدْ نُودِيَ فِيكُمْ بِالرَّحِيلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Equip yourselves and be ready, your departure has already been
announced.

No preparations will be more beneficial to you than your good moral
characteristics and merits, the heart’s piety, the righteous deeds, and
the purity and spotlessness of your conscience. If, supposedly, you are
a person of incomplete and apparent faith, you should cleanse yourself
of these impurities so that Divine mercy will put you amongst the
righteous and pious servants of God. Only the fire of repentance
(*tawbah*) will clean these impurities, when the self is melted in the
furnace of self-reproach with the fuel of remorse and return towards
God. Today perform this smelting yourself, in this world; otherwise only
God knows how many centuries of the Hereafter it will take for your soul
to be refined in the furnace of Divine chastisement, and with a fire of
which it has been said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿نَارُ اللَّهِ الْمُوقَدَةُ. الَّتِي تَطَّلِعُ عَلَى الْأَفْئِدَةِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is the fire of Allah, kindled, which leapeth up over the
hearts.*** (***109-6-7***)

It is much easier to purify oneself in this world, as changes occur
rapidly in this world; but in the next world, the process of change will
be a prolonged process, and the effacement of one evil attribute of the
soul will take several centuries.

Therefore, my dear, try to reform your self as long as you possess life,
youth, energy, and freedom. Do not pay any attention to this-worldly
fame and glory. Trample such phantoms under your feet. You are the. son
of Adam (A), so free your self from the trait. of Satan Perhaps the
Devil gives more importance to see that this vice, which is
characteristic of his own nature and for which he was driven out of the
court of the Almighty God, is shared by everyone, the sage or the
commoner, the scholar or the unlettered, and that they join his fold.

Then if you meet him in the next world, having carried this vice with
you, he will rebuke you for having adopted this vice. he will say to
you, ‘O son of Adam! Didn’t the prophets inform you that my haughtiness
towards your father drove me out of the court of the Almighty? I was
cursed due to my scorning of Adam and my self glorifying. Why did you
allow yourself to be afflicted by this vice?”

At that time, you, wretched creature that you would be, besides
confronting all kind of humiliations and tortures, besides all the
regret and remorse, will also have to face the rebukes of the most
wretched of beings and the basest of creatures. Satan was not guilty of
pride towards God, but of pride towards the creature of God and had said
to Him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿خَلَقْتَنِي مِنْ نَارٍ وَخَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ طِينٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Thou createdst me of fire., and him Thou didst create of clay.***
(***7:12***)

In this manner he glorified himself and looked down on Adam (A). You,
also, who look down on the progeny of Adam and glorify yourself, have
disobeyed God’s Commands; for God has commanded His creatures to be
modest and humble towards other human beings. You who treat people with
haughty contempt, why do you curse the Devil alone?

Why don’t you include your vicious self also in this curse, as it also
shares this vice with him? The proud man is a personification of all
Satans; perhaps in the purgatory and on the Day of Resurrection, his
appearance will be that of Satan. The criterion of man’s form in the
Hereafter are his spiritual qualities. It’s possible that you will
acquire the form of Satan as well as the size of an ant. The standards
in the Hereafter will be different from those in this world.

The Vicious Subtleties Of The Self
----------------------------------

Sometimes it happens that a person who lacks a certain merit is proud
towards the possessor of that merit, such as when a poor person is proud
towards a rich one or when an ignorant one is proud towards a learned
person. It should be remembered that in the same way as ‘*ujb* is
sometimes the source of pride, jealousy (*hasad*) may also be the source
of pride. One may perceive himself as lacking in a certain merit, which
is present in another; then he becomes jealous of him and this serves as
the cause of pride towards the other person, whom he tries to insult in
all possible ways.

In al-Kafi it has been reported from Imam al-Sadiq (A) that he said,
“Pride is found in the most vicious of human beings, to whatever kind
they may belong.” Then he added: “Once the Prophet (S) was passing
through one of the lanes of al-Madinah where a negress was gathering
dung. She was told to move aside and allow the Prophet (S) to pass. She
answered that the passage was wide enough. One of the persons who
accompanied the Prophet (S) tried to threaten her, but the Prophet (S)
prevented him from doing so, saying: Leave her alone, she is a proud
woman.”

Sometimes this vicious habit is seen among some scholars, who make an
excuse that to act with humility with the wealthy is not a virtue. Their
vicious self makes them believe that modesty with the rich weakens
faith. The poor fellow cannot differentiate between the humility before
wealth and humility towards the rich and others. It is true that
sometimes the vice of love of the world and the ambition for worldly
honor and glory makes men to adopt modest and humble behavior. This
cannot be counted as modesty; it is flattery, and is reckoned as a moral
vice.

The possessor of this trait does not show humbleness to the poor, except
when his self-interest requires it or when he uses it as a bait. But it
is also true that the virtue of humility of men invites man to act with
modesty and humility towards the others, irrespective of whether they
are rich or poor, whether of enviable conditions or not. That is, their
modesty is sincere and pure. Their souls are clean and unstained by the
love for popularity in society and honor, which have no charm for them.
This kind of humility and modesty is good with the poor, and it is good
with the rich as well.

Everyone should be treated with the respect that is due to him. But this
pride and contempt of yours towards the rich and wealthy is not on
account of the fact that you are not a sycophant, but it is because you
are a jealous person, and you do not understand this. If the same rich
man were unexpectedly to show you respect, you will be humble and modest
with him. In any case, the snares and the skilful guiles of the self are
so subtle that one cannot do anything except taking refuge in God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالحَمْدُ للهِ أَوَّلاً وَآخِراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Praise is God’s, in the beginning and the end.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi (Tehran), Vol. III (Arabic text with
Persian translation by Hajj Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi), pp. 421-422.

[^2]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, Vol. III, p. 426.

[^3]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi,Vol. III. p. 424.

[^4]: Al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Shu’bah al Harrani, Tuhaf
al-’uqul (Kitab furushi Islamiyyah, Tehran, 1402 H.), Arabic text with
Persian translation by Ahmad Jannati ‘Ata’i, p. 327.

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, Vol. III, p. .423.

[^6]: Usul al-Kafi, Vol. III, p. 423.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, Vol. III, p. 424.


