Fifth Hadith: Envy (Hasad)
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالسَّنَدِ المُتَّصِلِ إِلى مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ عَنْ عَلِيٍّ
بْنِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عِيسَى عَنْ يُونُسَ عَنْ
دَاوُدَ الرَّقِّيِّ قَالَ: قَالَ أَبُو عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ:
قَالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لِمُوسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ: يَا بْنَ
عِمْرَانَ لا تَحْسِدَنَّ النَّاسَ عَلَى مَا آتَيْتُهُمْ مِنْ فَضْلِي
وَلا تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ إلى ذَلَكَ وَلا تُتْبِعْهُ نَفْسَكَ، فَإنَّ
الحَاسِدَ سَاخِطٌ لِنِعْمَتِي ضَادٌّ لِقِسْمِي الَّذِي قَسَمْتُ بَيْنَ
عِبَادِي، وَمَنْ يَكُ كَذَلِكَ فَلَسْتُ مِنْهُ وَلَيْسَ مِنِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub (al-Kulayni), from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from Muhammad
ibn ‘Isa, from Yunus, from Dawud al-Raqqi, who reports from Abu ‘Abd
Allah (Imam al-Sadiq) (A) that the Apostle of God (S) said that God
Almighty addressed Musa ibn ‘Imran (A) thus: “O son of ‘Imran, never be
envious of people concerning the favors I have conferred on them by My
grace, do not glower at them, and do not succumb to your (envious) self.
Indeed the envious man is indignant at the bestowal of My favor, and
contests My apportioning of gifts among My creatures. Whoso is such, he
neither belongs to Me nor do I belong to him.”[^1]

Definition Of Hasad
-------------------

*Hasad* or envy is a psychic state in which a person wishes for the
deprivation of a blessing, talent or merit, real or imagined, possessed
by another person. It does not make any difference to the envious man
whether lie possesses it or not, whether he can acquire it or not.

The term ‘imagined’ is used here for the reason that it is not necessary
that there should be any real merits or advantage in the true sense of
the word. For it has been established by observation that even things
which are vices and defects, on account of their being considered by the
envious as excellences and merits, he desires their destruction.

Sometimes it is also true that certain attributes, which are a defect in
a human being but are bestial accomplishments are envied by the envious
man on account of the significance that he attaches to such qualities.
He sees them as merits on account of his animal state, and desires that
the other man should be deprived of them. For instance, there are
certain persons who consider ruthlessness and brutality as virtues, and
when they see a person possessing these qualities they envy him.

There are some who consider the capacity for idle talk and vulgar jokes
as virtues, and they feel jealous of those skilled at them. Therefore,
the criterion for identifying this psychic disease is the imagined
existence of merits and the suspected presence of accomplishments in the
mind of the afflicted person, not the real presence of merit and
accomplishment itself. In short, whenever a person notices any merit
(real or imaginary) in others and wishes for their loss and destruction,
such a person is described as *hasid* or envious.

Kinds Of Hasad
--------------

There are various kinds and degrees of *hasad* according to the state
and condition of the *mahsud* (the one envied), the *hasud* (the one who
envies), and the nature of *hasad* itself.

*According to the condition of the mahsud:* Qualities like certain
intellectual, spiritual, and moral merits, or good and pious deeds, or
outward factors like wealth, honor, and prestige can cause envy. Also
their antithetical qualities, when they are imagined to be merits, can
also cause envy and jealousy.

*According to the condition of the envious person:* The feeling of envy
in the heart of the person who harbors it is sometimes caused by enmity,
sometimes by pride, and at other times by fear and the like-causes which
will be discussed later on.

*According to the condition of envy itself:* As for envy itself, the
classification performed on its basis is an essential one, not those
performed on the previous bases. There are several stages and grades of
intensity and weakness according to their various causes and effects.
God willing, we will deal with their harmful effects and the methods of
curing them in several sections according to our capabilities, and hope
to receive His assistance in this regard.

The Causes And Motives Of Hasad
-------------------------------

There are numerous causes of *hasad,* and the main among them, as
opposed to *kibr,* are products of a feeling of one’s inferiority. In
the same way as a person contemplating his own merits considers others
to lack them, with a sense of elation, exultation, and rebelliousness
overcoming him; in the same manner when someone perceives others to be
more perfect, a feeling of inferiority and dejection seizes him, which,
with the help of external factors and inner propensities, generate the
feeling of envy in his heart.

Sometimes it may happen that he feels dejected on account of someone
sharing his merit, such as when a person endowed with a merit feels
jealous of those on an equal or lower footing than himself. Therefore,
it may be said that envy is a state of abjectness and dejection, which
finds an expression in the desire for the destruction, or deprival of
others’ merits and advantages. Accordingly, some scholars, like
al-’*Allamah* al-Majlisi, have confined the causes of envy to the
following seven:

1. Enmity.

2. The sense of one’s supremacy: It may happen that the envious man
anticipates the pride of the envied on account of a merit and advantage
that he enjoys. Not having the patience to put up with the pride, he
earnestly desires the loss of those merits and advantages.

3*. Kibr* (pride): The envious person desires to treat high-handedly the
person who is conferred some merit or favor, which is not possible
unless those favors and merits are lost.

4. Wonder: The envious person is puzzled to see the great blessing
enjoyed by the object of his envy. God Almighty reports the nations of
the past as saying to the prophets:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنْ أَنْتُمْ إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُنَا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Ye are but mortals like us.*** (***14:10***)

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَقَالُوا أَنُؤْمِنُ لِبَشَرَيْنِ مِثْلِنَا؟﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they said: ‘Shall we put faith in two mortals like ourselves?’***
(***23:47***)

They wondered as to how a mortal like them could reach the high station
of prophethood and be inspired by God; so they felt envious on account
of it.

5. Fear: The envious man is apprehensive of some hindrance on the part
of the person enjoying an advantage or merit that may, he fears,
frustrate his cherished aims and objectives.

6. Love of authority: This becomes a cause of envy when one’s acquiring
or preserving authority over others requires that nobody should share
his advantages or merits.

7. Viciousness of nature: The man of vicious nature does not like to see
others enjoying any kind of good whatsoever.

In the view of this writer, most, or rather all, of these causes are
derived from the feeling of inferiority and dejection.

Some Evil Effects Of Envy
-------------------------

Envy itself is one of the deadliest diseases of the heart. The mortal
diseases of the heart, like pride and other vices, though each is a
mortal sin in itself, produces additional vices each of which is fatal
independently. We shall discuss here a few of them, which are apparent
and known to this author. There may be others, which are hidden and
unknown. In two *sahih* traditions Imam al-Sadiq (A) and Imam al-Baqir
(A) inform us about the evil effects of *hasad:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُعَاوِيَةَ بْنِ وَهَبٍ قَالَ: قَالَ أَبُو عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ: آفَةُ الدِّينِ الحَسَدُ وَالعُجْبُ وَالفَخْرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mu’awiyah ibn wahab reports that Imam al-Sadiq (A) said, “Hasad, ‘ujb,
and vainglory are a bane of faith.”[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ مُسْلِمٍ عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
قَالَ: إنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَأْتِي بِأَدْنَى بَادِرَةٍ فَيُكَفَّرُ.
وَإنَّ الحَسَدَ لَيَأْكُلُ الإيمَانَ كَمَا تَأْكُلُ النَّارُ الحَطَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad ibn Muslim reports that Imam al-Baqir (A) said, “A man may be
forgiven for something done in a fit of anger; but envy devours faith as
fire consumes wood.”[^3]

It is a known fact that faith is a Divine light that illumines the human
heart with the radiance of His glory, as has been related by the *hadith
qudsi* quoted before:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَسَعُنِي أَرْضِي وَلا سَمَائِي، بَلْ يَسَعُنِي قَلْبُ عَبْدِيَ
المُؤْمِنُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Neither [the vastness of] My earth, nor [that of] My heaven can contain
Me. Indeed it is the heart of the man of faith, which can contain Me.

The spiritual light and the divine spark, which makes the human heart
greater than anything else in the world does not go along with the
darkness and narrowness, caused in it by this grievous vice. This
hideous quality makes the human heart so narrow and dejected that its
effects become apparent throughout the realm of one’s inner and outer
being.

The heart becomes grieved and depressed, the chest narrow and
suffocated, and the face grim and frowning.

This state extinguishes the light of faith and deadens the human heart.
The more it gains in strength, the more it diminishes the brightness of
faith. All the inward and outward attributes of faith are negated by the
effects of envy, which are manifested within and without one’s
personality. The man of faith is optimistic and has a hopeful attitude
towards God, and is satisfied with the way He has divided and
apportioned His bounties among His creatures. The envious person is
displeased with God and is resentful of the fate apportioned by Him. As
mentioned in tradition, a believer is not malicious towards other
believers; he loves them, whereas the envious man acts in an opposite
manner.

A true believer is not possessed by the love of mundane things, whereas
the envious man is afflicted with this vice due to his love of the
world. A believer has no fear or grief whatsoever in his heart, except
for that which is associated with the Ultimate Source and End of all
being. But the fears and griefs of the envious man revolve around the
person of whom he is jealous. The believer has a beaming countenance,
which depicts his cheerful nature. The envious man has a frowning face
and a grim countenance. The believer is humble, and is (most of the
time) not proud or envious.

Envy destroys faith in the same way as fire burns up wood. Therefore,
there does not exist any doubt about the danger of this vice, which
wrests from man his faith, the source of his salvation in the Hereafter
and the life and vigor of his heart, and reduces him into a helpless
wretch.

A great evil that is an inseparable ingredient of envy is indignation
with the Creator and the Beneficent Nourisher and annoyance with His
ordainments. Deprived of vision by the dark veils of carnal nature, our
immersion in the world of senses has blinded the eyes and deafened the
ears. We do not understand that we are angry with the King of kings, nor
know as to what form our anger and resentment will acquire as the result
of this vice in the next world, our permanent abode. We hear the words
of Imam al-Sadiq (A):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَكُ كَذَلِكَ فَلَسْتُ مِنْهُ وَلَيْسَ مِنِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoso is such, he neither belongs to Me nor do I belong to him.

Yet we do not understand the magnitude of the misfortune of God
Almighty’s disowning us, and what His disgust with us will bring for us.
One who is driven out from the sphere of His *wilayah* (guardianship)
and is not accepted under the standard of the Mercy of the Most
Merciful, there is no hope of his salvation. He will, not be able to
receive any intercession of the intercessors either:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿مَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يَشْفَعُ عِنْدَهُ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Who is he that intercedeth with Him save by His leave?***
(***2:255***)

Who will act as an intercessor for one who is wrathful and resentful
towards God, outside the pale of His *wilayah,* and whose bonds of love
between him and his Lord have been severed? Woe to us for the calamity
we have invited for ourselves! Despite all the warnings and alarms
sounded by the apostles of God to awaken us from the slumber, our
neglect and our wretchedness only grew day by day.

The Punishment Of The Grave
---------------------------

According to the *ulama*, the punishment of the grave and the darkness
therein is one of the evil consequences of this vice. They maintain that
the bearer of this vice, with its associated spiritual tension and
gloom, is oppressed by pressure and darkness in the grave and in
*Barzakh.* One’s condition in the grave depends upon the spaciousness of
the hearts and the narrowness thereof.

Imam al-Sadiq (A) is narrated to have said that the Prophet (S) went to
attend the funeral of Sa’d. While seventy thousand angels accompanied
the ceremonies, the Prophet (S) of God raised his head towards the
heavens and said, “Does anyone face the squeeze (of the grave) as Sa’d
faced?” The narrator of the tradition said to the Imam: “May I die for
your sake, we have been told that Sa’d was not very particular of
*taharah* while passing urine.” The Imam said, “God forbid, his only
fault was that he was harsh in his treatment of the people of his
household...:’

The state of darkness, narrowness, tension and constriction that appears
in one’s heart due to this vice is not likely to occur in other moral
vices. In any case, the person possessing this vicious trait suffers
torments in this life, then the oppressive darkness and constriction in
the grave, and will ultimately be helpless and wretched in the
Hereafter. All these are the evil effects of envy alone, on condition
that it does not breed any other vice or induce any other evil deed. But
it rarely happens that it does not generate some other affliction.
Rather, it often begets many other moral vices and misdeeds, such as
pride, as mentioned earlier, and other sins like backbiting, slandering,
abusing, and torturing, etc., each one of which is a deadly and mortal
sin.

Therefore, it is necessary for a wise person to make up his mind
immediately and strive to get rid of this shame and indignity, saving
his faith from the blaze of this fire and its disaster lie should rid
himself of this mental torture and narrow-mindedness, which is it
perpetual lifelong punishment in this world, followed by distress and
darkness in the grave and the Purgatory, and incurs Divine wrath. One
should consider that a malady, which has so many, harms needs to be
treated urgently. His envy does not harm the person of whom he is
envious. It does not make him lose any of the favors and merits either.
It may even give him some satisfaction, in this world as well as in the
other, to see the distress of one who is jealous of him and is his
enemy.

While he continues to enjoy all those advantages, which cause you
distress and anguish, it is yet another gift for him. And if you are
again jealous of him for the second one, it will multiply your torment
and anguish, which will again be a blessing for him, and so on. Hence
you shall ever remain in grief, pain, and anguish and he in a state of
bliss, joy, and exuberance. In the Hereafter, also, your envy will
benefit him, especially if it culminates in backbiting, slandering, and
other such acts of malice; as your good deeds will be assigned to him.
You will be reduced to utter destitution and he will enjoy bounties and
eminence. If you deliberate upon the matter for a while, you shall of
course purge yourself from this vice and save your soul from its
destructive effects.

Don’t think that psychic, moral, and spiritual vices are not curable;
this is an erroneous notion that has been inspired in you by Satan and
your carnal self, who want to keep you from treading the path of the
Hereafter and to frustrate your efforts at rectifying your self. As long
as man exists in this realm of transition and change, it is possible for
him to transform all his attributes and moral characteristics.

However strong his habits may be, as long as he is living in this world
he can quit them. The only thing is that the effort required to throw
them off varies with the degree of their strength and intensity. A bad
habit in the early phase of its formation, of course, requires only a
little self-discipline and effort to eradicate it. It is like uprooting
a young plant that has not run its roots deeply into the ground. But
when a quality becomes firmly rooted in one’s nature, becoming a part of
one’s spiritual makeup, it is not easily uprooted, but requires much
effort, like the tree that becomes old in age, having sent down its
roots deep into the earth; it cannot be easily extirpated. The more you
delay the decision to eradicate the iniquities of the heart, the more
time and effort it will require.

My dear, in the first place do not allow any moral vice, bad habit or
evil deed to enter the realm of your inner and outer being. This task is
much easier than that of expelling them after they enter, establish
themselves, and start flourishing. And if they enter, the more you delay
the action required to expel them, the more time and effort will it
require, and they will corrupt your inner faculties in the mean time.

Our great Shaykh, the accomplished ‘*arif* Shahabadi-my soul be
sacrificed for him—used to say that it is better to take an action
against moral vices when one’s youth and its powers and vivacity are
still there. At that stage one can fulfill one’s responsibilities as a
human being in a better way. One should not allow oneself to delay until
one’s powers have departed; as it becomes more difficult to achieve
success in this regard when old age sets in. Even if, presumably, one
succeeds, the effort required for the reform is, in comparison, much
greater.

Therefore, if a wise person considers the evil effects of anything and
realizes that he is not afflicted by it, he does not involve himself in
it and does not allow it to contaminate him; and if, God forbid, he is
afflicted he tries to get rid of it and correct himself as soon as
possible, not allowing it to strengthen its roots. If, God forbid, it
has taken roots, he makes every effort to root it out so as to avoid its
evil consequences in the Purgatory and the Hereafter. If he is
transferred in the state of affliction from this world of material
change, he will no longer be able to do anything about it. Woe to the
man who is such, for it will take ages of the *Barzakh* and the
Hereafter to transform a single moral characteristic.

In a tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) has been reported to have said that
every inhabitant of Paradise or Hell is consigned to it eternally on
account of his or her intentions and aims. Bad intentions, which result
from evil morals, cannot be shed unless their source and origin is
destroyed. In that world human qualities will manifest themselves with
such an intensity and power that either it is not possible for them to
perish at all-in which case one is lodged eternally in the Hell—or it is
possible to purge them only through torment, distress, and flames—in
which case it will take a time of several centuries of the Hereafter.

Therefore, O wise man, do not allow a vice which can be removed by
little effort of a month or a year or two, and whose removal is fully
within your capacity and means, to linger on and cause the distresses of
this world and the Hereafter and ultimately destroy you.

The Source Of Moral Corruption
------------------------------

It was mentioned earlier that faith, which is the joy and fortune of the
soul, is different from knowledge, which is the pleasure and
satisfaction of the intellect. All moral and behavioral corruptions
ensue from the absence of faith in one’s heart i.e. whatever the
intellect and reason have comprehended through rational proofs or the
reports of the prophets fails to enter the heart, and the heart is
unaware of their truth.

One of the doctrines which every ‘*arif*, *Hakim*, *mutakallim*, as well
as the laity and the legists, affirm and regard as indubitable is that
whatever has come into existence as the result of the stroke of the Pen
of the absolutely Wise Creator, from the viewpoint of being and
perfection to the apportioning of the means of sustenance among
creatures and the ordination of their terms of life---everything
demonstrates the utmost beauty of design and the utmost perfection of a
system which is in complete accordance with the *sumum bonum* of the
creatures and the most complete and perfect system imaginable.

However, each one of them describes this graciousness of God and His
absolute wisdom in his own specific language and in accordance with the
terminology of his discipline. The ‘*arif* says, “It is the shadow of
the Absolute Beauty.” The *Hakim* says, “The system of the real world is
in accordance with a scientific scheme free from any defect and evil;
that which is presumed to be evil in particular instances is nothing but
a means for the creatures to acquire their deserved degree of
perfection.” The *mutakallim* and the legist believe that God’s Acts are
based upon wisdom and the general good, and man’s limited intellect is
incapable of comprehending the higher good intrinsic in Divine
ordainments.

All subscribe to this idea and everyone sets forth an argument to prove
it according to his own knowledge and intelligence. But since they do
not go beyond words and have not entered the heart, voices of protest
and objection can still be heard, and yet the same man, not enjoying the
bounty of faith, counters his own words and confutes his own arguments.
Moral vices, too, are rooted in this weakness of faith.

The one who feels jealous of others and desires for the loss of a good
enjoyed by another and harbors spite against those who possess it in his
heart, should know that he does not believe that it is in his own
interest that God Almighty has not bestowed upon him that favor. Our
limited understanding fails to comprehend the wisdom of His
determinations. He should realize that he does not have faith in Divine
Justice and the justness of His apportioning.

Verbally he may declare his belief in the doctrine of Divine Justice.
But his declaration is mere words; for the belief in the justness of God
is contrary to envy. If you deem Him just, then consider His ordainment
to be just too, for the *hadith* says expressly that the envious man is
resentful at God’s apportioning of gifts among His creatures and
indignant at the favors conferred by Him. In accordance with the Divine
instincts inherent in him, man by nature is a lover of justice. Modesty
and reverence before justice and hatred and rebellion before injustice
are rooted in his nature. However, if an opposite attitude is observed,
it is because of a defect in his premises.

If he is indignant at the advantages enjoyed by others and is
contentious about the Divine apportioning of bounties, it is on account
of the fact that lie does not consider it as just, but, God forbid,
regards it as unjust and cruel. It is not because he considers the
Divine apportioning as just and is yet resentful of it. It is not that
he considers the Divine plan to be a perfect system and absolutely good
and yet is displeased with it. Alas, our faith is not complete and the
intellectual proofs have not crossed the limits of reason and intellect
to enter the realm of the heart. Faith is not [solely] a matter of
utterance. It is not mere reading, discussing, or quoting others; it
requires sincerity of intention. One who seeks God succeeds in finding
Him. Those who are interested in Divine knowledge, seek it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَنْ كَانَ فِي هَذِهِ أَعْمَى فَهُوَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ أَعْمَى
وَأَضَلُّ سَبِيلاً.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoso is blind here will be blind in the Hereafter, and yet further
front the road.*** (***17:72***)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَنْ لَمْ يَجْعَلْ اللَّهُ لَهُ نُورًا فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ نُورٍ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he for whom Allah hath not appointed light, for him there is no
light.*** (***24:40***)

The Practical Remedy For Envy
-----------------------------

Besides the theoretical cure that has been mentioned above, there is a
practical remedy also for this hideous vice. It consists of this: Try,
forcibly, to be affectionate with the person of whom you are jealous. By
making a display of your affection, your purpose should be to cure
yourself of this internal malady. Your inner self will ask you to hurt
him and malign him. It will demand that you treat him like an enemy and
recount to you his vices and mistakes. But you act against the
inclinations of your self and be friendly with him. honor him and
respect him and force yourself to speak in his praise. Try to see his
virtues yourself and make them known to others too, concentrating upon
his good qualities.

Though your behavior will be affected and unnatural in the beginning,
being artificial and feigned, but since your aim is self-rectification
and curing of this vice, your behavior will gradually become less
artificial. Day by day this affectation will be lessened and your self
will become accustomed to it and that which was affectation will become
reality. You convince your self and make it understand that he is a
creature of God; perhaps it is God’s grace, which has selected him for
the advantage that he enjoys.

If the object of your envy is a scholar endowed with knowledge and
piety, and you are jealous of him due to these merits, your envy is all
the more abominable and this enmity will bring you greater harm in the
Hereafter. It is for you to make your self understand that they are
chosen servants of God, who, through Divine grace, have been
distinguished by that great merit and favor.

Such a gift ought to make one feel affectionate and kindly towards its
possessors, inclining one to respect them and to be humble towards them.
Hence, if one perceives that anything that should stir up love and
respect in his heart is causing something that is contrary to it, he
should know that the baser emotions have overpowered him and their
darkness has conquered his inner self. Now it is time for him to
positively resolve to get rid of it by all theoretical and practical
means.

If he tries to stimulate the feelings of love and friendship in his
heart, he will succeed soon, since the light of love conquers the
darkness of hatred. God Almighty has promised that He will guide those
who struggle and help them through His invisible grace and increase
their capacities:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُ وَلِيُّ التَّوْفِيقِ وَالهِدَايَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Indeed He possesses the authority to grant ability and to guide.’

The Tradition Regarding Remission Of Envy
-----------------------------------------

In some of the holy traditions, it has been reported from the Prophet
(S) that he enumerated nine things from which his Ummah have been
granted remission; *hasad,* in case it is not expressed in one’s words
or deeds, is one of them. This tradition, and others similar to it,
should not, of course, prevent one from seriously uprooting the vicious
tree of envy from the self and freeing the soul from this faith-
consuming fire. Because, it rarely happens that this vicious thing
enters the soul without breeding diverse abominations there, without its
signs becoming visible, and without harming one’s faith.

It is mentioned in *sahih* *ahadith* that envy devours faith and is
baleful to it, and that God Almighty disowns the envious person and
would have nothing to do with him. Therefore, a thing, which is a major
source of corruption and endangers all that matters to a human being
should not be taken lightly due to misunderstanding the Prophetic
*hadith* about remission of the sin of *hasad.*

Therefore, it is for you to take the matter seriously and snip off its
branches and try to rectify yourself. Do not allow its venom to spill
over in your outward behavior, as it will weaken its roots and stop its
growth. And if you die during this period of spiritual reform and
struggle, you will be blessed with Divine Mercy. With His infinite mercy
and the boon provided by the spiritual station of the interceding Holy
Prophet (S), you will be granted forgiveness. The spark of Divine
beneficence will burn up any remaining traces of it, and the soul will
be purged and purified.

As to the following tradition narrated by Hamzah ibn Humran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ قَالَ: ثَلاثَةٌ لَمْ يُنَجَّ
مِنْهَا نَبِيٌّ فَمَنْ دُونَهُ: التَّفَكُّرُ فِي الوَسْوَسَةِ فِي
الخَلْقِ وَالطِّيَرَةُ وَالحَسَدُ، إلا أَنَّ المُؤْمِنَ لا
يَسْتَعْمِلُ هَذَا (الحَسَدَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah (Imam al-Sadiq) (A) said, “There are three things from
which neither any prophet nor others below his rank are Immune: doubts
about the creation, anticipation of misfortune for others, and envy,
although a believer does never make use of them.”[^4]

Either the statement is hyperbolic, the intention being that these form
the most frequent basis of their tribulations, without their being
actually subject to these vices; or *hasad* is used here to connote
*ghibtah* (envy which is free of ill will); or what is meant is the
inclination to wish for the loss of some of the advantages enjoyed by
infidels who propagate false beliefs. Otherwise, the prophets of God and
the saints are free from any taint of *hasad* in the real sense of the
word.

A heart, which is defiled with moral evils and inner impurities, cannot
receive Divine inspiration and revelation. Such a heart does not become
a mirror of the light of Divine Attributes and the radiance of the
Essence. Therefore, this tradition ought to be interpreted in the manner
indicated above or in some other fashion, or it should be referred back
to its speaker (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالحَمْدُ للهِ أَوَّلاً وَآخِراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Praise is God’s, in the beginning and the end.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi (Pub. by Intishirat-e’ilmiyyah Islamiyyah, Arabic
text with Persian translation by Hajj Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi), vol. III,
p. 418.

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi (Pub. by Intishirat-e’ilmiyyah Islamiyyah, Arabic
text with Persian translation by Hajj Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi), vol. III,
p. 418.

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi (Pub. by Intishirat-e’ilmiyyah Islamiyyah, Arabic
text with Persian translation by Hajj Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi), vol. III,
p. 416.

[^4]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, Bab ‘al- amr bi al-ma’ruf’.


