Preface
=======

History is a mirror that reflects the past events and happenings to the
inquisitive eyes of the researchers who, years and centuries later,
anxiously and eagerly try to scrutinize the past generations in order to
recognize among them the forgotten figures, their roles, and their
decisive historical impact. It teaches lessons of benevolence, honesty,
and righteousness from the good among them and creates a strong dislike
for the evil ones so that their footsteps are not followed.

Nevertheless, the mirror of history is not as transparent and
exhilarating as it should be; for, instead of illustrating the birth of
stars and the sunrise, it has crammed the long and tortuous memory of
ages and epochs with bitter recollections, sad views of sunset and
horrendous scenes of darkness!

Then, are the historians to be blamed to have witnessed most of the
sorrows, battles, killings, wailings, and captivities, overlooking the
beautiful blossoms and flowerings; or else, since the historians aspired
to record something attractive and unique, to witness a smile, and to
profile kind and relaxing moments of history and there were few of them
to be found, and such moments were overshadowed by the onslaught of
brutalities and oppressions!

In any case, we are now opening another page from the early history of
Islam that has perhaps remained hidden from the eyes of majority of
Muslims across the world. However, the magnitude of oppression and
aggression committed against innocent human beings and brutalities
reported in the pages of history against the inhabitants of the holy
city of Medina still shakes human conscience, and mournfully bereaves
souls and bitterly torments fair-minded people.

The battle of Harrah, which should be rightfully called the “tragedy of
Harrah” occurred just 64 years after the migration of the Holy Prophet
(s) to Medina and 53 years after his sad demise. It took place in
Medina, a city that was named as the city of the Prophet (s) whose
people were from the generation of the men and women who fore mostly
established the foundations of amity, compassion, benevolence, honesty
and great Islamic culture throughout the violently hostile Arab lands,
and with their self-sacrifice removed the pagan Arab customs of murder,
plunder, and transgression and promoted the divine culture of knowledge
and insight, and respect for human dignity.

However, within this short historical period of 64 years, especially
after the sad demise of the Prophet of God (s), the Muslim community
witnessed certain adverse and unanticipated events which eventually led
the Umayyad rule over them. Banu Umayyah (the Umayyids) that was the
polytheist tribe, and among the most aggressive ones against the Prophet
(s) and the Muslims, took the reign of Caliphate and command of the
Muslims' lives, property, and honor just within 40 years of the demise
of the Prophet (s).

Yesterday's rebels and polytheists now returned triumphantly and sat on
the Prophet's (s) pulpit and proclaimed to be the commanders of the
faithful!

Those freed at the conquest of Mecca and those who enjoyed the Prophet's
clemency and compassion (known as 'tulaqa'), were resolute to take his
*Ummah* as prisoners!

It was thus that after the battle of Harrah “Those among the children
and descendents of *Ansār* (Helpers) and *Muhājirin* (Emigrants) who
survived this tragedy had to formally admit in front of the commander of
the Shāmi (Syrian) army that they were the slaves of Yazīd (the leader
of the Umayyid) and that he is allowed to do with them whatever he
wished to!”

Achievements of this Research
-----------------------------

This research does not intend to call the uprising of the inhabitants of
Medina against the oppressive Umayyid rule of Yazid as great
socio-religious bravery, although it can neither ignore the existence of
religious, humanistic, and reformative motivations in that uprising.
However, it can definitely arrive at the conclusion that the trend of
Islamic Caliphate transformed into an anti-Islamic and anti-human trend
in which Yazīd's hereditary monarchy represented the peak of this
deviation.

The foundation of every government, its goals, its treatment of subjects
and policies in general and its performance in particular are the most
self-evident indicators of its rightfulness, legitimacy, and humanness,
and the clearest evidences of its illegitimacy as well.

“Harrah tragedy” is only second to the “great tragedy of Karbalā” and
the martyrdom of the descendents of Prophet (s) at the hands of Yazīd's
army that was caused by the incompetence and oppressive nature of the
Umayyid rule. It evidently showed that if the government of a Muslim
society gives up the religious and human standards, how disastrous it
can be to the religion and the Muslim *ummah*.

We have attempted, in the following pages, to illustrate as much of the
Harrah tragedy and issues related to some of its important aspects that
have been recorded in history's memory, and to make a critical review
and analyze them whenever necessary.

Among other achievements of this research that were not brought up in
the main body of the book are briefly listed as follows:

**A.** Although the tragedy of Karbalā in 61 A.H. (680 C.E.) and the
study of its different ideological and socio-political aftermaths could
by itself be a vivid testimony to the brutality of Yazīd's and Umayyid's
monarchy and an indication of the social degradation under the
illegitimate political administrations of that era, the battle of Harrah
that took place two or three years after the event of Karbalā showed
that the latter, too, had not been a casual event perpetrated by the
Umayyid ruling system.

It showed that the essence of Umayyid monarchy demanded involvement in
open onslaughts of murder and pillage of the household of Prophet (s),
forcing such great men as Imam Husayn b. 'Alī ('a), who refused to
recognize their rule, to pay for his religiosity and noble-spiritedness
by his own blood and that of his loved ones.

The Harrah tragedy was in fact confirmatory evidence to the Umayyid's
rebellious attitude towards religion of Islam and its humanistic values.

**B.** In the process of the Madinans' revolt and among various figures
who lost their lives, were executed, fled from Medina, or had to swear
allegiance to Yazīd out of degradation and humiliation and to call
themselves his slaves, there were those who in the earlier years of the
formation of deviation in political leadership of the Islamic community
refused to take even the smallest steps in the reformation and
correction of the deviated politico-religious trends; and when they
happened to do so and stand against such perversions, was also a
Christian.

Subsequently, those who from the outset merely surrendered to the
anti-Islamic trends and viewed religion as a means of power and polity,
took up the rule, recruited a powerful and equipped army of newly
converted Muslims who were unfamiliar with the basic teachings of the
Islam, and by means of forged traditions of the Prophet (s) and
ostensibly religious justifications persuaded them to slaughter and
plunder the Muslims!

It is truly admonitory that such men as 'Abd Allāh b. 'Umar who,
according to the historical reports regarded such high status and
authenticity for themselves and were so cautious and obsessive during
the Caliphate of 'Alī b. Abī Tālib ('a) that they would say, “We should
be the last ones to swear allegiance to 'Alī[^1]!” Whereas in order to
prevent people from opposition to Yazīd and to encourage them to pledge
allegiance to him, they proclaimed, “The one who dies without a pledge
of allegiance to Yazīd will die similar to the one who dies in a state
of ignorance.”[^2]22

Yet, what is more admonitory is that these people who did not pledge
allegiance to 'Alī ('a)'s mighty hands, mind, and faith or when they did
they did it hesitantly, hastened by night to pledge allegiance to such
persons as Hajjāj b. Yūsuf Thaqafī - the historically notorious savage -
not by shaking his hand as it was common but by vilely kissing his feet!

**C.** From whatever aspect that is considered, the tragedy of Karbalā
and the massacre and plunder of Madinans are too massive and shameful;
but what makes the resonance of those tragedies more painful and
agonizing is that the perpetrators of such cruelities have introduced
their inhuman actions as based on faith and religious foundations, to
the extent that the commanders of Yazīd army in order to spur the troops
to fight would shout at them ”*yā khail Allāh* - O Army of Allah!”[^3]

Or, in the battle of Harrah, Muslim b. 'Uqba - the commander of Syrian
army - wishes that before dying he would be able to suppress the revolt
of Medina and to terminate Yazīd's opponents in order to have enough
spiritual provision in his book of deeds when meeting Allah on the day
of Resurrection!

No doubt, such slogans, statements and tactics are more of a devilish
and political nature than being rooted in ignorance and misunderstanding
of religion. Unfortunately these policies and practices rapidly
influenced the hearts and minds of the newly converted naïve Muslims and
the weak in faith and knowledge of Islamic teachings at that time.

It is for these reasons that the true scholars and the guardians of
ideological boundaries of religion have always been concerned with such
misapplications and misunderstanding of religion by the begrudged and
spiteful and the feebleminded. In addition, whenever possible, they have
tried to represent the humane and rational essence of religion so that
no counter human and imprudent movement might be able to disguise its
deviated and detrimental face under superficially religious slogans and
banners.

Hoping that report of this crucial period of early Islamic history may
be a step towards further appreciation of the real nature of the
Umayyid's Rule and its background, brutal policies and devilish tactics,
its distortion of the Islamic teachings and the grievous aftermaths. It
may provide lessons from this painful incident for distinguishing truth
from falsehood and also serve as admonitions for avoiding wrong,
inhumane, and anti-religious ways and as motivation for moving toward
justice, fairness, and righteousness.

Ahmad Turābī  
 April 2008

[^1]: Ibn Abī al-Hadīd, Sharh-i Nahj al-Balāgha, vol. 4, p.11.

[^2]: Dhahabī, Siyar A‘lām al-Nubalā, vol. 3, p. 325.

[^3]: Al-Mufīd, Al-Irshād, vol. 2, p. 92.


