‘Abd Allāh b. Hanzala, Commander of Medinan Forces
==================================================

'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala played a pivotal role in the battle of Harrah.
Having been influential in provoking people for battle against Yazīd and
the Umayyid rule, he now undertook the high command of the combatant
forces in the defense of Medina.  
 In fact, the role that Ibn Zubayr had undertaken in Mecca was played by
'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala in Medina.

With the Syrian army approaching Medina, 'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala called
people to the Prophet's (s) Pulpit in Masjid al-Nabī and asked all those
who accompanied him, to swear allegiance to him until the end of their
lives.

The people of Medina swore an enduring allegiance to him and said that
they would be with him to the last of their lives. 'Abd Allāh mounted
the pulpit and after praising God said:  
 “O people! You have revolted for the sake of religion, so try to
successfully come out of this trial and be graced with God's
forgiveness, and may you enjoy the Paradise!  
 Be ready to fight with all your strength and power!

Let me inform you that the Syrians have halted and camped near Medina
and that Marwān b. Hakam and the Umayyids are also with them. If God
wishes, He will punish him for breaking the pledge he had made at the
Prophet's (s) tomb!” The people then began to curse and swear out loud
together at Marwān and the Umayyids and called Marwān a frog son of a
frog![^1])

'Abd Allāh then called people to silence and peace, saying: “Swearing
does not solve any problem; so, prepare for battle, since, by God, no
people have ever proceeded with truthfulness except that they triumphed
by Divine assistance.”

Then, 'Abd Allāh raised his hands to the sky and said: “O Lord! We trust
You and have faith in You and rely on You, ask You to help us
triumph.”[^2]95  
 The historians have elsewhere reported that 'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala also
said:  
 “O People of Medina! We did not revolt except for the reason that Yazīd
is an adulterous, drunkard, and prayerless (denouncer of Salāt) man; and
tolerating his rule will cause descent of Divine punishment. If I would
be left alone and no one would help me, still I won't give up revolting
against Yazīd.”[^3]9696

Meanwhile, Muslim b. 'Uqba, who was seeking to find a way to penetrate
into and dominate over Medina, got the chance to address the people of
Medina by sending them the following message:  
 ”*Amīr al-Mu'minīn* Yazīd sends his regards to you and says that you
are his clan and kinsmen. Fear God! Listen to my words and obey. There
are two bounties for you with me in my covenant to God: one in summer
and the other one in winter. I have made a covenant to God to keep the
price of wheat for you at the same rate as it is for us, which was one
dirham for every *sā'* (3 kg.). As for the bounty that 'Amr b. Sa'īd
Ashdaq has taken away from you, it is upon me to return it to
you.”[^4]97

This message had no impact on the people of Medina, because, although
there were some people among them whose religious motivations were
overshadowed by their material, tribal, and emotional motives, a large
number of the pioneers of this uprising were decisive and purposeful
people who were mainly motivated to overthrow the Umayyid rule and to
fight against Yazīd as a person notorious for his incompetence and
irreligiousness.

Thus, in response to Muslim b. 'Uqba, they said: “We have removed Yazīd
from Caliphate just like a shoe that we remove from out feet.”[^5]

Nevertheless, Muslim b. 'Uqba gave the Medinans three days' time to
finally make up their mind.[^6]99  
 Suffering from illness, Muslim b. 'Uqba avoided attacking Medina for
three days, and then since he did not receive a favorable answer from
the Medinans, finally decided to overcome them by force and violence and
subdue them to Yazīd.

Evidence shows that Muslim b. 'Uqba's hesitation for fighting the
Medinans was not merely for avoiding slaughtering, rather, he was
commissioned to go to Mecca after suppressing the Medinans' revolt in
order to suppress Ibn. Zubayr's revolt as well. Muslim b. 'Uqba seemed
to fear that if the battle with the Medinans would become difficult and
lengthy, the fighting energy of Syrian forces would get exhausted and
then he would not be able to confront Ibn. Zubayr and gain victory over
him.

That was because fighting with Ibn Zubayr in Mecca was in many aspects
more difficult and risky than fighting with the people of Medina. First
of all Mecca was a Divine Sanctuary on which invasion and launching a
military campaign would cost the invaders dearly; and secondly, the
distance between Mecca and Medina and its scorching and dry desert would
severely wear out Syrian forces. That was why Muslim b. 'Uqba in his
last talk to the people of Medina said: “If you give up revolting and
disobedience, I will get the chance to use all the Syrian forces against
Ibn Zubayr, who is an impious and rebellious man!

However, he was unaware of the fact that they not only approved of Ibn
Zubayr but did not allow the Syrian army to make any attempt to invade
the Divine Sanctuary and attack that Holy Land![^7]

[^1]: With this appellation, people were in fact referring to a hadīth
from the Prophet (s) who had used the epithet “a frog son of a frog”
about Hakam and Marwān for their indecent behavior. (Ibn Abī al-Hadīd,
Sharh Nahj al-Balāgha, vol. 4, p. 71.

[^2]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 5, p. 48; Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa
al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 20.

[^3]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 5, p. 47.

[^4]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 2, p. 9; Tabarī, Ta’rīkh,
vol. 4, p. 374.

[^5]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 2, p. 9; Tabarī, Ta’rīkh,
vol. 4, p. 374.

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 4, p. 374; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4,
p. 114.

[^7]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 374; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī
al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 114.


