The Syrian Army’s Savage Invasion of Medinan Houses
===================================================

As to the exact date of the Harrah event, some of the historians have
reported it to be the year 62 A.H. (682 C.E.) [^1] and some 63 A.H. (683
C.E.)[^2]; of which, of course, the majority of the historians have
taken the latter as more accurate and asserted the abominable day to be
Wednesday 27th or 28th of Dhū'l Hijja 63 A.H.[^3] which is according to
solar calendar to be August 27, 683 C.E.16

Referring to the historical sources and adding up and analyzing the
various views will strengthen the notion that the Syrian army actually
entered the battle region at the outskirts of Medina - i.e. Harrah - on
Monday 24th of Dhū'l Hijja 63 A.H. (August 23, 683 C.E.)[^4], and after
three days respite, the Syrian army's invasion of Medina started from
Harrah region at dawn on 27th of Dhū'l Hijja, and later, on the same
day, the defenders of Medina were killed at the end of the same day, and
the Syrian army seized the city of Medina overnight.

Narration of all the aspects of the battle of Harrah must be considered
on one side and this tragic part (the crimes of the Syrian army in
Medina) of the history of Yazīd's Caliphate, as the heaviest and the
most heinous of all the dreadful events that took place in this battle,
on the other.  
 Dīnawarī puts it this way:

“Entrance of Syrian army into Medina took place on 27th of Dhū'l Hijja
63 A.H. and Medina was in the clutches of Syrian army until the rise of
the new crescent of Muharram.”[^5]  
 As Yazīd b. Mu'āwiyah had advised, Muslim b. 'Uqba ordered the Syrian
army after conquering Medina: “Your hands are open! Do whatever you
wish! Plunder Medina for three days.”[^6]  
 This way, the city of Medina was allowed as permissible to the Syrian
troops to exploit and plunder in whatever way they wished, leaving no
man or woman on their way secure from their carnage, killing the people,
and pillaging their properties.[^7]129

More grievous than the Syrian's plundering and slaying the people of
Medina and the remaining generation of the companions of Prophet (s) as
well as the *Muhājirin* and *Ansār*, was the rash and avaricious Syrians
troops' assault upon the chastity of the women of Medina!

If we accept that the Syrian army was consisted of 27 thousand armed
men[^8] aged between 20 to 50 years old, we will find out how disastrous
could the invasion of this number of troops have been on a town
surrounded by numerous trenches and rugged lands. And if we agree with a
number of historians who have estimated the Syrian army in the battle of
Harrah to be the least of 10 thousand fighting men, still we can guess
the extension of this catastrophe that took place in Medina.

The ten thousand young fighting men, who have for several days traversed
the long distance between Syria and Medina with much hardship,
overwhelmed the enemy in a single day of aggressive and severely harsh
hit-and-fighting, and given full permission by their commander and
central government for any action they wished to do, now at the end of
the day stepped into houses whose men are either killed or escaped or
have raised their hands up as a sign of surrender to be taken as
captives.  
 How would have such ravenous and rash men treated the helpless and
unprotected women, girls and children?!  
 We do not need to merely guess and imagine the extension of the
tragedy; because the historians have explicitly recorded what had taken
place:  
 “Thousands of women were assaulted in the invasion of the Syrians into
Medinat al-Nabī (s), and months after the battle of Harrah, thousands of
babies were born whose fathers were unknown, hence were named “children
of Harrah”! The sinister aftermaths of this ethico-human diaster left
its ominous impact on families and the marriages of their daughters,
bringing in many individual and social problems that are too heavy to be
expressed by any pen.”[^9]131

Streets of Medina were filled with the bodies of the killed, blood
stains covered the way up to the Prophet's (s) Mosque[^10], children
were killed in their mothers' laps[^11], and the old companions of the
Apostle of Allah (s) were persecuted and disgraced.[^12]134

[^1]: Ya‘qūbī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 2, p. 251.

[^2]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 212

[^3]: Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 120; Ibn Athīr,
Al-Bidāya wa al-Nihāya, vol. 6, p. 236; Ibn Taghrī Birdī, Al-Nujūm
al-Zāhira, vol. 1, p. 132.

[^4]: Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 120; Ibn Kathīr,
Al-Bidāya wa al-Nihāya, vol. 6, p. 236; Ibn Taghrī Birdī, Al-Nujūm
al-Zāhira, vol. 1, p. 132.

[^5]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 220, 212.

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 10.

[^7]: Ibn A’tham Kūfi, Al-Futūh, vol. 3, p. 181; Madqisī, Al-Bad’u wa
al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 6, p. 16; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p.
17; Ibn ‘Imād, Shadharāt al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p. 71.

[^8]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 256; Ibn A’tham Kūfi, Al-Futūh.
vol. 5, p. 180.

[^9]: See: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 10; Ibn A’tham
Kūfi, Al-Futūh, vol. 3, p. 181; Maqdisī, Al-Bad’ wa al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 6,
p. 16; Ibn Khallikān, Wafayāt al-A‘yān, vol. 6, p. 276; Ibn Jawzī, Sibt,
Tadhkirat al-Khawās, p. 259; Ta’rīkh al-Khulafa, p. 209.

[^10]: Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, 4, p. 17.

[^11]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 215.

[^12]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 265.


