Tribes that Actively Participated in the Medina Uprising
========================================================

The names of several tribes residing in Medina and the number of people
belonging to those tribes who were killed in the uprising have been
recorded in the historical sources.  
 The great number and variety of these clans and tribes suggests
widespread dissatisfaction and anger of the Medinans with Yazīd's rule.

Historians have, with great effort recorded detailed lists of each of
these clans and tribes as well as their killed ones. On one hand, this
indicates the importance of this horrific event in the history of
Islamic *ummah* and the deep wounds it inflicted behind that the
historians have attempted to pay off their debt to the Islamic *ummah*
by accurately recording minute details. On the other hand, it indicates
that the recorded numbers and figures of the losses and damages
inflicted as result of the uprising of the Medinans and the invasion of
Syrian army over them are not exaggerated but accurate and realistic.

Some of the clans and tribes that had the greatest number of dead are as
follows:  
 Quraysh, Banī Hāshim and their confederates, ten killed  
 'Abd Manāf clan and their confederates, eleven killed  
 Banī Qusayy clan and their confederates, nineteen killed  
 Banī Zuhra and his confederates, nineteen killed  
 'Udayy b. Ka'b and his confederates, thirteen killed  
 Bani Fahr and his confederates, twenty four killed  
 'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala and seven of his children killed  
 Banī Mu'āwiyah b. Mālik, twelve killed  
 Banī Najjār, fifty three killed  
 Banī Khazraj, twenty killed

Some historical sources have recorded the number of *Ansār*'s killed to
be 137 and the total number killed of the *Ansār* and Quraysh to be 360.
Besides the above-mentioned clans, a number of other clans and tribes
have been recorded that are too many to mention here and the names
mentioned below will suffice as typical sample, while referring the
researchers to the historical sources for further study.[^1]

[^1]: See: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 5, p. 46; Zubayrī, Mus‘ab, Nasab-i
Quraysh, p. 88; Mas‘ūdī, Murūj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 70; Nuwayrī,
Nahāyat al-Irab, vol. 6, p. 227; Zirklī, Al-A‘lām, vol. 5, p. 355; Ibn
Khayyāt, Ta’rīkh, p. 293-314.


