Those who didn’t take part in the uprising
==========================================

Some people are seen among the eminent figures of Medinans who had
withdrawn from the uprising of the general public and did not interfere
in it from the early phases of the people's revolt and resistance
against the Umayyid rule. Although few in number, these people had
totally different motives and insights. Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a) was
among them who, according to ideological principles and religious
criteria, regarded the Umayyid rule as basically usurping and did not
have the least belief in Yazīd's competence and the overthrow of his
rule was one of the wishes of the Imam ('a) and his household. On the
other hand, among the withdrawers from the uprising of the Medinans were
such people as 'Abd Allāh b. 'Umar, who, according to what the
historians have recorded had a viewpoint and analysis opposite to that
of Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a).

**'Abd Allāh b. 'Umar**. He did not participate in the public protest of
the Medinans against Yazīd and the Umayyid rule, neither because he did
not view the battle style as inefficient, nor because he regarded the
consequences of the uprising as heavy and devastating; rather, he viewed
the Umayyid rule and the Yazīd's government as legitimate and
simplistically presumed Yazīd as the guardian of the Muslims.

This is implied from his remarks to 'Abd Allāh b. Mutī' - one of the
activists in the uprising of Medina - saying:  
 “Whoever abandons obeying a ruler will meet God on the Resurrection Day
without a proof and whoever dies and there is not an allegiance of a
leader on his neck dies a death of ignorance (*Jāhilliyah*).”3  
 If this is really stated by 'Abd Allāh b. 'Umar, it is so surprising
that with such contention he refused to swear allegiance to 'Alī b. Abī
Tālib during the latter's Caliphate while the people of Medina did swear
allegiance to the Imam, and was rated as among the six people who
refused allegiance to Imam 'Alī ('a).  
 He would say: “I must be the last one to pledge allegiance to 'Alī
('a)![^1]233

It is reported that when Yazīd died and 'Abd al-Malik b. Marwān took
over the rule and dispatched Hajjāj to Medina to suppress Ibn Zubayr and
his advocates, 'Abd Allāh b. 'Umar went to Hajjāj overnight to swear
allegiance and said: “I have come to swear allegiance to the Caliph!
“When asked why in such a hurry, 'Abd Allāh b. 'Umar replied: whoever
dies and has no leader, dies a death of *Jāhiliyyah*; and I am afraid I
may die overnight without having a leader! Hajjāj heedlessly stretched
his leg and said 'kiss my leg instead of my hand'!”[^2]234

**'Abd Allāh b. 'Abbās.** 'Abd Allāh b. 'Abbās was the Holy Prophet's
(s) cousin who was born in Shi'b of Abū Tālib three years before hijrah
and died in Tā'if in the year 80 A.H. (689 C.E.) at the age of 69 while
having lost his eye sight and was buried in that place.[^3]235  
 Amr b. Khazrajī The reasons for his not participating in the battle of
Harrah can be numerous, for it is reported that he became blind and was
sick toward the end of his life and since Tā'if had a pleasant climate,
he went there for rest and remedy. After the martyrdom of Imam Husayn b.
'Alī ('a), Ibn 'Abbās sent a letter of condemnation to Yazīd, part of
which is as follows:  
 “… Do not suppose that I will forget your killing of Imam Husayn ('a)
and the youth of the Banī 'Abd al-Muttalib who were beacons of guidance
and guiding stars. Your troops left their pure bodies soiled with dust
and exposed to the wind.”

Yet, he wrote in another part of his letter:  
 “You killed Husayn and his companions. Nothing is stranger to me than
your seeking my companionship! You have killed the sons of my father,
and it is my blood that is dripping from your sword.”[^4]  
 This shows that the withdrawal of 'Abd Allāh b. 'Abbās from the
uprising of Medina has not been because of avoiding opposition to
Umayyid rule, but it has mainly been due to his illness.

**Jābir b. 'Abd Allāh Ansārī**. Jābir b. 'Abd Allāh b. 'Amr b. Khazrajī
Ansārī Sulamī Sahābī[^5] died in Medina in 78 A.H. (687 C.E.) at the age
of 74 while blinded. Some have reported that he was the last of the
Prophet's (s) companions.[^6]238  
 Ibn Qutayba Dīnawarī writes:  
 “Jābir was blind during the Harrah battle. He would walk in some alleys
of Medina and say: Woe to the one who frightens God and the Messenger! A
man asked 'who has frightened God and the Messenger?! Jābir answered: I
heard the Messenger of Allah saying: Whoever frightens the people of
Medina is as if frightening what is with me. The Syrian man attacked
Jābir with his sword to kill him. Marwān drove that man away and ordered
to send Jābir back to his house and lock the door behind him.”[^7]  
**Muhammad b. Hanafiyya.** Muhammad b. 'Alī b. Abī Tālib b. 'Abd
al-Muttalib b. Hāshim b. 'Abd Manāf b. Qusayy, whose mother was Khawla
daughter of Ja'far b. Qays b. Muslima from the Hanafiyya tribe, hence
known as Hanafiyya.[^8]

Ibn Sa'd wrote:  
 “After Imam Husayn ('a) left Medina, Ibn Hanafiyya stayed in that city
until he heard that Yazīd troops were approaching; then he left Medina
for Mecca, where he stayed with Ibn 'Abbās.”[^9]

[^1]: Ibn Abī al-Hadīd, Sharh Nahj al-Balāgha, vol. 4, p. 11.

[^2]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 242.

[^3]: Dhahabī, Siyar A‘lām al-Nubalā, vol. 3, p. 354; Ibn Abī al-Hadīd,
Sharh Nahj al-Balāgha, vol. 20, p. 130, 134.

[^4]: Ya‘qūbī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 2, p. 250; Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 128.

[^5]: Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalānī, Al-Isāba, vol. 1, p. 213; Ibn Qutayba,
Al-Ma’ārif, p. 307.

[^6]: Dhahabī, Ta’rīkh al-Islām, vol. 5, p. 27.

[^7]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 214.

[^8]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 5, p. 66.

[^9]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 73.


