The Aftermaths of the Battle of Harrah
======================================

Claiming allegiance from the people of Medina for Yazīd
-------------------------------------------------------

After three days the invasion of the Syrian army over Medina and its
inhabitants was over and the fourth day was the time for those who
survived the massacre to go with full humiliation and debasement under
the yoke of Yazīd's slavery![^1]  
 At that time, on the fourth day, Muslim b. 'Uqba was stationed in a
place called “Wādī al-Qurā”[^2] and he ordered the surviving Medinans to
report to him for swearing allegiance to Yazīd.

The very command by Muslim b. 'Uqba to claim allegiance from the people
of Medina for Yazīd is not much surprising as the dominating army was
perpetually seeking to block the enemy's way to fight after having
dominated over it. What is unique in the history of Islam is the subject
and the type of allegiance that the people were forced to undergo.

Ibn Athīr wrote:  
 “Muslim b. 'Uqba said: Yazid has privilege over all kinds of
appropriation of the properties and families of the Medinans and their
blood is permissible to him in whatever ways he wishes.”[^3]244

Dīnawarī has pointed out the issue this way:  
 “Muslim ordered the people of Medina to swear allegiance to Yazīd to be
his prisoners of war and let him decide and act as he wishes about their
properties and family.”[^4]245

Samhūdī has recorded the procedure of allegiance as follows:  
 “Muslim b. 'Uqba summoned the dignitaries of Medina and ordered them to
swear allegiance to Yazīd and admit to be his slaves.”[^5]246

Exhausted and humiliated after the battle of Harrah, the people of
Medina were forced under the unsheathed swords of the Syrian army to
swear allegiance to Yazīd b. Mu'āwiyah to be his slaves[^6] and whoever
rejected this allegiance was killed on the spot.[^7]248  
 It is reported in historical sources that the only personality who was
exempted from such allegiance was Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a).[^8]249  
 In his talk to the Imam ('a), Muslim b. 'Uqba regarded his case apart
from the others and said: “Yazīd did not want me to make you swear
allegiance like others.”[^9]

Given the short interval between the battle of Harrah and the tragedy of
Karbalā, the heavy and irrepairable aftermath of the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn ('a) and his companions for Yazīd and Umayyid's rule - like the
uprising of *Tawwābīn* and Mecca and Medina revolts - and the Imam Zayn
al-'Abidīn's ('a) impressive speeches in Syria, it was obvious that
Yazīd had advised Muslim b. 'Uqba not to expect allegiance from Imam
Husayn b. 'Alī's ('a) son, as the 'Āshūra was created initially because
of descendents of 'Alī's ('a) abstaining to pledge allegiance to such a
person as Yazīd.

It is reported in some sources that before meeting with Imam Zayn
al-'Abidīn ('a), Muslim b. 'Uqba would revile him and his household, but
when he met with Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a), he became gentle and
obedient before him and faced him with respect. When his entourage asked
the reason for this encounter, Muslim answered that he had been
impressed by his imposing appearance and nobility.[^10]251

The second person who did not swear allegiance like others to Yazīd was
'Alī b. 'Abd Allāh b. 'Abbās; with the difference that in the first
place Muslim b. 'Uqba commanded him to swear allegiance to Yazīd like
others to be his slave, but since 'Alī b. 'Abd Allāh had some kind of
tribal kinship with Husayn b. Numayr - one of the commanders of Syrian
army - the latter protected him and told Muslim b. 'Uqba to exempt him
from such an allegiance.  
 Muslim felt that if he would insist on his command and did not accept
Husayn b. Numayr's request, it was possible that this would lead to
discord, conflict, and indolence in the Syrian army;[^11] thus, he gave
up his order and let 'Alī b. 'Abd Allāh simply state that: “I swear
allegiance to Yazīd and am obliged to obey him.[^12]

Muslim b. ‘Uqba's Report to Yazīd
---------------------------------

After his victory in early Muharram 64 A.H. (682 C.E.), Muslim b. 'Uqba
wrote a letter to Yazīd and informed him of the event of Harrah and what
befell the people of Medina and asked him for advice.

Muslim's letter is as follows:  
 “From Muslim b. 'Uqba to the chief commander of the faithful, Yazīd b.
Mu'āwiyah.  
 Salutations to you Oh commander of the faithful and God's Mercy and
Blessings be on you!  
 I thank the One God for your victory; now then, God has undertaken the
preservation and protection of the Amīr. May the shadow of Amīr be
prolonged. Now I forward a report of my mission to you:  
 I left Damascus while I was feeling unwell as Amīr knew about it. I met
some Umayyids who had left Medina in Wādī al-Qurā'. Marwān despite his
swearing not to help the enemy returned with us to Medina! He was our
aid in our victory over the enemy. We went to Medina and noticed that
the people of Medina had dug many trenches around them, installed armed
guards at the city entrances, taken their beasts inside Medina, and
claimed to have stored up enough foodstuff for one year so that they
would be able to resist in case of being beseiged. I advised them and
informed them of the Amīr's promises, but they did not accept.

Then, I arranged my troops in groups and sent each group to one
direction; I sent Husayn b. Numayr to Dhanāb region and its outskirts;
Habīsh b. Dalja as commander of Mawālī to Banī Salma region; and 'Abd
Allāh b. Mas'ūd to “Baqī' Gharqad” region.  
 I and other troops of Amīr's army stood against Banī Hāritha. Thanks to
the way shown to us by one of the Banī Hāritha tribesmen, we managed to
enter the city from the region of Banī 'Abd al-Ashhal early at the
sunrise.

It so happened that Marwān saw a man from the Banī Hāritha tribe and
secretly promised him that the commander of the faithful Yazīd will do
him benevolence and guarantee to pay off all his debts and give him some
rewards, too that man was deceived and showed the way to the Syrian army
to infiltrate into the city. Now, I am sending this letter to you via
the same person and hope that God may inspire His Caliph and slave Yazīd
the way that man deserves so that he the Caliph makes him satisfied with
his generous gifts!

God has graced and favored Amīr for his readiness, cleverness and
triumph over his enemies, and this victory over the enemies is something
that will not be lost for the Caliph of God and the Muslims.
Insha'Allah!

May God preserve Amīr's men Syrian army; no one was harmed! Their enemy
people of Mādīna resisted but only for four hours. After widespread
massacre and pillage, we performed the noon prayer in their mosque!

We wielded the swords against them, killing whoever that stood before
us. We chased the fugitives  
 and killed their wounded, as Amīr had commanded. We were busy killing
and plundering for three days! May God lengthen Amīr's shadow!

I made secure the houses of 'Uthmān's children. Thanks God that He
appeased my heart by killing the hypocrites and wrong-doers whose the
Medinans' rebellion had lasted too long.  
 I am writing this letter to Amīr from the house of Sa'īd b. 'Ās while I
am severely sick. For this sickness you may not see me any longer. I did
not have any other wish than revenge from the people of Medina!
Wassalām!”[^13]254

Some others have reported that in the end of his letter, Muslim had
written to Yazīd as follows:  
 “Do not be saddened for the faithless people!”[^14]255

Departure of the Syrian Army towards Mecca
------------------------------------------

Early in 64 A.H. (683 C.E.), following Muslim b. 'Uqba's ending of his
deadly mission in Medina - as he had already predicted - he dispatched
the Syrian army to Mecca to fight against 'Abd Allāh b. Zubayr who was
known to be the main instigator of the revolts in Hijāz region and had
made Mecca his base for such revolts, and to put an end to him and his
partisans' oppositions to the Umayyid rule. However, no farther than
three miles away from Medina, Muslim b. 'Uqba died due to
illness.[^15]256

Noticing the pangs of death, Muslim b. 'Uqba summoned Husayn b. Numayr
to come to him before dying and made some recommendations to keep moving
toward Mecca and battle against Ibn Zubayr, that have been recorded by
some historians as follows:  
 “Yazīd recommended to me that if I failed to continue this way, I
should appoint Husayn b. Numayr as the commander of the army; but if it
were up to me, I would not have chosen you because the Yemenis are
soft-hearted! But I do not disobey Yazīd's command.”[^16]257257  
 “Now I have some advice for you; keep it well in mind! Hasten to move;
be quick in confrontation and fighting; and search for the news from the
enemy. Beware! Do not give audience to the Quraysh and do not cooperate
with them!”[^17]258  
 “When you arrive in Mecca, launch the battle with Ibn Zubayr, and do
not prevent the people of Syria from doing whatever they wish to do with
their enemy, and do not listen to Quraysh lest they should deceive
you.”61

In another part of his advice to Husayn b. Numayr, he says:  
 “The mission we have ahead of us requires more violence, rigidity,
decisiveness, disregard for temptations, and unwavering mind. Therefore,
make yourself ready for slaughter and plunder! May it never happen that
the words of those who say “Mecca is the House of God and He has made it
a safe sanctuary” would make you indolent! Pay no heed to such nonsence.
The very sanctity of the Caliph Yazīd is much more superior to all other
sanctities, even from the sanctity of the House and *Haram* of
Allah!”[^18]259

Unfortunately, as it is evident from the words and recommendations of
Muslim b. 'Uqba, misunderstanding and misconception of the basic
religious concepts and lack of knowledge, tribal bigotry, vengeance, and
playful manipulation of religion for the political purposes, were the
most problematic issues that the people were entangled with during the
Umayyids' ruling era.

Absence of the Prophet (s), Muslim community's being distanced from the
the *'Itrat* ('a) - i.e. the Progeny (*Ahl al-Bayt*) of the Prophet
(s) - the dominance of the worldly-minded profane scholars who were
unfamiliar with the spirit of the Prophetic mission; the usurpation of
the political and social positions by the bullies, gold-worshippers, and
tribal authorities, were all aiding the Caliph and political commanders
of people to garner much more reverence and honor than that of all the
religious and Divine values, and any human and religious principle can
be easily trampled for the sake of the preservation of the ruler's
authority and power!

In his death-bed and after creating all these tragedies, Muslim b. 'Uqba
says:  
 “O Lord! You know that I never disobeyed the Caliph. O God! After
professing Your Oneness and the Prophethood of Muhammad (s), I have done
no better and more praiseworthy task than the massacre of the people of
Medina, and I take this massacre as a means of my salvation on the Day
of Resurrection.”[^19]260

A man, whom the historians have regarded as among the devotees of
Mu'āwiyan cult[^20] and one of the tyrants of Arabs and their
devils[^21], and who because of his countless murders and massacres has
been called Musrif b. 'Uqba, now tries to impute all his evils to
religion and serving the Muslims!

Thus he died and was buried at a distance of three miles from Medina.
However, those whose children and relatives were killed by his order
exhumed his body from the grave and burned it.[^22]263

The Invasion of Mecca by the Syrian Army
----------------------------------------

On 26th of Muharram 64 A.H. (24th of September 683 C.E.), Syrian troops
commanded by Husayn b. Numayr entered the city of Mecca in order to
fight with Ibn Zubayr and his followers.  
 In this invasion the Divine Sanctuary was disgraced and Holy Ka'ba was
damaged by the Yazidian army.

[^1]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 265.

[^2]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 373.

[^3]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma was al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 214; Ibn Athīr,
Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 118.

[^4]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 264.

[^5]: Samhūdī, Wafā’ al-Wafā’, vol. 1, p. 132.

[^6]: Ya‘qūbī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 2, p. 250; Mas‘ūdī, Murūj al-Dhahab, vol.
3, p. 70; Samhūdī, Wafā’ al-Wafā’, vol. 1, p. 134.

[^7]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma was al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 214; Mas‘ūdī,
Murūj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 70; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol.
4, p. 118; Samhūdī, Wafā’ al-Wafā’, vol. 1, p. 132.

[^8]: Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 119.

[^9]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma was al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 218; Dinawari,
al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 266; Ya‘qūbī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 2, p. 251; Ibn Athīr,
Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 119.

[^10]: Mas‘ūdī, Murūj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 70.

[^11]: ‘Alī b. ‘Abd Allāh b. ‘Abbās was on her mother side originally
from Zur‘a tribe and many people from that tribe were serving in Hassin
b, Numayr's army (Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 120).

[^12]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 267; Bābitī, Mu‘jam al-Shu‘arā,
p. 133.

[^13]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 217.

[^14]: Safwat, Zakī Ahmad, Jumhuratu Rasā’il al-‘Arab fī ‘Usūr
al-‘Arabiyyat al-Zāhira, vol. 2, p. 576.

[^15]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 267; Ibn A’tham Kūfi, Al-Futūh,
vol. 3, p. 314; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 132;
Azraqī, Akhbār Makkat al-Musharrafa, vol. 1, p. 139; Abū al-Fidā‘,
Al-Mukhtasar fī Akhbār al-Bashar, vol. 1, p. 192.

[^16]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 267.

[^17]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 219 and vol. 2, p.
12; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 123.

[^18]: Ibid.

[^19]: Ibn A‘tham, Al-Futūh, vol. 5, p. 185; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī
al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 123; Samhūdī, Wafā’ al-Wafā’, vol. 1, p. 136.

[^20]: Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalānī, Al-Isāba, vol. 3, p. 493.

[^21]: Mas‘ūdī, Murūj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 70; Zubayrī, Mus‘ab, Nasab-i
Quraysh, p. 127; Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 7, p. 14; Madqisī, Al-Bad’ wa
al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 6, p. 14; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p.
120.

[^22]: Zubayrī, Mus‘ab, Nasab-i Quraysh, p. 222; Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma
wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 219; Samhūdī, Wafā’ al-Wafā’, vol. 1, p. 135.


