Death of Yazīd b. Mu‘āwiyah
===========================

Not too long after the tragedy of Harrah, on 17th of Safar of the same
year, that is, about 20 days later, Yazīd b. Mu'āwiyah gave up his ghost
and died. Having remained on the throne for no more than three or four
years[^1], Yazīd lay in his grave[^2] while he had perpetrated the most
heinous crimes of the Islamic history. He had, as he frequently
admitted, taken the revenge on Islam for all the defeats suffered by the
pagans and hypocrites in the time of Prophet!

While Banī Hāshim had managed to gather the spiritual dignity and honor
of the Prophetic mission to their credit, the Umayyids - the descendents
of Abū Sufyān who were freed by the Prophet of God (s) -recorded
violence, mutiny, bullying, and worldliness to their credit, and threw
the yoke of slavery over the Muslims!

The death of the Syrian army commander after the tragedy of Harrah and
the quick setting of the ominous star of Yazīd's life can be a true
evidence of the Prophet's (s) words:  
 “The one who sets out toward Medina with an ominous intention and
commits any evil to it, Allah will soon wipe him out.”[^3]

[^1]: Historians have reported Yazīd's disgraceful caliphate variously:
three years and seven month and twenty two days; three years and six
months; three years and some days; four years and some days; and three
years and nine months and twenty days. Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih al-‘Iqd al-Farīd,
vol. 5, p. 124; Mas‘ūdī, Al-Tanbīh wa al-Ashrāf, p. 263; Imrānī,
Al-Anbā’ fī al-Ta’rīkh, p. 9; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4,
p. 125; Ibn Taghrī Birdī, Al-Nujūm al-Zāhira, vol. 1, p. 163.

[^2]: The death of Yazīd b. Mu‘āwiyah took place in the lands of Himas
in a quarter called Huwwārīn and his body was buried in the Bāb
al-Saghīr graveyard, where for a long time it remained a garbage dump
(Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-‘Iqd al-Farīd, vol. 5, p. 120; ; Mas‘ūdī, Al-Tanbīh
wa al-Ashrāf, p. 263).

[^3]: Samhūdī, Wafā’ al-Wafā’, vol. 1, p. 44.


