Causes of the Revolt
====================

The revolt of the people of Medina in 63 A.H. (683 C.E.) against the
monarchy of Yazīd, and the rule of the Umayyids, represented, among
other things, people's widespread dislike and hatred against the state's
politics and plans.

There seems to be no evidence in historical records and documents
indicating that this social uprising was ascribed to any particular
intellectual or political faction or leadership; rather, the communal
and tribal diversity of the participants in this popular movement
suggests that various social, religious, political, and emotional
factors have prompted harmonious sentiments among the people of Medina
that culminated in a widespread uprising, and cutting off the hands of
Yazīd's agents and administrators from that city.  
 Obviously, upon empathy and solidarity in rejecting the Umayyid rule
and in order to coordinate its defensive force, this spontaneous social
uprising chose a commander in chief. According to the historical
reports, the *Ansār* had selected 'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala[^1] and the
Quraysh had chosen 'Abd Allāh b. Mutī'[^2] as their military
commanders.[^3]13

Therefore, if in 'Ashūrā (Karbala) tragedy and Imām Husayn ('a)'s
movement, the goals, plans, and motives were above all centered in a
perfectly recognized leader, i.e., Imam Husayn b. 'Alī ('a) with his
holiness being considered as the pivot of the movement, in the battle of
Harrah and the social movement of Madinans, religious, political,
historical, and emotional grounds must be sought on which the movement,
without enjoying an outstanding leadership, had been able to bring the
scattered tribes and various clans settled in Medina to a similar
conclusion and integrate their power and capabilities toward rising up
against Yazīd and his agents.

Evidently, it would be impossible for the history researchers to have
access to all those causes and grounds, with such long interval and
scarcity of historical documents. However, a considerable portion of
these causes can be recognised on the basis of what has been recorded or
stated.

Sentiments and Religious Zeal
-----------------------------

In Islamic culture, two cities have been recognized as the early bases
where the religious thought of the Last of the Prophets (s) began to
propagate; Mecca, as the land of the Prophetic Mission and the *Qibla*
to the Muslims; and Medina, as the city of the Prophet (s) and the land
of expansion and export of the Revealed Message.

Mecca, as a Divine Sanctuary, overrates Medina, but the latter is
significant in that the development of religious knowledge, exposition
of the Prophetic traditions, and the understanding and interpretation of
the Revealed Word of Allah, all took place in that city. The companions
of the Prophet (s) - both *Muhājirin* and *Ansār* - lived there and most
of them preferred staying in that city over other cities after the
demise of the Prophet (s).

Thus, it is evident that Madinans' proximity to the Prophet's legacy and
traditions and his companions and successors had made their inclination
toward Islam to be stronger than that of the Syrians and thus leading
them to more quickly observe inappropriateness of the policies and
actions adopted by the rulers and governors. Hence, they were more
openly motivated to fight against the political and moral corruptions
and perversions in the ruling body of Islam. Furthermore, it was these
people who expressed their early political dis-satisfaction and
protested to Uthmān b. 'Affān and reprimanded him for the
discriminations and incompetence of his administrators and went so far
as to put an end to his life!

Now, the same people were witnessing the ruling of a crude young man who
neither knows anything about politics and civility nor is familiar with
the religious sanctities of Islam and its laws, nor even tries to hide
his moral corruptions from the people.

When the people of Medina ran out of patience due to the Yazīd's
countless tyrannies and bloodsheds and his openly blatant transgression
of the Islamic laws, they began to air their protest against the Syrian
government. 'Uthmān b. Muhammad b. Abū Sufyān - the governor of Medina -
pretended to show his competence by trying to make the dignitaries of
Medina pleased with himself, the rule, and Yazīd and to calm down his
own jurisdiction. He sent some of the youths of *Ansār* and *Muhājirin*
to Damascus so that they could meet with young ruler Yazīd in person and
discuss their complaints with him; perhaps he would be able to give them
convincing answers and avail them with his gifts and bounties.[^4]14

In this meeting, Yazīd not only was unable to attract the attention of
the emissaries of Medina and redress their grievances, rather on the
other hand, he further proved their previous beliefs and impressions of
his incompetence by showing frivolous and foolish behavior.[^5]15

There is difference of opinion in historical sources as to the number of
the emissaries dispatched from Medina to Syria in 62 A.H. (682 C.E.).
Some have recorded their number to be ten[^6], others have reported
more.[^7] Historians have recorded this meeting as follows:

'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala Ghasīl al-Malā'ika, 'Abd Allāh b. Abī 'Amr b.
Mughayra Makhzūmī, Mundhir b. Zubayr and a group of the noblemen of
Medina accompanied them.[^8]

When the emissaries came to visit Yazīd, he paid homage to them by
giving them generous gifts.  
 He even gave a hundred thousand *dirham*s to one of them, 'Abd Allāh b.
Hanzala b. Abī 'Āmir, who had come along with eight of his children, and
gave some gifts to others, too.[^9] Despite all this, his mean behavior
was not hidden from the guests.

These guests scrutinized all the conducts and life style of Yazīd for
which they had originally traveled to Syria.[^10]20

When they returned to Medina, they narrated to the people what they had
seen of Yazīd. They were soon shouting in the Prophet's (s) mosque: We
are coming back from someone who is faithless, drinks wine, plays lute,
spends nights with mean people and singing maids, and abandons
prayers.[^11]21

People asked 'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala: “What news have you brought?” He
said: “I am coming back from a man with whom I would have fought, I
swear by Allah, if my children were not with me.” People said: “We heard
that Yazīd has given you money and other gifts.” 'Abd Allāh said: “That
is true. I accepted it only for preparing forces against him.” This way
'Abd Allāh went on to instigate people against Yazīd and they followed
him.[^12]

Abū al-Fidā', one of the historians, puts it this way:  
 What fuelled the battle of Harrah was that a group of people went to
Damascus to visit Yazīd b. Mu'āwiyah. Yazīd honored them, gave them
gifts, and granted about a hundred thousand *dirham*s to 'Abd Allāh b.
Hanzala b. Abī 'Āmir, a dignitary from Medina. When the group returned
to Medina, they talked to the people about what they had seen of Yazīd -
drinking wine, vices, and other sins and injustices and immoralities,
the greatest of which were abandoning prayers due to being drunk.[^13]

Tabarī puts it in this way:  
 “Upon returning to Medina, the group reproached Yazīd among themselves,
cursed him, and said: We come back from someone who does not have faith,
drinks wine, plays lute and the maids sing for him; he plays with dogs
and keeps company with the mean people and the slaves. Bear witness that
we vow to dethrone him.”[^14]

The author of *Ta'rīkh-i Fakhrī* wrote:  
 “People were disturbed by the Umayyids, especially by Yazīd for
committing many forbidden and sinful acts and being notorious for vices
and iniquities.”[^15]25  
 “The cause of Medinans' revolt against Yazīd was his weakness of
faith.”[^16]26

Ibn Khaldun has opined as follows:  
 “About Imam Husayn ('a) and the battle that took place, it ought to be
said that since the vices and crimes committed by Yazīd were known to
general public of his era, the followers and the Shī'as of the Prophet's
(s) household in Kufa dispatched a delegation to Imam Husayn ('a) to
invite him to Kufa in order to revolt under his command. The Imam ('a)
realized that standing up against Yazīd was a duty, for the latter was
openly committing injustices and immoral acts, and that this uprising
was a duty for those who were able to revolt.”

Mas'ūdī has put it this way:  
 “When tyrannies of Yazīd and his functionaries began to mount up, his
debaucheries became disgracefully manifest; he killed grandson of the
Prophet (s) and his companions; went on drinking sprees; and took on
Pharaoh-like manners, even worse than Pharaoh in his injustice to the
high and low. Thereof, it so happened that the people of Medina expelled
his governor, Uthmān b. Muhammad b. Abū Sufyān, together with Marwān b.
Hakam and other members of Umayyid clan.”[^17]

In addition to observing Yazīd's moral corruption, the representatives
of the Medinans witnessed at close quarter that someone by the name of
Serjohn was working in Yazīd's court as his Roman counselor and that
Mansūr b. Serjohn - or Sergius - from a renowned Christian clan had been
Yazīd's close companion from days of his youth.  
 Ibn Uthāl[^18], Yazīd's personal physician was also a Christian in
charge of the financial affairs of the province of Hims.[^19]29

Akhtal[^20], the Umayyid court's poet, was also one of the Arab
Christians who frequently visited the Caliph's palace with a cross hung
around his neck, would read his poems to the Caliph, and was highly
praised and rewarded by him.[^21]31  
 Background knowledge of these unusual affairs stank of deep conspiracy
and when combined with Umayyid's unIslamic and inhumane rule, would make
any Muslim's zealous blood boil and incite severe reactions against the
Umayyid monarchy.

The Tragedy of Karbalā and the Martyrdom of Imam Husayn b. ‘Alī (‘a)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

As someone who had been able to acquire for himself the garment of the
Caliphate and monarchy over the Muslim lands, Mu'āwiyah had quite
learned that in the Muslim community, particularly among the *Sahāba*
(companions), *Tābi'īn* (their successors), *Muhājirin*, and *Ansār*,
the issue of *Ahl al-Bayt* ('a) enjoys a special status that could not
be easily violated.

On the other hand, more than anybody else, he had tried 'Alī b. Abī
Tālib ('a) and his progeny's robustness and perseverance in respect to
religious values and human principles, and found out that confronting
this household would cost too high for the Umayyids to afford.
Therefore, he had given necessary instructions to his crown prince as to
avoid confronting the household of the Prophet (s).

However, Yazīd was not such a person to comprehend the meaning of
politics and realize his father's bitterly tasted state policies and
experiences; rather, he saw himself as the heir to the power that he
himself had no role in acquiring, and like a traditional prince he spent
his carefree adolescence and early youth on the Muslims' public treasury
without any care for their plight and sufferings and now was ruling over
the *ummah* of Islam whose men, in his own thinking, were his freed
slaves and their women, his handmaidens who will submit themselves to
him whenever he wished!

This fanciful thinking, inflated by flatteries, once again set the
descendents of Banī Hāshim against those of Umayyid and prompted the
sons of Abū Sufyān to fight another battle with the household of the
Prophet (s), creating a tragedy in Karbalā which was the greatest of all
the battles between truth and falsehood in entire human history.

Yazīd wanted to take the revenge of all those killed in the battle of
Badr and all the polytheists and unbelievers of history from the
household of the Prophet (s) in half a day's time and he truly did so!  
 Like all the Cains of history, he did not realize the gravity and
expanse of that horrendous tragedy the moment he was perpetrating it.
However, it did not last long, that, before a half day's time with the
short speech by Zaynab al-Kubrā, the daughter of 'Alī ('a), he
dismounted his throne of triumph and power and proceeded to apologize;
but it was too late, as the blood of the Prophet's (s) household was
already shed and would not be washed out by any means. In this tragedy,
the decapitated heads of the descendents of 'Alī ('a) turned to
unsetting stars that directed people toward the way to deliverance in
the dark night of the Umayyid rule; and the people of Medina were the
most deserving to find out these telling clues and to show proper
reactions in the face of the unjustly shed blood of the Prophet's
descendents.

It was also because Imam Husayn b. 'Alī ('a) and his companions and
family members had come from their homeland and Imam Ali b. al-Husayn
(Zayn al-'Abidīn) ('a), the son of Imam Husayn ('a), had brought them
the message of their martyrdom. Those who failed to accompany and help
the Prophet's grandson were now ashamed of their past and considered
compensating that great damage!

Even if the newly converted Muslims of Syria had not yet considered the
*ayah* “Say, 'I do not ask of you any reward except the affection for my
relatives'”[^22] while reciting the Qur'an, and could not distinguish
between the descendants of Abū Sufyān and the household of the Prophet
(s). The people of Medina had frequently heard from the Prophet (s)
that: “… *Al-Hasan and al-Husayn sayyidā shabāb ahl al-janna* (Hasan and
Husayn are the two leaders of the youth of paradise)”.[^23] Thus, such
deep injuries to the souls, faith, and sentiments of the Medinans would
inevitably end up in an overall uprising and bloody confrontation.

Dhahabī wrote:  
 “When the tyrannies of Yazīd and his functionaries became widespread,
he killed the Messenger of Allah's (s) grandson and his companions, and
the people revolted.”[^24]34

Tabarī wrote:  
 “When Imam Husayn ('a) was martyred, Ibn. Zubayr talked to the people;
he regarded the Imam's martyrdom as important, reproached the people of
Iraq, and said: The people of Iraq are criminal and evildoers; they
invited Husayn ('a) to Iraq but as soon as he arrived, they attacked him
and demanded him to either surrender to the son of Sumayya (Ibn Ziyād)
or fight. Husayn ('a) knew that his companions were few in number but
preferred dignified death to a degraded life. May God bless Husayn ('a)
and debase his killer.”[^25]35

One of the writers of Arab history wrote in an analysis on the tragedy
of Karbalā that Husayn b. 'Alī's blood was more than anything else
effective in the development of Shī'ī thought to the extent that Shī'īsm
may be said to be reborn on the tenth of Muharram. As the later events
revealed, this issue was among the factors that undermined the
foundations of the Umayyid's government.[^26]

Description of the Karbalā Tragedy by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
----------------------------------------------------------

It is likely that if the Karbalā tragedy did not have narrators like
Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a) and Zaynab al-Kubrā (the daughter of Imam 'Ali
('a)) and the *Ahl al-Bayt* ('a) had not taken measures for preserving
and safeguarding it, the Umayyid ruling system could have easily
distorted the event for the uninformed masses and offered justification
to cover up their crimes. But what prevented the distortion of event of
'Āshūra and its justification by the ruling Umayyid's government were
the very influential and at the same time subtle ways of propagation
adopted by the surviving messengers of Karbalā, that would burn the
hearts and infuriate the spirits of the Muslim masses.

It was not a proper time for Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a) to start an open
campaign against the Umayyids to inform the public of their true face;
and the historical experience indicated that the people of Medina,
despite their good past records in assisting the Prophet (s) and
defending the religion, never had the required vigilance and solidarity
to support the household of the Prophet (s). That was possibly because
yesterday's *Ansār* and *Muhājirin* (i.e., Helpers and Emigrants) who
were regarded as simple and untainted Muslims, after the demise of the
Messenger of Allah (s) and with the city of Medina turning into the
Islamic capital, the seat of the Caliphate of the Muslims, and the
centre of distribution of social and political positions, had over the
years, acquired some status and reputation so as to view themselves as
companions and narrators of *hadīth* as opposed to the household of the
Prophet (s).

Nevertheless, Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a) would constantly whisper his
messages in between his supplications and intimate conversations
(*munajat*) with Allah, driving them deep down into one's soul; whenever
he saw drinking water, he would passionately remember the moments of the
martyrdom of martyrs of Karbalā with their parched lips. Thus, words,
expressions and gestures of the Imam ('a), who in spite of being
subjected to the harshness and cruelty of the age, was still known as
the most distinguished religious figure of his time, were communicated
from heart to heart to the farthest areas of city of Medina via
gatherings.

Historians have described the early hours of arrival of the survivors of
Karbalā Caravan at the gates of Medina as follows:

When Bashīr b. Jazlam declared the news of Imam Husayn's ('a) martyrdom
and the return of the *Ahl al-Bayt* ('a) to the people of Medina, it
sounded as if it was the Trumpet's Blast that turned Medina to a scene
like the morning of Resurrection. Women of Medina rushed out of their
houses and took to the gate of Medina, so that no man or woman remained
home except that all were running bare-footed and raising the cries of
“Wā Muhammadā! Wā Husayna!”(Alas O Muhammad, Alas O Husayn!), just like
the day when the Holy Prophet (s) departed from the world. No day ever
passed by for the Muslims more bitter and no cries of mourning and
lamentation more severe than that day.[^27]

After the people left town and went to Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a) and
others who were returning with them, the Imam delivered a very moving
sermon. Some people, such as Sawhān b. Sa'sa'a, apologized for not
assisting Imam Husayn ('a) and Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a) accepted their
apologies.[^28]

Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn's ('a) words left deep impact on the people of
Medina and made them feel that they had neglected to defend the sanctity
of the Messenger of Allah (s)!

Abī Mikhnaf wrote:  
 It was Friday that the caravan of the *Ahl al-Bayt* ('a) arrived near
Medina. Imam Zayn al-'Abidīn ('a) sent Bashir b. Jazlam towards Medina
to inform the people. He entered Medina and informed the people of the
arrival of *Ahl al-Bayt ('a)* by his poem. With this news, even the
women who were behind the veils came out of their houses, wearing black
garments and weeping with cries. I saw no man or woman except that they
were weeping, lamenting and reprimanding; all the Hashemite and
non-Hashemite women were weeping.

On Friday, the *Ahl al-Bayt ('a)* arrived in Medina and the Friday
preacher was delivering his sermon, mentioning what had befallen Husayn
('a) and his companions and adding even further to the lamentations and
sorrows of people so that some were weeping and some moaning. That day
all the people of Medina went toward *Ahl al-Bayt* ('a) just like the
day when the Prophet (s) had departed from this world. The poets among
them were reciting their poems and elegies, and the people of Medina
held public mourning and sorrowful gatherings for fifteen days for Imam
Husayn *('a)* and the martyrs of Karbala.

On the other hand, Zaynab al-Kubrā (sa) and the mothers of the martyrs
of Karbalā, each one of them created their own impressive gathering in
the widely span social milieu of Medina by individually narrating their
experiences of events of the 'Āshūrā tragedy and what they had seen on
the way to Kūfa and Syria and in Yazīd's court.

Following are the words of *Hadrat* Zaynab (sa), the daughter of 'Alī
*('a)*, addressed in the early hours of her arrival in Medina to a mass
gathering of mourning women who had encircled and accompanied her into
the city. She took advantage of the poetry to penetrate deep into the
hearts and minds of her listeners, as she knew very well that the Arab
women's memory would readily preserve them and recite them like their
soothing cradlesongs to their babies. Those lines are rendered as
follows:

*What answer will you give when the Prophet asks you:*  
*What did you do as my last Ummah after my demise*  
*To my progeny and my household?*  
*Some have been taken captives and some were immersed in their blood!*  
*Is it my reward for guiding and leading you to the Way of God?*  
*That you oppress my household to such an extent?*[^29]39

Political Unrests and Fallacies
-------------------------------

Among other factors that played an important role in Medinan's revolt
against the Umayyid government were the morally corrupt actions and
politically awkward decision-makings that were witnessed by the Muslim
community, especially by the people of Medina, that began with the
Caliphate of Uthmān b. 'Affān (who was from Umayyid clan), and reached
their extremes during the reign of Yazīd b. Mu'āwiyah.

The previous Caliphs usually had at their disposal some consultants from
among the companions and the erudite for administering the Muslim
community. Yazīd, however, had gathered around him some of his jokers
and drunkard cronies, who were of his age, as consultants and
administrators. This action was obviously intolerable to those who were
foremost on the path of faith at that time and to the *Ansār* and
*Muhājirin* and their descendents.

The nearest in mindset to Yazīd for the people of Medina was likely to
be the governor of Medina about whom Tabarī wrote:  
 ”'Uthmān b. Muhammad b. Abū Sufyān, who was appointed as the governor
of Medina after Walīd, was regarded as an inexperienced teenager.”[^30]

Before 'Uthmān b. Muhammad b. Abū Sufyān, another person known as Walīd
b. 'Uqba had been appointed by Yazīd as the governor of Hijāz who was
strongly criticized by people and about whom Ibn. Zubayr sent the
following letter to Yazīd:

“You have sent over us a rough and harsh man who does not care at all
about justice and truthfulness and pays no attention to the well-wishers
and the wise; whereas if you had sent a mild-mannered person, we hoped
that he would make the hard and complicated tasks much easier.”[^31]4141

It was after such remarks and complains that Yazīd discharged Walīd b.
'Uqba from office and appointed 'Uthmān b. Muhammad b. Abū Sufyān, who
was an arrogant, inexperienced, and heedless youth, as the governor of
Hijāz[^32], and the tragedy of Harrah took place while he was the
governor of Medina.[^33]

Surprisingly enough, 'Uthmān b. Muhammad b. Abū Sufyān was
simultaneously shouldering two heavy posts, i.e., the governorship of
Medina and Mecca which Yazīd had entrusted to this raw and inexperienced
youth![^34]

All these factors were in fact creating impulses and subtle reactions
that were adding together and awaiting a proper moment to burst out like
an explosion. That moment came up when Ibn Mīnā, the fully authorized
representative of Mu'āwiyah (and who continued working in that position
in Yazid's reign), for collecting taxes and properties in Medina, tried
to deliver the collected possessions out of Harrah to the governor of
Hijāz. It was at this point that the Medinan protesters blocked his way
and told him: “This much property that you are taking out of Medina does
not belong to you and Mu'āwiyah; we confiscate this property.”[^35]45

Ibn Mīnā reported the confiscation to 'Uthmān b. Muhammad b. Abū Sufyān
who was then the ruler of Mecca and Medina.  
 'Uthmān summoned some representatives from Medina for negotiations. A
number of *Ansār* and Quraysh met 'Uthmān and stated that the property
belonged to the people of Medina and that “Mu'āwiyah had purchased our
property at a low price during the time of our poverty and economic
pressure and he had not paid our due rights during his reign.”  
 The dispute dragged on to the extent that the governor of Medina
threatened the representatives and said: “This action of yours is rooted
in internal grudges and there is no end to it. I will report the issue
to Yazīd himself.”[^36]  
 The governor of Medina reported the story in a letter to Syria and
instigated Yazīd against the people of Medina. Furious to hear this,
Yazīd said:  
 “I swear to God that I will dispatch a massive army over them and
trample them under the horses' hooves…”[^37]

[^1]: Ya‘qūbī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 2, p. 251; Mas‘ūdī, Murūj al-Dhahab, vol.
3, p. 69; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 115.

[^2]: Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqāt al-Kubrā, vol. 5, p. 109; Ibn Athīr, Usd
al-Ghāba, vol. 3, p. 393.

[^3]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 374; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī
al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 115.

[^4]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 368; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-‘Iqd
al-Farīd, vol. 5, p. 136; Abū al-Faraj al-Isfahānī, Al-Aghānī, vol. 1,
p. 23.

[^5]: Ibn A‘tham Kūfī, Al-Futūh, vol. 5, p. 179; Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol.
4, p. 368; Nuwayrī, Nahāyat al-Irab, vol. 6, p. 217.

[^6]: Khwand Mīr, Habīb al-Siyar, vol. 2, p. 127.

[^7]: Nuwayrī, Nahāyat al-Irab, vol. 6, p. 217.

[^8]: Ibid, vol. 6, p. 217; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-‘Iqd al-Farīd, vol. 5,
p. 136.

[^9]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 368; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-‘Iqd
al-Farīd, vol. 5, p. 136; Nuwayrī, Nahāyat al-Irab, vol. 6, p. 217; Ibn
Kathīr, Ismā‘īl, Al-Bidāya wa al-Nihāya, vol. 6, p. 233.

[^10]: For further information about Yazīd's debaucheries see: Philip
Hitti, Ta’rīkh al-Duwal al-Islāmiyya, p. 113; Ibn Taghrī Birdī, Al-Nujūm
al-Zāhira, vol. 1, p. 163; Suyūtī, Ta’rīkh al-Khulafā, p. 209; Ibn Sa‘d,
Tabaqāt, vol. 5, p. 48; Jāhīz, Al-Tāj fī Akhlāq al-Mulūk, p. 258; Qummī,
Safīna al-Bihār, vol. 1, p. 583; Qummī, Tatimma al-Muntahā, p. 36.

[^11]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 368; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-‘Iqd
al-Farīd, vol. 3, p. 94; Nuwayrī, Nahāyat al-Irab, vol. 5, p. 136; Ibn
Kathīr, Ismā‘īl, Al-Bidāya wa al-Nihāya, vol. 6, p. 233.

[^12]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 368; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-‘Iqd
al-Farīd, vol. 5, p. 136; Nuwayrī, Nahāyat al-Irab, vol. 6, p. 217;

[^13]: Ibn Kathīr, Ismā‘īl, Al-Bidāya wa al-Nihāya, vol. 6, p. 233.

[^14]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 368.

[^15]: Ibn Tiqtaqā, Fī al-Ādāb al-Sultāniyya wa al-Duwal al-Islāmiyya,
known as Ta’rīkh-i Fakhrī, p. 116.

[^16]: Suyūtī, Ta’rīkh al-Khulafā, p. 166.

[^17]: Mas‘ūdī, Murūj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 68.

[^18]: Ibn Uthāl, a Christian physician, was a contemporary to Mu‘āwiyah
b. Abū Sufyān. Ibn Abī Usaybi‘a says: “He was sufficiently insightful in
the properties of spices, particularly poisons, from whom Mu‘āwiya would
ask for assistance for poisoning the Islamic dignitaries.” According to
Wāqidī: “Imam Hasan (a), Mālik Ashtar, and ‘Abd al-Rahmān b. Khālid b.
Walīd who opposed the crown-princeship of Yazīd, were poisoned by his
(Mu‘āwiya's) order. Eventually, Khālid b. Muhājir, ‘Abd al-Rahmān's
nephew went to Syria to take revenge for his uncle's blood and killed
Ibn Uthāl (Dehkhoda Dictionary vol. 2, p. 290, under the entry ابن). Ibn
Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 144-146; Ibn Abī Usaybi‘a,
‘Uyūn al-Abnā’ fī Tabāqāt al-Atibbā, p. 171. Ibn ‘Asākir, Ta’rīkh-i
Damishq, vol. 5, p. 80; Abū al-Faraj al-Isfahānī, Aghānī, vol. 5, p. 12;
Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 2, p. 82; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol.
3, p. 378.

[^19]: Ibn ‘Asākir, Ta’rīkh Damishq, vol. 5, p. 80; Hadramī, Mu‘āwiya wa
Ta’rīkh, p. 111.

[^20]: Akhtal, whose full name is Ghiyāth b. Ghawth b. al-Salt b.
Tāriqat b. ‘Amr of the Banī Taqlib tribe, nicknamed as Abū Mālik, was an
eminent poet who gained his famous during Umayyid reign in Syria and
most of whose eulogy poems are about the Umayyid Caliphs. He went to the
Umayyid and became their poet. He was born in 19 A.H. (640 C.E.) and
died in 90 A.H. (708 C.E.), and grown up among the Christians around
Hīra. (Zirkilī, Al-A‘lām, vol. 5, p. 318; Abū al-Faraj al-Isfahānī,
Al-Aghānī, vol. 8, p. 280; Ibn Qutayba, Al-Shi‘r wa al-Shu‘arā, p. 189;
Baghdādī, Khazānat al-Adab, vol. 1, p. 219 & 221).

[^21]: Philip Hitti, Ta’rīkh al-‘Arab, vol. 1, p. 254 (Trans. Abū
al-Ghāsim Pāyandeh).

[^22]: Al-Qur'an, 42: 23.

[^23]: Khatīb Baghdādī, Ta’rīkh Baghdād, vol. 11, p. 91, and vol. 2, p.
181; Dhahabī, Ta’rīkh al-Islām, vol. 3, p. 5.

[^24]: Dhahabī, Ta’rīkh al-Islām, vol. 3, p. 5.

[^25]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 264.

[^26]: Amīr ‘Alī, Mukhtasar Ta’rīkh al-‘Arab, vol. 1, p. 247.

[^27]: Ibn Tāwūs, Al-Lahuf, p. 130; Abī Mikhnaf, Maqtal p. 200;
Muqarram, Maqtal al-Husayn, p. 375.

[^28]: Tūsī, Al-Amālī, p. 66; Muqarram, Maqtal al-Husayn, p. 375;
Majlisī, Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 45, p. 147.

[^29]: Ibn Qutayba, ‘Uyūn al-Akhbār, vol. 1, p. 212; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil
fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 36; Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 357; Bīrūnī,
Āthār al-Bāqiya, p. 329; Khwārizmī, Maqtal al-Husayn, vol. 2, p. 84; Ibn
Jawzī, Sibt, Tadhkirat al-Khawās, p. 240.

[^30]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 357.

[^31]: Nuwayrī, Nahāyat al-Irab, vol. 6, p. 217.

[^32]: Ibid.

[^33]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Ma‘ārif, p. 345.

[^34]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 205.

[^35]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 206; Ya‘qūbī, vol.
2, p. 250.

[^36]: Ibid.

[^37]: Samhūdī, Wafā’ al-Wafā’, vol. 1, p. 127.


