Open Confrontation of the People of Medina against Umayyid Government
=====================================================================

Confiscation of the state property by the people of Medina and the
fruitless and unfriendly negotiations of the representatives of Medinan
tribes with Uthmān b. Abū Sufyān was the beginning of *Muhājirin* and
*Ansār*'s open confrontation with the Umayyid rule. This action of the
people of Medina actually opened up the deep and old wound inflicted on
their bodies by the Umayyid rule long time ago.

The atmosphere was quite ready for a serious action against the Umayyid
government.  
 'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala Ghasīl al-Malā'ka, who had witnessed at close
quarters Yazīd's irresponsibility and incompetence in Syria and even had
accepted his gifts with the intention of using them in toppling his own
rule, called people of Medina to the final battle against Yazīd and the
Umayyids.

'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala's social status[^1] among the people of Medina
made them to go along with him and even choose him as the governor of
Medina, swear allegiance to him, and regarded Yazid as discharged from
the Caliphate.[^2]49

Ibn Zubayr, who was himself one of the protesters and had chosen Mecca
as his base, sent a letter to the people of Medina encouraging them to
stand up against Yazīd and Umayyid's administrators settled in Medina
and expel them from Medina.[^3]50  
 Ibn Zubayr himself ousted Yazīd's administrators from Hijāz.[^4]51

Expulsion of the Governor of Medina
-----------------------------------

After swearing allegiance to 'Abd Allāh b. Hanzala on the first day of
Muharram 63 A.H. (682, C.E.), the people of Medina expelled Uthmān b.
Muhammad b. Abū Sufyān, Yazīd's representative and the governor of
Medina, from that city. Then, they imprisoned the Umayyids, their
relatives, as well as those Qurayshīs who were the supporters of the
Umayyid government, amounting to one thousand persons in Marwān b.
Hakam's house without doing them any harm.[^5]52

Some historians, in the meantime, have put it this way: Those imprisoned
in Marwān's house were besieged, water was denied to them, and some of
them were assaulted and battered including 'Uthmān b. Muhammad and
Marwān b. Hakam and his son Abd al-Malik.[^6] However, such remarks have
not been reported in the first hand sources.

After the revolt of Medinans and besiege of Umayyids in Marwān's house,
the governor of Medina sent his torn up shirt to Yazīd along with a
letter saying: “Come to our rescue! The people of Medina have expelled
our clan out of Medina!”[^7]

Some have pointed out that of all the kindred of the Umayyids, only the
children of Uthmān b. 'Affān were not expelled from Medina.[^8]  
 Some have also pointed out that the governor of Medina escaped to Syria
overnight.[^9]56

Yazīd's Reaction against the People of Medina
---------------------------------------------

The letter written by Marwān b. Hakam and the Umayyids was delivered to
Yazīd by Habīb b. Kurra and upon reading the letter, Yazīd got agitated
and asked Habīb: “Didn't the Umayyids and their relatives and slaves
amount to a thousand people?” Habīb answered: “Yes; they were even over
a thousand.”

Yazīd asked: “So, why didn't they resist for a while?”  
 The courier replied: “All the inhabitants were united against them, so
they were unable to resist against such a great number of people.”[^10]

At night time, while two guards were flanking him on his sides and he
was holding a candle in his hand, Yazīd left the palace in a colorful
outfit and with an angry face, walked to the mosque, climbed the pulpit,
and cried out:  
 “O People of Syria! 'Uthmān b. Muhammad, the governor of Medina, has
written to me that the People of Medina have expelled the Umayyids from
the town. I swear to God that if there were no greenery or prosperity,
it would be more tolerable for me than to hear this news.”[^11]58

With these words, in fact, Yazīd declared his firm decision to send his
forces to attack Medina.  
 Yazīd wrote a letter to the people of Medina and ordered 'Uthmān b.
Muhammad, the governor of Medina, to read it for them. He sent the
letter through Nu'mān b. Bashīr Ansārī and told him:  
 “Most of the people of Medina are your relatives. Go to them and
prevent them from opposition, for if they did not revolt on this matter,
the people will not dare to oppose me.”

Nu'mān went to his relatives in Medina and ordered them to obey and
warned them against revolt and sedition, but they didn't listen to
him.[^12] Not only that, in reply, they said to Nu'mān:

“O Nu'mān! Yazīd is not a Muslim, because he drinks wine day and night;
he does not offer obligatory prayers, he practices debauchery, and he
deems as permissible shedding the blood of the descendents of the
Prophet (s); and you know that no other Caliph has not done what Yazīd
has been doing. He does not deserve to be the leader of Muslim
community.”[^13]60

As soon as 'Uthmān b. Muhammad timidly read Yazīd's letter to the people
of Medina, 'Abd Allāh b. Mutī' and some other people began to curse and
use abusive language. When they found out that Yazīd had dispatched an
army to suppress them, they made a firm decision to stand up and fight
against it.[^14]61

After the people of Medina decisively resolved to fight against the army
of Syria, the Umayyids were ousted out of town, either on their own
demand or as deemed advisable by Medinan fighters, and settled in a
place called Dhī Khushub[^15] located at a day's journey from
Medina.[^16]  
 Marwān b. Hakam was among the expelled. However, he was happy for not
having stayed in Medina because he knew that if they had stayed in
Medina, they would have been more at a loss than otherwise. Thus, Marwān
told his son 'Abd al-Malik:

“… O My son! It seems that the people of Medina have permitted us to
leave without consulting each other or without enough deliberation, or
they have expelled us from Medina.”  
 'Abd al-Malik asked his father why he said so?

Marwān answered: “The very fact that the people did not kill or take us
captive is enough to be happy, for if they took us captive, they would
keep us as hostages and would kill us in case of invasion of Syrian
army! Now we are worried that they would realize their mistake and
change their minds to chase after us!”[^17]64

[^1]: Hanzala b. Abī ‘Āmir, a famous companion of the Prophet (s), was a
youth who got married to Jamīla, ‘Abd Allāh b. Ubayy's daughter,
consummated with her and ‘Abd Allāh's embryo was conceived but he did
not get the chance to perform the major ablution (ghusl) in the morning
as he had to proceed to the battle of Uhud on the orders of Prophet (s)
and was martyred. The Prophet (s) told the people that the angels had
performed the ghusl on him (Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 5, p. 46; Dinawari,
al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 310).

[^2]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 5, p. 47; Qazwīnī, Muhammad Husain, Riyād
al-Ahzān, p. 176.

[^3]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 264; Maqdisī, Al-Bad’ wa
al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 1, p. 15.

[^4]: Ibn A’tham Kūfi, Al-Futūh, vol. 3, p. 179; Mas‘ūdī, Murūj
al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 69.

[^5]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 5, p. 47 and 166; Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa
al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 208; Ya‘qūbī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 2, p. 250; Ibn Athīr,
Al-Kāmil fī al-Tārīkh, vol. 4, p. 111; Fakhrī, Ta’rīkh, p. 115; Ibn
Khaldūn, Tā’rīkh, vol. 2, p. 37.

[^6]: Ya‘qūbī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 2, p. 250; Bayhaqī, Al-Mahāsin wa
al-Masāwī, vol. 1, p. 46.

[^7]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 2, p. 9; Bayhaqī,
Al-Mahāsin wa al-Masāwī, vol. 1, p. 46; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-‘Iqd
al-Farīd, vol. 5, p. 137; Abū al-Faraj al-Isfahānī, Al-Aghānī, vol. 1,
p. 25; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 111; Samhūdī, Wafā’
al-Wafā’, vol. 1, p. 127.

[^8]: Azraqī, Akhbār Makkat al-Musharrafa, vol. 1, p. 139.

[^9]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 208.

[^10]: Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 371.

[^11]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 2, p. 9; Bayhaqī,
Al-Mahāsin wa al-Masāwī, vol. 1, p. 46.

[^12]: Nuwayrī, Nahāyat al-Irab, vol. 6, p. 217.

[^13]: Bal‘amī, Ta’rīkh Nāma-yi Tabarī, vol. 2, p. 719.

[^14]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 208.

[^15]: Yāqūt Hamawī, Mu‘jam al-Buldān, vol. 2, p. 372.

[^16]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 208; Ibn Athīr,
Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 111.

[^17]: Abū al-Faraj al-Isfahānī, Al-Aghānī, vol. 1, p. 24.


