Dispatch of the Syrian Army to Medina
=====================================

Yazīd knew that the military expedition to Medina and the Prophet's (s)
shrine, where many of the inhabitants were the *Muhājirin* and *Ansār*
and the companions of the Prophet (s) would be a difficult task,
requiring a confidential and trustable commander.

The historians reported that Yazīd first called upon a person named
Dahhāk b. Qays Fihrī[^1], then 'Amr b. Sa'īd Ashdaq[^2]), and after that
'Ubayd Allāh b. Ziyād[^3] to carry out this mission. Each one of them,
however, rejected this mission, stating that shedding the blood of the
descendents of *Muhājirin* and *Ansār* and violating the sanctity of the
Prophet's (s) shrine was a burden too heavy for them to shoulder.

Finally, this mission was assigned to someone known as Muslim b. 'Uqba
and Yazīd entrusted this costly command to him!

Muslim b. 'Uqba was an old man who had lived for more than ninety years
and was sick then![^4]68  
 A person at that age and in that unfavorable physical condition did not
seem to be the right option for such a mission. But, apparently it
seemed that Yazīd:

Firstly, had to take this option, as the others whom he had selected did
not accept the mission.

Secondly, the mission required above all, a commander who was entirely
at the service of the Umayyids and deeply devoted to them; and Mu'āwiyah
had already talked to Yazīd about Muslim b. 'Uqba and reassured him of
his devotedness and loyality to the Umayyids.[^5]69

Thirdly, Yazīd had to send someone to the battle against the *Muhājirin*
and *Ansār* who had no fear of bloodshed and whose physical appearance
could be a source of encouragement to the troops.  
 Although Muslim b. 'Uqba was physically not regarded as a commander
powerful enough to stir up the forces by his military gestures, his old
age could encourage the naïve and ill-informed troops of Syrian army to
invade the sanctity of the Prophet's holy land and fail to view it as an
emotionally and religiously vile act.

With these calculations in mind, Yazīd appointed Muslim b. 'Uqba as the
commander-in-chief of his army and assigned Husayn b. Numayr Sakūnī,
Hubaysh b. Dulja Qīnī, and Rawh b. Zanbā' Jazāmī, each of them to
separately command a section of that army.[^6]70

Yazīd ordered the government's officials as well as the ordinary people
to be encouraged to participate in this conflict.

The state heralds were announcing in the streets and public places:  
 “O People! Mobilize for fighting against the people of Hijāz and
receive your wage!” Whoever volunteered would receive one hundred dinars
cash right on the spot. Those for whom only money was important
immediately agreed. After a short while about twelve thousand
individuals gathered.[^7]

Some other historians have reported the number of Syrian army as
amounting to ten thousand troops.  
 The age span of the troops was between twenty to fifty years. All
required equipment had been provided for them, so that many camels were
carrying necessary equipment and weapons of the army.[^8]72

Some other historians have put it this way: Yazīd ordered people to
prepare to go to Hijāz; twenty thousand infantry troops and seven
thousand cavalries prepared. Yazīd gave two hundred dinars to the
mounted and a hundred dinars to the infantry troops as award and ordered
them to move along with Muslim b. 'Uqba.[^9]73

Yazīd accompanied Muslim b. 'Uqba and the Syrian army for about half a
Farsakh (2.8 km) to see them off.[^10]  
 Among the army, some Syrian Christians were also seen who had prepared
to fight against the people of Medina.[^11]

[^1]: Ibn A’tham Kūfi, Al-Futūh, vol. 3, p. 179.

[^2]: ‘Amr b. Sa‘īd b. ‘Ās b. Umayyah b. ‘Abd Shams, renowned as Ashdaq
is the same person who was the governor of Medina in 61 A.H. (680 C.E.)
when Imam Husain (a) was martyred. (Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 5, p. 176

[^3]: Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 11.

[^4]: Ibn A’tham Kūfi, Al-Futūh, vol. 5, p. 180.

[^5]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 180; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4,
p. 112; Samhūdī, Wafā’ al-Wafā’, vol. 1, p. 130.

[^6]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 310; Ibn Kathīr, Al-Bidāyat wa
al-Nihāya, vol. 6, p. 234.

[^7]: Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 112; Ibn Taghrī
Birdī, Al-Nujūm al-Zāhira, vol. 1, p. 261; Samhūdī, Wafā’ al-Wafā’, vol.
1, p. 128.

[^8]: Ibn Qutayba, Al-Imāma wa al-Siyāsa, vol. 1, p. 209; Abū al-Fidā‘,
Al-Mukhtasar fī Akhbār al-Bashar, vol. 1, p. 192.

[^9]: Dinawari, al-Akhbār al-Tiwāl, p. 310; Tabarī, Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p.
371; Ibn A’tham Kūfi, Al-Futūh, vol. 5, p. 180.

[^10]: Mas‘ūdī, Murūj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 95; Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil fī
al-Ta’rīkh, vol. 4, p. 56; Bal‘amī, Ta’rīkh Nāma-yi Tabarī, vol. 4, p.
279.

[^11]: Philip Hitti, Ta’rīkh al-‘Arab, vol. 1, p. 248.


