An Introduction to: Recognition of the Imams in The Light of Traditions
=======================================================================

Imamate and leadership are among the significant issues of which every
Muslim should have a clear understanding and to which should recognize
his/her responsibility. Imamate is a subject to which the Holy Prophet
has paid special attention. The Prophet has mentioned it frequently in
his speeches and it has been discussed in various times and places and
in different ways. Its significance is to such an extent that according
to traditions, agreed upon by the Shi’a and the Sunni—some of which will
follow—the great Prophet of Islam (a.s) warned sharply: “One who dies
without knowing the Imam of his age dies as a pagan,” and hence will be
raised beside apostates and disbelievers on the Resurrection Day.
Moreover, the Muslim community would have naturally faced this issue
after the tragic demise of the Holy Prophet (a.s), since the question
then was that who would be the Prophet’s successor and how the Muslims’
affairs should be managed.

Therefore, seeking and finding the truth about Imamate, unscathed by
pagan bias, is an inevitable necessity for the Muslims. Discussions on
Imamate are presented in three main ways, each having its own
characteristics. These are as follows:

1. **Logical Method**: In this method, the necessity of Imamate and
Imam’s infallibility is proved via for example *Lutf* (benevolence)
principle and logical understanding and then by this principle and its
results, consequences of Imamate are stated.

2. **Miracle Method**: Here, individuals make sure of the Imams’
truthfulness by seeing directly or getting information about their
miracles.

3. ***Nass*** **(wording) Method**: In this case, the Imams’ Imamate is
determined by the Prophet’s introduction or stipulation or each Imam’s
introduction of his next successor (s).

In various books written about Imamate, Imam Ali’s leadership after the
Prophet (a.s) has been stated in all the above-mentioned ways. But the
leadership of other Imams has been proved via the first (Logical) and
the second (Miracle) methods.

The purpose of this book is to prove Imamate via the third method
(*Nass*) and mostly traditions narrated by the Sunnis and is organized
in such a way to be helpful for most people.

To begin with, is there any leadership after the Prophet (a.s) at all?
Attempts to find the answer to this question is the start of our
research. In this view, this issue is proved by presenting various
traditions and we will find out that Imamate existed after the Prophet
(a.s) and this continued through the ages. Whenever a bright star from
this Household of the Holy Prophet (the Ahl al-Bayt) set, another would
rise and hence the earth would never be without a *Hujjah*. Then in
proceeding with this research, we deal with our Imams’ characteristics
in order to distinguish them. So, Imamate is first proved as a vast
circle and then this circle is gradually reduced to include only the
Twelve Imams. With this introduction, the issues will be discussed in
the following order:

-The meaning of Imamate and leadership,

-The continuation of Imamate and the necessity of knowing the Imam,

-The number of the Imams and that they are twelve in number and all from
Quraysh,

-The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) and Imamate,

-The intended concept of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)

-The leadership of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)

-Presence of people from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) until the Resurrection
Day,

-Belonging of Imams to the Prophet’s Household (a.s),

-Names and identity of Imams.

Before getting to this last step and finding the names and
identification of the Imams in *ahadith* (traditions of the Holy
Prophet), traditions from Sunni books have been used.

In each chapter, care is taken as to include stipulation of Sunni
clerics for at least some of the traditions. This makes the Sunni
readers realize that even in the most authentic books of their owns,
there are successive traditions clearly proving Imamate of the Twelve
Imams, and that in spite of all the political, cultural, financial and
physical pressures for diminishing the light of the Ahl al-Bayt and
eliminating such traditions from the *hadith* lexicon of the Prophet,
and secluding their traditions, the ray of truth is glittering from the
most certified Sunni *hadith* books, saturating everyone who has
insight, knowledge and conscience.

It will also increase the belief and strengthen the faith in the hearts
of the Shi’a readers, since they realize that the Ahl al-Bayt’s Imamate
is provable even through the books of those who do not believe in them.
But in this last step, although some wordings (*nass*) of Imams are
narrated by the Sunni and are mentioned in many sources, including the
present book, for more certitude, a few of the traditions of the Shi’a,
though little more than a drop in the ocean, are given.

It is worth mentioning that for investigating into the authenticity of
such traditions and selecting the most authentic ones, we should go to
traditions whose narrators are among document chains of jurisprudence
traditions, for clerics expert in *Rijal* (knowledge of distinguished
*hadith* narrators) have paid more attention to them and hence they can
be more easily recognized. With regard to the excess of traditions in
the present topic and the existence of various indications, of course,
there is no need for investigating any documents.

In any case, in writing this book nearly fifty books of both the Sunni
and Shiite have been used, the most important of which are as follow:

*Ithbat Al-Hudat*, *Ghayat Al-Maram*, *Muntakhab Al-Athar*, *Aman
Al-Ummah*, *Jami’ Al-Ruwat* and *Tanqih Al-Maqal* from the Shi’a, and
*Sahih Al-Bukhari*, *Sahih Muslim*, *Mustadrak*, *Sunan Al-Tirmidhi*,
*Sunan Al-Nisa’i*, *Sunan Abi Dawud*, *Sunan Ibn Majah*, *Musnad Ahmad*,
*Al-Mu’jam Al-Kabir*, *Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhriqah*, *Kanz Al-Ummal*, *Lisan
Al-Mizan*, and *Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib* from the Sunni.

What are Imamate and Caliphate?
-------------------------------

Raghib—the famous lexicographer—in his book entitled *Mufradat* states,
“An Imam is one who is followed. It can be either a person whose speech
and behavior are followed, or a book, etc.”

He also says about Caliphate, “Caliphate is the succession of another
person.”

The terms “Imamate” and “Caliphate” seem to have been used in the same
lexical meaning in religious texts, too. The realm of these two
concepts, however, may be wide or narrow, depending on their sphere of
usage. So, if Imamate is used with ‘*Ummah*’ (nation) or ‘*naas*’ (the
masses); or it is used in the abstract, it means all-around leadership
which is of excellent status and we are not to deal with its features
and greatness here.

The relationship between the concepts of Imamate and Caliphate is a
distinct issue which should be dealt with in its own place. But two
points are of significance in the present discussion:

First, Imamate and Caliphate are the succession of the Prophet of Islam
(a.s) after his demise, in religious and social affairs. Second, Imamate
and Caliphate are in practice inseparable. In other words, the same
person who is Imam should be Caliph and the Prophet’s successor. It is
impossible to consider someone as only Imam and the other as merely
Caliph.

Taftazani, a famous Sunni scholar, in his book ‘*Maqasid*’ defines
Imamate as “the leadership of the public as Caliphate and succession of
the Prophet (a.s) in religious and social affairs.”[^1]

Qushji, a great Sunni theologian, gives the same definition.[^2] Other
Sunni scholars have presented the same or nearly the same definitions
for Imamate.[^3] As is quoted, Abu Bakr too, when denying Ansar’s[^4]
candidate for Caliphate, adduced the tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأئمَِّةُ مِن قُريشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Imams are from Quraysh.”[^5]

Therefore, he did not differentiate between Imamate and Caliphate
either.[^6] The conclusion derived from this brief discussion is that in
traditions, which will be quoted, by Imamate means Caliphate, too.

The Continuation of Imamate and the Necessity of Recognition of Imam
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Islam is undoubtedly the everlasting religion until the Resurrection Day
and never dependent upon the great Prophet of Islam (a.s). The Holy
Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مُحَمَّد إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ
أَفَإِيْن مَاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انْقَلَبْتُمْ عَلَى أَعْقَابِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Muhammad is no more than a messenger; the messengers have
already passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you
turn back upon your heels? 2:144***[^7]”

So the continuation of Islam, as a religion, over time is an established
principle.

Defending religion, execution of Shari’ah commandments and protecting
the glory of Muslims and Islamic territory, on the other hand, requires
leadership and commandment or else it would not be possible. The
necessity of leadership is an issue agreed upon by all Islamic sects and
branches and except for a small group, not worthy of attention, no one
has doubted it.

Adhud al-Din Iji, a Sunni judge and scholar, in *Mawaqif* says: “Muslims
in the early years after the Prophet’s demise have successively reached
consensus that an age without Imam is impossible.[^8]

But since the method of this book is based on quotation, an attempt is
made to follow the issues in the light of traditions quoted from the
great Prophet (a.s) by the Sunni.

The traditions can be divided into two parts:

1. Many traditions in which the terms ‘Imam,’ ‘Caliph’ and the like (in
various forms) have been mentioned. These traditions briefly prove that
there are Imamate and Caliphate, after the honorable Messenger of Allah
(a.s); such as, **“الأئمّةُ اثنا عَشَر.”** (Imams are twelve in number.)
Because if there is no Imamate, it cannot be said that Imams are twelve
in number. Some traditions of this sort will be stated.

2. Some traditions verify that an Imam exists in every age, some of
which state that one should know his Imam and follow him and that if
someone dies without knowing and following the Imam of his age, he dies
as a pagan; i.e. he dies as apostate.

• *Musnad Ahmad*, Vol. 3, p. 446:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : من مات وليست عليه طاعه مات
ميتة جاهلية.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) has said: One who dies without obedience (to an
Imam), dies as a pagan and disbeliever.[^9]

• *Sahih Muslim*, Vol. 12, p.240 (Nawawi’s exposition):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمعت رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يقول: ومَن ماتَ وَلَيسَ في
عُنُقِه بَيعَةٌ ماتَ ميتة جاهلية.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) has said: One who dies with no allegiance (to an
Imam) has died as a pagan.[^10]

• *Al-Mu’jam* *Al-Kabir*, Vol. 10, p.289:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : مَنْ ماتَ ولَيسَ عليه إمامُ
فَمِيتَتُهُ مِيتَةٌ جاهِلِيّة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) has said: One who dies and has no Imam has died
as a pagan.[^11]

• *Sahih Muslim*, Vol. 12, p. 201 (Nawawi’s exposition):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : لا يَزالُ هذا الأمرُ في
قُرَيشٍ ما بَقيَ في النّاسِ اثْنانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) has said: As long as there are at least two
people (in the world), this issue (Caliphate) remains in Quraysh.[^12]

As is evident, this requires the continuation of Caliphate.

• *Musnad Ahmad*, Vol. 4, p.96:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : مَنْ ماتَ بِغَيرِ إمامٍ ماتَ
مِيتةً جاهِلِيّة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) has said: One who dies with no Imam dies as a
pagan[^13].

Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Umar Ibn Abi ‘Asim Al-Sheybani, died in 287 AH, quotes
the same tradition with slight differences not changing the meaning in
‘*Kitab Al-Sunnah’*.[^14] The researcher of the book says about the
tradition, “It is well-documented,” as is included in other *Musnads*
and collections of traditions.

• *Mustadrak Hakim*, Vol. 1,p.77:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : مَن ماتَ ولَيسَ عَلَيه إمامُ
جَماعَةٍ فإنّ مِيتَتَهُ مِيتَةٌ جَاهِلِيةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah said: One who dies and has no Imam of the public
dies as a pagan.

Hakim considers this tradition as valid.

• *Al-Mu’jam* *Al-Kabir*, Vol. 12, p.336:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ ماتَ مِن غَيرِ إمامِ جَماعَةٍ ماتَ مِيتَةً جَاهِلِيَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who dies without an Imam of the public dies a pagan death.

In the last two traditions,**"إمام جماعة"** means Imam of the Muslim
community and it is obvious that the Prophet (a.s) means true Imam;
since he certainly does not intend an Imam who has gained his position
unlawfully. Shahab Al-Din Al-Turbashti Hanafi[^15] has been quoted as
saying: “The true meaning of this and other similar traditions is to be
applied to Imams who are just, since they are the only ones who deserve
to be named Caliph.”[^16]

As some of the following traditions state, “There is no refuge from a
government,” they do not intend to legalize the government of oppressors
and transgressors. They do not want to say that God and His Messenger
are content with the ruling of such people, but that human beings cannot
continue to live without leadership. Hence, even difficult social
circumstances, caused by the ruling of an oppressor government, are much
better than the unbearable consequences of confusion and anarchy. So
traditions do not prescribe oppressor and corrupt governments at all.
Accordingly, as emphasized by great Sunni scholars too, Imam and Caliph
should be just.

• *Al-Mu’jam* *Al-Kabir*, Vol. 10, p.132, No. 10210:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : لا بُدَّ للنّاسِ مِن إمارَةٍ
بَرَّةٍ أو فَاجِرَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) has said: People have no refuge from the
government; either a good or a bad one.

• *Al-Sunan Al-Kubra*, Vol. 8, P. 184:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَمِعَ عَليّاً رَضيَ اللهُ عَنهُ قوماً يَقولونَ: لا حُكْمَ إلاّ للهِ!
قال: نَعَمْ! لا حُكْمَ إلاّ لله. وَلكِنْ لا بُدَّ لِلنّاسِ مِنْ أمِيرٍ
بَرٍّ أوْ فاجِرٍ يَعْمَلُ فِيهِ المُؤْمِنِ وَيَسْتَمتِعُ فِيهِ
الكَافِرُ وَيُبلِّغُ اللهُ فيهِ الأَجَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali (a.s)—May God be content with him—heard a group saying: “The ruling
is only Allah’s.”[^17] He said: “This is true! Ruling is only Allah’s,
but there is no refuge from rulers, good or bad, so that under their
rule, the believer does his deeds and the corrupt gets benefit, and
Allah will expire the appointed time.” [^18]

• *Al-Durr Al-Manthur*, Vol. 4, p. 194 :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : ﴿يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ
بِإِمَامِهِمْ﴾ قال: يُدعَى كُلُّ قَومٍ بِإمامِ زَمانِهِمْ وَكِتابِ
رَبِّهِمْ وَسُنّةِ نَبِيِّهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Mardwiah has quoted Ali—May his God be content with him—as saying
that the Prophet (a.s), when interpreting the honorable Qur’anic verse:
“(Remember) the day when We will call every people with their Imam,
18:71” said: “Each group is called with the Imam of its age, its God’s
Divine Book and its Prophet’s Sunnah (tradition).”

Qurtubi too has quoted it from the Holy Prophet (a.s) in his exegesis
(of the Holy Qur’an)—*Tafsir*.[^19] He has quoted another tradition from
Ali (a.s) under this verse: “Their Imam” in the honorable verse means
the Imam of their age.[^20]

• *Al-Musannaf*, Vol. 8, p.614, No. 146:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَلِيٍّ: وإنَّ النّاسَ لا يُصْلِحُهُم إلاّ إمامٌ بَرٌّ أو فاجِرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali (a.s) is quoted as saying: People are indeed not guided, except by
Imam and leader, either good or bad.[^21]

• *Kanz Al-Ummal*, Vol. 5, p.779, No. 14366:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَليٍّ قالَ: إنَّ مُعاوِيَةَ سَيَظْهَرُ عَلَيكُم. قالوا: فَلِمَ
نقاتل إذاً؟ قال: لا بُدَّ لِلنّاسِ مِن أميرٍ بَرٍّ أوْ فاجِرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali (a.s) is quoted as saying: “Mu’awiyah will certainly dominate you.”
“Why do we fight then?” he was asked. “People have no refuge from having
a ruler, either a good or a bad one,” he replied.

• *Al-Musannaf*, Vol. 8, p. 741, No. 51:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَخَلَ رَجُلٌ المَسْجِدَ فَقَالَ: لا حُكْمَ إلاّ للهِ. ثُمَّ قالَ
آخَرُ: لا حُكْمَ، فَقالَ عَليٌّ: لا حُكْمَ إلاّ للهِ ﴿إِنَّ وَعْدَ
اللَّهِ حَقٌّ وَلَا يَسْتَخِفَّنَّكَ الَّذِينَ لَا يُوقِنُونَ.﴾ فَما
تَدْرونَ ما يَقولُ هَؤلاء؟ يَقولون لا إمارَةَ! أيُّها النّاسُ! لا
يُصْلِحُكُمْ إلاّ أميرٌ بَرٌّ أوْ فاجِرٌ. قالوا: هَذا البَرُّ فَقَد
عَرفْناهُ، فَما بَالُ الفاجِرِ؟ فَقالَ: يُملى لِلفاجِرِ وَيُبَلِّغُ
اللهُ الأجَلَ وتَأمَنُ سُبُلُكُم وَتَقومُ أسْواقُكُم وَيُجْبى فَيئُكُم
وَيُجاهِدُ عَدُوَّكُم وَيُؤخَذُ لِلضَّعِيفِ مِنَ الشَّدِيدِ مِنْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A man entered the mosque and said: “Ruling is only Allah’s.” Another one
came and repeated the same thing. Ali (a.s) said: “Ruling is only
Allah’s.” Then he recited the Qur’anic verse:

***“Surely the promise of Allah is true, and let not those who have no
certainty hold you in light estimation. (30:60)***”

He then added: “You do not know what they are saying. They say there is
no ruling and government. O People! You are not guided except by a
ruler, either good or bad.” His companions said: “We have thus realized
the merits of a good ruler! Now, tell us about a bad one’s.” Ali (a.s)
said: “The corrupt are given respite and God will expire the appointed
time. Your roads become safe and your markets loaded. The fees are
collected and the foes fought. The rights of the oppressed are obtained
from the oppressor.”[^22]

Imams are twelve in number and all from Quraysh
-----------------------------------------------

Having proved Imamate and its continuation over time, we now turn to
other traditions, which state, “Imams are twelve in number and are all
from Quraysh.”

Ibn Hajar in his book ‘*Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhriqah*’—written for proving
Caliphate of the three Caliphs and rejecting Shi’a—after bringing a
tradition says, “All Sunni scholars accept the validity of this
tradition.”[^23]

Apart from other traditions about Imamate and Caliphate, this group of
traditions per se, can prove not only the invalidity of other Islamic
branches and sects except Twelver Shi’a, but also the validity and
soundness of Twelver Shi’a, since none of the Islamic branches
conclusively believe in the Twelve Imams. Especially with regard to
traditions stipulating the presence of an Imam in every age this can be
proved, for no Islamic branch or sect believe in Twelve Imams over ages
in a way that the earth is never deprived of one of them. In fact, this
honor is only given to Twelver Shi’a to believe in Twelve Imams, the
first of whom is Imam Ali (a.s) and the last one Mahdi (a.s), the true
and chosen Imam, who is still alive, but passing by his occultation
period.

So certain and frequent traditions including “The Imams are twelve in
number,” added to those proving the continuation of Imamate in all ages,
provide sufficient evidence to reject all branches of Islam save Twelver
Shi’a. These two groups of traditions prove the legitimacy of the
Twelver Shi’a too, because it is supposed that one can get the truth of
Imamate by doing research, for according to traditions dying as a
believer requires knowing the Imam of age and leaving this world as a
believer is undoubtedly possible.[^24]

So knowing the Imam of age from among these Imams is possible, otherwise
one cannot die as a believer and Muslim. Since no Islamic branch or sect
save Twelver Shi’a believe in the Twelve Imams, one of which to be the
Imam of a certain age, it becomes clear that only belief in this branch
of Islam is belief in truth and leads to salvation.

Exactly for the same reason, Sunni scholars have faced an unusual
confusion in explaining and interpreting traditions including “The Imams
are twelve in number,” not being able to find a true meaning for them,
to the extent that Ibn Hajar in *Fat’h Al-Bari* quotes Muhallab as
saying, “I found no one completely sure of a definite meaning for this
tradition.”[^25]

Nearly the same confusion is expressed by Ibn Al-Jawzi in *Kashf
Al-Mushkil*. In short, one scholar rejects the second and considers him
as ignorant; a third one sees both of them as going astray and so on and
so forth.

Interestingly, these traditions appear in the books written before the
completion of the number of Imams, too. Not only does this confirm the
Imamate of the Twelve Imams, but also it is a clear miracle of the Holy
Prophet. Some traditions are mentioned hereinafter:

• *Sahih Al-Bukhari*, Vol. 4.p. 168:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمعتُ النبيّ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يقول: يَكونُ اثْنا عَشرَ أميراً،
فقالَ كَلمَةً لم أسْمَعْها، فقال أبي إنّه قال: كُلُّهُم مِن قُريشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir says: I heard the Prophet (a.s) saying: “There will be twelve
leaders and Caliphs.” Then he added something I could not hear. My
father said that the Prophet said: “All of them are from Quraysh.”[^26]

• *Sahih Muslim*, Vol. 6, p. 3:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : إنَّ هذا الأمْرَ لا يَنْقَضي حَتىّ
يَمضي فيهم اثنا عَشَرَ خَليفَةً. قال: ثم تكلم بكلام خفِيَ عليّ، فقلتُ
لأبي: ما قال؟ قال: كُلُّهُم مِن قُرَيْشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir narrates: My father and I went to the Prophet (a.s). We heard him
saying: “This issue (Caliphate) will not be completed until twelve
Caliphs come.” Then he added something I did not get. I asked my father
what the Prophet had said. He said: “All are from Quraysh.”[^27]

• *Sahih Muslim*, Vol. 6, p.4 (Nawawi’s exposition):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمعتُ رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يقول: لا يَزالُ الدّين قائِماً
حتىّ تَقومَ السّاعَةُ أو يَكونَ عَليكُم اثْنا عَشَرَ خَليفَةً كُلُّهُم
مِن قُريشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) has said: The religion (Islam) remains
established until twelve Caliphs, all of whom from Quraysh, rule over
you.[^28]

Again the same tradition is quoted in “*Sahih Muslim*” in different
words.

• *Sahih Muslim*, Vol. 6, p. 3:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمعتُ رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يقول: لا يَزالُ الإسلامُ
عَزيزاً إلى اثنَي عَشرَ خَليفَةً. ثمّ قالَ كَلمَةً لم أفْهَمْها،
فقُلتُ لأبي: ما قال؟ فَقالَ: كُلُّهُم مِن قُريشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir narrates: I heared the great Prophet (a.s) saying: “Islam will
always remain mighty until twelve Imams come.” Then he said something I
did not understand. I asked my father: “What did he say?” He replied:
“All are from Quraysh.”

• *Sahih* Al-Tirmidhi, Vol 2, p. 45 :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : يَكونُ مِن بَعدِي اثْنا عَشرَ
أميراً. ثمّ تَكَلّم بِشيءٍ لم أفهَمْه، فسأَلْتُ الذي يَليني فقال:
كُلّهُم مِن قُريْشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir says that the Prophet (a.s) said: “There will be Twelve Imams and
leaders after me.” Then he said something I did not get. I asked the
person beside me about it. He said: “All of them are from Quraysh.”[^29]

Tirmidhi writes after this tradition, “This is a fine and true tradition
which is narrated from Jabir in different chains.”[^30]

• *Musnad Ahmad*, Vol. 5, p. 106:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمعتُ النبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يقول: يكونُ لِهذِه الأمَّةِ اثْنا
عَشَر خَليفةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) said: There are twelve Caliphs for this
nation.[^31]

Some reckon that Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in *Musnad* have quoted traditions
about this issue in thirty four different tradition chains from Jabir.

• *Sahih Abu Dawud*, vol. 2, p. 309:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يَزالُ هذا الدّينُ عَزيزاً إلى اثنَي عَشرَ خَليفَةً. قال: فَكَبَّر
النّاسُ وضَجّوا ثُمّ قالَ كلمةً خفيّةً. قُلتُ لأبي: يا أبه؛ ما قالَ؟
قال: كُلُّهُم مِن قُريشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This religion will always be mighty until Twelve Imams come.” Hearing
this, people glorified Allah with ‘Allahu Akbar’ (God is Great) and
cried harshly.[^32] Then he said something in a soft voice. I asked my
father: “What did he say?” “They are all from Quraysh,” he replied.[^33]

Hakim Nayshapuri narrates this tradition with a document different from
those previously mentioned.

• *Mustadrak Ala Al-Sahihayn*, Vol. 3, p. 618:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم : لا يَزالُ أمرُ أمّتي ماضياً
حتىّ يَمضي اثنا عَشرَ خَليفَةً. ثُمّ قالَ وخفّضَ بها صوتَه، فقُلتُ
لعَمّي وكانَ أمامي: ما قال يا عمّ؟ قال: قالَ، يا بُنيّ، كُلّهُم مِن
قُريشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Awn quotes his father Abu Juhayfah as saying: My uncle and I were with
the Holy Prophet, when he said: “The affairs of my nation passes until
twelve Caliphs come.” Then he lowered his voice. I asked my uncle who
was sitting in the front about what the Prophet (a.s) had said. He
answered: “O’ my son! The Prophet (a.s) said that they would all be from
Quraysh.”[^34]

Nur Al-Din Haythami, in *Majma’ al-Zawa’id*,[^35] after this tradition
adds, “Tabarani, in *Al-Mu’jam* *Al-Awsat* and *Al-Mu’jam* *Al-Kabir*,
and Bazzaz have quoted this tradition; and the chain of Tabarani is the
same as quoted in books of *Sahih*.”

• *Musnad Ahmad*, Vol. 1, p. 398:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَلَقد سألْنا رَسولَ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم فقالَ: اثنا عَشرَ
كَعِدّةِ نُقَباء بني إسرائيل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Masruq says: We were sitting with Abdullah Ibn Mas’ud, learning Qur’an
from him. Someone asked him, “Did you ask the Prophet (a.s) how many
Caliphs would rule this nation?” Ibn Mas’ud replied: “We surely asked
the Messenger of Allah this question and he replied: ‘Twelve; like the
number of the Israelites’ Chieftains.’”[^36]

Ibn Hajar in *Fat’h Al-Bari* considers Ahmad’s quotation from Ibn Mas’ud
as fine documentation.

• *Al-Mu’jam* *Al-Kabir* of Tabarani, Vol. 2,p. 196:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…النبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم قال: يكونُ لِهذه الأمة اثنا عشرَ
قَيّماً لا يَضُرّهُم مَن خَذَلهم. وهَمسَ رَسولُ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ
وسلَّم بكلمةٍ لم أسمَعْها، فقلتُ لأبي: الكَلمَةُ الّتي هَمس بِها
رَسولُ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم ؟ فَقال: كُلّهُم مِن قُريشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir says: My father and I were before the Prophet (a.s) when he said:
“Rulers and Caliphs of this nation will be twelve in number. They will
suffer no harm in case people stop helping them,”[^37] and added
something I did not hear. I asked my father about it, “The Prophet said:
They are all from Quraysh,” he replied.[^38]

• *Al- Mu’jam* *Al-Kabir*, Vol. 2, p.256:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمعت رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يقول: إثنا عَشرَ قَيّماً مِن
قُرَيشٍ لا يَضُرّهُم عَداوَةُ مَن عَادَاهُم. قال: فالتَفَتُّ خَلفي
فإذا أنا بعُمَرَ بنِ الخَطّاب، رضي الله عنه، وأبي في أُناس؛ فأثبَتوا
ليَ الحديث كما سمِعْتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir says: I heared the Prophet (a.s) delivering sermon and saying:
“There will be twelve guardians from Quraysh the enmity of whose enemies
will not harm them.” I turned back and saw ‘Umar and my father among the
people; they confirmed the tradition as I heard it.[^39]

As is emphasized in this tradition too, it is a reality that the Imams
should be these twelve people, though superficially, government and
power might not be in their hands.

• *Yanabi’ Al-Mawaddah*, Vol. 2, p. 315:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…رسولُ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يقولُ: بَعدي اثْنا عَشرَ خَليفَة.
ثم أخفى صوتَه، فقُلتُ لأبي: ما الّذي قال؟ قال: قالَ كُلُّهُم مِن بَني
هاشِمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir is quoted as saying: My father and I were before the Messenger of
Allah (a.s) when he said: “There will be twelve Caliphs after me.” Then
he lowered his voice. I asked my father what the Prophet had said
softly. He replied: “The Prophet said: All of them are from Banu Hashim
(the Hashimites).”[^40]

Samak Ibn Harb has quoted nearly the same tradition.

This tradition leads us to the conclusion that Imams are not only from
Quraysh, but also from Banu Hashim (Hashimites). The aforementioned
traditions was but a small part quoted by the Sunnis proving that Imams
are twelve in number and all from Quraysh.[^41]

Confession and Deviation
------------------------

Ibn Kathir in *Al-Bidayah wa’l-Nahayah* says, “In the Torah of the
Scripturists, there is material implying that God, the Almighty, gave
good tidings to Abraham over Ishmael’s birth and that He will raise
Ishmael and increase his children and select twelve persons from his
generation, great in status.[^42]

Then Ibn Kathir adds: “Our master Allamah, Ibn Taymiyah says: These
twelve are the same persons about whom Jabir (Ibn Samarah) gave good
tidings in his tradition. It is established that they are spread in the
nation (They will not come successively). And the Resurrection Day will
not come unless all those twelve appear. A great number of Jews
embracing Islam has made mistake and thought that these twelve people
are those who the heretic (Rafizi) group (i.e. the Shi’a) call on the
nation to follow! Hence, they followed the Shi’a.”

In fact, because of his deviation from the Ahl al-Bayt and ungrounded
bias, Ibn Taymiyah could not understand the good tidings of the previous
Divine Books and the statements of the great Messenger of Allah (a.s).

How did he indeed conclude from the “Twelve Imams” in traditions that
the Imams will come separately? Is it not the case that Muslim, Abu
Dawud, Ahmad and Hakim have quoted from Jabir Ibn Samarah and Abu
Juhayfah by different chains of narrators that the Holy Prophet (a.s)
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يَزالُ الإسلامُ عَزيزاً إلى اثْنَي عَشرَ خَليفَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This religion will always be mighty until Twelve Imams come.

The Arabic **"لا يزال"** implies the concept of connectedness. Various
traditions state that there is an Imam in every age and that one who
dies without knowing the Imam of his age has in fact died as a pagan.
Does this not require the continuation of existence of Imams over the
ages? Successive *Thaqalayn* (the Two Precious Things) traditions say
that the Holy Prophet and the Ahl al-Bayt are inseparable up to the
Resurrection Day? Do these traditions not indicate the continuation of
existence of Imams from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) in a successive manner?

When individuals do not show humility before the truth, they face such
contradictions. This way, they cannot understand the message intended by
the great Prophet (a.s). They either remain in astonishment or make
deviant interpretations, matching these honorable traditions with the
wicked, transgressors and disbelievers such as Yazid, Walid Ibn Yazid
Ibn Abdul Malik and other oppressors from Banu Umayyah (the Umayyad
dynasty) who not only were more than twelve in number, but also did not
deserve Imamate and Caliphate, as every fair person giving a little
attention confesses. And this is the retribution for arrogance before
the truth.

The Ahl al-Bayt’s Claim to Imamate is Truthful
----------------------------------------------

Conclusive and successive traditions from the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
emphasize the fact that the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) are infallible; never
making mistakes or being wrong, and to follow them is to follow the
truth and leads to salvation. In these traditions, the Prophet (a.s) has
given the Ahl al-Bayt equal status with the Holy Qur’an. He has
recommended holding fast to them absolutely and unconditionally and has
considered opposition to them as satanic. The Prophet’s determined
statements about the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) indicate that their way and their
speech are not but truth.

Therefore, if one of them claims Imamate or introduces another one as
Imam, he is truthful in his claim and his claim and confirmation are
divine proof for the nation. Some traditions arguing for the Ahl
al-Bayt’s infallibility are mentioned hereinafter:[^43]

• *Musnad Ahmad* *Ibn Hanbal*, Vol. 3, p. 17:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن النّبيّ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم انه قال: إنّي أوشَكُ أنْ أدْعى
فأُجيبُ، وإنيّ تارِكٌ فِيكُم الثَّقَلَينِ كِتابَ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
وعِترَتي. كِتابُ اللهِ حَبْلٌ مَمدودٌ مِن السَّماءِ إلى الأرض
وَعِترَتي أهل بَيتي؛ وَإنّ اللّطيفَ الخَبيرَ أخْبَرني أنَّهُما لَن
يَفتَرقا حَتىّ يَردا عَلَيَّ الحَوْضَ؛ فانْظُروني بِم تُخَلَّفوني
فِيهِما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The honorable Messenger of Allah (a.s) said: I will soon be called to my
Lord and will accept it. I leave two invaluable entities among you; the
Divine Book of the Almighty Allah, stretching from heaven to the earth
like a rope; and my family, my Household. The Almighty informed me that
these two would never be separated from each other until they meet me on
the River in Paradise (Kawthar). So be aware of what you will do with
them after me!

• *Sahih Muslim*, Vol. 7, Part 4, p.122:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قام رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يوماً فينا خطيباً بماءٍ يُدعى
خُمّاً بين مَكَّة والمَدينَةِ فحَمِدَ اللهَ وأثْنى عَليهِ ووَعَظَ
وذَكَّرَ ثمّ قالَ: أمّا بَعدُ! ألا أيّها النّاسُ فإنَّما أنا بَشَرٌ
يُوشكُ أنْ يأتيَ رَسولُ رَبّي فأُجيبُ، وأنا تارِكٌ فِيكُم الثَّقَلين؛
أوَّلُهُما كِتابُ اللهِ فيهِ الهُدى وَالنُّورُ، فَخُذوا بِكِتابِ اللهِ
وَاسْتَمْسِكوا بهِ. فَحَثَّ على كِتابِ اللهِ ورغَّبَ فيهِ ثُمّ قالَ:
وأهْلَ بَيتِي؛ أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ في أهل بَيتي أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ في
أهل بَيتي أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ في أهل بَيتي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd Ibn Arqam says: One day, the Messenger of Allah stopped beside
Khumm Pond, between Mecca and Medina, for a sermon. After praising God
and advising to the people, he said: “O, people! I am a human just like
you who will soon go with God’s messenger (angel of death). I will leave
two valuable things among you. First, the Divine Book of Allah in which
there is light and guidance, so hold fast to it.” Then he continued
encouraging to God’s Book, and added: “And my Household. I remind you of
God about my Household, I remind you of God about my Household, I remind
you of God about my Household.”

• *Mustadrak*, Vol. 3, p. 109:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن زَيدٍ قال: لمّا رجعَ رسولُ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم مِن
حِجّةِ الوَداعِ ونَزَلَ غَديرَ خُمٍّ أُمرَ بِدَوحاتٍ فَقُمِمنَ فقالَ:
كأنّي قد دُعيتُ فأُجيبُ. إنّي قَد تَرَكتُ فِيكُم الثّقَلَين أحَدُهُما
أكبَرُ مِن الآخَرِ؛ كِتابَ اللهِ وعِترَتي فانْظُروا كَيفَ تُخَلّفُونني
فِيهِما فإنَّهُما لَن يَفتَرقا حتىّ يَرِدا عَلَيَّ الحَوضَ. ثمّ قال:
إنّ الله عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مَولايَ وأنا مَولى كُلِّ مُؤمِنٍ. ثمَّ أخذَ
بِيدِ عَلِيٍّ فقالَ: مَنْ كُنتُ مَولاهُ فَهذا وَلِيُّهُ، اللّهُمّ والِ
مَن وَالاهُ وعَادِ مَن عاداهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah was returning from The Farewell Hajj[^44] when he
stopped at Khumm Pond (Ghadir Khumm) and ordered people to sweep the
ground under some trees. Then he said: “I will apparently be called and
will accept it. I leave two worthy things both very great in status;
Allah’s Divine Book and my Household. Be careful of how you will deal
with them. They will never be detached from each other until they join
me at the River in Paradise.” He then added, “God, the Glorified, is my
Lord, and I am the lord of all the believers.” Then he took Ali’s hand
and said: “Whoever I am his lord, then Ali is his guardian. O Allah!
Befriend everyone who likes him and hate everyone who dislikes
him.”[^45]

• *Kanz Al-‘Ummal*, Vol. 1, p. 167:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَرَكتُ فِيكُم ما لَنْ تَضِلّوا إنْ اعْتَصَمْتُم بِه؛ كِتابَ اللهِ
وَعِتْرَتي أهل بَيتي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir quotes the great Prophet (a.s) as saying: “I left things among
you; you will never go astray if you hold fast to them—Allah’s Divine
Book and my family, the Household.”[^46]

Ibn Hajar says: “The Messenger of Allah (a.s) called Qur’an and his
Household as ‘*Thiql*,’ since everything worthy of keeping safe is named
‘*Thiql*,’ and these two are so. They are both the sources of divine
sciences, invaluable secrets and wisdom, and Islamic commandments. That
is why the Prophet (a.s) has strongly persuaded into following and
getting knowledge from them.”[^47]

He adds: “Only those members of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) who are
knowledgeable in Allah’s Book and the Prophet’s tradition (*Sunnah*) are
the subject of the Holy Prophet’s attention and persuasion, for they
would not be separated from Allah’s Divine Book up to the River in
Paradise.”[^48] After stating some more sentences, he says, “This is
because God, the Almighty, has distanced them from contamination and
wickedness and made them pure and clean.”[^49]

• *Mustadrak*, Vol. 2, p.343:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…أيُّها الناس! مَن عَرفَني فأنا عَرفْتُم وَمَن أنْكَرني فأنا أبو
ذَرٍّ؛ سمِعْتُ رسولَ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم يقولُ: مَثَلُ
أهل بَيتي مَثَلُ سَفِينَةِ نوحٍ؛ مَن رَكِبَها نَجا وَمَن تَخَلَّفَ
عَنها غَرِقَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hanash Kanani narrates: I saw Abudhar taking hold of the Ka’bah (Allah’s
House) door and saying: “O People! If you know me, I am the one you
know, otherwise I am Abudhar. I heard the honorable Messenger of Allah
(a.s) saying: My Ahl al-Bayt (Household) is comparable to Noah’s Ark;
whoever enters it will be rescued and whoever disobeys will be drowned.”

Hakim has confirmed this tradition.

• *Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhariqah*, p.184:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ أهل بَيتي مَثَلُ سَفِينَةِ نوحٍ؛ مَن رَكِبَها نَجا وَمَن
تَخَلَّفَ عَنها غَرِقَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abbas has quoted the Holy Prophet (a.s) as saying:[^50] My Ahl
al-Bayt (Household) is comparable to Noah’s Ark; whoever enters it will
be rescued and whoever disobeys will be drowned.

• *Al-Jami’ Al-Saghir*, Vol. 9, p. 155; *Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhariqah*, p.
184

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنّ النبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم قال: مَثَلُ أهل بَيتي مَثَلُ
سَفِينَةِ نوحٍ؛ مَن رَكِبَها نَجا وَمَن تَخَلَّفَ عَنها غَرِقَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abdullah Ibn Zubayr has quoted the honorable Prophet as saying: My Ahl
al-Bayt (Household) is comparable to Noah’s Ark; whoever enters it will
be rescued and whoever disobeys will be drowned.

Abu Bakr Shahab Al-Din Husayni Shafi’i says: “Islamic scholars have
stated that the Prophet (a.s) compared his honorable Household to Noah’s
Ark, for everyone who entered it was rescued from the fear of storm.
Likewise one who follows the Prophet’s Household (a.s) and benefits from
the light of their guidance, as the traditions has persuaded to do so,
is rescued from the darkness of adversities and asking for help from
God’s best mediators. On the contrary, one who does not follow them and
recognize their status is drowned in the oceans of transgression and is
doomed to the inferno.”[^51]

• *Mustadrak*, Vol. 3, p.149:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم قال: النُّجُومُ أمانٌ لأهْلِ
الأرض مِن الغَرَقِ وأهْلُ بَيتي أمانٌ لأمَّتي مِن الاخْتِلافِ، فإذا
خالَفَتْها قَبيلَةٌ مِن العَربِ اختَلَفوا فَصاروا حِزبَ إبْليسَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abbas quotes the Prophet (a.s) as saying: The stars save human race
from being drowned; my Household saves the nation from having conflicts.
Whenever an Arab tribe opposes my Household, its people will come into
conflict with each other and become the people of Satan.

Hakim has confirmed this tradition.

• *Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhariqah*, p. 150:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أهل بَيتي أمانٌ لأهْلِ الأرض، فإذا هَلَكَ أهل بَيتي جاءَ أهل الأرض في
الآياتِ ما كانوا يوعَدونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

My Ahl al-Bayt are the protectors of people on the earth. If they
vanish, people will experience the promised signs.

• *Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal*, *Faza’il Al-Sahabah*; *Al-Sawa’iq
Al-Muhariqah*, p. 333:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : النُّجومُ أمانٌ لأهْلِ
السّماءِ وأهْلُ بَيتي أمانٌ لأهلِ الأرض، فإذا ذَهبَ أهل بَيتي ذَهبَ
أهل الأرض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali (a.s) has quoted the Holy Prophet (a.s) as saying: “The stars are
security for the inhabitants of the heavens; and if they vanished, the
inhabitants of the heavens will disappear. And my Ahl al-Bayt are
security for the inhabitants of the earth; hence, if they disappear from
the earth, its inhabitants will vanish.[^52]

Ahmad says: “God, the Almighty, created the earth for the sake of His
Prophet (a.s) and kept it lasting with his Ahl al-Bayt’s
existence.”[^53]

Who are the Prophet’s Household?
--------------------------------

What is the meaning of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)? Who are those having such
a sacred and great position to accompany the Holy Qur’an forever and
being like an ark for the people’s safety? Does the term ‘Ahl al-Bayt’
include all the Prophet’s relatives and family members? Does it involve
the Prophet’s wives too?

Conclusive traditions quoted from the Holy Prophet (a.s) by both Shi’a
and Sunni narrators provide the answer to these questions. Many
traditions have been quoted by different chains of narrators under the
exegesis of the following honorable Verse in the Sunni books:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أهل الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), and to purify you a thorough purifying.
(33:33).”***

These books indicate that ‘the Ahl al-Bayt’ includes Ali, Fatimah, Hasan
and Husayn (a.s). So the Prophet (a.s) does not mean all his family
members and relatives when he speaks about ‘the Ahl al-Bayt’, possessing
such characteristics and advantages. Many of the Prophet’s relatives,
regardless of their excellent status, needed guidance. Was it not Aqil,
Imam Ali’s brother, who was reproached by the Imam (a.s) due to his
inappropriate request; let alone others who were not of his high
rank?[^54] Therefore, some relatives of the Prophet’s may be regarded as
his household lexically, but according to their virtues referred to in
the Holy Qur’an and the statements of the Prophet (a.s), they are
probably not included in the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s).

• *Sahih Muslim*, Vol. 7, p. 130:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن عائِشَةَ قالَت: خَرجَ النبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم غداة وعَلَيه
مِرطٌ مُرجَّلٌ مِن شعر أسوَدَ، فجاء الحسنُ بن عَليٍّ فأدخَلَهُ ثمَّ
جاءَ الحُسينُ فَدخلَ معه ثمّ جاءَت فاطِمةُ فأدخَلَها ثمّ جاءَ عَليٌّ
فأدْخَلَهُ، ثمّ قالَ: ﴿إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ
الرِّجْسَ أهل الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

Aishah says: One morning, the Holy Prophet (a.s) came out of his house
wearing a cloak made of black hair. Hasan (a.s) came in and the Prophet
(a.s) placed him under the cloak. Then Husayn (a.s) came and went in
there. Then came Fatimah (a.s) who was placed there by the Prophet
(a.s). Next Ali (a.s) came and the Prophet took him under his cloak and
recited,

“***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), and to purify you a thorough purifying.
(33:33)***.”

• *Sahih Al-Tirmidhi, Kitab Al-Manaqib*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أمّ سَلَمَة: أنّ النبيّ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم حَلَّلَ عَلى
الحَسَنِ والحُسينِ وَعَلِيٍّ وَفاطِمَةَ كِساءً ثمّ قال: اللّهُمّ
هؤلاءِ أهلُ بَيتي وَخاصَّتي؛ أذْهِبْ عَنهمُ الرّجْسَ وَطَهّرهُم
تَطهيراً. فقالَت أمُّ سَلَمة: وأنا مَعَهُم يا رَسولَ الله؟ قال: إنّك
إلى خَيرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ummu-Salamah has quoted that the Holy Prophet (a.s) covered Hasan,
Husayn, Ali and Fatimah (a.s) with his cloak and then stated: “O Lord!
These are my Household (Ahl al-Bayt) and my chosen ones. Take wickedness
away from them and make them pure!”

Ummu-Salamah says, “I asked the Prophet (a.s), ‘O Messenger of Allah! Am
I among them?’ He replied, ‘You are into goodness (but not among
them).’”

Tirmidhi writes under this tradition: “This tradition is true and
well-documented and the best one quoted in this regard.”

• *Sahih Al-Tirmidhi*, Vol. 13, p.200:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لمّا نَزَلَتْ هذه الآيَةُ على النّبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم :
﴿إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أهل الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.﴾ في بَيتِ أُمِّ سَلَمةَ دَعا النّبيُّ صلّى
اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم فاطِمَةَ وَحسَناً وَحُسيناً وعَليٌّ خَلفَ ظَهْرِه
فَجَلَّلَهُم بِكِساءٍ، ثمَّ قال: اللّهُمّ هؤلاءِ أهلُ بَيتي فَأذْهِبْ
عَنهمُ الرّجْسَ وَطَهّرهُم تَطهيراً. قالَت أُمُّ سَلَمة: وأنا مَعَهُم
يا نَبيَّ الله؟ قالَ: أنْتِ عَلى مَكانِكِ وأنْتِ إلى خَيرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Umar Ibn Salamah, the Holy Prophet’s stepchild, says: The honorable
verse of “Purification” was revealed in the house of Ummu-Salamah, the
Holy Prophet’s wife. The Holy Prophet (a.s) called Fatimah, Hasan and
Husayn (a.s), and Ali (a.s) was behind him. Then he covered them with a
cloak (*kisa’*) and stated: “O Allah! These are my Household, so banish
wickedness from them and make them pure!” At this moment, Ummu-Salamah
asked: “O Prophet of God! Am I among them?” He answered, “You are in
your own place and you are into goodness, too.”[^55]

• *Mushkil Al-’athar* (authored by Al-Tahawi), Vol. 1, p. 336:[^56]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أُمّ سَلَمَة: أنْزَلَ اللهُ هذِه الآيَةَ: ﴿إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ
اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أهل الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ
تَطْهِيرًا.﴾ وَما في البَيتِ إلاّ جِبريلُ وَرَسولُ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ
عليهِ وسلَّم وَفاطِمةُ وَالحَسنُ وَالحُسينُ عَليهِمُ السَّلامُ،
فقُلتُ: يا رَسولَ اللهِ! أنا مِن أهلِ البَيتِ؟ فقال: إنّ لكَ عِندَ
الله خَيراً. فَوَددتُ أنّه قالَ (نَعم) فَكانَ أحَبَّ إليَّ ممّا تطلُعُ
عليه الشّمسُ وتغرُبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ummu-Salamah says: When the honorable verse (of purification) was
revealed, there was no one at home except (Archangel) Gabriel, the Holy
Prophet (a.s), Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn (a.s). I asked: “O Messenger of
Allah! Am I from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)?” He replied: “Indeed, you have
good deeds before God.” I wished he had said ‘yes’. It was more
pleasurable for me than all the things over which the sun shines and
sets.”[^57]

Dear reader! Pay considerable attention to the fact that the honorable
Prophet (a.s) has separated Ummu-Salamah, his wife, from his Household
(a.s). Hence when Zayd Ibn Arqam was asked, “Who are the Ahl al-Bayt?
Are the Prophet’s wives among them?” He answered, “No! A wife lives with
her husband for a while, then her husband divorces her and she returns
to her father’s and her tribe.”[^58]

• *Al-Durr Al-Manthur*, under the exegesis of the Purification Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن ابنِ عبّاس قالَ: شَهِدْنا رَسولَ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم
تِسعَةَ أشهُرٍ يأتي كُلَّ يَومٍ بابَ عَليّ بنِ أبي طالِبٍ رضي الله عنه
عندَ وَقتِ كُلِّ صَلاةٍ فيَقولُ: السّلامُ عَلَيكُم وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ
وَبَركاتُه أهْلَ البَيتِ! ﴿إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ
عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أهل الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.﴾ الصّلاةَ
رحِمَكُم اللهُ. كُلّ يَومٍ خَمسَ مَرّاتٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abbas says: For nine months, we witnessed that the Messenger of
Allah (a.s) came to the door of Ali’s house five times a day at the time
of the five prayers and stated: “Peace be upon you, the Ahl al-Bayt, and
Allah’s blessings and mercy! Allah only desires to keep away the
uncleanness from you, O people of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), and to purify
you a thorough purifying. It is the prayer time. May God bless you!”

Is there not a secret here? Why does the Prophet, whose speech and
behavior are always brimful of wisdom and expediency, emphasize on this
issue so strongly? Not only did Ibn Abbas narrate such traditions, but
also others did, such as Abu Al-Hamra, Abu Barzah and Anas Ibn
Malik.[^59]

The Ahl al-Bayt’s Claim to Imamate
----------------------------------

Among the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s), Imam Ali and Imam Hasan (a.s) reached
Caliphate and managed the affairs of the Muslim community, albeit for a
little while. Although Imam Husayn (a.s) apparently did not take power
and government, and adversaries of Islam ruled over the Muslim community
in his age, as history goes on, the holy Imam in different circumstances
introduced himself as an Imam deserving Caliphate.

When people of Kufah invited Imam Husayn (a.s) for an oath of allegiance
writing to him, “We have no Imam,” the honorable Imam sent Muslim Ibn
Aqil, his representative, to Kufah to investigate the situation.[^60]

It is evident that if he did not believe in his own Imamate he led the
nation to the true Imam, if not denying his own Imamate; rather he did
the reverse.

Imam Husayn (a.s), in response to people of Kufah, wrote:

In the name of Allah, the most Merciful, the most Compassionate.

From Husayn Ibn Ali to the assembly of Muslims and believers.

Hani and Sa’id, your last messengers, brought your letters to me. I
understood what you had mentioned. The majority of you had said, “We
have no Imam, so come to us so that God may lead us to truth under your
guidance.” I sent my cousin to you who is my trustee and ordered him to
report your situation and attitudes. If he writes to me that the
attitudes of your scholars and noble ones are as stated in your letters
and by your messengers, I will come to you as soon as possible, God
willing.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَعَمْري ما الإمامُ إلاّ العامِلُ بِالكِتابِ وَالآخِذُ بِالقِسْطِ
وَالدّائِنُ بِالحَقِّ والحَابِسُ نَفْسَهُ عَلى ذاتِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I swear by myself that Imam is not but to practice Allah’s Book, do
justice, and surrender himself to God’s will.[^61] Peace be upon you!

Continuation of the Presence of Members from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)
------------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Hajar says: “The traditions exciting and persuading to holding fast
to the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s), implying non-stop presence of a pious person
from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s), deserving to be followed, until the
Resurrection Day. The same is the case about the Holy Qur’an, which
would be proof until the Last Day. And hence the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) are
safety for the inhabitants of the earth.[^62]

• *Dhakha’ir Al-Uqba*, p. 17:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن عُمرَ إن النّبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم قال: في كُلِّ خُلوفٍ مِن
أُمَّتي عُدولٌ مِن أهْلِ بَيْتي يَنفونَ عَن هذا الدِّينِ تَحْريفَ
الغالِينَ وَانتِحالَ المُبطِلينَ وتأويلَ الجَاهِلينَ. ألا وإنَّ
أئِمَّتَكُم وفْدُكُم إلى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، فانظُروا بمَنْ
تُوفِدونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Umar quoted the Holy Prophet (a.s) as saying: In each generation of my
nation, there are just people from my Ahl al-Bayt, defending religion
against distortions of exaggerators, claims of the liars and
interpretations of the ignorant. Your Imams are your messengers to
Almighty God. Be aware of who you choose as your messengers!

Therefore, in the Prophet’s age, the Ahl al-Bayt included Ali, Fatimah,
Hasan and Husayn (a.s), but there will always be people from the Ahl
al-Bayt for the safety and guidance on the earth.

The great Prophet of Allah (a.s) has considered Imam Mahdi (a.s) from
the Ahl al-Bayt too; who is the last Imam is as stipulated in the
following traditions:

• *Musnad Ahmad*, Vol. 3, p. 28:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ رسولَ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم قالَ: تُمْلأُ الأرضُ ظُلْماً
وَجَوراً ثُمَّ يخْرُجُ رَجُلٌ مِن عِترَتي يَملِكُ سَبعاً أو تِسعاً
فَيَمْلأُ الأرضَ قِسْطاً وَعَدلاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The earth will become full of injustice and oppression and then a man
from the House (a.s) will emerge. He will govern the earth for seven or
nine years, making it full of justice.[^63]

Hakim has also narrated this tradition as a true one.[^64]

• *Sunan Al-Tirmidhi*, Vol. 4, p. 505:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن عبدِالله عن النبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : يَلي رَجُلٌ مِن أهْلِ
بَيتي يُواطِيءُ اسْمُه اسْمي...
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي هُريرَةَ قالَ: لَو لَمْ يَبْقَ مِن الدّنيا إلاّ يَومٌ
لَطَوَّلَ اللهُ ذلِكَ اليَومَ حَتىّ يلي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (a.s) said: “A man from my Household will come; his name
will be as same as mine.

Abu Hurayrah said: If there were to remain in the life of the world but
one day, God would prolong that day until he (Mahdi) comes.”

Tirmidhi says: “This tradition is fine and true.”

• *Muntakhab Kanz Al-Ummal*, Vol. 6, p. 32:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسولُ اللهِ صَلّى اللهُ عَليهِ وَسَلّم: يخْرُجُ رَجلٌ مِن أهْلِ
بَيتي يُواطِيءُ اسْمُه اسْمي وَخُلُقُهُ خُلُقي فَيَمْلأُها قِسْطاً
وَعَدلاً كَما مُلِئَتْ ظُلْماً وَجوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) said: A man from my Household (a.s) will emerge
whose name and manner are the same as mine. He will fill in the earth
with justice as it had been filled with injustice and oppression.

• *Musnad Ahmad*, *Musnad* *Al-Asharah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن عَليٍّ عَليهِ السَّلامُ قال: قالَ رسولُ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ
وسلَّم : المَهدِيُّ مِن أهْلِ البَيتِ؛ يُصْلِحُه اللهُ فِي لَيلَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) said: Mahdi is from my Household. God will
provide him with victory over night.”[^65]

• *Sunan Abi-Dawud*, Kitab Al-Mahdi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أُمّ سَلَمةَ قالَت: سمِعْتُ رسولَ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم
يقولُ: المَهدِيُّ مِن عِترَتي مِن ولْدِ فاطِمَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ummu-Salamah quoted the honorable Prophet (a.s) as saying: “Mahdi is
from my Household and Fatimah’s descendants.”[^66]

• *Al-Mu’jam Al-Awsat* of Tabarani, Vol. 1, p. 56:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن عَليِّ بنِ أبي طالِبٍ أنّهُ قالَ لِلنّبيِّ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم
: أمِنّا المَهدِيُّ أمْ مِنْ غَيرِنا يا رَسولَ الله؟ قال: بلْ مِنّا؛
بِنا يَخْتِمُ اللهُ كَما بِنا فَتَحَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali Ibn Abi Talib asked the Holy Prophet (a.s): “O the Messenger of
Allah! Is Mahdi from us?” The Prophet (a.s) answered: “He is surely from
us. God will conclude with us as He commenced with us.”[^67]

Imams Are From the Prophet’s Household (the Ahl al-Bayt)
--------------------------------------------------------

Another sign of the Imams (a.s) found in traditions is their belonging
to the Holy Prophet’s Household.

• *Hilyat Al-Awliya’*, Vol. 1, p. 86:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : مَن سَرَّهُ
أنْ يَحْيا حَياتي وَيمُوتَ مَماتي وَيَسكُنَ جَنَّةَ عَدْنٍ غَرَسها
رَبِّي فَلْيُوالِ عَليّاً مِن بَعْدي وَلْيُوالِ وَلِيَّهُ وَلْيَقْتَدِ
بِالأئِمَّةِ مِن بَعدي؛ فإنَّهُم عِترَتي خُلِقوا مِن طينَتي وَرُزِقوا
فَهْماً وَعِلْماً. وَوَيْلٌ لِلمُكَذّبِينَ بِفَضْلِهِمْ مِن أُمَّتي
وَالقاطِعِينَ فِيهِم صِلَتي لا أنالَهُمُ اللهُ شَفاعَتي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) said: One who would like to live and die as I do
and be placed in Paradise (of Eden) that is made by my Lord should
follow Ali and his successors and Imams after me; since they are my
Household. They are created from my disposition and given knowledge and
understanding. Woe betide those who deny their excellence! Woe betide
those who deny their relation to me! May God deprive them of my
intercession![^68]

• *Musnad* *Al-Firdaws*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي سعيدٍ الخدري قالَ: صَلّى بِنا رَسولُ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ
وسلَّم الصّلاةَ الأولى ثمَّ أقْبلَ بوَجهِهِ الكَريمِ عَلينا فقالَ: يا
مَعاشِرَ أصحابي! إنَّ مَثَلَ أهْلِ بَيتي فِيكُم مَثَلُ سَفينَةِ نوحٍ
وبابِ حِطَّةٍ في بَني إسرائيلَ، فَتَمَسَّكوا بأهْلِ بَيتي بَعدي؛
الأئمَّةِ الرّاشدِينَ مِن ذُرّيَّتي؛ فَإنَّكم لَن تَضِلّوا أبَداً.
فقِيلَ: يا رَسولَ اللهِ، كَم الأئِمّةُ بعدَكَ؟ قالَ: اثْنا عَشرَ مِن
أهْلِ بَيتي، أو قال: مِن عِتْرتي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Sa’id Khudri says: The Prophet (a.s) accomplished the first prayer
with us and then turned to us and stated: “O my companions! The like of
my Ahl al-Bayt among you is Noah’s Ark and the Gate of Repentance (Bab
Hittah) of the Israelites.[^69] So after me, hold fast to my Ahl
al-Bayt; the followers of truth from my progeny. Surely you will never
go astray.”[^70] He was asked: “O the Messenger of Allah! What is the
number of Imams after you?” He replied: “They will be twelve from my
Household.”

• *Al-Mu’jam* *Al-Kabir*, Vol. 3, p. 93:[^71]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن الإمام المُجْتَبى: إتّقوا اللهَ فينا فإنّا أمَراؤُكم… وَنَحنُ
أهْلُ البَيتِ الّذي قالَ الله عَزَّ وَجَلَّ ﴿إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ
لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أهل الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ
تَطْهِيرًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Hasan Mujtaba (a.s) says: “Be pious concerning our affairs; we are
your rulers indeed… we are the same People of the House about whom God
said: “Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness away from you, O
People of the House, And to purify you a (thorough) purifying.”

Haythami in *Majma’ al-Zawa’id* quotes this tradition from Tabarani and
says, “The narrators of this tradition are trustworthy.”[^72] The same
tradition is included in many other books too, such as *Shawahid
Al-Tanzil* by Hakim Hasakani,[^73] Ibn Kathir Dimashqi’s *Tafsir*
Exegesis,[^74] *Tarikh Dimashq* by Ibn ‘Asakir,[^75]… etc.

• *Al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah*, Vol. 1, p. 559:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن زياد بن مطرف قال: سَمعْتُ رسولَ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يقول:
مَنْ أحبَّ أنْ يَحيا حَياتي ويَموتَ مِيتَتي وَيَدخُلَ الجَنَّة الّتي
وَعَدني رَبّي، وهِي جَنَّةُ الخُلدِ، فَلْيَتَولَّ عَلِياً وذُرّيَّتَهُ
مِن بعدِهِ فَإنَّهُم لَنْ يُخْرِجوكُم بابَ هُدىً وَلَن يُدخِلوكُم بابَ
ضَلالةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (a.s) said: Anyone who likes to live and die the same
as I do and be placed in the eternal Paradise promised by my Lord should
take Ali (a.s) and his children as his guardians (*wali*),[^76] for they
never take you away from guidance and will never lead you astray.[^77]

• *Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhriqah*, p. 15:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن رسولِ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : يا أيّها النّاسُ! إنّ
الفَضلَ وَالشَّرَفَ وَالمَنْزِلةَ والولايَةَ لِرسولِ اللهِ
وذُرِّيَّتِهِ، فَلا تَذهَبَنَّ بكُمُ الأباطِيلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (a.s) says: O People! Excellence, honor, dignity
and government are for the Messenger of Allah and his Progeny, so be
aware not to be deceived by untruths!

Qanduzi Hanafi narrates this tradition from Hudhayfah Ibn Al-Yaman in
*Jawahir Al-’Aqdayn* and states, “Ibn Hanafi, in *Al-Tanbih*, and
Zarandi, in *Durar Al-Simtayn*, have narrated this tradition.[^78]
Interestingly, those who replaced the Ahl al-Bayt unlawfully, occupying
the position of Caliphate, used these kinds of traditions for arguing
against their rivals. Abu Bakr, for rejecting the candidate of Ansar
said, “Caliphate is not known but for Quraysh.”[^79]

Mu’awiah too, for denying Ibn Zubayr and Ibn Umar and supporting Yazid’s
prospective Caliphate said, “Caliphate is only for the children of Abd
Manaf (the grandfather of Banu Hashim and Banu Umayyah), because they
are the relatives of the Messenger of Allah.” He added, “O son of Zubayr
and son of Umar! Surely, Allah has taken you away from Caliphate.”[^80]

Pay attention to how Mu’awiah told that God has taken Caliphate away
from them, but in their own case, he says nothing of the Revelation or
the Prophet’s will.

To conclude this chapter, here is just one tradition that is narrated by
Qunduzi Hanafi about the names of all the Imams (a.s):

• *Yanabi’ Al-Mawaddah*, p. 440:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… قَدِمَ يَهودِيٌّ يُقالُ لهُ ’نَعْثل‘ فقالَ: يا مُحَمَّد! أسْألُكَ
عَن أشْياءَ تَلَجْلَجُ في صَدْري مُنذُ حينٍ، فإنْ أجَبْتَني عَنها
أسْلَمْتُ عَلى يَدَيْكَ. قال: سَلْ يا أبا عِمارة! فقالَ: يا مُحَمَّد…
فأخْبِرْني عَن وَصِيِّكَ مَن هُو؟ فَما مِنْ نَبيٍّ إلاّ وَلَهُ وَصيٌّ
وإنَّ نَبِيَّنا مُوسى بنَ عِمرانَ أوْصَى إلى يوشَعَ بنِ نونٍ. فقالَ:
إنَّ وَصِيّي عَليُّ بنُ أبي طالِبٍ وَبَعْدَهُ سِبطايَ الحَسَنُ
وَالحُسَينُ تَتلوهُ تِسْعَةُ أئِمَّةٍ مِن صُلبِ الحُسَين. قال: يا
مُحَمَّد! فَسَمِّهِمْ لي. قالَ: إذا مَضى الحُسَينُ فابْنُه عَلِيٌّ،
فإذا مَضَى عَليٌّ فابْنُهُ مُحَمَّد، فإذا مَضى مُحَمَّد فابْنُهُ
جَعفَرُ، فإذا مَضى جَعفَر فابْنُه مُوسى، فإذا مَضى مُوسى فابْنُه
عَلِيٌّ، فإذا مَضى عَليٌّ فابْنُه مُحَمَّد، فإذا مضَى مُحَمَّد فابْنُه
عَلِيٌّ، فإذا مَضى عَليٌّ فابْنُهُ الحَسَنُ، فإذا مَضى الحَسَنُ
فابْنُهُ الحُجَّةُ مُحَمَّد المَهدِي. فَهؤلاءِ اثنا عَشر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Jew called Na’thal came to the Holy Prophet (a.s) and said, “O
Muhammad! I have some questions, which have been in my mind for a while.
If you answer me, I will embrace Islam with your help.” The Prophet
(a.s) said, “O Aba Amarah! You may ask me!” The man asked, “O Muhammad!
Make me aware of your successor after you, for there is no Prophet
without a successor. Our Prophet Musa Ibn ‘Imran (Moses) set Yusha’
(Joshua) Ibn Nun as his successor.”

The Holy Prophet replied, “My successor is Ali Ibn Abi Talib and after
him my two grandsons Hasan and Husayn after whom nine Imams from
Husayn’s progeny will come successively.” “Tell me their names,
Muhammad,” he asked. The Prophet (a.s) stated, “After Husayn will come
his son Ali (Sajjad), after Ali his son Muhammad (Baqir), after Muhammad
his son Ja’far (Sadiq), after Ja’far his son Musa (Kazim), after Musa
his son Ali (Riza), after Ali his son Muhammad (Jawad), after Muhammad
his son Ali (Hadi), after Ali his son Hasan (‘Askari) and after Hasan
his son Hujjah Muhammad Mahdi. They are thus twelve in number.[^81]

Shi’a Traditions are Proof for everyone
---------------------------------------

There are various traditions about Imamate and features and signs
suggested by them matching with the Twelve Imams (a.s). The variety of
the traditions is much beyond those briefly mentioned here. The number
of traditions is to such an extent that regardless of truthfulness and
justice of narrators, they cannot be the result of a joint plot for
making false information. Since different people from diverse places
with various attitudes have narrated these traditions and these are
mentioned in numerous books. Therefore, when such diverse individuals
have narrated a single concept in different words, alteration and
forgery are basically rare.

As mentioned before, since the discussions in this book are brief, we
here deal with a sample of traditions narrated by the Shi’a, evidencing
the signs of Imamate and Caliphate with the names and personality of the
Imams. Though this discussion is also a cursory one, with due attention
to what preceded and the following true[^82] traditions, truth will be
clear. It is noteworthy that in the following traditions’ documents,
there are people who may be opposed because of their being Shi’a, and
hence these traditions are not considered as proof, especially because
the Imams themselves are included in the documents.

In response, it should be said that this objection is not acceptable
since it requires that even if a just and trustworthy person narrates
something he believes in it himself, then that would be untrue.
Furthermore, Sunni scholars themselves quote and depend upon Shi’a
scholars in their books. The late Allamah Abd Al-Husayn Sharaf Al-Din
has collected the names of many Shi’a scholars whose trustworthiness,
honesty and Shiism has been stipulated by Sunni scholars and narrators
such as Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmidhi… etc, have learnt their knowledge from
them.[^83]

Hakim Nayshapuri in the book entitled *Ma’rifat ‘Ulum Al-Hadith*, when
writing about the most valid documents and the best chains of narrators,
mentions some Companions of the Prophet (a.s); but at the very beginning
he says,[^84] “The most valid documents of the Ahl al-Bayt’s traditions
are narrated by Ja’far Ibn Muhammad (Imam Sadiq (a.s)) from his father,
Imam Baqir (a.s) from his grandfather, Imam Sajjad (a.s) from Imam Ali
(a.s), provided that the narrator from Ja’far is trustworthy.”[^85]

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, when speaking about the document of the famous
tradition, “The phrase, ‘Allah is He besides whom there is no God’ is my
fortress,” narrated by Imam Reza (a.s) from his father, from his
grandfather, from the Messenger of Allah, says, “If this phrase is
recited before an insane, he will surely be healed.”[^86]

Therefore these traditions act as proof for the non-Shi’a, too.
Furthermore, we naturally have two options—we either make belief that
traditions about Imamate and Caliphate are only limited to those
narrated by the Sunni from the Holy Prophet (a.s), or that there are
more such traditions. The result of both is the same, since in the first
case, no Islamic branch save Twelver Shi’a match with the
tradition,[^87] and in the second case, (i.e. if the traditions are more
than those narrated by the Sunni), these other traditions and their
documents should be studied. In so doing, it will become clear that they
all prove the Imamate of the Twelve Imams (a.s).

Knowing the Names and Personalities of the Imams
------------------------------------------------

Some well-documented traditions quoted by the Shi’a and including the
auspicious names of Imams (a.s) follow:

### Imam Ali, Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn (a.s)

• *‘Uyun Akhbar Al-Riza* (a.s), Vol. 1, p. 57:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن حُسَين بن عليٍّ عَليهِ السَّلامُ قال: سُئِلَ أميرُ المُؤمِنينَ
عَليهِ السَّلامُ عَن مَعنى قَولِ رسولِ الله صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ
وسلَّم : إنّي مُخَلِّفٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَينِ كِتابَ اللهِ وَعِتْرَتي؛
مَن العِتْرَة؟ فقالَ: أنا وَالحَسَنُ وَالحُسَينُ والأئِمَّةُ
التّسْعَةُ مِن ولْدِ الحُسينِ، تاسِعُهُم مَهْدِيُّهُم وَقائِمُهُم، لا
يُفارِقونَ كِتابَ اللهِ وَلا يُفارِقُهُم حَتىّ يَردوا على رَسول اللهِ
صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم حَوضَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali (a.s) was asked, “What did the Prophet mean by ‘Household’ when he
said, ‘I leave two valuable things among you—Allah’s book and my
Household?’” He replied, “By ‘Household,’ the Holy Prophet referred to
me, Hasan, Husayn and nine Imams from Husayn’s progeny the ninth of whom
is their Mahdi and Qa’im (the living). They would not be separated from
Allah’s Book until they come to the Prophet (a.s) at the River.

### Imam Ali Ibn Al-Husayn (a.s)

• *Ithbat Al-Hudat*, Vol. 5, p. 218:

Shaykh Kulayni narrates from Imam Baqir (a.s), When Husayn (a.s) was
martyred, Muhammad Ibn Al-Hanafiyyah (son of Imam Ali) sent someone to
Ali Ibn Al-Husayn (a.s), his nephew, to tell him in privacy, “O son of
my brother! The Prophet (a.s) appointed for his succession and for the
Imamate the Commander of the Believers (Amir Al-Mu’minin; Imam Ali), as
you know, and then Hasan and Husayn. Your father was martyred and did
not make his will. I am your uncle, your father’s brother, and more
deserving than you in terms of age and being Ali’s son. So do not
quarrel with me about Imamate and the Prophet’s succession. Imam Sajjad
(a.s) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عَمُّ! إتَّقِ اللهَ وَلا تَدَّعِ ما لَيْسَ لكَ بِحَقٍّ، إنّي
أعِظُكَ أنْ تَكونَ مِن الجَاهِلينَ. إنَّ أبي، يا عَمُّ -صَلواتُ اللهِ
عَلَيهِ- أوْصى إليَّ قَبْلَ أنْ يَتَوجَّهَ إلى العِراقِ وَعَهِدَ إليَّ
في ذلِكَ قَبلَ أنْ يُسْتَشْهَدَ بِساعَةٍ، وَهذا سِلاحُ رَسولِ اللهِ
صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم عِندي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O uncle! Fear God and do not claim something to which you have no
right. I admonish you lest you may be of the ignorant. O uncle! My
father—peace be upon him—before going to Iraq appointed me as his
successor; and a while before his martyrdom, he took allegiance with me
about Imamate. And this is the Prophet’s weapon being with me.”

He then added, “Do not interfere with this issue lest your life may
become short and your mood dispersed! Almighty God has placed Imamate
and succession in Husayn’s offspring. If you want to make sure, let us
go to the Black Stone (in the Holy Ka’bah) together and leave the
judgement to it.”

Imam Baqir (a.s) says: “This discussion took place in Mecca. So they
went to the Black Stone together and Imam Sajjad said to Muhammad Ibn
Hanafiyyah, “First, you beseech God and ask Him to make the Black Stone
speak and then you ask it your question.” Muhammad prayed insistently,
asked God and called the Stone, but there was no response. Imam (a.s)
said, “O uncle! If you were Imam and successor of the Prophet (a.s), the
Stone had replied you.” Ibn Hanafiyyah said, “O son of brother! Now you
pray and ask it.”

Then Ali Ibn Al-Husayn prayed and beseeched God stating, “(I adjure you)
By Him Who have placed the allegiance of Imams, successors and all the
people in you, tell us about the Imam and successor after Husayn Ibn Ali
(a.s).” The Stone moved in such a way that it was nearly removed from
its place. It uttered Allah’s Name and said, “O Allah! Imamate and
succession after Husayn Ibn Ali (a.s) is for Ali Ibn Al-Husayn, son of
the Prophet’s daughter—Fatimah.” So Ibn Hanafiyyah regretted accepting
Imam Sajjad as Imam.

This tradition is quoted from Imam Baqir (a.s) with different
documents.[^88]

### Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (a.s)

• *Ithbat Al-Hudat*, Vol. 5, p. 263:

Shaykh Saduq, in his book entitled *Al-Amali*, narrates from Imam Sadiq
(a.s):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ جابِراً دَخَلَ عَلى عَلِيِّ بنِ الحُسَينِ عَليهِ السَّلامُ فَوَجدَ
ابْنَهُ مُحَمَّد بنَ عَلِيٍّ عَليهِ السَّلامُ عِندَهُ غُلاماً فقال:
مَن هذا؟ قالَ: هذا ابْني وَصاحِبُ الأمْرِ بَعدي مُحَمَّد الباقِر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir went to Imam Sajjad (a.s) and saw his son, Muhammad who was a
child then. He asked the Imam, ‘Who is he?’ The Imam (a.s) replied, ‘He
is my son and my successor, Muhammad Al-Baqir.’

### Imam Ja’far Al-Sadiq (a.s)

• *Ithbat Al-Hudat*, Vol. 5, p. 323:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبي جعفر عَليهِ السَّلامُ… سُئلَ عَن القائِم عَليهِ السَّلامُ
فضَربَ بِيَده على أبي عَبدِاللهِ عَليهِ السَّلامُ فقالَ: هذا واللهِ
قائِمُ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم … فَلَمّا قُبضَ
أبو جَعفَرٍ عَليهِ السَّلامُ دَخَلْتُ عَلى أبي عَبدِالله عَليهِ
السَّلامُ فَأخْبَرْتُه بِذلِكَ فقالَ: صَدَقَ جابرُ، ثمَّ قالَ:
لَعَلَّكُم تَرَونَ أنْ لَيسَ كُلُّ إمامٍ هُو القائِمَ بعدَ الإمامِ
الّذي كان قَبلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Baqir (a.s) was asked, ‘Who is Qa’im?’ He pointed to Imam Sadiq
(a.s) and said, ‘(I swear) By God that he is the Qa’im of the Household
of Muhammad (a.s).’ Anbasah (the narrator) said, ‘After Imam Baqir’s
demise, I went to Imam Sadiq (a.s) and quoted Jabir’s tradition to him.
He said, ‘Jabir has been truthful. You may think that each Imam is not
Qa’im of his last Imam.’

Therefore, Qa’im here is not used in its special meaning, standing only
for Imam Mahdi (a.s), but it has its general meaning used for all Imams,
since all Imams are *‘Qa’im bi ‘amri Allah*.’[^89]

### Imam Musa Al-Kazim (a.s)

• *Ithbat Al-Hudat*, Vol. 5, p. 472:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَعى أبو عَبدِالله عَليهِ السَّلامُ أبا الحَسَنَ عَليهِ السَّلامُ
يوماً وَنحْنُ عِندَه فقالَ لنا: عَلَيكُمْ بِصاحِبِكُم هذا فَهُو
وَاللهِ صاحِبُكُم بَعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shaykh Kulayni quotes Sulayman Ibn Khalid as saying: One day we were
with Imam Sadiq (a.s) when he called his son Abu al-Hasan (Musa) and
told us, “By God, he is your Imam after me.”

### Imam Ali Ibn Musa Al-Riza (a.s)

• *Ithbat Al-Hudat*, Vol. 6, p. 8:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي الحسَنِ عَليهِ السَّلامُ أنّه قالَ: إنّ ابْنِي عَلِيّاً
أكْبَرُ وِلْدِي وأبَرُّهُم وأحَبُّهُمْ إليّ وَهُو يَنظُر مَعي في
الجَفْرِ ولَمْ يَنْظُر فيهِ إلاّ نَبيٌّ أو وَصِيٌّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shaykh Kulayni narrates from Abu al-Hasan, Imam Kazim (a.s), “My son,
Ali, is the eldest and most beloved of my children. He reads *Jafr*
[^90] along with me, while no one except the Prophet and his successors
look at it.

### Imam Muhammad Al-Taqi Al-Jawad (a.s)

• *Ithbat Al-Hudat*, Vol. 6, p. 157:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن صَفوانَ بنِ يحيى قال: قُلتُ لِلرّضا عَليهِ السَّلامُ: كُنّا
نَسأَلُكَ… (إلى أنْ قال) فَلا أرانا اللهُ يَومَكَ! فإنْ كانَ كَوْنٌ
فَإلى مَن؟ فَأشارَ بِيدِه إلى أبي جَعفَرٍ عَليهِ السَّلامُ وهوَ قائِمٌ
بَينَ يَديه، فقُلت: جُعِلتُ فِداك! هذا ابنُ ثلاثِ سنينَ! فقال: وَما
يَضُرُّهُ مِن ذلكَ؟ فَقَد قامَ عيسى بالحُجَّةِ وهوَ ابْنُ ثَلاث سنينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shaykh Kulayni quotes Safwan as saying: I told Imam Riza (a.s), ‘We
always ask… If something happens to you, God forbid, whom should we
follow?’ The Imam pointed at his son, Abu Ja’far, Imam Jawad (Muhammad
Taqi) who was standing before him. I said, ‘May I be sacrificed to you!
He is only three years old!’ The Imam (a.s) stated, ‘What is wrong with
it? Jesus was also three years old when he rose as a proof. (Maybe
prophecy is intended.)

### Imam Ali Al-Naqi Al-Hadi (a.s)

• *Mir’at Al-’Uqul* (Exposition of *Al-Kafi*), Vol. 3, p. 383:

Isma’il Ibn Mihran says: When Imam Jawad (a.s) was taken from Madinah to
Baghdad for the first time, I said to him, “May I be sacrificed to you!
I am afraid about where you are going. Who is the Imam after you?” He
looked at me laughing and said, “This year, my absence is not the way
you think.” The second time he was taken to Mu’tasim (the Abbasid
caliph), I asked, “You are going. Who will be the Imam after you?” He
cried until his beard was wet. Then he returned to me and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِنْدَ هذِه يُخافُ عَلَيَّ؛ الأمْرُ مِن بَعدي إلى ابْني عَلِيٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This time, my life is in danger. After me, Imamate is for my son, Ali
(Imam Hadi (a.s)).

### Imam Hasan Al-Askari

• *Mir’at Al-’Uqul* (Exposition of *Al-Kafi*), Vol. 6, p. 205:

Imam Jawad (a.s) narrates a happening in which Al-Khidr (a.s) testifies
to God’s Unity, the Prophet’s Mission and the Imamate of the Imams one
by one. He then continues:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأشهَدُ عَلى الحَسَنِ بنِ عَليٍّ بأنَّهُ القائِمُ بأمْرِ عَلِيِّ بنِ
مُحَمَّد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I testify that Hasan Ibn Ali is the successor of Imam Hadi, Ali Ibn
Muhammad, and the Imam after him.

### Imam Al-Mahdi

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأشْهَدُ عَلى رَجُلٍ مِن ولْدِ الحَسَنِ لا يُكَنّى وَلا يُسَمّى حتىّ
يَظْهَرَ أمْرُهُ فَيَمْلأُها عَدلاً كَما مُلِئَتْ جَوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I testify to a man, the son of Hasan (Imam Askari) whose name and
nickname are unknown until his emergence, when he will make the earth
full of justice as it was filled with oppression and injustice.

#### Imam Mahdi’s Occultation

• *Mir’at Al-Uqul* (Exposition of *Al-Kafi*), Vol. 4, p. 50:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن مُحَمَّد بنِ مُسلِمٍ قالَ: سمِعْتُ أبا عَبدِاللهِ عَليهِ السَّلامُ
يَقولُ: إنْ بَلَغَكُمْ عَن صاحِبِكُمْ غَيبَةٌ فَلا تُنكِروها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad Ibn Muslim quotes Imam Sadiq (a.s) as saying: “If you were
informed of your Imam’s Occultation, do not deny it.”

• *Mir’at Al-’Uqul* (Exposition of *Al-Kafi*), Vol. 4, p. 52:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبد الله عَليهِ السَّلامُ: للقائم غيبتانِ إحداهما طويلةٌ،
والأخرى قَصيرة. فالأولى يعلَمُ بمَكانه فيها خاصةٌ من شِيعَتِه،
والأُخرى لا يعلَم بمَكانه فيها إلاّ خاصة مَواليه في دينِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Sadiq (a.s) says: “Imam Qa’im (a.s) has two Occultations—short and
long. In the first one, nobody knows about his place except particular
Shi’a; and in the second one, no one except particular Companions
(special friends) know about his place.

Muslims in the Occultation period, for determining their duties, refer
to trustworthy and knowledgeable jurisprudents that deduce Islamic laws
from Allah’s Book and the Imams’ Sunnah.

An honorable *Tawqi’* (letter from Imam Mahdi) that Shaykh Saduq
narrated from a person called Ishaq Ibn Ya’qub reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا الحَوادِثُ الواقِعَةُ فارجِعوا فِيها إلى رُواةِ أحادِيثِنا
فإنَّهُم حُجَّتي عَلَيكُم وأنا حُجَّةُ اللهِ عَليهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And when something happens, refer to the narrators of our traditions who
are my proof for you, and I am Allah’s proof for them.[^91]

And at the end of this letter we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا وَجهُ الانتِفاعِ بي في غَيبَتي فكالانتِفاعِ بالشَّمْسِ إذا
غيَّبَها عَن الأبْصارِ السَّحابُ. وإنّي لأمانٌ لأهلِ الأرْضِ كَما أنَّ
النُّجومَ أمانٌ لأهْلِ السَّماءِ. فأغْلِقوا بابَ السُّؤالِ عَمّا لا
يُعنِيكُم ولا تَتَكلَّفوا عِلْمَ ما قد كُفِيتُم وأكْثِروا الدُّعاءَ
بِتَعجيلِ الفَرجِ فإنّ ذلِكَ فَرَجُكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And benefiting from me (The Imam) in the Occultation time is like
benefiting from the sun while it is covered by the clouds. I am safety
for the inhabitants of the world as the stars are safety for the
inhabitants of the heavens. Avoid irrelevant questions (useless for your
fate) and do not try to know what is unnecessary. Pray a lot for
hastening my reappearance, which is relief for you.[^92]

[^1]: Sharh Maqasid, Vol. 5, P. 232.

[^2]: Sharh Tajrid, p. 399

[^3]: For further reading see: Sharh Al-Mawaqif, 1st ed. 1419, Dar
Al-Kutub Al-’ilmiyyah, Beirut, Vol. 8, p.376

[^4]: Ansar (helpers) is a term especially used for defining the people
of Yathrib (lately, al-Madinah) who aided and received the Holy Prophet
and his followers (Muhajirun).

[^5]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. 3, p. 129.

[^6]: In Sahih Al-Bukhari, kitab Al-Hudud, Bab Rajm Al-Hubla, No. 6328,
Abu Bakr is quoted as saying: لا يُعرَفُ هذا الأمْرُ إلاّ لهِذا الحَيِّ
مِن قُريْشٍ. “Caliphate is not recognized except for Quraysh.” Nearly
the same tradition exists in Musnad of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, No. 376.

[^7]: The first number refers to the Surah (chapter) and the second to
the Ayah (verse).

[^8]: Sharh Al-Mawaqif, Dar Al-kutub Al-’ilmiyyah, Beirut, 1st ed. 1419,
Vol. 8, p. 377.

[^9]: Musnad Al-Makkiyin, No. 15140 (Int’l No.)

[^10]: Kitab Al-Imarah, Bab Wujuh Mulazimah Al-Jama’ah, No. 3441 (Int’l
No.)

[^11]: 2nd ed. Ibn Taymiyah Publication.

[^12]: Kitab Al-’imarah, No. 3392; Sahih Al-Bukhari, Kitab Al- Manaqib,
No. 3240; Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Al-Mukathirin min Al-Sahabah, No.
4600,5419 and 5847 (Int’l No.)

[^13]: Musnad Al-Makkiyin, No. 16271 (Int’l No.)

[^14]: 3rd ed., Al-Maktab Al-Islamiyyah, Beirut, p.489

[^15]: The author of Sharh Masabih Al-Sunnah of Baghawi, Al-Mu’tamad fi
Al-Mu’taqid, and so on.

[^16]: ‘Awn Al-Ma’bud, 2nd ed., Dar Al-Kutub Al-’ilmiyyah, Vol. 11,
p.245

[^17]: The phrase “ "لا حكم الا لله is derived from the Qur’anic verse,
“إن الحُكم إلاّ لله” (Al-An’am, 57; Yusuf, 40 and 67), which the
Kharijites had set as their motto. The Commander of the Believers (Amir
al-Mu’minin) (a.s) hearing this said: “كلمه حق يراد بها باطل”: “This is
a true speech used wrongly.” See Nahj Al-Balaghah; Sobhi Salih, Sermon
No. 40 and maxim No. 198 (Editor).

[^18]: Also, Al- Musannaf of Ibn Abi Shaybah Al-Kufi, Vol. 8, p.735, No.
27; Ansab Al-Ashraf of Baladhiri, p. 377, No. 449.

[^19]: Tafsir of Qurtubi, published by Mu’asisah Al-Tarikh Al-’arabi,
1405, Vol. 10, p. 297.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Dar Al-Fikr 1409.

[^22]: Also in Kanz Al-Ummal, Vol. 5, p. 751, No.14286. In Nahj
Al-Balaghah, nearly the same meaning is given. (Sobhi, sermon 40)

[^23]: Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhriqah, p. 11

[^24]: God, the Exalted, states: وَلَا تَمُوتُنَّ إِلَّا وَأَنْتُمْ
مُسْلِمُونَ. And do not die unless you are Muslims. 2:102. God does not
ask or order His servants to do something impossible. He also does not
give an order which is not enforceable, since it would be nonsense, and
nonsense is rare for the All-knowing. Also, various traditions state:
سَتَفْتَرِقُ أُمّتي إلى ثَلاثٍ –أو اثْنَتَينِ- وَسَبْعينَ فِرْقَةً
كُلُّها فِي النّارِ إلاّ وَاحِدَةً. My nation will soon be divided into
seventy three groups—or seventy two according to other traditions—all of
which will be placed in Hell save one group. These prove the existence
of one saved group, too. On the other hand, since all the groups and
sects, except the one believing in Twelve Imams are invalid, the one
saved group is probably the Twelver Shi’a. Some traditions state that
the majority group is the saved one. Regardless of the weak
documentation, these are in contrast with some other traditions and the
Qur’anic Verses. Furthermore, the majority cannot be the criterion for
truth. Two groups such as the Hanafite and the Malikite, or the
proponents of compulsion or free will, may be the same with regard to
number, but none can be the majority. How is it possible to know the
truth in this case? So, considering this tradition as valid, the
majority should probably be the one, which is true. Shaykh Saduq—May God
bless him—in his book entitled Man La Yahzaruhu Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, p.
376, quotes the Holy Prophet (a.s) as saying: المُؤمِنُ وَحدَهُ حُجَّةٌ
وَالمُؤمِنُ وَحدَهُ جَماعَةٌ. A believer alone is proof (hujjah) and the
majority. God, the Exalted, says about Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham): إِنَّ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ كَانَ أُمَّةً قَانِتًا لِلَّهِ. Surely Ibrahim was an
exemplar (ummah—nation), obedient to Allah. In his exegesis of verse 128
of chapter (Surah) Baqarah, Qurtubi gives the meaning of majority for
‘ummah’ (nation), saying that ummah can be one person in case he is
followed in good deeds. The same meaning is true of God’s statement
about Ibrahim (stated above). See Qurtubi Exegesis (Tafsir), 2nd ed.,
Dar Al-Sha’b 1372, Vol. 2, p.127. The Holy Prophet (a.s) said about Zayd
Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Nufayl, “He will be raised as a nation per se.” (Mustadrak
Hakim, Vol. 4, p. 438) There are also other traditions, which make the
identification of the saved group possible.

[^25]: Fat’h al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih Al-Bukhari, 2nd ed., Dar Al-Ma’arif,
Beirut, Vol. 13, p. 183

[^26]: Egypt 1351,Kitab Al-’Ahkam, No. 6682, Sahih Muslim, Kitab
Al-’Imarah, No. 3393, 3394, 3395, 3396 and 3397; Sunan Al-Tarmadhi,
Kitab Al-Fitan, No. 2149; Sunan Abi-Dawud, Kitab Al- Mahdi, No.3731 and
3732; Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Al-Basriyyin, No. 19875, 19901, 19920, 19963,
20017, 20019, 20032 and 20125 (Int’l No.)

[^27]: Egypt, 1334, Kitab Al-’Imarah, No. 3393 (Int’l No.)

[^28]: Kitab Al-’Imarah, No. 3398 (Int’l No.)

[^29]: New Delhi 1342, No. 2149, (Int’l No.)

[^30]: The same thing is quoted from Jabir in Sahih Abu Dawud, Vol. 2,
Matba’a (press) Taziyah, Egypt. Kitab Al-Manaqib, p.207, No.3731 (Int’l
No)

[^31]: Matba’a Miymaniyyah, Egypt 1313, Musnad Al-Basriyyin, No. 19944
(Int’l No.)

[^32]: Maybe the meaning of “فكّبر النّاسُ وضجوا” is that people found
the issue of Imamah and its conclusiveness to twelve persons great and
also strange, so they cried. This is infact part of what the honorable
verse implies: وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنْ النَّاسِ. Allah will protect
you from the people. 5:67.

[^33]: 1st ed., Dar Al-Fikr 1410.

[^34]: Hiydar Abad Press, 1334.

[^35]: Vol. 5, p. 190

[^36]: Musnad Al-Mukathirin min Al-Sahabah, No.3593 and 3665 (Int’l No.)
2nd ed., Dar Al- Ma’rifah, Vol. 13, p. 182

[^37]: That is, it does not decrease the dignity of Imams, either people
help them or not.

[^38]: 2nd ed., Maktabah Ibn Taymiyah.

[^39]: Ibid.

[^40]: 2nd ed., Maktabah Ibn Taymiyah.

[^41]: The tradition: الخِلافَةُ بَعدي ثَلاثونَ سَنَةً ثمّ يكونُ بَعدَ
ذلِكَ المُلكُ. Caliphate after me will be up to thirty years and then
will turn to kingdom and monarchy. This tradition is of great
controversy because (1) it is in contrast with other traditions
stipulating by the Sunni themselves, (2) all the sources has quoted it
from Sa’id Ibn Jumhan, and as Tirmidhi states, “We know this tradition
only from Sa’id Ibn Jumhan about whom Abu Hatam says, “Traditions quoted
by him are written but not adduced.” Ibn Mu’in comments, “He has quoted
some traditions from Safinah, no one else has ever quoted.” Al-Bukhari
says about him, “There are eccentric matters in traditions quoted by
him.” (See Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib) Moreover, Ibn Hazm writes in Al-Muhalla
(Vol. 5, p. 185), “Sa’id Ibn Jumhan is not famous for fairness, but his
traditions are said to be of no value.“ The same is true about the
tradition: لا يَزالُ هذا الدّينُ قائِماً حَتىّ يَكونَ عَليكُم اثْنا
عَشرَ خَليفَةً كُلُّهُم تَجْتَمِعُ عَليه الأُمَّةُ. The religion will
always remain established until twelve Caliphs around whom all the
people congregate will come. This tradition is only quoted by Abu Dawud
on the authority of ‘Isma’il Ibn Abi Khalid on the authority of his
father, Abu Khalid, on the authority of Jabir. The concluding part of
it, which says, “around whom all the people congregate,” seems to be
added by the narrator himself, as is evident from Tabarani’s tradition
in “Al-Mu’jam Al-Kabir” (Vol. 2, p. 208). For Tabarani quotes this
tradition in two forms from Ibrahim Ibn Humayd from Isma’il Ibn Abi
Khalid from his father from Jabir Ibn Samarah like this: قال رسول الله :
لا يَزالُ هذا الدّينُ قائِماً حتّى يَقومَ اثنا عَشرَ خَليفَةً. The
Prophet (a.s) said: “The religion is always established up to the time
when twelve Caliphs will come.” ‘Isma’il said he doubted whether his
father said, “The nation will congregate around them.” As is evident,
‘Isma’il was doubtful, whereas Almighty God says: وَإِنَّ الظَّنَّ لَا
يُغْنِي مِنْ الْحَقِّ شَيْئًا. And surely conjecture does not avail
against the truth at all. 53:28. In other words, doubt is not useful in
getting the truth. And then this groundless guess is narrated in Marwan
Ibn Mu’awiah’s tradition, who was, according to the testimony of Ibn
Mu’in, a hypocrite person (Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Hydar Abad Press, Vol.
10, p. 98). The hypocrisy in documentation is apparently transferred to
the context too. Furthermore, Isma’il Ibn Abi Khalid was an uneducated
person, having excessive mistakes. His father Abu Khalid who is also
mentioned in the document is not so familiar to Rijal scholars (Tahdhib
Al-Tahdhib). Moreover, supposing that the tradition is valid and true,
based on other traditions, the phrase: تجتمع عليه الأمة: should mean
that the nation should congregate around them as a responsibility. Or as
Qanduzi Hanafi says it means after the advent of the last Caliph, Imam
Mahdi (a.s), people will congregate around all of them. Anyway, what is
intended by this tradition is not that all the people will swear
allegiance to them, as is proved by the tradition “لا يضرهم من خذلهم”.
Also according to the testimony of the master Sunni scholars and
successive traditions, Imam Ali (a.s) and Imam Hasan (a.s) are among
these twelve Caliphs, though not all the Muslims congregate around these
two honorable Imams.

[^42]: This is an indication to Genesis, 17:20: “And for Ishmael I have
heard thee: behold, I will bless him, and will make him fruitful, and
will very greatly multiply him; twelve princes will he beget, and I will
make him a great nation.” Derby’s Version of the Bible. Abu Al-Fath
Al-Karajaki in Al-’Istinsar fi Al-Nass Al-’a’imah Al-Athar, page 30,
states that the good tidings are not in a complete form in usual
Versions of the Torah. He quotes a complete phrase from some copies of
the Greek Version of the Torah that removes some uncertainties.

[^43]: The proof on the Ahl al-Bayt’s infallibility by the “Purification
Verse” is included in “Ijtihad and Taqlid” Section, of the present book.

[^44]: The Farewell Hajj is the Prophet’s last pilgrimage to Mecca in
the last year of his honorable life. The happening of Khumm Pond (Ghadir
Khumm) on the way back from this journey has been narrated in history
books successively. The late Allamah Amini in his worthy book Al-Ghadir,
consisting of eleven volumes in Arabic, has investigated different
aspects of this event authentically. (Editor)

[^45]: Dar Al-Kutub Al-’ilmiyyah, p.107, No. 947.

[^46]: Another version: Dar Al-Kutub Al- ‘ilmiyyah, p. 107, No. 947;
Al-Risalah Publication, p. 187, No. 951.

[^47]: Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhriqah, p.40.

[^48]: Ibid.

[^49]: Ibid.

[^50]: Also: Hilyat Al-Awliya’, Vol. 4, p. 306; Al-Jami’ Al-Saghir, Vol.
2, p. 155.

[^51]: Rashfah Al-Sadi min Bahr Faza’il Bani Al-Nabi Al-Hadi, Matba’ah
Al- ‘ilmiyyah, Egypt 1303, p.80

[^52]: Mu’assisah Al-Risalah 1403, Vol. 2, No. 1145

[^53]: Yanabi’ Al-Mawaddah, p.19

[^54]: As Imam Ali (a.s) states in sermon No. 224 of Nahj Al-Balaghah:
“He (Aqil, Imam Ali’s brother) thought I would sell to him my faith and
follow his tread leaving my own way. Then I (just) heated a piece of
iron and took it near his body so that he might take lesson from it,
then he cried as a person in protracted illness cries with pain and he
was about to get burnt with its brandings. Then I said to him, ‘Moaning
women may moan over you! O Aqil! Do you cry on account of this fire
which has been made by a man for fun while as you are driving me towards
the fire which Allah, the Powerful, has prepared for (manifestation of)
His wrath? Should you cry from pain, but I should not cry from the
flames?” (Editor)

[^55]: Egypt Press, with exposition of Ibn Arabi Maliki, Kitab Al-
Manaqib, No. 3719, Tafsir (Exegesis of Qur’an), No. 3129 (Int’l No.)

[^56]: 1st ed., Dar Sadir, Beirut, Section: “on what has been narrated
from the Holy Prophet about the Verse of Purification.”

[^57]: Tahawi Hanafi, in this section, mentions eleven traditions, with
the same meaning, quoted from Ummu-Salamah from different chains of
narrators. In order to conclude from these and other rare traditions
stating that the Prophet (a.s) told Ummu-Salamah that she was among the
Ahl al-Bayt too, he then writes: “It is clear from these traditions that
when the Holy Prophet (a.s) told Ummu-Salamah that she is from the Ahl
al-Bayt, he did not mean that she is among those referred to in the
Purification Verse. And that the intention of the honorable verse is
only the Prophet (a.s) himself, Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn (a.s),
and no one else. It also makes clear what the Prophet (a.s) meant when
he told Ummu-Salamah, ‘You are from my Household.’” (i.e. here the
Prophet does not mean the special meaning of the Ahl al-Bayt and the
virtues mentioned in the verse do not match with her.) Then in response
to those who say that the Purification Verse is preceded and followed by
two addresses to the Prophet’s wives, he writes: “So, we understand that
God’s statement in the verse (انما يريد الله ) is addressed to His
intended men to remind them of their great status, and the Prophet’s
wives are only the addressees of the previous part of the verse, before
address to the men.” Then he narrates two traditions like this, “In the
mornings, the Holy Prophet (a.s) used to come to the door of Fatimah’s
house and state, ‘Peace be upon you! O the Ahl al-Bayt! God has inclined
to take any wickedness away from you.” He then adds, “Also what is
narrated for us in this regard implies that the Purification Verse
(Tat’hir) is in their dignity.” See: Mushkil Al-Athar, Vol. 1, pp.
332-339. (Editor)

[^58]: Sahih Muslim, Kitab Fadha’il Al-Sahabah, No. 4425.

[^59]: Al-Dur Al-Mathur, exegesis of Purification verse; Majma’
al-Zawa’id, Vol. 9, p. 169

[^60]: Al-Imamah and Al-Siyasah, Part 2, p.4; Muruj Al-Dhahab, Part 3,
p. 54; Ya’qubi History, Vol. 2, p. 242

[^61]: Tarikh Tabari, Vol. 5, p.353; Al-Akhbar Al-Tiwal, p. 238; Maqtal
Al-Husayn by Abu Mikhnaf, p. 17; Al-Imamah wa Al-Siyasah, Vol. 2, p. 8.

[^62]: Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhriqah.

[^63]: Musnad Al-Mukathirin, No. 10791, 10737, 10780, 10706, 10887,
10898 and 11238 (Int’l No.)

[^64]: Mustadrak Hakim, Vol. 4, p. 558

[^65]: No. 610. Also: Sunan Ibn Majah, Kitab Al-Fitan, No. 4075 (Int’l
No.)

[^66]: No. 3735. Also: Sunan Ibn Majah, Dar Al-Fikr, Kitab Al-Fitan,
Vol. 2, p. 1368, No. 4076 (Int’l No.)

[^67]: All the Sunni master scholars have denied the tradition “There is
no Mahdi except Jesus.” In Awn Al-Ma’bud fi Sharh Sunan Abi Dawud” (vol.
11, p. 244), we read about this tradition: “Bayhaqi and Hakim Nayshapuri
have considered this tradition as weak. Within the narrators of this
tradition is Aban who is rejected.” The same is stated in “Tuhfat
Al-Ahwadhi fi Sharh Sunan Al-Tirmidhi” (Vol. 6, p. 402). Ibn Hajar in
Fat’h Al-Bari (Vol. 6, p. 358) says: “Abul Hasan Khasa’i in Manaqib
Shafi’i says: “Successive traditions argue that Mahdi is from this
nation and that prophet Jesus will follow him in prayers.” This is
stated to reject the tradition that “There is no Mahdi except Jesus”
quoted by Ibn Majah from Anas. The same is true about the tradition,
“The Prophet (a.s) said: ‘His name is my name and his father’s name is
my father’s,’” that is quoted in “Sunan Abu Dawud”, all the chains of
this tradition reach back to Asim Ibn Bahdalah, though trusted by some,
a group of scholars in Rijal attribute excess of mistakes, invalidity,
lack of preservation, unfamiliarity and evasion to his traditions. (See
Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib). So Haythami says explicitly in Majma’ al-Zawa’id
(Vol. 6, p. 327), “Some scholars have regarded his narrations as
doubtful.” The same is also the case about a tradition included by Abu
Dawud in Sunan (Dar ‘Ihya’ Al-Sunnah Al-Nabawiyyah, Vol. 4, p. 108, No.
4290) in Kitab Al-Mahdi stating, “Ali (a.s) looked at his son, Hasan
(a.s), and said something implying that Mahdi is from Hasan’s progeny.”
Regardless of its documentation, this tradition is probably misprinted,
replacing Husayn with Hasan. Because Sayyid Ibn Tawus in Al-Tara’if
(Khayyam Publication, p. 177) and Ibn Al-Bitriq in Al-Umdah (Mu’assasah
Al-Nashr Al-Islami Publication, p. 434) have quoted the same tradition
from the book entitled Al-Jam’ Bayn Al- Sihah Al-Sittah by Razin
Al-Abdari, from Abi Ishaq himself -the narrator of tradition- as
follows: “Ali (a.s) looking at Husayn (a.s) said…” to the part which
reads: “ A man from his progeny comes…” Also various other traditions
state that Mahdi (a.s) is from Husayn’s progeny, such as the tradition
recorded by Qunduzi Hanafi in Yanabi’ Al-Mawaddah (Vol. 3, p. 394) on
the authority of Al-Darqitni in Al-Jarh wa’l-Ta’dil on the authority of
Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri: أنّ النبيّ مَرِضَ مرضَةً ثَقيلَةً فَدَخَلتْ عليهِ
فاطِمَةُ وأنا جالِسٌ عندَهُ ولمّا رأتْ ما بهِ مِن الضّعفِ خَنَقَتْها
العَبرَةُ… وَهوَ أنّه ضَربَ عَلى مَنكِبِ الحُسَينِ وقالَ: مِن هذا
مَهدِيُّ هذهِ الأُمّةِ سلامُ الله عليهِم. The Prophet (a.s) got
seriously ill. Fatimah came to him while I was there. Seeing the
Prophet’s weakness, Fatimah got lump in her throat…the Prophet tapped
Husayn on the shoulder and said: “Mahdi is from Husayn’s progeny. Peace
be upon them all.” The tradition under discussion is also not
well-documented, since, first, Abu Dawud says, “I narrated it from Harun
Ibn Al-Mughirah.” It is not clear who narrated on the authority of Harun
Ibn Al-Mughayrah to Abu Dawud. So the tradition is interrupted. Second,
Sulaymani has said about Harun Ibn Al-Mughayrah Ibn Al-Hakim, “His
traditions should be closely investigated.” Ibn Habban has said, “He may
make mistakes.” (Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Dar Sadir, Published in Hiydar
Abad, Vol. 11, p.12) Thirdly, in this tradition’s documentation, after
Harun Ibn Mughayrah, there is Amr Ibn Qays about whom Abu Ubayd Ajuri
quotes Abu Dawud as saying, “There is mistake in his traditions.”
(Tahdhib Al-Kamal, Al-Risalah, Vol. 22, p.205, No. 4437) Dhahabi in
Mizan Al-I’tidal says, “His traditions are groundless.” (Dar Al-Ma’arif,
Vol. 3, p. 285, No. 6669) and Sulaymani says, “He is doubted.” (Tahdhib
Al-Tahdhib, Dar Al-Fikr, Vol. 11, p. 12) It is thus clear that what Azim
Abadi has mentioned in Awn Al-Ma’bud fi Sharh Sunan Abi Dawud as the
result of arguments, stating that Mahdi (a.s) is from Hasan’s progeny
and that he is related to Husayn (a.s) on his mother’s side is
completely wrong, because, first, the result of arguments is possible
when the truth of all of them is proved, while our study made it clear
that the tradition of Abu Ishaq as quoted in the present versions of
Sahih Abu Dawud is invalid from different aspects. This meaning is
expressed in no other way either. Second, numerous traditions stipulate
that Mahdi (a.s) is from the progeny of Husayn (a.s) and that he is from
the ninth generation of Husayn’s children. This is incompatible with
concluding statement of the author of Awn Al-Ma’bud. Basically, it seems
that these two traditions quoted by Abu Dawud, that is the tradition
implying that the name of Mahdi’s father is Abdullah and another one
saying that Mahdi (a.s) is from Hasan’s progeny, are fabricated by the
proponents of Muhammad Ibn Abdullah Ibn Hasan, known as Al-Nafs
Al-Zakiyyah (The pious Spirit). Even some people like Al-Mansur
Al-Dawaniqi, the Abbasid caliph, before the establishment of The Abbasid
dynasty, had named him Mahdi and sworn allegiance to him. However
Muhaddith Qumi, in his book entitled Muntaha Al-Amal, says, “Abu
Al-Faraj and Sayyid Ibn Tawus have frequently narrated that Abdullah
al-Mahz, the father of Al-Nafs Al-Zakiyyah, and all his family denied
his being the promised Mahdi.” (See: Muntaha Al-’Amal, Section on the
murder of Muhammad Ibn Abdullah) The tradition, “There is no Mahdi
except Jesus” is the reaction of their opponents. Impiety and
worldliness have caused many calamities and altered many facts.

[^68]: 4th ed., Dar Al-Kutub Al-’Arabi 1405.

[^69]: This is a reference to an event stated in Surah (Chapter)
Al-Baqarah (The Cow), Verse 58 of the Holy Qur’an: After wandering about
in lands for many years, due to their sins and obstinacy, the Israelites
got subject to God’s blessing and forgiveness and were led to a place
for living. When entering into its gate, they were asked to bind, as a
sign of humility, and say the word “hittah—meaning repentance.” It is
narrated that the Gate of Repentance was built short so that the
Israelites had to bend a little when entering, as to accomplish God’s
order. But they entered with their knees bent and straight head, instead
of entering in the state of genuflection. Indeed they did not genuflect
before Almighty God. Moreover, as stipulated in the next verse, instead
of ‘hittah,’ some of them said similar words mockingly. See: Shaykh
Tabarsi, Tafsir (Exegesis) Jawami’ Al-Jami’ Exegesis, vol. 1, p. 48.
(Editor)

[^70]: Since all the Imams except Ali (a.s) are the Prophet’s progeny,
he has known all of them as his children, i.e. they are mostly from his
progeny. 3 2nd ed., Maktabah Ibn Taymiyah. 4 Vol. 9, p. 172.

[^71]: 2nd Edition, Maktabah Ibn Taymiyah.

[^72]: Vol. 9, p. 172.

[^73]: 1st ed. 1411, Vol. 2, p. 32.

[^74]: Dar Al-Ma’rifah, 1412, Vol. 3, p. 495.

[^75]: Dar Al-Fikr 1415, Vol. 13, p. 270.

[^76]: The term ‘wali’ has several meanings, such as friend, lover,
ruler, confederate by an oath, follower…etc. What is more in harmony
with this tradition is ‘ruler.’ Even if it is used in its other
meanings, the point is proved, since the tradition says that Ali (a.s)
and his children guide people and, as will be mentioned, he and his
infallible children claimed their Imamah.

[^77]: Also, Al-Muntakhab min Dhayl Al-Mudhayyal of Tabari, p. 83; Kanz
Al-’Ummal, Al-Risalah, 5th ed., Vol. 11, p, 611.

[^78]: Yanabi’ Al-Mawaddah, 1st ed., Uswah publication, Vol. 2, p. 45

[^79]: Sahih Al-Bukhari, Kitab Al-Hudud, Section Rajm Al-Halabi, No.
6328 (Int’l No.)

[^80]: Al-Imamah wa Al-Caliphate, Vol. 1, p. 150

[^81]: Al-Hafiz Sulayman Ibn Ibrahim Al-Qanduzi Al-Hanafi, Yanabi’
Al-Mawaddah, 8th ed. Dar Al-Kutub Al-Iraqiyyah 1385, Section 76, p. 440

[^82]: ‘True’ here is not used in its special idiomatic sense, but it
means narratives whose narrators are trustworthy people; though most
traditions are ‘true’ in the sense used in Rijal too. (True traditions
should meet some characteristics, such as narrator’s belief in Imams and
the like)

[^83]: See Al-Muraja’at, p. 52

[^84]: p. 54.

[^85]: In these cases, Imam Sajjad (a.s) narrates from his father, Imam
Husayn (a.s) who narrates from Imam Ali (a.s).

[^86]: See: Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhriqah, 2nd ed. 1358 H. Q., Maktabah
Al-Qahirah in Egypt, p. 205.

[^87]: Allamah Sharaf Al-Din says: We investigated what the Sunni have
narrated about the virtues of the Sahabah—Companions (except the Ahl
al-Bayt) and found no opposition (in them) with the Imamiyyah (believers
in the Twelve Imams) belief and no argument for Caliphate of the
Companions. So no one has used them in proving the Caliphate of the
three Caliphs. But great Sunni scholars consider what is stated in some
books about Abu Bakr and others as forgery. See: Sharh ‘Aqa’id ‘Azudi,
Vol. 2, p. 644; Sharh Nahj Al-Balaqah, Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Vol. 11, p. 49,
etc.

[^88]: The late Allamah Majlisi in Bihar Al-Anwar quotes from the book
entitled Al-Khara’ij wa’l-Jara’ih by Ravandi, “Some believe that
Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyyah did so to resolve people’s doubts (He did not
deny it himself) See: Bihar Al-Anwar, Islamiyyah Publication, Tehran,
Vol. 46, p. 30.

[^89]: That is they maintain Allah’s orders.

[^90]: “Jafr” (arithmomancy) is one of the sources of the Imams’
knowledge. The author of Majma’ Al-Bahrayn writes, “It is quoted in the
tradition, ‘The Messenger of Allah (a.s) taught Jafr and Jami’ah to the
Commander of the Believers, Ali (a.s).’ These two are interpreted as,
“skin of goat and skin of ram on which all the sciences, even the
different compensation prices for a scratch, a whip and half a whip,
were written.” The researcher Sharif Jurjani in Sharh Mawaqif is quoted
as saying, “Jafr and Jami’ah are two books of Ali’s (a.s) in which all
the happenings of the world until the end of the world are included
according to the science of Huruf, and known Imams from his children
know this science and rule with it.” (Editor)

[^91]: Though the narrator of this tradition, Ishaq Ibn Ya’qub, is not a
well-known person, this meaning is confirmed by jurisprudents and some
other traditions.

[^92]: Kamal Al-Din, p. 483


