Ijtihad and Taqlid
==================

Lexical Meaning of Ijtihad
--------------------------

Lexically, Ijtihad means effort for getting something. Ibn Al-Athir
writes, in *Al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah*, “Ijtihad means making effort in
search of something. This word is in the same conjugation with the
keyword *jahd*,[^1] meaning strength and ability.

The term *Ijtihad* was used in the same meaning in the Prophet’s age and
his Companions’, until the end of the first century after the Prophet’s
Hijra. There are numerous traditions quoted from the Holy Prophet (a.s)
testifying to this usage, three of which are mentioned here:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمّا السّجُود، فاجْتَهِدوا بالدّعاءِ فَضَمِنَ أنْ يُسْتَجابَ لَكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When praying, in the state of prostration, make effort; your prayer will
be accepted hopefully.[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلّوا عَلَيَّ واجْتَهِدوا في الدّعاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Pay tribute to me and make effort when praying.[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَضْلُ العَالِمِ عَلى المُجْتَهِدِ مِائَةُ دَرَجة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A scientist is a hundred times more excellent than one who only makes
effort in worship[^4].[^5]

Apart from what was mentioned from the Holy Prophet, here are just two
examples from the various statements available in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كانَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يَجْتَهِدُ في العَشْرِ
الأواخِرِ ما لا يَجْتَهِدُ في غَيرِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The messenger of Allah (a.s) made such an effort in worshiping in the
last ten days of Ramadan that he did not make in other times.[^6]

Ummah Harithah, a female Companion of the Prophet, when speaking with
the Prophet about her martyred son says:[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنْ كانَ في الجَنَّةِ صَبَرْتُ وإنْ كانَ غَيْرَ ذلِكَ اجْتَهَدْتُ
عَلَيهِ في البُكاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

If my child is in Paradise, I will be patient otherwise I will make
effort in crying.[^8]

As a result, the lexical meaning of Ijtihad, during the Prophet’s age
and a while after him, was to attempt or make effort. The only exception
to this usage is the tradition of Mu’adh reading:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أجْتَهِدُ رأيِي وَلا آلو.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I will practice according to my opinion and do not fear.[^9]

This will be discussed in details later on.

Idiomatic Meanings of Ijtihad
-----------------------------

Islamic scholars have used the term Ijtihad[^10] with different
meanings. In general, Ijtihad is used to refer to two meanings—general
and specific. Of course, this term was mostly used in its specific
meaning for quite a while at first.

Ijtihad in its general meaning
------------------------------

There are various definitions for Ijtihad in its general meaning, some
of which follow:

A) “Ijtihad is the jurisprudent’s best attempt to reach understanding
(and certainty) about Islamic rules.”[^11]

B) “Ijtihad is making effort in recognizing conjectural religious
rules[^12] to such an extent that no greater effort is possible.”[^13]

C) “Ijtihad is obtaining religious rules from explanatory reasons.”[^14]

D) “Making every effort in reaching a conjecture to religious rules, in
such a way that reaching beyond it would be impossible.”[^15]

E) “Ijtihad is the disposition (*malakah*)[^16] to obtain the proof of
religious rules or practical duties, either a religious or a logical
proof.”[^17]

These are general definitions for Ijtihad found in the scholars’ books.
Each of them is subject to some criticisms and there is controversy
about their scope of inclusion. But they all seem to have a common point
and that is the concept of “attempting to obtain religious rules via
some reasons.” There is controversy on whether some reasons such as
*Qiyas* (analogy), *Istihsan* (approbation), *masalih mursalah* and
*khabar wahid* (one tradition)… etc, are really proof; and that if they
are reasons, what their requirements are. That is why Muhaqqiq Hilli,
when defining Ijtihad from the viewpoint of jurisprudents, begins like
this: “Making effort in obtaining religious rules.”[^18] Then he adds:
“Accordingly, obtaining rules from religious reasons is Ijtihad, since
this requires exerting views and cannot be done with regard to
manifestations of the religion.”[^19] He continues: “That reason may be
*Qiyas* (analogy) or something else. Hence, *Qiyas* can be a kind of
Ijtihad.”[^20]

Here, Muhaqqiq Hilli poses a problem and the answer to it: “If one says:
‘So, Imamiyyah (Twelver Shi’a) accepts Ijtihad.’ I reply: Yes, it is so,
but there is a paradox here, because *Qiyas* is considered as a means
for Ijtihad. But if *Qiyas* is excluded, we accept Ijtihad as obtaining
rules through theoretical ways (means) other than *Qiyas*.”[^21]

Some may think this definition of Muhaqqiq Hilli is about the special
meaning of Ijtihad. But it is not true, since he considers as Ijtihad
issues such as concluding from traditions either substituting full with
conditional, or general with specific, and other conclusions and also
opposition of traditions with each other, preference or option of them;
whereas Ijtihad in its special meaning does not include these issues.
Since as will follow, the special meaning of Ijtihad belongs to issues
in which there is no tradition.

Ijtihad in its Special Meaning
------------------------------

There are some definitions for the special meaning of Ijtihad, too. Some
have defined it as *Qiyas*, as Imam Shafi’i who equals between Ijtihad
and *Qiyas* and says, “These two are used to name the same
concept.”[^22] Others equal it with *Ra’y* (opinion).

Ijtihad is defined as: “Making effort in obtaining a rule, when there is
no (reported) tradition, by pondering and using ways shown by religion
in order to inference.”[^23] Still others have equaled Ijtihad with
*Ra’y* (opinion), *Qiyas* (analogy) and *Istihsan* (approbation). The
late Sayyid Murtaza Alam al-Huda has a different view. To him, Ijtihad
and *Qiyas* are different and their relationship is general and
specific. This great scholar writes: “Among jurisprudents, some
differentiate between *Qiyas* and Ijtihad saying, ‘In *Qiyas*, the
analogy is made based on a definite principle, but in Ijtihad there is
no principle for analogy, such as Ijtihad in finding Qiblah, defining
the value of the damaged things and difference of healthy and injured
(*arsh*).’[^24] Some others consider *Qiyas* as a kind of Ijtihad. So
when speaking of those who accept Ijtihad, we mean those who use
conjectures and reasons to reach religious rules, not those who only
trust reasons.[^25]

Ijtihad in its specific usage, meaning either *Ra’y* (opinion), *Qiyas*
(analogy), or *Qiyas*, *Istihsan* and *Masalih Mursalah*, if proved only
through conjecture, is not valid to Imamiyyah jurisprudents, and hence
cannot prove religious rules.[^26] Since it includes reasons prohibiting
from following conjectures.[^27] It should be kept in mind that since
Ijtihad was used by jurisprudents as conjectural Ijtihad at a point in
time, the early Shi’a scholars have written explicitly or implicitly on
rejection of Ijtihad (conjectural Ijtihad). As an example Shaykh Mufid,
the great Shi’a scholar of the third century, has written a book under
the title *Al-Naqz Ala Ibn Al-Junayd fi Al-Ra’y* (rejection of Ibn
Junayd in Ijtihad according to the opinion). As a result, when dealing
with the term Ijtihad in the books, or when using it, we should pay
attention to its two senses.

Sources of Ijtihad
------------------

Having defined Ijtihad, we now turn to the sources of Ijtihad (in its
general sense). All that is included in *Usul* (the science of
principles of obtaining religious rules) books as sources of Ijtihad
are:

(1) Allah’s Book—the Holy Qur’an,

(2) The Holy Prophet’s Sunnah (tradition) and the tradition of the Ahl
al-Bayt and the Companions,

(3) *Ijma’* (consensus),

(4) *Aql* (wisdom),

(5) *Qiyas* (analogy),

(6) *Istihsan* (approbation) and

(7) *Masalih Mursalah*.

In the following discussion, we review the above sources and their
proof[^28] briefly to see which of them can be used as the religious
reasons to obtain the rules.

### Examining the proof of the Holy Qur’an

Among the mentioned sources, all Muslims agree upon the proof of the
Holy Qur’an. Of course, some Sunni books like *Sahih Al-Bukhari*[^29]
and *Sahih Muslim*[^30] and some Shi’a ones such as *Al-Kafi*[^31]
include traditions stating that some Qur’anic Verses have not survived
to be available to us. But none of the Sunni or Shi’a researchers have
attended to these traditions. So, all Muslims consider the Holy Qur’an
(in its present manifestation) as proof and the first source of Islamic
attitudes and rules. Of course, it is clear that inference from the Holy
Qur’an requires knowing some principles to make true understanding of
the verses possible, help recognize absolute from conditional,
abrogating from abrogated and indisputable from analogous verses.

### Examining the proof of the tradition

Tradition is based on one of these three:

a) The Prophet’s speech,

b) The Prophet’s behavior,

c) The Prophet’s confirmation or keeping quiet.

The proof of Prophet’s tradition, like the proof of Allah’s Book, is
clear and no one can deny it. It is completely mistaken to say, “Allah’s
Book is sufficient and there is no need to other things,” since Qur’an
has denied this, stating:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الذِّكْرَ لِتُبَيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ مَا نُزِّلَ
إِلَيْهِمْ وَلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We have revealed to you the Reminder that you may make clear to
men what has been revealed to them, and that haply they may reflect.
(16:44).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا آتَاكُمْ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ
فَانْتَهُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back. (59:7).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger. (4:59).***

There are also other Verses and traditions stipulating this issue. Imam
Shafi’i says in this regard: “If we reject the traditions altogether, we
face an unsolvable problem and that is if someone performs the least of
what is called prayers or Zakat (statutory Islamic levy), he does his
duty. For example, one may perform two units (*rak’ah*) of prayers,
saying what is not in Allah’s Book is not obligatory (i.e. in Qur\`an,
there is only prayer in itself and that can be accomplished with two
units.) Meanwhile, tradition has determined the number of units in a day
and their quality for us. This is also the case about Zakat, its
different kinds, quantities and the specific properties to which it
belongs.[^32]

Of course, like Allah’s Book, for understanding tradition one should
acquire its principles, varieties and proofs and works, and the
traditions adducing them to distinguish the true traditions, which proof
the rules.

### The Ahl al-Bayt’s Tradition

Reference to the Prophet’s tradition, successively narrated in Sunni
books, makes it clear that the excellent and unique status of the
Prophet’s Household (Ahl al-Bayt) is among the principles of Islam.
Affection to the Holy Prophet’s Household and following them is
necessary. Though there is no doubt about the proof of the Ahl al-Bayt’s
tradition, for discarding any possible temptation in this issue, just
two of the most famous reasons for it, i.e. “Purification Verse” and
“Thaqalayn tradition” will follow:

### The first reason for proof of the Ahl al-Bayt’s tradition

The Holy Qur’an sates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying. (33:33).***

For more explanation about this honorable verse known as Purification
(*Tat’hir*) Verse, it should be said that according to this verse God
wants to take any wickedness away from the Ahl al-Bayt, and since any
sin is wickedness, they are away from any sin and hence infallible, by
God’s will

As is evident from the word **“إنَّما”** which is used for exclusion in
Arabic, this is God’s certain inclination to specialize the Ahl al-Bayt
in purification, while the Almighty has invited anyone to be pure and
avoid committing sins. What remains is to see who are the Ahl al-Bayt.
To find the answer to this question, we should attend to traditions on
the cause of the revelation of this verse. Some such traditions from the
most trusted Sunni books are mentioned hereinafter:[^33]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن عائِشَةَ قالَت: خَرجَ النبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم غداة وعَلَيه
مِرطٌ مُرجَّلٌ مِن شعر أسوَدَ، فجاء الحسنُ بن عَليٍّ فأدخَلَهُ ثمَّ
جاءَ الحُسينُ فَدخلَ معه ثمّ جاءَت فاطِمةُ فأدخَلَها ثمّ جاءَ عَليٌّ
فأدْخَلَهُ، ثمّ قالَ: ﴿إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ
الرِّجْسَ أهل الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

Aishah says: One morning, the Holy Prophet (a.s) came out of his house
wearing a cloak made of black hair. Hasan (a.s) came in and the Prophet
(a.s) placed him under the cloak. Then Husayn (a.s) came and went in
there. Then came Fatimah (a.s) who was placed there by the Prophet
(a.s). Next Ali (a.s) came and the Prophet took him under his cloak and
recited, ***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), and to purify you a thorough
purifying. (33:33).”***[^34]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لمّا نَزَلَتْ هذه الآيَةُ على النّبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم :
﴿إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أهل الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.﴾ في بَيتِ أُمِّ سَلَمةَ دَعا النّبيُّ صلّى
اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم فاطِمَةَ وَحسَناً وَحُسيناً وعَليٌّ خَلفَ ظَهْرِه
فَجَلَّلَهُم بِكِساءٍ، ثمَّ قال: اللّهُمّ هؤلاءِ أهلُ بَيتي فَأذْهِبْ
عَنهمُ الرّجْسَ وَطَهّرهُم تَطهيراً. قالَت أُمُّ سَلَمة: وأنا مَعَهُم
يا نَبيَّ الله؟ قالَ: أنْتِ عَلى مَكانِكِ وأنْتِ إلى خَيرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Umar Ibn Salamah, the Holy Prophet’s stepchild, says: The honorable
verse of “Purification” was revealed in the house of Ummu-Salamah, the
Holy Prophet’s wife. The Holy Prophet (a.s) called Fatimah, Hasan and
Husayn (a.s), and Ali (a.s) was behind him. Then he covered them with a
cloak (*kisa’*) and stated: “O Allah! These are my Household, so banish
wickedness from them and make them pure!” At this moment, Ummu-Salamah
asked: “O Prophet of God! Am I among them?” He answered, “You are in
your own place and you are into goodness, too.”[^35]

The same in narrated by Tirmidhi with a little difference in words and
he comments under it, “This tradition is fine and true.”[^36]

Dear readers: certainly pay attention that the Prophet (a.s) excluded
his wife, Ummu-Salamah, from the Ahl al-Bayt. With so many traditions on
this issue, how can one trust few traditions, which consider the
Prophet’s wives among the Ahl al-Bayt? Moreover, as history and the
reference books of traditions, like *Sahih Muslim* state, the Umayyad
and the Abbasid rulers tried to put out the light of the Ahl al-Bayt,
and scholars in *Rijal* and biographies have stipulated that some of the
narrators of these few traditions like Ikramah and Muqatil were liars
and fabricators. Furthermore, in these traditions only the Prophet’s
wives are considered as the Ahl al-Bayt, while so many traditions
exclude exactly the Prophet’s wives from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s).
Therefore, even if the documents of these traditions are true, since
they are in contrast with a great many of other traditions excluding the
Prophet’s wives from the Ahl al-Bayt, these latter traditions are
preferable with regard to their number and documentation.

Another issue posed about the Purification Verse is that its preceding
and following verses are:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَرْنَ فِي بُيُوتِكُنَّ وَلَا تَبَرَّجْنَ تَبَرُّجَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ
الْأُولَى وَأَقِمْنَ الصَّلَاةَ وَآتِينَ الزَّكَاةَ وَأَطِعْنَ اللَّهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ
أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا. وَاذْكُرْنَ مَا يُتْلَى
فِي بُيُوتِكُنَّ مِنْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَالْحِكْمَةِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ
لَطِيفًا خَبِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And stay in your houses and do not display your finery like the
displaying of the ignorance of yore; and keep up prayer, and pay the
poor-rate, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah only desires to keep
away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House, and to purify you
a (thorough) purifying. And keep in mind what is recited in your houses
of the communications of Allah and the wisdom; surely Allah is Knower of
subtleties, Aware.

A doubtful question may be posed here as to why this honorable verse
accompanies verses about the Prophet’s wives. The answer would be,
first, as is evident from various traditions, the latter part of the
honorable verse has been revealed independently and then arranged in the
present order later on. Second, the change in address form from feminine
plural[^37] to masculine plural[^38] is a clear reason for the
multiplicity of addresses, especially since it shifts to feminine
plural[^39] again. It may be stated that: the change in pronouns is to
include people other than the Prophet’s wives. The answer would be that
if it is so, the same should be continued to the end, while this is not
the case. So, the honorable verse mentions characteristics for a certain
group determined in traditions and the Holy Prophet’s Sunnah.

Also, with regard to this change in style and the usage of **“إنما”**
for exclusion, it becomes clear that here God’s will is of genesis kind
and hence unobjectionable, just like the true meaning of will. Moreover,
if there were a religious will stressed by the Prophet, it were not only
unnatural but stylistically obscene to address the Ahl al-Bayt with
masculine words. Because the Prophet’s wives are included in the
religious will and besides they have been addressed in the beginning of
this honorable verse. Furthermore, the traditions including Thaqalayn
traditions which will follow, proves that God’s will has been since the
genesis. And consequently the Ahl al-Bayt’s infallibility and the proof
of their tradition are proved.

**The second reason for the proof of the Ahl al-Bayt’s tradition**

The second reason for the proof of the Ahl al-Bayt’s tradition is
Thaqalayn tradition. These traditions have been narrated in many Sunni
books in different senses. Some of these sources are *Sahih Muslim*,
*Sunan Al-Darimi*, *Khasa’is Al-Nisa’i*, *Sunan Abi Dawud*, *Sunan Ibn
Majah*, *Musnad Ahmad* and *Mustadrak* *Hakim*.

According to Qaysarani, Thaqalayn tradition has twenty seven Sunni
narrator chains, as counted by some researchers. Some others believe
they are thirty nine. These are narrated by eighty two Shi’a chains of
narrators. Here, we quote this honorable tradition from *Sahih Muslim*
and *Sunan Al-Tirmidhi*:

Ibn Hayyan says:[^40] Husayn, Umar Ibn Muslim and I went to Zayd Ibn
Arqam. Husayn told him: “O Zayd! You have surely gained great goodness,
you have seen the Prophet (a.s), heard his speech, accompanied him in
battles and prayed behind him. Tell us something of what you have heard
from the Holy Prophet (a.s).” Zayd said: “O son of my brother! By God
that I have lived my age and reached an old age, thus forgetting some of
the Prophet’s statements I have heard. So, accept what I tell you and do
not take me into trouble more than that.” Then he continued: “One day,
the Holy Prophet (a.s) delivered a sermon to us beside a pond named
Khumm, somewhere between Mecca and Medina. After eulogy to God he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، فَإِنَّمَا أَنَا بَشَرٌ يُوشِكُ أَنْ
يَأْتِيَنِي رَسُولُ رَبِّي فَأُجِيبُ، وَأَنَا تَارِكٌ فِيكُم
ثَقَلَيْنِ: أَوَّلُهُمَا كِتَابُ اللهِ فِيهِ الهُدىٰ وَالنُّورُ؛
فَخُذُوا بِكِتابِ اللهِ وَاسْتَمْسِكوا بِهِ... وَأَهْلُ بَيْتِي؛
أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ
بَيْتِي، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O people! I am a human being. God’s angel will soon come to take my
soul and I will accept him. I will leave two valuable things among you;
first Allah’s Book in which there is light and guidance, so hold fast to
it and follow it. The second is my Household (the Ahl al-Bayt). I remind
you of God about my Ahl al-Bayt. I remind you of God about my Ahl
al-Bayt. I remind you of God about my Ahl al-Bayt.”

In *Sunan Al-Tirmidhi*, Zayd Ibn Arqam has quoted the Holy Prophet (a.s)
as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّي تارِكٌ فيكُمُ الثَّقَلَينِ ما إنْ تَمَسَّكْتُم بِهِما لنْ
تَضِلّوا بَعدي؛ أَحَدُهُما أعْظَمُ مِن الآخَرِ؛ كِتابُ اللهِ حَبْلٌ
مَمدودٌ مِن السَّماءِ إلى الأرْضِ وعِتْرَتي أهلُ بَيتي، وَلَن
يَتَفَرَّقا حَتىّ يَرِدا عَليَّ الحَوضَ فانْظُروا كَيفَ تُخَلِّفونِي
فِيهِما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I leave two invaluable things. If you follow them, you will never go
astray after me. They are both great: Allah’s Book that is taken from
the Heavens to the earth like a rope, and my family; my Household. These
two will not separate each other until they come to me in the River in
Paradise. So be careful of how you will do after me!”[^41]

As to the stipulation of this tradition, the Ahl al-Bayt has an equal
status as to the Holy Qur’an and following it is like following Qur’an
in that it saves from going astray. And there would never be a
separation between them. Therefore as Qur’an is away from deviation, the
Ahl al-Bayt is away from misguidance too. Otherwise, it cannot be equal
with and inseparable from Qur’an forever. Anyhow, it is quite obvious
from the above-mentioned tradition that Ali, Fatimah Al-Zahra, Hasan and
Husayn (a.s) are the Ahl al-Bayt. So, at the time of the revelation of
this verse, these honorable persons are the Ahl al-Bayt and as the
successive tradition, “Imams will be twelve in number,” and other
traditions certify, after them nine Imams from Husayn’s progeny are from
the Ahl al-Bayt.[^42] Here, we just mention two traditions about this
issue from the Holy Prophet (a.s):

Muhammad Ibn Muthana, with a few persons in between, narrates Jabir Ibn
Samarah who quotes the Prophet (a.s) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَكونُ اثْنا عَشَرَ أمِيراً… كُلُّهُمْ مِن قُرَيشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There would be twelve leaders all from Quraysh.”[^43]

Ziyad Ibn Mutarrif says: “I heard the Prophet (a.s) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِن أحَبَّ أنْ يَحْيا حَياتي وَيَموتَ مِيتَتي فَلْيَتَوَلَّ عَلِيّاً
وَذُرَّيَّتَهُ مِنْ بَعدِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Everyone who would like to live and die like I do should set Ali as his
leader and Ali’s progeny after him.”[^44]

With such an excellent position for the Ahl al-Bayt, being Qur’an’s
equals, away from any wickedness, and people’s guidance and safety from
going astray, it is obvious that their speech and Sunnah, which implies
the Prophet’s Sunnah, are proof. Of course, the recognition of the Ahl
al-Bayt’s Sunnah needs some requirements and to gain it, the criteria
mentioned earlier should be considered.

### The Proof of the Companion’s Sunnah

There is no proof for the tradition (Sunnah) of the Prophet’s Companions
(Sahabah), as long as it belongs to them themselves, not to the Prophet,
and there is no consensus about it. What some people have regarded as
the proof for the Companions’ Sunnah are two verses of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنْتُمْ خَيْرَ أُمَّةٍ أُخْرِجَتْ لِلنَّاسِ تَأْمُرُونَ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَتَنْهَوْنَ عَنْ الْمُنكَرِ وَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are the best of the nations raised up for (the benefit of) men;
you enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong and believe in Allah.
(3:110).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا لِتَكُونُوا شُهَدَاءَ عَلَى
النَّاسِ وَيَكُونَ الرَّسُولُ عَلَيْكُمْ شَهِيدًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And thus We have made you a medium (just) nation that you may be the
bearers of witness to the people and (that) the Messenger may be a
bearer of witness to you. (2:143).***

But it should be pointed out that these two honorable verses are
probably not the proof of the Companions’ Sunnah, since the first verse
states, “You are the best nation for enjoining right and forbidding the
wrong.” This is not to say that if a few Companions said something,
their statement is proof per se. The second verse also says, “You are a
medium nation.” It is not about the Companions individually, rather it
implies the characteristics of the Islamic nation as a whole.
Furthermore, though being a Companion of the Prophet is a great virtue,
as history goes, some Companions did not recognize this value and were
criticized in the Holy Qur’an and the Prophet’s traditions because of
their wrongdoing.

The establishers of Zirar Mosque[^45], the abandoners of Jihad (the holy
war)[^46], Walid Ibn Uqbah Ibn Abi Mu’it[^47], Samarah Ibn Jundab[^48],
and some others are all examples of this bitter truth.

The Holy Qur’an is the best witness to ingratitude and hypocrisy of some
of the Companions, when it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِمَّنْ حَوْلَكُمْ مِنْ الْأَعْرَابِ مُنَافِقُونَ وَمِنْ أَهْلِ
الْمَدِينَةِ مَرَدُوا عَلَى النِّفَاقِ لَا تَعْلَمُهُمْ نَحْنُ
نَعْلَمُهُمْ سَنُعَذِّبُهُمْ مَرَّتَيْنِ ثُمَّ يُرَدُّونَ إِلَى
عَذَابٍ عَظِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And from among those who are round about you of the dwellers of the
desert there are hypocrites, and from among the people of Medina (also);
they are stubborn in hypocrisy; you do not know them; We know them; We
will chastise them twice then shall they be turned back to a grievous
chastisement. (9:110).***

It is worth mentioning that some traditions stipulate to the injustice
of some Companions to make it clear that according to the Prophet’s
tradition, the Companions’ traditions cannot be totally the proof. The
honorable Prophet (a.s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا وإنَّهُ سَيُجاءُ بِرِجالٍ مِنْ أُمَّتي فَيؤخَذُ بِهِمْ ذاتَ
الشِّمالِ فأَقُولُ: يا رَبِّ أصْحابي! فَيُقالُ: إنَّكَ لا تَدري ما
أحْدَثوا بَعدَك. فأقولُ كَما قالَ العَبْدُ الصّالِحُ: ”مَا قُلْتُ
لَهُمْ إِلَّا مَا أَمَرْتَنِي بِهِ أَنْ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ رَبِّي
وَرَبَّكُمْ وَكُنتُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا مَا دُمْتُ فِيهِمْ فَلَمَّا
تَوَفَّيْتَنِي كُنتَ أَنْتَ الرَّقِيبَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَنْتَ عَلَى كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ. إِنْ تُعَذِّبْهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ عِبَادُكَ وَإِنْ
تَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ فَإِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ.“ (قال)
فَيُقالُ لي: إنَّهُم لَمْ يَزالوا مُرْتَدّينَ عَلى أعْقابِهِمْ مُنْذُ
فارَقْتَهُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Be aware that soon people from my nation will come and be placed in
Hell. So, I will say to God: “O Almighty God! Save my Companions!” The
answer comes: “You do not know what they have done after you.” So I will
say the same thing as God’s pious servant (Jesus Christ) said, ‘And I
was a witness of them so long as I was among them, but when Thou didst
cause me to die, Thou wert the watcher over them, and Thou art witness
of all things. If Thou shouldst chastise them, then surely they are Thy
servants; and if Thou shouldst forgive them, then surely Thou art the
Mighty, the Wise.’ Then I will be told: “When you left them, they
retrograded and became apostates.”[^49]

In *Sahih Muslim*, Hudhayfah is quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ النّبي صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم : في أصْحابي اثْنا عَشَرَ
مُنافِقاً فِيهِمْ ثَمانِيَةٌ لا يَدْخُلونَ الجَنَّةَ حَتىّ يَلِجَ
الجَمَلُ في سَمّ الخِياطِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah said: “Among my Companions, there are twelve
hypocrites eight of whom will not enter the Garden (Paradise) until a
camel passes through the eye of a needle.”[^50]

A similar tradition is narrated in *Musnad Ahmad*, too.[^51] It is
interesting that some narrators who found this tradition in accord with
their opinion, changed “among my Companions” into “among my
nation.”[^52] Also, Nawawi in his exposition on *Sahih Muslim*, regards
“Companions” as those who have ever talked to the Prophet (a.s), not
really his followers.[^53] The judgement is here left to the readers to
say if these constitutions in the traditions are true.

The following is recorded in *Sahih Al-Bukhari*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن العَلاء بنِ المُسَيّب عَن أبيهِ قالَ: لَقِيتُ البَراءَ بنَ عازبٍ
رَضِي عَنهُما فَقُلتُ: طوبى لك! صَحِبْتَ النّبيّ… فَقالَ: يا بنَ أخي!
إنّكَ لا تدْري ما أحْدَثْنا بعدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is quoted from Al-Ala’ Ibn Musayyib who quoted his father as saying:
I saw Bara’ Ibn ‘Azib and told him: “Good for you! You were with the
Prophet (a.s)…” So, he said: “O son of my brother! You do not know what
we did after him.”[^54]

Therefore, when it is possible for a Companion to become an apostate, as
stated in the Prophet’s tradition, it is of more likelihood for him to
become unjust, too. How can we accept the traditions of all the
Companions as proof then? So it is not true that the Companions’
tradition is completely proof.

### The Proof of Consensus

Another source of Ijtihad is consensus, that is to say that if all
Muslims unanimously agree upon a statement, it will be the proof. It
should be said that if such unanimity and consensus exists about a rule,
that is the proof for sure, at least because the Infallibles are among
them, too. But if only some Muslims have consensus on it, regardless of
who they are, that rule would not be proof.

### The Proof of wisdom (Common Sense)

There is controversy over the proof of wisdom in jurisprudential rules.
Some people know wisdom as the source of religious rules saying: If
wisdom got the goodness or wickedness of something, we understand that
the religion is in accord with that, too. For example, if wisdom
considers oppression as wickedness, we realize that the religion rejects
it too, or if wisdom regards justice as goodness, we get the religion’s
confirmation of it. This is a brief discussion of the proof of wisdom,
but detailed discussion about it needs a complete book.[^55]

### The Proof of Qiyas, Istihsan and Masalih Mursalah

We first deal with the definitions and then a brief discussion on the
proofs of *Qiyas, Istihsan* and *Masalih Mursalah*.

#### Qiyas (analogy)

Various definitions have been proposed for *Qiyas*, some of which are as
follow:

First definition: “To generalize from principle to consequence, based on
a common point between them.”

Second definition: “To prove a definite rule for another definite rule,
via something common between them.”

#### Istihsan (approbation)

Different definitions have been also given for *Istihsan*, three of
which follow:

First definition: “Issuing a verdict by jurisprudent only because it
seems fine to him.”

Second definition: “An argument in the jurisprudent’s mind which he
cannot express it in words.

Third definition: “Substituting any arguments for the accepted facts for
the benefit of the people.”[^56]

#### Masalih Mursalah

In order to define this term, first we should make the meaning of
*masalih* and *mursalah* clear. *Maslahah* (singular form of *masalih*)
is by definition the religious consideration of issues. Also, *masalih*
here is a cause leading to religious consequences, either it be worship
or habitual issues. Worship is what religion wants as its own right.
Habit is what the religion wants for the benefit of the people and the
order of their lives. But there is some controversy over the concept of
*mursal*. Some interpret it as using no tradition, saying: “Discovery of
some issues is left to wisdom.” Some others define it as using general
traditions but not special ones.[^57]

So far, the definitions of *Qiyas* (analogy), *Istihsan* (approbation)
and *Masalih Mursalah* were mentioned. Regarding their proof, however,
it should be said that all arguments for the pure authenticity of them
are invalid. Some Sunni scholars and researchers have not accepted their
proof either, since all these three concepts have one common point and
that is “following without knowledge” which is prohibited in the Holy
Qur’an, even if it is following conjecture. The following verses are the
best proofs for rejecting “following without knowledge.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَقْفُ مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And follow not that of which you have not the knowledge. (18:36).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ وَإِنَّ الظَّنَّ لَا يُغْنِي مِنْ
الْحَقِّ شَيْئًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They do not follow anything but conjecture, and surely conjecture
does not avail against the truth at all. (53:28).***

*Qiyas* (analogy) which is followed by most of the Sunnis and especially
the Hanafite, *Istihsan* (approbation) especially accepted by the
Hanbalite (followers of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal’s school of Islamic law) and
the Hanafite (followers of Abu Hanifah’s school of Islamic law), and
*Masalih Mursalah* used by the Malikite (followers of Malik Ibn Anas’s
school of Islamic law) and the Hanbalite are all instances of following
without knowledge and thus invalid, since based on the above verses,
following conjecture is not permitted. There is also no argument for
excluding *Qiyas*, *Istihsan* and *Masalih Mursalah* from the Qur’an’s
general principle. Of course, some cases like analogy to a reason
included in the traditions, preferring the most important to the
important when being in contrast to each other, and applying the
leader’s opinion as that of ruler—not attributed to Islam—are
acceptable. So, two points should be borne in mind about *Qiyas*:

First, what is being criticized here as *Qiyas* is that whose reason is
obtained by conjecture and inference. But if the reason is emphasized in
the tradition as mentioned above, the case would not be an analogy,
rather deducing a valid general rule.[^58]

Second, the term *Qiyas* as used here is different from the one in
Logic, since that is called analogy.

In short, it can be concluded that what is known as *Ra’y* “opinion” is
not valid, since most of what has been stated in support of
opinion—whether *Qiyas*, *Istihsan* or *Masalih Mursalah*—is based on
Mu’adh’s tradition, as will be followed, and adducing it is not
authentic. Moreover Ibn Majah has recorded another tradition from Mu’adh
which rejects this claim. This issue is dealt with next.

### Adducing Mu’adh’s tradition

The most important reason for the proof of ‘opinion’ in Ijtihad is
Mu’adh’s tradition. When sending his young and competent Companion,
Mu’adh Ibn Jabal, to Yemen, the Messenger of Allah (a.s) had a
conversation about judgment with him, which is narrated in *Sunan
Al-Darimi* like this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُعاذٍ أنَّ النّبيَّ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم لمّا بَعَثَهُ إلى
اليَمنِ قالَ: أرَأيْتَ إنْ عَرَضَ لكَ قَضاءٌ، كَيفَ تقْضي؟ قال: أقْضي
بِكتابِ اللهِ. قالَ: فإنْ لَمْ يكُنْ في كِتابِ اللهِ؟ قالَ:
فَبِسُنَّةِ رَسولِ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم . قالَ: فإنْ لَمْ
يَكُن فِي سُنَّةِ رَسولِ اللهِ؟ قالَ: أجْتَهِدُ رأيي وَلا آلو. قالَ
فَضَربَ صَدْرَهُ ثمَّ قالَ: الحَمْدُ للهِ الّذي وَفَّقَ رَسولَ رَسولِ
اللهِ لما يُرضي رَسولَ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated from Mu’adh that when the Prophet (a.s) was sending him
to Yemen, he asked, “What would you do if you face a judgment case?” He
said, “I will judge according to Allah’s Book.” The Prophet (a.s) asked,
“What if you do not find it in the Book?” Mu’adh replied, “I will judge
as to the tradition of the Messenger of Allah (a.s).” The Prophet (a.s)
asked again, “How about if there was nothing in the Prophet’s traditions
about it?” Mu’adh answered, “I will judge based on my own opinion and
will not fear.” Mu’adh narrates that the Prophet (a.s) beat himself on
the chest and stated, “Praise be to God Who led the Prophet’s envoy to
what satisfies the Messenger of Allah.”[^59]

Ibn Hazm, about concluding the authenticity of opinion in Ijtihad from
this tradition, says: “Adducing this tradition is not true, because it
is only narrated by Harith Ibn ‘Amr who is an unidentified person.”
Bukhari in *Tarikh Al-Awsat* says: “The narrator of this tradition,
Harith, is not known except with this tradition. He himself narrates the
tradition from people of Hams (a city in Syria) who are not known. Also
this tradition was not narrated in the Companions’ age nor in their
follower’s until the time Abu Awn narrated it from an indefinite source
and when the Companions heard the tradition from Shu’bah, they spread it
everywhere.”

Ibn Hazm also says: “The reason for the quotation of this tradition and
then its rejection is that it is very rare for the Prophet to say: “If
you do not find anything in Allah’s Book or the Prophet’s tradition,”
while he knows God’s statement that,

‘***Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord. (7:3),’***

***‘This day have I perfected for you your religion. (5:3),’***

***‘And whoever goes beyond the limits of Allah, he indeed does
injustice to his own soul. (65:1)’***

Furthermore, in case the tradition is true, Mu’adh’s saying ‘I will
judge based on my own opinion,’ will mean, ‘I will do my best to find
the truth in the Qur’an and Sunnah.’”[^60]

Besides, the above-mentioned tradition is mentioned in Chapter Qadha’
(the Judgments), where there is a necessity to solve the problem of the
two parties in some way, as Tirmidhi has included this tradition in
Chapter *Al-Aqdhiyah* (the Judgments).[^61] So, applying it in Section
*Ifta’* (Issuing Verdicts) requires strong reason. Apart from this,
there is another tradition quoted by Mu’adh in *Sunan Ibn Majah* which
is in contrast with the one under discussion:

• *Sunan Ibn Majah*, Kitab Al-Muqaddamah (introduction)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَدَّثنا مُعاذُ بن جَبل قالَ: لمّا بَعَثَني رسولُ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ
عليهِ وسلَّم إلى اليَمَنِ قال: لا تَقْضِيَنَّ وَلا تَفْصِلَنَّ إلاّ
بِما تَعْلَمُ، فَإنْ أشْكَلَ عَلَيْكَ أمْرٌ فَقِفْ حَتىّ تُبَيِّنَهُ
أو تَكْتُبَ إليَّ فيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mu’adh narrates: When the Prophet (a.s) sent me to Yemen, he said: “Do
not judge and solve arguments except when you are completely sure. So,
if you encounter something sophisticated, stop issuing verdicts until it
becomes clear for you, or you write a letter about it to me.”[^62]

There are also other traditions rejecting the practice according to
one’s opinion. The honorable Prophet (a.s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَبقى ناسٌ جُهّالٌ يُسْتَفْتَوْنَ فَيُفْتونَ بِرأيِهِم فَيُضِلّونَ
وَيَضِلّونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Those people remain in foulness who are asked questions and they answer
according to their own opinion, leading others astray and going astray
themselves.[^63]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يزَلْ أمْرُ بَني إسرائيلَ مُعتَدِلاً حتىّ نَشَأَ فِيهِم
المُوَلَّدونَ أبْناءُ سَبايا الأُمَمِ، فَقالوا بالرّأيِ فَضَلّوا
وأَضَلّوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Israelites were moderate until people emerged among them who were
the children of the captives. They issued verdicts based on their own
opinions, going astray and leading astray, too.”[^64]

In his *Sahih*, Bukhari says, “The Prophet (a.s) never talked according
to personal opinion or analogy, because of the Exalted God’s statement:
Surely we have revealed the Book to you with the truth that you may
judge between people by means of that which Allah has taught you. 4:105”

The Abandonment or Allowance of Practicing Ijtihad
--------------------------------------------------

The last topic to be discussed in this chapter is whether the issue of
Ijtihad is still open to practice or not. In our time, most of the
Sunni, except some of their scholars, believe that practicing Ijtihad is
not allowed anymore. Shaykh Ahmad Abdul Rahim, a Sunni scholars, divides
jurisprudents into three different groups, the third of which he calls
‘attributed jurisprudents’ and considers following their verdicts as the
duty of all Muslims.

As stated in his words, ‘attributed jurisprudent’ is one who is
attributed to one of the four Islamic schools (the Shafiite, the
Hanbalite, the Malikite and the Hanafite), not issuing any verdicts
against them. He says, “The third group are those Muslims who emerged
from the fourth century. It is a must for the public to follow the
jurisprudents attributed to one of the four Islamic schools, since an
independent jurisprudent is rare to this day.”[^65]

His most important argument for his claim is that: “The Islamic nation
has reached consensus to trust the predecessors for recognizing the
religion. We should refer to them too, and this is only possible through
fine-documented traditions narrated in famous books and reached upon by
stating the most preferred traditions, selecting the most general ones
and concluding from them. These features are not found but in the four
Islamic schools. No other Islamic sect or school lacks theses features
save Imamiyyah (the Twelver Shi’a) and Zaydiyyah, whose followers are
heretics.”[^66]

Our question here is that: If one knows what is narrated from these four
Sunni Imams and finds all or some of them mistaking in the inference of
some issues, should he still follow them? If a rule with the same
strength is narrated from someone else like professors, contemporaries
or the scholars of the four Islamic schools, are these four Imams the
only ones to be followed? Furthermore what is wrong with discrimination
in following?

When we see the verdict issued by one of these four Imams or others is
more convincing and logically more acceptable, why should we ignore it
and just stick to a specific Islamic school? Is it not heresy to confine
the recognition of Islamic rules in only four people?

The Holy Qur’an and honorable traditions invite us to ponder over the
religion. Following predecessors is true in case of traditions, not in
inference, especially if it is opposed to our own inference. What do
those who confine jurisprudence to these four people, say about the
Prophet’s (a.s) statement that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَضَّرَ اللهُ عَبداً -أوْ رَحِمَ اللهُ مَنْ- سَمِعَ مَقالَتي فَوعاها
ثُمَّ أدّاها إلى مَنْ لَمْ يَسْمَعْها، فَرُبَّ حامِلِ فِقْهٍ لا فِقْهَ
لهُ وَرُبَّ حامِلِ فِقْهٍ إلى مَنْ هُوَ أفْقَهُ مِنهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May God promote the rank of that servant of Him who hears my speech,
keeps it in mind and narrates to those who have not heard it. Too many
are the narrators who do not understand the traditions they narrate, and
too many are the narrators who narrate the tradition for someone who
understand it more than they do.”[^67]

Moreover, this is in contrast with the consensus of Muslims in the first
century and their followers. Mawlawi Shah Waliyullah Dahlawi in his
*Al-Insaf* says: “Muslims in the first and second centuries did not have
consensus on following single Islamic schools. The ordinary people got
the rules from their fathers or the scholars in their cities who were
capable of total or partial inference from the Holy Qur’an or the
traditions.”[^68]

Is it not heresy to ignore the method of the Companions and their
followers and limit our understanding of God’s religion to four persons?
Also, what does it mean that Imamiyyah are heretics? Is following the
Ahl al-Bayt heresy, while the leaders of the four Sunni schools had
directly or indirectly benefited from Imam Sadiq’s knowledge? As this
fact is implicitly acknowledged in the book entitled *Al-Tuhfah Al-Ithna
‘Ashariyyah*, written to reject the Shi’a,[^69] a part of which reads:

“And this is Abu Hanifah—May God be satisfied with him—with his high
rank before the Sunni, who is proud to say eloquently, ‘If Nu’man (Abu
Hanifah) had not passed those two years, he was perished.’ Abu Hanifah
means the same two years he accompanied Imam Sadiq—May God be satisfied
with him—for obtaining knowledge.”[^70]

Malik says:[^71]

“I went to see Ja’far Ibn Muhammad (Imam Sadiq (a.s)) for a while. I did
not see him but in one of three states: either praying or fasting or
reciting the Qur’an. I did not see him quoting traditions from the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) except that he was pure. He never said nonsense
and was among scholars, worshipers, ascetics and those who fear God.

When Abu Hanifah was asked, “Who was the best jurisprudent you have ever
seen?” He replied:

“I have seen no one better than Ja’far Ibn Muhammad. When calling him to
Al-Hirah, Mansur (The Abbasid caliph) sent someone to me saying, ‘O Abu
Hanifah! People are fascinated by Ja’far Ibn Muhammad (and I cannot help
arresting him), so prepare your sophisticated questions for him.’ I made
forty difficult questions for him. Then I went to Abu Ja’far (Imam
Baqir) and found Ja’far (Imam Sadiq) sitting on his right side. Seeing
those two, Ja’far’s dignity attracted me more than his father’s did. So,
I greeted them and was allowed to sit. Ja’far attended to me and asked
his father, ‘O Abu Ja’far! Do you know this man?’

He answered, ‘Yes, he is Abu Hanifah, he has come to us.’ And then Abu
Abdullah (Imam Sadiq) continued, ‘O Abu Hanifah! Bring your questions to
ask Abu Abdullah.’ Then I began questioning and in each case he said,
‘Your opinion about this issue is so-and-so while people of Medina say
so-and-so and I say so-and-so.’ He sometimes accepted our ideas and
sometimes theirs and sometimes rejected both ideas, until we covered all
the forty questions. Then Abu Hanifah said, ‘Is it not that the most
knowledgeable of the people is one who is aware of different ideas?’

The Dangers of Ignorant Prejudices
----------------------------------

Unfortunately, ignorant biases have hurt the Islamic nation seriously
throughout history. So many calamities have harmed the Muslims under the
title of Islam and have blackened the pages of history! The writer of
*Majma’ Al-Buldan* writes about Isfahan:

“Recently and previously, there has been much damage in Isfahan due to
the biases of the Shafiite and the Hanbalite and many quarrels between
them. Whenever one group wins, it ravages, dismantles and sets on fire
the other group’s districts. No contract prevents them from so
doing.”[^72]

The same is quoted from *Mir’at Al-Jinan*.[^73] In Nayshapur too, there
was a big quarrel between the Hanafite and the Shafiite in which schools
and marts were burnt and many Shafiites were killed. Then they won over
the Hanafites but overdid in revenge. All these occurred in AH 554. Such
also happened between the Shafiite and the Hanbalite in 716.[^74] The
same events happened in Baghdad in 323.[^75]

Many similar happenings have taken place, some of which are mentioned in
the worthy book *Al-Imam Al-Sadiq wal Madhahib Al-Arba’a*.[^76] You may
suppose that these disputes only involved the public and that the
scholars of the four Islamic schools did not have any role in them. But
unfortunately the fact is that the leaders of all these disputes or most
of them were the scholars who stimulated the public by their verdicts.

As an example, Shaykh Ibn Hatam Hanbali claimed that one who is not
Hanbalite is not Muslim.[^77] Meanwhile Shaykh Abu Bakr Muqri Wa'iz
believed in the blasphemy of all the Hanbalite.[^78] Also Muhammad Ibn
Musa Hanafi, the judge of Damascus died in 506, is quoted as saying, “If
affairs were governed by me, I would take Jizyah[^79] from the
Shafiite.” In the same vein, Abu Hamid Tusi, died in 567, have said, “If
I was in control, I would take Jizyah from the Hanbalite.”[^80]

These ignorant biases worsened to such an extent that they reached books
of biography (*Rijal*) and some people were described as ‘doubtful’ and
‘liar’ only because of their belief. Sabuki says: “Ignorance and bias
are more than alteration and adaptation in historians, and I have seen
few history books lacking these. The history of our teacher, Dhahabi—May
God forgive him—with all his comprehensiveness is replete with
prejudice. He has taunted Muslims, who are selected servants of God,
very much. He has gone too far, deviated from the truth and insulted
Shafiite and Hanbalite Imams, but he has praised the Anthropomorphists
excessively.

Hafiz Salah says: “Hafiz Shams Al-Din Dhahabi, there is no doubt in
whose piety, has been overcome by argumentation, aversion of
interpretations and unawareness of purifying to such an extent that have
deviated his nature badly.”[^81]

Furthermore, some of them have fabricated traditions on their Imams’
virtues and attributed to the Prophet (a.s) wrongly, like what is
falsely narrated from Prophet (a.s) about Abu Hanifah, “God’s Prophets
take pride in me and I take pride in Abu Hanifah. Whoever likes him has
also liked me and whoever dislikes him has disliked me,”[^82] and so
on.[^83]

Other traditions have been fabricated in the vices of other Islamic
schools’ founders, as Ibn Hajar says about Muhammad Ibn Saeed Tawarruqi,
“He is among the fabricators and has fabricated inappropriate issues
about the trustee… like this tradition wrongly narrated from the
Prophet,[^84] “A man will soon come from my nation, called Ibn Idris
(Shafi’) whose danger is worse than that of Satan.”

Concluding Abandonment or Permission of Practicing Ijtihad
----------------------------------------------------------

Some cases of biases of these four Islamic schools’ followers were
mentioned. It is thus clear what they did with the Ahl al-Bayt’s
religion! Many alterations, adaptations and fabricated traditions for
eliminating the light of the Ahl al-Bayt![^85]

Of course, a few true quotations can be found with some impartial people
who were moderate to some extent. Anyway, confining Ijtihad to the four
jurisprudents (of the four Islamic schools) is an unprecedented issue.
It is true that throughout history, sometimes a religious sect overcame
another, but it has been a political issue depending on the whims of the
rulers and leaders.

For instance, when Abu Yusuf, Abu Hanifah’s student, was appointed as
the chief judge of the state, he gave dominance to the Hanafite
jurisprudence and their judges. Other instances of this you can see in
the book entitled *Tarikh Hasr Al-Ijtihad* (The history of the
abandonment of Ijtihad) Historians’ statements show that the official
and effective dominance of these four Islamic schools and restriction of
others has occurred almost in the seventh century. If truth be told,
practicing Ijtihad must be allowed and understanding religion must not
be restricted to what Malik, Abu Hanifah, Shafii and Ibn Hanbal have
understood from it. Reference to the predecessors is only true in
traditions, not Ijtihad.

[^1]: Jahd or juhd

[^2]: Sahih Muslim, Kitab Al-Salat, Section on prohibition of recitation
in genuflection and prostration, No. 207, 738 (Int’l) and Musnad Ahmad
Ibn Hanbal, Vol. 1, No. 199.

[^3]: Sunan Al-Darimi, Vol. 1, Introduction, Section on superiority of
knowledge, No. 100, 335 (Int’l No.)

[^4]: Sunan Al-Darimi, Vol. 1, Introduction, Section on superiority of
knowledge, No. 100, 335 (Int’l No.)

[^5]: As is evident, in this tradition and the next one, Ijtihad means
effort in worshiping.

[^6]: Sahih Muslim, Kitab I’tikaf (seclusion for worship), No. 2009
(Int’l No.)

[^7]: Sahih Al-Bukhari, Kitab Al-Jihad (holy war), Vol. 2, tradition 93,
No. 259 (Int’l No.); Musnad Ahmad, Vol. 3, tradition 260 and 283.

[^8]: Harithah was one of the fighters who was martyred due to a
mistaken shooting in Badr Battle. The Holy Prophet told his restless
mother, “Your son is placed in high Paradise.” (Editor)

[^9]: Sunan Al-Darimi, Vol. 1, p. 60, No. 168 (Int’l No.)

[^10]: Islamic jurisprudential investigations, endeavoring for the
deduction of commandments based on Islamic fundamentals

[^11]: Kharazmi, Usul Al-Fiqh, p. 357.

[^12]: About conjectural religious issues, The late Muhaqqiq Khurasani
in the book entitled Kifayat Al-Usul, section 6, p. 297 writes: “When a
mujtahid attends to a religious rule, either he reaches certainty about
it or not. If he reaches confidence about a religious rule, he performs
according to it. In case he does not make certain however, there are
three situations: either there is a weak and unimportant probability
which is called Wahm (illusion), or a 50 percent probability or Shakk
(doubt), or a strong probability of more than 50 percent that is Zhann
(conjecture). The duty of a person in doubt is to refer to one of the
scientific principles (association, acquittal, precaution and option) to
get the apparent rule for it and not be left perplexed and wandered in
the action phase. Indeed, conjecture is more preferable to illusion. But
if one has a conjecture about a religious rule, he should see if his
conjecture is religiously valid or not. If it is not, such as a
conjecture resulting from a tradition quoted by an evil-doer, his duty
is as of one in doubt. If his conjecture is religiously valid however,
his duty is to do according to that conjecture. Therefore conjectural
religious issues are those about which we are not certain, but to which
we are led because of its religious validity. In such cases, though we
are not aware and confident of the religious rule, since we have reached
a valid religious conjecture, that is considered as reaching knowledge
and confidence. Hence practice according to these rules is obligatory.

[^13]: Allamah Hilli, Mabadi Al-Usul ila ‘Ilm Al-Usul, p. 240.

[^14]: Mustafa Al-Zarqa’, Hadharat Al-Islam Magazine, Vol. 1, p. 240,
No. 2.

[^15]: Amudi, Irshad al-Fuhul, p. 250.

[^16]: A firm tendency in human soul, including virtues and vices
(Editor).

[^17]: Al-Sayyid Al-Khu’i, Misbah Al-Usul, p. 434.

[^18]: Ma’arij Al-Usul, p. 179.

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Ma’arij Al-Usul, p. 179.

[^22]: Shafi’i, Al-Risalah, Published in Egypt, p. 477.

[^23]: Masadir Al-Tshri’, p. 7.

[^24]: Arsh or difference of healthy and injured means ‘compensation of
every harm -other than murder- to wealth and health of others.’ So, harm
is compensated by arsh. Some cases in which arsh is paid are (1) when a
harm is done to someone’s animal, (2) when someone’s goods is taken and
harmed, (3) when something is sold, but harmed before delivery, or (4)
when something is sold and found to be damaged later on, but the
contract cannot be dissolved. In these cases, the difference between
sound and damaged animal or goods should be paid to the owner or
customer.

[^25]: Al-Dhari’a, p. 673.

[^26]: As stipulated in Verse 28 of Surah (chapter) Al-Najm: وَإِنَّ
الظَّنَّ لَا يُغْنِي مِنْ الْحَقِّ شَيْئًا. Surely conjecture does not
avail against the truth at all.

[^27]: These reasons prohibit from following any conjecture, i.e. what
is not knowledge cannot be acquired. But on the other hand, some
conjectures are exceptions to the general rule in this honorable Verse,
like a conjecture reached upon by Bayyinah (two witnesses). Therefore,
except the exceptions to this general rule, other conjectures cannot be
acted upon, such as Shuhrah (fame), Qiyas (alalogy), Istihsan
(approbation) etc. (Editor).

[^28]: This proof can either be an inherent or a conjectural one, which
is religiously valid and can be followed. Since it has two
possibilities: either it is followed truly or not. In the latter case,
because that is what the religion has ordered, there’s no duty left.
(Editor)

[^29]: Vol. 8, p. 169.

[^30]: Vol. 4, p. 167; Vol. 3, p. 100.

[^31]: Mir’at Al-Uqul (exposition of Al-Kafi), Vol. 2, p. 536.

[^32]: Tarikh Al-Fiqh Al-Islami, p. 229 (the abridged version)

[^33]: For more information see: narrative books such as Al-Durr
Al-Manthur, by Suyuti.

[^34]: Sahih Muslim, Published in Egypt, Vol. 7, Kitab Fadha’il
Al-Sahabah, p. 130, No. 4450; Musnad Ahmad, Vol. 1, Baqi Musnad
Al-Ansar, p. 31, No. 24132; Sunan Al-Tirmidhi, Kitab Al-Adab, No. 2738;
Sunan Abu Dawud, Kitab Al-Libas, No. 3513, (Int’l No.)

[^35]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi with exposition of Ibn Arabi Maliki, Published
in Egypt, Vol. 13, Kitab Tafsir (Exegesis of Qur’an), p. 200, No. 3129
(Int’l No.) Kitab Al- Manaqib, No. 3719, Tafsir (Exegesis of Qur’an),
No. 3129 (Int’l No.)

[^36]: Sunan Al-Tirmidhi, Kitab Al-Manaqib, No. 3806 (Int’l No.).

[^37]: “بيوتكن” (your houses), “تبرجن” (display), “أقمن” (keep up),
“ءاتين” (pay), اطعن”“ (obey).

[^38]: “عنكم” (away… from you), “يطهركم” (purify you).

[^39]: “واذكرن” (keep to mind), “بيوتكن” (your houses).

[^40]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. 7, Kitab Faza’l Al-Sahabah, p. 122, No. 4425;
Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Al-Kufiyyin, No. 18464 and 18508; Sunan Al-Darimi,
Kitab Faza’il Al-Qur’an, No. 3182 (Int’l No.)

[^41]: Kitab Al-Manaqib, Vol. 2, p. 308, No. 3720; Musnad Ahmad, Baaqi
Musnad Al-Mukathirin, No. 10681,10707,10779 and 11135 (Int’l No.)

[^42]: For further information see: first chapter of the present book or
explanatory books such as Ithbat Al-Hudat and the like.

[^43]: Sahih Al-Bukhari, Kitab Al-Ahkam, p. 127, No. 6682; Sahih Muslim,
Kitab Al-Imarah, No. 3393, 3394, 3395, 3396 and 3397; Sunan Al-Tirmidhi,
Kitab Al-Fitan, No. 2149; Sunan Abi Dawud, Kitab Al-Mahdi, No. 3731 and
3732; Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Al-Basriyyin, No. 19875, 19901, 19907, 19920,
19943, 19963, 19987, 19997, 20017, 20019 and 20022 (Int’l No.).

[^44]: Al-Isabah, Vol. 1, p. 559, No. 2865, Al-Muntakhab Min Dhayl
Al-Mudhayyal by Tabari, p.83; Kanz Al-Ummal, fifth ed., Al-Risalah, Vol.
11, p. 611.

[^45]: The mosque built by some hypocrites under the leadership of
Abdullah Ibn Ubay, when the Prophet (a.s) had left Medina for a holy
war, to be a center for hypocrites and the Prophet’s adversaries. The
Prophet was informed of the event by the Divine Revelation, and arriving
at Medina, ordered to dismantle it at once. See: Surah (Chapter)
Al-Tawbah, Verse 107. (Editor)

[^46]: These are three of the Prophets Companions, i.e. Furat, Hilal and
Ka’b, who refused to engage in Tabuk War. See: (Surah) (Chapter)
Al-Tawbah, Verse 118 (Editor.)

[^47]: He was a Companion of the Prophet who gave him information about
a newly-embraced Muslim. The angel of Revelation descended and rejected
his information. See: Surah Al-Hujurat, verse 6 (Editor.)

[^48]: He was one of the Companions who had a tree in the house of one
of the Ansar (Helpers) and entered the garden to watch for his tree now
and then. The owner of the house was disturbed by him and complained
about it to the Prophet (a.s). The Holy Prophet suggested that he would
pay the price of the tree to Samarah who rejected it. Then he promised
to give Samarah a tree in Paradise instead. But he did not accept it
either. Then the Prophet (a.s) ordered to uproot it and said, “You do
harm to people.” This tradition is narrated in Sunan Abi Dawud, Kitab
Al-Aqziyah, No. 3125 (a Sunni source) and in Wasa’il, Kitab Ihya’ Mawat,
Section 12, No. 1,3 and 4. ( a Shi’a source).

[^49]: Sahih Muslim, Kitab Al-Jannah, p. 157, No. 5104 and 5103; Sahih
Al-Bukhari, Kitab Ahadith Al-Anbia’, No. 3100, 3191, 4371 and 6045;
Sunan Al-Tirmidhi, Kitab Siffah Al-Qiyama, No. 2347 and 3091; Sunan
Al-Nisa’i, Kitab Al-Jana’iz, No.2060; Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Bani Hashim,
No. 192, 2168,… (Intl No.).

[^50]: Sahih Muslim, Kitab Sifat Al-Munafiqin, No. 4983 and 4984 (Int’l
No.).

[^51]: Musnad Kufiyyin, No. 22229 (Int’l No.).

[^52]: Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Al-Kufiyyin, No. 18128 (Int’l No.).

[^53]: Dar Al-Ihya’ Al-Turath Al-’Arabi 1392, Vol. 17, p. 125.

[^54]: Vol. 5, Kitab Al-Maghazi, Dar Al-Fikr 1401, p. 65, No. 3852
(Int’l No.).

[^55]: For further information see: The Philosophy of Ethics, section on
intellectual goodness and wickedness and their accordance with religious
rules, pp. 247-263 and pp. 48-58 (by the present author.)

[^56]: Tajrid Al-Usul, p. 91.

[^57]: See: Muhammad Taqi Hakim, Al-Usul Al-’Ammah lil Fiqh Al-Muqarin,
section one, part 7, 1st ed., Dar Al-Andilus Publications, p. 381.

[^58]: Tajrid Al-Usul, p. 93.

[^59]: No. 168 (Int’l No.)

[^60]: Al-Ahkam, Al-’Asimah Publication, Vol. 5, p. 773.

[^61]: No. 3119 (Int’l No.)

[^62]: No. 54 (It’l No.)

[^63]: Sahih Al-Bukhari, Kitab Al-I’tisam, Dar Al-Ilm, No. 4828; Sunan
Al-Tirmidhi, Kitab Al-Ilm, No. 2576; Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Al-Mukathirin,
No. 6222, 6498 and 6602; Sunan Ibn Majah, Kitab Al-Muqaddamah, No. 51;
Sunan Al-Darimi, Kitab Al-Muqaddamah, No. 241 (Int’l No.)

[^64]: Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 1, p. 8 No. 55 and Kanz al-Ummal.

[^65]: Al-Insaf, by Dahlawi, p.7.

[^66]: Al-Insaf, by Dahlawi, p.7.

[^67]: Sunan Al-Darimi, Al-Muqaddama (introduction), Vol. 1, p. 75, Dar
Ihya’ Al-Sunnah, No. 229 and 230; Sunan Ibn Majah, Al-Muqaddamah, No.
227 and Kitab Al-Manasik, No. 3047; Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Al-Madiniyyin,
No. 16153 and 16138 (Int’l No.)

[^68]: Quoted from the Encyclopedia of Muhammad Farid Wajdi, Vol. 3, p.
221 (with a little difference)

[^69]: The book is originally in Farsi, by Shah Abdul Aziz Dihlawi
Hindi. Shaykh Qulam Aslami has translated it into Arabic in 1227 and
then in 1301, Mahmud Shukri Alusi has abridged this translation
(Editor.)

[^70]: Then he continues: “It is said that Abu Hanifa has learnt
knowledge and the traditions from Imam Sadiq, his father—Imam Baqir and
his uncle Zayd Ibn Ali Ibn Al-Husayn (a.s). In this regard it suffices
to say that most tradition chains of the Sunnis reaches back to the
Prophet’s Household (a.s). No one denies this save one who does not
differentiate between the dead and alive. See Alusi, Mukhtasar Al-Tuhfah
Al-Ithna ‘Ashariyyah, Maktabah Ishiq, Istanbul 1399, p.8 (Editor).

[^71]: Sharh Al-Zurqani ala Mawatta’ Al-Imam Malik, 1st ed., Dar
Al-Nashr Publications 1411, Vol. 1, p. 334; Also Al-Shifa’ bi Ta’rif
Huquq Al-Mustafa, Dar Al-Fikr Publications 1409, Vol. 2, p. 42.

[^72]: The Encyclopedia of Muhammad Farid Wajdi, Dar Al-Kutub
Al-Ilmiyyah, Vol. 1, p. 247.

[^73]: Vol. 3, p. 343.

[^74]: Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah, Vol. 4, p. 76.

[^75]: Ibn Al-Kathir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 3, p. 375.

[^76]: Vol. 1, p.190-206.

[^77]: Quoted from Tadhkirat Al-Huffaz, Vol. 3, p. 375.

[^78]: Quoted from Shadharat Al-Dhahab, Vol. 3, p. 253.

[^79]: A kind of tax charged from believers of other Heavenly religions
in lieu of their non-acceptance of Islam and covering the cost of
administration and their security in an Islamic country. (Translator)

[^80]: Al-Imam Al-Sadiq wal Madhahib Al-Arba’a, Vol. 1, p. 190.

[^81]: Tabaqat Al-Shafi’iyyah, Vol. 1, p. 190.

[^82]: Al-Dur Al-Mukhtar fi Sharh Tanwir Al-Absar, Vol. 1,p. 53-54.

[^83]: Like what is said in praise of Shafi’i which is more a kind of
reproach, as Fakhr Razi quotes from Harmalah: “Shafi’i took his tongue
out and reached it to his nose; that is why he was so powerful in
speaking and eloquence.” See Manaqib Al-Imam Al-Shafi’i, p. 35.

[^84]: Lisan Al-Mizan, Vol. 5, p. 179.

[^85]: See Sharh Nahj Al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Vol. 11, p. 44.


