Tradition and Heresy in Adhan (Call to Prayer)
==============================================

*Adhan* (call to prayer) lexically means ‘announcement,’[^1] as the
Exalted God states in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذَانٌ مِنْ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى النَّاسِ يَوْمَ الْحَجِّ
الْأَكْبَرِ أَنَّ اللَّهَ بَرِيءٌ مِنْ الْمُشْرِكِينَ وَرَسُولُهُ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And an announcement from Allah and His Messenger to the people on the
day of the greater pilgrimage that Allah and His Messenger are free from
liability to the idolaters. (9:3).***

In religion, ‘*Adhan*’ is used for naming a certain set of phrases. In
this chapter, some issues about *Adhan* are discussed based on the Sunni
documents hoping to be useful for those who follow the best arguments
and logic, rather than blind imitation, thus illuminating some
uncertainties caused by insufficient attention to the documents of
traditions, and lead to the unity of Muslims, God willing. The least
advantage of this discussion is for our Sunni brothers to understand
that what their Shi’a brothers say about *Adhan* is supported by so many
traditions narrated by the Sunni and acknowledged by great jurisprudents
and narrators.

Shi’a and the religious outset of Adhan
---------------------------------------

All Imamiyyah jurisprudents, following the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s), believe
that *Adhan* began with God’s order and revelation to the Prophet’s
heart. Various traditions have been narrated from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)
supporting this meaning:

Kulayni, in *Al-Kafi*, narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لمّا أُسْرِيَ بِرَسولِ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم إلى
السَّماءِ فَبَلغَ البَيتَ المَعمورَ وَحَضَرتِ الصّلاةُ، أذَّنَ
جِبرَئيلُ وأقامَ فَتَقدَّمَ رَسولُ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ
وسلَّم وَصَفَّ المَلائِكَةُ وَالنّبيّونَ خَلْفَ مُحَمَّد صلّى اللهُ
عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم .
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Baqir (a.s) said: When the Messenger of Allah (a.s) was ascended to
the heaven and reached *Al-Bayt Al-Ma’mur*,[^2] the prayer time came.
So, (Archangel) Gabriel called out *Adhan* and iqamah. The Prophet (a.s)
stood in front and the angels and Prophets queued behind him.[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لمّا هَبطَ جِبرَئيلُ بالأذانِ عَلى رَسولِ اللهِ كانَ رأسُهُ في حِجْرِ
عليٍّ عَليهِ السَّلامُ فأذَّنَ جِبرَئيلُ عَليهِ السَّلامُ وأقامَ،
فَلَمّا انْتَبَهَ رَسولُ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وآلِهِ وسلَّم قال: يا
عَليُّ! أسَمِعْتَ؟ قالَ نعم. قال: ادْعُ بِلالاً فَعَلِّمْهُ. فَدَعا
عليٌّ عَليهِ السَّلامُ بِلالاً فَعَلَّمَه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Sadiq (a.s) said: When Gabriel descended to the Prophet (a.s)
bearing *Adhan*, his honorable head was on Ali’s leg. Gabriel called out
*Adhan* and iqamah. When the Prophet recovered back to normal state, he
asked Ali, ‘Did you hear that?’ ‘Yes!’ he replied. ‘Did you memorize
it?’ the Prophet asked again. Ali answered, ‘Yes!’ The Prophet stated,
‘Call Bilal and teach him the *Adhan*.’ Ali called Bilal and taught him
the *Adhan*.[^4]

These two traditions include two times of calling out the *Adhan* by
Gabriel, once for the Prophet in his Ascension to heaven and the other
for the religious declaration of it. Attention must be paid to the fact
that the frequency of a revelation, even if it is twice, is quite
important.

The viewpoint of the Sunnis
---------------------------

Sunnis in general have two viewpoints about the outset of the *Adhan* in
religion, regardless of its features; the origin of *Adhan* is  
 (1) a revelation or

(2) a dream.

In his book entitled *Al-Mabsut*, Sarakhsi says:

Abu Hafs Muhammad Ibn Ali denied that the origin of *Adhan* is a dream.
He said, “You are attacking one of the religion’s clearest signs saying
that it is proved by a dream. Never! Rather, when the Prophet (a.s) was
taken to Masjid Al-Aqsa and was surrounded by the other Prophets, an
angel called out the *Adhan* and iqamah and the Prophet (a.s) prayed
along with them. It is said that Gabriel (a.s) descended with the
*Adhan*.”[^5]

In *Umda Al-Qari fi Sharh Sahih Al-Bukhari*, it is recorded that
Zamakhshari has quoted some people that the *Adhan* was descended by a
Divine Revelation, not a dream.[^6]

In *Al-Bahr Al-Ra’iq*, we read, “The origin of *Adhan* is Gabriel’s
*Adhan* and iqamah in the night of the Prophet’s Ascension to the
heaven, when the Prophet (a.s) led the prayer of the angels and the
Prophets’ souls. Then the dream of Abdullah Ibn Zayd is mentioned.”[^7]

Various traditions narrated by major Sunni narrators confirm that the
origin of *Adhan* has been a revelation, not a dream:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لَمّا أُسرِيَ بِالنّبيِّ أوْحى اللهُ إلَيهِ الأذان فَنَزَلَ بِه
فَعَلَّمَهُ بِلالاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Prophet’s Ascension to heaven, God revealed *Adhan* to him, so he
descended and taught it to Bilal.[^8]

As you see, this tradition introduces revelation as the origin of the
*Adhan* in the night of the Prophet’s Ascension. It has nothing to do
with the issue of dream, since those narrating the dream know it as a
happening in Medina, long after the Prophet’s Hijra (migration to
Medina) when Islam had been strengthened, prayer and fasting and zakat
(Islamic statutory levy) had been religiously established, the doctrinal
provisions were established and the permissible and prohibited issues
were set up.[^9] This is while the Prophet’s Ascension had occurred
before Hijra and from Masjid Al-Haram (The Sacred Mosque); therefore, as
this tradition and other similar ones stipulate, *Adhan* had been
religiously set up many years before Hijra.[^10] Ibn Hajar Asqalani, in
his exposition of *Sahih Bukhari*, and also Halabi, in his *Sirah*,
acknowledge this stipulation saying: “There are traditions stipulating
that the *Adhan* was set up before Hijra in Mecca.”[^11]

The only objection Ibn Hajar raises to the tradition quoted by Ibn Umar
is due to the existence of Talha Ibn Zayd in its document. He says about
Talha, “He is denied.” But if one studies the documents of traditions
supporting the dream (as the origin of *Adhan*), people would be seen
who are not so much different from Talha Ibn Zayd, if not worse than
him. Hence, there is no sense in preferring the traditions about dream.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أنَسٍ أنَّ جِبرَئيلَ أمَرَ النّبيَّ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم
بالأذانِ حينَ فُرِضَتِ الصَّلاةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Anas narrated that when the prayer became obligatory, Gabriel ordered
the Prophet (a.s) to call out the *Adhan*.[^12]

Based on this tradition, at the same time as performing the prayer was
set up, *Adhan* was established. On the other hand, the prayer was
established from the very beginning of the Prophet’s Mission, so the
origin of *Adhan* has nothing to do with the dream at all.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لمّا أسْريَ بي أذَّنَ جِبْرَئِيلُ فَظَنَّتِ المَلائِكَةُ أنَّهُ
يُصَلّي بِهِمْ، فَقَدَّمَني فَصَلَّيْتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A’ishah said that the Holy Prophet (a.s) said: When I was ascended to
the heaven, Gabriel called out the *Adhan*. The angels thought that he
wanted to lead the prayer; but he led me forward and I led the
prayer.[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لمّا أرادَ اللهُ أنْ يُعَلِّمَ رَسولَهُ الأذان أتاهُ جِبرَئيلُ
بِدابَّةٍ يُقالُ لَها البُراقُ فَرَكِبَها... إذا خَرجَ مَلَكٌ مِن
وَراءِ الحِجابِ فقالَ: اللهُ أكْبَرُ اللهُ أكْبَرُ… ثمَّ أخَذَ
المَلَكُ بِيَدِه فَأمَّ بأهْلِ السَّماءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

… (Imam Ali narrated) When God inclined to teach His Messenger the
*Adhan*, Gabriel brought the Prophet a riding thing named Buraq and the
Prophet mounted it… Then an angel appeared and called out, ‘*Allahu
Akbar*—Allah is Great’… Then the angel took the Prophet’s hand to lead
the prayer.[^14]

After narrating this tradition, Ibn Hajar says: Ziyad Ibn Mundhir Abu
Al-Jarud is mentioned in the document of the tradition; he is
abandoned.” In response to Ibn Hajar, it should be said that Abu
Al-Jarud is subject to controversy, but he is not as doubtful as those
present in the tradition of dream. So, there is no sense in preferring
the traditions of the dream to these ones.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لَمّا كانَ مِن الحَسنِ بنِ عَليٍّ ما كانَ قَدِمْتُ عَليهِ المَدينةَ
وهو جالِسٌ في أصْحابِه... فَتَذاكَرنا عندَهُ الأذان فقالَ بعضُنا:
إنَّما كانَ بِدءُ الأذان بِرؤيا عبدِاللهِ بنِ زَيد بن ِعاصمٍ. فَقالَ
له الحَسنُ بنُ عَليٍّ: إنَّ شَأنَ الأذان أعْظَمُ مِن ذاكَ! أذَّنَ
جِبرَئِيلُ في السَّماءِ مَثنى وَعَلَّمهُ رَسولُ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ
وآلِهِ وسلَّم وَأقامَ مَرّةً مَرّةً فَعَلَّمهُ رَسولُ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sufyan Al-Layl narrated that after what happened for Imam Hasan (a.s),
he went to him in Medina. There, a discussion posed about *Adhan*. Some
said that the origin of *Adhan* had been the dream of Abdullah Ibn Zayd.
Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s) said, “The status of *Adhan* is greater than that.
Gabriel called out the phrases of *Adhan*, each twice and taught it to
the Prophet (a.s) and called out iqamah once and taught it to him.[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…إنّ رَسولَ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم عَلَّم الأذانَ لَيلَةَ
أُسْرِيَ بهِ وَفُرضَتْ عَلَيهِ الصّلاةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Harun Ibn Sa’d reported form the martyr, Zayd Ibn Al-Imam Ali Ibn
Al-Husayn, from his grandfathers from Imam Ali that the Prophet (a.s)
learnt *Adhan* in his Ascension Night when prayer became obligatory for
him.[^16]

Abu’l-Ala’ said: I said to Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyyah, “We believe that the
origin of *Adhan* had been the dream of a man from the Ansar.” Muhammad
Ibn Hanafiyyah objected sharply and said, “You are attacking one of the
roots of Islam and its teachings, supposing that *Adhan* was originated
from a dream seen by one of the Ansar while a dream can be true or
false, and is sometimes a wrong illusion.” I said, “What I said about
*Adhan* is common among the public.” He answered, “By God I swear that
it is a false idea.”[^17]

It is clear that Abd Al-Razzaq has narrated from Ibn Jurayj that Ata’
said, “Indeed, *Adhan* was descended from Allah, the Glorious.” [^18]

On the other hand, some traditions attribute the origin of *Adhan* to
the dream of a man from the Ansar called Abdullah Ibn Zayd about whom
Tirmidhi says, “We know nothing about Abdullah Ibn Zayd truly narrated
from the Holy Prophet (a.s) except this single tradition about *Adhan*.”
He also quotes Bukhari as saying, “There is no tradition narrated by
Abdullah Ibn Zayd except this one.”[^19] Bukhari and Muslim have not
quoted these traditions in their *Sahih* books[^20] and even Hakim has
not cited them in his *Mustadrak*. It thus becomes clear that these
traditions have not been acceptable on the side of these two scholars.

Hakim says,[^21] “Abdullah Ibn Zayd is the one who dreamed of *Adhan*;
and Islamic scholars have apparently accepted it. But because of the
differences among the narrators, it has not been cited in the two
*Sahih* books.[^22]

Examining the Tradition of Dream
--------------------------------

When the Prophet (a.s) ordered the Muslims to make a bell for calling
the people to prayer, I saw a man in my dream turning around me with a
bell in his hand. I asked him, “O Servant of Allah! Do you sell me this
bell?” “What do you want it for?” he asked. I answered, “For calling the
people to prayer.” He asked again, “Do you want me to teach you
something better than a bell?” I said, “Yes, I do.” He said, “Say these
phrases: *Allahu Akbar* (Allah is great) four times; *Ashhadu An La
Ilaha Illa Allah* (I testify that there is no deity but Allah) twice;
*Ashhadu Anna Muhammadan Rasoul Allah* (I testify that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah) twice; *Hayya* *Ala al-Salat* (Hurry to prayer)
twice; *Hayya Ala al-Falah* (Hurry to salvation) twice; *Allahu Akbar*
(Allah is great) twice; *La Ilaha Illa Allah* (There is no deity but
Allah).”[^23]

He then paused for a while and added, “When you stand for offering the
prayer, you may say: *Allahu Akbar* (Allah is great) twice; *Ashhadu An
La Ilaha Illa Allah* (I testify that there is no deity but Allah);
*Ashhadu Anna Muhammadan Rasoul Allah* (I testify that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah); *Hayya Ala al-Salat* (Hurry to prayer); *Hayya Ala
al-Falah* (Hurry to salvation); *Qad Qaamat al-Salat* (Surely prayer is
performed) twice; *Allahu Akbar* (Allah is great) twice; *La Ilaha Illa
Allah* (There is no deity but Allah).”

When I rose in the morning, I went to the Messenger of Allah (a.s) and
informed him of what I had dreamed. The Prophet (a.s) said, “It has in
fact been a true dream, God willing, so go with Bilal and teach him what
you have dreamed to call it out, since he has a better voice than you.”
I went with Bilal and taught him the *Adhan* and he called it out.

Umar Ibn Al-Khattab heard *Adhan* while he was in his house. He came out
while his cloth drew on earth saying, “I swear by God Who appointed you
rightfully for the Prophethood that I dreamed of what he dreamed, too.”
The Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “Praise be to God!”

Bayhaqi quotes from a chain of narrators reaching Muhammad Ibn Yahya
that among the traditions narrated by Abdullah Ibn Zayd about *Adhan*,
none is more valid than this one narrated by Muhamad Ibn Ishaq from
Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim Al-Taymi from Muhammad Ibn Abdullah Ibn Zayd,
because Muhammad has heard this tradition from his father.

We now discuss the validity of the document of this tradition, beginning
from Muhammad Ibn Ishaq who is the first one in the chain of narrators.
Al-Darqutni writes about him, “Master scholars have had controversy
about him. He is not proof, though is regarded as a narrator.”[^24]
Also, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal has regarded Muhammad Ibn Ishaq as doubtful in
numerous traditions. Abu Dawud says, “I heard Ahmad Ibn Hanbal saying
about Muhammad Ibn Ishaq, ‘He was a man who narrated traditions out of
whim. He took other narrators’ books and adopted their traditions in his
own books.’”[^25] Also, Al-Maruzi says, “Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said,
‘Muhammad Ibn Ishaq altered the facts. When he entered Baghdad, it made
no difference for him whether to narrate traditions from Kalbi or
others.’”[^26]

Hanbal Ibn Ishaq says, “I heard Ahmad Ibn Hanbal saying, ‘The speech of
Ibn Ishaq is not proof.’”[^27] Abdullah Ibn Ahmad also says, “I never
saw my father considering traditions quoted by Ibn Ishaq as valid;
rather he changed his traditions.” He was asked, “Can the traditions of
Ibn Ishaq be dependable?” He replied, “They are not dependable.” Ayyub
Ibn Ishaq Ibn Samiri says, “I asked Ahmad, ‘Would you accept a tradition
narrated only by Ibn Ishaq?’ He said, ‘No, By God! I saw him narrating
the speech of a group in one tradition without distinguishing each
individual’s speech from another.’”[^28] About Ibn Ishaq, Al-Maymuni
narrates from Ibn Mu’in, “He was doubtful.”[^29] Al-Nisa’i says about
him, “He is not a strong person.”[^30]

The document of this tradition is also faulty on the side of Muhammad
Ibn Ibrahim Ibn Al-Harith Al-Taymi from whom Ibn Ishaq has narrated the
tradition. Al-Aqili quotes from Abdullah Ibn Ahmad, from his father who
said about Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim, “In his traditions, there are biases.
He narrates unknown traditions.”[^31] Moreover, the document of the
present tradition reaches back to Abdullah Ibn Zayd about whom the
viewpoints of Tirmidhi and others were mentioned.

For studying other aspects of the document and reviewing other
traditions narrated about the dream as the origin of the *Adhan*, you
can refer to *Al-Nass wa’l-Ijtihad*, case 23, *Al-I’tisam bil Kitab
wa’l-Sunnah*, *discussion on* *Al-Tathwib fi Adhan Salat Al-Fajr* and
*Tadhkira Al-Fuqaha’*, Vol. 3, p. 38 and 39.

The Chapters of Adhan and Iqamah
--------------------------------

Sunni jurisprudents have a lot of controversies regarding the chapters
of *Adhan* and iqamah. Ibn Rushd says, “Scholars have controversy over
*Adhan* holding four different views.”[^32] Having mentioned these four
methods, he says, “The reasons for the different views held by these
four groups are various traditions narrated in this regard and the
variation of common routine among the members of each group over
time.”[^33] Yet, the main differences among Shi’a and Sunni
jurisprudents are in two issues; one is whether **“حَيَِّ عَلى خَيرِ
العَمَلِ”** (Hurry to the best deed) is part of the *Adhan* and iqamah,
and the other is that if *tathwib* is permitted in *Adhan* or not.

Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal
-----------------------

Besides what is enormously narrated from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) about the
inclusion of *Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal* in both *Adhan* and iqamah,
various traditions have been narrated by the Sunnis. Bayhaqi, in
*Al-Sunan Al-Kubra*, has a chapter entitled, **باب: ما رُويَ في حَيَّ
عَلى خَيْرِ العَمَل**ِ “Chapter: Narrations About *Hayya Ala Khayr
al-Amal*” Here, we mention some of these traditions as quoted from
*Al-Sunan Al-Kubra* and other sources and then bring some Sunni
scholars’ confirmation of them.

Ibn Umar used to say, in *Adhan*, *Allahu Akbar* and *Ashhadu An La
Ilaha Illa Allah* three times each. Then, he probably said *Hayya Ala
Khayr al-Amal* (Hurry to the best of deed) after *Hayya Ala al-Falah*
(Hurry to salvation).

The document of this tradition, as narrated in *Al-Muwatta’* by Muhammad
Ibn Al-Hasan Al-Shaybani, is, “Malik narrated from Nafi’ and he narrated
from Ibn Umar that… etc.”[^34] Regarding the regularities common among
our Sunni brothers, who can question the validity of this tradition’s
document? Bukhari, too, writes about this document, “The most valid
documentation of a tradition is that narrated by Malik from Nafi’ from
Ibn Umar. Hakim has quoted this statement of Bukhari from Muhammad Ibn
Isma’il Al-Bukhari.[^35] Ibn Hajar has also mentioned it in the
biography of Nafi’ in *Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib*.

Ibn Umar used not to say *Adhan* when he was in travel; he rather used
to say *Hayya Ala al-Falah* and, sometimes, *Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal*.

Muhammad Ibn Sirin, about Ibn Umar, said, “Ibn Umar used to say *Hayya
Ala Khayr al-Amal* in *Adhan*.”

Nasir Ibn Dha’luq has narrated the same thing about Ibn Umar while he
was in a travel, as he has quoted from Abu Umamah.

Ibn Hazm, in his *Al-Muhalla*, writes, “It is indeed proven that Ibn
Umar and Ibn Umamah, son of Sahl Ibn Hunayf, used to say in the *Adhan*
*Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal*; and this has been proven by the most valid
documents.”[^36]

Ali Ibn Al-Husayn (a.s) used to follow *Hayya Ala al-Falah* by *Hayya
Ala Khayr al-Amal* in the *Adhan* saying, “The primary *Adhan*[^37] was
like this.”[^38]

Halabi, in *Sirah*, says, “Ibn Umar and Imam Zayn Al-Abidin Ali Ibn
Al-Husayn, after *Hayya Ala al-Falah* used to say *Hayya Ala Khayr
al-Amal*.”[^39]

Whenever Ibn Umar said *Hayya Ala al-Falah* in *Adhan*, he followed it
by *Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal*. Then he said *Allahu Akbar*…[^40]

The editor of the book writes down as footnote, “This tradition is
narrated by Ibn Abi Shaybah from Ibn Ajlan and Ubaydullah from Nafi’
from Ibn Umar.[^41] The narrators reported by Ibn Abi Shaybah are
generally accepted by all Sunni jurisprudents.[^42]

Bilal used to say *Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal* during calling for the Fajr
(Dawn) Prayer, but the Messenger of Allah ordered him to say *Al-Salat
Khayrun Min al-nawm* (Prayer is preferred to sleep) instead.[^43]

The only problem posed by the author of *Majma’ al-Zawa’id* about this
tradition is the existence of Abdul Rahman Ibn Ammar Ibn Sa’d among the
narrators. However, by reference to *Rijal* books, it becomes clear that
no one has totally rejected him. Ibn Habban, in contrast, has considered
him among the trustworthy narrators. It is interesting that despite
these valid traditions recorded in the most authentic books of the
Sunnis, Ibn Taymiyah says, “*Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal* is added by the
heretic.”[^44] Nawawi has rejected it in *Al-Majmu’*. The major problem
that some people have mentioned about *Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal* is that
the practice of Ibn Umar and Abu Umamah, the Companions, is not proof
and the traditions about their practice are not successive.

It should be said, in reply, that, first, some people regard the
tradition and speech of the Companions as proof, as is quoted from Abu
Hanifah, “We follow whatever we inherit from the Companions and
investigate those of their followers and may oppose them.”[^45]
Sarakhsi, too, says in *Usul*, “Our scholars, both the past and the
late, have no difference in the fact that the speech of a Companion is
proof in an issue which cannot be obtained by *Qiyas*.”[^46] In saying
*Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal*, there is undoubtedly no analogy. Second, in
some of the traditions, previously cited and others, *Hayya Ala Khayr
al-Amal* is attributed to the time of the Prophet (a.s) and his own
assertion.[^47]

According to these traditions, the Prophet ordered to replace *Hayya Ala
Khayr al-Amal* with *Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm* in the *Adhan* of the
Fajr (Morning) Prayer; yet, this does not harm our intention, since as
is explicit in the tradition, this substitution is only for the *Adhan*
of the Fajr Prayer. Therefore, the *Adhan* of the other Prayers should
include *Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal* as stipulated in the same tradition.
Moreover, this tradition is in contrast with the traditions that deny
*tathwib* in *Adhan* and shows clearly that *Al-Salat Khayrun Min
al-Nawm* is something added after the Prophet (a.s).[^48]

The probability of the abrogation of *Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal* is also
impossible, since if it were so, Ibn Umar, Abu Umamah and others would
be informed and it would be meaningless to mention it in their *Adhan*.
Furthermore, traditions narrated from the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) stipulate
that *Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal* is a major part of *Adhan* in all
occasions, which is revealed to the honorable Prophet.[^49]

Discussion on Tathwib
---------------------

The second issue of controversy among the Sunni and Shi’a jurisprudents
is *tathwib*. There is also controversy over it among the Sunni
jurisprudents themselves. It has been said, “*Tathwib* means return and
is therefore returning to calling out to prayers. When it is called out
*Hayya Ala al-Salat*, people are invited to prayers; when *Al-Salat
Khayrun Min al-Nawm* is called out, there is a returning to the same
phrase which means inviting to the prayers. It is quoted from Al-Mughrib
that the traditional *tathwib* is the same calling out of *Al-Salat
Khayrun Min al-Nawm* in the Fajr Prayers twice and the recent one is
calling out *Al-Salat* *Al-Salat* (prayer, prayer) or *Qaamat Qaamat*
(Prayer is established). Another meaning of *tathwib* is saying *Hayya
Ala al-Salat* and *Hayya Ala al-Falah* each twice between *Adhan* and
iqamah.”[^50]

Anyway, whatever meaning *tathwib* may have, it is not included in
*Adhan* and iqamah, but is something added later. Since the common
meaning of *tathwib* is to say *Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm* we focus
on it in this discussion. Ibn Rushd in *Bidayah Al-Mujtahid*, about the
controversy over this issue, says:

The jurisprudents are not in agreement whether *Al-Salat Khayrun Min
al-Nawm* should be said in the Morning *Adhan* or not. Most of them
believe that it should be said, but some do not agree with it, since it
was not so in the *Adhan* of the Prophet. Shafi’i believes so. The
difference in this issue is that whether this phrase was said in the
Prophet’s reign or added in Umar’s.[^51]

The following is quoted from *Al-Muhadhab*:

In case of the Morning *Adhan*, after *Hayya Ala al-Salat* and *Hayya
Ala al-Falah*, *tathwib*—saying *Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm* should be
added twice. But in the recent verdicts, to say this phrase is
undesirable.[^52]

In *Al-Majmu’*, it is written that Abu Hanifah did not accept *tathwib*
in this way and in *Sharh* *Kabir*, some people such as Ibn Umar, Hasan,
Malik, Sufyan Thawri, Ishaq and Shafi’i believe in *tathwib* (in its
common sense). Abu Hanifah said, “*Tathwib* between *Adhan* and iqamah
for the Morning Prayer is to say *Hayya Ala al-Salat* and *Hayya Ala
al-Falah* each twice.[^53] Nearly the same is narrated in
*Al-Mughni*.[^54] Anyhow, in both books, the tradition of Abu Mahdhurah
is adduced for *tathwib*. This tradition says, “In case of the Morning
Prayer, you should say, ‘*Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm*…”

It should be born in mind that some people have considered *tathwib* as
external to *Adhan*. In *Al-Mabsut*, after quoting a tradition, Sarakhsi
says, “This tradition is an argument for *tathwib* being after *Adhan*
(not a part of it).”[^55] After some more lines, he says, “People
created this *tathwib*.[^56] People of Kufah added *Al-Salat Khayrun Min
al-Nawm* to the *Adhan* and set the *tathwib* between *Adhan* and iqamah
as two times of *Hayya Ala al-Falah*.

Now that the controversy of the Sunni jurisprudents themselves about
tathwib became clear, we conclude that *tathwib* and even *Al-Salat
Khayrun Min al-Nawm* is not included in *Adhan* and to say it between
*Adhan* and iqamah is not recommended at all because nothing has been
revealed about it, nor is there any recommendation about it by the
Prophet (a.s). Rather it is a phrase included in *Adhan* after the
Prophet (a.s) by some of the Companions’ personal desire. Authentic
evidences, to be discussed later on, are present in the Sunni traditions
proving our claim.

Scholars’ Views on the Origin of Tathwib
----------------------------------------

Imam Malik says, in *Al-Muwatta’*:

“It has been narrated to us that the caller to the Prayer came to Umar
for the Morning Prayer and found him asleep; he said, “Prayer is
preferred to sleep. (*Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm*)” Umar therefore
ordered to include this phrase in the *Adhan* for the Morning
Prayer.”[^57]

As is seen, it is explicitly mentioned in this tradition that *Al-Salat
Khayrun Min al-Nawm* is an addition to the *Adhan* made by Umar and has
nothing to do with the original *Adhan* of Islam. Thus Muhammad Ibn
Al-Hasan Al-Shaybani, in *Al-Muwatta’*, stipulates that *Al-Salat
Khayrun Min al-Nawm* is not related to the *Adhan*. His exact viewpoint
is that “*Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm* is said after the *Adhan* and
since it is not a part of it, it is not obligatory to add.”[^58]

Suyuti, in *Tanwir Al-Hawalik*, explaining the document of this
tradition, says:

What Malik has narrated from Umar is also narrated by Al-Darqutni in his
*Sunan* with two documents; one is narrated by Waki’, in his *Musannaf*,
from Muhammad Ibn Ajlan from Nafi’ from Umar’s son from Umar who
instructed his Muezzin (caller to *Adhan*), “When you reach *Hayya Ala
al-Falah* in the Morning *Adhan*, you should say *Al-Salat Khayrun Min
al-Nawm* twice.” [^59]

Zurqani narrates the same issue in *Ta’liqah*.[^60] Master Sunni
biographists have validated the narrators in both document chains and in
general, there is no fallacy in the documents cited by the Sunni
jurisprudents.[^61] Shawkani, about *Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm*,
quotes the following from *Al-Bahr Al-Zukhar*:

When Umar invented this phrase, his son told him, “This is heresy.” When
hearing this phrase, Ali is narrated as saying, “Do not add anything to
the *Adhan*.” The author of *Al-Bahr Al-Zukhar*, after citing the
tradition of Abu Mahdhurah and Bilal says, “If *tathwib* were
religiously allowed, Ali, Ibn Umar and Tawus would not deny it.” As a
conclusion from the traditions, we accept this issue (*tathwib*), not
religiously, but if said as an additional part of *Adhan*.[^62]

It is narrated from Abu Hanifah from Hammad from Ibrahim in *Jami’
Al-Masanid*…

I asked him about *tathwib* and he replied, “People have made *tathwib*
and it is a good thing they have made. *Tathwib* includes saying
*Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm* twice, after *Adhan*.” Imam Muhammad Ibn
Hasan Shaybani has cited this tradition in *Athar* from Abu Hanifah
saying, “This is Abu Hanifah’s statement and we follow it.”[^63]

It is narrated from Ibn Uyaynah from Al-Layth that Mujahid said:

“I was with Ibn Umar when we heard someone saying *tathwib* in the
mosque. Ibn Umar said, ‘Let us get away from this heretic.’”[^64]

Abu Dawud narrates this occurrence from Mujahid about the Noon or
Evening Prayer.[^65]

Ibn Jurayj says:

Amr Ibn Hafs informed me that Sa’d, a muezzin, was the first to say
*Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm*. That was during Umar’s reign. At first,
Umar told him that it was a heresy, but left it to himself later.
Balabil did not say *Adhan* for Umar.[^66]

Ibn Jurayj says:

Hasan Ibn Muslim informed me that someone asked Tawus, “When was
*Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm* first called out?” He replied, “That was
not called during the Prophet’s reign. After his demise, in the reign of
Abu Bakr, Balabil heard this phrase from a man who was not a caller to
*Adhan*. So, he learnt it and called out *Adhan* with it from then on.
Abu Bakr was a little while alive after this happening. Then in his
reign, Umar said, “It would be better if we prohibit Balabil from what
he has invented.” But he apparently forgot this issue and people called
out *Adhan* with this phrase up to the present time.[^67]

Though a little difference is noticed between the first and second
traditions, they share the same concept; that is *tathwib* and *Al-Salat
Khayrun Min al-Nawm* was established after the Messenger of Allah (a.s).
Anyway, the tradition of Malik with the document of Al-Darqutni and the
testimony of famous and master Sunni jurisprudents suffice for proving
it.

Examining the Traditions of Tathwib
-----------------------------------

The traditions resorted to for proving *Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm*
are all fallacious regarding their documents. These traditions are
mostly those narrated by Abu Dawud and Al-Nisa’i from Abu Mahdhurah as
is mentioned in *Al-Mughni*,[^68] *Al-Sharh Al-Kabir*[^69] and
*Al-Majmu’*.[^70]

The tradition of Nisa’i
-----------------------

In *Sunan Al-Nisa’i*, the tradition is as follows:

Suwayd Ibn Nasr said: Abdullah narrates from Sufyan from Ibn Ja’far from
Abi Salman that Abu Mahdhurah said: “I called out *Adhan* for the Holy
Prophet (a.s) and I called out in the Morning *Adhan* *Al-Salat Khayrun
Min al-Nawm*.[^71]

The document of this tradition in *Sunan Bayhaqi* is in this form: “It
was narrated for us from Sufyan Thawri from Abu Ja’far from Abu
Sulayman…” Abu Salman is therefore replaced with Abu Sulayman. Bayhaqi
continues: “The name of Abu Sulayman is Hammam Mu’adhin (muezzin).”[^72]

In this document, Abu Salman or Abu Sulayman is named Hammam Mu’adhin
and is an unknown person. All that Ibn Hajar has brought about this man
is that, “It is said that the name of Abu Salman Mu’adhin is Hammam and
he narrates traditions from Ali and Abu Mahdhurah. Abu Ja’far Farra’ and
Ala’ Ibn Salih Kufi narrate traditions on his authority.[^73]

Beside the problem posed by Abu Sulayman about the document of this
tradition, some believe that Abu Ja’far whose name is in this tradition
is not known and not the same person as Abu Ja’far Al-Farra’. Nisa’i
himself has mentioned this issue in *Sunan*.

The traditions of Abu Dawud
---------------------------

(1) Musaddad narrated to us from al-Harith Ibn Ubayd from Muhammad Ibn
Abd al-Malik Ibn Abu Mahdhurah from his father that his grandfather
said: I said, “O the Messenger of Allah! Teach me your way of saying the
*Adhan*!” The Prophet touched my head and said, “Say like this…” He
mentioned the phrases in *Adhan* one by one until he reached *Hayya Ala
al-Falah*; and then he said: “In case of the Morning Prayer, say:
*Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm*.[^74]

In this tradition’s document, there is Muhammad Ibn Abd al-Malik about
whom Ibn Hajar narrates Ibn Qattan’s saying, “He is unidentified and
nobody has ever narrated a tradition from him except Harith.” After
quoting the traditions of Thawri and Harith Ibn Ubayd narrated by
Muhammad Ibn Abd al-Malik, Ibn Hajar quotes Abdul Haq as saying, “We
cannot adduce these documents.”[^75] Harith Ibn Ubayd is also subject of
controversy.[^76]

(2) Al-Hasan Ibn Ali, nicknamed Abu Ali, narrated to us from Abu Asim
and Abd al-Razzaq from Abu Jurayj that Uthman Ibn Sa’ib narrated from
his father and the mother of Abd al-Malik Ibn Abu Mahdhurah that Abu
Mahdhurah narrates from the honorable Prophet (a.s) that *Al-Salat
Khayrun Min al-Nawm* is said twice in the Morning…[^77]

In this tradition too, Uthman Ibn Sa’ib and his father are not known
except by this very tradition.[^78] The mother of Abd al-Malik is also
unknown.

(3) Al-Nufayli narrated to us from Ibrahim Ibn Isma’il Ibn Abd al-Malik
that he heard his grandfather, Abu Mahdhurah, saying in the Fajr Prayer
*Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm*.[^79]

This document is also invalid, since Ibrahim Ibn Isma’il Ibn Abd
al-Malik has explicitly been criticized.[^80]

In concluding from the traditions narrated about *tathwib*, it should be
said that, first, as we know, the documents of these traditions are
doubtful and unacceptable. Second, even if these traditions are not
considered as doubtful, they undoubtedly cannot be followed. The reason
is that they are in contrast with those true ones stating that *Al-Salat
Khayrun Min al-Nawm* is a phrase added by people’s own approbation,
after the time of the Prophet (a.s). As a result, both groups of
traditions are invalid and thus unacceptable. Therefore, there is no
proof for the inclusion of *tathwib* in the *Adhan*, or its
recommendation after the *Adhan*.

Testimony to Ali’s (a.s) wilayah in Adhan
-----------------------------------------

As the final discussion of this chapter, I quote the research-based
statements of Allamah Sharaf Al-Din, in *Al-Nass wa’l-Ijtihad*, to
illuminate the issue of the testimony to Ali’s (a.s) Wilayah in *Adhan*:

“*Adhan* includes eighteen phrases, in our view as followers of
Imamiyyah; *Allahu Akbar* (Allah is great) four times; *Ashhadu An La
Ilaha Illa Allah* (I testify that there is no deity but Allah) twice;
*Ashhadu Anna Muhammadan Rasoul Allah* (I testify that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah) twice; *Hayya Ala al-Salat* (Hurry to prayer) twice;
*Hayya Ala al-Falah* (Hurry to salvation) twice; *Hayya Ala Khayr
al-Amal* (Hurry to the best of deed) twice; *Allahu Akbar* (Allah is
great) twice; *La Ilaha Illa Allah* (There is no deity but Allah)
twice.”

iqamah is composed of seventeen phrases which are the same as *Adhan*’s,
each repeated twice, except *La Ilaha Illa Allah* (There is no deity but
Allah) which is said once; and between *Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal* (Hurry
to the best of deed) and *Allahu Akbar* (Allah is great), there are two
times of *Qad Qaamat al-Salat* (Surely prayer was established).

Tribute to Muhammad and his Household (saying “**اللهم صلِّ على مُحَمَّد
وآل مُحَمَّد**” *Allahumma Salli Ala Muhammad(in) wa Aali Muhammad*)
after mentioning the name of the Prophet (a.s) is recommended as is
completing the testimonies by the testimony to the Wilayah and Imamate
of Ali (a.s), in both *Adhan* and iqamah.

Whoever has denied the testimony to Ali’s Wilayah in *Adhan*, regarding
it as heresy, has made mistake and has as uncommon belief. The caller to
*Adhan* in Islam [usually added phrases to the beginning and the end of
*Adhan*—phrases that are not derived from the religion, but still they
are not heresy and adding them is not forbidden. The reason is that the
callers to *Adhan* do not consider these phrases as parts of *Adhan*,
and include them just due to the general arguments.[^81] The testimony
to Ali’s Wilayah is subject to these general arguments. Moreover, short
phrases from the people themselves do not nullify *Adhan* and
iqamah.[^82] To say these during *Adhan* and iqamah is therefore not
forbidden…”[^83]

Consequently, since naming Ali (a.s) is as worship, there is no doubt
about the preference of mentioning his name in general and in *Adhan*,
in particular. As Muttaqi Hindi narrates in *Kanz Al-Ummal*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذِكْرُ عَلِيٍّ عِبادَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mentioning Ali’s name is as worship.[^84]

[^1]: As is cited in Majma’ Al-Bahrayn, Adhan comes from the root Idhn,
meaning knowledge or permission. Regarding the root of the word, there
are two possibilities; (1) its original form is Idhan, which means
beliefe and granting, or (2) it may be Adhan. (Editor)

[^2]: Al-Bayt Al-Ma’mur is the counterpart of the Holy Ka’ba (Allah’s
House) in the heaven around which the angles revolve.

[^3]: Al-Furu’ min Al-Kafi, Dar Al-Kutub Al-Islamiyyah, Vol. 3, Bab
bada’a Al-Adhan wa Al-Iqamah wa fazlaha wa thawabahuma, p. 302, Hadith 1
and 2.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Vol. 1, p. 128.

[^6]: Vol. 5, p. 107.

[^7]: Vol. 1, p. 268.

[^8]: Fat’h Al-Bari, Dar Al-Kutub, Al-Ilm, 1410, Vol. 2, Kitab Abwab
Al-Adhan, Bab Bad’at Al-Adhan, p. 100, another version: Fourth edition,
Dar Al-Ihya’ Al- Turath Al- Arabi, p. 62. The same concept is quoted by
Mutaqqi Hindi from Tabarani from Ibn Umar. See: Kanz Al-Ummal, Vol. 8,
p. 329, No. 23138.

[^9]: Sirah by Ibn Husham, Vol. 2, p. 154.

[^10]: Fat’h Al-Bari, Vol. 2, Kitab Al-Adhan, Bab bada’a Al-Adhan, p. 62
and 63.

[^11]: Sirah Halabi, Vol. 2, p. 296, Bab “Bada’a Al-Adhan wa
Mashru’iyyatih”

[^12]: Ibn Hajar Asqalani, Fat’h Al-Bari, First Edition, Dar Al-Ma’rifa,
Vol. 2, p. 100; Fourth Edition, dar Al-Turath, p. 62.

[^13]: Ibn Hajar Asqalani, Fat’h Al-Bari, First edition, Dar Al-Ma’rifa,
Vol. 2, p. 100.

[^14]: Ibn Hajar asqalani, Fat’h Al-Bari, First Edition, Dar Al-Ma’rifa,
Vol. 2, p. 100; Fourth Edition, Dar Al-Turath, p. 62.

[^15]: Al-Mustadrak, Maktaba Al-Matbu’at Al-Islamiyyah, Beirut, Vol. 3,
p. 171, Kitab Ma’rifa Al-Sahaba, Faza’il Al-Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s).

[^16]: Tahawi has cited this tradition in Mushkil Al-Athar. Also Ibn
Mardiwiyh has quoted it from Muttaqi Hindi in Kanz Al-Ummal. See: Kanz
Al-Ummal, Part 6, p. 277, Hadith 397 (quoted in Al-Nass wa Al-Ijtihad,
p. 205) Al-Musannaf, Vol. 1, p. 456, No. 1775 (quoted from Al-I’tisam,
p. 30)

[^17]: Al-Sirah Al-Halabiyyah, Vol. 2, p. 297 (quoted from Al-I’tisam,
p. 29)

[^18]: Al-Musannaf, Vol. 1, p. 456, No. 1775 (quoted from Al-I’tisam, p.
30)

[^19]: Tahdhib Al-Kamal, Vol. 14, p. 541.

[^20]: Sahih Al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim.

[^21]: Al-Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 336.

[^22]: Allamah Sharaf Al-Din writes down, “Here, Hakim says something
which indicates his belief in the invalidity of the traditions
introducing a dream as the origin of adhan. He states, “The reason why
the two Shaykhs (Bukhari and Muslim) have not mentioned the tradition of
Abdullah Ibn Zayd about dream and adhan is that Abdullah’s death was
prior to the establishment of adhan.” This is exactly what Hakim stated
in part 4, p. 348; see Al-Nass wa Al-Ijtihad, p. 202.

[^23]: Sunan Abi Dawud, Kitab Al-Salat, Bab Kayfa Al-Adhan, No. 421
(Int’l No.)

[^24]: Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 9, p.43 and 44.

[^25]: Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Hydar Abad 1326, Vol. 9, p. 43.

[^26]: Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 9, p. 43.

[^27]: Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 9, p. 44.

[^28]: Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 9, p. 43.

[^29]: Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 9, p. 44.

[^30]: Ibid.

[^31]: Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 9, p. 6.

[^32]: Bidayat Al-Mujtahid wa Nahaya Al-Muqtasid, Dar Ibn Hazm, Part I,
Kitab Al-Salat, Chapter II, fi Ma’rifa Al-Adhan wa Al-Iqamah, p. 206.

[^33]: Bidayat Al-Mujtahid wa Nahaya Al-Muqtasid, Dar Ibn Hazm, Part I,
Kitab Al-Salat, Chapter II, fi Ma’rifa Al-Adhan wa Al-Iqamah, p. 206.

[^34]: 2nd ed, p.55.

[^35]: From Ma’rifat ‘Ulum Al-Hadith, p. 53, it is quoted that “Though
Hakim and others are not pleased with this statement.”

[^36]: Vol. 3, p. 160.

[^37]: The adhan revealed to the Prophet (a.s) by Gabriel.

[^38]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, Vol. 1, p. 424, 425.

[^39]: Vol. 2, p. 110 (quoted from Al-Nass wa Al-Ijtihad, p. 207)

[^40]: Al-Musannaf, vol. 1, p. 460, No. 1786.

[^41]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, Vol. 1, p. 145.

[^42]: To investigate about any of these narrators, see: Tahdhib
Al-Tahdhib.

[^43]: Nur Al-Din, Ali Ibn Abu Bakr Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, Dar
Al-Kutub Al-’Ilmiyyah, Beirut 1408, Vol. 1, Kitab Al-Salat, Bab Kayf
Al-Adhan, p. 330.

[^44]: Quoted from Ta’liq of Muwatta’, p. 55, No. 92.

[^45]: Ahmad Ibn Abi Sahl Al-Sarakhsi, Usul, 1st ed. 1414, Dar Al-Kutub
Al-Ilmiyya, Beirut, Vol. 1, p. 313.

[^46]: Usul, Vol 2, p. 110.

[^47]: Qushji, a grand Sunni theologian, quotes from Umar that Hayya Ala
Khayr al-Amal has been common in the Prophet’s age. He narrates that
Umar said in a sermon, “Three things were common in the Prophet’s era
from which I prohibit and for which I penalize: temporary marriage
(mut’ah), hajj tamattu’ (a kind of the ritual pilgrimage) and saying
Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal in the adhan.” Then Qushji says, “This is not a
fallacy of Umar since a jurisprudent’s opposition to others’ views in
jurisprudential issues is not regarded as heresy.” See: Sharh Tajrid, p.
408.

[^48]: It is quoted from Ibn Abbas that Umar, the second caliph, ordered
to exclude Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal for the fear that people may leave
out Jihad (holy war) and turn to prayers instead. Not to let the Muslims
neglect jihad, he prohibited Hayya Ala Khayr al-Amal and ordered
Al-Salat Khayrun Min al-Nawm instead. But indeed the superiority of
prayers over any other deed is a fact found in other traditions,
independent of adhan, and Islam knows the philosophy of its rules. In
his Sunan, Bayhaqi quotes the Prophet (a.s) as saying, “Be it known to
you that the best deed for you is the prayer.” See: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra,
Vol. 1, p. 457.

[^49]: Jami’ Ahadith Shi’a, Kitab Al-Salat, Chapter 17 on “adad fusul
Al-adhan wa Al-Iqamah wa kiyfiyyatiha wa ilaliha” (phrases of adhan and
iqamah, their quality and justification).

[^50]: Al-Mabsut, Vol. 1, p. 130; Al-Mughni, Vol. 1, p. 420; Al-Sharh
Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 399.

[^51]: Bidayat Al-Mujtahid, Vol. 1, p. 106.

[^52]: Al-Majmu’, Vol. 3, p. 99.

[^53]: Al-Mughni and Al-Sharh Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 399.

[^54]: Ibn Qudama, Al-Mughni, p. 420.

[^55]: Al-Mabsut, Vol. 1, p. 130.

[^56]: Al-Mabsut, Vol. 1, p. 130.

[^57]: Al-Mutawwa’, 2nd ed. Tahqiq Abdul Wahhab Abdul Latif, Kitab
Al-Nida’ Lissalat, p. 55.

[^58]: Ibid.

[^59]: Tanwir Al-Hawalik, Vol. 1, p. 93.

[^60]: Al-Ta’liqah, Vol. 1, p. 25 (quoted from Al-Nass wa Al-Ijtihad).

[^61]: For the biography of each of them see: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib.

[^62]: Nayl Al-Awtar, Vol. 2, p. 43.

[^63]: Jami’ Al-Masanid, Vol. 1, p. 296 (as quoted From Al-I’tisam)

[^64]: Al-Musannaf, Vol. 1, p. 475.

[^65]: Sunan Abi Dawud, Vol. 1, p. 148, No. 453 (Int’l No.)

[^66]: Kanz Al-Ummal, Vol. 8, p. 357, No. 23251.

[^67]: Kanz Al-Ummal, Vol. 8, p. 357, No. 23252.

[^68]: Al-Mughni, Vol. 1, p. 420.

[^69]: Al-Mughni and Al-Sharh Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 399.

[^70]: Al-Majmu’, Vol. 3, p. 99.

[^71]: Sunan Al-Nisa’i, Vol. 2, Bab Al-Tathwib fi Al-Adhan, p. 13.
Nisa’i narrates the tradition with another document, which again reaches
Sufyan.

[^72]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, Vol. 1, p. 422.

[^73]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 12, p. 114.

[^74]: Sunan Abu Dawud, Vol. 1, p. 136, No. 421 (Int’l No.)

[^75]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 9, p. 317.

[^76]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, Vol. 2, p. 149.

[^77]: Sunan Abu Dawud, Vol. 1, p. 136, No. 422 (Int’l No.)

[^78]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 7, p. 117; Vol. 3, p. 451; Vol. 12, p.
483.

[^79]: Sunan Abu Dawud, Vol., p. 137, No. 426 (Int’l No.)

[^80]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 1, p. 105.

[^81]: ‘General arguments’ are religious reasons stating a general rule
with no special instance, just as true traditions consider mentioning
the name of Ali (a.s) in adhan as recommended. Such general arguments
are valid until there are no other certain reasons to exclude adhan from
these rules. Hence, bringing Ali’s name in adhan is recommended too.
(Editor)

[^82]: Sunni master scholars have consensus that additional words during
adhan are lawful and do not distort adhan. As is mentioned in Fat’h
Al-Bari, “Permission of including words in adhan is obtained from
Bukhari’s statements. Ibn Mundhir narrates the permission of including
words in adhan from Urwa, Ata’, Hasan, Qutada, and Ahmad. Nakha’i and
Awza’i agree about this permission, though consider it as undesirable.
Ibn Hanifa, Malik and Shafi’i allow it too, but consider the omission of
it more desirable. The only person forbidding the inclusion of words in
adhan is Thawri. See: Fat’h Al-Bari, Abwab Al-Adhan, Bab Al-Kalam fi
Al-Adhan, p. 80 (Editor).

[^83]: Allamah Sharaf Al-Din, Al-Nass wa Al-Ijtihad, p. 207 & 208.

[^84]: Vol. 11, p. 601, No. 32894; Jami’ Al-Saghir, No. 4332; “Ibn
Asakir” has narrated this tradition in “Tarikh Madina Dimashq” (The
history of Damascus) with valid documents (Vol. 42, p. 356).


