Prostration in the Tradition of the Prophet (a.s) and the Companions
====================================================================

The prostration in prayers is another issue on which the Shi’a and Sunni
are disagreeing. The Shi’a necessarily prostrate themselves only on the
earth (either soil, sand or stone) or uneatable and unclothing
plants.[^1] When they do not have access to clean earth, they carry some
molded soil or something else on which they can prostrate. Those aware
of jurisprudential issues know that so many arguments prove this way of
prostration, which has been the way of many Companions and their
followers. It is also preferred according to religious precautions. In
this part, we first define prostration, and then briefly deal with some
traditions adducing the way of the prostration of the Shi’a. We finally
mention the opinions of jurisprudents.

Lexical and Idiomatic Meaning of Prostration
--------------------------------------------

In *Al-Sihah*, an Arabic-Arabic dictionary compiled by Al-Jawahiri, we
read, “Prostration in prayers stands for putting the forehead on the
earth.” The same definition is mentioned in *Al-Nahayah*, *Lisan
Al-Arab* and *Taj Al-Aroos*. Obviously, prostration is the ultimate
degree of humility above which there is no humility and it is not
permitted except for Allah, the Holiest.[^2]

The Holy Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ اللَّيْلُ وَالنَّهَارُ وَالشَّمْسُ وَالْقَمَرُ لَا
تَسْجُدُوا لِلشَّمْسِ وَلَا لِلْقَمَرِ وَاسْجُدُوا لِلَّهِ الَّذِي
خَلَقَهُنَّ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ إِيَّاهُ تَعْبُدُونَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And among His signs are the night and the day and the sun and the
moon; do not prostrate to the sun nor to the moon; and prostrate to
Allah Who created them, if Him it is that you serve. (41:37).***

Also, prostration is the closest state a servant can have toward his
Lord:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا لَا تُطِعْهُ وَاسْجُدْ وَاقْتَرِبْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nay! Obey him not, and make obeisance and draw nigh (to Allah).
(96:19).***

A tradition reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ رَسولَ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم قالَ: أقْربُ ما يَكونُ
العَبْدُ مِن رَبِّهِ وَهُو ساجِدٌ؛ فَأكْثِروا الدُّعاءَ فَيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (a.s): “The nearest state of a servant to his Lord is in
prostration, so supplicate a lot in prostration.”[^3]

Keeping in mind that prostration is the ultimate degree of humiliation
and is lawful only for the Almighty, we should now see what can we
prostrate on to show the greatest degree of humility. As is evident from
the definitions of the lexicographers, the highest level of humility is
prostration on the ground and, especially, the soil while the ground
cannot be applied to rug or eatable or clothing things growing from the
earth.

So, in addition to the arguments, which will follow, prostration should
essentially be on the ground or soil, unless of course there is enough
evidence that prostration on things other than the earth is lawful. Yet,
as we will see later on, there is only support for prostration on the
ground and uneatable and unclothing things growing from it.

Traditions about Prostration
----------------------------

The traditions about prostration are generally of the following kinds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جُعِلَتْ لِيَ الأرْضُ مَسْجِداً وَطَهوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (a.s): The earth is set as the place for my prostration
(*masjid*) and as cleaner.[^4]

As you see, in this uninterruptedly reported tradition, the ground is
especially mentioned as the place of prostration proving that there must
be a reason for this specification. This tradition at least shows that
prostration is not permissible on anything and, as a result, it is only
permitted on the things allowed in the religion and not on uncertain
things. It may be claimed that the honorable tradition means that
worship in Islam is not limited to special places like the synagogues of
the Jews or the churches of the Christians, and it is possible in any
place on the earth.

The tradition is therefore, not related to prostration. In response,
this meaning is not in contrast with the issue of prostration, and that
prostration is not allowed on all things. In other words, the former
meaning is included in the latter and is a requirement for it because if
all the places on earth are suitable for prostration (and this is
prostration in prayer, because of the concept of ‘clean’ afterwards,)
worship can be done on all the places on the earth. Accordingly, Sunni
master scholars, like Ibn Hajar[^5], Muhammad Ashraf Azim Abadi[^6],
Qastalani[^7] and Amir Al-San’ani[^8] have all accepted and rather
preferred the meaning of prostration place for ‘*masjid*,’ in the
tradition.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… كُنْتُ أُصّلّي الظّهرَ معَ رَسولِ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم
فأخَذَ قَبضَةً مِن الحَصى لِتَبرُدَ في كَفّي أضَعُها لجَبهَتي أسْجُد
عَليها لِشدَّةِ الحَرِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari said:[^9] I was performing the Noon Prayer. It
was so hot that I took a handful of sands to cool it and use it for
prostration.[^10]

Bayhaqi has narrated this tradition in *Al-Sunan Al-Kubra* with a little
difference. He also narrates the same tradition from Anas Ibn Malik in
another way commenting, “If prostration on a cloth one is wearing was
permissible, it would for sure be easier than cooling hot sand in one’s
hand and putting it for prostration.”[^11] Bayhaqi has hence considered
this tradition as the proof on the impermissibility of prostrating on a
cloth attached to the body.

Though Bayhaqi’s claim is true, it should be added that if prostration
on cloth—either attached or unattached to the body—was permissible, it
would be no need for cooling the sands, because as prostration on an
attached cloth is easy, it is also easy on an unattached cloth, a piece
of cloth or even a coin in one’s pocket. So, the tradition can also act
as a proof on the impermissibility of prostration on unattached as well
as attached cloth.[^12]

The reason is that Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari narrates the tradition with
past continuous verb, adding **كنت** to the present tense verb, which
shows that this has not occurred just once.

Nevertheless, this tradition shows that prostration is not permissible
on everything, otherwise constant attempting to prostrate on sands was
not wise.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… شَكَونا إلى رَسولِ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم شِدَّةَ الرَّمْضاءِ
في جِباهِنا وأكَفِّنا فَلَم يُشكِنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We complained to the Prophet (a.s) about the hotness of sands to our
faces and palms when praying, but he did not pay attention.[^13]

Having narrated the same tradition, Ibn Hajar Asqalani says, “This is a
true tradition narrated by Muslim.”[^14] It is emphasized in *Tuhfat
Al-Muhtaj* that the document of Bayhaqi is valid.[^15] It is also said
in *Subul Al-Salam* that the tradition is true.[^16] The same is
narrated from Ibn Mas’ud.[^17] This tradition clearly proves that
prostration is not allowed on everything, otherwise complaining about
the hotness of the sands was unnecessary and they could prostrate
themselves on things other than the hot sands.[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… وإذا سَجَدْتَ فَأمْكِن جَبْهَتَكَ مِن الأرْضِ حَتىّ تَجِدَ حَجْمَ
الأرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A man asked the Prophet (a.s) something about prayer. The Messenger of
Allah (a.s) told him: “… and when you prostrate, place your forehead on
the earth, in a way that you can feel it.[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… إنّ النّبيّ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم كَانَ إذا سَجَدَ أمْكَنَ أنْفَهُ
وَجَبْهَتَهُ مِنَ الأرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (a.s) used to make his forehead and nose touch the
earth[^20] in prostration.[^21]

Tirmidhi says after this tradition, “The tradition of Abu Humayd is true
and fine.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… رَأيْتُ رَسولَ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يَضَعُ أنْفَهُ عَلى
الأرْضِ إذا سَجَدَ مَعَ جَبْهَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I saw the Prophet (a.s), when prostrating himself, place his forehead
and his nose on the earth.[^22]

The same tradition is narrated with a bit difference, “I saw the Prophet
(a.s) prostrating himself on the earth putting his forehead and nose on
it.”[^23]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… إنَّها لا تَتِمُّ صَلاةُ أحَدِكُمْ حَتىّ يُسبِغَ الوُضوءَ...
فَيَسجُدُ فَيُمَكِّنُ وَجْهَهُ (أو جَبْهَتَهُ) مِن الأرْضِ... لا
تَتِمُّ صَلاةُ أحَدِكُم حَتىّ يَفْعَلُ ذَلكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The holy Prophet (a.s) said: Your prayers would not be true unless you
accomplish your ablutions… and place your faces (or foreheads) on the
earth.”[^24]

In point of fact, using the word ارض (the earth) in these traditions has
been on purpose. It is mentioned to distinct earth from the other
things, especially since both are being mentioned in the traditions, as
we read in *Sahih* *Bukhari* and other books:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنّا نُصَلّي مَع النَبيِّ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم في شِدَّةِ الحَرِّ،
فإذا لَم يَسْتَطِعْ أحَدُنا أنْ يُمَكِّنَ وَجهَهُ مِن الأرْضِ بَسطَ
ثَوبَهُ فَسَجدَ عَليهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We[^25] prayed with the Prophet (a.s) in hot weather, and whenever one
of us was not able to reach his face to the earth, he prostrated himself
on his cloth.[^26]

If prostration on cloth or rug was the same as prostration on the
ground, there was no need for opposing earth and things other than it in
these traditions. That is why even when the ground was wet, prostration
was done on it. It is narrated, for instance, that the Holy Prophet’s
forehead was wet with mud sometimes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَأيْتُ رَسولَ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم يَسجُدُ في المَاءِ
وَالطّينِ حَتىّ رَأيتُ أثَرَ الطّينِ في جَبْهَتِه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I saw the Messenger of Allah (a.s) prostrating on the earth, which was
wet with water and mud, to the extent that I saw mud on his holy
forehead. [^27]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَن أبي سَعيد الخِدريّ: إنّ رَسولَ اللهِ صلّى اللهُ عليهِ وسلَّم رُئيَ
عَلى جَبْهَتِهِ وَعَلى أرْنَبَتِه أثَرُ طِينٍ مِن صَلاةٍ صَلاّها
بِالنّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mud was seen on the Prophet’s forehead and nose because of the prayer he
had performed with the Muslims.[^28]

‘Aishah[^29] also says, “I never saw the Prophet (a.s) place something
between him and the earth.”[^30]

Tradition confirming that the Prophet was seen, on a raining day,
putting a parchment rug on earth for praying should only be applied to
special situations, not to contrast the previous ones. How is it
possible that prostration be permissible on everything and still the
earth be specifically mentioned in various traditions?

There are various traditions stipulating that the nose should be put on
the earth in prostration, while stating the same condition for the
forehead, too. This is specially the case in traditions stating that the
nose should be put on the same thing as the forehead is put in
prostration. One instance is the tradition Ibn Abbas narrates from the
Prophet (a.s):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا صَلاةَ لِمَنْ لا يَمَسُّ أنْفُهُ الأرْضَ ما يَمَسُّ الجَبينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The prayer of one, who doesn’t put his nose on the same thing as he puts
his forehead, would not be accepted.[^31]

Also, traditions stating that in prostrating, the turban should be put
aside from the forehead shows the necessity of putting the forehead on
the earth:

“The Prophet (a.s) saw a man who prostrated on a layer of his turban, so
he pointed with his finger to the man, to take off his turban and
pointed to his forehead.”[^32]

Bayhaqi, too, says in *Sunan*, “Reports indicating that the Holy Prophet
(a.s) prostrated on a layer of his turban is by no means valid.”[^33]
People other than Bayhaqi have stipulated this concept, too.

Opinions of Some Companions and Scholars
----------------------------------------

With regard to the aforementioned traditions, some of the Companions,
their followers and others in later ages necessarily prostrated
themselves with their foreheads directly on the earth or at least they
preferred this way of prostration.

Abdul Karim Abu Umayyah says, “I was informed that Abu Bakr Siddiq, the
caliph, prostrated on the ground or prayed in a way that his body
touched the earth.

Abu Ubaydah narrates, “Ibn Mas’ud did not prostrate or pray on anything
except the ground.”

Asim narrates, “Whenever Ibn Sirin prayed in a place where his forehead
and nose did not touch the earth, he would change his place of praying.

It is narrated that whenever Masruq left home, he carried a brick with
him to prostrate on.[^34] It is also narrated in *Fat’h Al-Bari* that
whenever Masruq embarked a ship, he carried a brick with him to
prostrate on when praying. The same tradition is narrated from Ibn
Sirin.[^35]

Razin, a former slave of the Abbasids, said, “Ali, son of Abdullah Ibn
Abbas, asked me to send a flat stone for him for prostration.”[^36]

Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz has been narrated to take the soil from the earth
and put it on his mat to prostrate on.[^37]

Ibn Abi Shaybah narrates that Urwah Ibn Al-Zubayr was reluctant to
prostrate on anything except the earth.[^38] The same is narrated from
people other than Urwah.

It is recorded in *Al-Mudawwana Al-Kubra* that Malik knew it undesirable
to prostrate on a carpet, cloth, mat or skin. He used to say, “It is
allowed to stand, genuflect or sit on these materials, but prostration
and putting the palms on them is forbidden. But he permitted prostration
and putting the palms on sand and things growing from the earth.”[^39]

As a result, as stipulated by some Sunni scholars, prostration should be
on earth not other things, except khumra[^40], straw mat and other
uneatable and unclothing things growing from the earth. The traditions
that allow prostration on mat and things other than the earth should
only be applied to cases of necessity or be ignored entirely because of
their contrast with other traditions. In short, one who puts his
forehead on the earth has followed the act of the Prophet (a.s) who
said, “Place your face on the earth.”[^41]

On the other hand, anyone who refrains from this has in fact followed
the ignorance of Abu Jahl who said, as Muslim, in *Sahih*, and Ahmad, in
*Musnad*, narrated from Abu Hurayrah,[^42] “Did Muhammad put his face on
the earth before you?” They said, “Yes, he did.” He said, “I swear by
Lat and Uzza’ (two idols) that if I see him do this, I will cast his
face to the earth.” He once came to the Prophet (a.s) while he was
praying and wanted to tread his holy neck.

Whenever Abu Jahl tried to harm the Prophet (a.s), he returned shielding
himself with his hands. When he was asked about that, he would answer,
“There is a trench of fire and fear between him and I; and many feathers
and wings.” The holy Prophet (a.s) said, “If he approached me, the
angels would tear him into pieces.”

At the end, it is worthwhile to bring a tradition from Imam Sadiq (a.s)
determining things appropriate for prostration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السُّجودُ لا يَجوزُ إلاّ عَلَى الأرْضِ أوْ عَلى ما أنْبَتَتِ الأرْضُ
إلاّ ما أُكِلَ أوْ لُبِسَ… لأنَّ السُّجُودَ خُضوعٌ للهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
فَلا يَنْبَغي أنْ يَكونَ عَلى ما يُؤكَلُ وَيُلْبَسُ لأنَّ أبْناءَ
الدُّنيا عَبيدُ ما يأكُلُونَ وَيَلبِسونَ، والسّاجِدُ في سُجودِهِ في
عَبادَةِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، فَلا يَنبَغي أنْ يَضعَ جَبْهَتَهُ في
سُجودِه عَلى مَعبودِ أبْناءِ الدُّنْيا الّذينَ اغْتَرُّوا بِغُرورِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Husham asked Imam Sadiq (a.s): “Inform me of things on which prostration
is permissible and things on which it is unlawful.” Imam Sadiq (a.s)
stated: “Prostration is not permissible but on the earth or things
growing on it, except eatable or clothing things from it.” Husham asked:
“May I be sacrificed for you! What is the reason?” The Imam (a.s)
replied: “Because prostration is for the Glorified Allah, so it is not
lawful to be done on things which are eaten or worn; since those fond of
this world are servants of what they eat and wear, while prostration is
worshipping God. Therefore, prostration is not lawful on things that
deceive the adorers of the worldly life.”[^43]

[^1]: Some jurisprudents confirm prostrating on paper, even if it is not
made of wood, like a paper made of silk.

[^2]: About the prostration of the angels before Adam and the
prostration of Prophet Jacob’s sons before Joseph (a.s), much has been
said in books of Tafsir. One argument is that Prophet Joseph and Prophet
Adam (a.s) were qiblah, not worshipped.

[^3]: Sahih Muslim, Kitab Al-Salat, No 744; Sunan Al-Nisa’i, Kitab
Al-Tatbiq, No. 1125; Sunan Abu Dawud, Kitab Al-Salat, No. 741; Musnad
Ahmad, Baqi Musnad Al-Mukathirin, No. 9083 (Int’l No.) Al-Sunan
Al-Kubra, Part II, Kitab Al-Salat, Jama’ Abwab Sifat Al-Salat, Bab
Al-Ijtihad fi Al-Du’a’ fi Al-Sujud, Dar Al-Fikr Publication, 1st ed., p.
448, No. 2744.

[^4]: Sunan Ibn Majah, Kitab Al-Tahara wa Sunataha, No. 560; also: Sahih
Al-Bukhari, Kitab Al-Tayammum, No. 323 and Kitab Al-Salat, No. 419;
Sahih Muslim, Kitab Al-Masajid, No. 811; Musnad Ahmad, Baqi Musnad
Al-Mukathirin, No. 11358, 11483, 11362; Sunan Al-Darimi Kitab Al-Salat,
No. 1353 and Kitab Al-Siyr, No. 2358; Sunan Al-Nisa’i, Kitab Al-Ghusl wa
Al-Tayammum, No. 429 and Kitab Al-Masajid, No. 728; Sunan Al-Tirmidhi,
Kitab Al-Salat, No. 291 and Kitab Al-Siyr, No.1474 (Int’l No.) etc.

[^5]: Fat’h Al-Bari, Vol. 1, p. 370.

[^6]: Awn Al-Ma’bud, Sharh Sunan Abi Dawud, Dar Al-Kitab Al-Arabi, Vol.
1, Bab fi Al-Mawazi’ Allati la Tujawizu fiha Al-Salat, p. 182.

[^7]: Irshad Al-Sari, p. 435.

[^8]: Subul Al-Salam fi Sharh Bulugh Al-Maram, Vol. 1, Bab Al-Tyammum,
p. 110.

[^9]: Sunan Abu Dawud, Vol. 1, Kitab Al-Salat, p. 100, No. 338; Sunan
Al-Nisa’i, Kitab Al-Tatbiq, No. 1071; Musnad Ahmad, Baqi Musnad
Al-Mukathirin, No. 13982 and 13983 (Int’l No.) with unnoticeable
difference.

[^10]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, Vol. 2, p. 106

[^11]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, Vol. 2, p. 105.

[^12]: After narrating the tradition of cooling the sands, Bayhaqi
narrates another tradition stipulating the unconditional permissibility
of prostration on cloth. But since he does not accept the latter, he
writes afterwards “It is however preferred not to prostrate on cloth.”
(Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, Dar Al-Fikr, p. 442, No. 2723).

[^13]: Sahih Muslim, Kitab Al-Masajid, No. 981 and 982; Sunan Al-Nisa’i,
Kitab Al-Mawaqit, No. 493; Sunan Ibn Maja, Kitab Al-Salat, No. 667;
Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Al-Basriyyin, No. 20144 & 20153 (Int’l No.);
Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, Vol. 2, Kitab Al-Salat, Jama’ Abwab Sifat Al-Salat,
p. 105, In the version published by Dar Al-Fikr: p. 442, No. 2728;
Nearly the same is narrated in Al-Mu’jam Al-Kabir, Vol. 4, p. 80 &
Shu’ar Ashab Al-Hadith, Vol. 1, p. 49, etc.

[^14]: Fat’h Al-Bari, Dar Al-Ma’rifa, 1379, Vol. 2, p. 16.

[^15]: Vol. 1, p. 110.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: Sunan Ibn Majah, Kitab Al-Salat, No. 668 (Int’l No.).

[^18]: Vol. 1, p. 110.

[^19]: Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Musnad bani Hashim, No. 2473 (Int’l
No.).

[^20]: Sunan Al-Tirmidhi, Kitab Al-Salat, No. 250; Sunan Abu Dawud,
Kitab Al-Salat, No. 730, (with a little difference).

[^21]: In Sunan Abu Dawud, Kitab Al-Salat, No. 527, there is another
tradition reading, “Having Prayed with the Prophet (a.s), we saw him
cause his forehead and face to be touched to the earth.” Here in the
phrase ‘to the earth,’ the conjunction “بـِ” is for the purpose of
attaching; hence, it becomes clear that the Prophet (a.s) always put his
forehead on the earth whenever prostrating (Editor).

[^22]: Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Kufiyyin, No. 18101 (Int’l No.).

[^23]: Musnad Ahmad, Musnad Kufiyyin, No. 18109 (Int’l No.).

[^24]: Sunan Abi Dawud, Kitab Al-Salat, No. 730; Sunan Al-Darimi, Kitab
Al-Salat, No. 1259 (Int’l No.); Sunan Al-Darqutni, Vol. 1, p. 95.

[^25]: It’s been said in another version, “…was not able to reach his
forehead to the earth.”

[^26]: As it was cited before, in this tradition and other similar ones,
the earth is mentioned as opposed to things other than it. In this
tradition, for example, prostration on cloth is mentioned. As it will be
mentioned later, this prostration only applied to the situations where
prostration on the earth is not easy or possible. Moreover, these and
other similar traditions are in contrast with those permitting only
prostration on the earth.

[^27]: Sahih Al-Bukhari, Dar Ibn Kathir, No. 801 (Int’l No.)

[^28]: Sunan Abu Dawud, Kitab Al-Salat, No. 777 and 760 (Int’l No.).

[^29]: Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Baqi Musnad Al-Ansar, No. 23170; Sunan
Abu Dawud, Kitab al-Salat, No. 1108 (int’l No.).

[^30]: That is the Prophet (a.s) placed his forehead directly on the
earth.

[^31]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, Vol. 2, p. 104.

[^32]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra.

[^33]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, p. 106.

[^34]: Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra, Dar Sadir Beirut, Vol. 6, p. 79.

[^35]: Fat’h Al-Bari, Dar Al-Ma’rifa, 2nd Edition, Vol. 1, p. 410.

[^36]: Al-Musannaf, Ibn Abi Shaybah, Maktabat Al-Rushd 1409, Vol. 1, p.
246.

[^37]: Fat’h Al-Bari, Dar Al-Ma’rifa, 2nd edition, Vol. 1, p. 410.

[^38]: Ibid.

[^39]: Al-Mudawwana Al-Kubra, Vol. 1.

[^40]: Khumra is a small mat made of palm tree branches (Editor).

[^41]: Sunan Al-Tirmidi, Kitab Al-Salat, No. 348; Musnad Ahmad, Baqi
Musnad Ansar, No. 25360 and 25519 (Int’l No.) Also: Kanz Al-Ummal, Vol.
4, p. 79 and Vol. 7, p. 342 and Vol. 8, p. 86, No. 295 and 4559.

[^42]: Sahih Muslim, Kitab Sifat Al-Qiama, No. 5005; Musnad Ahmad, Baqi
Musnad Al-Mukathirin, No. 8475 (Int’l No.).

[^43]: Wasa’il Al-Shi’a, Mu’assisa ‘Al Al-Bayt, Vol. 5, Abwab ma yasjudu
alayh, Part one, p. 343, No. 6740.


