68. Poverty
===========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشَّيْطانُ يَعِدُكُمُ الْفَقْرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Shaitaan threatens you with poverty”***[^1]

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تحفة المومن فى الدنيا الفقر
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Poverty is a Mu'min’s gift in the world”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Usually, those belonging to the lower class suffer from indigence and
their numbers are large too. Since they are not contented and lack
patience - hunger, thirst, lack of accommodation, inability of their
children to tolerate penury and various sicknesses, brings about
helplessness in their lives as a result of which they tend to extend
their hands before others for assistance.

If poverty persists and a person lacks the ability to endure it, he may
occasionally get inclined towards sins and even *kufr* (disbelief).

A poor person must rely on God, abstain from avarice, be contented and
must exhibit patience to preserve his esteem and reputation, since the
Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) has said: *The
best of this ummah are the indigent ones and they shall enter paradise
before everyone else. Poverty is my glory; paradise is desirous of the
indigent ones and they are* *the kings of the inmates of paradise.*[^3]

1) The Poor Pious Person
------------------------

Sa’di relates:

I heard that a poor pious person, due to extreme poverty, was in great
adversity. Piece by piece he would repeatedly stitch his torn garment
and for serenity of mind would say: *With dry bread and a patched woolen
garment I shall content myself, my heavy burden I shall endure but not
the burden of someone’s obligation.*

A person said to him: *Why do you sit here? Do you not know that in the
city there lives an honourable and magnanimous gentleman, who has
resolved to help the needy ones and seeks the happiness of the pained
ones? Go to him and inform him of your state for if he comes to know of
your condition he shall provide you with food and new clothes and make
you happy!*

The pious person retorted: *Keep quiet! Stitching patches repeatedly on
one’s clothes and exhibiting endurance is better than approaching a rich
person and seeking clothes from him. Indeed, entering paradise as a
result of a neighbour’s intercession is equivalent to the tortures of
the fire of hell.*[^4]

2) The Destitute and Retirement
-------------------------------

An old blind man once came up to Amirul Mu'mineen (peace be upon him)
and sought some monetary assistance from him (peace be upon him). Imam
Ali (peace be upon him) turning to those around him asked: *Who is this
person and how is his state?*

They replied: *O’ Amirul Mu'mineen (peace be upon him)! He is a
Christian;* and spoke in a manner which conveyed that he should not be
given any assistance.

Noticing this, the Imam (peace be upon him) exclaimed: *What? Till such
time that he had the strength to work, you extracted work from him, and
now that he has turned frail, you leave him uncared-for! It appears that
when he was strong, he used to work and serve.*

Having said this, the Imam (peace be upon him) ordered: *He should be
given a pension from the Public Treasury.*[^5]

3) The Benefits of Assisting a Poor
-----------------------------------

One year, Abdullah Ibn Mubarak resolved to go to Makkah for Hajj. One
day, as he was passing through a lane, he suddenly witnessed a woman,
who bent down, picked up a dead and putrid fowl from the ground and hid
it under her cloak!

Abdullah said to her: *O’ Lady! Why have you picked up this fowl?*

The woman replied: *Need and adversity have compelled me to resort to
such an act!*

When Abdullah heard this, he took the indigent woman to his house and
handed her the five hundred dinars that he had set aside for Hajj.

That year, he did not go for Hajj. When the other pilgrims returned
after having performed their pilgrimage, he proceeded to welcome them.
As soon as they set their eyes upon him, they said to him: *We have seen
you performing the rites of Hajj at A’rafaat, Mina and other places.*

Astonished, Abdullah approached the Imam (peace be upon him) and
narrated the entire episode to him, whereupon he (peace be upon him)
clarified: *God had created an angel, in your likeness, to perform the
pilgrimage of the House of God (in your place).*[^6]

4) The Neighbour of Sayyid Jawaad
---------------------------------

Sayyid Jawaad A’amoli, a jurist and the author of the book Miftaah
al-Karaamah*,* narrates:

One night as I was having my meals, someone knocked at the door. Opening
the door, I saw it was the servant of Sayyid Bahr al-U’loom. He said to
me: *The dinner of Sayyid Bahr al-U’loom is ready and he awaits you.*

I accompanied the servant to the house of Sayyid Bahr al-U’loom; as soon
as I arrived in his presence, he said: *Do you not fear God that you
tend to be so negligent?*

I said humbly: *O’ Teacher! What is the matter?*

He said: *One of your brethren in faith, out of indigence, has only been
able to provide his family dates, and that too on credit; seven days
have passed without them having eaten anything except dates. Today he
approached a grocer to procure something, but the grocer flatly refused
causing him immense embarrassment. At the present moment he (Muhammad
Najm A’amoli) and his family have gone to sleep without dinner. You eat
a full dinner while you have a neighbor, who is needy and deserving!*

I pleaded: *I possessed no information whatsoever of his condition!*
Sayyid replied: *And had you been aware of his state and yet not helped
him, you would have been regarded as a Jew or even, an infidel; I am
distressed as to why you do not investigate the state of your brethren
in faith? My servant shall now carry these utensils of food; go with him
to that person’s house and tell him: “I desire that tonight we have
dinner together”. Then place this bag of money (120 riyals) under his
carpet and do not bring back the utensils.*

Sayyid Jawaad says: *I proceeded to the person’s house in the company of
the servant and acted as per the teacher’s instructions.* The neighbour
said to me: *No Arab can prepare this kind of meal. Tell me! To whom
does this food belong?* Upon his insistence, I confessed: *It belongs
to* *Sayyid Bahr al-U’loom.*

Hearing this, he was filled with great astonishment over this act of
Sayyid; taking an oath, he confided: *No one, save for God, has been
aware of my state - not even my next-door neighbours, let alone those
individuals who stay far from me*.[^7]

5) Abandoning Poverty is also Difficult!
----------------------------------------

During the time of the King Husain Kurt (771 – 732), there lived a
person by the name of Maulana Arshadi, who was well known for his
poverty and beggary; however, he possessed a beautiful voice by means of
which he would move the hearts of the people. When Husain Kurt desired
to send a messenger king Shujah of Shiraz, to convey his message to him,
the people suggested: *The speech of Maulana Arshad, the beggar, is
excellent.*

King Husain summoned him and said: *I intend to send you upon an
important mission. The only flaw that you possess is that you beg.
However, I am willing to send you to Shiraz if you promise not to bring
my name into disrepute by begging there.*

Saying this, he gave him twenty thousand dinars; on his part, Maulana
Arshadi promised that he would not beg in Shiraz.

Preparations were made for the journey, the money was handed over to him
and he eventually set out for Shiraz. Reaching there, he was given the
reply for the message that he had from King Husain; however, when he
desired to return, king Shujah and the members of his administration
expressed their desire to hear some sermon in his voice.

It was decided that he would preach in the mosque after the Friday
prayers. People as well as the members of the king’s administration had
gathered in the mosque to hear him speak.

On Friday, as he began to speak, it was not long before he had
captivated everyone by his voice; observing this, his trait of beggary
stimulated his greed and so, unable to restrain himself, he said: *I
have been placed under oath not to speak of my indigence and beggary.
However, from the time I have entered your city I have not witnessed any
charity from your side! Is it that all of you have taken an oath not to
give me any alms?*

Hearing this, the people burst out in laughter, and then proceeded to
give him so much money that he was left pleased and satisfied.[^8]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Baqarah (2), vs. 268.

[^2]: Jaame' Al-Sa'adaat, vol. 2, pg. 83.

[^3]: Ihyaa Al-Quloob, pg. 89.

[^4]: Hikaayat-ha-e-Gulistan, pg. 151.

[^5]: Baa Mardum In Guneh Barkhord Kuneem, pg. 30; Tahdheeb, vol. 6, pg.
292.

[^6]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, vol. 2, pg. 413; L’aali al-Akhbaar, pg. 253.

[^7]: Pand-e-Taareekh, vol. 1, pg. 140; Kalimah-e-Tayyibah, pg. 111.

[^8]: Lataaif al-Tawaaif, pg. 371.


