74. The Day of Judgment
=======================

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّما تُوَفَّوْنَ أُجُورَكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And you shall only be paid fully your reward on the resurrection
day”***[^1]

Imam Ali (peace be upon him) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْخَلْقَ لَا مَقْصَرَ لَهُمْ عَنِ الْقِيَامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For the people, there is no escape from Qiyaamah”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

After the Purgatory *(Barzakh),* all the people shall gather together on
a Day in which they would either be rewarded or punished and it would be
God, Who would be the Judge over them.

Those who had rejected and denied the truth would be led by the angels
towards torture and chastisement, while those who had endured hardships
in the way of religion and refrained themselves from sins would be
heralded towards Paradise.

That day is the *Qiyaamah* in which none shall be able to object or
protest; this is because in that angelic realm, all the deeds committed
in the world would be found recorded in a manner such that not a single
deed would be concealed or hidden for anyone to register a protest.

1) The Plaintiff of the Day of Judgment
---------------------------------------

Ja’far Tayyaar, the brother of Amirul Mu'mineen (peace be upon him),
together with eighty two other Muslims, emigrated to Ethiopia in the
fifth year after the proclamation of the Prophethood by the Holy Prophet
(peace be upon him and his holy progeny) so that not only would they
remain safe from the persecutions of the polytheists, but they would
also be able to propagate Islam there.

These emigrants stayed there for around twelve years, returning to
Medinah in the year 7 A.H., that is, around the time when the Muslims
had emerged victorious in the battle of Khaibar.

It has been reported that the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
holy progeny) asked Ja'far: *During your stay in Ethiopia, what strange
thing did you witness there?*

He replied: *I witnessed a black Ethiopian woman passing by, carrying a
large basket on her* *head. An eve-teaser elbowed her causing her to
fall down, as a result of which the basket on her head fell to the
ground as well. The woman turned to the person and said: “Woe unto you
from the Judge of the Day of Judgment, Who shall grant justice to the
oppressed from the oppressor.”*

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) hearing this,
was also overcome with great astonishment over this startling speech of
the woman.[^3]

2) The Most Wicked of the People on the Day of Judgment
-------------------------------------------------------

Abdullah Ibn Ubayy Salool (one of the most obstinate hypocrites of early
Islam and a staunch enemy of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
holy progeny) sought permission to arrive in his (peace be upon him and
his holy progeny) presence.

When the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) came to
realize who had come, he expressed his displeasure at the thought of
having to meet him; however, he ordered: *Allow him to enter.*

When he had entered, the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy
progeny) seated him and spoke to him in a warm and friendly manner. When
Abdullah had departed, A’aishah queried: *O’ Prophet of God! You had not
spoken well of him before his entry, however, after he had entered, you
spoke to him in a very cordial manner.*

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) stated: *O’
A’aishah! The most iniquitous of all people on the Day of Judgment shall
be one, whom the people respect in order that they may remain safe from
his evils.*[^4]

3) Fear of the Day of Judgment
------------------------------

Whenever the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) would
leave for a battle, he would make it a point to establish a bond of
brotherhood between two of his companions; he did so between Sa’eed Ibn
A'bd al-Rahmaan and Tha’labah Ansaari before he left for the battle of
Tabuk.

Sa’eed accompanied the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy
progeny) for jihad while Tha’labah stayed back and was responsible for
looking after his family.

One day when Tha'labah went to Sa’eed’s house for arranging food
provisions for his family, the Satan tempted him to look at Sa’eed’s
wife, and before long, he was soon overcome with lust. Approaching near,
he placed his hand upon her, at which point she cried out: *Is it
appropriate that while your brother has gone on jihad, you intend to
violate the chastity of his wife?*

These words affected him so drastically that he set out into the
wilderness and upon reaching the base of a mountain, fell onto the
ground and began weeping day and night - remorseful of his evil action.

When the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) and his
companions returned from battle, all the people from the city thronged
to welcome their brothers, except Tha'labah. Sa’eed went to his house
and questioned his wife about Tha'labah, whereupon she informed him of
what had transpired.

Sa’eed came out of his house and began to search for Tha'labah till he
eventually found him seated near a stone and repentantly slapping his
head and wailing out loudly: *Woe from the shame and humiliation of the
Day of Judgment.*

Sa’eed took him in his arms, consoled him and sought to take him to the
Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) to find out a way
for his forgiveness, but Tha'labah said: *Tie my hands and place a rope
around my neck in an appearance similar to that of slaves who have
attempted to run away.*

When Sa'eed brought him before the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and
his holy progeny), he (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said to
him: *You have indeed committed a grave offence. Go away from me, seek
forgiveness from God and await His orders.*

After a period of time, when the verse of Forgiveness and Repentance[^5]
was revealed at the time of the A'sr prayers, the Holy Prophet (peace be
upon him and his holy progeny) sent Ali (peace be upon him) and Salman
to bring Tha'labah.

They set out into the desert in search of him, eventually finding him
conversing with his Lord and seeking His forgiveness. Witnessing his
state, Amirul Mu'mineen’s (peace be upon him) eyes filled up with tears
and he (peace be upon him) gave him the good news that God had forgiven
him!

It was night when they brought him to Medinah; the Holy Prophet (peace
be upon him and his holy progeny) was reciting the chapter al-Takaathur
in the Maghribain prayers. No sooner did Tha'labah hear the first
verse[^6], he gave out a cry; hearing the second verse[^7], he shrieked
loudly and when he heard the third verse[^8], he fell down unconscious;
after the prayers, people found that he had died.

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) and the
companions began to weep. He (peace be upon him and his holy progeny)
instructed that Tha'labah be given the ablutions and prayers offered
over him. As he (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) accompanied
Tha’labah’s funeral procession, he was seen to be walking on the tips of
his toes. When the people sought to know the reason for it, he (peace be
upon him and his holy progeny) said: *The angels who had come to
participate in his prayers and join his funeral procession were so great
in number that I had to walk upon my toes!*[^9]

4) Imam al-Mujtaba
------------------

When Imam Hasan (peace be upon him) was about to die, those around him
observed that he (peace be upon him) was weeping and so they asked: *O’
Son of the Prophet of God! Despite your relationship with the Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) and the rank and status
that the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) has
mentioned about you do you still weep? Twenty times you have performed
Hajj on foot; on three occasions you have given one half of all your
wealth in the way of God, and yet you weep?*

The Imam (peace be upon him) said: *I weep due to fear of Qiyaamah and
separation from my friends.*[^10]

5) Taubah Ibn Summah
--------------------

There lived a person by the name of Taubah Ibn Summah, who spent most of
the time of his day and night in vigilance and self-examination of his
soul.

One day he sat to count the number of days he had lived and calculated
the figure to be 21,500. When the enormity of the figure struck him, he
said: *Woe unto me! Would I be meeting the Exalted God on the Day of
Judgment with this figure? If I were to have committed even one sin per
day, I would have 21,500 sins; what then would be my state?* Having said
this, he fell down unconscious.

When the people approached him, they found that he had died in that
state of unconsciousness; it was only the thought and fear of the
reckoning of the Day of Judgment that brought about his death.[^11]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Aale I’mraan (3), vs. 185.

[^2]: Nahjul Balaghah (Faidh), pg. 488.

[^3]: Hikaayat-ha-e-Shanidani, vol. 2, pg. 12; Aa’laam al-Waraa, pg. 21.

[^4]: Baa Mardum In Guneh Barkhord Koneem, pg. 129; Mustadrak
al-Wasaail, vol. 2, pg. 92.

[^5]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Aale I’mraan (3), vs.135.

[^6]: أَلْهاكُمُ التَّكاثُرُ

[^7]: حَتَّى زُرْتُمُ الْمَقابِرَ

[^8]: كَلاَّ سَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ

[^9]: Khazinah al-Jawaahir, pg. 315; Raudhah al-Anwaar of Sabzwaari.

[^10]: Pand-e-Taareekh, vol. 4, pg. 208.

[^11]: Sarmaayeh-e-Sa’adat, pg. 39.


