75. Working
===========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنْ لَيْسَ لِلْإِنْسانِ إِلاَّ ما سَعى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that man shall have nothing but what he strives for”***[^1]

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُؤْمِنَ إِذَا لَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ حِرْفَةٌ يَعِيشُ بِدِينِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If a Mu'min does not possess a profession, he shall endeavour to
earn his livelihood by using his religion*** **(which is immensely
reprehensible)*****”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

The best food for oneself and one’s family is that which has been
procured by one’s own effort, legitimately.

Lawful food is a consequence of lawful work and earnings, and one who
works in this manner and strives for the sake of himself and his family
is akin to a soldier striving in the way of God.

Those who have habituated themselves to laziness and lethargy, face
great difficulties with respect to their livelihoods such that they are
unable to procure earnings sufficient to fulfill even their basic
necessities. They thus, pollute themselves by engaging in illegal and
unlawful professions.

One who is incapable in earning his basic needs of this world, would
also be impotent in earning for his hereafter.

1) The Endowment Letter
-----------------------

During his caliphate Amirul Mu'mineen (peace be upon him) once said:
*All throughout Iraq my subjects are in ease and comfort – they drink
sweet water and eat bread made of wheat.*

The Imam (peace be upon him) had freed one of his slaves, by the name of
Abu Naizar, upon the condition that he should work for him (peace be
upon him) in his plantation for five years. Later on, the Imam (peace be
upon him) granted him the task of supervising his fields and springs,
one of which came to be popularly known as *‘river of Abu Naizar’.*

He relates:

One day the Imam (peace be upon him) came to inspect his field and
dismounting from his horse inquired: *Do you have some food with you?*

I replied: *Yes, although I fear it does not match up to your standards
– I have gourd with some fat oil.*

The Imam (peace be upon him) said: *Bring it.*

When I had brought the food, he washed his hands and then proceeded to
eat it. After he had finished, he washed his hands again, drank some
water and then said: *Bring me the pickaxe*.

When I brought it, he took it from me, entered into a dry well and began
to dig so hard that he was eventually overcome with exhaustion and
fatigue.

To do away his exhaustion he came out of the well; perspiration dripping
from his holy forehead which he would clear by means of his fingers.

A little later he once again entered the well, raising a din as he
worked hard in it. While he (peace be upon him) was digging, all of a
sudden, a fountain of water gushed out like the neck of a camel. The
Imam (peace be upon him) immediately emerged from within the well and
still perspiring, kept saying: *This is charity! This is charity. Bring
me some ink and paper.*

I hurriedly brought some ink and paper for the Imam (peace be upon him),
who wrote the following bequest: *This is an endowment from the servant
of God, Amirul Mu'mineen (peace be upon him) given to the needy ones of
Medinah as charity – a charity that cannot be sold, gifted or
transferred till for so long as God is the owner of the heavens and the
earth, except if Hasan and Husain* *(peace be upon them) fall in need of
it for then this well would become their property.*[^3]

2) U'mar Ibn Muslim
-------------------

One day Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) inquired about one of his
companions by the name of U'mar Ibn Muslim, whereupon a person informed
him: *He has confined himself to acts of worship and has totally
abandoned his trade.*

Hearing this, the Imam (peace be upon him) said: *Woe unto him! Does he
not know that the prayers of one, who abandons his work and profession
are not answered?*

Continuing, the Imam (peace be upon him) related:

When the second and third verses of the chapter al-Talaaq were revealed,
stating: ***“And whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah, He will make
for him an outlet, And give him sustenance from whence he thinks not;
and whoever trusts in Allah, He is sufficient for him”***[^4]***,***
some of the companions of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
holy progeny) enclosed themselves in their houses, abandoned their work
and confined themselves in acts of worship, saying: *God is sufficient
for us to provide us sustenance.*

When the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) was
informed of this, he asked them: *What has caused you to adopt this
attitude?*

They replied: *According to the second and third verses of the chapter
al-Talaaq, God has taken upon Himself to provide us our sustenance and
hence we have restricted our activities to acts of His worship!*

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) rebuked them
saying: *The prayers of one, who abandons his work and busies himself in
worship, are not answered. It is incumbent upon you to work and earn
your sustenance.*[^5]

3) To Work is Better than Consuming Charity
-------------------------------------------

Once the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) was
informed that a person from Madinah had become afflicted with abject
poverty. He (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said: *Bring him to
me!*

When some people brought the person before him, he (peace be upon him
and his holy progeny) said to him: *Bring whatever you possess in your
house; do not regard anything as insignificant.*

The person went home and returned with a bowl and sackcloth. The Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) placed them for
auction, and they were eventually purchased by a person for two dirhams.

Handing over the money to the poor Muslim, the Holy Prophet (peace be
upon him and his holy progeny) advised: *Utilize one dirham to buy some
food for your family and use the other dirham to purchase an axe for
yourself.*

The man did as instructed; purchasing an axe he approached the Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny), who then said to him:
*Go into the desert and collect firewood; collect every piece of wood
that you find and do not consider anything to be trivial and
insignificant, and then proceed to sell them.*

He went away and begun to act as per the instructions of the Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny). Fifteen days later his
financial state had improved; he came to the Holy Prophet (peace be upon
him and his holy progeny) who said to him: *It is better for you that
you work and earn your wage rather than take charity and enter the
plains of Qiyaamah on the Day of Judgment with the ugly sign of charity
manifesting upon your face.*[^6]

4) Putting the Soul to Labour
-----------------------------

Fadhl Ibn Abi Qarrah relates:

Once when we approached Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him), we found him
hard at work in his field. Observing this, we said to him (peace be upon
him): *May we be made your ransom! Either permit us to do the work or
let your servants do it.*

The Imam (peace be upon him) said: *No. Let me work. I desire that I
meet God after having exerted myself and worked by my own hands in
seeking lawful sustenance.*

He (peace be upon him) then added: *Even Ali (peace be upon him) used to
inconvenience himself for the purpose of procuring lawful income.*[^7]

5) Ya’qub Ibn Laith Saffaar
---------------------------

All the rulers of the Saffaar dynasty had been Shiites and their rule
had extended for a period of fifty six years. They were seven in number,
the first of them being Ya'qub Ibn Laith Saffaar (d. 265 A.H.).

Ya'qub originally was a coppersmith by profession and it is for this
reason that he came to be known as Saffaar. Slowly, he set about
gathering an army for himself and began killing the anti-religious
*Khawaarij*. His activities witnessed an upturn till he eventually
occupied Khorasan, Seestaan and several other cities.

It has been recorded that he was an extremely gifted administrator such
that few have been known to possess the management and systematization
skills that he possessed. The obedience of his soldiers to his orders
was unparalled.

When Ya'qub would order his army to proceed for battle, the soldiers
would ready themselves in such a manner that they would collect their
mounts while they were grazing, mount them and set out towards their
target.

It was observed that once, a person’s horse was chewing some hay; the
person pulled it out of the animal’s mouth in order that there be no
delay, even in the measure of chewing of the grass by the animal, in
obeying the orders of the Ya’qub. Addressing the horse, he said: *King
Ya'qub has prohibited the animals from eating their food!*

Another person was observed to be naked under his battle-dress. When
questioned, he replied: *I was engaged in performing the ablution of
janaabat when the king’s announcer announced: “Get ready for battle”.
Not wanting to delay myself in complying with the king’s order, I did
not wear my clothes and satisfied myself with wearing only the
battle-dress!*[^8]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Najm (53), vs. 39.

[^2]: Bihaar al-Anwaar, vol. 103, pg. 9.

[^3]: Islam Wa Kaar Wa Kushish, pg. 24.

[^4]: َ مَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجاً وَ يَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ
حَيْثُ لا يَحْتَسِبُ وَ مَنْ يَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ فَهُوَ حَسْبُهُ‏

[^5]: Daastaan-ha Wa Pand-ha, vol. 9, pg. 73.

[^6]: Hikaayat-ha-e-Shanidani, vol. 3, pg. 57; Bihaar al-Anwaar, vol.
103, pg. 10.

[^7]: Shanidani-ha-e-Taareekh, pg. 47; Mahajjah al-Baidhaa, vol. 3, pg.
147.

[^8]: Tatimmah al-Muntaha, pg. 262.


