77.  Helping Others
===================

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَجَدَا فِيهَا جِدَارًا يُرِيدُ أَن يَنقَضَّ فَأَقَامَهُ قَالَ لَوْ
شِئْتَ لَتَّخَذْتَ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then they found in it a wall which was on the point of falling, so
he put it into a right state”***[^1]

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن قَضَى لِاَ خِيْهِ الْمُوْمِن حاَجَةً فَكَانَّما عَبدَ اللهَ
دَهْرَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“One who fulfils the desire of his brother Mu’min, would be as if he
has worshipped God for his entire life”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

God has created the people in a manner that they remain associated and
connected to one another so that, by this way, they strive to fulfill
each other’s needs and requirements.

At times a Mu'min falls in need of money for his house rent or treatment
of disease or requires a recommendation in order to attain someone’s
assistance but some people, despite possessing the means and the
ability, due to some imaginary or apparent benefits, hesitate to offer
their help. In such cases, God gets them entangled with their enemies
(in this world) while, on the Day of Judgment, they shall be made to
suffer punishment and chastisement.

The recommendations and rewards related to fulfilling the needs of the
people have been emphasized in such great measure that one is left
amazed that despite this great path available for procuring the success
in the hereafter, how very few are those who make the best of it.

Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) has stated: *Fulfilling a need of a
Mu'min brother is better than liberating a thousand slaves and giving a
thousand horses (for jihad) in the path of God.*

Despite all the emphasis, it is the whisperings (of the Shaitaan) and
attachment to the world, which prevent man from helping out the
others.[^3]

1) Nine Thousand Years
----------------------

Maimoon Ibn Mahraan narrated:

I was sitting beside Imam Hasan (peace be upon him) when a man came up
to him and said: *O’ Son of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
holy progeny)! I owe a person a debt but do* *not possess any money to
repay it and so he intends to hurl me into prison.*

The Imam (peace be upon him) said: *Presently I do not possess any money
by which I can pay off your debt.* The man pleaded: *Then do something
so that he does not put me into prison.*

The Imam (peace be upon him) had been in a state of *itekaaf*, but he
put on his shoes and intended to move out of the mosque whereupon I said
to him: *O’ Son of the Prophet of God! Have you forgotten that you are
in a state of itekaaf (and you must not go out of the mosque)?*

The Imam (peace be upon him) said: *No! I have not forgotten. However I
have heard from my father that the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and
his holy progeny) used to say: “One, who strives to fulfill a desire of
his Muslim brother is like one who has spent nine thousand years,
fasting during the days and worshipping during the nights.*[^4]

2) Breaking the Circumambulation
--------------------------------

Aabaan Ibn Taghlib narrates:

I was engaged in the circumambulation of the Ka’bah in the company of
Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) when one of my friends asked me to move
to a side and listen to his request. Not wanting to leave the company of
the Imam (peace be upon him), I ignored him and disregarded his request.

In the next round around the Ka’bah that person signaled me to come
towards him; this time however the Imam (peace be upon him) happened to
see him and so asked me: *O’ Aabaan! Does he have some work with you?* I
replied in the affirmative, whereupon the Imam (peace be upon him)
inquired: *Who is he?* I said: *One of my friends.* The Imam (peace be
upon him) further inquired: *Is he also a Mu'min and a Shiite?* I
replied: *Yes.* Hearing this, the Imam (peace be upon him) instructed:
*Go to him and fulfill his desire.*

*Should I discontinue my circumambulation?* I queried. He (peace be upon
him) replied: *Yes.* I asked: *Is it permissible to discontinue even the
obligatory circumambulations and leave them midway if it is for the
purpose of fulfilling the needs of a Mu'min?* He (peace be upon him)
replied: *Yes.*

I halted my circumambulation and proceeded towards the man. After
assisting the person, I returned to the Imam (peace be upon him) and
requested him to inform me of the rights of a Mu'min upon another
Mu'min…[^5]

3) Concern towards the Needy
----------------------------

Waqidi relates:

It so happened that once I was faced with abject poverty and was
compelled to seek a loan from an A’lawi[^6] friend of mine, especially
since the month of Ramadhan was near at hand. I wrote him a letter and
he reciprocated by sending me a sac containing one thousand dirhams.

Soon after, I received a letter from another friend requesting me to
assist him with a loan. I sent the sac containing the thousand dirhams,
which I had taken as loan, to him so that so that he could be relieved
of his problem.

It was not long before both, the *A’lawi* friend as well as one to whom
I had sent the money, arrived at my place. The *A’lawi* enquired: *What
did you do with the money that I sent to you?* I said: *I have utilized
it in a good deed.* Hearing this he laughed and, placing that sac of
money before me, said: *Having sent you the money,I had no more money
left. With the month of Ramadhan approaching, I decided to seek some
money from this friend, only to receive the sac with my own seal upon
it, which I had sent for you.*

*As all of us are in need, we have come here so that we distribute the
money amongst ourselves till such time that God provides an opening for
us.*

We divided the money amongst ourselves and parted from each other.

However within the first few days of the month of Ramadhan all the money
was exhausted. One day Yahya Ibn Khaalid summoned me; when I presented
myself before him, he said: *I have dreamt that you are faced with
poverty. Tell me the truth.*

When I narrated to him the past incidents, he was greatly astonished,
and subsequently ordered thirty thousand dirhams to be given to me and
ten thousand dirhams to be given to each of the other two friends.

It was because of our concern and care towards fulfilling the needs of
our brethren that this windfall came our way.[^7]

4) Extinguishing the Lamp
-------------------------

Haarith says:

One night I was engaged in conversation with Amirul Mu'mineen (peace be
upon him). As we talked, I said to him (peace be upon him): *I am in
need of something.*

The Imam (peace be upon him) said: *O’ Haarith! Do you regard me worthy
of informing me of your need?*

*Of course O’ Ali:* I said

When he heard this, the Imam (peace be upon him) suddenly rose from his
place and extinguished the lamp; then, with great affection and
compassion he sat down beside me and said: *Do you know why I have
extinguished the lamp?* *I have done this so that you can speak out all
that is there in your heart without any kind of formality, and that I do
not see the embarrassment upon your face.*

*Now speak out all that you desire to state for I have heard the Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) say: “When the needs of
a person are placed in the heart of another, they becomes a divine
trust, which must be concealed from others; the one who conceals them,
shall be given the rewards of worship.*

*But if they happen to be divulged, it befits all those who become aware
of them to endeavour to fulfill them for the needy one.”*[^8]

5) Lettuce
----------

One of the scholars of Najaf relates:

One day, at a greengrocer’s shop, I witnessed the late Ayatullah Sayyid
Ali Aaqa Qaadhi[^9] (d. 1366 A.H.) busy selecting lettuces. However,
contrary to the normal practice, I observed him selecting those that had
become withered and those that possessed large and coarse leaves.

He selected the lettuces and handed them to the owner of the shop, who
weighed it for him after which, tucking them under his cloak, he moved
out of the shop. I hastened after him and enquired: *Sir, why did you
select the lettuces that were inferior and undesirable?*

He replied: *This greengrocer is a poor person and I occasionally help
him; however, I do not wish to give him something gratuitously so that
firstly, his esteem and honour does not erode and secondly, he does not,
God forbid, habituate himself to taking things free of charge and thus
become lax in his work.*

*I am aware that no one shall purchase these lettuces from him and he
shall have to dump them outside when he closes his shop and so, in order
to prevent him from suffering losses, I purchased them from him.*

*As for me, it does not make a difference if I eat lettuces that
delicate and tender or those that are large and coarse!*[^10]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Kahf (18), vs. 77.

[^2]: Jaame' al-Sa'adaat, vol. 2, pg. 230.

[^3]: Ihyaa al-Quloob, pg. 121.

[^4]: Riwaayat-ha Wa Hikaayat-ha, pg. 122; Daastaan-ha-e-Paraakandeh,
vol. 2, pg. 152.

[^5]: Shanidani-ha-e-Taareekh, pg. 69; Mahajjah al-Baidhaa, vol. 3, pg.
356.

[^6]: One, who is from the descendants of Imam A'li (peace be upon him)
(Translator’s comments)

[^7]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, vol. 2, pg. 438; Farajun Ba’d al-Shiddah, pg.
186.

[^8]: Baa Mardum In Guneh Barkhord Koneem, pg. 95; Wafi, vol. 6, pg. 59.

[^9]: He was the teacher of irfaan (mysticism) for Allamah Tabatabai,
Ayatullah Behjat, Ayatullah Sayyid A'bd al-Kareem Kashmiri and numerous
others, and truly, the like of him has rarely been seen in the past
sixty years.

[^10]: Seema-e-Farzaanegaan, pg. 349; Mehr-e-Taabaan, pg. 20.


