78. Malice
==========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ نَزَعْنَا مَا فىِ صُدُورِهِم مِّنْ غِلٍ‏ّ ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We will remove whatever of ill-feeling is in their
breasts”***[^1]

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المومن ليس بحقود
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A Mu'min is never malicious”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Malice is housed within the soul. A malicious person, because of the
fact that he cannot prevail over his opponent or has been insulted,
abused, suffered false allegations or has been deprived of rank or
riches, continues to harbour enmity towards a person and awaits for an
opportune and sensitive moment when he can overcome and destroy him.

A malicious person, upon witnessing the person whom he resents, is
always disturbed; the flames of malice and acrimony, if not checked,
would only intensify to an extent that when the faculty of reason and
intellect gets overpowered by the faculty of anger, man, God forbid,
perpetrates an act, repentance over which does not yield any benefit.

A Mu'min is never malicious and vindictive, either entrusting the evils
committed by a person to God, or pardoning and disregarding them –
always seeking assistance from the faculty of reason so as to prevent
himself from burning in the flames of malice and rancour.[^3]

1) Maliciousness of Waleed
--------------------------

A’qabah, the father of Waleed (the governor of Kufah), had once spat
upon the face of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy
progeny) in Mecca. He had joined the ranks of the infidels in the battle
of Badr. When the infidels were defeated, Aqabah was taken captive and
brought before the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy
progeny), who ordered Amirul Mu'mineen (peace be upon him) to put him to
death.

Consequently, his son Waleed, who had been appointed the governor of
Kufah during the caliphate of U'thman, always harboured malice towards
Amirul Mu'mineen (peace be upon him) and continued to abuse him (peace
be upon him) throughout his life.

When Waleed fell ill, Imam Hasan (peace be upon him) paid him a visit.
He opened his eyes and witnessing Imam Hasan (peace be upon him) said:
*I am repentant of all my past deeds and seek God’s forgiveness for
them, except the abuses which I hurled at your father, for which I am
not repentant.*

The Imam (peace be upon him) said: *My father had killed your father and
had punished you (for consuming wine) and this is the reason of your
animosity towards him (and it is this malice that has provoked you to
abuse him).*[^4]

2) Ibn Sallaar
--------------

In the sixth century a person by the name of Ibn Sallaar, one of the
officers of the Egyptian army, rose to the rank of minister and ruled
over the people with comprehensive power and authority.

On the one hand he was courageous, intelligent and active, while on the
other hand self-centered and malicious and hence, while he was a
minister, he not only served the people but also committed great and
numerous acts of oppression.

During the time when he was a soldier in the army, he was sentenced to
pay certain damages and compensation. He appealed to Abi al-Karam, the
clerk of the treasury, for justice, but Abi al-Karam refused to consider
his explanations and upheld the sentence saying: *Your words do not
enter into my ears.* Ibn Sallaar was infuriated and continued to harbour
malice towards him. When he became the minister and an opportunity
presented itself for revenge, he had Abi al-Karam arrested and ordered a
long nail to be hammered into one of his ear till it emerged from the
other one.

While the nail was being hammered, whenever Abi al-Karam would shriek
out in pain, Ibn Sallaar would say: *Now my words have entered into your
ears!*

Later, upon Ibn Sallaar’s orders, the lifeless body of Abi al-Karam with
the hammered nail was hung up on the gallows.[^5]

3) Rancour Transforms into Friendship
-------------------------------------

Shaibah’s father was called U'thman, who, along with the other
disbelievers, was killed in the battle of Uhud. Since the Holy Prophet
(peace be upon him and his holy progeny) had killed his father and eight
persons from his family, Shaibah held an intense grudge against him.

He himself said: *There was none towards whom I harboured more animosity
than Muhammad, for he had killed eight persons from my family, all of
whom possessed the competence and ability to be leaders and commanders.
I had always nurtured the idea of killing him but, after the conquest of
Mecca, I lost hope of achieving my goal for I used to think:* *How would
it be possible for me to achieve my objective when all the Arabs had
flocked into his religion.*

However when the people of Hawaazan united in their opposition towards
him (peace be upon him) and declared their intention to fight him (peace
be upon him and his holy progeny), the desire of mine was to a certain
extent rekindled within my heart. But the problem that lay before me was
that he (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) was surrounded by ten
thousand soldiers!

However when the Muslim forces fled in their first encounter with the
forces of Hawaazan, I said to myself: *This is the opportunity to
achieve my objective and take revenge for the killings (of the family
members).*

I attacked the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny)
from the right flank but found A'bbas, his uncle, guarding him. Coming
up from the left flank, I realized that Abu Sufiyaan Ibn Haarith, (peace
be upon him and his holy progeny) was vigilant of him and said to
myself: *This person guarding Muhammad is also a brave person.*

I then came up from behind up and reached so close that my sword was
about to reach him when suddenly, a veil of fire appeared as a barrier
between him and me leaving my eyes dazzled with its intensity. Covering
my face with my hands I retreated, realizing that he was under God’s
protection.

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) became aware
of me and said: *Shaibah come near.* When I had done so, he (peace be
upon him and his holy progeny) placed his hand upon my chest and said:
*O’ Lord! Ward away the Shaitaan from him.* Now when he looked at me, I
found him to be dearer to me than my own self and all the former rancour
had been transformed into friendship and affection.

I then engaged myself in fighting against the enemies and was so devoted
in assisting the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny)
that even if my father were to have stood up before me, I would have
killed him too.

After the battle had concluded, he (peace be upon him and his holy
progeny) said to me: *What God has desired for you is better than what
you had desired for yourself.*[^6]

4) The Vindictive Hypocrite
---------------------------

Rancour and malice are of the signs of hypocritical individuals and
during the time of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy
progeny), they used to manifest these in various forms.

Once the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) was
seated in the mosque in the company of a group of *Muhaajir* (The
Emigrants) and *Ansaar* (The Helpers), when suddenly Ali (peace be upon
him) entered. Those present rose up in respect and warmly welcomed him
till he (peace be upon him) sat in his usual place - near the Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny).

Meanwhile, two individuals in the gathering who were being suspected of
hypocrisy, began to whisper to each other.

Observing them, the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy
progeny) realized why they were speaking amongst themselves. This
enraged him so much that the signs of infuriation became manifest upon
his face. He then said: *By The One in Whose power lies my soul! None
shall enter Paradise except he who loves me. And do know that one who
imagines that he loves me but regards this person as an enemy (Ali Ibn
Abi Talib), is a liar.*

At this moment Ali’s hand was in the hand of the Holy Prophet (peace be
upon him and his holy progeny) and the following verse was revealed[^7]:
***O you who believe! when you confer together in private, do not give
to each other counsel of sin and revolt and disobedience to the
Messenger, and give to each other counsel of goodness and guarding
(against evil); and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, to Whom you
shall be gathered together.*** [^8]

5) The Liver Eating Hind
------------------------

In the battle of Uhud, Hamzah, the Chief of the Martyrs and the uncle of
the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) killed nearly
thirty people before he was eventually martyred.

Hind, the wife of Abu Sufiyaan, in maliciousness, had no parallel
amongst all the ladies of her time. She promised Wahshi, the slave of
Jubair Ibn Muti’m, great wealth and riches if he would kill Hamzah. Thus
Wahshi lay in ambush for Hamzah, and pierced his dagger into Hamzah’s
body and killed him.

As per the instructions of Hind, he then split open Hamzah’s stomach and
removed his liver. When it was brought before Hind, she began to bite it
and it is because of this that Hind came to be notoriously known as
‘liver-eater’.

As per her promise, Hind gave all her ornaments to Wahshi. Then coming
to the body of Hamzah, due to the malice that had existed in her heart,
she cut off his ears, nose, lips and proceeded to make a crude necklace
out of them so that she could take it to Mecca and display it to the
ladies there. The other ladies of Mecca followed suit in mutilating the
bodies of the other martyrs.

The vindictive Abu Sufiyaan too, when he stood over the body of Hamzah,
pierced his spear into a corner of his mouth and said: *O’ disowned one!
Taste this!*[^9]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Aa’raaf (7), vs. 43.

[^2]: Jaame' al-Sa'adaat, vol. 1, pg. 311.

[^3]: Ihyaa al-Quloob, pg. 64.

[^4]: Kaifer-e-Kirdaar, vol. 1, pg. 109.

[^5]: Daastaan-ha Wa Pand-ha, vol. 1, pg. 163; Lughat Naameh-e-Dehkhuda,
Abu Sa’d, pg. 320.

[^6]: Paighambar Wa Yaaraan, vol. 3, pg. 298; Bihaar al-Anwaar, vol. 21,
pg. 156.

[^7]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Mujaadilah (58), vs. 9 يَأَيهَُّا الَّذِينَ
ءَامَنُواْ إِذَا تَنَاجَيْتُمْ فَلَا تَتَنَاجَوْاْ بِالْاثْمِ وَ
الْعُدْوَانِ وَ مَعْصِيَتِ الرَّسُولِ وَ تَنَاجَوْاْ بِالْبرِِّ وَ
التَّقْوَى‏ وَ اتَّقُواْ اللَّهَ الَّذِى إِلَيْهِ تحُْشَرُون‏

[^8]: Hikaayat-ha-e-Shanidani, vol. 4, pg. 159; Bihaar al-Anwaar, vol.
39, pg. 270.

[^9]: Muntahal Aa’maal, vol. 1, pg. 61.


