79. Weeping
===========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَضْحَكُواْ قَلِيلًا وَ لْيَبْكُواْ كَثِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore they shall laugh little and weep much”***[^1]

Imam Ali (peace be upon him) had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُكاءُ الْعُيُون وَ خَشْيَةُ الْقُلوبِ مِنْ رَحْمَةِ اللهِ تَعاَليَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The weeping of the eyes and the fear of the hearts are of the mercy of
God, The Exalted”*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

One of the manifestations of divine mercy is weeping. Tears flow out for
a number of reasons – out of attraction for those, who are attracted;
out of sorrow for those who are in misery and out of worldly losses for
those who are attached to the world.  
 If one weeps as a result of an inner change, it is due to Divine grace
but if it stems from deceit (like the brothers of Yusuf), its
pretentiousness shall become apparent and its evil effects manifest.

If a person cannot weep, he should put up an appearance of weeping in
order that he becomes a recipient of divine mercy, especially so with
respect to Imam Husain (peace be upon him) as it has been greatly
emphasized to shed tears over him (peace be upon him).

1) Prophet Nuh
--------------

The name of Prophet Nuh had been A'bd al-Ghaffaar. After the lashing of
the storm, the rising of the water and the drowning of the people, the
archangel Jibraeel approached him and said: *Some time back, your
profession was carpentry, now turn to pottery!*

When Prophet Nuh had constructed numerous pots, Jibraeel said to him:
*God has commanded* *you to break the pots.* Nuh hurled some of the pots
onto the ground and broke them – some of them he hurled lightly while
others he dashed with reluctance and disinclination. A little later
Jibraeel observed that he (peace be upon him) was not breaking any more
pots and so questioned: *Why don’t you break them?*

He (peace be upon him) replied: *My heart is unwilling to break them for
I have spent a lot of effort in constructing them.*

Jibraeel said to him (peace be upon him): *O’ Nuh! Do any of these pots
possess life? Do they possess fathers, mothers etc.?*

Continuing, he said: *The earth and water are from God. Your only
contribution was that you exerted yourself and constructed them, but yet
you are reluctant and unwilling to break them. So how did you permit
yourself to curse the people and destroy them all despite the fact that
they had been created by God and possessed life and had fathers and
mothers…*?

Hearing this Nuh wept bitterly and intensely and hence came to acquire
the title of Nuh.[^3]

2) Prophet Yahya
----------------

Prophet Yahya (peace be upon him) once came to *Bayt al-Maqdas* and
witnessed some clerics and priests wearing coarse garments and woolen
caps. He requested his mother to arrange for him a similar dress so that
he too could engage himself in worship with them. When his mother gave
him the outfit, he engaged himself in worship in *Bayt al-Maqdas*.

One day, looking at himself in the mirror and observing that he had
become very thin, he began to weep. God revealed to him: *You weep
because your body has become thin? By My Honour and Glory! If you were
to possess the slightest awareness of the fire of Hell, you would have
worn a garment made of iron rather than one made of fabric.*  
 Hearing this, Yahya (peace be upon him) wept immensely and intensely.

One day his father, Zakariya (peace be upon him) said to him: *Dear son!
Why do you weep so much? I had sought you from God so that you may be
the apple of my eye!*

Yahya (peace be upon him) replied: *But were you not the one, who had
said that between Paradise and Hell lies a pass; none shall traverse it
except those who weep intensely out of fear of God?*

Yahya (peace be upon him) used to weep so much that his mother arranged
for him two pieces of felt, which would absorb the tears which flowed
from his eyes. When they would become drenched with his tears, he would
squeeze the felt and tears would flow down from them from between his
fingers.

Zakariya (peace be upon him) would look at his son, raise his head
towards the heavens and say: *O’ Lord! This is my son and these are his
tears and You are the most Merciful of the merciful* *ones.*

When Yahya (peace be upon him) would hear the name of Sukran (a mountain
in Hell), in a state of utter perturbation and distress, he would rush
out into the desert crying: *Woe (unto me) due to heedlessness (with
respect to God)*, and his father and mother would rush out after him in
the desert.[^4]

3) The Intense Weeping of Hadhrat Zahra
---------------------------------------

The loss of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny),
the sacrilege committed in connection with Wilayah and the injurious
blows (to her) caused *Hadhrat* Zahra (peace be upon her) to become
tearful.

The people of Medinah used to be inconvenienced by her weeping and so
said to her (peace be upon her): *We are troubled by your wailings!*
Thus she was compelled to go to the graves of the martyrs of Uhud for
weeping and then return to Medinah.

In another tradition it has been reported that the elders of Medinah
approached Imam Ali (peace be upon him) and said: *O’ Aba al-Hasan!
Fatimah weeps during the day and the night and none of us are able to
sleep at night. During the day, we are unable to rest due to our
involvement in earning the livelihood, while at night we are unable to
do so due to her (peace be upon her) weeping. Ask her to weep either
during the day or during the night.* The Imam (peace be upon him)
conveyed this message to her (peace be upon her) whereupon she said: *O’
Aba Al-Hasan! I shall not remain in this world for long but shall
shortly depart from amidst the people. I shall never be able to calm
myself from my weeping till I am united with my father.*

Imam (peace be upon him) constructed for her, in the cemetery of Baqee’
outside Medinah, a room of bricks and date-palm leaves by the name of
*Bayt al-Ahzaan.* Every morning, Zahra (peace be upon her) would take
her children and go to Baqee’ where she would weep incessantly amongst
the graves; when night would fall, the Imam (peace be upon him) would
come and bring her home with him.[^5]

4) Thirty Five Years of Weeping!
--------------------------------

Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: *The fourth Imam (peace be upon
him) wept for his father for around forty years, the days of which he
used to remain in a state of fasting while the nights he would pass in
worship. When it would be time for breaking the fast, his slave would
bring food and water, and placing them before him, say: “Eat it”.
(Whereupon) he (peace be upon him) would say: “My father was killed in a
state of hunger and thirst”, and then he would weep so intensely that
his food would become moistened by his tears. And this continued for as
long as he was alive.*

One of the friends of Imam Sajjaad (peace be upon him) says:

One day the Imam (peace be upon him) had started out for the desert and
so I too went after him. When I found him, I saw him prostrating upon a
rough stone, weeping and wailing and counted that he recited a dhikr a
thousand times. He then raised his head (and I observed) that his face
and beard were moistened with tears.

I said to him: *O’ My Master! End your sorrow and reduce your weeping!*
He said: *Woe unto you! Ya'qub, the son of Ishaaq, was a prophet and the
son of a prophet. He had twelve sons and when one of them was lost, he
was so grieved that his hair turned white, his body bent over and due to
the intense weeping his eyes lost their vision, and this despite the
fact that his son was still alive. But I have seen my father, brother
and seventeen persons from my family being killed and lying on the
ground with my own eyes, so how can my sorrow end and how can the tears
of my eyes reduce?*[^6]

5) The Weeping of Mercy
-----------------------

From his first wife Khadijah, the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and
his holy progeny) had six children while from his other wives, it was
only Maria Qibti, who bore one son, whom the Holy Prophet (peace be upon
him and his holy progeny) named Ibrahim.

Ibrahim did not live for more than one year, two months and eight days
and passed away in the month of Dhul Hijjah in the year 8 A.H.

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) was overcome
with intense grief over the loss of Ibrahim and with tears flowing from
his eyes involuntary, he was heard saying: *The eyes are tearful and the
heart is anguished (but) we shall not say anything, which shall anger
the Lord. Surely we, O’ Ibrahim, are grief-stricken for you.*

A’aishah says: When tears began to flow from his eyes over his cheeks, a
person said: *“O’ Prophet of God! You prohibit us from weeping whereas
you yourself weep!* The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy
progeny) explained: *This is not weeping but mercy. One who does not
exhibit mercy shall not be encompassed by mercy.*[^7]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Taubah (9), vs. 82.

[^2]: Tafseer al-Mu’een, pg. 309.

[^3]: Jaame’ al-Nurain, pg. 122.

[^4]: Risaalah Liqaa Allah, pg. 157; Amaali Al-Saduq.

[^5]: Museebat-e-Buzurg, pg. 47;Bihaar al-Anwaar, vol. 43, pg. 155, 177.

[^6]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, vol. 2, pg. 589; Anwaar al-Nu’maaniyyah, pg. 2,
pg. 27.

[^7]: Daastaan-ha Wa Pand-ha, vol. 7, pg. 75; Wasaail al-Shia’h, vol. 2,
pg. 921.


