61. Knowledge
=============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَلَّمَكَ ما لَمْ تَكُنْ تَعْلَمُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He has taught you what you did not know”***[^1]

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُحِبُّ الْعِلْمَ اِلاَّ السَّعِيْدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“None loves knowledge except the one, who is fortunate (and
prosperous)”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

The way to attain cognisance of God and the *Sharia’h* is by means of
knowledge. Knowledge is an embellishment for man in this world, and
causes its owner to become one of those with whom God is pleased.

One who possesses knowledge, ought to realize that the acquisition of an
hour of knowledge demands a life-time of practice (in accordance with
the knowledge). Thus, when one seeks to acquire knowledge he should bear
in mind that he has to practice what he acquires. This is because God,
regarding a scholar that does not act in accordance with the knowledge
that he possesses, has said: “*From seventy of my punishments (that I
would subject him to), the least that I would do to him is to remove the
sweetness of My remembrance from his heart.”*[^3]

Knowledge does not mean mere memorization of terminologies, or
information that is not beneficial, or information that is accompanied
by evil intentions such as exhibiting one’s scholarly calibre before
other scholars - in which case it would only serve to be an encumbrance
and burden - rather, it means the comprehension of piety, (divine)
cognisance and certainty.

1) Al-Hajj Sheikh Abbas Qummi
-----------------------------

The late Sheikh Abbas Qummi, the author of Mafatih al-Jinan narrates:

“When I had compiled and published the book Manazil al-Akhirah*,* it
reached the hands of Sheikh Abd al-Razzaq who used to explain religious
rulings daily before dhuhr time in the holy courtyard of Hadhrat
Ma’sumah (peace be upon her).

My father, Kerbalai Muhammad Ridha, was greatly fond of Sheikh Abd
al-Razzaq and would attend his sessions every day. The Sheikh had
procured the book Manazil al-Akhirah and used to read from it for his
audience.

One day my father returned home and said to me: *O Sheikh Abbas! I wish
you would be like that person, who explains religious rulings, and climb
onto the pulpit and recite from the book in the manner he recited for us
today.*

Several times I felt the urge to tell him that the book was authored by
me, but I restrained myself and just said to him: *“Pray to God that He
may grant (me) grace and success (for such a venture).”* [^4]

2) The Tutor of Jibraeel
------------------------

Once, Jibraeel was engaged in a conversation with the Holy Prophet
(peace be upon him and his holy progeny) when Imam Ali (peace be upon
him) entered. As soon as Jibraeel’s eyes fell upon him he stood up and
displayed great respect towards him (peace be upon him).

Witnessing this, the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy
progeny) asked: *O Jibraeel! For what reason did you display such
respect for this young man?* Jibraeel replied: *How could I not exhibit
deference towards him when I am under his obligation by virtue of the
fact that he has taught me!*

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) inquired:
*What teaching?* Jibraeel replied: *After God created me, He questioned
me: “Who are you and who am I?”* *I did not know what to answer and so
remained silent for some time whereupon this youth appeared before me in
a state of light and taught me that I should say: “You are the Glorious
and Beautiful Lord while I am Jibraeel, a lowly servant.” And it is for
this reason that when I saw him now, I paid my respects to him.*

*How old are you, Jibraeel?* Asked the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him
and his holy progeny). He replied: *O Prophet of God! In the heavens
there is a star, which rises once every thirty thousand years, and I
have witnessed it thirty thousand times!*[^5]

3) The Practicing A’alim
------------------------

Sheikh Ahmad Ardabili, popularly known as Muqaddas Ardabili (d. 993 AH)
was an abstentious and practicing scholar, and lived contemporaneous to
scholars such as Sheikh Bahaai, Mulla Sadra and Mir Damaad. His grave
lies within the holy shrine of Imam Ali (a.s.) in the city of Najaf. It
has been reported that once a person had come to Najaf for pilgrimage
and not recognising him, had requested him to wash his clothes.

Muqaddas agreed and after washing it, brought it to the pilgrim. It was
at this point that the pilgrim happened to become aware of his identity
and felt greatly embarrassed at his own behaviour, and the people too
rebuked him for his conduct. Muqaddas, however, said:

*Why do you censure him? Nothing (significant) has happened. The rights
of brethren-in-faith are far more than what I have done for him.*[^6]

4) The Dangers of Possessing Knowledge without Prior Purification (of the Soul)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Mawardi, an inhabitant of Basra, was a judge, a
teacher of the Shafi’i jurisprudence and a contemporary of Sheikh Tusi.
He narrates:

I had expended great effort in writing a book on the religious rulings
relating to transaction and business, and had memorized all the details
in connection with the topic such that when the book reached completion,
it crossed my mind that I was the most learned of all in this topic; I
was overcome with pride, conceit and vanity.

One day, two Arab bedouins came to my assembly and sought to know from
me the ruling in connection with a transaction that had transpired in
their village. The issue also had four other offshoots to it; however I
was unable to provide answers to any one of them.

For a while I was lost in thought, I then said to myself: *You claim to
be the most learned of all your contemporaries in this chapter of
jurisprudence; how is it that you are unable to answer the questions of
the inhabitants of the village?*

Turning to them, I confessed: *I do not know the answers.* Astonished,
they said: *You ought to study more in order that you are able to answer
the questions.*

They left me and proceeded to refer their queries to a person, who in
terms of knowledge, was inferior to even some of my students, but when
they presented their questions to him, he was able to provide them with
the answers. The Bedouins were delighted to hear the answers and
praising him, left for their village.

Al-Mawardi says: *This incident caused me to come to my senses and
extricate my soul from conceit and vanity of knowledge so that I may not
incline towards self-praise in the future.*[^7]

5) Asma’i and the Officious Grocer
----------------------------------

Asma’i[^8] narrates:

The initial period of my education was endured in poverty and indigence.
Every morning when I would leave my house for acquiring knowledge I
would have to pass by an officious grocer who would question me: *Where
are you going?* I would reply: *I am going to gain knowledge.* On my way
back home, he would repeat the same question.

At times, he would say: *‘Don’t waste your life. Why don’t you learn
some work so that you can become wealthy and affluent? Give me these
books and papers of yours; I shall put them in the wine-jar and you will
see nothing shall remain of them.’*  
 He would constantly reproach me as a result of which I would become
disturbed, mentally.

Days passed by with such great financial hardships that I would be
unable to buy even a garment for myself.

Years passed till one day a messenger of the ruler of Basra approached
me and asked me to present myself before the ruler. I said to him: *“How
can I present myself before him in this torn garment?“* The messenger
departed, only to arrive again with some clothes and money. I wore the
clothes and arrived before the ruler. He said: *I have selected you to
educate the Caliph’s son* *and so you must proceed to Baghdad.*

I set off for Baghdad and approached the Abbasid caliph, Harun
al-Rashid, who ordered me to educate his son Muhammad Amin. With this,
my financial state gradually became extremely good.

Years passed and when Muhammad Amin had achieved a high level of
knowledge, Harun desired to test him asked him to deliver a sermon. One
Friday, Muhammad delivered an extremely eloquent sermon, which greatly
pleased Harun and so, turning to me, said: *What do you aspire for?* I
replied: *I wish to return to my birth-place, Basra.* He accepted my
request and arranged for me to return to Basra with great honour and
esteem.

The people of Basra came to meet me and amongst them was the officious
grocer. As soon as my eyes fell upon him, I said: *Do you observe the
fruits which that knowledge and those papers have yielded?*

Apologetic and rueful, he said: *I uttered those words out of ignorance.
Even though the returns may be delayed, but knowledge does yield returns
that possess worldly and religious benefits.*

[^1]: Qur’an, 4:113.

[^2]: Jami’ al-Sa’adat, v. 1, p. 104.

[^3]: Tadhkirah al-Haqaiq, p. 58.

[^4]: Seema-e-Farzanagan, p. 153; Mard-e-Taqwa wa Fadhilat, p. 48.

[^5]: Tuhfah al-Majalis, p. 80.

[^6]: Muntakhab al-Tawarikh, p. 181.

[^7]: Safinah al-Bihar, v. 2, p. 162.

[^8]: A'bd Al-Malik Ibn Qareeb Basri (d. 213 A.H.) had been of the great
narrators of poems and Arab traditions, and has several books to his
credit.


