63. Food
========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يُطعِمُونَ الطَّعاَمَ عَلیَ حُبِّهِ مِسکِيناً وَ يَتِيماً وَ
اَسِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan
and the captive”***[^1]

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الاِطعاَمَ مِن مُوجِباَتِ الجَنَّةِ وَ المَغفِرَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, feeding (others) is one of the causes for forgiveness (of
sins) and entering into Paradise”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Do know that eating less for the well-being of one’s interior and
exterior self is always recommended. Consuming food is indispensable for
the body and is necessary for procuring strength for performing acts of
worship and other needful tasks. However, eating excessively causes the
heart to become hard and cruel, passions to be aroused and the body to
become sick. It ought to be noted that procurement of food by lawful
means is mandatory; all the prophets and the *auliya* (friends of God)
always abstained from impure, unlawful and dubious food, and constantly
endeavoured to procure their livelihoods by lawful means. This is
because the foremost of the achievements and successes is attained by
means of the morsels that enter into the stomach.

1) The Excessive Eater and the Moderate Eater
---------------------------------------------

Two mystics from Khorasan set out on a journey together. One of them was
weak, consuming food only once in two nights, while the other was strong
and healthy, eating food three times a day.

As fate would have it, when they happened to be near a city both of them
were taken into custody, charged with spying for the enemies, imprisoned
in a house and the door of the house was locked and sealed. A couple of
weeks later it came to be known that they were not spies but two
innocent people. When the house was opened, it was observed that the
strong mystic had died while the weak one was still alive. The fact that
it was the stronger of the two, who had died caused great astonishment
amongst the people.

Coming to know of the bewilderment of the people, a learned doctor from
amongst them said: *On the contrary, it would have been a matter of
great astonishment had the weak mystic died; the death of the strong one
was caused by the fact that being an excessive eater, he could not get
himself to endure these fourteen days without food, whereas the weak
one, being accustomed to eating less, was able to endure this adversity
and managed to survive.*[^3]

2) Food with Friendship
-----------------------

Abd al-Rahman Ibn Hajjaj narrates:

We were in the house of Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) and were having
food with him when some more rice was brought for us. We sought to
excuse ourselves from eating more whereupon the Imam (peace be upon him)
said: *Whoever likes us more shall consume more food with us.*

Hearing this, we once again sat down and began eating the food.
Witnessing this, the Imam (peace be upon him) stated: *This is so much
better.*

He (peace be upon him) then continued: *One day, the Holy Prophet (peace
be upon him and his holy progeny) was presented with some rice,
whereupon he (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) invited Salman,
Abu Dharr and Miqdad to join him in eating it. They sought to excuse
themselves but he (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) insisted:
“Whoever likes us more ought to eat more with us.” Hearing this, all of
them ate to their full.*[^4]

3) One Morsel and Selling One’s Faith
-------------------------------------

Fadhl Ibn Rabi’ relates:

Once, *Sharik Ibn Abdullah Nakhai’* arrived before Mahdi Abbasi, the
third Abbasid Caliph, who said to him: *You must accept to perform one
of these three tasks: Become a judge in the judicial setup, educate my
children, or eat my food.*

Sharik thought that teaching the Caliph’s children was a tough
proposition; becoming a judge was tougher; however, eating the Caliph’s
food appeared to be simple and so he accepted the third option. Mahdi
instructed the cook to prepare various kinds of delicacies which were
then brought before Sharik, who satiated himself with them.

The kitchen attendant said to Mahdi: *O Caliph! This sheikh, after
consuming these delicacies, shall never attain salvation.*[^5]

Fadhl Ibn Rabi’ states:

By God! After consuming that food, not only did Sharik began to increase
his association with the Bani Abbas and agree to educate their children,
but also consented to become the judge. Once, Sharik’s pay-slip, which
was used to collect his salary from the treasury, was handed over to
him. When he approached the treasurer for his pay he insisted that he be
paid immediately in cash. Noting his insistence, the treasurer said to
him: *You have not sold linen or an expensive garment that you insist so
vehemently on receiving immediate cash payment.*

Hearing this, Sharik retorted: *By God! I have sold something that is
more precious than linen – I have sold my religion!*[^6]

4) The Blessing is in the Bread
-------------------------------

**The Blessing is in the Bread**[^7]

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) has said:
*Regard bread with great esteem for most of the entities that exist
between the Arsh (Throne) and the earth have some form of contribution
in making and preparing it.* He (peace be upon him and his holy progeny)
then said: *Previous to you, there lived a Prophet by the name of
Daniyal. One day he gave a loaf of bread to a pauper, who, upon
receiving it frowned and flung it in the middle of the road, saying:
What can I do with a loaf of bread, which has no worth.*

When Daniyal witnessed this he raised his hands towards the skies and
said: *Honour bread with a lofty rank!*

Due to that reprehensible act of that person, God withheld the rains
from pouring and prohibited the earth from bringing forth its
vegetation. Circumstances became so adverse that people resorted to
cannibalism, and began eating one another.

Two women, each of them possessing two children, decided amongst
themselves that one day the child of one woman would be eaten while the
next day it would be the turn of the child of the other. On that day one
child was consumed; however the next day, the mother of the other child
whose turn it was to be eaten, refused to give her child. This led to a
great dispute between them until eventually they approached Daniyal and
placed their issue before him.

When he came to realise the condition of the people, he prayed to God,
Who then opened the doors of His mercy upon them.[^8]

5) The Food of Death
--------------------

After the death of Mu’tasim Abbasi (d. 227 AH), his son Harun, titled
*Waathiq Billaah Abbasi,* became the Caliph. It has been recorded that
he was immensely fond of sexual intercourse, and so requested his doctor
to provide him a concoction that would serve to increase his sexual
strength.

*Excessive sexual intercourse wastes away the body and I do not want
your body to be wasted,* the doctor advised. But Waathiq insisted: *You
have got to prepare it for me.*

The doctor, seeing no alternative, set about to prepare the concoction;
he ordered meat of wild beasts to be boiled seven times in vinegar that
was procured from wine. This meat was to be consumed in a measure
equivalent to the weight of 54 peas, after drinking wine.

However, Waathiq consumed more than the prescribed quantity and before
long was afflicted with dropsy. The doctors were unanimous in their
opinion that his stomach would have to be split open after which he
would have to be placed within a furnace heated by means of olive oil.

They then set about putting their suggestion into execution and, despite
his repeated requests, refrained from providing him water for 3 hours
till large boils manifested themselves upon his body, whereupon he was
taken out of the furnace.

*Do not place me in the furnace again for I shall surely die,* he
beseeched, but once again they put him inside. When the boils burst they
pulled him out of the furnace in a state that his entire body had turned
black; he died shortly afterwards.

A cloth was placed over his dead body, and his corpse lay forgotten and
unattended as the people soon became occupied in pledging allegiance to
his brother Mutawakkil. Thus, in the year 232 AH, at the age of 34, he
succumbed to his food of death.[^9]

[^1]: Qur'an, 76:8.

[^2]: Safinah al-Bihar, v. 2, p. 83.

[^3]: Hikaayat-ha-e-Gulistaan, p. 154.

[^4]: Shanidanihaa-e-Taareekh, p. 26; Mahajjah al-Baydha, v. 3, p. 22.

[^5]: لَيسَ يُفلحُ الشّيخُ بَعدَ هَذِهِ الاَکلَةِ اَبَداً

[^6]: Pand-e-Taareekh, v. 4, p. 86; Muruj al-Dhahab, v. 3, p. 320.

[^7]: The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) has
said: اللَّهُمَّ باَرِک لَناَ فيِ الخُبز and also اَکرِمُوا الخُبز

[^8]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, v. 1, p. 276; Safinah al-Bihar, v. 1, p. 375.

[^9]: Tatimmah al-Muntaha, p. 231.


