65. Anger
=========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لا تَتَوَلَّوْا قَوْماً غَضِبَ اللَّهُ
عَلَيْهِمْ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Do not make friends with a people with whom Allah
is wroth.”***[^1]

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْغَضَبُ يُفْسِدُ الْإِيمَانَ كَمَا يُفْسِدُ الْخَلُّ الْعَسَلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Anger corrupts faith just as vinegar corrupts honey.”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

One of the harmful diseases, which possesses numerous ill-effects and
also causes aggravation of the nerves, is anger. This is especially so
if it creates a feeling of vengefulness and malice, for then its harm
becomes twofold.

Anger that manifests itself while battling the infidels or opposing
someone who seeks to inflict harm upon one’s reputation, family, etc.,
is not only regarded as commendable by religion and intellect, but is
also a sign of courage and valour.

But in instances other than the above, anger is from the whisperings of
Shaitan and a key to all evils. It destroys intellect and forces changes
in the physical and mental disposition of man by altering the colour of
the face and the eyes, and bringing about mental aggravation and stress;
it is also accompanied by other effects such as abuses, taunts,
violence, ridicule, murder and other similar acts.

It is better to stay away from all such things that induce anger, and
repel it by practicing patience and forbearance.[^3]

1) Dhul Kifl
------------

When the life of Prophet Elisha was nearing its end, he decided it was
time to appoint his successor. With this in mind, he gathered the people
and said: *Whosoever from amongst you undertakes to perform three
things, I shall make him my successor: To fast during the days, to
remain awake during the nights and abstain from anger.*

A youth by the name of U’waidiya, who apparently did not possess a great
status in the eyes of the people, stood up and said: *I am willing to
accept the undertaking.* The next day when Prophet Elisha repeated his
words, once again it was only this youth who stood up to accept the
offer, and so Prophet Elisha appointed him as his successor; shortly
afterwards he departed from the world.

God granted Prophethood to the youth, who was none other than Prophet
Dhul Kifl.[^4]

Once, Shaitaan resolved to make him angry and thus cause him to break
his pledge, and so appointing a satan by the name of Abyadh for this
task, commanded him: *Go and make him angry.*

Dhul Kifl would usually remain awake during the nights and sleep a
little during the day. Abyadh waited till he had gone to sleep; then,
approaching him, he shouted: *I have been oppressed and have suffered
injustice. Grant me justice from my oppressor!*

Dhul Kifl said: *Go and bring the person before me.* The satan said: *I
shall not move from here since I know he shall not come with me.* Giving
him his ring, Dhul Kifl asked him to take it to the oppressor and ask
him to come in his presence.

Abyadh took possession of the ring and departed. The next day arriving
again, he wailed: *I have been oppressed; the oppressor disregarded your
ring and refused to come with me!*

Dhul Kifl’s doorkeeper said: *Let him rest, for neither did he sleep
yesterday nor has he slept the whole of last night.* But Abyadh
insisted: *I shall not let him sleep; I have been oppressed.*

Hearing this, Dhul Kifl wrote a letter and handed it to Abyadh so that
he could show it to the oppressor who would then present himself before
Dhul Kifl.

On the third day, no sooner had Dhul Kifl closed his eyes when Abyadh
appeared again and woke him up to state that the person still refused to
come. This time Dhul Kifl took hold of Abyadh’s hand and, without any
sign of anger, set off in the sun to talk to the person.

Realizing he had failed in his task of making Dhul Kifl angry, Abyadh
slipped away from him and took to flight.[^5]

2) Who is the Strong One?
-------------------------

Once, the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) happened
to be passing by a locality when he noticed a large crowd. In the midst
of the people stood a strong and powerful man, who was exhibiting his
strength by lifting a gigantic stone, which the people referred to as
‘stone of the strong ones’ and ‘weight of the champions’. The
spectators, visibly impressed over his display of strength, were seen
complimenting and praising him.

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) questioned:
*Why have these people gathered here?* Some people, informing him of the
weight-lifting acts of the champion, said: *A person is displaying his
strength.*

Hearing this, he (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said: *Should
I inform you, who (in reality) is a strong person and a champion? A
champion is one, who, when someone abuses him, does not get enraged,
exhibits tolerance, prevails over his ego and gains dominance over the
satan of his self.*[^6]

3) One Advice
-------------

Once, a person approached the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
holy progeny) and said: *Impart me knowledge and teach me the rulings of
religion.* He (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said: *Go and
refrain from getting enraged.*

The man said: *This very sentence shall suffice for me,* and then
proceeded to return to his tribe.

When he reached his tribe he observed that dispute had arisen amongst
them and having armed themselves, they stood facing each other ready for
battle. Observing this, the man too put on his battle-dress ready to
join his friends for battle when suddenly he recollected the words of
the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) asking him to
abstain from anger.

Dropping his weapons, he proceeded towards the opposition and began to
reason with them: *Battle and war shall not yield anything. I shall pay
you from my own wealth whatever you desire!*

Realizing the truth of his words, they acquiesced: *We are more
deserving of disregarding and ignoring the differences that have taken
place.*

And thus, by this advice of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
holy progeny), a major conflict was averted.[^7]

4) The Imam (peace be upon him) and the Slave
---------------------------------------------

Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) had sent his servant out to perform a
task for him. When a long time had passed and he had not returned, the
Imam (peace be upon him) set out in search for him. After searching for
a while, the Imam (peace be upon him) found him asleep.

Without the slightest exhibition of anger, the Imam (peace be upon him)
sat down near his head and began to fan him till he woke up from his
sleep. After he had woken up, he (peace be upon him) said to him: *By
God! It does not befit you that you sleep during the night as well as
during the day. You ought to sleep during the night, but work for us
during the day.*[^8]

5) Bad Disposition and the Servants
-----------------------------------

Abdullah Ibn Taahir, after the death of his brother Talhah (d. 213
A.H.), was appointed the governor of Khorasan. He continued to rule over
it till the time of Al-Waathiq Billah and, after seventeen years of
governorship, died in the year 230 A.H. at the age of forty eight.

Abdullah Ibn Taahir relates:

One day when I was with the Abbasid Caliph, none of the servants were
seen to be around. Observing this, the Caliph called out: *O’ Slave! O’
Slave!* A Turkish slave suddenly appeared and discourteously said to the
Caliph:

*The servants too have important tasks to do for themselves such as
eating, using the lavatory, performing ablutions, offering prayers and
sleeping; just as we go out for some important task you raise your voice
and holler out O’ Slave! ’ Slave! How long will you go on saying: O’
Slave?*

Abdullah says: *Hearing this outburst, the Caliph lowered his head; I
was convinced that the moment the Caliph raised his head he would order
the slave to be beheaded!*

However, when the Caliph raised his head after a few moments, he said to
me: *O’ Abdullah! When the masters conduct themselves in a good manner,
the slaves become ill-mannered; (however) we cannot become ill-mannered
in order that the slaves behave in a good manner* (Meaning that the
slaves misuse the patience and tolerance of their masters).[^9]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Mumtahanah (60), vs. 13.

[^2]: Jaame' Al-Sa'adaat, vol. 1, pg. 288.

[^3]: Ihyaa al-Quloob, pg. 56.

[^4]: He was one of the prophets and lived after the period of Prophet
Sulaiman.

[^5]: Taareekh-e-Anbiya, vol. 2, pg. 196.

[^6]: Iblees Naameh, vol. 1, pg. 75; Majmua-e-Warraam, vol. 2, pg. 10.
The late Sheikh Saduq has reported in his book Ma’ani al-Akhbaar, that
the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) had stated
three things in connection with a person, who is a champion - one of
them being that when he is enraged, his anger does not distance him from
truthful and correct speech.

[^7]: Shanidanihaa-e-Taareekh, pg. 305, Mahajjah al-Baidhaa, vol. 5, pg.
293.

[^8]: Muntahal Aa’maal, vol. 2, pg.130.

[^9]: Lataaif al-Tawaaif, pg. 94.


