67. Obscene Language
====================

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لا تَسُبُّوا الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ فَيَسُبُّوا
اللَّهَ عَدْواً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not abuse those whom they call upon besides Allah, lest
exceeding the limits they should abuse Allah”***[^1]

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الله لا يحب الفحش و التفحش
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, Allah does not like obscene language and abusiveness”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Utterance of vulgar, reprehensible and dirty things is referred to as
obscene language. One, who speaks obscene language lacks modesty and
shame, and possesses a tongue that is filthy and impure.

Obscene language is prohibited and its evil effects are numerous. It
ought to be realized that evil acts manifested by a person externally,
is indicative of evil that exists within him internally.

God does not approve of obscene language and hence a (true) Mu'min can
never be foulmouthed. Obscene language is an offshoot hypocrisy and
Shaitaan, by means of this vice, seeks to develop a friend for himself.

Of course, there are ways by means of which man can protect himself from
using obscene language such as binding himself by means of vows and
oaths, staying away from foulmouthed individuals, engaging in the
remembrance of God, recitation of lofty supplications, ethical poems and
the like.[^3]

1) The Imam’s Reaction
----------------------

A'mr Ibn Nu’man Ju’fi relates:

Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) had a companion, who used to constantly
accompany him (peace be upon him) wherever he (peace be upon him) would
go, and never separate from him (peace be upon him).

Once when the Imam (peace be upon him) was travelling to a place called
Hadhaain*,* this person together with his slave, also joined the Imam.

In the course of this journey, the person looked around but saw that his
servant was not to be seen. Three times he looked for him but failed to
locate him. On the fourth try he found him; as soon as his eyes fell
upon him, he yelled out in anger: *O’ Son of an adulteress! Where have
you been?*

As soon as these words reached the ears of the Imam (peace be upon him),
he slapped his forehead and said: *Subhanallah! You have ascribed an
evil act to his mother! All along I had regarded you as a pious
individual, however now I have realized that you have no piety.*

*May I be made your ransom! But his mother is of the polytheists (and so
there is nothing wrong in the allegation)*, said the man, trying to
justify his statement.

The Imam (peace be upon him) remarked: *Do you not know that every
community has its own customs of marriage, which need to be respected.
Go away from me!*

The narrator of this tradition comments: *From that day onwards, I never
saw him in the company of the Imam (peace be upon him) for as long as
they were alive.*[^4]

2) Usaamah’s Reply
------------------

Usaamah Ibn Zaid was one of those who had been set free by the Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny), and about whom the
Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said: *He is of
those individuals, whom I am particularly fond of and is one of the
pious ones from amongst you.* Just before his (peace be upon him and his
holy progeny) death, he (peace be upon him) appointed Usaamah, despite
his young age, as the commander of the army.

It has been reported that one day Usaamah was engaged in prayers in the
Prophet’s Mosque near the grave of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him
and his holy progeny). In the meantime, since a person had died, the
people approached Marwaan Ibn Hakam, the ruler of Medinah, to lead the
funeral prayers for the deceased. He arrived, led the prayers and was on
the way out when he observed Usaamah standing near the door of the house
of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) still
engaged in his prayers. Realizing that he had not participated in the
funeral prayers that he had led, a greatly offended Marwan spoke out:
*You want the people to see you engaged in prayers, isn’t it?* He then
followed this up with a tirade of abuses and obscene language.

After completing his prayers, Usaamah came up to Marwaan and said: *You
have hurt me and used obscene and abusive language towards me. I have
heard the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) say:
“God abhors a person, who uses obscene and abusive language.*[^5]

3) Satan in the Company of Those Using Foul Language
----------------------------------------------------

One day the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) and
Abu Bakr were seated together when a person came up to Abu Bakr and
began abusing and reviling him.

When the person had finished his outburst Abu Bakr, for the sake of
defending himself, spoke out and in the process began to abuse the
person.

The moment Abu Bakr began using foul language, the Holy Prophet (peace
be upon him and his holy progeny), who till then had remained a mute
spectator to the incident, suddenly got up from his place in order to
distance himself from him.

As he (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) moved away, he commented:
*O’ Abu Bakr! When that person was abusing you, an angel of God, was
answering the person in your defense, but the moment you began abusing
him, that angel left you and his place was taken over by the Shaitaan;
and I am not of the persons, who would sit in a gathering in which the
Shaitaan is present.*[^6]

4) Conduct
----------

A person approached Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) and said: *Your such
and such cousin was* *talking about you, but whatever he spoke was
nothing except for abuses and obscene language.*

The Imam (peace be upon him) said to his slave-girl: *Bring me some
water for ablution.* He then performed the ablution and stood up for
prayers.

The narrator said: *I thought to myself that the Imam (peace be upon
him) would curse the person.*

When the Imam (peace be upon him) had concluded is two-raka’h prayer, he
beseeched: *O’ Lord! It was my right (which he had transgressed) and I
have forgiven him (for his invectives and abuses). Your munificence and
benefaction is much more than mine, so forgive him and do not chastise
him for his conduct.*

The narrator says: *Seeing this compassion of the Imam (peace be upon
him), I was overcome with astonishment and amazement.*[^7]

5) Ibn Muqaffa’
---------------

Ibn Muqaffa’ was an erudite and intelligent person, who had translated
several academic and scholarly books into Arabic. His superior acuity
and excellence had caused him to become conceited such that, in public
gatherings, he would end up belittling others and at times, even resort
to speaking dirty and vulgar things.

One of those, who found themselves the object of his offensiveness, was
Sufiyaan Ibn Mua'wiyah, who had been appointed the governor of Basrah on
the part of Mansur Dawaaniqi, the second Abbasid Caliph.

Sufiyaan had a disproportionately large nose and whenever Ibn Muqaffa’
would arrive before him, he would call out loudly: *Salutations to both
of you* (meaning Sufiyaan and his large nose).

At times, he would humiliate him by making references to his mother; one
day, in a gathering of people, he addressed him in a loud voice by
saying: *O’ Son of a lecherous woman!* In other gatherings, he would
hurt him by various forms of humiliating and abusive language.

Sufiyaan constantly awaited an opportunity to pay him back.

It so happened that Abdullah Ibn Ali initiated an uprising against his
nephew and the Abbasid Caliph - Mansur Dawaaniqi. Mansur dispatched Abu
Muslim Khorasani to Basrah to quell the rebellion. In the battle than
ensued, Abu Muslim emerged victorious and Abdullah Ibn Ali took to
flight, eventually taking shelter with his brothers Sulaiman and Isa.

They interceded on his behalf before Mansur and requested that they be
pardoned; Mansur accepted their intercession for Abdullah Ibn Ali and
pardoned him. The uncles of Mansur returned to Basrah and approached Ibn
Muqaffa’ so that he could write for them the official letter of pardon
(for Abdullah Ibn Ali).

Arrogant that he was, he wrote in the letter of pardon: *In the event
that Mansur Dawaaniqi deceives his uncle Abdullah Ibn Ali and troubles
him, all his wealth would be considered as having become the property of
the people, all his slaves would be considered free and all Muslims
would be considered as free from their pledge of allegiance to him.*

When the letter of pardon was brought before Mansur for signing, he was
immensely disturbed; while he refrained from signing it, he covertly
ordered its writer to be killed.

Sufiyaan, who had for long, been exasperated by the utterances of Ibn
Muqaffa’, ordered him to be taken into a room. Arriving before him, he
taunted: *Do you recall the abuses and obscene language that you had
used for my mother and me?*

He then ordered a furnace to be lit up and the thirty three year old Ibn
Muqaffa’, as per the orders of Mansur Dawaaniqi, was hurled into the
flames and killed.[^8]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-Ana’am (6), vs. 108.

[^2]: Jaame' Al-Sa'adaat, vol. 1, pg. 314.

[^3]: Ihyaa al-Quloob, pg. 65.

[^4]: أَ ماَ عَلِمْتَ اَنَّ لِکُلِّ قَومٍ نِکاَحاً

[^5]: Paighambar Wa Yaaraan, vol. 1, pg. 194.

[^6]: Iblees Naameh, vol. 1, pg. 73; Ihyaa al-U’loom, vol. 3, pg. 370.

[^7]: Muntahal Aa’maal, vol. 2, pg. 127; Miskaah al-Anwaar.

[^8]: Dunyaa-e-Jawaan, pg. 64; Jawaan, vol. 2, pg. 21.


