Preface
=======

Every system, intending to achieve certain goals, must be designed in a
realistic manner. Therefore, if the system is supposed to be implemented
in order to serve human life, particularly in the long-run, it must
serve man's goals and be consistent with his fi\>rah (primordial
nature). This is not possible unless the designer of the system has a
command over the knowledge necessary for understanding social and
individual aspects of man. Besides, the designer should have a thorough
understanding of actual relations between those two aspects of man and
the primordial nature of man as well.

In addition to those prerequisites, the designer should understand the
historical trends of such a relationship, the needs for the development
of such relationships and methods for pursuing those needs in order to
realize an evolutionary, human approach toward actualizing the goals of
the creation of man.

Indeed, the way the aforesaid satisfaction of needs is to be carried
out should not overlap other systems which are meant for satisfying
other needs of man. In other words, such a system should observe a wise
balance and study the role and interrelationship of other systems which
together comprise the whole system of life.

If we assume that the designer of the system possesses all those
necessary prerequisites, we should assess subsequent stages in the
process of achieving the desirable realism which is necessary for a
system to be able to provide a proper context for itself. By this we
mean the extent to which this system is compatible with the norms and
values of the society (where the system is to be implemented), the
extent of consistence between those norms and values and the emotional
values presented by the system, and finally the extent to which this
system assures the realization of a desirable education to create social
obedience for those ideological views and emotional values.

Although the system may be realistic, accurate, and rational in
perceiving the reality and understanding its needs and their
satisfaction, it will remain incapable if it is not preceded by an
ideological impetus which supplies the society with bases for the stance
that it should take toward the universe, the life, and the man itself.
Consequently, the ideological impetus will guarantee the system the
element of i'ma'n [faith] rescue it from the most important
civilizational maladies including ila'd [atheism], which is the opposite
of i'ma'n, and shirk [polytheism], which signifies the excessive belief
in false gods, and shakk [doubt], which is a manner resembling other
destructive attitudes.

Unless these requirements are realized, we cannot assure the provision
of the first contextual element for the system's implementation.
Similarly, as long as the emotional motivations, which are the focus of
education, are not perfectly compatible and harmonious with the
ideological structure of the society, we cannot guarantee balance in
man's personality when there is a wide gap between his beliefs and the
internal and external values and motivations that the system provides in
order to satisfy his needs. Moreover, these emotional motivations cannot
form human behavior and action unless they are strong and clearly
defined.

So far, we have realized the necessity of two factors for every system
intending to materialize its human goals: first, the planner's holistic
approach towards human reality, including his relations and needs as
well as their fulfillment concomitant with the rest of the system;
second, facilitating its implementation through faith and compatible
emotional motivations.

Realism, in turn, requires the following two fundamental factors:
first, the system should contain legal guarantees binding all those who
oppose the harmonious human nature or those few who have not chosen the
complete i'ma'n or the full commitment to the requirements of i'ma'n;
second, it has a perfect flexibility to accommodate the temporal and
spatial variations in human life and provides fixed solutions for fixed
elements of human life and flexible ones for the accommodation of its
alterable elements.

We believe that Islam was correct in announcing its rule in the form of
general rules. Thus, it did not ignore any one of those aspects, but
observed them perfectly and completed the religion which provides
appropriate answers to man's needs till the Day of Judgment.

Accordingly, it announces that the whole Islamic system is based on
reality and nature and that it is the fixed truth aiming at serving
human beings and accomplishing the purpose of his creation. Thus, it
enjoins whatever is desirable and forbids whatever is refused by the
nature.

God, the Exalted, says: "Then set your face upright for religion in the
right state, the nature made by Allah in which He has made men. There is
no alteration in Allah's creation. That is the right religion but most
people do not know." (30:30)

And He, the Exalted, says: "Say: O people! Indeed there has come to you
the truth from your Lord ..." (10:108)

And He, the Exalted, says: "O you who believe! Answer (the call of)
Allah and the Apostle when he calls you to that which gives you life,
and know that Allah intervenes between man and his heart, and that to
Him you shall be gathered." (8:24)

And He, the Exalted, says: "Those who follow the Apostle Prophet, who
was taught neither to read nor to write, whom they find written down
with them in the Tawra'h and the Inji'l [Old and New Testaments], (who)
enjoins them to do good and forbids them from doing evil, and makes the
pure and good things ala'l [lawful] for them and makes impure and
harmful things ara'm [prohibited] for them, and remove from them their
burden and the shackles which were upon them. So (as for) those who
believe in him and support him and help him and follow the light which
was sent down with him, they are indeed the saved." (7:157)

The proof of this argument is the same one that proves its attribution
to the Great Creator as it proves for this Creator all attributes of
knowledge about all facts and full, absolute control over the formation
of shari'\`ah (the comprehensive body of Islamic rules), and perfect
kindness to the servants and other attributes which are not imaginable
for any body other than Him the Exalted.

We are not to present any reasoning for this but only point to the Holy
Qur'a'n's emphasis on this fact in all occasions when it points to
Allah's kindness and knowledge:

"Does He not know Who He created? He it is Who made the earth smooth
for you, therefore go about in the spacious sides thereof, and eat of
His sustenance, and to Him is the return after death." (67:14-15)

"Say: Allah suffices as a witness between me and you. Surely He is
Aware of His servants, Seeing. And whomsoever Allah guides, is the
follower of the right way, and whomsoever He causes to err, you shall
not find for him guardians besides Him. And We will gather them together
on the day of resurrection on their faces, blind and dumb and deaf.
Their abode is hell, whenever it becomes allayed We will add to their
burning." (17:96-97)

After this introduction, we try to discuss several points pertaining to
the core of the discussion with emphasis on the following subjects:

1. Major attributes of the Islamic economy, their natural character,
and Islam's emphasis on them.
2. The proper grounds Islam prepares for its economic system.
3. Relationship between this system and other systems.
4. Flexibility of the Islamic economic system.


