Salient Features of the Islamic Economy
=======================================

When we study the Islamic economy as a way which Islam prescribes for
individual and social behavior in the economic field and examine Islam's
rules in this area, we can conclude that its most important attribute is
social justice. In this respect, the Islamic economy resembles all other
systems that claim to be serving human being and realizing his social
aspirations but it differs from them in the details of its conception of
social justice.

Justice cannot emerge unless the following requirements are present:
first, believing in the private and social property on an equal and
advanced level in a way that the private property acts on the
fulfillment of man's natural demands for possessing the result of his
effort and obtaining the benefits of his business. While the public
property aims at guaranteeing that social action enjoys a social product
through which the provision of some needs and shortages would become
possible.

Second, faith in individual economic freedom as a general, continuous,
comprehensive principle which stems from the nature of the ownership
along with the belief in the existence of some limits at which this
freedom ends. This is for the purpose of either guaranteeing
individual's interest as in the case of objects the use of which was
outlawed because of the physical or moral damage that they could inflict
upon the individual, or to secure others' rights and liberties which is
also a natural guarantee admitted by all religions and human
affiliations.

Third, faith in the principle of mutual responsibility. Islam
guarantees, for every individual in the Islamic society, the subsistence
level, i.e., provision of his natural needs. The government is obliged
to provide this minimum for all and it is absolutely impermissible that
even a single needy person is found in the Islamic society. Regarding
how to make the society economically capable of doing this, the
following factors may be mentioned:

Obliging individuals to accomplish their responsibilities and duties
with respect to the provision of the necessary needs of others. Since
one of government's responsibilities is to compel individuals to perform
their obligations, even those which are individual, it may bind
individuals to carry out these duties as well.

The legal power of wali'y al-amr [head of the Islamic government] to
determine the limits of public domain (saddu man\>aqat al-muba'a't)
through legislation supplies the government with the desirable power.

Public properties and anfa'l [properties with no particular owner/s]
which are designated by the government as public properties which the
government oversees and uses to achieve the above goal.

Financial punishments and methods that are devised by Islam to transfer
private properties to the public ownership as with respect to mawqu'fa't
[endowments] or the lands the inhabitants of which perished or the dead
without heirs and so forth. Nature of the Islamic legislation--as
Shahi'd al-@adr (r) put it--which aims at strengthening the social
structure for the realization of this mutual responsibility.

Fourth, belief in the principle of social balance and refusal of the
class system in the Islamic society. We came to know through the third
point that the required minimum is to provide subsistence for all
individuals. As far as the maximum is concerned, it may be assumed
through the following factors:

1. The prohibition of tabdhi'r and isra'f [wasting and squandering] in
all areas, therefore, an individual cannot possibly trespass to the line
of isra'f.

2. The prohibition of every action that leads to misuse of particular
properties, and of lahw [amusement] and muju'n [impudence].

3. Rejection of all social and economic privileges which discriminate
between different groups of people which, in turn, eliminates all the
grounds for the emergence of the class system.

If we go back and scrutinize all of these features and expose them to
human nature and conscience we will find them principles that may be
admitted in a natural way. This explains the return of each of the two
extremist systems of capitalism and socialism to a moderate position
after its collision with opposing natural factors--as we believe.

The natural basis of these views is evidently emphasized by general
regulatory and conceptual authoritative texts (nu\#u'\#) that are
numerous and to some of which we point here:

There are nu\#u'\# that stress the inherence character of private and
public property:

The Exalted says: "And the man shall gain nothing but what he strives
for." (53:39) (naturally if we interpret it as including worldly
possession).

Ami'r al-mu'mini'n (\`a) says: "This property is indeed neither mine
nor yours but it is a collective property of the Muslims ... what is
earned by their hands does not belong to any mouths other than theirs."
(Nahj al-Bala'ghah, sermon 232)

There are some nu\#u'\# that emphasize the economic freedom in a
natural form the clearest of which is the rule on which all fuqaha''
[Islamic scholars] rely, namely the rule (Al-na'su musalla\>u'na \`ala'
amwa'lihim [people are in control of their properties]). Naturally,
there are some limits to this freedom which are mentioned by other
nu\#u'\# stressing that this restriction is only for the benefit of the
individual and the society.

There are some nu\#u'\# that emphasize the inherence of mutual
responsibility and cooperation and further consider all kinds of
negligence with respect to this principle as a general rejection of di'n
[faith and religion]. The Exalted says: "Have you seen the person who
rejects the religion? He is the one who treats the orphan with
harshness, and does not urge (others) to feed the poor." (107:1-3)

Finally, there are some nu\#u'\# that stress the necessity for the
realization of balance in the society through their emphasis on the
prohibition of isra'f and also the necessity of renouncing poverty and
providing subsistence for every individual. The Ima'm (\`a) says, while
speaking of the duties of the wali'y al-amr [leader] toward the needy:
"He keeps giving him from zaka'h till he makes him needless."


