The Proper Grounds Which Islam Prepares For Its Economic System
===============================================================

In this regard, the analyst can find in front of him a huge wealth of
noble nu\#u'\# that emphasize various concepts and numerous rules and
fixed historical laws and that all serve the cause of Islamic economy
and participate, in a natural way, in the realization of its
far-reaching goals. We mention below a number of these issues:

A. The Real ownership belongs to Allah, the Exalted: This principle is
the most important tenet that forms man's image as it leaves its visible
marks on the economic behavior of Muslim individual. Ownership belongs
only to the Unpaired, Almighty Allah and He the Exalted bestowed an
assumed, legal ownership upon the human being so that it distributes the
properties among its individuals and exercises this ownership according
to the purposes that Allah chose for the benefit of humanity. This
notion has great influence on the exclusion of negative effects on
ownership in its absolute capitalistic form.

B. The purpose is to reclaim the land through a joint, human effort and
responsibility: In this way, the man believes that the human effort from
the beginning to the end is one and that the important goal is to make
the humanity subservient before God, establish the worshipping society
and prepare the grounds for it through making the earth inhabitable,
extract the greatest benefits from it to the advantage of all through
performing the duties arising from the joint responsibility. Diversion
from this is diversion from the purpose.

C. Ethical concepts in the service of economic cause: Islamic nu\#u'\#
are full of a magnificent ethical plan which leads to its contribution
to this economic system and to the realization of its goals. Most of the
riwa'ya't [traditions], on one hand, encourage in the human being the
spirit of cooperation, responsibility, Islamic fraternity, itha'r
[self-sacrifice], zuhd [piety], and compassion for the miseries and
aspirations of others.

On the other hand, they drive away from the human being such vices as
stinginess, greed, exclusivism, transgressing the rights of others,
opportunism, avarice, and envy. Ima'm @a'diq (\`a) counted all good
manners as the troopers of \`aql [wisdom] and all vicious attributes as
the troopers of jahl [ignorance]. We can neither mention all of the
riwa'ya't in this regard nor touch on their educational details,
therefore, only point to this particular fact that the Islamic ethics
and educational system augment in human being the spirit of generosity
before they emphasize the economic freedom and the possibility of using
it to his own particular benefits. The story of Qa'ru'n [Korah] is
well-known for its focus on this ethical principle (And seek by means of
what Allah has given to you the otherworld's abode and do not neglect
your share of this world ... (28:77)).

This story and this principle is a multifaceted Islamic creed which, if
prevails in the society, will provide the greatest grounds for the
implementation of the desirable economic system.

D. Al-infa'q al-musta [commendable spending for a divine cause] and the
extended life: Here, a wonderful aspect of the solution to the problem
of conflict between the inherent motivations for serving one's self and
the motivations for serving the society is manifested. According to this
notion, one begins with the prolongation of his own life and ends up
with a level of eternity in the hereafter. He finds out that
self-interest and social interest are integrated; a notion that
encourages him to make continuous infa'q which does not ever run out of
its driving forces according to the principle which says "whoever
establishes a favorable habit he will be rewarded both for it and for
the action of whoever follows it." And here we would like to remind
emphatically the extended effect of waqf since, as the result of these
motivations, the private property is transferred to the public ownership
and man's permanent exploitation of his property is realized.

E. Shukr al-ni\`mah [gratitude for a blessing] means to make the best
use of the wealth and avoiding its waste: The major problem in the
global economic domain does not lie in the weakness of growth rates of
natural resources and their failure to keep up with the population
growth rate but it lies in the failure to make ideal use of natural
resources or, as the nu\#u'\# put it, in kufra'n al-ni\`mah [ingratitude
for the blessing] and squandering the natural, mineral and animal
resources and so forth (And He gave you of whatever you asked Him for
and if you count Allah's blessings you will not (possibly) obtain their
number. Man is indeed very unjust, very ungrateful. ... (14:34))

And it is a kind of shukr al-ni\`mah to make ideal use of he labor
force and to avoid wasting it. For this reason, the nu\#u'\# emphasize
the continuous work and even declare it obligatory for those who are
able.

F. Relationship between moralities and material pursuits at the
civilizational level: There is an amazing civilizational fact that
nobody can perceive it except those who believe in the ghayb [the
metaphysical world] and its various aspects. The Holy Qur\`a'n stresses
that ~ulm [injustice] leads to hala'k [annihilation] (Thus, because of
their injustice We destroyed them) and that 'adl [justice] and du\`a''
[praying] and shukr [gratitude] leads, in a lawful way, to rakha''
[comfort] (Ask for your Lord's forgiveness, surely He is the most
Forgiving. He will send down the cloud upon you pouring down abundance
of rain. And help you with properties and sons, and make for you gardens
and make for you rivers. (71:10-12). This fact arouses, in hearts, a
great hope in the future, even the material future, and opens the way
for a social and economic dynamism.

Add to what was mentioned above other major factors that contributes to
this background.


