Strong Connection With Other Systems
====================================

It is evident in all systems devised by Islam that they are put forward
as parts of a larger system which includes, in general, the whole
universe. These systems are in strong and close interconnection in such
a manner that none of them can achieve its desired goal without the
implementation of other systems (and naturally, we do not claim here
that the obligation to set up the system hinges on the establishment of
other systems but what we emphasize is the issue of system's achievement
of all of its desired goals.)

In this regard the following points should be made:

A. Certain areas of the social system are reserved to be filled by the
wali'y al-amr (or by some one appointed by him) due to his ijtihad
[ability to extract Islamic rule whenever needed] and determination of
the nature of the prevailing situations and ummah's interest. This is
what we observe, for example, in economic, legal, and penal systems and
in the institutions of waqf [endowment], mu\`a'mala't [transactions],
irth [inheritance], and so forth. This fact indicates the complete
connection between these institutions and the ruling political system.

B. The economic system is strongly related to the system of \`iba'da't
[worshippings]. This is the issue which is sometimes presented as the
companionship of the prayers and zaka'h in tens of Qur'anic cases. Zakah
and khums are two financial \`iba'dahs. Financial kaffa'ra't
[expiations] are, in fact, also a huge economic participation by
\`iba'da't system in the service of public economic interest. It should
not be ignored that some \`iba'dahs like \#awm [fasting] and provide the
elements of economic grounds, to which we clearly pointed. There are
certain \`iba'dahs that strongly contribute to the public ownership such
as waqf, if we require ni'yyat al-qurbah [proximity intention] in it.

C. The economic system and its goals and pecularities naturally have a
strong connection with the system of mu\`a'mala't [transactions] which
is designed in such a manner to provide the proper environment for the
realization of mutual responsibility, balance, and dual ownership,
emphasize the labor element, and prohibits riba' [usury], 'akl al-ma'li
bi al-ba'\>il [financial misappropriation], harmful acts, lahw
[debauchery], and wasting of the wealth.

D. There is a considerable linkage between the economic system and the
system of jiha'd [military defense] in Islam for the latter system
involves, in addition to combative rules and methods, implications for
ownership, war spoils, and so forth.

E. Undoubtedly, the economic system is also related to the social
system including the form of society's principle cell, i.e. the family,
and also the social relations among the families, and individual's
relations with the society. All of these are predominated by social
Islamic rules including mutual responsibility and balance, which form
the most important characteristics in the economy as we mentioned
frequently. This argument also involves the rules regarding mahrs
[dowries], nafaqahs [allowances], various methods of division of labor,
and such issues as irth [inheritance], wa\#i'iyyahs [bequests], and the
rulings with regard to children, qa\_a'' [adjudication], financial
ta\`zi'rs [discretionary punishments] and other varieties of financial
punishments, and others which may not be all discussed in this limited
space.


