Supplement
==========

G. Touching on these relations, the late A'yatulla'h al-@adr points to
another aspect of the issue, namely the relationship between
government's economic doctrine and its financial policy which is, in
fact, a part of government's planning for enforcement of the laws of
Islamic economy, thus, it is a part of the economy itself.

H. We already pointed to the link between Islam's economic system and
its ethical system which makes the latter one of the major preludes and
the motivating element for the ummah in the way of implementing the
economic system and realizing its goals to such an extent that it
becomes hard to distinguish between the two systems.

Here I would like to point, as a diversion from the main course of
discussion, to the fact that Islam addresses the whole life in general
and devises for it the best system which guides toward the goal in a
deliberate manner and based on principles of justice and equity. Whereas
we find the positivist world today floundering in the establishment of a
desirable system for the protection of human dignity, distribution of
responsibilities, and realization of rights. Therefore, social systems
collapse, one after another, and admit their defeat while Islam remains
a straight religion without any deviation.

As an example for this argument, we focus on the slogan which the
positivist world spouts through giving it a widespread global character
and which has recently altered to a sweeping emotional wave, namely the
slogan of equality of women and men in all situations, periods, and
places, and with respect to all rights without any exceptions whatever
it would be. We have been finding this slogan tens of times in the
documents presented in the conferences of Mexico City, Bucharest, Cairo,
and recently in a strong and explicit form, in the Beijing Conference on
Woman. We see the document produced by this conference concentrating,
specifically, on the issues of inheritance, absolute material equality,
judgeship, and the so called sexual freedom rights for all ages and so
forth.

We consider this slogan as a blind assertion although it has an
attractive appearance since equality is one of the principles favorable
to the human taste concerning two individuals whose rights are equal in
terms of their human dignity and affiliation, i.e. the man and the
woman. But this principle is not too general to have exceptions. This is
due to the natural differences between man's and woman's physical and
emotional structures, nature of the social responsibility which is to be
carried out by each, and the extent of participation by each in the
social construction including the establishment of social justice.

Hence, we may not call out the slogan of quantitative equality without
considering the desired balance otherwise we will commit, through this
equality, injustice and unfairness. When the principles of equality and
social justice are in conflict, one may ask to which one the priority
goes? Undoubtedly, the principle of justice is the one which
common-sense testifies to its generality and insusceptibility to
exception, therefore, social justice qualifies the principle of equality
and even determines its socially desired form.

We feel great regret on the blind, sweeping, global wave that has been
put forward thoughtlessly and that criticizes against the Islamic
inheritance system pretending to ignore that it is part of a whole and
that there is a wonderful balance between this system and the nafaqah
[allowance] system and the duties of each of the man and the woman in
the social life.


