The Flexibility of Islamic Economic System
==========================================

This subject is, in general, related to the flexible character of
Islamic rules but we will show it from the economic angle.

Briefly, Islam supplied this system with all necessary elements which
enable it to accommodate the vital changes which occur frequently and
rapidly in the economic field. The reason is that economy is a field
related to the complexities of man's social life as well as to nature's
ability to provide, and the proper environmental conditions, and so on.
Therefore, with respect to land distribution and ownership, there is a
great difference between the situation of land's perfect abundance and
man's insufficient physical power and the situation of scarcity and
increasing shortage resulted from human growth rates on one hand, and
man's immense technological power to reclaim the land. This difference
may affect the issues of 'ya'zah [occupancy] -which is considered as an
ownership factor-, social development, mines' ownership, vertical
ownership -both in depth and in altitude-, energy's ownership, etc.

This difference may also influence the issue of alteration of the
nature and effects of property relationship leading mujtahids [jurists]
to keep aloof from the issue of absolute ownership of land and suggest
the subject of al-ikhti\#a'\# [exclusivity right] which results from the
impact made by the individual on the land, thus when the impact ceases
to exist the right will expire and returns to the public domain which
can be used by the Islamic state according to the public interest.

Therefore, existence of the element of ijtihad and its constant
openness represents one of flexibility elements without which one cannot
know the developments' effects on the nature of the rule deduced form
the nu\#u'\#.

The fact that Islam put forward certain broad economic rules and
related them to the \`urf [prevailing standards of conduct] concept has
a special connotation for notions like isra'f and tabdhi'r [wasting and
squandering], faqr and ghina' [poverty and needlessness], al-nafaqa't
al-muta\`a'rifah [customary allowance], al-manfa\`at al-mualah [lawful
profit], ma\`u'n [basic need], riba' [usury], mithli'yyah and qi'mi'yyah
[fungibility and being ad valorem], circulation and depression of cash
currencies, \_ama'n [liability], individual and social damage,
[impediment], \_aru'rah [urgency], al-ma\#lahat al-\`ulya' [the higher
expediency], being asbaq [preceding] in waqf, being \`aqdi'y
[contractual], being bay\`i'y [exchange], trade through tara'\_i [mutual
agreement], being qimari'y [gamble], lahw, and even \`ada'lah [justice],
~ulm [injustice], ta\`addi' [transgression], and akl al-ma'l bi
al-ba'\>il [misappropriation of property]. Thus, \`urf intervenes when
these concepts change, often due to change in conditions, and
consequently, as a result of change in the \`urfi' [commonplace] view of
the subject the judgment also changes as we saw in the issue of
sha\>ranj [chess] for example.

However, the most important element on which the Islamic system
concentrates is the element of intervention by the mujtahid, just wali'y
al-amr in the economic life. This intervention has its own criteria,
rules, and what the late al-@adr calls the penetrating beams that
illuminate Islam's positions and give it the spirit of the system and
its promising goals1. In such a system, the wali'y has the obligation to
take advantage of his social power and true commitment to Islam and the
Islamic expediency of the ummah and, through consultation with the
masters of knowledge and expertise, carry out his duties which can be
summarized as the following:

1. Identification of the best methods and executive arrangements for
the enforcement of the fixed rules of Allah, e.g. looking for the best
way to eliminate riba' in the society while preserving the positive
activities performed by the banks.

2. Filling the public domain with laws in accordance with the supreme
Islamic expediency while preserving, as much as possible, the primary
rule regarding the various cases.

3. Determining the extent to which the conditions are favorable for the
enforcement of Islamic rules and institutions. Therefore, if the faqih
finds the conditions and the rules in such a serious incompatibility
that is called by the scholars of u\#u'l as taza' [conflict], namely
taza' between the wuju'b [obligatoriness] of implementing the [ruling]
and the prohibition of resulting evil consequences, he must produce the
best possible solution to facilitate the implementation of the while
compensating its mafsadahs [damaging results].

If this appears to be impossible he should shift to the area of tarji'
bi al-ahammi'yah [preference based on priority] which is a vast area
that follows the opinions of experts and mujtahids. The situation may
reach to a point that due to the priority of preventing the mafsadah
caused by it, the implementation of a certain hukm is suspended. This
area is an accurate and a delicate one which is not to be resorted to
except in rare situations.


