Conclusions
===========

Based on what was discussed above we can briefly highlight the
following practical conclusions:

First, we repeatedly see or hear those who suggest the idea of
cross-combination of ideology and system which signifies the
establishment of a socialist or a capitalist economic system in an
Islamic environment or the implementation of Islamic institutions in
secular social structures. When these combinationists do not achieve
desirable results from their efforts they tend to ignore the
contradiction between the system and its implementation context and
place the blame on the system itself. We may mention two experiences as
examples here:

1) the experience of establishing socialist systems in our Islamic
world and their quick failure as in Algeria -- during Houari
Boumedienne's presidency -- and Libya.

2) the experiment of setting up al-qar\_ al- [interest-free loan] funds
under secular systems where it was struck with unsatisfactory results
that encouraged the opponents to attack the resulting situation as
cacophony and accusing the planners of neglecting the absence of
favorable conditions.

Second, If we wish to achieve good results in our Islamic community, we
must provide the desirable grounds through deepening the faith in Allah
and disseminating the elevated Islamic ethics, explicate the Islamic
concepts related to economics and convey them to the public, and strive
to mobilize the feelings and sensations and give them a desirable
Islamic shape. As long as we do not accomplish this task we should not
expect ideal results. In this regard, I would like to draw your
attention to some advertising tactics employed by the banks which
concentrate on the profits generated by the money deposited in al-qar\_
al- funds and on prizes that it may bring for the depositors without
ever referring to the great reward which ensues whenever they
participate in the revitalization of the public economy and server the
society through their bank activities and deposits and without
mentioning the noble ayat and a'dith which call for such deeds.

Third, we propose that Islamic banks form a fiqhi' committee consisting
of prominent scholars, and further, that the mujtahids in al-'t
al-\`ilmi'yyah (Islamic theological schools) undertake a study about the
legitimacy and plausibility of the proposed economic, financial, and
banking systems from the viewpoint of Islamic laws and constantly
express their opinions concerning new forms for such systems.

Bay\` al-salam [forward sale], and bay\` al-salam al-muma'thil
[fungible forward sale], bay\` al-is[manufactural sale], tawri'd [mutual
forward] contracts, murabahah [resale with stated profit] contracts, and
so on are examples of economic institutions that provide banks with more
alternatives for economic activities. This is what the late Shahi'd
al-@adr proposed a quarter of a century ago through his famous proposal
known as riba'-free banking and what I put forward as the draft law for
the prohibition of riba' in the Islamic Republic of Iran. Ijtiha'd is
indeed a source of blessing and Islamic rules are overflowing reserves
that can undoubtedly help us to safeguard the Islamic character and
spirit and overcome the difficulties caused by the developments of
modern life.

**Endnotes**

1. These goals include, for example, Qur'a'n's emphasis on avoidance
from creating a situation that causes exclusive circulation of wealth
only among the rich, and its emphasis on the necessity to prohibit the
manipulation of the property which Allah made the sustenance of the
ummah, or the emphasis by some nu\#u'\# on the view that the purpose of
trade is to extract benefits or on the prohibition of if its opening
results in evil consequences and so on.


