Supplement 1
============

Jalal Ali Ahmad (b. 1923) belonged to a family of strong religious
traditions. The famous revolutionary Ayatullah Mahm'd Taliqani (d. 1979)
was his paternal uncle and Jalal Ali Ahmad had been always impressed by
him, but particularly during his later religious phase came closer to
him. Jalal's family was reasonably well-off. When the clerical class was
deprived of its notarial function and the income they derived from it,
his family was put to hardship and Jalal had to give up his education
after primary school.

Instead he was sent to work to supplement the family's income. Jalal
secretly enrolled in night classes and obtained his high school diploma
in 1943. One year later he joined the T'deh party, and made a complete
break with religion. There he founded a literary association of Marxist
writers, and within three years was appointed director of the party's
publishing house with the responsibility of launching a new monthly
Mahanah-yi mardum.

He wrote prolifically for the party journals. In this period he was
under the influence of the nationalist, anti-Shi'i writer Ahmad Kisrawi.
In 1946, he graduated from the Teachers' Training College in Tehran, and
started his career as a teacher and as a writer of fiction almost
sirnultaneously.

His first collection of stories Did wa Bazdid (Visits exchanged) was
published in 1945, and his anti-religion stance in those stories marked
his complete break with Islam and his father.

His second collection of short stories Az ranji ki mibarim, an exercise
in socialist realism, was published in 1947 The very same year he came
out of the T'deh party along with a group of activists led by Khalil
Maliki as an aftermath of the party's support to the Soviet Union's
refusal to save the communist-dominated autonomous government of
Azarbayjan. Now he devoted most of his time, except brief occasional
sojourns in politics, to literary work. Seh Tar, his third collection of
stories is product of this period.

He returned to political activity with Dr. Musaddiq's campaign joined
an alliance for the nationalization of the Iranian oil industry and'
with Hizb-e Zahmat Kashan. In 1952, as a result of Maliki's rift with
the Hizb-e Zahmat Kashan, a new party Nir'-ye Sewwum was formed and
Jalal served it for a short time. In 1953, when the fugitive Shah was
brought back by the U.S.A., Jalal left this party also.

Moreover, political activity was made virtually impossible due to
severe repressive measures. Jalal turning again to literary pursuits
translated Gide's Re tour de l'URSS and brought out Zan-e ziyadi (The
superfluous woman). He dabbled in modernist poetry and painting also for
some time. But more, significant for his intellectual development was
his interest in anthropology. Within a period of four years he published
three research monographs dealing with Iranian villages and their
age-old customs, viz. Aurazan, Tatneshinha-ye Bul'k-i Zahra, and
Jazirah-ye Khark.

During this research the contradictory nature of the Western and the
Islamic Eastern traditions dawned upon him, a realization that paved the
way for his return to Islam. The worth of his anthropological work was
immediately recognized by both the Iranian academic circles and Western
universities.

He undertook extensive foreign travels: to Europe in early 1963, to the
Soviet Union in 1964, and to the United States in 1965. Of all these,
the journey exercising the farthest reaching impact on his psyche was
his hajj pilgrimage in 1964, which proved to be a great leap towards
Islam. During this period of great creativity he realized the basic
conflict between the traditional Iranian social structure and the new
changes being imposed on the Iranian society in the name of
modernization.

The interiorization of this awareness resulted in a unique kind of
self-realization-broadening of the field of self-activity to the levels
of national as well as religious collective-self-realization. The
Iranian-Islamic archetypal patterns of conscious and unconscious
psychical processes were revealed to him to be in opposition to those
patterns of thought and practice which were being imported with
technology from the West and transplanted on the Eastern soil.

Jalal's realization of the contradictory characters of the Western and
Eastern cultures caused him to write Gharbzadegi, an analysis of the
corrupting influence of the West on the East in the historical
perspective with particular reference to the Iranian society and body
politic. In the last years of his life he produced two major works: the
novel, Nafrin-e zamin (The curse of the land), published in 1967, a
damaging criticism of the so-called Land Reform; and a work of
ideological importance, Dar khidmat wa khiyanat-e rawshanfikran
(Concerning the service and disservice of the intellectuals), which was
posthumously published during the peak hours of the Revolution.

Jalal died on September 9, 1969 in a village in Gilan, and was buried
near the Fir'zabadi mosque at Shahri Ray. Thus came to end an
intellectual career, apparently chequered with swift shifts in political
and philosophical position, but in reality depicting the journey of a
restless soul in search of its true identity, a quest for the roots.
Jalal's psychological and intellectual biography is not different from
those of many others who underwent similar radical upheavals and
transformations in the post-Second-World-War period of disillusionment
with almost all the modern ideologies causing a deep sense of
rootlessness.

Jalal traced back the roots of his own existence along with the roots
of Iranian culture and soul to Islam-a diagnosis of great relevance to
the Muslim world in general. Hamid Algar's introduction to the
translation of Gharbzadegi furnishes all necessary information about
Jalal's literary and political life.

Algar's following observation provides the key to understanding the
real nature of Occidentosis:

It is important to remember that its author was neither a historian nor
an ideologue. He was a man who after two decades of thought and
experimentation had discovered an important and fundamental truth
concerning his society-disastrous subordination to the West in all
areas-and was in a hurry to communicate this discovery to others. He had
neither the time nor the patience to engage in careful historical
research, and at some points in the book he even enjoins his readers to
dig up the historical evidence for a given assertion. (p. 14).
A more important observation made by Algar concerns the nature of
Jalal's rediscovery of the soul of Islam. In his view, Jalal's return to
Islam is not straightforward, because, firstly, he could not completely
free himself from the Orientalist influence, and secondly, there was an
unmistakably nationalist colour to Ali Ahmad's proud claim that Islam
became Islam when it reached the settled lands between the Tigris and
the Euphrates, until then being the Arabs' primitiveness and Jahiliyyah"
Jalal in Occiden tosis blames Orientalists for inflating the Iranian ego
by causing them to believe that they are the people with a great past
and consequently making them think that they did not need learn anything
new from the West except the use of machine.

Then taking advantage of this false pride and complacence, in his view,
Western scholars changed the moulds of Iranian thought substituting them
by their own measures. It is strange that an intellectual of Jalal's
calibre, who was aware of the Western scholars' conspiracy, fell so
cheaply into their trap and explained the origin of Islam in terms of "a
kind of delayed response to the call of Mani and Mazdak" or, using
Marxist jargon, "a new call based on the needs of the urban populations
of the Euphrates region and Syria".

These and many other false notions and criteria are fabrications of the
Western mode of thinking imported to the East in the name of "scientific
tools of socio-historical analysis".

And our intelligentsia is so allured by the temptation of being
considered modern that a conscious writer like Jalal, fully aware of
Western intellectual conspiracy, applies them to the realities of Islam
and the Eastern culture unhesitatingly. Unfortunately all intellectuals
who have been and are in the vanguard of political and intellectual
movements in the third world have been using Western concepts and
criteria to interpret and solve the complexities of their own
traditions.

Modernism, liberalism, scientism, secularism, sociologism and many
other 'isms' were evolved and developed in the West according to the
changing conditions of the Western society and polity, which were
confronted with a fundamental contradiction between new scientific modes
of thinking and Christian-dominated medieval ways of life and thought
that caused an unbridgeable breach between sacred and profane, spiritual
and physical, worldly and otherworldly, religion and social existence,
or the church and the state.

So-called Eastern intelligentsia in general, and Muslim intellectuals
in particular, without applying their intellect to the fundamental
opposition between Oriental and Occidental milieu, accepted Western
notions as if they were universally true and applicable to various
realities.

Nationalism is also such a category having little relevance to the
realities and ideals of Islam. Iranian Islam, Indian Islam, Malaysian
Islam, Pakistani Islam, Turkish Islam and Arab Islam as terms have
become so current in contemporary writings that even the most cautious
and meticulous of Muslim scholars brought up under the Western
educational system use them as valid. Undoubtedly Islamic teachings due
to their immense potential of adaptability could fit in different
environs without being altered basically, but it did not mean that Islam
could be variously interpreted.

Since such a wrong conception of Islam became current, Muslim Ummah as
a whole began to lose political and economic power and became stagnant
intellectually and scientifically. Jalal's pride in an Islam which
became Islam after settling in what is presently known as Iraq, Syria
and Iran stems from a similar nationalist oriented misconception.

Surprisingly enough Jalal is critical of the Safawid Iran for playing
into the hands of anti-Muslim Eastern and Western powers by stabbing the
Ottoman Muslim empire in the back which proved to be the last stronghold
of Muslim resistance against the world supremacy of the West. Granted
that his criticism is not justified concerning all the points,
nonetheless his analysis, though defective, reveals his keen desire for
Muslim unity. He is also aw are that the breaking up of the Ottoman
empire into small states and principalities was engineered by Western
imperialist designs. This awareness should have led him to understand
the true nature of the movements of nationalism in the Muslim world.

The seeds of nationalism were sowed in the hearts of the Muslims by a
well-planned conspiracy of Western imperialism, intellectually supported
by Orientalists and Western educators with a view to break Muslim
unity.


