Supplement 2
============

The Arabs who are still serving their Western masters, with their
overemphasis on Arab nationalism fail to realize that the differences
within their own fold are due to themselves and are offshoots of the
spirit of nationalism cultivated in their minds by the vested Western
interests. The divisive role of nationalism does not stop at alienating
Arab Muslims from the rest of the Muslim world, but it goes further and
deeper by causing subdivisions among themselves making them even more
dependent on the West.

Like many modern and so-called progressive writers of the past
generation Jalal Ali Ahmad, in his diagnosis of the evil effects of
Western influence, could not smell the danger of the West-inspired
nationalism.

Thus he, whose messianic mission was to liberate Iranians from the
clutches of Westernization, fell an easy prey to the Occidental trap not
realizing the ideological pitfalls in Western thought. This is how
Orientalists consciously coin certain notions with ulterior motives and
our Eastern, or more precisely Muslim, intellectuals imitate them
unconsciously subscribing to their views and serving their motives.

Algar, quoting Simin Danishwar, Jalal's wife, concludes that Jalal's
"relative return to religion was a means to preserving national identity
and a path leading to human dignity, mercy, reason, and virtue." All
these terms are ambiguous, rather emptyclichs, confusing "Islamic
identity" with a particular kind of "national identity."

Jalal's return to Islam is dubbed as incomplete by Algar, for, even in
Khassi dar Miqat, Jalal's travelogue of his hajj pilgrimage, despite his
occasional emotional outbursts, he is more concerned with the human and
material surroundings than with his own inner experience. On the one
hand, it may be explained in terms of a hangover from his Marxist past,
and on the other, it can be deciphered "as an attempt to flee from the
mosque" The last phrase occurs in Khassi dar Miqat (Tehran: 1345/1966,
p. 74) on the occasion of his visit to the tomb of the Prophet (S) in
Medina.

In the morning when I said, 'peace be upon you, O Prophet,' 1 was
suddenly moved. The railing surrounding the tomb was directly in front
of me and 1 could see the people circumambulating the tomb ... I wept
and fled from the mosque. (Occidentosis, p.18)

However, this incomplete return to Islam in itself is significant,
because it paved the way for the coming of many an intellectual in the
fold of the Islamic Revolution. Ayatullah Taliqani remarked of him:
'Jalal was very good toward the end of his 'life.' Had he lived till the
victory of the Islamic Revolution, most probably he would have been on
the side of the 'ulama'. This is not a shallow conjecture, but can be
supported with ample evidence. He was the first member of the
intelligentsia to lament the killing of Shaykh Fadl Allah N'ri, the
chief opponent of Western-style constitutionalism. .Jalal reevaluated
his positive role in blocking the smooth sailing of the Western
interests in Iran in the following words:

... The martyred Shaykh N'ri was forced to mount the gallows not as an
opponent of constitutionalism, which he had defended early on, but as an
advocate of rule by Islamic law (and as an advocate for Shi'i
solidarity). This is why they all sat waiting for the fatwa from Najaf
to kill him-this in an age when the leaders among our occidentotic
intellectuals were the Christian Malkum Khan and the Caucasian Social
Democrat Talibov.

Now the brand of occidentosis was imprinted on our foreheads. I look on
that great man's body on the gallows as a flag raised over our nation
proclaiming the triumph of occidentosis after two hundred years of
struggle. Under this flag we are like strangers to ourselves, in our
food and dress, our homes, our manners, our publications, and, most
dangerous, our culture .... (Occidentosis, pp. 5657)

Ali Ahmad was probably the lone litterateur who recognized the
significance of the 15 Khurdad 1342 (6 June 1963) uprising, and could
see how decisive a role the 'ulam a' were to play in shaping the destiny
of Iran.

He also went to see Imam Khumayni, who was quoted as saying: I once saw
Jalal Ali Ahmad for a quarter of an hour. It was in the early part of
our movement. I saw someone sitting opposite me, and the book
Gharbzadegi was lying near me. He asked, 'How did you come by this
Nonsense?' and I realized it was Ali Ahmad. Unfortunately, I never saw
him again. May he enjoy the mercy of God. (Commemorative supplement to
Jamh'ri-ye Islami, p.10)

The first chapter of Occidentosis deals with the nature of the disease.
It is said that the division of the world in two blocs, East and West,
or communist and non-communist, has become redundant. In fact there
exist two blocs, and they are: producers of the machine and buyers of
the machine. It makes all the difference who exports and who imports
machines. Economy, politics, sociology, psychology, and every other
thing including prosperity, mortality and birth-rates, social welfare,
nutrition, culture, and socio-political structure depend upon this
single fact. The West or the exploiter owns the machine, and the East or
the oppressed, or in more respectable terms the developing countries,
need the machine. The boundaries of the East and the West are also
floating and shifting. Sometime the East overlaps the West, and vice
versa.

The East includes Asia, Africa, and Latin America, while the West
comprises Europe, America, Japan, South Africa and Israel. In such a
division ideological compartmentalization becomes superfluous. Jalal
discovered this radically new reality in the early sixties. In the past
the area from the Eastern Mediterranean to India (and China), presently
called by the West 'the East' was the advanced and civilized part of the
world, whereas the present West then led a semi-barbaric life.

Now the balance is tipped in favour of the other side. It was success
in trade and advancement in machinery and technology that vested the
West with superior authority in all respects. With the process of
civilization, or rather Christianization, the worst forms of
deprivation, exploitation and dehumanization encroached upon the lands
of Asia, Africa and Latin America.

Religion, culture, economy, social structure and the old value systems
were destroyed by the colonizers. It was only Muslim unity that
obstructed the onward march of imperialism. With the elimination of
Islamic Andalusia the last battle scene was set in the Ottoman empire,
the last citadel of formal or real Islamic unity.

When the Ottoman empire was disintegrated as an aftermath of the first
world war, its provinces, formed as independent states, but virtually
Western satellites, fell an easy prey to the ever-increasing lust of the
West. Iran was a part and parcel of this scheme, where a dictator of the
West's choice was crowned emperor.

This entire process was facilitated by importing into Iran the machine
and its Western experts along with all its paraphernalia. The post-war
period witnessed the all-embracing tentacles of occidentosis rapidly
taking into their deadly embrace the entire Iran and all the aspects of
its religious, cultural, social and economic life. This was the end of a
national identity.

The next three chapters describe the earliest signs of the illness, the
wellsprings of the flood, and the first infections. In these chapters
Jalal gives an account of the historical events leading to the ultimate
surrender of the East to the West. The villain of this long drawn drama
is the machine-a substitute for Fate, the villain in the classical
Western play-as a tool of the demigods of money and political power in
Iran.

The delayed reaction on the part of the East, like that of
Shakespearian hero Hamlet, comes to the surface at the end of the
nineteenth century, in the form of constitutionalism, which also proved
to be inspired and manoeuvred by the Britishers. It is in this
perspective that the martyrdom of Fadl Allah N'ri is assessed as a
sacrifice of great significance by the author. Before that Jalal had
analysed the vital role of Iran-Turkey conflict as an instrument of
strengthening the forces of the West.

In the fourth chapter, "The First Infections", among other things,
Jalal evaluates the nature and character of Western education. The first
point he makes out is that the entire Western education is based upon
and modelled according to Christianity. In the East it aims at
alienating the Eastern people from their culture, religion, and social
structure.

It is an irony of events that an educational system more advanced than
that of the medieval Christian system was put aside as being obsolete
and retrogressive in the name of modern science and technology. This
type of education alienated the so-called elite from their people, soil,
and their traditions, without bestowing upon them the slightest spark of
expertise in modern science and technology. In the Iranian context,
Jalal makes note of the following fact:

This estrangement came about because the two generations that have
cropped up here since the Constitutional Era to become professors,
writers, ministers, lawyers, general directors, and so on, only the
doctors among them having any true specialized competence ... they all
went astray in opting for "adoption of European civilization without
Iranian adaptation".... (p. 58)

Westernization is not an isolated phenomenon confined to Iran.


