Supplement 3
============

All colonies of the West in the East had to meet this challenge. For
instance, the Indian subcontinent, which remained under the British
colonial rule virtually for about two centuries, underwent a process of
Westernization, but it could affect a minority of civil servants and
upper ruling class only, and failed to engulf the vast majority of the
Muslim and non-Muslim population.

The Western education system was thrust upon the subcontinent partly
due to needs of the British rulers for efficient functionaries for their
administration, and partly because a few far-sighted leaders considered
the old Muslim and Hindu systems of education out-dated and felt that
the Indians' acquaintance with modern sciences was the only means of
rescuing them from total destruction. A section of orthodox Muslim
'ulama' and staunch champions of Hindu culture put up some resistance to
the Western influence.

This resistance, though not lasting long, served as a warning as well
as a safety measure and effective restraint in checking complete
surrender of India to the W est. Thus, the Indians were enabled to
master modern scientific knowledge and its tools without being totally
alienated from their own cultural traditions. Only a negligible minority
of timeservers took pride in Anglicizing themselves, but the majority of
the Muslims, Hindus, and other communities, including even new converts
to Christianity, retained and preserved their traditional style of
life.

As a consequence of firm adherence to their native traditions, Indians
learnt modern sciences and proved themselves to be the equals, in
specialized fields, of the Westerners, but at the same time they
retained their "Indianness". Contrarily, in Iran, after the early
resistance against Westernization by the clergy was repressed by force,
there was no check against Westernization.

It is more tragic that instead of trying to specialize in modern
sciences they remained content in imitating Western ways of dressing,
living and eating, and they forcibly unveiled their women without
initiating them into modern spirit. Another factor that accelerated
superficial Westernization was affluence, which came in the wake of the
oil money.

Jalal repeatedly uses the phrase "the ugly head of oil" for referring
to the negative consequences of the oil. Though the lion's share of oil
revenue was usurped by the Western powers and companies, yet the remnant
of it was enough to ensure Iranians that they could buy all they needed
from the West.

They became accustomed to the use of the machine without having
technical know-how. Gradually they became more and more easygoing and
comfort-loving, and surrendered their social, cultural, political, and
economic freedom to the despotism of the machine. When Jalal curses the
machine and holds it responsible for Iran's slavery to the
machine-producing West, his criticism issues from a realization that the
machine played the key role in subjecting Iran to occidentosis. The
imported machine and technology required expertise, which was not
available in the country, and hiring of foreign experts meant importing
the necessary paraphernalia.

which was accompanied by all sorts of foreign cultural influence,
including that of the Orientalists, sociologists, political analysts,
functionaries of cultural exchange programmes, etc. With all this,
Iran's subjection to occidentosis was complete. The same process took
place in the Arab countries also with some minor differences. But
probably the pre-Revolution Iran had become much more Western in its
life-style than any other Muslim or Eastern country.

All diseases produce corresponding antibodies. Similarly the plague of
occidentosis produced from within writers like Jalal and a combating
resistance force in the form of the 'ulama', who untiringly fought
against all forms of Western supremacy. This concerted struggle
ultimately culminated in the movement led by Imam Khumayni. Jalal
witnessed its beginning and anticipated correctly its far-reaching
socio-political effects.

The fifth chapter '"The War of Contradictions", brings out the main
contradictions of the Iranian society caused by the machine
transformation. The logic of machine consumption compelled premature
urbanization, as a consequence of which villages were deserted and
agriculture destroyed. This change forced Iranian consumers to be
dependent on foreign food grains and frozen or tinned food products.

The entire Iranian economy collapsed. The figures which are supplied
and analysed by Jalal concern the years 1331-1340 (1952-1961), which
marked just the beginning of Iran's dependence on the West, and
particularly the U.S.A. Desertion of the countryside and total collapse
of agriculture in the coming years turned Iran into a country spoon-fed
by the West. Oil reserves were drilled and exported with an alarmingly
fast rate. No long-term planning was even conceived at any level. The
White Revolution did nothing except darkening the conceivable future of
the nation. Urbanization and occidentosis everywhere and always go hand
in hand:

First, the new urban resident attends initially to the wants of his
stomach and then to those of the region beneath his stomach, and for the
sake of the latter, to his grooming. (p. 66)

In this period, as compared to the most advanced cities of the world,
Tehran had 2200 licensed men's barbers and women's hairdressers and 2500
unlicensed ones. Comparing this with London's 4300 barbers and
hairdressers, or Moscow's 3900, one can appreciate how much the people
of Tehran devoted themselves to maintaining their appearance. Similarly
the number of cinema houses and other places of refuge from urban
anxiety, home and family, school, and sexual and other deprivations
increased stupendously.

The bank accounts of the Hollywood film-makers were incessantly fed
from the pockets of lower and middle class Third World citizens. The
amounts spent and earned in this business were staggeringly high.
Secondly, the problem of security grew serious day by day. Thirdly,
traditional industries and handicrafts were ruined.

Fourthly, a whole course of time is needed to accustom people to the
use of the machine. In the West, the people's consciousness and mode of
living developed with the evolution of the machine, whereas in Iran its
introduction on a large scale was so sudden that people in general lost
the sense of all proportion. A simple villager came to the city and w as
astounded to such a degree that he fell an easy prey to all sorts of
temptations, which led him to a life of easy-money and crime.

In this process corruption was logically accepted as a way of life.

Fifthly, in a medieval social set-up that did not provide women with
respectable work and valued their labour much cheaper than that of men,
women were superficially emancipated. Without being trained in any trade
of social significance, they had no other job but to freshen and exhibit
themselves as objects of sex. Sixthly, ninety per cent of the people of
Iran have deep-rooted faith in the return of the Twelfth Imam (A), "all
awaiting him, each in his own way; because none of the Iranian
governments ever lived up to the least of its promises; for oppression,
injustice, repression, and discrimination had been always pandemic."

In such a clime of waiting for a just government, propagation of the
idea of a national government with all its tools and institutions of
oppression, the SAVAK and the torture, and an alien system of education
could cause only a wider breach between faith and practice. Such a
system could breed either cynics and rebels or timeservers and
hypocrites. Another contradiction to which Jalal attracts attention is
that in this age of shrinking international boundaries with all the
affluence that provides every Iranian an opportunity for travel,
Iranians remained usually ignorant of their immediate neighbours and
their cultures :

But if the Afghan and I, united in our religion, language, and racial
stock, know nothing of each other or if to travel to Iraq Or India is
harder than to penetrate the iron Curtain, it is because we are within
the sphere of influence of one corporation and the Afghan in that of
another.

Jalal's conclusion is that the world is compartmentalized according to
the interests of our masters who pull our strings from behind the scene
and we submit like puppets to them. In Jalal's view, the most dangerous
of all the contradictions arising from occidentosis is our ignorance of
our own situation in that part of the world in which significant events
are taking place.

The locus of threat has been transferred to the Middle East. The sixth
chapter contains some positive suggestions as to how we can break the
spell of occidentosis. Jalal says that the road Iran has so far followed
is to remain only a consumer of the machine, to submit utterly to this
twentieth-century juggernaut.

... First we need an economy consistent with the manufacture of
machines, that is, an independent economy. Then we need an educational
system, then a furnace to melt the metal and impress it with the human
will. Then we need schools where these skills may be practically
imparted. Then we need factories to convert the metal into machines and
other industrial goods. And then we need markets to make them available
to the people in the towns and villages.


