Supplement 5
============

As the five preceding chapters are a prelude to the main theme of
occidentosis elaborated in the seventh chapter, the remaining four
chapters, from the eighth to the eleventh, form a sequel to it. "A
Society in Collapse" is again an account of the tyranny of the machine,
in the wake of which the armed forces emerge as the final arbiters.
Jalal has described various wings of the armed forces in terms of their
utility for the oppressive regime and its subservience to its Western
masters.

The ninth chapter gives an account of the pitfalls of the West-oriented
educational system and its irrelevance to Iranian society and people.
The educated class was a typical breed of occidentotics; all its
activities and products lacked any sense of purpose and direction. Some
passages from this chapter can be quoted to serve as an index for the
study of the occidentotic elite of other similar countries:

With very few exceptions, the sole output of these colleges over the
last twenty or thirty years has consisted of distinguished scholars, all
of whom know the language, know some biography, are scrupulous workers,
write marginalia in others' books, resolve tough problems in language or
history, determine which graves lack tenants or which figures lack
graves, explore the mysteries of Sura an-Nahl, know who is citing or
plagiarizing from whom as much as a thousand years ago, and write
treatises on the poets of the tenth century of the Hijra, whom one could
count on the fingers of one's two hands.

Worst of all, most of them become teachers of literature, educational
directors, or civil judges. Bless this last group, whose members have
given some underpinnings to the Justice Ministry and some meaning to the
idea of the independence of the judiciary and who well distinguish truth
from falsity, if conditions allow. But what of the others? All in all,
what benefit have we realized from them, besides a deeper plunge into
occidentosis?

All these professors and their carefully trained pupils, with their
ears stopped like Seven Sleepers', have retreated so far into the cave
of texts, textual variants, and obscure expressions that even the roar
of the machine cannot awaken them. Rather, they have plastered these
texts to their ears to avoid hearing these most loathsome of sounds.

The encroachments of foreign tongues day by day are undermining the
importance of the mother tongue and making a sound command of it less
necessary. Defections to scientific and technical fields further thin
the ranks of those pursuing these fields.

With things in such a state, the nation's centers for letters, legal
studies, and leaning, the Colleges of Letters, Law, and the Religious
and Philosophic Sciences have retreated into the cocoons of old texts,
content to train pedants, just as the clergy have drawn into their
cocoons of fanaticism and paralysis in the face of the West's
onslaught.

These days, just as the clergy languishes in the toils of doubt between
two and three and explication of ritual purity and impurity, such
centers of Iranian, Eastern, and Islamic letters, law, and learning
languish in the toils of whether the decorative be should be joined to
the following word or whether the silent should be written.

Those exiled from the world of universals will clutch at minutiae. When
the house has been carried off in the flood or has collapsed in an
earthquake, you go looking for a door in the debris to bear the rotting
corpse of a loved one to the graveyard.

As we speak of educational questions and questions of the university,
we meet with another major question, that of the army of returnees from
Europe and America, each of whom has returned at least a candidate for a
position in a ministry and who collectively form the bulwark of the
:nation's organizations.

Each of these educated persons is a boon-something like finding one
shoe in the desert. For look closely. See, after returning and finding a
post in an organization and getting entrenched there, what each of these
boons turns into. They haven't the authority or the competence to do the
job. They are illiberal, apathetic, and for the most part lacking in
concern, mostly because they see themselves and their opinions as
amounting to nothing next to the Western advisors and consultants who
dominate the scene.

Contrary to the widespread view, the greater the army of returnees from
Europe, the less their power to act and the greater the distress of the
institutions that absorb their impact- Because there has never been a
plan for where to send these youths and what specialty, what trade, what
technology they should study,

they have gone each to some part of the world to study or experience
something completely different from others' experiences, on their own
choice and initiative, to their own taste. As they return, each having
to join some group in one of our country's organizations, it becomes
obvious how dissonant they are and how at a loss to carry out anything.
Consider the French-educated Iranian, or the English; German; or
American-educated one :

each tunes up and plays in a distinct style.

If I have hope for the future of intellectuals in Iran, however, one
reason is this very diversity of methods by which our European-educated
have studied, of their fields of study and places of study. This is the
wellspring of the wealth of Iran's intellectual environment. Look at the
intellectual environment of India, at how English its majority of
Oxford-educated intelligentsia have made it. Under present conditions in
this country, these youths generally resemble the lovely tulips,
daffodils, and hyacinths we import as bulbs from Holland and grow in the
Tehran greenhouses. When they bloom, we put them in exorbitantly priced
flowerpots and give them to friends or acquaintances to set in a hot
room under the sun where they will survive a week at most.

These flowers at the top of society's basket also wither in this
society's climate. Or if they don't, they generally fade to the color of
the society. Notwithstanding all the propaganda cranked out to lure back
students from abroad in Europe, I do not believe that their return
promises to be a service to the country so long as no environment suited
to their future work is provided. Who is to provide this environment? In
this intense cold, those can prepare it who have been both baked in the
furnace and acclimated to the icehouse....

Although many young men return with European or American wives, very
few of the young women return with European or American husbands. This
constitutes an additional problem. As we watch crumble the foundation of
the Iranian family, an intimate relationship of husband and wife of the
same stock, the responsibility of these incongruous households is
obvious. The saying, "the pigeon of two towers" means these youths with
their families-the firsthand human products of occidentosis. (pp.
117-119)

Under the heading "Mechanosis" the distinguishing factors of a
transitional period of society are discussed, which are : advance of
science; transformation of technique, technology, and machine, and some
semblance to Western type of democracy. In all cases these factors cause
crises, which are in proportion to the speed of transformation of a
society.

Iran sought to make up for a two-hundred-year lag within two decades,
which naturally gave rise to social aberrations and psychological
disturbances. In the West, mechanization of socioeconomic structure
produced gangsters, brigands, killers, adventurers, and deportees at the
social level, and militarism and fascism at the political level.

Jalal holds that the Iranian society has its own rogues, who are
sometimes exported to the West under imperial patronage. He regards
African and Asian countries raped and transgressed, and put to
pressures, humiliations, and killings as the victims of the same
abnormal phenomena. In a democratic set-up, political parties also help
technocracy and bureaucracy to iron out individual differences and to
mould all individuals in one and the same shape. This is again a
byproduct of the machine which demands total conformity to its
dictates.

Conformity in the work place", in Jalal's words, "culminates in
conformity in the party and union, which in turn culminates in
conformity in the barracks-that is, before the war machine." The
yardstick of standardization is not only applied to dress, form, and
manners, but also to thought and inner make-up. Out of this come the
Blackshirts, the Brownshirts and the Fascists of all sort. In such
deterministic and standardized society, psychosis and neurosis,
personality split and dissociation, schizophrenia and melancholia become
the order of the day.

Jalal has enumerated three specific forms of melancholia common in
Iranian society. the melancholia of grandiosity, the melancholia of
glorifying the nation's remote past, and the melancholia of constant
pursuit.

The last chapter, "The Hour Draws Nigh", gives a brief account of some
Western thinkers and writers who predicted the end of the road taken by
the pursuers of the machine. First of all he refers to Albert Camus and
his masterwork The Plague, then to Eugene Ionesco's Rhinoceros, Ingmar
Bergman's film The Seventh Seal, Sartre's Erostratus and other similar
works and characters. After translating The Plague one-third, a
realization came to him that "the plague" symbolized mechanism, murder
of beauty and poetry, spirit and humanity.

And now I, not as an Easterner, but as one like the first Muslims, who
expected to see the Resurrection on the Plain of Judgement in their
lifetimes, see ... that all these fictional endings raise the threat of
the final hour, when the machine demon (if we don't rein it in or put
its spirit in the bottle) will set the hydrogen bomb at the end of the
road for humanity. On that note, I will rest my pen at the Quranic
verse: "The hour draws nigh and the moon is split in two." (The Quran,
54:1) (p.137)

In Iran the occidentosis-demon has been reined and put in the bottle by
the Islamic Revolution, and "Mechanosis" has been controlled to some
extent. Watch out! The danger has not vanished, it still lingers on in
some of the darkest corners of the society. The hour to relax has not
arrived as yet. At the end, it can be pointed out that some of the
translations of the titles of Jalal's books are not accurate, which are
modified in this review. It is feared that such errors might have crept
into the text of the book also.

\*Gharbzadegi, a literary event in modern Persian literature, was
published in 1962. The author Jalal Ali Ahmad is one of the most eminent
writers of Iran, whose importance was not diminished by the Islamic
Revolution but was rather enhanced. The English translation of
Gharbzadegi by Campbell is reviewed by Dr. Wahid Akhtar, an eminent Urdu
writer and poet. Dr. Akhtar is a professor of philosophy at Muslim
University Aligarh, India- He is presently on the editorial board of
al-Tawhid (English).


