Translator’s Introduction
=========================

*Philosophical Instructions: An Introduction to Contemporary Islamic
Philosophy* is a textbook compiled for the purpose of introducing the
students of the Islamic seminaries in Qom to the rudiments of Islamic
philosophy. It is arranged in the form of seventy short lessons which
cover the breadth of Islamic philosophy, including discussions of the
history of philosophy, epistemology, metaphysics and philosophical
theology. The lectures were originally presented by the author to
students and taped at the*Dar Rāh-e Haqq Institute* in Qom in 1981 and
1982, the transcriptions of the tapes were revised and edited by Prof.
Miṣbāḥ and published in two volumes by the Islamic Propagation
Organization in Qom. In the Persian edition, titled*Āmūzesh-e Falsafeh*
, first printed in 1985-86, each lesson is followed by a summary and
review questions, but the lessons themselves are so concise that we
decided to omit these materials from the translation.

The book was not written for an English speaking audience, and for this
very reason it serves that audience as a very good introduction to
Islamic philosophy as it is seen from within the seminaries of Qom. The
author, Ayatullah Miṣbāḥ Yazdī, is one of the most highly respected
clerics in the Shī‘ī world, and a revered professor of philosophy.
His*Philosophical Instructions* is a unique work, not only because of
its survey of the topics of Islamic philosophy, but because the author
self-consciously attempts to defend his considered views from opponents
at home and abroad. So, the work is polemical as well as instructional.
What is defended is a controversial way of looking at Islamic philosophy
as a foundation for religious thought.

Philosophy and the interpretation of the Qur’ān, like mysticism,*‘irfān*
, are looked upon with suspicion by many Shī‘ī clerics who teach Islamic
law and jurisprudence, *fiqh* and *uṣūl* , although the situation has
improved somewhat since the Islamic Revolution due to the fact that Imam
Khomeini promoted these areas of learning, and due to the esteem in
which ‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī is held, whose works in these areas have
become standards. [^1] What is at issue is not so much the methods of
philosophy as the doctrines with which it is associated in the Islamic
world. Among the scholars of Islam, philosophy is not merely a tradition
of thought extending from ancient Greece, winding its way through the
Neoplatonists, Muslims, Christians, modern Europeans and leading to the
contemporary academic study of philosophy of science, religion, law and
politics. In the Muslim world, philosophy has always been more than a
method and set of topics with a history; it has always demanded the
acceptance of specific doctrines which have been considered by some to
be inconsistent with Islam. The philosophers of Islam, like the sufis
and the Shī‘ah (and important thinkers often claimed allegiance to all
three of these forms of esotericism), proposed non-literal
interpretations of various verses of the Qur’ān and narrations
attributed to the Prophet and his folk ( *ṣ* ). The reaction from the
literal minded is predictable: charges of heresy, deviation and
infidelity.

In the Qur’ān, we seem to be presented with the concept of a personal,
if not anthropomorphic deity, while the philosophers and sufis claimed
that God is existence itself, or the truth of existence, or absolute
existence,

Being. Islam apparently teaches that in the temporal period following
death, various physical rewards and punishments are to be encountered.
The philosophers and sufis claimed that the rewards and punishments were
somehow simultaneous with our current lives. The resurrection of the
body has also been given various mystical and philosophical
interpretations which are anathema to the literalists. The literalists
are not to be dismissed as stubborn narrow minded people who insist on
the authority of the Word of God over the use of human reason. Christian
fundamentalism does not find a precise analogue in Islam. In the quarrel
with philosophy, both sides have employed subtle philosophical arguments
to defend their positions, at least since the time of Ghazālī (d. 1111).
The charge of the literalists is often that it is unreasonable to
interpret the scriptures as suggested by the mystics and philosophers,
and no matter how much we might like to side with the non-literalists,
it must be admitted that philosophers and mystics have often provided
interpretations of the texts which are hard to swallow.

In the Shī‘ī milieu, however, esoteric interpretation of texts is an
intrinsic part of orthodoxy, for the Imams (*‘A* ) themselves revealed
various levels of esoteric knowledge passed down to them from the
Prophet (*ṣ* ) along with their status of trusteeship (*walāyah* ). This
esoteric knowledge pertains to the interpretation of the Qur’ān and to
doctrine, but it is rarely directly pertinent to the details of ritual
law. For the Shī‘ī scholars of the law, the*fuqahā* , whose business is
providing clear textual evidence in support of legal judgments as to
what actions are obligatory, recommendable, neutral, discouraged or
forbidden, it is natural to develop a preference for a natural common
sense reading of the texts. So, there is a hermeneutic tension to be
found in the Shī‘ī seminaries. On the one hand, there is a special
sensitivity to the esoteric encouraged by the pronouncements of the
Imams (*‘a* ), and on the other hand interest in the juristic studies
fosters a tendency toward literalism and common sense reasoning.

The situation is further complicated if we consider the split among the
Shī‘ī jurists into the*Akhbāriyyūn* and *Uṣūliyyūn* With respect to
exegesis, there are two fundamental issues dividing these two groups:
first, how to distinguish authentic from inauthentic narrations
attributed to the Prophet and his folk ( *‘A* ), and second, how to
derive juridical rulings on the basis of the authentic narrations. The
*Akhbāriyyūn* tended to accept the entire corpus of *aḥādīth* or to
adjudicate authenticity on the basis of the text of the narrations,
while the *Uṣūliyyūn* sought to derive the authenticity of a report
first by estimating the reliability of its chain of transmission and
then considering the text itself. Once the authentic reports have been
identified, the *Akhbāriyyūn* would let them speak for themselves to
answer questions of law, while the *Uṣūliyyūn* argued that various
principles ( *uṣūl* ) of jurisprudence must be used in order to provide
answers to many legal questions, and in these principles common sense
and reason are prominent. By the mid-nineteenth century, the
*Akhbāriyyūn* had virtually disappeared, and the *uṣūlī* attitude toward
exegesis, favoring common sense and rationalism, has come to dominate
not only studies of Islamic law and the principles of jurisprudence, but
the Islamic sciences generally. The

literalism associated with the study of the law is a moderate literalism
that emphasizes the place of reason and common sense.

*Philosophical Instructions* displays a balance between*uṣūlī*
literalist and esoteric tendencies in the context of a defense of
Islamic philosophy. The charge of misinterpreting sacred texts is
obviated by the absence of any significant reliance on scripture at all.
Reason, as understood from within the scholastic tradition of Shī‘ī
learning, is the sole standard to which appeal is made, and it is
recognized that scriptural language is often used in figurative ways so
that esoteric interpretation dictated by reason must finally be accepted
to reconcile philosophy with religion.

The Islamic philosophy defended is one that derives from the works of
Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī (d. 1641), commonly known as Mulla Ṣadrā and usually
referred to in this work by the honorific title,*Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn* ,
the pride of the theosophists. Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn was himself a
sythesizer who built a system called*Ḥikmah al-Muta’āliyyah
(transcendent theosophy)* which includes elements of the thinking of Ibn
Sīnā (d. 1037), Suhravardī (d. 1191), Ibn ‘Arabī (d. 1240) and such
great Shī‘ī theologians as Khwājah Naṣīr al-Dīn Ṭūsī (d. 1274) and
‘Allāmah Ḥillī (1325), and he was also subjected to the assaults of
those who considered his esoteric interpretations of doctrine to be
heresy, to whom he exasperatingly responded with a pointed moral
invective in his only Persian treatise.[^2] Ṣadra’s influence gained
ground only gradually after his death, but by the nineteenth century his
thought had established itself among Shī‘ī students of philosophy, and
the*Sharḥ al-Manzūmah* of Ḥakim Sabzavārī (d. 1878), which is in
agreement with all of the major theses of Ṣadrā’s*transcendent
theosophy* , became a standard text for students who privately studied
philosophy in the seminaries.

In the latter half of the twentieth century, the ulama were confronted
by an increasing interest in Marxism among the youth, and they sought to
meet this philosophical challenge with an elucidation of the principles
of*transcendent theosophy* *.* It is for this purpose that ‘Allāmah
Ṭabāṭabā’ī wrote his*Uṣul-e Falsafah va Ravish-e Ri’ālīsm (The
Principles of Philosophy and the Method of Realism)* in Persian, and
following his lead, in Najaf, Shahīd Bāqir Ṣadr wrote his*Falsafatunā
(Our Philosophy)* .[^3]

‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī had studied philosophy in Najaf, and came to Qom
shortly after World War II with the express intention of reforming the
beliefs of the students of the seminaries and “combating the false
doctrines of the materialists and others.” When he began openly teaching
Mulla Ṣadrā’s*Asfār* , the leading cleric of the time, Ayatullah
Burūjirdī threatened to cut off the stipends of ‘Allāmah’s students.
Ayatullah Burūjirdī confessed that he himself had studied the *Asfār* ,
but privately. He had no objection to the continuation of private
lessons in philosophy, abut the subject was considered dangerous, and it
was feared that if publicly taught, it would give rise to unorthodox
beliefs. ‘Allāmah responded that after consulting the poetry of āfiẓ by
random selection of a poem, he was convinced that he must not abandon
his teaching. The poem beings:

I am not the rascal to abandon

the beauty nor the goblet,

The guard knows that this deed

I would not do.

Furthermore, he explained that the students of the seminary did not
arrive in a state of ideological purity, but were in need of such
teaching to quell the doubts they already had and to prepare them for
combat with materialism, and that for this reason he would continue his
teaching unless officially ordered by Ayatullah Burūjirdī to stop. After
this, Ayatullah Burūjirdī never again tried to interfere with ‘Allāmah’s
teaching, but thereafter always treated ‘Allāmah with courtesy, and even
gave him the gift of a fine copy of the Qur’ān.[^4]

The resistance to the public teaching of philosophy did not always stem
from disagreement with philosophical principles, but often from
religious scruples. It is considered a grave sin to weaken the faith of
a Muslim, and philosophy has been viewed as being dangerous because it
can plant doubts in the minds of the insufficiently subtle from which
they may be unable to extricate themselves. This idea is even expressed
by Ibn Sīnā, who warns the casual reader not to read any further after
the discussions of logic have been completed and philosophy is to begin
in his*Remarks and Admonitions* .[^5] It is not uncommon to find such
warnings in the works of the philosophers and ‘urafā of Islam that a
proper background and training is needed before a correct appreciation
of the teaching can be expected. Indeed, was this not the point of the
inscription above the door to the Academy?

In addition to the public teaching of philosophy, the ideological war
between Marxism and Islam led to several innovations in Islamic
philosophy. Until the twentieth century, works in Islamic philosophy
were written in order to answer questions posed by Muslim thinkers
within the context of Islamic culture. No reference was made to modern
European thought. With the threat of Marxism, however, Muslim
philosophers addressed themselves to questions raised by the Europeans,
especially to epistemological questions. While classical Islamic
philosophy was primarily concerned with issues of metaphysics, an
important feature of twentieth century Islamic philosophy is its
attention to epistemology. ‘Allāmah Ṭabātabā’ī’s*Uṣūl-Falsafah* is the
first work of Islamic philosophy to contain a prominent and extended
discussion of the epistemological issues associated with modern Western
(particularly Marxist) thought, and a similar sort of attention is given
to the same issues in Bāqir Ṣadr’s*Falsafatūnā.*  In these works, as in
Prof. Miṣbāḥ’s*Philosophical Instructions,* skepticism is attacked and
the capacities of reason are defended. The modern European rationalists,
with attention given primarily to Descartes, are clearly preferred to
the empiricists and Kant.

Another reason for the attention given to modern European philosophy and
its problems is that Western philosophy had begun to make its way into
the curricula of the universities of the Islamic world (where Islamic
philosophy, unfortunately, was, and, more unfortunately, continues to
be, largely ignored), and translations of several works on European
philosophy began to appear in Arabic and Persian. One of the first
traditional masters to study in the West in the twentieth century and
return to the seminaries was

Sayyid Muḥammad Kāẓim ‘Aṣṣār, who studied in France and then taught at
Najaf and later at the University of Tehran.[^6]

‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī apparently became acquainted with Western philosophy
through Arabic translations that had made their way to Najaf. In Iran,
Western philosophy was taught at the University of Tehran since its
founding, roughly fifty years ago, and even earlier, among the Shī‘ī
scholars, we have evidence that some discussions of Western philosophy
were beginning.[^7] Prof. Miṣbāḥ also made use of the Persian
translation of several volumes of Copleston’s history, and
Furūghī’s*Sayr-e Hikmat* , a three volume history of Western
philosophy.[^8] Although Furūghī held a ministerial post in the
government of Reza Shah (r. 1925-41), his work is widely esteemed for
its accuracy and the introduction of the apparatus of scholarly
references.

While the primary aim of ‘Allāmah’s*Principles of Philosophy* was to
meet the challenge of Marxism, one finds evidence in its pages of a
deeper attention to Kant and Hume. So, ‘Allāmah’s project of basing a
reform of doctrine in the seminaries on*transcendent theosophy* was
begun with an eye toward Western thought generally, and attention was
also paid to the natural sciences. Likewise, in*Philosophical
Instructions* we find an attempt to provide a philosophical foundation
for religious belief based on*transcendent theosophy* and able to quell
the doubts of those acquainted with Western philosophy and science. In
order to achieve these aims, certain departures from traditional Islamic
philosophy are deemed necessary. For example, for nearly a thousand
years cosmology has held a central place in Islamic philosophy. The
emanation of the world from Allah was held to occur by means of
intermediary intellects, often identified with angels or associated with
the celestial spheres. The rejection of the medieval system of the
celestial spheres by modern astronomy is an embarrassment to Islamic
philosophy. The solution posed in*Philosophical Instructions* is to
remove astronomy from Islamic philosophy. Given its long association
with the subject, however, this is no easy task. Some principle must be
found from within the tradition of Islamic philosophy itself on the
basis of which the excision can be justified. The principle proposed
in*Philosophical Instructions* is the exaltation of reason. Reason
alone, it is held, is nearly sufficient to serve as a foundation for a
philosophy capable of supporting religious doctrine. Furthermore, the
only element in addition to reason that is needed can be found through
introspection. The concerns of philosophy are solely with what can be
discovered by reason and introspection alone. Whatever remains is to be
conceded to the empirical sciences.

It may be helpful for the Western reader to compare the strategy
employed here with some trends in Christian theology. In some ways, the
program initiated by ‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī and continued in*Philosophical
Instructions* is similar to that of neo-Thomism, but with Ṣadr
al-Muta’alihīn playing the role of Aquinas. In both theologies there is
a defense of traditional proofs for the existence of God, or natural
theology, presented in the context of a philosophical system that
retains some features of Aristotelian thought as developed and modified
within a religious tradition. In both theologies there is a defense of
the ability of reason to justify

religion. If anything, the emphasis on reason is stronger in
contemporary Islamic philosophy than among many neo-Thomists, and this
is seen as an inherent advantage due to the superior rationality of
Islamic doctrine in comparison to Christian beliefs.

On the other hand, although liberal Protestant theology has tended to be
skeptical about traditional philosophy, both the liberal Christian and
the Muslim philosopher find themselves faced with a contradiction
between medieval doctrine and the modern sciences. Both respond with a
protective strategy that would isolate religion from natural science,
and both propose that introspection may serve as a focal center for
religious thought. However, while introspection is seen by
Schleiermacher (d. 1834) as a way to religious experience that is prior
to and independent of both theoretical and practical reason, Prof.
Miṣbāḥ views introspection as a way to knowledge by direct apprehension
of causal relations and their terms. These direct apprehensions are then
to be understood by means of the conceptual apparatus provided by pure
reason. Liberal Protestant theology came to emphasize religious
experience and faith, and to disparage reason as fallen and sinful.
Islamic philosophy, on the other hand, makes an appeal to the standards
of reason, without which religious belief could be dismissed as
ungrounded, supplemented with*knowledge by presence* . Both
Schleiermacher and Prof. Miṣbāḥ find a complete dependency of human
existence through introspection, but while Schleiermacher would eschew
the doctrines of any philosophical theology in favor of the experience
of this dependency, Prof. Miṣbāḥ finds through introspection all the
data needed to complete a natural theology consonant with *transcendent
theosophy* in which the existence of God is to be proved through
rational reflection on direct acquaintance with existence itself.

The Author
----------

The author, Muḥammad Taqī Miṣbāḥ Yazdī, was born in 1934 in Yazd, were
he completed primary studies in the Islamic sciences, and began reading
the major classic texts in Islamic law and jurisprudence. In order to
pursue advanced studies, he went to Najaf, but due to financial
difficulties, he returned to Iran after one year and continued his
studies in Qom. There, from 1952 to 1960, he participated in the classes
taught by Imam Khomeini, while at the same time he studied the
interpretation of the Qur’ān, Ibn Sīnā’s*Shifā* and Mulla Ṣadrā’s*Asfār*
with ‘Alāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī. He also spent approximately fifteen years as
the student of Ayatullah Bahjat in*fiqh* . After his formal studies with
Imam Khomeini were put to an end by the latter’s exile, he spent some
years engaged in discussions about the social significance of Islam,
including discussions about*jihād* , judicature and Islamic government.

Around 1964 he cooperated with Shahīd Dr. Biheshtī, Shahīd Bāhonar and
Hujjatulislām Hāshemī Rafsanjānī in resistance to the regime of the
Pahlavi shāh, and wrote two works, one called*Bi‘that* (*The Prophetic
Mission* ) and the other*Intiqām* (*Revenge* ), the second of which he
did the work of publishing himself. He also participated in the founding
of a political organization of the clergy in Qom, that was primarily led
by Ayatullah Rabānī Shīrāzī, and that included among its members
Ayatullah

Khāmene’ī, Hujjatulislām Rafsanjānī and Shahīd Qudūs. The founding
documents of this organization were obtained by the regime and those
whose names appeared on it were to be prosecuted, and so they went into
hiding, including Ayatullah Miṣbāḥ. When the atmosphere cooled down, he
was able to return to Qom to continue his scholarly activities.

After that, he worked in the administration of*Madrassah Ḥaqānī* along
with Ayatullah Jannatī, Shahīd Bihishtī and Shahīd Qudūs, and for about
ten years he taught philosophy and Qur’ānic studies there. Then, shortly
before and following the Islamic Revolution, with the support and
encouragement of Imam Khomein he participated in the founding of several
schools and institutes, among the most important of which was the*Dar
Rāh-e Ḥaqq Institute* , the*Bāqir al-‘Ulūm Foundation* and the*Imam
Khomeini Education and Research Institute* which he currently directs
and where he is teaching the*Asfār* of Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī.

He was recently elected (1996) to a five year term as representative of
Khūzistan province to the the*Majlis-e Khubrigān* (Counsel of Experts).

Among the works authored by Prof. Miṣbāḥ, the following are some of the
most important:

\**Chikīdeh-ye Chand Baḥth-e Falsafī (A Summary of Some Philosophical
Discussions)* , Qom: Dar Rāh-e Ḥaqq, 1357/1978). This is a summary of
discussions held in London through the course of a series of
conferences, along with the comments of Iranian students residing in the
U.S., on the concept of philosophy and the course of its history,
rational knowledge and its value, cause and effect, the fixed and the
fluid and actuality and ability.

\**Pāsdārī az Sangarhā-ye Iydi’ūlūzhīk (A Sentry from the Ideological
Trenches),* Qom: Dar Rāh-e Ḥaqq, 1361/1982). This book is a compilation
of shorter pieces written by the author, plus an article by Dr. Aḥmad
Aḥmadī concerning idealism and realism. The topics discussed by Prof.
Miṣbāḥ include: worldview, knowledge, cause and effect, motion,
dialectic and the materialist worldview.

\**Iydi’ūlūzhī Taṭbīqī (Comparative Ideology)* , Qom: Dar Rāh-e Ḥaqq,
1361/1982. This book consists of forty lessons delivered by the author
following the victory of the Islamic Revolution of Iran, and later
transcribed and edited. Topics discussed include the concept of
ideology, the relation between world-view and ideology, types of world
view, metaphysical concepts, epistemological concepts, the reality of
the external world, sophism and skepticism, realism and idealism, types
of knowledge, types of intelligibles, the fundamentality of reason in
imagination, the philosophies of Descartes, Locke, Berkeley, Hume and
Kant, empiricism in Marx ist theory and the scopes of the types of
knowledge.

\**Durūs Falsafah (Philosophy Lessons),* Tehran: Mu’assisah Muṭāli‘āt va
Taḥqīqāt Farhangī, 1363/1984). This is an abridged version of the same
lectures from which*Āmūzish-e Falsafah* was compiled.

\**Ta‘līqah ‘alā Nahāyat al-Ḥikmah (A Commentary on Nahāyat al-Ḥikmah)*
, Qom: Dar Rāh-e Ḥaqq Institute, A. H. 1405/1985. This book, written in
Arabic, is perhaps the author’s most penetrating philosophical work. In
it he presents a subtle analysis and sharp critique of the major

philosophical work of his teacher, ‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī ’s advanced
lessons in Islamic philosophy.

\**Durūs-e Falsafeh-ye Akhlāq* (Lessons in Philosophical Ethics),
Tehran: Iṭilā‘āt, 1367/1988. The eighteen lessons of this book were
delivered at the Dar Rāh-e Ḥaqq Institute, transcribed and edited. They
include discussions of the place of ethics in philosophy,
characteristics of ethical concepts, rational good and evil, value
concepts, ethical schools of thought, relativism and the relation
between ethics and religion.

\**Uṣūl-e ‘Aqā’id (Principles of Doctrine)* 2 vols. Qom: Markaz-e
Mudīriyyat Ḥawzah ‘Ilmiyyah, 1368/1989. This book was commissioned by
the administration of the seminaries of Qom as a text for its students.
The first volume is devoted to discussions of divine unity and divine
justice. The second volume contains discussions of the missions of the
prophets and Imams (*‘A* ).

\**Mu‘ārif-e Qur’ān (The Teachings of the Qur’ān),* Qom: Dar Rāh-e Ḥaqq,
1368/1989). This work is divided into three parts: theology, cosmology
and anthropology.

\**Jām‘ah va Tārīkh az Dīdgāh-e Qur’ān (Society and History from the
Perspective of the Qur’ān),* Qom: Sāzmān Tablīghāt Islāmi, 1368/1989.
This books consists of a series of lectures originally presented at the
Dar Rāh-e Ḥaqq Institute and transcribed from tapes by Āqā-ye Malikiyān.
Various issues related to the philosophy of the social sciences are
raised, such as the relation of the individual to society and the
question of which has priority, the Islamic Revolution and leadership in
Islam.

\**Ḥukūmat Islāmī va Vilāyat-e Faqiyyah (Islamic Government and the
Guardianship of the Jurist),* Qom: Sāzmān Tablīghāt Islāmi, 1369/1990.
This is a compilation of lectures delivered at the Dar Rāh-e Ḥaqq
Institute on the need for Islamic government, the need for law in
society, characteristics of legislature, the cause of differences in
divine laws in Islamic societies, conflicts in judgments and standards
of importance, the need for a legislative assembly in the Islamic
system, the apparatus of government in the Islamic system, freedoms,
prerequisites and responsibilities of the Islamic ruler, the
guardianship of the jurist.

\**Amūzesh-e ‘Aqā’id (Instructions in Doctrine)* 3 vols. Qom: Sāzmān
Tablīghāt Islāmi, 1370/1991. This work was prepared by Prof. Miṣbāḥ with
the assistance of a group of the scholars at*Dar Rāh-e Ḥaqq Institute*
for students of an intermediate level of study. Each volume consists of
twenty lessons, among which are discussions of such topics as the nature
of theology, religious studies, proofs of the Necessary Existent, the
Attributes of God, a criticism of materialism, divine unity, free will
and determinism, the need for the prophets and Imams and their
inerrancy, the Qur’ān, Imam Mahdī, the immateriality of the spirit, the
resurrection, the afterlife, faith and infidelity and intercession.

\**Akhlāq dar Qur’ān (Ethics in the Qur’ān)* , Tehran: Amīr Kabīr,
1372/1993. This work is a transcription of lectures delivered at the*Dar
Rāh-e Ḥaqq Institute* edited by Āqā-ye Iskandarī. This work not only
elucidates the principles of ethics to be derived from the Qur’ān, but
it compares the perspective on ethics to be found among Muslim writers
with those of other

schools of thought, and it defends a philosophical approach to ethics
within Islamic tradition.

\**Tarjomeh va Sharḥ-e Burhān-e Shifā (Translation and Commentary on the
“Demonstration” of the Shifā),* Tehran: Amīr Kabīr, 1373/1994. This is a
translation and commentary of the first part of Ibn Sīnā ’s chapter on
logic in his*Shifā* , transcribed from lectures and edited by Muḥsin
Gharavīyān.

\**Rāhiyyān-e Kū-ye Dūst (Paths to the Mountain of the Friend),* Qom:
The Imam Khomeini Education and Research Institute, 1374/1995. This is a
collection of twenty lectures on Islamic morals, covering such topics as
reliance on God, divine love, the need for attention in prayer, the
afterlife and how to love God, presented in the form of a commentary on
reports pertaining to what was revealed to the Prophet of Islam (*ṣ* )
during his*mi‘rāj* (ascension).

\**Rah-e Tūsheh (Provisions for the Road),* Qom: The Imam Khomeini
Education and Research Institute, 1375/1996. This is a collection of
twenty lectures on Islamic morals presented in the form of a commentary
on a famous*ḥadīth* in which the advice of the Prophet of Islam (*ṣ* )
to Abū Dhar is reported.

\**Sharh-e Asfār al-Arba‘ah, Vol. I (Commentary on the Four Journeys),*
Qom: The Imam Khomeini Education and Research Institute, 1375/1996. This
is the first volume of transcriptions of lectures on Mulla Ṣadrā ’s
masterpiece.

The Translation
---------------

The translation was begun in 1992 as a collaborative effort by Aẓīm
Sarvdalīr and Muḥammad Legenhausen and has been supported by the Bāqir
al-‘Ulūm Foundation and later by its successor, the Imam Khomeini
Education and Research Institute. The learning made possible through
cooperative translation with native speakers of both languages warrants
further attention. Each of the translators benefited enormously by the
work of the other. The result far exceeds what could be expected by
summing the separate talents of the translators. This is not to boast of
any brilliance for the final product. This translation was undertaken as
a learning process. Our aim has been to produce an accurate translation
in a relatively fluent style of academic English that can be of service
to the beginning student of Islamic philosophy. For this reason, all
technical terms have been transliterated in parentheses beside the
English terms coined to represent them. Finding a useful English
expression has often been difficult. Sometimes the nearest equivalent
English word has a somewhat different sense than the Arabic or Farsi
term, and a proper understanding of the text turns upon the difference.
Sometimes distinct Arabic terms come closest to a single English word,
as there are good reasons for translating both*dhāt* and*māhiyyah* as
“essence”. While other more experienced translators have used “essence”
and “quiddity” respectively for these two terms, I have shunned
“quiddity” because it is not used in philosophy in English, while
“essence”*is* used by English speaking philosophers, but in different
contexts for what the Muslim philosopher would express by one or the
other of the Arabic terms. I began by translating both as “essence” with
the Arabic in parentheses, but this made the passages in which both
terms occur nearly unintelligible if one

read only the English. Finally, William Chittick’s suggestion to use
“whatness” for*māhiyyah* has been adopted (leading to the use of
“whatish” for*māhuwī* ).[^9] This makes for an artificial English, but
it is less confusing, and once one gets accustomed to it, the literal
affinity of “whatness” to the Arabic*māhuwiyyah* seems to convey its
sense better than other suggestions. “Essence” has been retained
for*dhāt* (and “essential” for*dhātī* ) although this also leads to
divergence from contemporary philosophical usage. In Islamic philosophy,
the essential (*dhātī* ) is that pertaining to the entity in question,
intrinsically, in itself, while in contemporary English philosophical
usage, essential properties are those the entity must have to retain its
identity or to exist as what it is. On the other hand, we have often
found that a single Arabic or Persian word has various meanings which
must be translated by different English terms, as the
notorious*i‘tibārī* , which can be used to indicate that something is
subordinate, or that it is a mere respect, or that it lacks entified
(*‘aynī* ) reality, or that it pertains to value rather than fact, and
there are other meanings. Here the term is translated as*respectival* ,
unless another meaning is clearly indicated, in which case the Arabic is
transliterated. These observations belie the reliability of
back-translation as an adequate test of accuracy. We have often found
that in order to make the author’s point clear, we have to phrase a
sentence in such a way that if the English were translated back into
Farsi, the result would be different from the original. Near synonymy in
translation is not a symmetric relation.

Starting with Lesson 11, on epistemology, this translation first
appeared serialized in*Al-Tawḥīd,* beginning with Vol. XI, Nos. 3 & 4,
1414/1994, p. 96f. We are grateful for the sensitive editing of Alī Qulī
Qarā’ī, although we accept responsibility for the infelicities and
inconsistencies that remain.

References
----------

[^1] His interpretation of the Qur’ān is the twenty volume*Al-Mīzān fī
Tafsīr al-Qur’ān* (Tehran: Dār al-Kitāb al-Islamiyyah, n.d.). The
English translation by Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, has reached eight
volumes published in Tehran by the World Organization for Islamic
Services, the first volume of which appeared in [^1983]: His major
philosophical texts are*Bidāyah al-Ḥikmah* and*Nihāyah al-Ḥikmah* both
published in Qom by Mu’assisah al-Nashr al-Islamī and by Daftar
Tablīghāt Islamī. A. Q. Qara’i has translated the former which has been
serialized in Vols. IX-XI of the journal*Al-Tawḥīd* . While ‘Allāmah has
not written any systematic work in Islamic mysticism, his views
pertaining to this topic have been influential in the works of Ayatullah
Javādī Amulī and Ayatullah Husayni Tehrani.

[^2]*Seh Aṣl (Three Roots [of Evil]),* ed., Seyyid Hossein Nasr,
(Tehran: University of Tehran Press).

[^3] ‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī ’s*Uṣul-e Falsafah va Ravish-e Ri’ālīsm,* 2nd
ed. (Tehran: Ṣadrā, 1368/1989) with the extensive annotations of Shahīd
Muṭahharī was completed in 1332/[^1953]: Bāqir Ṣadr ’s*Fasafatūna,* 10th
ed. (Beirut: Dar al-Ta‘āruf, 1980) was completed in A. H. L. 1379 (c.
1959).

[^4] See ‘Allāmah Ayatullah Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ḥusaynī
Ṭehrāni,*Mihr-e Tābān* (Tehran: Bāqir al-‘Ulūm, n.d.), pp. 60-[^62]:

[^5] Ibn Sīnā,*Al-Ishārāt wa al-Tanbīhāt* , ed. Sulayman Dunyā, (Beirut:
Mu’assassah al-Nu‘mān 1413/1992), Vol. II, p. [^147]:

[^6] See the article on Islamic philosophy in modern Persia by Mehdi
Aminrazavi in*History of Islamic Philosophy,* 2 vols., ed., Seyyed
Hossein Nasr and Oliver Leaman (London: Routledge, 1995), 1037-[^1050]:

[^7] A few pages are devoted to a discussion of modern Western
philosophy in the*Risā’il Ḥikmiyyah* of Ayatullah Mīrzā ‘Alī Akbar
Mudarris Yazdī Ḥakamī (d. A. H. L. 1344 (c. 1926), (Tehran: Vizārat-e
Irshād-e Islāmī, 1365/1986).

[^8] Muḥammad ‘Alī Furūghī,*Sayr-e Ḥikmat dar Urūpā (The Course of
Philosophy in Europe),* (Tehran: Zavār, 1360/1981).

[^9] William C. Chittick,*The Self-Disclosure of God* (Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1998), p. xx.
