Lesson Eight: The Method of Philosophical Inquiry
=================================================

The Evaluation of the Rational Method
-------------------------------------

In the previous lessons it has been repeatedly said that philosophical
problems must be investigated by the rational method, and that the
empirical method is of no use in this area. However, those who have come
more or less under the influence of positivist thinking imagine that
this is reason for the imperfection and worthlessness of philosophical
thought, because they think that the empirical method is the only sure
and scientific method and that no certain conclusions can be obtained by
the rational method.

On this basis, some imagine that philosophy is the infancy of the
sciences and they consider it to be the duty of philosophy to present
hypotheses for solving scientific problems, and even Karl Jaspers, the
German existentialist philosopher, writes: “Philosophy yields no certain
knowledge... and as soon as knowledge is accepted by all as certain with
decisive reasons, then that knowledge cannot be considered
philosophical, but rather, it at once becomes transformed into
scientific knowledge.”

Others who have been intimidated by Western industrial and scientific
progress reason that Western scientists have achieved bewildering and
daily increasing scientific progress only when they abandoned the
deductive and rational methods and began to employ the inductive and
empirical methods. Evolutionary progress was especially hastened since
the time of Francis Bacon, who emphasized the empirical method. This is
the best reason for the superiority of the empirical method to the
rational method.

Unfortunately, some of the new Muslim thinkers and imitators who accept
this reason would hang a medal of honor on the chest of Muslim scholars
as if they had been inspired by the Noble Qur’an to confront and
challenge Greek culture and to replace the deductive and rational method
by the inductive and empirical method, so that later, the influence of
Islamic culture in Europe would cause the awakening of Western
scientists and their awareness of this victorious method.

This fantasy has gone so far that some of the ignorant imagine that the
research method which is presented by the Noble Qur’an for solving all
problems is none other than the empirical and positivist method. They
even imagine that the problems of theology,*fiqh* (Islamic
jurisprudence) and morals must be investigated by this method!

Of course, it should come as no surprise that those whose eyes are fixed
on that which is given by the senses, who have closed their eyes to that
which is beyond sensory perception, who have denied the power of reason
and rational understanding and who consider rational and metaphysical
concepts to be invalid and meaningless(!) should also deny any place for
philosophy among the human sciences. They consider it to have no role
but explaining some terms current in languages, and that its dignity
must be reduced to that of linguistics. They present its function to be
that of offering hypotheses for the solution of the problems of the
sciences. This is most unfortunate, that someone who calls himself a
Muslim, who is acquainted with the Qur’an, should relate such
intellectual perversions and decadence

to the Noble Qur’an. They consider this to be cause for the honor of
Islam and for Muslim scholars.

Here, we do not intend to criticize positivist ideas, which are the
basis of such fantasies, and in comparative discussions these will
become more or less familiar. However, we consider it necessary to
explain more about the rational and empirical methods so that the
weakness of the arguments which have been made in this area become
clear.

Analogy, Induction and Deduction
--------------------------------

Attempts to discover what is unknown on the basis of what is known are
of three forms:

1. Inference from particulars to another particular, that is, when two
subjects are similar to one another and a judgment about one of them is
known, we may infer the same judgment about the other, on the basis of
the similarity which exists between the two of them. For example, if two
people are similar and one of them is intelligent, we say that the other
is also intelligent. In logical terms this is called*tamthīl* (analogy)
and in the terminology of*fiqh* (Islamic jurisprudence) it is
called*qiyās* . It is obvious that the mere similarity of two things
does not imply that the common judgment about them is certain, and thus,
analogy is of no use for obtaining certainty and has no scientific
worth.

2. Inference from particulars to a universal, that is, when we
investigate the individuals of one essence and it is found that they
share a common property, we may infer that this property holds of the
essence, and that it occurs in all of its instances. In logical terms
this is called induction, and it is divided into two kinds: complete
induction and incomplete induction.

In complete induction it is assumed that all the individuals under
consideration are investigated and that their common property is
observed in all of them. It is clear that in practice this is
impossible, for even if all the present instances of a whatness could be
investigated, there would be no way to investigate all past and future
instances. At the very least, the possibility would remain that in the
past or in the future there could be instances of that essence.

Incomplete induction occurs when many of the instances of a whatness are
observed and a property common to them is attributed to all individuals
of that essence. But this intellectual inference will not lead to
certainty, for there will always be the possibility, no matter how weak,
that some of the individuals which have not been investigated lack this
property.

Therefore, in practice, certain and indubitable conclusions cannot be
obtained by induction.

3. Inference from universals to a particular, that is, first a predicate
is proved for a universal subject and on the basis of this the judgment
about the particulars of that subject becomes clear. In logic this sort
of intellectual inference is called*qiyās* (deduction), and it yields
certainty under the conditions that its premises are certain and the
deduction also has a valid form. Logicians have allocated an important
section of classical logic to the explanation of the material and formal
conditions of certain deduction, proof.

There is a famous problem which has been raised regarding deduction. If
a judgment is known to hold generally, the application of that judgment
to all instances of the subject will also be known. But then there would
be no need for the formulation of a deductive argument. The scholars of
logic have answered that a judgment for a major premise may be known in
summary form, but in the conclusion it becomes known in detail.
Meditation on the problems of mathematics and the ways of solving them
shows how useful deduction is, for the method of mathematics is that of
deduction, and if this method were not useful, none of the problems of
mathematics could be solved on the basis of mathematical principles.

A point which must be mentioned here is that in analogy and induction
there is a hidden form of deduction, but nevertheless, in the cases of
analogy and incomplete induction this deduction does not constitute a
proof and is of no use for obtaining certainty. If, however, this sort
of hidden deduction did not exist, there could be no form of inference
at all, no matter how speculative. The hidden deduction of analogy is
this: this judgment is true for one of the similar objects, and every
judgment which is true of one of a pair of similar objects is also true
of the other. It is to be noted that the major premise of this deduction
is not certain. In incomplete induction there is a similar speculative
deduction, that is, there is a suppressed major premise in it such as:
“Every judgment which is proved for many individuals of a whatness is
proven for all the individuals of that essence.” Even if induction is
considered valid by way of the probability calculus, it will still need
deduction. Likewise, empirical propositions are in need of deduction if
they are to take the form of universal propositions, as is explained in
the books of logic.

It is to be concluded that reasoning about a problem always must take
the form of an inference from universal to particular, although this
intellectual inference will sometimes be performed explicitly and
clearly, as in logical deduction, and sometimes in a hidden form, as in
analogy and induction. Sometimes it yields certainty, as in deductive
proofs and complete induction, and sometimes it does not bring
certainty, as in rhetorical and polemical deductions, analogy and
incomplete induction.

Rational Method and Empirical Method
------------------------------------

As was previously mentioned, deduction brings certainty when in addition
to having a valid form, and satisfies logical conditions, each of its
premises is also certain. If certain propositions themselves are not
self-evident, inevitably they should lead to self-evident ones, that is
they should be inferred from propositions which have no need of rational
proof.

Logicians have divided self-evident propositions (*badīhiyyāt* ) into
two general groups: primary self-evident propositions and secondary
self-evident propositions. One of the types of secondary self-evident
propositions is considered to be “empirical” (*mujarrabāt* ), that is,
propositions which are obtained by experience. According to them the
experience is not a method which is the opposite of the deductive
method, and it not only includes the deductive method but it may also
serve as one of the premises in another deduction. Therefore, it is not
proper to equate induction and experience nor to take deduction and
experience as opposites!

Of course, experience has a variety of other meanings, but this is not
the proper place to discuss them. However, taking the empirical method
to be the opposite of the rational method is based on considering the
rational method to be limited to the deductive method where the only
premises are those of pure reason. These premises are those which are
either primary self-evident propositions or are implied by them (not
merely by empirical propositions), such as all of the syllogistic proofs
which are employed in first philosophy, mathematics and for many of the
problems of the philosophical sciences. The difference between this and
the empirical method is not that one of them employs deduction and the
other induction. Rather, the difference is that the rational method is
supported solely by primary self-evidence while the empirical method is
supported by empirical premises, which are considered to be secondary
self-evident propositions. Far from being a flaw in the rational method
this is the greatest distinction of the rational method.

Conclusions
-----------

With the points which have been mentioned here in summary form, it
becomes clear how weak and far from the truth are the positions
mentioned [of the positivists], because:

Firstly, it is not correct to equate experience and induction.

Secondly, it is incorrect to consider the empirical method as the
opposite of the deductive method.

Thirdly, neither induction nor experience is without need of deduction.

Fourthly, both the rational and empirical methods are deductive, and the
distinction of the rational method is that it relies upon primary
self-evident propositions, contrary to the empirical method which relies
upon empirical propositions, premises whose value never reaches the
level of the value of primary self-evident propositions.

It should be noted that this topic requires further explanation and
investigation; and some of principles of classical logic are debatable,
while we have merely indicated the materials necessary to the extent
required to dispel some fantasies in this regard.

The Scope of the Rational and Empirical Methods
-----------------------------------------------

Despite the advantages which the rational method has over the empirical
method, it is not applicable to all sciences, and likewise, the
empirical method has its own specific scope and cannot be applied to
philosophy and mathematics.

Of course, this division between the ranges of these methods is not
conventional, but is required by the nature of the problems of the
sciences. The kind of problem in the natural sciences requires that they
be solved by the empirical method and from premises obtained by sensory
experience, for the concepts which are used in these sciences and which
make up the subjects and predicates of their propositions are those
which are obtained from sensible things. Naturally, sensory experiences
are also required to prove them.

For example, merely by using philosophical and rational analysis, no
philosopher, no matter how much mental effort he makes, can discover
that

bodies are composed of molecules and atoms, or what elements must be
combined to form a given chemical matter and what properties it will
have, or what living existents are composed of, and under what material
conditions they survive, and what things cause sickness in animals and
humans, and how various diseases may be cured and treated, so this sort
of problem and thousands of others like them can only be solved by the
empirical method.

On the other hand, the problems which are related to immaterial things
can never be solved by means of sensory experience, nor can they be
denied by the empirical sciences. For example, with what sensory
experience, and in what laboratory, and by means of what scientific
instruments can the spirit and immaterial things be discovered or their
absence be established? Furthermore, it is the propositions of first
philosophy which are composed of secondary philosophical intelligibles,
that is, of concepts which are obtained by means of mental effort and
rational analysis. It is only possible to prove or disprove their
relations or unity by means of reason. This sort of problem must be
solved by the rational method and by reliance on rational self-evident
propositions.

From this, it becomes clear how weak the position is of those who
confuse the ranges of the empirical and rational methods and who try to
establish the superiority of the empirical method over the rational
method, and who imagine that the ancient philosophers only used the
rational method, and that it is for this reason that they were unable to
make successful scientific discoveries. However, the ancients also used
the empirical method in the natural sciences, and among them Aristotle,
with the help of Alexander of Macedonia prepared a large garden in
Athens, and grew various kinds of plants and animals there, and he
himself observed their states and characteristics. The rapid advance of
modern scientists must be considered to be the result of the discovery
of new scientific instruments, their endeavors to solve natural and
material problems, and the focusing of their thoughts and ideas on
discovery and invention, not a result of a turning of their backs on the
rational method and its replacement by the empirical method.

Let it not remain unsaid that in cases in which the means and
instruments of experience were insufficient for solving a given problem,
the ancient philosophers tried to compensate for this deficiency by
postulating hypotheses, and probably, in order to confirm or explain
these hypotheses they sought the help of the rational method. However,
this was due to the immaturity of their philosophical thought and the
inadequacy of their empirical instruments, not an indication of their
failure to heed or underestimation of the empirical method, and this is
no reason to think that the function of philosophy is to provide
hypotheses and the function of science to confirm them by scientific
methods. Basically, in that period, there was no distinction between
science and philosophy, and all of the empirical sciences were also
considered to be parts of philosophy.


