Lesson Nine: The Relation between Philosophy and the Sciences
=============================================================

The Relations among the Sciences
--------------------------------

Although the sciences, in the sense of collections of appropriate
problems, are separated and distinguished from one another according to
different criteria, such as their subjects, aims, and methods of
inquiry, they are still related to one another. Each of them is able, to
some extent, to assist with the solution of the problems of another
science. As was previously indicated, mostly, the positive principles of
every science are presented in another science, and the best example of
the benefit given to one science by another can be found in the relation
between mathematics and physics.

The relations among the philosophical sciences are also clear, and the
best example of this can be found in the relation between morals and
philosophical psychology, for one of the positive principles of the
science of morals is the possession of will and freedom of man without
which moral goodness and evil, praise and blame and reward and
punishment would be meaningless. This positive principle must be
established in the philosophical psychology (*\`ilm al-nafs* ), which
discusses the characteristics of the human soul by the rational method.

There is more or less of a relation between the natural and
philosophical sciences, as well. In order to solve some problems which
are raised in the philosophical sciences, one can employ premises which
are established in the empirical sciences. For example, in empirical
psychology it is demonstrated that sometimes despite the existence of
necessary physical and physiological conditions for seeing and hearing,
perception does not take place. Perhaps all of us have had the
experience of meeting a friend but failing to see him because the focus
of our mental attention was elsewhere, or a sound may have caused our
eardrums to vibrate although we did not hear it. This subject can be
used for premises to solve one of the problems of the philosophical
science of the soul, and it may be concluded that perception is not
simply due to the category of material interaction, otherwise perception
would always take place when the material conditions were satisfied.

Now the question may be raised as to whether such relations also obtain
between philosophy (i.e., metaphysics) and the other sciences, or
whether there is an impenetrable wall and no relation between them.

In response it must be said that there are relations between philosophy
and the other sciences, although philosophy is not dependent on the
other sciences, and even has no need for positive principles which are
established in other sciences. On the one hand, it assists other
sciences and satisfies some of their fundamental needs, while on the
other hand, it benefits from the other sciences in one sense.

We shall now briefly investigate the interrelations between philosophy
and the sciences in two sections.

The Assistance given by Philosophy to the Sciences
--------------------------------------------------

The fundamental assistance given by philosophy (i.e., metaphysics) to
the other sciences, including the philosophical and non-philosophical
sciences, is confined to explaining their assertive principles, that is,
the establishment [of the existence] of non-self-evident subjects and
the establishment of the most general positive principles:

(A.) The establishment of the subject of science. We know that the
problems of every science turn about a subject which includes the
subjects of the problems of that science. When such the existence of
such a subject is not self-evident, it needs to be established, and this
establishment is not within the scope of the problems of that science,
for the problems of every science are limited to propositions which
represent the states and accidents of the subject, not its existence. On
the other hand, in some cases, the establishment of a subject by means
of the research methods of that science is not possible. For example,
the methods of the natural sciences are empirical, but the real
existence of their subjects must be established by the rational method.
In such cases, it is only first philosophy which can assist these
sciences and establish their subjects by rational proof.

This relation between philosophy and the sciences has been considered by
some authorities to be a general relation, and that all the sciences
without exception are in need of philosophy for the establishment of
their subjects, and some have even gone further to assert that the
establishment of the existence of all things is the responsibility of
metaphysics. Every proposition which has the form of a*haliyyah basīṭah*
(simple existential proposition), that is one whose predicate is
"existent", such as "Man is existent," is considered to be a
metaphysical proposition. The apparent meaning of this claim, however,
seems to be an exaggeration, but there is no doubt that the
non-self-evident subjects of the sciences are in need of proofs which
are composed of universal and metaphysical premises.

(B.) Establishing positive principles. As has been repeatedly indicated,
the most general principles required by all the real sciences are
discussed in first philosophy, and the most important of them is the
principle of causality and its subordinate laws, which we explain as
follows:

All scientific endeavors turn about the discovery of causal relations
between things and phenomena. A scientist who spends long years of his
life in the laboratory to analyze and synthesize chemicals searches to
discover what elements cause the appearance of what material, and what
properties and accidents will appear in it, and what factors cause the
analysis of compounds, that is, what is the cause for the appearance of
these phenomena?

Likewise, a scientist who sets up an experiment to discover the microbe
which causes a disease and the medicine for it, really is searching for
the cause of that disease and its cure.

Hence, scientists, prior to beginning their scientific endeavors,
believe that every phenomenon has a cause, and even Newton, who
discovered the law of gravity, by observing the falling of an apple, was
blessed by this same belief. If he had imagined that the appearances of
phenomena are accidental and without a cause, he would never have been
able to make such a discovery.

Now the question is: In what science is this very principle which is
required by physics, chemistry, medicine and other sciences to be
investigated? The answer is that the investigation of this rational law
is not appropriate to any science but philosophy.

Likewise, the subordinate laws of causation, such as the law that every
effect has a specific and suitable cause, for example, the roaring of a
lion in the jungles of Africa does not cause a man to be afflicted with
cancer, and the singing of a nightingale in Europe would not cure him.
Also the explanation of these and the following laws are worthy of no
science but philosophy: the law that wherever a complete cause occurs,
its effect will also necessarily come into existence, and until a
complete cause occurs, its effect will never be existent.

After their experiments, scientists remain in need of the principle of
causality, for the immediate results of their experiments are nothing
but the fact that in the cases tested specific phenomena have occurred
simultaneously or following other phenomena.

The discovery of a universal law, and the claim that this cause always
brings about the appearance of certain effects, requires another
principle which can never be obtained by experimentation. The correct
view is that this principle is the very principle of causation, that is,
a scientist can present a universal law with certainty only when he has
been successful in discovering the common factor in all cases, and he
has found the existence of the cause of phenomena in all the cases
tested. In this way it may be said that whenever and wherever such a
cause occurs, the phenomenon of its effect will come into existence.

Also, this law can be accepted in a universal form which admits no
exceptions only when the law of the necessity of causation is accepted;
otherwise, it may be considered possible that the existence of the
complete cause does not always necessitate the appearance of its effect,
or that the occurrence of the appearance of the effect is possible
without the existence of its complete cause. In this way, the
universality and necessity of the above mentioned law would be flawed,
and its certainty would be lost.

Of course, the discussion about whether experience can discover the
complete and exclusive cause of a phenomenon is another matter, but in
any case, the necessity and certainty of a universal law (given that
such laws can be discovered in the natural sciences by empirical
methods) depends on the acceptance of the principle of causation and its
corollaries.

The proof of these laws is part of the assistance given by philosophy to
the sciences.

The Assistance given by the Sciences to Philosophy
--------------------------------------------------

The most important assistance given by the sciences to philosophy takes
two forms:

(A.) The demonstration of the premises of some proofs. At the beginning
of this lesson we indicated that sometimes in order to solve some
problems of the philosophical sciences empirical premises can be used.
For example, from the absence of the occurrence of perception despite
the existence of material conditions the conclusion may be drawn that
perception is a non-material phenomenon. Likewise in order to establish
the existence of the

spirit one may employ the biological fact that the cells of the bodies
of men and animals gradually die and are replaced by other cells so that
during several years all the cells of the body (except the cells of the
brain) are replaced, and by adding the fact that the structure of the
cells of the brain also gradually change with the consumption of their
contents and renewed nourishment, for individual unity and the
persistence of the spirit are cases of consciousness and are undeniable.
The body, however, is constantly in a state of change. Hence, it becomes
clear that the spirit is other than the body, is persistent and
unchangeable. Even in some proofs of the existence of God the Exalted,
such as the proof from motion and the proof from creation, in one sense,
empirical premises are used.

Now, regarding this relation which exists between the natural and
philosophical sciences, the relation between them and metaphysics can be
established in this way, in order to solve a metaphysical problem, such
as, that existence is not equivalent to matter, and that being material
is not a characteristic of all of being and is not an accident of all
existents, in other words, that existence may be divided into the
material and the non-material, for this a premise may be employed that,
for example, is obtained from philosophical psychology, and its
establishment, in turn, will all be accomplished with the assistance of
the empirical sciences. Also, in order to establish the fact that
dependence is not an inseparable implication of being and that there is
an independent existent (the Necessary Existent), the proofs from motion
and from creation are used, which are based on empirical premises.

This relation between the natural sciences and philosophy does not
contradict that which was explained before, that philosophy is not in
need of the other sciences, for the way of establishing the mentioned
facts is not limited to these kinds of proofs, and for each of them
there are proofs of pure philosophy, which are composed of primary
self-evident premises and those given by consciousness (propositions
which refer to presentational knowledge), as will be explained in the
appropriate place, God willing. In reality, the setting forth of proofs
consisting of empirical premises is for the sake of the indulgence of
those whose minds are not sufficiently trained to completely understand
pure philosophical proofs, which are composed of pure rational premises
which are far from the mind familiar with sensory affairs.

(B.) Preparing new grounds for philosophical analysis. Every science
begins with a number of basic and universal problems, and they develop
in order to elaborate and explain specific and particular cases with the
appearance of new fields which sometimes appear with the aid of other
sciences.

Philosophy is no exception to this rule, and its first problems are
limited, and it has developed and will develop with the appearance of
wider horizons, horizons which sometimes are discovered by mental
efforts and the exchange of ideas and thoughts, and sometimes through
the guidance of revelation, or by gnostic disclosures, and sometimes
they appear by means of things which are established in other sciences,
which prepare the ground for comparison with other philosophical
principles and new rational

analyses, such as the problems of the truth of revelation and miracles
given by religion, and other problems, such as the world of images and
forms, given by the gnostics (*\`urafa* ). These have prepared the
grounds for new philosophical investigations. Likewise, the progress of
empirical psychology has opened up new problems for the philosophical
science of the soul.

Therefore, one of the services the sciences render to philosophy, a
cause for the broadening of its vision, the widening of the range of its
problems, its development and fruitfulness is to prepare new subjects
for philosophical analysis and comparison with its general principles.

For example, in the modern age when the theory of the transformation of
matter to energy and the composition of particles from compressed energy
were presented, a problem was posed for the philosopher as to whether it
is possible for something to occur in the material world which lacks the
basic attributes of matter, and for example, has no volume? Is it
possible for something which does have volume to be transformed into
something without volume? Given that the answer to these questions is
negative, it will be concluded that energy does not lack volume, despite
the fact that this is not provable by sensory experience.

Likewise, when energy was introduced by some physicists as being of the
same family as motion, the question arose as to whether it is possible
that matter, which is assumed to have come into existence from
compressed energy, to be homogeneous (*ham sinkh* ) with motion. Is it
possible for matter to lose its essential properties by being
transformed into energy, or with the transformation of some atomic
particles into "fields" (according to some hypotheses of modern
physics)? Basically, is physical matter the same as the body discussed
in philosophy? And what relations are there between physical matter and
other concepts, such as force, energy and field, and the concept of body
in philosophy?

It is clear that this service rendered by natural science to the
philosophical sciences, especially metaphysics, does not mean that
philosophy is in need of them, even if the range is broadened for
philosophical activity and manifestation with the problems which are
raised as an effect of the progress of the sciences.

The Relation between Philosophy and Gnosis (‘Irfān)
---------------------------------------------------

At the end of this lesson it is good to indicate something about the
relation between philosophy and*‘irfān* , and for this purpose there is
no alternative but to give a brief explanation about*‘irfān* .

*‘Irfān* literally means knowing, and in technical terms it is applied
to special perceptions which are obtained through the focusing of one's
attention on the interior of the soul (not by means of sensory
experience nor by rational analysis), and in the process of this
spiritual wayfaring (*sayr wa sulūk* ) some disclosures usually are
obtained which are similar to “visions” and sometimes there is the exact
presentation of something which occurred in the past, present or future,
and sometimes it needs an interpretation, and sometimes it appears as an
effect of being possessed by the devil.

The topics which the gnostics (*‘urafa* ) explain as their own
interpretations, disclosures and findings of conscience, are called
"scientific

gnosis " ( *‘irfān-e ‘ilmī* ). Sometimes by adding reasonings and
inferences they take the form of philosophical discussions.

There is also an interrelation between philosophy and gnosis which is
investigated in the following two sections.

### The Assistance given by Philosophy to Gnosis (‘Irfān)

###

(A.) Real gnosis is acquired exclusively through bondage to God and
obedience to His orders. Bondage without knowledge is impossible, and
this knowledge requires philosophical principles.

(B.) The recognition of correct gnostic disclosures is achieved by their
comparison with the standards of reason and the (religious) law, and by
one or more intermediaries they go back to principles of philosophy.

(C.) Since gnostic visions are a sort of interior perception and are
completely personal, their mental interpretations are achieved by means
of concepts and these are then transformed into others by means of terms
and expressions, and in view of the fact that most gnostic truths are
beyond the level of common understanding, precise concepts and proper
terminology must be e

### The Assistance given by Gnosis (‘Irfān) to Philosophy

###

(A.) As was previously indicated, gnostic disclosures and visions raise
new problems for philosophical analysis which help with the broadening
of vision and the development of philosophy.

(B.) Where problems are solved in the philosophical sciences by means of
rational proof, gnostic visions are considered a powerful corroboration,
and in reality, that which is understood by the philosophy by means of
reason is found by the gnostic by means of visions of the heart.


