Lesson Ten: The Necessity of Philosophy
=======================================

The Man of the Age
------------------

The sun has newly risen from its bed of the green waters of the sea, and
flashes its golden rays on the sleepy faces of the voyagers of as ship,
voyagers who have just awakened from last night’s slumber, and who, with
minds at ease and unaware of all else, have begun eating and drinking
and amusing themselves. The ship, as always, advances through the
limitless ocean.

Meanwhile, somebody who seems brighter than the others starts to think a
bit, and then turns to his shipmates and asks, “Where are we going?”
Somebody else who seems to have been roused from his sleep, ask the same
question of the others in wonder, and.... Some are so intoxicated with
their enjoyments and amusements that they pay no heed to him, and
continue with their own affairs without thinking of answering this
question. But little by little, the question spreads until it reaches
the crew and the captain. They also repeat the question without having
an answer for it. At last, a question mark hangs in the atmosphere of
the ship and a strange horror and embracing distress appear….

Is this imaginary scene not the story of the people of the world, who
have boarded the great ship of the earth, and while revolving about
themselves in cosmic space, they travel through the limitless ocean of
time? Are they not like cattle feeding, as it says in the Qur’an: “they
take their enjoyment and eat as cattle eat” (47:12). And it also says:
“they have hearts, but understand not with them; they have eyes, but
perceive not with them; they have ears, but they hear not with them.
They are like cattle; nay, rather they are further astray. Those—they
are the heedless.” (7:179).

Yes! This is the story of the people of our times, who along with the
amazing progress of technology have become afflicted with puzzlement and
wandering and knows not from where they have come and to where they are
going, and to which direction they must turn, and which path they must
take. This is why absurdism, nihilism and hippie-ism have appeared in
the space age. Like a cancer they attack the soul, thought and spirit of
civilized man, and like termites eat away at the pillars of palace of
humanity and weaken it.

These questions raised by conscious people which have roused the
semiconscious have compelled thinkers to seek answers to them. A group
of those ready to think correctly have obtained correct, illuminating
and orienting answers. They know the true purpose, and they eagerly
follow the straight path. However, those who are under the influence of
immature thought and psychological factors imagine that there is no
beginning and no end to the caravan, and that there are always ships
which appear upon the ocean, and by means of roaring waves are aimlessly
pulled this way and that. But, before they reach the safe and tranquil
shore, they drown in the sea, “They say, there is nothing but our
present life; we die and we live, and nothing but Time destroys us”
(45:24).

In any case, these questions are wily-nilly raised for the conscious
person: What is the beginning? What is the end? What is the right path
toward the aim?

It is obvious that the natural and mathematical sciences have no answer
to them, so what is to be done? In what way is the correct answer to
these questions to be obtained?

In the previous lessons the way to find answers to these questions has
been indicated, that is, each of these three basic questions is related
to a branch of philosophy and must be investigated by rational methods.
All of them require metaphysics or First Philosophy. Hence, we must
begin with epistemology and ontology and then deal with the
philosophical sciences to find correct answers to these questions and
others like them.

Social Schools
--------------

Wandering and bewilderment which have befallen space age man are not
limited to individual and personal problems, for attendant social
problems have also crystallized in various political and economic
schools and systems, and although these artificial systems have failed
to prove themselves worthy and complete, there are still wandering
societies of people who have not given them up, and even those who have
been disillusioned continue to plod along in the same deviant directions
seeking new artificial systems woven from the same cloth. Each time a
new “-ism” appears in the arena of ideology, a misled group is attracted
to it, and a brawl and tussle gets underway. It does not take very long
before they fall, broken and unfulfilled until the time when they appear
again under a new name, new color and scent to deceive another group.

It seems that these unfortunate misled people have vowed never to listen
to the call of the truth and not to listen to words of divine leaders,
and they gripe, “Why are your hands empty of the silver and gold and all
that glitters in this world? If you speak the truth, why are the white
and red palaces not in your control?”

Yes, these are the followers of those whose stories are repeatedly
whispered by the Noble Qur’an into the ears of the people of the world.
But where are the ears of the listeners?!

Anyway, as an invitation by way of wisdom, one should say: social
systems must be arranged on the basis of awareness of the nature of man
and all his existential aspects, with regard to the purposes of his
creation, and in recognition of the factors which enable him to achieve
the final goal. Finding such a complicated formula is beyond the mental
capacities of ordinary humans. That which can be expected of our thought
is knowledge of fundamental problems and general foundations of these
systems which should be established more firmly and steadfastly, that
is, knowledge of the Creator of the cosmos and man, knowledge of the
purposefulness of human life, and knowledge of the way opened by the
Wise Creator for man so that he may journey and progress toward the
final goal. Then it is time for the heart to turn toward Him, to head
down the path and following the divine guides to take firm steps, and
without doubt or wavering to fare the way and make haste.

If one fails to benefit from the God given blessing of reason, does not
think of the beginning and end of being, fails to solve the basic
problems of life, selfishly chooses his own way, and brings about a
system and sets his own powers and those of others for its sake, then
such a one will suffer the consequences of his own selfishness,
foolishness, licentiousness, aberrant thinking and perversities.
Finally, one must not blame others for his lack of fulfillment and
misfortunes.

Yes! Finding the correct ideology depends on having the correct world
view, and until the bases of the world view are firmly established,
until its fundamental problems are properly solved and until opposing
temptations are dispelled, one cannot hope to find a fair, useful and
effective ideology. Until one knows what there is one will never be able
to discover what ought to be.

The fundamental problems of a world view are the same threefold
questions for which the awakened consciousness innate to man seeks
definite and convincing answers. It is not without reason that Islamic
scholars have called them the “principles of religion” (*uṣūl al-dīn* ):
theology answers the question: “What is the beginning?”; the study of
the resurrection answers the question of “What is the end?”; the study
of revelation and prophecy answers the questions of “What is the way,
and who is the guide?”

It goes without saying that the correct and definite solution to these
questions depend on philosophical and rational ideas. In this way, we
are led by another route to the importance and necessity of the problems
of philosophy, and prior to all of them, those of epistemology and
ontology.

The Mystery of Humanity
-----------------------

There is a third way to come to appreciate the importance and necessity
of philosophy which can motivate those who are of extraordinary
aspiration and who seek advancement, and it is that the true humanity of
man depends on the gains of philosophy, and the explanation of this is
as follows:

All animals are known to have the characteristic that their actions are
performed with consciousness and will which spring from the instincts.
An existent which has no sort of consciousness is outside the realm of
the animals. Among the animals there is a distinguished kind whose
under-standing is not limited to sensory perception and whose will does
not conform to natural instincts, but who has another perceptive power
called the intellect, such that man’s will takes form in the light of
his intellect. In other words, what distinguishes man is his own vision
and inclinations. So, if one limits oneself to sensory perceptions
alone, and does not benefit from his own intellectual powers, and his
movements are entirely determined by his animal instincts, then in
reality, he is nothing more than an animal, or rather, according to the
Qur’an, he is even further astray than the beasts.

Therefore, the real man is one who uses his own intellect in order to
determine the most important aspects of his destiny, and on that basis
comes to know, in a general way, how to live, and then, in all
seriousness, he fares the way. From what has been explained previously
it became known that the most fundamental problems facing the conscious
human being which play a crucial role in the social and individual
destinies of man are the same

fundamental problems of a world view, problems whose ultimate and
definite solutions depend on philosophical efforts.

We may conclude that without the benefit of that which is obtained
through philosophy, neither individual nor social felicity is possible,
nor the achievement of the true perfection of man.

The Solution to Some Problems
-----------------------------

Regarding these explanations, it is possible that some doubts may be
raised, the most important of which will be mentioned with answers to
each of them.

*Objection 1.* These explanations can establish the necessity of
philosophy only when the world view is restricted to a philosophical
one, and the way to solve its fundamental problems is limited to
philosophy, while other world views exist as well, such as the
scientific world view, the religious world view and the mystical
(*‘irfānī* ) world view.

*Answer 1* . As has been repeatedly explained, the solution to these
sorts of problems is beyond the scope of the empirical sciences, and
therefore, there is really no such thing as the “scientific world view”
(in its proper meaning). However, regarding the religious world view, it
can only be of use when we know what the true religion is. And this, in
turn, is based on knowledge of the Prophet and the One Who sent him,
that is, God the Exalted, and it is clear that basis of the content of
revelation one cannot prove the one who sent it or the one who received
it. For example, one cannot say that since the Qur’an says that God
exists, His existence has been proven! Regarding the mystical world
view, as was indicated in the section on the relation between philosophy
and gnosis (*‘irfān* ), it depends on prior knowledge of God the
Exalted, and prior knowledge of the correct way of spiritual wayfaring,
which must be established on the basis of philosophical principles.
Hence, all ways ultimately lead to philosophy.

*Objection 2.* In order for one’s efforts to solve the problems of a
world view and of philosophy to be worthwhile, one should be optimistic
about reaching a conclusion to one’s efforts. But considering the depth
and breadth of these problems, one cannot have much hope for success.
Therefore, instead of wasting one’s life along a way whose destiny is
uncertain, one had better investigate those problems for which there is
more cause for hope of a solution.

*Answer 2.* First, the hope for a solution to these problems is no less
than the hope for reaching an end to scientific efforts to discover
scientific mysteries and conquering the forces of nature. Secondly, the
value of an estimation depends upon more than one factor, that is, its
quantity of risk, rather, another factor must be taken into
consideration, and that is the value of the outcome, and it is the
result of multiplying these two factors which determines the value of an
estimation. Considering that the outcome here is infinite human felicity
for eternity, no matter how weak the probability, the value of the
estimation is more than the value of the probability of success by any
other way whose outcome is finite and limited.

*Objection 3.* How can one be certain of the value of philosophy when
many scholars have been opposed it and there are even*aḥādīth* which
find fault with it?

*Answer 3.* Opposition to philosophy has originated from various people
with various motivations, however, opposition from aware scholars and
impartial Muslims really meant opposition to the set of current
philosophical ideas, some of which—at least in the view the
opponents—were not compatible with Islamic doctrine. And if there are
some credible*aḥādīth* in which fault is found with philosophy, it is
with the above mentioned meaning in which it is applicable. However,
what we mean by philosophical efforts is the use of the intellect in
order to solve those problems which can be solved only by rational
methods. And the necessity of this work is emphasized in the unambiguous
verses of the Noble Qur’an and honorable*aḥādīth,* and abundant examples
of these efforts may be observed in*aḥādīth* and even in the text of the
Noble Qur’an, such as the reasoning about*tawḥīd* and the resurrection
in the Book and the*sunnah* .

*Objection 4.* If the problems about [the proper] world view are
investigated by rational and philosophical methods in the Book
and*sunnah* , then what need do we have for philosophical books and the
discussions presented in them, discussions which are often derived from
the Greeks?

*Answer 4.* Firstly, the presentation of philosophical discussions in
the Book and*Sunnah* does not change their philosophical essence.
Secondly, there should be no objection to extracting this set of
problems and arranging them in the form of a science, as was done in the
case of*fiqh* and*uṣūl* , and the other Islamic sciences. The fact that
the origins of these discussions are in the books of the Greeks, and
even that they have been adapted, does not take away from the value of
these problems, as is also true in the case of arithmetic, medicine and
astronomy. Thirdly, in the Book and*sunnah* the doubts which were
investigated were those which were current in that epoch, and this does
not suffice to answer the objections one encounters almost every day
from atheistic schools of thought. Rather, according to that which has
been emphasized in the Noble Qur’an and the words of religious leaders,
rational efforts must be expanded until they suffice for the preparation
for the defense of true beliefs and replies to every sort of objection
raised against them.

*Objection 5.* The best argument for the inadequacy of philosophy is the
differences which exist among philosophers themselves, and attention to
these differences brings about a loss of confidence in the correctness
of their methods.

*Answer 5.* Differences regarding theoretical problems is an unavoidable
feature of every science. The scholars of*fiqh* have differences of
opinion about the problems of that subject, while these sorts of
differences are no reason for the invalidity of the science of*fiqh* or
the special methods of that science. Likewise, the existence of
differences between two mathematicians about a mathematical problem is
no reason for the invalidity of mathematics. Attention to these
differences should be a powerful motivation for devoted thinkers to
increase their efforts and endeavors, to persist and persevere until
they discover more certain results.

*Objection 6.* People have been observed who have made admirable studies
in the philosophical sciences, but with respect both to personal and

moral problems and to social and political matters they have weaknesses.
So how can philosophy be considered the key to individual and social
felicity?

*Answer 6.* The emphasis on the importance and necessity of philosophy
does not mean that this science is the complete cause and sufficient
condition for the possession of the correct ideology and behavior which
accords with it, rather it means that it is a necessary condition for
obtaining a desirable ideology, that is, following the right path
depends on knowing it, and knowing the straight path depends on having a
correct world view and solving its philosophical problems. If someone
takes a proper first step, but his second step falters or deviates, this
is no reason for saying that the first step was also deviant, rather the
cause of the faltering or deviation should be sought in the second step.


