Lesson Eleven: Introduction to Epistemology
===========================================

The Importance of Epistemology
------------------------------

There is a series of fundamental problems that confront man as a
conscious being whose activities spring from his consciousness; and if
man becomes negligent and remiss in his efforts to find correct answers
to these problems, he will find instead that he has crossed the boundary
between humanity and bestiality. Remaining in doubt and hesitation, in
addition to the inability to satisfy his truth-seeking conscience, will
not enable man to dispel anxieties about his likely responsibilities. He
will be left to languish or, as occasionally happens, turn into a
dangerous creature. Since mistaken and deviant solutions, such as
materialism and nihilism, cannot provide psychological comfort or social
well-being. One should look for the fundamental cause of individual and
social corruption in aberrant views and thoughts. Hence, there is no
alternative but to seek answers to these problems with firm and
unflagging resolution. We may spare no effort until we establish a basis
for our own human lives and in this way assist others as well, and
arrest the influence in society of incorrect thoughts and the deviant
teachings which are current.

Now that the necessity of an intellectual and philosophical endeavor has
become clear and no room has been left for doubt or uncertainty or
hesitancy, it remains for us to take the first step in the mandatory and
unavoidable journey upon which we have resolved by facing up to the
following question: Is the human intellect able to solve these problems?

This query forms the nucleus about which the problems of epistemology
are centered. Until we solve the problems of this branch of philosophy,
we will neither be able to be arrive at solutions to the problems of
ontology nor to those of the other branches of philosophy. Until the
value of intellectual knowledge is determined, claims presented as
actual solutions to such problems will be pointless and unacceptable.
There will always remain such questions concerning how the intellect can
provide a correct solution to these problems.

It is here that many of the well-known figures of Western philosophy,
such as Hume, Kant, Auguste Compte, and all of the positivists have
blundered. With their incorrect views they have mislaid the cultural
foundations of Western societies, and even the scholars of other
sciences, especially the behaviorists among psychologists, have been
misled by them.  Unfortunately, the battering and ruinous waves of such
teachings also have spread to other parts of the world, and apart from
the lofty summits and unimpregnable cliffs that rest on the stable and
firm grounds of divine philosophy, all else more or less has come under
their influence.

Therefore, we must endeavor to take the first steady step by laying the
foundations of our house of philosophical ideas solidly and sturdily
until, with the help of Almighty God, we are worthy to tread through
other stages and arrive at our desired goal.

A Brief Overview of the History of Epistemology
-----------------------------------------------

Although epistemology as a branch of philosophy does not have a long
history as a separate science, it may be said that the problem of the
value of

knowledge, which forms its central axis, has been somehow raised since
the most ancient periods of philosophy. Perhaps the attention of
thinkers was first drawn to this problem by the discovery of the flaws
and defects in the disclosure of external events by the sense organs.
This very matter prompted the Eleatics to distrust sensory perception
and to rely more heavily on rational knowledge. On the other hand,
differences among thinkers pertaining to rational problems and the
contradictory proofs set forth by each group to substantiate and
corroborate their own ideas and views provided the Sophists with the
opportunity to deny the value of rational knowledge. They go so far in
this way as basically to doubt and even to deny external realities.
After that, the problem of knowledge was not raised seriously until
Aristotle compiled the principles of logic as standards for correct
thinking and for evaluating proofs. After twenty some odd centuries
these principles are still useful. Even the Marxists, after battling for
years against it, have finally accepted the human need for a part of
this logic.

After the centuries during which Greek philosophy flourished,
oscillations appeared in the evaluation of sensory and rational
knowledge. There were two other occasions when Europe was faced with the
crisis of skepticism. After the period of the Renaissance and the
development of the empirical sciences, empiricism gradually came to
prevail. At the present empiricism is still the dominant school of
thought, although in the midst of this prominent rationalists do appear
from time to time.  Virtually the first systematic investigations in
epistemology were performed by Leibniz on the continent of Europe, and
in England by John Locke In this way an independent branch of philosophy
took shape. Locke’s investigations were followed by those of his
successors, Berkeley and Hume  Their philosophy of empiricism won fame
and gradually the position of the rationalists was weakened to such an
extent that Kant, a rationalist, was actually very deeply influenced by
the ideas of Hume.

Kant declared the evaluation of knowledge and the ability of reason to
be one of the most important duties of philosophy. However, he only
accepted the value of the conclusions of theoretical reason within the
limits of the empirical sciences, mathematics, and areas subordinate to
them. The first blow from among the rationalists was struck against
metaphysics, although earlier Hume, a prominent figure amongst the
empiricists, had begun a severe attack which would later be followed in
a more serious form by the positivists. In this way the precise
influence of epistemology in the other fields of philosophy and the
reasons underlying the decline of Western philosophy come to light.

Knowledge in Islamic Philosophy
-------------------------------

In contrast to the oscillations and crises that developed for Western
philosophy, especially in the field of epistemology, such that after the
passage of the twenty-five centuries of its lifetime it not only has not
acquired a firm and sturdy foundation, but rather it can be said that
its support has become ever more unsteady, Islamic philosophy, to the
contrary, has continually retained its strength and stability, and has
never become the victim of shakiness, upheaval or crisis. Despite some
contrary tendencies which have occasionally posed a challenge for
Islamic

philosophers, they have maintained their doctrine that the intellect is
fundamental for the solution of metaphysical problems.  Without
underestimating the importance of the experience of the senses or
denying that of the experimental method in the natural sciences, they
have persisted in the application of the rational method to
philosophical problems. Confrontation with those of opposing views and
wrestling with critics, far from making Islamic philosophers weak, has
only served to strengthen and increase their abilities. For this reason,
the tree of Islamic philosophy has flourished and become more fruitful
daily, and has even become resistant and immune to the attacks of its
enemies. It is now completely capable of defending its rightful
positions and defeating its competitors.

The trends that have more or less been opposed to philosophy have had
two main sources. From one quarter there are those who have considered
some current philosophical views to conflict with literal
interpretations of Scripture and Tradition (*sunnah* ), and fearing that
the propagation of philosophy would weaken religious belief among the
people, have opposed such views. On the other hand, the*‘urafā*
(gnostics) have emphasized the importance of the spiritual way, and have
feared that philosophical tendencies would lead to the neglect of the
path of gnosis and lack of progress on the way of the heart.Hence, they
ignored it, claiming that rationalists had wooden feet. 1

One must realize that a true religion like the manifest religion of
Islam will never be threatened by the thoughts of the philosophers.
Despite whatever shortcomings or deviations they may have, with
philosophical development and maturity and after passage from a raw and
naive phase, the verities of Islam will come to the fore and its truth
will become ever more manifest. Philosophy turns out to be a worthy and
an irreplaceable servant [of Islam] on the one hand by explaining its
lofty teachings, and on the other hand by defending it from perverse and
hostile schools of thought, as it has done and shall continue to do in
an ever improved manner, God willing.

Spiritual and gnostic wayfaring is by no means in conflict with divine
philosophy; rather it has been assisted [by such philosophy] and has
also profited from it. It must be admitted that on the whole this sort
of conflict has been useful for preventing one-sidedness and extremism,
and for demarcating the bounds of each of them.

Because of the sturdy, steadfast and unshakable position of the
intellect in Islamic philosophy, no need has arisen for a detailed
examination of the problems of knowledge in a methodical and systematic
form as an independent branch of philosophy. Merely a few scattered
issues pertaining to knowledge, addressed in various chapters of logic
and philosophy, have sufficed, for example, in one section pertaining to
the teachings of the Sophists where their invalidity is pointed out, and
in another section where the divisions of the sciences and their
principles are explained. Even the problem of mental existence, which is
one of the topics germane to the problems of knowledge, was not advanced
as an independent topic until Ibn Sīnā Even after that, all angles and
sides of the issue have not been comprehensively examined and
researched.

Now, considering the current conditions, when Western thought has almost
penetrated our cultural environs raising questions about many of the
axioms of divine philosophy, philosophical questions can no longer be
limited to their former framework, and the discussion can no longer be
carried on in the traditional manner. Since this manner has not only
prevented the development of philosophy through interchange with other
schools of thought, but also has made our intellectuals, who inevitably
have become and will continue to become familiar with Western thought,
pessimistic about Islamic philosophy, bringing about the illusion that
Islamic philosophy has lost its effectiveness and is unable to compete
with other philosophical schools. Hence, day by day, their tendency
toward foreign culture increases, with disastrous results. This
situation could be seen during the previous regime in our universities.

To repay our debt to the Islamic Revolution and the sacred blood which
has been shed for it, and to fulfill our divine responsibility we should
increase our efforts to explain the foundations of philosophy and
propagate them in such a way that they may answer the doubts posed by
the perverted and atheistic schools of thought, and we should support
the current needs for belief and make it available to young seekers of
truth and investigators, so that the education of Islamic philosophy can
spread, and so Islamic culture may be insured against the encroachments
of alien·ideas.

The Definition of Epistemology
------------------------------

Before we begin to define epistemology (*shinākht shināsī* ) it is
necessary to comment on the word*shinākht* (knowledge).2 This word,
which is equivalent to*ma‘rifah* in Arabic, has various usages. Its most
general meaning is knowledge in general, awareness and information.
Sometimes it is used for particular perception, and sometimes for
recognition. Sometimes it is employed for science which corresponds to
reality with certainty. There are some debates in philology and
etymology about the foreign synonyms which need not be mentioned here.

Knowledge as the subject of the science of epistemology may be
understood as having any of these meanings or any other. In fact, it is
based on convention. But since the goal of surveying epistemological
problems is not particular to any specific kind of knowledge, it is
better to use that general meaning which is equivalent to knowledge in a
general sense.

The concept of knowledge is one of the clearest and most self-evident
concepts, so that it not only is in need of no definition, but its
definition is impossible, since there are no more obvious terms by which
to define it.

The phrases and statements which are used in philosophical and logical
books as definitions of knowledge and science are not genuine
definitions. The purpose of mentioning them is to specify its instances
in some specific science or field of study. For example, logicians
define knowledge as “the obtaining of the form of something in the
mind,” and the purpose of this definition is to specify their intended
instance which is “acquired knowledge”. Or it refers to the view
concerning certain problems of ontology of some philosophers who define
knowledge as “the presence of a non-material being to another
non-material being,” or “the presence of a thing to a non-material
existent.” The purpose of these definitions is to state

their view about the non-material nature of knowledge and the knowing
subject.

If we are to explain knowledge, it is better to say that it is the
presence of the thing itself or its particular form or its general
concept in a non-material existent. In addition, we should say that it
is not necessary for knowledge that the knower always should be other
than the object known. It is possible, as in the case of awareness of
one’s own self, that there be no difference between the knower and the
object of knowledge. In fact in such cases*unity* is the most perfect
instance of*presence* .· By the definition we have presented of the
word*knowledge* we may define epistemology as ‘the science which
discusses human knowledge and the evaluation of its types and the
criteria of their validity.’

References
----------

1 The way of the rationalists, according to the sūfīs, such as Mawlānā
Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī (1207-1273), is artificial, like that of one who would
walk with crutches, or like that of the blind man who walks with a cane.
See the*Mathnavī* , Bk. 1, [^2128]: (Tr.)

2 The Fārsī word used for epistemology in this text is*shinākht-shināsī*
, both halves of which are derived from the verb*shinākhtan* , which
means ‘to know’ in the sense of being acquainted with, as in the
German*kennen* , as opposed to*wissen* . Today, the term*ma‘rifat
shināsī* has gained wider currency in Iran. (Tr.)
