Lesson Twelve: The Self-Evidence of the Principles of Epistemology
==================================================================

The Nature of the Dependence of Philosophy on Epistemology
----------------------------------------------------------

Understanding the concept of knowledge in a broad sense which includes
every kind of awareness and perception, many topics of epistemology
could be presented, some of which do not formally come under this
science, such as those concerning revelation, inspiration, and the kinds
of mystical disclosure and intuition. However, one problem which is
usually included for discussion in this branch of philosophy pivots
about the senses and the intellect. But we cannot discuss all of these
issues here, for our principal aim is to explain the value of
intellectual perception and to affirm the truth of philosophy and the
validity of its rational methods. For this reason, we shall only present
those topics which are useful for metaphysics and theology, and
incidentally for some other areas of philosophy such as philosophical
psychology and philosophical ethics.

At this point it is possible to raise the question of what are the basic
premises which support epistemology, and in what way they can be
confirmed. The answer is that epistemology is in no need of borrowed
axioms for its subjects, for its issues can be clarified solely on
self-evident primary grounds (*badīhiyyāt* *awwaliyyah* ).

Another question which may be raised is this: If the solutions to the
problems of ontology and other sciences which are arrived at by rational
methods depend upon whether or not the intellect has the capacity to
solve these sorts of problems, doesn’t that imply that first philosophy
[metaphysics] also is in need of the science of epistemology to provide
the basic axioms of philosophy, although it is said that philosophy has
no need for any other science?

Elsewhere we have indicated the answer to this question. Here we present
a more precise answer. First, the premises directly needed by
metaphysics are really self-evident judgments and have no need of proof,
and the explanations regarding these judgments given in the science of
logic or epistemology are in truth expository, clarifying rather than
argumentative. That is, they are a means to direct the attention of the
mind toward a truth which the intellect understands without need for
reasons. The reason for discussing this kind of judgment in these
sciences is that misconceptions have arisen about them which turn into
doubts, as in the case of the most self-evident of judgments, that is,
the impossibility of contradiction, leading some even to imagine that
contradiction is not only not impossible, but that it underlies all
reality!

Doubts which have arisen about the value of rational knowledge are cut
from the same cloth. It is to address these doubts and to remove these
misconceptions from the mind that these discussions are undertaken.
Really, the inclusion of these judgments among the topics of logic or
epistemology is a digression, an indulgence, or condescension for the
sake of those who harbor suspicions. If someone did not accept the value
of rational knowledge, albeit unconsciously, how could one argue with
him on the

basis of rational proof?! Even the arguments advanced in favor of such
doubts would be of a rational nature (note carefully).

Secondly, the need of philosophy for the principles of logic and
epistemology is an application of knowledge to knowledge. To explain,
someone whose mind has not been poisoned by doubt can reason to a
certain conclusion with respect to most topics, and his reasoning would
be in accord with logical principles without the need for attending to
them and without knowing, for instance, that his reasoning accords with
the first form of the syllogism and the conditions that govern it, or
without being aware that there is an intellect which understands these
premises and which accepts the validity of the conclusion that follow
from them. On the other hand, it is possible that some, in order to
refute rationalism or metaphysics may employ reasoning and be unaware of
the rational metaphysical premises they use, or in order to refute the
rules of logic they may base their reasoning on the rules of logic, or
even in order to invalidate the inviolability of the law of
contradiction, they may resort to this very principle without being
aware of it, and if they were told, ‘This reasoning of yours is both
valid and invalid,’ they would become annoyed and regard this as
mockery.

Thus, in reality, the dependence of philosophical reasoning on the
principles of logic or the principles of epistemology is not the sort of
need that the sciences have for the posited principles of their
subjects. Rather it is a secondary need involving the dependence of the
principles of these sciences upon themselves; that is, it is the need
for reconfirmation in science, for acquiring further confirmation for
these judgments, as in the case of the self-evident propositions
concerning which it is said that they depend on the impossibility of a
contradiction. It is clear that the dependence of self-evident
propositions on this principle is not of the same kind as the dependence
of speculative propositions on self-evident propositions, otherwise the
difference between self-evident and speculative propositions would not
remain, and at least one proposition, the principle of
non-contradiction, has to be accepted as being self-evident.

The Possibility of Knowledge
----------------------------

Every rational person is of the belief that he does know things, and
that he can know things. Hence he makes an effort to acquire information
concerning matters of his needs or interests, and the best sign of this
sort of effort is what scientists and philosophers have done by bringing
about the various fields of the sciences and philosophy. Hence the
possibility and actuality of science is not something that any rational
person whose mind has not been confounded by doubt would deny or even
have reservations about. That which is open to discussion or examination
and which it is reasonable to disagree about is identification of the
frontiers of human knowledge and specification of the means of acquiring
certain knowledge, and the way to distinguish correct from incorrect
thought, and matters of this kind.

As has been indicated in previous discussions, in Europe, dangerous
waves of skepticism have repeatedly appeared, and even great thinkers
have been swallowed by it. The history of philosophy remembers schools
of

thought which absolutely have denied knowledge, such as sophism,
skepticism, and agnosticism. The best explanation of the absolute denial
of knowledge (if this charge is correct) is that its victims were
afflicted by a severe form of over scrupulousness, a state which affects
some people with regard to various other matters as well. Actually it
should be considered a kind of mental illness. In any event, without
going into a historical investigation concerning the existence of such
people and inquiring into the motivation behind such views or the verity
of their ascription to those who are claimed to have held them, we take
them as doubts or questions that require an answer suitable to
philosophical discussion, leaving the subject of historical fact to be
decided by historical research.

A Survey of the Claims of the Skeptics
--------------------------------------

That which has been reported of the statements of the sophists and the
skeptics may be divided from one angle into two parts: one having to do
with what they have said about existence and being, and the other
concerning what they have expressed about science and knowledge. That
ْis, their statements have two aspects: one aspect concerns the subject
of ontology, while the other pertains to epistemology. For example, the
remark is attributed to one of the most extreme of the sophists, Gorgias
: “Nothing exists, and if there were anything, it could not be known,
and even there were knowledge of being, this knowledge could not be
communicated to others.” The first phrase of this remark is about being,
which must be discussed in the section on ontology, but the second
phrase is relevant to the present discussion, epistemology, and so,
naturally, it is this second phrase which we shall proceed to discuss,
while the first phrase will be examined in the discussions of ontology.

First, this point must be mentioned: all who would doubt everything will
not be able to doubt their own existence, the existence of their doubt,
nor their perceptual faculties, such as the power of sight and hearing,
and the existence of mental forms and their own psychological states. If
someone even expresses doubts about these cases, he is either sick, and
must be cured, or he is lying and expresses evil intentions, and so must
be corrected and reprimanded. Likewise, someone who speaks and discusses
or writes books cannot doubt the existence of a party to the discussion,
or the existence of the paper or the pen with which he writes. At the
extreme it might be said that I perceive all these things within myself
but I doubt their existence in the external world. As would appear from
the statements of Berkeley and some other idealists, they accepted all
objects of perception as mere forms within the mind, and denied their
external existence. However, they accepted the existence of other people
who have minds and perceptions. This view is not an absolute denial of
knowledge and existence, but a denial of material existents, and their
doubt amounts to one in relation to some of the objects of knowledge.

Now, if someone claims that no certain knowledge is possible, the
question will be put to him as to whether he knows this, or whether he
also has some doubt about it. If he says that he knows it, then at least
one thing that is certainly known has been admitted, and his own claim
has been

violated. If he says that he does not know it, this means that it is
possible that he grants the likelihood of certain knowledge. In other
words, his own speech has been shown to be invalid. However, if someone
says that he has doubts about the possibility of knowledge and definite
knowledge claims, it will be asked of him whether he knows that he has
such doubts or not. If he answers that he knows that he has such doubts,
then not only the possibility but the ْactuality of knowledge has been
admitted. If, however, he says that he also has doubts about his very
own doubts, this very speech is either caused by illness or bad
intention, and requires a non-theoretical response.

In response to those who advocate the relativity of all knowledge, who
claim that no proposition is valid absolutely, universally and
eternally, one may ask such a person whether that claim itself is valid
absolutely, universally and eternally, or whether it is relative,
particular, and temporary. If it holds always, and in all cases, and
with no qualification or condition, then it is true. Then at least one
proposition which is absolute, universal and eternal has been proved. If
this knowledge itself is also relative this means that in some cases it
is not valid, and in the cases where it does not hold there are
propositions which are absolute, universal and eternal.

The Rejection of the Doubts of the Skeptics
-------------------------------------------

One of the doubts upon which the sophists and skeptics rely and which
they have expressed in various forms and by presenting different
examples is the following: Sometimes one acquires certainty about the
existence of something by means of the senses, but afterwards he comes
to realize that a mistake has been made. Thus one comes to know that
sensory perception is not necessarily reliable. It follows that the
likelihood arises that my other sensory perceptions may also be
mistaken, and the day may come when their error will also become
apparent. Likewise sometimes a person finds a principle to be certain on
rational grounds, but afterwards he finds that his reasoning was
incorrect, and his certainty is transformed into doubt. Thus it becomes
known that intellectual reasoning is also not necessarily reliable. In
the same way the probability of error infects other intellectual
perceptions. The conclusion is that neither sensation nor reason are
reliable. Nothing remains for man but doubt.

The response would be as follows:

1. The purpose of this argument is to arrive at the validity of
skepticism and the knowledge of its truth through reasoning, and at
least to get the other party to the discussion to accept your point,
that is, you expect that he will attain knowledge of the validity of
your claims, while you maintain that the attainment of knowledge is
absolutely impossible.

2. The discovery of error in sensory and intellectual perceptions
implies the knowledge that these perceptions do not conform to reality.
This necessarily implies that we accept the existence of knowledge of
the error of perception.

3. Another implication is that we know that there is a reality with
which our mistaken perception does not accord, otherwise there would be
no concept of the error of perception.

4. Another implication is that it must be known to us that the mistaken
perception itself and its mental form are contrary to actuality.

5. Finally, the existence of the one who errs, as well as his senses and
intellect must be accepted.

6. This reasoning itself is a rational argument (however fallacious) and
to rely upon it is to consider the intellect and its perceptions to be
reliable.

7. In addition to this, other knowledge is assumed here, and that is
that mistaken perceptions, being in error, cannot be true. So, the
skeptic’s argument itself implies the acceptance of several instances of
knowledge, and so how can one deny the possibility of knowledge
absolutely, or even doubt it?!

All of these answers refute the argument of the skeptics. In analyzing
it and exposing its fallacy we prove the validity and error of sensory
perception by the help of reasoning. However, as has also been said, it
is not true that the discovery of error in intellectual perceptions also
infects all other intellectual perceptions, because the possibility of
error may only enter speculative, or other than self-evident,
perceptions. But the self-evident propositions of the intellect which
are the basis of philosophical proofs do not admit of error at all, and
the explanation of their infallibility will be presented in Chapter
Lesson Nineteen.


