Lesson Thirteen: The Divisions of Knowledge
===========================================

In Search of the Cornerstone of Knowledge
-----------------------------------------

It was mentioned in the previous lesson that some knowledge and
perceptions are completely indubitable. Furthermore, the reasons given
by the skeptics to justify their perverted views based on their absolute
denial of knowledge embody and necessitate several instances of
knowledge. On the other hand, we know that not all our ‘knowledge’ and
beliefs are true or correspond to reality, and furthermore, in many
cases we ourselves notice some falsehoods. In view of these two points,
the questions arise as to the differences among the varieties of human
perceptions, such that some of them are infallible and indubitable while
others are fallible and doubtable, and how we might distinguish between
them. It is a well-known matter that Descartes tried to found an
unshakable philosophy in order to combat skepticism, and he used the
indubitability of doubt itself as the cornerstone of his philosophy.
Furthermore, the existence of the ego of the doubter and thinker is a
corollary based on that foundation. He introduced clarity and
distinctness as the criterion of indubitability, which he made a
standard for distinguishing correct from incorrect ideas. He also
attempted to employ a mathematical approach to philosophy, and in fact
sought to introduce a new logic..

We are not presently in a position to evaluate Descartes’ philosophy, or
to examine the degree to which he was successful at the task he set for
himself. We shall only mention the point that to begin with doubt as a
starting point for arguing with the skeptics is reasonable, as was seen
in the previous lesson. However, if someone were to imagine that nothing
is quite so clear and certain, and that even the existence of the
doubter must be inferred from the doubt, this would not be valid. Rather
the existence of the aware and thinking ego is at least as clear and
indubitable as the existence of the doubt itself which is one of its
states..

Likewise, ‘clarity and distinctness’ cannot be considered the major
criterion for distinguishing correct from incorrect ideas, for this
criterion by itself is not sufficiently clear and distinct and free from
ambiguity, and is not a serious and crucial measure, and consequently
cannot divulge the secret of the infallibility of certain kinds of
perceptions. To be sure, other views of Descartes could be argued at
great length, but such an examination would be outside the scope of the
present study..

The First Division of Science
-----------------------------

The first division of knowledge to be considered is that between (1) the
knowledge which is known directly of the essence (*dhāt* )1 of the known
object, in which the real and genuine existence of the object of
knowledge is disclosed to the knowing subject or the percipient, and (2)
the knowledge in which the external existence of its object is not
observed and witnessed by the knower; rather he becomes aware of it by
the mediation of something which represents it, which is termed its
‘form’ (*ṣūrat* ) or ‘mental concept’ (*mafhūm dhihnī* ). The first kind
is called ‘presentational knowledge’ or ‘knowledge by presence’ (*‘ilm
ḥuḍūrī* ) and the second kind is called

‘acquired knowledge’ (*‘ilm ḥuṣūlī* ), [that is, knowledge acquired by
conceptual representation].

The division of knowledge into these two kinds is rational,
comprehensive and exclusive, and in this regard no third state can be
supposed besides these two; that is, there is no knowledge other than
knowledge which is of these two kinds. Either there is an intermediary
between the person who knows and the essence of the known object, by
means of which the awareness is obtained, in which case the knowledge is
called ‘acquired,’ or such an intermediary does not exit, and in that
case there will be ‘knowledge by presence.’ However, the existence of
these two kinds of knowledge in man needs to be explained.

Knowledge by Presence
---------------------

The knowledge and awareness that every one has of himself as a
perceiving existent is a knowledge which cannot be denied. Even the
sophists who considered man to be the measure of all things did not deny
the existence of man himself and the knowledge man has of himself.

Of course, this means that man himself, his very ego, is a perceiver, a
thinker, who by internal witnessing (*shuhūd* ) is aware of himself, not
by means of sensation or experience nor by forms or mental concepts. In
other words, he himself is the knowledge, and in this knowledge and
awareness there is no plurality or otherness between knowledge, the
knower, and the known object. As was previously mentioned, ‘the unity of
the knower and the known’ is the most perfect instance of ‘the presence
of the known object to the knower’. However, awareness of man by color,
shape, and other characteristics of the body is not like this, but is
acquired through sight, touch, and the other senses, and by means of
mental forms.

Within the body there are numerous internal organs of which we are not
aware, unless we come to know of them by means of their signs and
effects, or we become aware of them by learning anatomy, physiology, and
other biological sciences.

Likewise, this means that such knowledge is simple and unanalyzable, not
such as the propositions, “I am,” or “I exist,” which are composed of
several concepts. Thus, the meaning of ‘self-knowledge’ is this very
intuitive, simple and direct awareness of our own souls. This knowledge
and awareness is an essential characteristic of this ‘self-knowledge’.
This is proved in its own appropriate place [in this book], that the
soul is immaterial, and that every non-material substance is aware of
itself. These topics are related to ontology and philosophical
psychology, consequently this is not the place to discuss them.

Our awareness of our psychological states, sentiments and passions are
cases of direct presentational knowledge. When we become frightened we
become directly aware of this psychological state without any
intermediary, without the mediation of any form or mental concept. When
we are affectionate toward someone or something, we find this
inclination within ourselves. When we make a decision to do something,
we are aware of our decision and will. To be afraid of something, or to
like something, or to decide to do something without awareness of the
fear, or affection, or will is meaningless. For the same reason, the
existence of our doubts or

suppositions is undeniable. No one can claim that he is unaware of his
own doubt, and that he doubts the existence of his doubt!

Another instance of knowledge by presence is the knowledge the self has
of its perceptive and motor faculties. The awareness the self has of its
ability to think or imagine or of its motor abilities is presentational
knowledge and is direct. These things are not known by means of forms or
mental concepts. For this reason one never makes a mistake about their
employment. For example, one never uses the perceptive faculty instead
of one’s motor abilities, and one never uses one’s ability to move
instead of thinking about something. Among the things known by presence
are the forms and mental concepts themselves, which are not known to the
self through the mediation of other forms and concepts. If it were
necessary for knowledge of anything to be obtained by means of forms and
mental concepts, one would have to know every mental form by means of
some other form, and knowledge of that form also by means of another
form. In this way, for everything you knew you would have to know an
infinite number of other things and have an infinite number of other
mental forms.

It is possible that a question might be raised here, for if
presentational knowledge is the thing known itself, then it becomes
necessary that mental forms will be both presentational knowledge and
acquired knowledge. For these forms in one respect will be known by
presence, so they themselves will be knowledge by presence itself. In
another respect, it is supposed that they are cases of acquired
knowledge of external things. So, how is it possible that one knowledge
can be both presentational knowledge and acquired knowledge?

The answer is that mental forms have the property of mirroring outer
forms and representing external things, and as they are means for
knowing external things, they are considered as cases of acquired
knowledge. With respect to the fact that they are present before the
self, and the self is directly aware of them, they count as
presentational knowledge. These two respects are different from one
another: the respect of their being present is the self’s direct
awareness of them, and the respect of their being acquired is their
representing external things.

In order to explain this further we shall attend to the analogy of the
mirror. We are able to observe a mirror in two independent ways. One way
is that of one who wants to buy a mirror, who looks at both sides of it
to see that it is not broken or defective. The other way is that of one
who uses the mirror, as when we look at the mirror to see our face, and
although we look at the mirror, our attention is to our own face, not to
the mirror.

Mental forms can also be independently attended to by the self, and in
this case we say that they are perceived by presentational knowledge.
They can also be a means by which external things or persons may be
known, and in this case we say that they are cases of acquired
knowledge. It should be noted that the point of this explanation is not
to distinguish the two cases temporally; rather the point is to
distinguish two respects, without entailing that a mental concept, in so
far as it is a case of acquired knowledge of an external object, should
not also be known by the self or lack the respect of presence to the
self.

The Reason Behind the Infallibility of Presentational Knowledge:
----------------------------------------------------------------

By attending to the explanation given about presentational knowledge and
acquired knowledge and the difference between them, it becomes known why
the knowledge of the self and knowledge of the states of the self and
likewise other cases of knowledge by presence are fundamentally
infallible, for in these cases it is the reality itself which is
observed. To the contrary, in cases of acquired knowledge, forms and
mental concepts play an intermediate role, and possibly there may not be
complete correspondence with external things and persons.

In other words, error in perception is imaginable when there is an
intermediary between the perceiving person and the perceived entity, and
knowledge is realized by means of it. In this case the question arises
as to whether this form or concept which mediates between the perceiving
subject and the perceived object and plays the role of reflecting the
perceived object represents the perceived object precisely and
corresponds to it perfectly or not. Unless it is proved that this form
and concept corresponds precisely to the perceived object certainty will
not be acquired with respect to the validity of the perception. However,
in the case that the thing or person perceived is present before the
perceiver without any intermediary with its own very existence, or is
united with it, no error can be supposed, and one cannot ask whether the
knowledge corresponds with what is known or not, for in this case the
knowledge is the known itself.

Furthermore, the meaning of truth and error in perception now become
clear. Truth is the perception which corresponds to reality and
completely reveals it. Error is the belief which does not correspond to
reality.

The Concomitance of Acquired Knowledge with Presentational Knowledge
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Here we should mention an important point, namely that the mind always
takes a picture of what is present to it like an automatic machine. From
these it gets specific forms and concepts and then analyzes and
interprets them. For example, when one becomes afraid his mind takes a
photo of the state of fear which it can remember after the state has
left. Furthermore, it apprehends its universal concept and by appending
other concepts projects it as a proposition such as ‘I am afraid,’ or ‘I
have fear,’ or ‘Fear exists in me.’ It interprets the appearance of this
psychological state with a marvelous alacrity on the basis of its
previous knowledge and identifies its cause.

This entire mental process, which is accomplished so quickly, is
distinct from the state of fear and its presentational knowledge.
However, simultaneity with knowledge by presence is often the source of
a mistake, and one fancies that since he finds fear with knowledge by
presence he also comes to know its cause with knowledge by presence, but
that which was apprehended with knowledge by presence is simple, without
any form or concept and also devoid of any interpretation whatsoever,
and that is why it allows no room for error. To the contrary, the
simultaneous interpretation is from acquired perceptions which by
themselves provide no guarantee of truth and correspondence to reality.
With this explanation it becomes clear

why and how mistakes occur in some cases of acquired knowledge. For
example, a person feels hungry and thinks that he needs food, but this
is a false appetite and he does not really need to have a meal. The
reason is that that which has been perceived with the infallible
presentational knowledge was that specific feeling, which was
accompanied by a mental interpretation based on comparison with previous
feelings according to which the cause of the feeling must be a need for
food. This comparison, however, is incorrect and because of it an error
occurs in specifying the cause and providing a mental interpretation.
The errors which occur in gnostic disclosures are also of this sort.
Hence, it is necessary to be completely precise in specifying
presentational knowledge and to distinguish it from its accompanying
mental interpretations in order not to err as a result of this
confusion.

Gradation in Knowledge by Presence
----------------------------------

Another noteworthy point is that all cases of presentational knowledge
are not equal with respect to intensity or weakness. Rather, sometimes
knowledge by presence is adequately powerful and intense to come to
one’s consciousness, while at other times it is so weak and pale that
one is only semiconscious or even unconscious of it..

Sometimes the difference among the levels of knowledge by presence are
caused by difference in the levels of existence of the perceiving
subjects, that is, to the extent that the self is weak with respect to
the degree of existence, his presentational knowledge will also be weak
and pale.

To the extent that the degree of his existence is more perfect, his
knowledge by presence will be more perfect and more conscious. This
explanation depends on explanation of the gradation of existence and of
the degrees of perfection of the self, which are to be proved in another
area of philosophy, but here we can accept that on the basis of these
two principles it is possible for presentational knowledge to be intense
or weak.

Knowledge by presence of psychological states also can have other forms
of intensity and weakness. For example, when a sick person who is
suffering from pain and who perceives this pain with knowledge by
presence, sees a close friend and turns his attention to him, he no
longer perceives the pain. To the contrary, in times of solitude, and
especially in the dark of night in which there is nothing else to which
he can pay attention, he feels the pain more intensely, and the cause of
this is the intensity of his attention.

Differences in the degrees of presentational knowledge may effect the
mental interpretations associated with the degrees of intensity and
weakness. For example, although a self at the lowest levels has
presentational knowledge of itself, it is possible that due to the
weakness of this knowledge it may imagine that the relation between the
self and the body is the relation of identity, concluding that the
reality of the self is this very material body or the phenomena related
to it, but when a more perfect degree of knowledge by presence is
achieved, and in other words, when the substance of the self is
perfected, such a mistake will no longer occur.

Likewise, in its proper place it is proved that man has presentational
knowledge of his Creator, but due to weakness of the degree of existence
and also due to the attention given to the body and material things,
this

knowledge becomes unconscious. However, with the perfection of the self
and decrease in attention to the body and material things and the
strengthening of attention of the heart to God, the Exalted, this same
knowledge will reach the stage of clarity and consciousness, until one
says: “Is there any manifestation of [something] other than You and not
of You?”2

References
----------

1 By essence (*dhāt* ) is meant the thing itself, the reality of the
thing. This is to be distinguished from the whatness or quiddity, which
is the descriptive answer to the Aristotelian question, ‘What is it?’.

2 These words are commonly attributed to Imam Ḥusayn (*‘a* ) and are
included in standard printings of his Supplication of the Day of
‘Arafah, although Muḥammad Bāqir Majlīsī (1037/1628 - 1110/1699)
expresses doubts about the authenticity of this part of the supplication
and opines that it is the work of a ṣūfī shaykh. See William Chittick,
“A Shadhili Presence in Shi‘ite Islam”,*Sophia Perennis,* Vol. 1, No. 1,
Spring 1970, pp. 97-100, where it is pointed out that the section is
from the*munājāt* attributed to Ibn ‘Aṭā’illāh (d. 709/1309), included
in the translation by Victor Danner,*Ṣūfī Aphorisms* (Lahore: Suhail
Academy, 1985), p. 66, paragraph [^19]:
