Lesson Fourteen: Acquired Knowledge
===================================

The Necessity for the Survey of Acquired Knowledge
--------------------------------------------------

We saw that knowledge by presence is the finding of reality itself, and
that therefore there is no way to have doubt or scruple about it. But we
know that the range of presentational knowledge is limited and by itself
it cannot provide a solution to the problems of epistemology. If there
were no way to ascertain facts by means of acquired knowledge, we would
not logically be able to accept definite theories in any science, and
even self-evident first principles would lose their definiteness and
necessity, and only the name of self-evidence and necessity would remain
with them. Therefore, it is necessary that we continue our endeavor to
evaluate acquired knowledge and to obtain a criterion of truth for it.
For the sake of this we shall survey the various kinds of acquired
knowledge.

Idea and Affirmation
--------------------

Logicians divide knowledge into two parts: idea (*taṣawwur* ) and
affirmation (*taṣdīq* ). In fact, they have limited the common concept
of knowledge to acquired knowledge, and on the other hand, they have
extended it to include simple ideas.

The literal meaning of*taṣawwur* is ‘to form an image’ and ‘to acquire a
form,’ and in the terminology of the logicians it means a simple mental
appearance which has the property of disclosing something beyond itself,
such as the idea of Mount Damavand and the concept of mountain. The
literal meaning of *taṣdīq* is ‘to consider true’ and ‘to acknowledge,’
and in the terminology of logicians and philosophers it is used with two
similar meanings, and in this respect it is considered to be ambiguous:

a.  a logical proposition which in simple form includes the subject,
predicate, and judgment of unity;

b.  the judgment itself which is a simple matter and shows one’s belief
in the unity of the subject and predicate.

Some modern Western logicians imagine that affirmation (*taṣdīq* ) means
the transference of the mind from one idea to another on the basis of
the rules of the association of ideas. But this conception is incorrect,
for neither is affirmation necessary everywhere there is an association
of ideas, nor is an association of ideas required everywhere there is
affirmation. Rather, affirmation rests on judgment, and this is the very
difference between a proposition and several ideas accompanying each
other and following one upon the other in the mind, pictured without any
relation between them.

Elements of the Proposition
---------------------------

We know that ‘affirmation’ in the sense of judgment is something simple,
but in the sense of proposition it is composed of several elements.
Several different views have been expressed about the elements of the
proposition.

Since it would require a lengthy discussion to survey all of them, and
such a survey properly belongs to the subject of logic, we shall merely
have a glance at them here. Some say that each predicative proposition
(*qaḍiyyah ḥamliyyah* ) is composed of two elements: subject and
predicate. Others add

the relation between these two as a third element. Yet others consider
the judgment of the occurrence of the relationship or the lack of
occurrence of the relationship to be a fourth element of the
proposition.

Some distinguish between affirmative and negative propositions and say
that with regard to negative propositions a judgment does not exist, but
rather they consider it to be a case of the negation of judgment. Others
deny the existence of the relation in simple existential propositions
(*halliyyah basīṭah* ), i.e. propositions which assert the existence of
the subject in the external world, and in primary predications, i.e.
propositions in which the conceptual content of the subject and the
predicate are the same, such as ‘Man is a rational animal.’ However,
undoubtedly, in logic no proposition can be without either a
relationship or judgment, for, as we said, affirmation rests on
judgment, and judgment is with respect to two elements of the
proposition. However, it is possible that one may have to recognize a
difference among propositions from a philosophical and ontological point
of view.

Divisions of Ideas
------------------

From one perspective, ideas can be divided into two types: universal and
particular. A ‘universal idea’ is a concept which can represent numerous
things or persons, such as the concept of man which applies to millions
of individuals. A ‘particular idea’ is a mental form which only
represents one existent, such as the mental form of Socrates.

Each of the ideas, whether universal or particular, may be further
divided by other divisions about which we shall provide a brief
explanation.

**Sensory Ideas** : These are simple phenomena in the soul which result
from the effects of the relations between the sensory organs and
material realities, such as images of scenery which we see with the
eyes, or sounds which we hear with the ears. The subsistence of this
kind of idea depends on the subsistence of relations with the external
world, and after being cut off from contact with the external world they
vanish in a short period of time (such as one tenth of a second).

**Imaginary Ideas** : These are simple specific phenomena in the soul
which are subsequent results of sensory ideas and links with the
external world. But their subsistence does not depend upon links with
the external world, such as the mental image of a view of a garden which
remains in the mind even after the eyes are closed, and may be recalled
even after years have gone by.

**Ideas of Prehension (** ***Wahm*** **)** :1 Many philosophers have
mentioned another kind of particular idea which is related to particular
meanings, and which is exemplified by the feeling of enmity which some
animals have for some others, a feeling which requires them to flee.
Some philosophers have extended this term to cover particular meanings
in general, including the feelings of affection and enmity of man..

Undoubtedly, universal concepts of affection and enmity are a kind of
universal ideas. They cannot be counted as types of particular ideas.

The perception of particular affections and enmities in the perceiver
himself, that is the affection which a person finds in himself for
another, or the enmity which he feels in himself for another, is really
a kind of

presentational knowledge of qualities of the soul, and we cannot count
them as kinds of acquired knowledge.

Our feeling of another person’s enmity, in fact, is not a direct feeling
without intermediary, but it is a comparison between a state which a man
has found within himself and attributed to another person in a similar
condition. But judgments about the perceptions of animals require
another discussion which we do not have the opportunity to pursue
further here.

What can be accepted as a kind of specific idea is an idea which results
from states of the soul, and is apt to be recalled, and which are like
imaginary ideas with relation to sensory ideas, such as remembering a
specific fear that appeared at a certain moment, or a specific affection
which existed at a specific moment. It is necessary to mention that
sometimes ideas of*wahm* are spoken of as ideas that do not correspond
to any reality and are sometimes referred to as ‘fantasy’.

Universal Ideas
---------------

We saw that in one respect ideas may be divided into two parts,
universal and particular. The types of ideas which we have discussed
until now have all been particular ideas. Universal ideas, which are
called ‘concepts of the intellect’ or ‘intelligibles’ are the focus of
important philosophical debates, and since long ago have been the
subject of discussion.

From ancient times there have existed views according to which basically
there are no universal concepts. The terms which are used to denote
universal concepts are in reality like equivocal terms which denote
various things. For example, the term ‘man’ which is used to designate
many individuals is like some proper name used by several families to
name their children, or like a family name which applies to all the
members of a family.

Proponents of this theory are known as ‘nominalists.’ At the end of the
Middle Ages, William of Ockham inclined toward this theory, and it was
later accepted by Berkeley In modern times, positivists and some other
schools must also be considered to hold this kind of position.2 The
other theory which is similar to that which has been mentioned is that
universal concepts are vague particular concepts, such that some
features of particular and specific forms are omitted so that they may
conform to other things or persons. For example, our idea of a specific
person could be adapted to his brother by deleting some of its features.
By deleting more features it could be applied to even more people, and
by continuing in this way the idea becomes more general and applies to
more and more people until at last it may even be applied to animals, or
even plants and minerals, such as a phantom seen from afar, which
because of its vagueness may conform to the idea of a stone, tree,
animal or a man. This is why at first glance we doubt whether it is
human or something else. The closer we get and the clearer we see it,
the more restricted are the limits of probability, until finally, we
determine a specific person or thing.

Hume had this sort of belief about universal concepts, and many others
also have thought this way about universals. On the other hand, some
ancient philosophers, such as Plato, insisted on the reality of
universal concepts, and even considered them to have a kind of reality
of their own outside the bounds of space and time. The knowledge of
universals is

likened to a kind of observation of non-material entities and
intellectual archetypes (Platonic Ideas). This theory has been
interpreted in various ways and many theories have branched off from
it.3 Thus some have held that the human spirit prior to acquiring a body
had seen intellectual truths in the world of immaterial entities, and
after acquiring a body it forgot them, and by seeing material
individuals, the spirit becomes reminded of these immaterial truths and
the perception of universals is this remembering. Others who do not
subscribe to the spirit’s existence prior to its attachment with the
body, understand sensory perception as a means to prepare the self to
observe immaterial entities.

This observation which is obtained by this capacity is observation from
afar, and the perception of universals is this same observation of
non-material realities from afar, in contrast to gnostic disclosures,
which are obtained by a different kind of preparation and are observed
from up close.

Some Islamic philosophers, like Mulla Ṣadr and the late ‘Allāmah
Ṭabāṭabā’ī, accepted this interpretation.

The most famous theory of universal concepts is that they are a special
kind of mental concept realized with the attribute of universality in a
special stage (*martabah* ) of the mind. Hence, in one of its
definitions the intellect is termed as the faculty for the apprehension
of universal mental concepts. This theory is ascribed to Aristotle and
has been accepted by most Islamic philosophers.

Noting that the first and second theory in fact imply the denial of
intellectual perception, which is a rallying point for the destruction
of metaphysics and its depreciation to philological discussion and
linguistic analysis, it is necessary to delve further on this issue in
order to find a firm foundation for our future discussions.

A Study of Universal Concepts
-----------------------------

As has been pointed out, the nominalists held that general terms involve
a kind of equivocation or something similar so that they may refer to
numerous individuals. For this reason, in order to provide a decisive
answer to them it is necessary to explain ambiguity, wherein a common
expression is used for different things (*mushtarak lafẓī* ), and common
meanings (*mushtarak ma’nawī* ).

Ambiguity (*mushtarak lafẓī* ) occurs when a word is given several
designations or is used to designate different meanings through multiple
conventions, 4 as ‘spring’ is used for a coil, a season, a fountain, and
a leap. However, common meaning ( *mushtarak ma’nawī* ) occurs when an
expression by a single convention designates a common aspect of numerous
cases, and with a single meaning corresponds to all of them. The most
important differences between ambiguity and common meaning are as
follows:

(1) Ambiguity requires numerous initial conventions, whereas common
meaning requires no more than one initial convention.

(2) Common meaning is true of a potentially infinite number of
individuals or instances, whereas ambiguity is only true of a set number
of meanings.

(3) Common meaning is a single general meaning which is understood
without a need for comparison, whereas ambiguity involves several
meanings the determination of which require determining indications
[that fix the meaning].

Now, with regard to these distinctions, we shall resume our discussion
of such expressions as ‘man,’ ‘animal,’ etc., to find whether each of
these expressions can be understood as having a single meaning without
need for a determining indication, or whether several meanings come to
mind when one hears them and if there is no determining indication we
remain puzzled about which of them the speaker meant. Undoubtedly, we do
not take Muḥammad, ‘Alī, Ḥasan and Ḥusayn to be the meanings of the word
‘man’; therefore, when we hear this expression we are not in doubt about
the sense of this expression, asking which of these meanings it has.
Rather we know that this expression has a single meaning which is common
among these individuals and other men. Hence, it is not ambiguous.

Now let us see if this kind of expression has limited instances or
whether it is true of an infinite number of individuals. It is obvious
that the meaning of this expression does not accept any sort of limit on
the number of its instances, but may be truly applied to infinite
individuals.

Finally, we see that none of these expressions has an infinite number of
designating conventions. No one is able to imagine in his mind an
infinite number of individuals, while specifying an infinite number of
designating conventions for a single expression. On the other hand, we
see that we ourselves can designate a single expression in such a way
that it conforms to an infinite number of individuals. Hence, universals
do not require an infinite number of designating conventions.

Consequently, universal terms are a kind of those which have common
meaning, not of those which are ambiguous.

One may object that this explanation is not sufficient to explain the
impossibility of numerous designating conventions, for it is possible
that the one who designates may imagine one instance (and not an
infinity of instances) in his mind, and designate an expression for all
similar individuals.

We know that this person must imagine the meanings of ‘all’ and
‘individual’ and ‘similar’ in order to make such a convention. Hence the
question returns to how these expressions are designated. How can they
be applied to an infinite number of cases? We have no choice but to
posit that the mind has the ability to conceive concepts which apply to
an unlimited number of cases. Hence it is not possible for such concepts
to be designated one at a time for an infinite number of instances, for
this is not feasible for any human.

A Response to a Doubt
---------------------

Nominalists, in order to deny the reality of universal concepts, have
raised the following doubt: every concept which occurs in a mind is a
particular and specific concept which differs from concepts of the same
kind which occur in other minds. Even if a person conceives the same
concept at another time, it will be another concept. So, how can it be
said that universal concepts occur in the mind with the attributes of
universality and unity?

This doubt originates from confusion between the respect of conception
and the respect of existence, in other words, confusion between the
principles of logic and the principles of philosophy. We have no doubt
that each concept, in so far as it exists, is particular, in
philosophical language, “existence is equivalent to particularity.” When
it is imagined again, it will have another existence, but its conceptual
universality and singularity are not due to its existence but owing to
its conceptual respect, that is, the same representative aspect in
relation to various people and instances.

In other words, when our minds look at a concept from the point of view
of its instrumental, mirroring capacity (and not independently) and
examine its capacity for correspondence in various instances, the
property of universality is abstracted from it. To the contrary, when
its existence is considered in the mind, it is a case of particularity.

A Survey of Other Views
-----------------------

Those who imagine that a universal concept is a particular vague idea,
and that general terms designate these same vague and pale forms [as
though the particularity had been bleached out of them], will not be
able to find the truth about universals. The best way to make clear
their error is to draw attention to concepts which either do not have
any real instances in the external world at all, such as ‘non-existent’
or ‘impossible,’ or which do not have material or sensible instances,
such as ْthe concepts of God, angel, and the spirit, or which are
conformable to both material and non-material instances, such as the
concepts of cause and effect. For with regard to these concepts it
cannot be said that these are particular pale forms. Also, concerning
concepts which are true of opposite things, such as the concept of
color, which applies both to black and to white, it cannot be said that
the color white has become so vague that it takes the absolute form of
color and so is also true of black, or that the color black has become
so weak and pale that it may also be truly applied to white.5 Platonists
also have such difficulties, for most universal concepts, such as the
concept of the non-existent and the impossible, do not have intelligible
archetypes, so they cannot hold that the perception of universals is the
observation of such intellectual and non-material truths. Therefore, the
correct position is that held by most of the Islamic philosophers and
the rationalists, that man possesses a special cognitive faculty called
the intellect, whose function is intellection of universal mental
concepts, whether they have sensible instances or not.

References
----------

1See Parviz Morewedge, *The* Metaphysica *of Avicenna (ibn Sīnā)*
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973), p. 321f.

2 In fact, while nominalism has attracted some positivists and their
students, the official position of such logical positivists as Rudolf
Carnap was that the entire debate about the existence of universals is
meaningless. This claim was subsequently shown to be based on an
inadequate theory of meaning. (Tr.)

3 The phenomenology of Edmund Husserl should be considered as being
derived from this theory.

4 ‘Convention’ is used here in much the same way that Kripke uses
‘initial baptism’ for the social agreement by which a word is applied to
a given kind of object. (Tr.)

5 The idea seems to be that particular vague ideas should group together
things that are similar within the limits of the vagueness, as the
concept of grey may be vague enough to allow for various shades. But
concepts which apply to opposites do not function in this way, for black
and white are not shades of color analogous to the shades of grey. Black
and white are opposites, and not similar within some vague limits. (Tr.)
