Lesson Fifteen: Types of Universal Concepts
===========================================

Types of Intelligibles
----------------------

Universal concepts which are employed in the intellectual sciences1 are
divided into three groups: (1) whatish concepts or first intelligibles
such as the concept of man and the concept of whiteness; (2)
philosophical concepts or secondary philosophical intelligibles, such as
the concept of cause and the concept of effect; and (3) logical concepts
or secondary logical intelligibles, such as conversion (*‘aks mustawī* )
and contraposition (*‘aks naqīḍ* ).

We should remember that there are other types of universal concepts
which are used in ethics and law, and later we shall refer to them.

This tripartite division which was originated by Islamic philosophers
has many uses with which we shall become familiar in future discussions.
Lack of precision in recognizing and distinguishing them from one
another causes confusion and many difficulties in philosophical
discussions. Most of the lapses of Western philosophers are due to
confusing these concepts, examples of which can be found in the words of
Hegel and Kant. Therefore it is necessary to provide some explanations
about them.

Universal concepts are either predicable of entified (*‘aynī* ) things,
in which case, in technical terms, it is said that they have external
characterization (*ittiṣāf khārijī* ), as the concept of man which is
predicated of Ḥasan, Ḥusayn, and so on, and it is said, “Ḥasan is a
man,” or, they are not predicable of entified things but only to
concepts and mental forms, in which case they are technically said to
have mental characterization (*ittiṣāf dhinī* ), such as the concepts
universal and particular (in logical terms), the first of which is an
attribute of ‘the concept man’ and the second of which is an attribute
of ‘the mental form of Ḥasan’. The [concepts of the] second group which
are applied only to mental things are called ‘logical concepts’ or
‘secondary logical intelligibles’.

Concepts which are predicated of external things are divided into two
groups: one group is of those concepts which the mind acquires
automatically from specific cases, that is to say, when one or several
individual perceptions are obtained by means of the external senses or
internal intuitions, immediately the intellect acquires a universal
concept of them, such as the universal concept of ‘whiteness’, which is
acquired after seeing one or several white things, or the universal
concept of ‘fear’, which is acquired after the appearance of specific
feelings once or several times. Such concepts are called whatish
concepts or first intelligibles.

There is another group of concepts whose abstraction requires mental
effort and comparison of things with one another, such as the concepts
of cause and effect, which is abstracted by attending to the relevant
relation after comparing two things such that the existence of one
depends on the other. For example, when we compare fire with the heat
which comes from it, we notice the dependence of the heat on the fire.
The intellect abstracts the concept of cause from the fire and the
concept of effect from the heat. If there were no attention and
comparison, these kinds of concepts would never be obtained. If fire
were seen thousands of times, and in the same way

if heat were felt thousands of times, but no comparison were made
between them, but the appearance of one from the other were not noticed,
the concepts of cause and effect would never be obtained. These kinds of
concepts are called ‘philosophical concepts’ or ‘secondary philosophical
intelligibles,’ and in technical terms it is said:

The occurrence (*‘arūḍ* ) and characterization (*ittiṣāf* ) of first
intelligibles are both external.2

The occurrence (*‘arūḍ* ) is mental but the characterization (*ittiṣāf*
) is external for secondary philosophical intelligibles.

The occurrence (*‘arūḍ* ) and characterization ( *ittiṣāf* ) of
secondary logical intelligibles are both mental.

The definitions and applications of the expressions ‘mental occurrence’
and ‘external occurrence’ and likewise the designations ‘philosophical
concepts’ and ‘secondary intelligibles’ are controversial. We consider
these only as technical terms and justify them as was mentioned.

Characteristics of Each of the Types of Intelligibles
-----------------------------------------------------

1. The characteristic of logical concepts is that they apply only to
mental concepts and forms, and consequently they are completely
recognized with a little attention. All the basic concepts of logic are
of this group.

2. The characteristic of whatish concepts is that they describe the
whatnesses of things and specify the limits of their existence and are
like empty frameworks for existents, and therefore they may be defined
as conceptual frameworks. These concepts are employed in various true
sciences.

3. The characteristic of philosophical concepts is that they are not
obtained without comparison and intellectual analysis. When they are
applied to existents they describe types of existents (not their whatish
limits), such as the concept of cause, which corresponds to fire but
never specifies its specific essence, but describes the kind of relation
it has with fire, which is the relation of having an effect, a relation
which also exists among other things. Sometimes this characteristic is
interpreted in such a way that philosophical concepts have no entified
referents, or their occurrence is mental, although this interpretation
is controversial and requires justification and explication. All pure
philosophical concepts are of this group.

4. Another characteristic of philosophical concepts is that there are no
particular concepts or ideas for them. For example, it is not the case
that in our minds there is a particular form of causality and a
universal concept, and likewise for the concept of effect, and other
philosophical concepts. On the other hand, every universal concept for
which there is a sensory, imaginary, or prehensive (*wahmī* ) idea, such
that the difference between them is only in universality and
particularity, then it will be a whatish concept, not a philosophical
concept. It is to be noted that the opposite of this characteristic does
not generally hold of whatish concepts, that is, it is not the case that
for every whatish concept there is a sensory, imaginary or prehensive
form. For example, the concept ‘soul’ is a species concept and a whatish
concept, there is no particular mental form of it, and its instance can
only be intuited by presentational knowledge.

Respectival (I‘tibārī) Concepts
-------------------------------

The term*i‘tibārī (respectival)* , which frequently encountered in
philosophical discussions, is employed with various meanings and is
really equivocal. One must take care to distinguish among its meanings
so as not to confuse them or make mistakes.

In one sense, all secondary intelligibles, whether logical or
philosophical, are called*i‘tibārī* , and even the concept of existence
is counted as*i‘tibārī* . This term is used extensively by Shaykh
al-Ishrāq, and in various books of his he uses ‘intellectual*i‘tibārī’*
with this meaning.

Another sense of*i‘tibārī* is specified for legal and ethical concepts,
which in the language of recent scholars are called ‘value concepts’. In
a third sense, only concepts which have no external or mental instances
and which are constructed with the help of the faculty of imagination
are called*i‘tibārī* , such as the concept of a ghoul. These concepts
are also called ‘fantastic’.*I‘tibārī* also has another sense to be
contrasted with fundamentality (*aṣālat* ) which is employed in
discussions of the fundamentality of existence (*aṣālat wujūd* ) or
fundamentality of whatness (*aṣālat māhuwiyāt* ), and which will be
mentioned in its proper place.

Here it is appropriate to explain*i‘tibārī* in the sense of value,
although detailed discussion of the subject must be sought in the
philosophy of ethics or the philosophy of law. We shall provide here
only a brief explanation as is appropriate.

Ethical and Legal Concepts
--------------------------

Every ethical or legal topic which we consider consists of concepts such
as*ought* and*ought not* ,*is required* and*is prohibited* , and the
like, which may be the predicates of propositions. Likewise other
concepts, such as justice and injustice, trustworthiness and treachery
can be the subjects of propositions.

When we consider these concepts we see that they are not whatish
concepts, for they have no entified (*‘aynī* ) instances, hence they are
called*i‘tibārī* . For example, the concepts of*thief* or*usurper*
happen to be attributes of people, but not because they pertain to the
quiddity of a person, but because the person has taken someone’s
property. When we consider the concept of property, we see that even if
it is applied to gold and silver, it is not because they are metals of a
specific kind, but because they are desired by people and they can be a
means for meeting their needs. From another perspective, the acquisition
of property by a person is the sign of another concept called
‘possession’ which also has no external instance, that is, to credit
(*i‘tibār* ) someone with the title ‘possessor’ and to credit the gold
with the title ‘possession’ does not change the essence of the person
nor the essence of the gold. In conclusion, expressions of this kind
have special features which must be discussed from several different
perspectives.

One of these perspectives is linguistic and literary, that is, for what
meaning was the term originally coined, and how has the meaning changed
to have acquired its present form? Is the application of this meaning
literal or figurative? Likewise one may discuss prescriptive and
descriptive terms, and what the purport of prescription is, and whether
ethical and legal terms

refer to prescriptions or descriptions. Discussions of this kind are
related to branches of linguistics and literature, and scholars of the
science of the principles of Islamic jurisprudence (*uṣūl al-fiqh* )
also have made a great many researches and investigations into these
matters.

Another aspect of discussions about these concepts is related to the
ways in which these concepts are perceived, and the mechanism of
transference of the mind from one concept to another, which must be
examined in the psychology of mind.

Finally, another aspect of discussions about these concepts is related
to their relations with objective realities, and whether these concepts
have been invented by the mind and have no relation to external
realities. For example, are ‘ought’ and ‘ought not’ and other value
concepts completely independent of other kinds of concepts which are
constructed by means of a special mental power, or are they are merely
descriptive of individual or social desires and inclinations, or are
these concepts related to objective realities or somehow abstracted from
them? Are ethical and legal propositions descriptive? Do they have truth
values? Can they be correct or in error? Are they prescriptive so that
correctness and incorrectness are meaningless for them. In the case that
truth values are imagined of them, what would be the criteria for truth
and falsehood? By what standards may their truth and error be
recognized? This part of the discussion is related to epistemology, and
this is the area in which it must be explained.

Here we shall provide a brief explanation of the simple concepts of
ethics and law, and in the final portion of the discussion of
epistemology we shall deal with the evaluation of value propositions,
and at the same time we shall indicate the difference between ethical
and legal propositions.

Ought and Ought Not
-------------------

The words ‘ought’ and ‘ought not’ which are used for cases of commands
and prohibitions, in some languages are expressed by a single particle
(as in Arabic, in which the letter*lām* indicates the command form and
the word*lā* indicates prohibition). In every language about which we
have information, we may replace the command and prohibition forms, such
as ‘You ought to say it’ replaces ‘Say it’, and ‘You ought not to say
it’ replaces ‘Do not say it’. However, sometimes they are used in the
form of independent concepts with the meaning of ‘obligation’ and
‘prohibition’, as when we employ the descriptive sentence, ‘It is
obligatory for you to say it’ instead of the prescriptive expression,
‘Say it.’

These rhetorical devices exist in many languages, but they cannot be
considered as the key to solving philosophical problems. One cannot
define legal expressions as those which are prescriptive, for, as has
been mentioned, in place of prescriptive statements one may use
descriptive sentences.

The expression ‘ought’, whether expressed as a particle or as an
independent noun, and also equivalent expressions such as ‘obligatory’
and ‘necessary’, which are sometimes used in propositions which by no
means express values, such as when a teacher in a laboratory says to a
student, “You ought to mix sodium with chlorine to make salt,” or when a
physician tells a patient, “You ought to take this medicine until you
become well.”

Undoubtedly, the purport of such expressions is nothing but the
exhibition of the relation between the production of a chemical
substance and the action and reaction, or cause and effect, during the
combining of two elements, or between taking some medicine and
recovering. In philosophical terms the ‘ought’ in these cases expresses
the deductive necessity between the reason and its result or cause and
effect, that is to say, if a specific event (cause) does not occur, its
result (effect) will not occur.

When these expressions are used as legal or ethical terms, they gain an
evaluative aspect. Here, various views are presented about them, one of
which is that the purport of such terms is to express individual or
social desires and their objects regarding an action. If it is expressed
in the form of a descriptive sentence, it will have no other meaning
than desirability.

The correct view is this, that such terms do not directly indicate the
object of desire but rather the value and the object of desire of an
action is understood by a conditional indication. The main purport is
the very expression of the relation of causality which exists between
the action and the goal of ethics or law. For example, when a lawyer
says, ‘The criminal must be punished,’ even though the aim of this
action is not mentioned, in reality he wants to present the relation
between punishment and the goal or one of the goals of the law, that is,
security for the society.

Likewise, when a moral trainer says, “A loan ought to be repaid to the
creditor,” he really wants to describe the relation between this action
and the goal of morality, such as the ultimate perfection of man, or
eternal felicity. For the same reason, if we ask a lawyer, “Why ought
criminals to be punished?”, the answer would be, “Because if criminals
were not punished, chaos and anarchy would be imposed on the society.”
Also, if we asked a moral trainer, “Why ought loans to be repaid to
their creditors?”, an answer will be given appropriate to the standards
accepted in ethical philosophy.

Therefore, the kind of concept of ought and moral and legal obligation
is also that of the secondary philosophical intelligibles. If it is
possible for other meanings to be included, or if they may be used in
another way, it will be in a kind of figure of speech.

Legal and Ethical Subjects
--------------------------

As was mentioned, another group of concepts are used in legal and
ethical propositions which include the subjects of these propositions,
such as justice and injustice, ownership and marriage. There are also
discussions from the point of view of lexicography and etymology, about
these concepts and the changes in literal and figurative meanings, which
are related to literature and linguistics. In brief, it can be said that
most of them are borrowed from whatish and philosophical concepts and
used with conventional meanings in accord with the practical needs of
man in individual and social contexts. For example, for the sake of
controlling desires and putting limits on behavior, in general, limits
are assigned the violation of which is called injustice and despotism.
The opposite is called justice and fairness, as with respect to the
necessity of limiting man’s domination over property acquired in a
special way; contractual domination over some pieces of property are
considered as ownership.

‏What is noteworthy from the epistemological point of view, is whether
these concepts are only based on the desires of groups or individuals
and have no relation to objective truth independent of the inclinations
of social groups and individuals. Consequently, either these concepts
are not susceptible to intellectual analysis, or one can search for a
basis for them among objective truths and external realities, and they
can be analyzed and explained on the basis of cause and effect.

In this context the correct view is this. These concepts, although they
are conventional and*respectival* in a specific sense, they are not
generally without relation to external reality and outside the realm of
the law of cause and effect. Their validity is based on the recognized
needs of man to attain felicity and his own perfection. This
recognition, as in other cases, sometimes is correct and corresponds
with reality, and sometimes is in error and opposed to reality.
Possibly, one may put forth legislation for his own personal interests,
and may even impose it on a society by force. However, even then, it
cannot be considered as being done capriciously and without standard. It
is for the same reason these things can be examined critically, and some
conventions may be confirmed and some may be rejected. For each of them
reasons and arguments can be given. If this legislation were merely an
expression of personal inclinations, like a matter of individual taste
in the choice of the color of one’s clothing, it would never have been
worthy of praise or blame. Approval and disapproval would otherwise have
no meaning but agreement or disagreement in taste.

Consequently, the worth of these concepts, although dependent on
convention and contract, is considered as a symbol of objectively true
relations between man’s actions and their results, relations which must
be discovered in the behavior of man. In truth, these contractual and
conventional concepts are grounded on existential relations and true
welfare.

References
----------

1 The intellectual sciences (*‘ulūm ‘aqlī* ), derived from reason, are
contrasted with the transmitted sciences (*‘ulūm naqlī* ), the revealed
or literally,*narrated* sciences. (Tr.)

2 Mohaghegh and Izutsu translate*‘arūḍ* as ‘occurrence’ and*ittiṣāf* as
‘qualification’, in*The Metaphysics of Sabzavari* (Tehran: Iran
University Press, 1983), p. [^67]: Both concepts pertain to the relation
between the concept and the object to which it applies, but*‘arūḍ*
refers to the application of the predicate concept to the object, a
relational property of the predicate concept, while*ittiṣāf* refers to
the qualification of the object by the concept. Any translation of these
terms is bound to be artificial, but as a memory aid the*ittiṣāf* will
be called the characterization and the*‘arūḍ* will be called the
occurrence, indicating that the former pertains to the character of the
object while the latter to the manner in which the predicate concept
occurs to one who applies it to the object, in keeping with the author’s
explanation.
