Lesson Sixteen: Empiricism
==========================

Positivism
----------

In the previous lessons we briefly mentioned the kinds of ideas while at
the same time introducing opposing opinions held concerning them. Here
we explain more fully some of the famous noteworthy positions to be
found in Western sources.

We know that most of the thinkers of the West basically deny the
existence of universal ideas, and so naturally they do not accept the
power by means of which these ideas are perceived, called the
‘intellect’. In the present age, positivisits have not only developed
the same taste, but also have gone beyond it. They hold that true
perception is limited to sense perception, to perception which is
obtained as a result of contact with the sense organs by material
phenomena, and which, following the cessation of the relation with the
external world, remain in some weaker form.

They believe that man constructs verbal symbols for objects of
perception which are similar to one another, and that when he speaks or
thinks, he brings to mind all cases of the same kind, or he repeats the
same verbal symbols which were posited for those cases. And in reality,
thinking is a kind of mental speaking. Hence, that which philosophers
call universal ideas or intelligible concepts, in their view, are
nothing but those same mental words. Only when these words directly
represent objects of sense perception, and their instances can be
perceived by the sense organs, and can be shown to others, are they
considered as meaningful and verifiable, otherwise they are considered
words without meaning. In truth, they only accept a portion of the
whatish concepts, and these only as mental words whose meanings are
their particular sensory instances. However, they do not accept the
secondary intelligibles, especially metaphysical concepts, not even as
meaningful mental words. On this basis, they consider metaphysical
topics as unscientific and absolutely meaningless.

They limit experience to sensual experience, and do not pay attention to
inner experiences which are acquired through knowledge by presence. At
least they are considered unscientific because in their view, the word
“scientific” is only applicable to cases which can be proven for others
by the senses.

In this way, positivists consider discussion of instincts and motives
and other psychological matters which are perceived by inner experience
as unscientific. Only external behavior is held as the subject of
psychology fit for scientific discussion. Consequently, they void
psychology of its content.

According to this philosophy, which can be called “empiricism” or
“extreme empiricism”, there is no place for scientific discussion and
research which could result in certainty about metaphysical topics. They
consider all philosophical topics to be nonsense and worthless. Perhaps
philosophy has never faced such a hard headed enemy. Therefore, we had
better discuss it more fully.

A Critique of Positivism
------------------------

Positivism, which is truly one of the most base tendencies of human
thought in all history, has numerous failures, the most important of
which will be indicated below:

1. With this tendency, the most firm foundations of knowledge, that is,
knowledge by presence and propositions evident by reason (*‘aql* ), are
lost. With this loss no intellectual explanation can be presented for
the correctness of knowledge, and its correspondence to reality.
Positivists have tried to define true knowledge in another way. Truth is
held to be knowledge which is accepted by others, which can be proved by
sensory experience. Obviously, the change in terminology does not solve
the problem of the value of knowledge. The agreement and acceptance of
those who do not attend to this difficulty cannot create any value and
worth.

2. Positivists rely on sense perception, which is the most unstable and
dubious basis for knowledge. Sensory knowledge, more than any other type
of knowledge, is exposed to error. Noting the point that sensory
knowledge, in reality, occurs inside of man, they have closed off the
way to logical proof of the external world. There is no way for them to
answer the doubts of the Idealists.

3. The difficulties which we mentioned with regard to the nominalists
also apply to the positivists.

4. To claim that metaphysical concepts are meaningless is absurd and
obviously invalid, for if words which refer to these concepts were
generally devoid of meaning there would be no difference between them
and nonsense, and the denial and affirmation of them would be
equivalent. For example, that fire is the cause of heat could never be
equivalent to its opposite. Even if one denies causality, he denies a
proposition whose concepts he understands.

5. According to the positivists, there is no way for scientific laws to
be regarded as universal, definite and necessary, for these
characteristics do not admit of confirmation by the senses. Cases are
acceptable to them if and only if they are cases in which sensory
experience is obtained (without paying heed to difficulties which arise
due to the fallibility of sense perception which applies to all cases of
it). That whereof sensory experience cannot be obtained, one must be
silent, and one must absolutely withhold one’s affirmation and denial.

6. The most important dead end down which positivists have been led is
the subject of mathematics, which is explained and solved by
intellectual concepts, that is, the same concepts which are meaningless
in their view, as though they had been disgraced, while no sage would
dare to consider the propositions of mathematics meaningless or
unscientific. Hence, a group of new positivists had no choice but to
accept a kind of mental knowledge for logical concepts, and have sought
to join mathematical concepts to them. This is an example of confusing
logical concepts with other concepts. It is sufficient to show the
invalidity of their view to point out that mathematical concepts have
instances in the external world, i.e., in technical terms, their
characterization (*ittiṣāf* ) is in the external world. The
characteristic of logical concepts is that they do not correspond to any
but mental concepts.

The Priority of Sensation or Intellect
--------------------------------------

Among Western scholars there are other forms of empiricism than
positivism, which are more moderate and less fraught with difficulties.
Most of them accept intellectual perception, but they still believe in
some kind of priority for sense perception. Opposing them, there are
other groups which believe in the priority of intellectual perception.

The subjects which are presented under the heading of ‘the priority of
sensation or intellect’ are divided into two groups: one group is
related to the evaluation of sensory and intellectual knowledge, and the
preference of one over the other, and must be discussed in the lesson on
the value of knowledge; the other group relates to their relative
dependence or independence from one another. Are sensation and intellect
separate and independent, or is intellectual perception integrally
related to sensation?  The second group of subjects may also be divided
into two parts: one is related to ideas and the other to affirmations.
The first subject which is discussed here is the priority of sensation
or intellect with respect to ideas. In our view, after accepting the
specific form of concepts, called universals, and accepting a special
conceptual power called the intellect (‘*aql* ), this question presents
itself: is the function of the intellect merely to change the form and
to abstract and generalize sense perceptions, or does the intellect have
independent perception, such that sensory perception at most can serve
in some cases as a condition for intellectual perception?

Those who believe in the priority of sensation hold that the intellect
has no function other than abstraction, generalization, and changing the
form of sensory perceptions, in other words, there is no intellectual
perception which does not follow upon sensory perception. Opposed to
them, the Western rationalists believe that the intellect has
independent perceptions which necessarily result from its existence, in
other words, it is innate. The intellect does not require any previous
perceptions in order to have these intellectual perceptions. However,
the correct view is that the intellectual perception of ideas which are
universal concepts are always preceded by other particular individual
perceptions. Sometimes that particular perception is an idea which
results from sensation. Sometimes presentational knowledge, which is
basically not a kind of idea. In any case, the function of the intellect
is not to change the form of sensory perceptions.

The second discussion is about the priority of sensation or intellect
with respect to affirmations (*taṣdīqāt* ). This must be considered as
an independent subject which is not a function of the previous subject,
for this subject turns on the question of whether after obtaining simple
intellectual concepts, they follow upon sensation or are independent of
sensation. Is the judgment of unity between subject and predicate in a
predicative proposition, or the judgment of accord or opposition of the
antecedent and consequent in a conditional proposition, always dependent
upon sensory experience? Or can the intellect, after obtaining the
necessary imaginative concepts, judge independently, without need of
help from sensory experience? Therefore it is not true that one who
believes in the priority of sensation with respect to ideas necessarily
has the same view with respect to affirmations. Rather, it is possible
for one to believe in the priority of

sensation in the one case, but to believe in the priority of the
intellect in the other.

Those who believe in the priority of sensation with respect to
affirmations, who are usually called ‘empiricists’, believe that the
intellect cannot make judgments without the help of sensory experience.
Those who believe in the priority of the intellect with respect to
affirmations, believe that the intellect has certain assertive
perceptions perceived by the intellect independently and without need of
sensory experience.

Western rationalists usually consider these perceptions to be inherent
in the intellect. They believe that the intellect was created in such a
way that it understands these propositions automatically. However, the
correct view is that independent intellectual affirmations either
originate from presentational knowledge or are obtained through the
analysis of concepts of ideas and by comparing their relations with one
another. It is only by extending the meaning of “experience” to include
knowledge by presence, internal intuitions (*shuhūd-e bāṭinī* ) and
psychological experiences that one can consider all intellectual
affirmations to require experience. In any case, intellectual
affirmations do not always require sensory experience or the employment
of the sense organs.

The result is that neither the opinions of the empiricists nor the
rationalists, whether with respect to ideas or affirmations, are
exclusively correct. The correct view regarding each case is a certain
sense of the priority of the intellect. In the case of ideas, it means
that intellectual concepts are not the same as the changed forms of
sensory ideas. In the case of affirmations, it means that the intellect
does not require sensory experience to make its own specific judgments.


