Lesson Seventeen: The Role of the Intellect and Sensation in Ideas
==================================================================

The Fundamentality of the Intellect or Sensation for Ideas
----------------------------------------------------------

As we have mentioned, Western philosophers may be divided into two
groups with regard to the explanation of the appearance of ideas. One
group believes that the intellect perceives a series of concepts without
need for sensation, like Descartes believed with regard to the concepts
of God and soul, from among the immaterial things, and length and shape
from among the material things. He call these kinds of qualities of
materials which are not perceived directly from sensation ‘primary
qualities’. To the contrary, he called qualities such as color, smell
and taste, which are perceived by sensation ‘secondary qualities’. In
this way he believed in a kind of priority of the intellect. He
considered the perception of secondary qualities which are obtained by
means of the senses to be fallible and unreliable. In this way, he
proved another kind of priority of the intellect, which is related to
the discussion of the value of knowledge.

Likewise, Kant related a series of concepts called ‘*a priori* ’ to the
mind. From among them he related the concepts of space and time to the
levels of sensation, and he related the twelve categories to the level
of understanding. He considered the understanding of these concepts to
be essential innate qualities of the mind.

The other group believes that the mind of man is created like a blank
slate, with no engraving on it, and that contact with external existents
by means of the sense organs causes the appearance of images and
engravings on it. In this way various perceptions occur. Epicures is
reported to have said, “There is nothing in the intellect unless it has
previously been in sensation.” The very same phrase was repeated by John
Locke, the English empiricist.

However, their statements about the appearance of intellectual concepts
differ. The apparent meaning of some of them is that sensory perceptions
are changed in shape and transformed to intellectual perceptions by the
intellect, just as a carpenter cuts pieces of wood to make them into
various shapes and build a table, chair, door or window. So,
intellectual concepts are the very sensory forms whose shapes have been
changed. The statements of some others may be interpreted to mean that
sensory perceptions provide the grounds and capital for intellectual
perceptions, although this is not to say that sensory forms are really
changed to intellectual concepts.

### The Table of the Categories

###


Judgment

Category

Example

Quantity

Universal

Unity

All men are mortal.

Particular

Plurality

Some men are philosophers.

Singular

Totality

Socrates was a sage.

Quality

Affirmative

Reality

Man is mortal.

Negative

Negation

The spirit is not mortal.

Infinite

Limitation

The spirit is non-material.

Relation

Categorical

Of inherence and subsistence

God is just.

Hypothetical

Of causality and dependence

If God is just to people, He will give rewards and punishments.

Disjunctive

Of community

Byzantium was the greatest nation of ancient Europe.

Modality

Problematical

Possibility—Impossibility

Some planets may have living things on them.

Assertorical

Existence—Nonexistence

The earth is round.

Apodeictical

Necessity—Contingency

God is necessarily just.

We mentioned previously that extreme empiricists, such as the
positivists, basically deny the existence of intellectual concepts, and
they interpret them as forms of mental words.

Some empiricists, such as the French Condiac, limit experiences which
cause the appearance of mental concepts to sense experience. Others,
such as the English John Locke, extend them to inner experiences. Among
them Berkeley has an exceptional position, and he limits experiences to
inner experience, for he denies the existence of material things. On
this basis, sensory experience is not possible.

We must add that most empiricists, especially those who accept internal
experiences, do not limit the realm of knowledge to the material, and
they prove metaphysical matters by the intellect. Although, according to
the doctrine of the fundamentality of sensation, and the complete
dependence of mental conceptions on sensory conception, such belief is
not very logical. The denial of metaphysics is also without reason.
Because of this, Hume, who had noticed this point, considered cases
which cannot be directly experienced as dubious.

It is clear that extensive detailed criticism of both tendencies would
require a separate and weighty text, so that the statements of each
thinker could be reported and examined, but this work is not appropriate
in this book. Hence, it suffices to briefly criticize their basic ideas
without regard to the particular features of each position.

Critique
--------

1. It is not acceptable to assume that from the beginning of its
existence the intellect has specific concepts, and that it is mixed with
them, or that after a while it understands them automatically and
without the effect of any other factor. The conscience of every aware
human being denies this, whether the assumed concepts are related to the
material or related to the abstract, or whether it accords with both
areas.

2. Supposing that a series of concepts are necessary for the nature and
constitution of the intellect, it cannot be proved that they represent
reality, and at most it can be said that a certain subject is accepted
by the nature of the intellect, and it is probable that if the intellect
had been created in another form, it would have perceived objects in
other ways.

To compensate for this deficiency, Descartes grasped hold of divine
wisdom. He said that if God had placed these concepts in the nature of
the intellect, contrary to reality and truth, he necessarily would have
been a deceiver. However, it is clear that the attributes of Almighty
God, and His lack of deception must be proved by intellectual reasons.
But if intellectual perceptions are not correct the basis of this
argument collapses. The guarantee of its correctness through this
argument is circular.

3. Suppose that intellectual concepts came from a change in sensory
forms. This would require that a form which changes and is transformed
into an intellectual concept would not retain its original form,
however, with the appearance of universal concepts in the mind;
concomitantly and simultaneously we see that sensory and imaginary forms
retain their own states. Moreover, it is only material existents which
are apt to change, while perceptual forms are abstract, as will be
proved in its proper place.

4. Most of the intellectual concepts, such as the concept of cause and
effect, do not have sensory or imaginary forms at all, so they cannot be
said to come from changes in sensory forms.

5. Suppose that sensory forms provide the stock and ground for
intellectual concepts, and that they do not really change into them.
Although this is less problematic and closer to the truth [than the
previous supposition], and is acceptable with respect to some whatish
concepts, nevertheless, it is not proper to limit the grounds of
intellectual concepts to sensory perceptions. For example, it cannot be
said that philosophical concepts are obtained from abstraction and
generalization of sensory perceptions, because, as has already been
pointed out, there does not exist any sensory or imaginal perceptions
equivalent to them.

Inquiry into a Problem
----------------------

In order to become clear about the role of sense and intellect in ideas,
we shall take a glance at the types of concepts and the way in which
they appear.

When we open our eyes to the beautiful scenery of a garden, the
different colors of the flowers and leaves attract our attention.
Various perceptual forms are pictured in our minds. When we close our
eyes, we no longer see the beautiful dazzling colors, and this is the
same sensory perception which vanishes when the relation to the external
world is cut. However, we can imagine the same flowers in our mind, and
remember that beautiful scenery. This is imaginary perception.

In addition to sensory and imaginary forms which represent specific
things, we also perceive a series of universal concepts which do not
describe specific things, such as the concepts of green, red, yellow,
purple, indigo, etc.

Likewise the concept of color itself, which can be applied to various
different colors, cannot be considered as the faded and vague form of
one of them.

Obviously, if we had not seen the color of the leaves of trees and
things of the same color, we could envisage neither imaginary forms nor
intellectual concepts of them. So, one who is blind cannot imagine
colors and one who has no sense of smell has no concept of the various
fragrances. Because of this, it is said, “He who lacks a sense lacks a
knowledge,” that is, someone who lacks a sense is deprived of a kind of
concept and awareness.

So undoubtedly, the appearance of this kind of universal concept depends
on the occurrence of particular perceptions. But this does not mean that
sensory perceptions are transformed into intellectual perceptions like
wood into a chair, or material to energy, or like a specific kind of
energy is transformed into another kind, for, as we have said, this kind
of transformation requires that the initial state of the thing
transformed does not remain while particular perceptions can remain
after the appearance of the intellectual concepts. Moreover,
transformations are basically material, while perceptions are absolutely
abstract, as will be proved in its proper place, God willing.

Therefore, the role of the senses in the creation of this kind of
universal concept is only that of a basis or necessary condition.

There is another group of concepts which has no relation to sensible
things, but rather describe psychological states, states which are
perceived with presentational knowledge and inner experience, such as
the concepts of fear, affection, enmity, pleasure and pain.

Undoubtedly, if we did not have inner feelings, we could never perceive
their universal concepts. So, a child cannot understand some adult forms
of pleasure until after it reaches maturity, and prior to that it has no
specific concept of them. Therefore, this group of concepts is also in
need of prior individual perceptions, but not perceptions which are
acquired with the help of sensory organs. Therefore, sensory experience
has no role in the acquisition of this group of whatish concepts.

On the other hand, we have a series of concepts which have no instances
in the external world, and only have instances in the mind, such as the
concept “universal”, which corresponds to other mental concepts, and
there is nothing outside of the mind which can be called “universal”
with the meaning of a concept applicable to numerous individuals.

It is clear that this kind of concept is not obtained by abstraction and
generalization from sensory perceptions, although a kind of mental
experience is needed, that is, until a series of intellectual concepts
is acquired by the mind, we cannot discuss whether they are applicable
to numerous individuals or not. This is the very mental experience which
we have indicated. That is, the mind of man has the power to be aware of
concepts within itself, and to recognize them just as he does the
objects of

the external world, and has the power to abstract specific concepts from
them. The instances of these abstracted concepts are the same as the
primary concepts. This is why these kinds of concepts which are used in
logic are called “secondary logical intelligibles”.

Finally, we arrive at another chain of intellectual concepts, which are
used in philosophy, from which primary self-evident propositions are
formed, and hence, these concepts have great importance. Various
opinions have been presented with regard to the formation of these
concepts, discussion of which would take too much time, but in the
discussion of ontology we shall speak of the conditions for the
formation of each of these relevant concepts. Here we shall only present
as much as is necessary. It is to be noted that these concepts, since
they are applied to things in the external world, or in technical terms,
their characterization (*ittiṣāf* ) is external, they are like whatish
concepts, but since they do not describe specific whatnesses, and in
technical terms, their occurrence (*‘arūḍ* ) is mental, they are like
logical concepts. For this reason they are sometimes confused with these
two other groups of concepts. This very mistake is made by the great
thinkers, especially Western philosophers.

We have already learned that we recognize our own selves and our
psychological states or mental forms and actions of the soul, such as
our decisions, with presentational knowledge. We now add that man is
able to compare each aspect of the self with the self itself, without
paying any attention to the whatnesses of either of them, but by paying
attention to their existential relations, and finding that the self can
exist without any of them. However, none of them could occur without the
self. By attending to this relation it may be judged that each aspect of
the soul requires the self, but the self does not require them, but is
self-sufficient, needless and independent. On this basis, the mind
abstracts the concept of cause from the self and the concept of effect
from each of these mentioned aspects.

Clearly, sensory perceptions play no role in the formation of the
concepts of need, independence, self-sufficiency, cause and effect. The
abstraction of these concepts does not originate with the sensory
perception of their instances. Even knowledge by presence and inner
experience relating to each of them are not sufficient for the
abstraction of the concepts related to them. Rather, comparison between
them is necessary, and the specific relation between them must be taken
into consideration, and for this reason it is said that these concepts
do not have objective equivalents, although their characterization
(*ittiṣāf* ) is external.

In conclusion, every intellectual concept requires a prior individual
perception, a perception which provides the grounds for the abstraction
of a concept of a species. This perception, in some cases, is a sensory
perception, and in other cases is knowledge by presence and inner
intuitions. Therefore, the role of sensation in the formation of
universal concepts is only that of providing the grounds for one group
of whatish concepts. It is the intellect that plays the basic role in
the formation of all universal concepts.
