Lesson Eighteen: The Role of the Intellect and Sensation in Affirmations
========================================================================

Points about Affirmations
-------------------------

Before speaking about the role of the senses and the intellect in
affirmations (*taṣdīqāt* ) it is necessary to make some points about
affirmations and propositions, points which are related to logic. We
shall discuss them here briefly and to the extent necessary.

1. As was indicated in the definition of*idea* , each idea has no more
than a *capability* to show that which is beyond itself, that is,
imagining a specific matter or a universal concept does not mean that
what corresponds to it actually takes place. This capability for real
representation becomes actual when it takes the shape of a proposition
and affirmation, which consists of judgment and represents belief in its
purport. For example, the concept of ‘man’ by itself does not denote the
occurrence of man in the external world. But when it is combined with
the concept of ‘existent’ and the relation of unity, it gives it the
form of an affirmation, whose actuality is to be discovered in the
external world, that is, one can consider this proposition, “Man
exists,” as a proposition which describes the external world.

At least two concepts are obtained even from simple presentational
knowledge, which is never compound or multiple (such as the feeling of
fear), when reflected in the mind: one is the whatish concept of fear,
and the other the concept of being, and by their composition they are
reflected in the form of “There is fear,” and sometimes by adding other
concepts, it takes the form of “I am afraid,” or “I have fear.”

It must be noted that sometimes an idea which seems to be simple and
without judgment really breaks down to an affirmation, for example, the
purport of this proposition, “Man searches for truth,” is this, that
man, who is an existent in the external world, has the property of
searching for truth. So, in reality, the subject of the proposition,
‘man’, which apparently is a simple idea, breaks down into this
proposition, “Man is an existent in the external world,” and so the
predicate, ‘searches for truth’ applies to this. This sort of
proposition which breaks down into implied components is called by
logicians*‘aqd* *al-waḍ‘* .

2. The subject of a proposition sometimes is a particular idea which
refers to a specific existent, such as “Everest is the highest mountain
in the world,” and sometimes a universal concept and applies to an
infinite number of instances. In the second case, it is sometimes a
whatish concept, such as “Metals expand when heated,” and it is
sometimes a philosophical concept, such as “An effect without a cause
does not come into existence,” and it is sometimes a logical concept,
such as “The contradictory of a universal negative is a particular
affirmative.”

3. In classical logic, propositions are divided into two forms,
predications and conditionals. Predications are composed of subjects and
predicates and the relation between them is ‘unity’, such as, “Man is a
thinker.” Conditionals are composed of antecedent and consequent, and
the relation between them is either necessary, such as, “If a plane
figure is triangular, then the sum of its angles is equal to that of two
right angles,” or it is one of

exclusive disjunction (*ta‘ānud* ), such as “A number is either even or
odd,” that is, if a number is even, it will not be odd, and if it is
odd, it will not be even. However, other forms also may be imagined for
propositions, and all of them may be returned to predications. [All
propositions are composed of predicational propositions.]

4. The relation between subject and predicate sometimes has the
attribute of ‘contingency’ (*imkān* ), such as in this proposition: “One
human individual is bigger than another individual.” Sometimes the
attribute is necessary, such as in this proposition: “Each whole is
larger than its parts.” Logicians call these attributes ‘the matter of
the proposition’ ( *māddah qaḍiyyah* ). When these attributes are
explicitly mentioned in a proposition, they are called the ‘mode of the
proposition’ ( *jahat qaḍiyyah* ).

The matter of a proposition is usually mentioned implicitly, and is not
an element of it, although the predicate may be assimilated to the
subject, and the matter or mode of the proposition take the form of a
predicate and an element of the proposition. For example, in the above
proposition one may say, “One human individual’s exceeding the size of
another is possible,” and “A whole's exceeding the size of its parts is
necessary.” This kind of proposition is really a representative of the
quality of the relationship of the subject and predicate of another
proposition.

5. The unity considered to be between a subject and predicate sometimes
is a conceptual unity, such as, “Man is human,” and sometimes it is a
unity of instance, such as, “Man searches for truth,” in which the
subject and predicate do not have a conceptual unity, but they are
united by instance. The first kind is called “primary predication”
(*ḥaml awwalī* ) and the second kind is called “common predication”
(*ḥaml shāyi‘* ).

6. In common predication the predicate of the proposition is ‘existent’
or the equivalent, and the proposition is termed a ‘simple question’
(*halliyyah basīṭah* ) whereas in other cases it is termed a ‘compound
question’ ( *halliyyah murakkabah* ). 1 The first is like, “Man is an
existent,” and the second like, “Man searches for truth.”

The acceptance of simple questions depends on this, the concept of
“existence” must be accepted in terms of a independent concept which may
be predicated (predicative concept). But most of the Western
philosophers accept the concept of existence only as a nominal concept
which is not independent. Discussion of this may be found in the part on
ontology.

7. In compound questions, if the concept of the predicate is obtained
through analysis of the concept of the subject, the proposition is
called ‘analytic’, and otherwise it is called ‘synthetic’. For example,
the proposition, “All children have fathers,” is analytic, for when the
concept of child is analyzed, the concept of father is obtained from it.
But the proposition, “Metals expand when heated,” is synthetic, for from
the analysis of the meaning of ‘metal’ we cannot obtain the concept of
expansion. In the same way, the proposition, “All men have fathers,” is
synthetic, for from the analysis of the meaning of ‘man’ the concept of
‘having a father’ is not obtained. Also, “Every effect requires a
cause,” is analytic, and “All existents require a cause,” is synthetic.

It must be noted that Kant has divided the synthetic propositions into
two kinds,*a priori* and*a posteriori* , and considers mathematical
propositions to belong to the former. However, some positivists attempt
to reduce them to analytic propositions.

8. In classical logic, propositions are divided into self-evident and
theoretical (non-self-evident). Propositions are self-evident whose
affirmation does not require thinking and reasoning, while theoretical
propositions are those whose affirmation requires thinking and
reasoning. Self-evident propositions are divided in to two subdivisions:
primary self-evident propositions, whose affirmation does not require
anything except the exact imagining of the subject and predicate, such
as the proposition of the impossibility of the unity of contradictories,
which is called ‘the mother of all propositions’. The other is secondary
self-evident propositions whose affirmation depends on the use of
sensory organs, or things other than the imagination of the subject and
predicate. They are divided into six groups: those pertaining to the
senses, to conscience, to speculation, to innate constitution, to
experience, and to testimony.

The truth of the matter is that not all of these propositions are
self-evident. Only two groups may really be considered to be
self-evident. First, the primary self-evident propositions, and second,
those pertaining to conscience, which are the mental reflections of
knowledge by presence. Those pertaining to speculation and innate
constitution are merely close to being self-evident propositions. The
other propositions must be considered theoretical and in need of
argument, and they will be discussed in the [following] lesson on “The
Value of Knowledge”.

Inquiry about a Problem
-----------------------

Although the problem of the priority of sense or intellect is not
usually discussed independently, we can discover the views of the
rationalists and empiricists by considering the origins of these
schools. For example, the positivists, who limit real knowledge to
sensory knowledge, are naturally, if stubbornly, on the side of the
priority of the senses with regard to this problem, as well. They
consider every non-empirical proposition to be either meaningless or of
no scientific value. Some empiricists place more moderate emphasis on
the role of sensory experience, and they more or less accept a role for
the intellect. However, the rationalists emphasize the importance of the
role of the intellect, and they more or less believe in propositions
independent of experience. For example, Kant, in addition to considering
analytic propositions to be without need for experience, also considered
one group of synthetic propositions, including all the problems of
mathematics, to be prior to experience and without need of it.

In order that our discussion not become too lengthy, our review will not
include discussions of every empiricist and rationalist scholar, and we
shall simply explain the correct view of this problem:

With regard to the fact that in primary self-evident propositions
precise imagination of the subject and predicate is sufficient for a
judgment of their unity, it becomes quite clear that this kind of
affirmation does not require sensory experience, even if the imagination
of the subject and predicate requires sensory experience. The problem is
that after the subject and

predicate are imagined exactly—whether this imagination depends on the
use of the sense organs or not—does the application of the predicate to
the subject require the use of the senses or not? It is assumed that in
primary self-evident propositions that the mere imagination of subject
and predicate is sufficient for the intellect to judge their unity.

The same judgment applies to all analytical propositions, for in these
propositions the concept of the predicate is obtained from the analysis
of the concept of the subject. Obviously, the analysis of a concept is a
mental affair and without need for sensory experience. The application
of predicates which are obtained from their subjects is also necessary,
and is like “*thubūt al-shay’ li nafsih* ” (the attribution of the thing
to itself).

The same judgment also applies to primary predications, and requires no
further discussion.

Likewise the propositions which are obtained through reflection in the
mind of presentational knowledge (inner experiences (*wijdāniyyāt* ))
have no need for sensory experience at all, for in these propositions
even imaginative concepts are also obtained from knowledge by presence,
and sensory experience is not relevant to them at all.

With regard to the fact that mental forms in whatever shape—whether
sensory, imaginary, or intellectual—are understood with knowledge by
presence, affirmation of their existence, as actions and reactions of
the soul, is a kind of inner experience and does not require sensory
experience, even if without obtaining sensory experience some of them,
such as sensory forms, would not be acquired. However, after acquiring
them, and after the mind analyzes them into existential and whatish
concepts, does the judgment of the unity of these concepts which include
the subject and predicate of a proposition require sensory experience?
It is obvious that the judgment of simple questions which are related to
matters of inner experience does not require the use of the sense
organs, but it is a self-evident judgment, and signifies infallible
presentational knowledge.

As to affirmation of the existence of instances of sensible things in
the external world—although according to some it is obtained at the
moment of the occurrence of sensory experience—with attention it becomes
evident that the fixation of judgment requires intellectual proof, as
the great Islamic philosophers, such as Ibn Sīnā, Mulla Ṣadrā, and
‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī have explained, because sensory forms do not
guarantee correctness and complete correspondence with instances in the
external world.

Therefore, it is only in this kind of proposition that sensory
experience plays a role, but not a complete and definitive role, but
rather an indirect and preparatory role.

Likewise, in universal sensory propositions, which in the terminology of
logicians are called “experiences” or “experienced things”, in addition
to requiring the mentioned intellectual judgment for affirming their
external instances, there is another requirement for an intellectual
proof of the generalization and proof of their universality, as was
mentioned in lesson nine.

The reconfirming of knowledge in every proposition and science, due to
the necessity of its purport and the impossibility of its contradictory,

requires the ‘mother of propositions’ (*umm al-qaḍāyā* ), that is, the
proposition of the impossibility of bringing two contradictories
together (*ijtimā‘ naqīḍayn* ).

In conclusion, no certain affirmation is obtained merely by sensory
experience, but there are numerous certain propositions which do not
need sensory experience. By attending to this truth, the poverty of the
thought of the positivists becomes quite clear.

Reference
---------

1 The term ‘question’ here does not indicate an interrogative. Simple
and compound questions are merely two kinds of propositions. Simple
questions are propositions that posit the existence of something, as in
“A exists,” or “A is.” Compound questions are statements in which one
thing is affirmed of another, e.g., “A is B.” (Tr.)
