Lesson Nineteen: The Value of Knowledge
=======================================

Return to the Original Problem
------------------------------

We know that the original problem of epistemology is whether man is able
to discover the truth and obtain information about reality. If so, how?
What is the criterion by which one can recognize the truth from
incorrect thoughts which are contrary to reality? In other words, the
main fundamental discussions of epistemology include the problem of ‘the
value of knowledge’, and other problems are considered to be
introductory or supplementary.

Since there are several kinds of knowledge, it is natural that the
problem of the value of knowledge should also have different dimensions.
But what is of special importance for philosophy is the evaluation of
intellectual knowledge and the proof of the ability of the intellect to
solve the problems of epistemology and other branches of philosophy.

We first explained the general types of knowledge, and we came to the
conclusion that one sort of human knowledge is without intermediary and
is knowledge by presence. In other words, it is finding reality itself.
In this kind of knowledge error is impossible. But with regard to the
fact that this knowledge by itself does not meet the scientific needs of
man we discussed acquired knowledge and its types. We also made clear
the role of the senses and the intellect in them.

Now it is time to return to the original problem and explain the value
of acquired knowledge. As acquired knowledge, in the sense of the actual
discovery of reality, is the same as affirmations and propositions,
naturally, the evaluation of acquired knowledge is accomplished in their
area. If ideas are mentioned it will be indirectly and as the components
of propositions.

What is Truth?
--------------

A fundamental problem about the value of knowledge is how to prove that
human knowledge corresponds to reality. This difficulty appears in case
there is an intermediary between the knower and the known. Because of
that, the knower is the one to whom knowledge is attributed, and the
known is the one to which being known is attributed. In other words,
knowledge is other than that which is known, but in case there is no
intermediary, and the knower finds the objective existence of the known,
naturally such questions will not arise.

Therefore, knowledge which is capable of truth—that is, which
corresponds to reality—and is capable of error—that is, which differs
from reality—that very knowledge is acquired knowledge. And if truth is
attributed to knowledge by presence, this is in the sense of a denial of
the possibility of its being in error.

Meanwhile, the definition of truth, which is discussed under the topic
of the value of knowledge, is known, that is, it is the correspondence
of the form of knowledge with the reality which it describes. However,
there may be other definitions of truth, such as the definition of the
pragmatists, “Truth is a thought which is useful in the practical life
of man,” or the definition of the relativists, “Truth is knowledge which
is appropriate to a healthy perceptual apparatus,” or a third
definition, which says, “Truth is that upon

which all people agree,” or a fourth definition, which says, “Truth is
knowledge which can be proved by sensory experience.” All of these are
besides the point of the discussion, and avoid answering the original
problem about the value of knowledge. They can be considered as signs of
the inability of the definers to solve this problem. Supposing that some
of them are correctly justified, or they are considered as the
definitions necessary for specific cases (even if the definition itself
is not correct), that is, they are considered as specific signs of some
truth, or they indicate some specific terminology, but in any case, it
must be noted that none of these justifications are able to solve our
original problem. The question about the truth in the sense of knowledge
which corresponds to reality is left unanswered, and requires a correct
and clarifying answer.

Criteria for the Recognition of the Truth
-----------------------------------------

The rationalists hold that the standard for recognizing the truth is
‘the nature of the intellect’ (*fiṭrat-e ‘aql* ). The propositions which
are inferred correctly from self-evident propositions and which are
really components of them are considered to be truth, while sensory and
experiential propositions are considered valid to the extent that they
are proved by the aid of intellectual arguments. However, we do not see
any explanation given by them of the correspondence of self-evident
propositions and innate propositions (*fiṭriyyāt* ) with realities,
except the one mentioned by Descartes, who resorted to the wisdom and
honesty of God with respect to innate thoughts. The weakness of this is
clear as was mentioned in the seventeenth lesson.

There is no doubt at all that the intellect, after imagining the subject
and predicate of self-evident propositions, automatically and without
need for experience, definitively judges their unity. Those who have
raised doubts about this proposition either have not correctly imagined
the subject and predicate or are affected with a kind of illness or
scruples. But our discussion pertains to the following: whether this
so-called innate kind of understanding is requisite of the way in which
man’s intellect has been created, so that it would be possible for the
intellect of another existent (for example, the intellect of a jinn) to
understand the very same propositions but in another form, or if man’s
intellect were created in another way would it understand matters in a
different form, or whether these understandings correspond perfectly to
reality and are representatives of things in themselves, and any other
existent which also had an intellect would understand the same forms.

Plainly, what it means for intellectual knowledge to have real value and
to be true is the latter, but its mere innateness (assuming that it is
here interpreted in the correct way) does not prove the matter.

On the other hand, empiricists hold that the standard for the truth of
knowledge is capability of being proved by means of experience, and some
of them have added that it must be proved by practical experience.
However, it is clear that first of all this standard is only applicable
to sensory things and cases which are susceptible to practical
experience. Matters of logic and pure mathematics cannot be evaluated by
this standard. Secondly, the results of sensory and practical experience
must be

understood by means of acquired knowledge. Exactly the same question
will be repeated regarding what guarantees the correctness of acquired
knowledge, and by what standard can its truth be distinguished.

Inquiry into a Problem
----------------------

The main point of difficulty regarding acquired knowledge is how it can
be determined when there is correspondence, while it is this very form
of cognition and acquired knowledge that serves as the means of our
relation to the external world!

Therefore, the key to this problem must be sought where we are able to
have an overview of both the form of understanding and that which is
concomitant with it and we can understand their correspondence by
presence and without any other intermediary. Those are propositions of
inner sense, which on the one hand we find by presence concomitant with
cognition, for example, the very state of fear, and on the other hand,
we perceive the mental form related to it directly. Therefore, the
propositions, “I am”, or “I am afraid”, or “I doubt”, are completely
indubitable. So, these propositions (propositions of inner sense) are
the first propositions whose value is one hundred percent proven, and
there is no way for them to be in error. To be sure, we must take care
that these propositions are not mixed with mental interpretations, as
was mentioned in lesson thirteen.

We find such an overview in the propositions of logic, which describe
other mental forms and concepts. For although both the description and
the object described are found in two levels of the mind, both levels
are present to the self (i.e., the I who understands). For example, this
proposition, “The concept of man is a universal concept” is a
proposition which describes the features of ‘the concept of man’, a
concept which is present in the mind. We are able to distinguish these
features by mental experience, that is without using sensory organs or
the intermediary of any other perceptual form. We understand that this
concept does not describe a specific individual, but is applicable to
numerous individuals. So, the proposition “The concept of man is a
universal concept” is true.

By this means the way is open for the recognition of two groups of
propositions, but these are not sufficient for the cognition of all
acquired knowledge. If we are able to obtain a guarantee of the
correctness of primary self-evident propositions we would be completely
successful, for in their rays we can recognize and evaluate theoretical
propositions such as the sensory and experiential propositions.

For the sake of this task we must pay careful attention to the
whatnesses of these propositions. On the one hand, we must examine the
concepts employed in them and consider what kind of concepts they are,
and how they are obtained. On the other hand, we must look at the
relations among them and consider how the intellect is able to judge the
unity of their subjects and predicates.

The first aspect has been made clear in lesson seventeen. We know that
these propositions are formed of philosophical concepts, concepts which
terminate in presentational knowledge. That is, the first group of
philosophical concepts, such as ‘need’ and ‘independence’ and then
‘cause’ and ‘effect’ are abstracted from direct knowledge and inner
sense. We find

their correspondence with the source of their abstraction by presence.
Some philosophical concepts also reduce to them.

The second aspect, that is the qualities of judgment of unity between
their subjects and predicates becomes clear with comparison between the
subjects and predicates of these propositions with each other. The means
that all of these propositions are analytical, the concept of whose
predicates is obtained from the analysis of the concept of their
subjects. For example, in this proposition, “Every effect requires a
cause”, when we analyze the concept of effect we arrive at the
conclusion that an effect is an existent whose existence is based on
another existent, that is, it needs another existent, which is called
the cause. Therefore the concept of need for a cause is implicit in the
concept of effect. Their unity is found by mental experience. To the
contrary, in the proposition “Every existent requires a cause,” because
from the analysis of the concept of ‘existent’ the concept of ‘requires
a cause’ is not obtained, we cannot consider it a self-evident
proposition. But it is also not a true speculative proposition.

In this way it becomes clear that primary self-evidence also terminates
in knowledge by presence, and so they find the way to the guarantee of
their truth.

A problem may be raised, that if what we find by presentational
knowledge is a specific effect, how can we generalize judgments
regarding it to every effect and consider such a universal judgment to
be self-evident?

The answer is that although we abstract the concept of effect from a
specific phenomenon, like that of our own will, it is not for that
reason a specific essence, and, for example, to be considered from among
the kinds of qualities of the soul, but it is because its existence is
related to the existence of another. So, everywhere this quality is
found this judgment is also established. Of course, the confirmation of
this quality for other cases requires intellectual proof. For this
reason this proposition by itself cannot establish the requirement of
material phenomena for a cause, unless an intellectual proof of their
existential relationship can be provided. God willing, we will explain
their proofs in the lesson on cause and effect. With the same
proposition we also can judge that everywhere there is an existential
relationship, the terms and relation can be established, and so, the
existence of the cause.

In conclusion, the secret of the infallibility of primary self-evident
propositions is their dependence on knowledge by presence.

The Criteria of Truth and Falsity of Propositions
-------------------------------------------------

With our explanation about the standard of truth it became clear that
self-evident propositions, such as primary self-evident propositions and
propositions of inner sense have the value of certainty. The secret of
their infallibility is that the correspondence between the knowledge and
the object of the knowledge is proved through presentational knowledge.
Propositions which are not self-evident are to be evaluated by logical
standards, that is, if a proposition is obtained according to the
logical rules of inference, it is true; otherwise it will be incorrect.
Of course, it must be noted that the incorrectness of a reason does not
always signify the incorrectness of the conclusion, for it is possible
to prove something which is correct by using

reasons which are incorrect. Therefore, the invalidity of an argument
only provides a reason for lack of confidence in the conclusion, not a
reason for its actual error.

It is possible that a doubt may be raised here. According to the
definition of truth as knowledge which corresponds to reality, truth and
error are to be found only with regard to propositions which may be
compared to reality in the external world. Metaphysical propositions,
however, do not have an external reality to which they could correspond.
Hence, they cannot be considered as true or false, but it must be said
that they are absurd and meaningless.

This doubt arises from the assumption that external objective reality is
equivalent to material reality. In order to remove this doubt it is to
be noted that, first of all, external objective reality is not limited
to material reality, but also includes the abstract; furthermore, it
will be proven in the appropriate place that the abstract participates
in reality to a greater extent than does the material. Secondly, the
reality which is meant is that to which propositions must correspond,
the absolute referent of propositions; and by the external world is
meant that which is beyond the concepts about them, even if that reality
and referent is in the mind, or is psychological; and as we have
explained, purely logical propositions describe other mental things. The
relationship between the level of the mind which is the place of the
referents of these propositions and the level from which they are viewed
is like the relationship between that which is outside the mind and the
mind.

Therefore, the general criterion of the truth and falsity of
propositions is their correspondence or lack of correspondence with the
concepts beyond them, that is, the recognition of the truth and falsity
of propositions of the empirical sciences is the comparison of them with
the material reality to which they are related, for example, in order to
discover the truth of the proposition, “Iron expands when heated”, we
heat iron in the external world, and observe the difference in its size,
but logical propositions must be evaluated by means of other mental
concepts which are related to them. In order to recognize the truth or
falsity of philosophical propositions, one must consider the relation
between the mind and its object, that is, their being correct is that
their objective referents, whether material or abstract, must be such
that the mind abstracts the concepts related to them. This evaluation is
accomplished directly in the case of propositions of inner sense, and
for other propositions it is accomplished with one or more
intermediaries, as was explained.

The Case Itself (Nafs al-Amr)
-----------------------------

We come across this expression in the language of most philosophers,
that a certain matter corresponds to “the case itself”. Among these are
‘true propositions’ some of which do not have any instances for their
subjects in the external world. If supposing an instance to be existent,
the predicate applies to it, such a proposition will be true. It is said
that the criterion of truth for these propositions is their
correspondence with the case itself, for not all their instances exist
in the external world, so that we may evaluate the correspondence
between the purport of the propositions with them, and say that they
correspond to the external world.

Likewise with regard to propositions which are formed of secondary
intelligibles, such as logical propositions and propositions which apply
to judgments about nonexistent objects or impossible objects, it is said
that the criterion for their truth is their correspondence to a thing in
itself.

With regard to the meaning of this expression, there are several
accounts which are either very artificial, such as the saying of some
philosophers that the word ‘*amr* ’ (case) is the world of the abstract,
or they do not solve the problem, such as the saying that what is meant
by ‘*nafs al-amr* ’ is the thing itself, for the question is left
unanswered that at last for the evaluation of these propositions, with
what are they to be evaluated?

With the explanation of the truth and falsity of propositions it became
clear that the meaning of*nafs al-amr* is something other than external
reality, rather it is a container for the intellectual demonstration of
reference which differs in various cases. In some cases it is a specific
level of the mind, such as with regard to logical propositions. In other
cases it is the assumption of an external demonstration, such as the
referent of the proposition of the impossibility of the unity of
contradictories. In cases in which there is an accidental relation in
the external world, such as when it is said, “The cause of the absence
of the effect is the absence of the cause,” it is established that the
relation of causality in truth is between the existence of the cause and
the existence of the effect, and accidentally it is also related to
their absence.


