Lesson Twenty: The Evaluation of Ethical and Legal Propositions
===============================================================

Features of Ethical and Legal Knowledge
---------------------------------------

Knowledge of ethics and law, sometimes called ‘evaluative knowledge’,
has features which can be divided into two general groups. One group of
features is related to specific imaginative concepts, from which legal
and ethical terms are formed. This was discussed in Lesson Fifteen. The
other group of features concerns the shape and form of evaluative terms.
Legal and ethical knowledge may thus be explained in two ways: one is in
the form of prescriptions and commands and prohibitions, as is seen in
may verses of the Noble Qur’ān; and the other is in descriptive form,
the from of propositions which have the logical forms of subjects and
predicates or antecedent and consequent, which is employed in other
verses and narrations.

We know that prescriptive expressions are not propositions and do not
have truth values, so one should not ask whether they are true or false.
If one does ask this question, the answer is neither one nor the other,
but it is simply prescriptive. Indeed, with respect to commands and
prohibitions, it may be said that they potentially indicate the
desirability of the object commanded for the one who commands, or the
undesirability of the object of prohibition for the one who prohibits,
and because of this potential indication, they may be said to be true or
false. If the object of command is really desired by the one who
commands and the object of prohibitions is really detested by the one
who issues the prohibition, the prescriptive expressions, according to
what they potentially indicate, are true, and otherwise they are false.

Some Western thinkers have imagined that the consistency of ethical and
legal rules is based on command, prohibition, obligation and warning, in
other words, that their essence is prescriptive. Therefore, ethical and
legal knowledge is not considered to have truth value. Naturally, they
believe that there is no standard for their truth or falsity, and that
no criterion for recognizing their truth or error can be produced.

This idea is wrong. Without a doubt, ethical and legal rules can be
expressed in the form of descriptive expressions and logical
propositions without prescriptive meaning. In reality, to try to fit
ethical and legal knowledge into the framework of prescriptive
expressions is either to consider them to be a sort of mental diversion
or to be solely for the sake of meeting certain educational goals.

The Criterion for the Truth and Falsity of Evaluative Propositions
------------------------------------------------------------------

Ethical and legal propositions are explained in two ways: the first way
is by describing the application of specific rules in a certain system.
For example, it is said, “Lying for the purpose of reconciliation is
permitted in Islam,” or “Cutting the hand of a thief in Islam is
obligatory,” and when a jurist or Muslim judge explains such precepts he
does not need mention the

ethical or legal system of Islam. Hence, the expression “according to
Islam” is not usually employed.

The criterion for the truth and falsity of such propositions is their
correspondence or non-correspondence to ethical and legal references and
sources. The way of knowing them is to refer to sources related to the
appropriate system. For example, the way of knowing the ethical and
legal precepts of Islam is to refer to the Qur’ān and sunnah.

The second way to describe their real application and the ‘case itself’
of their purport is with regard to the universal principles of ethics
and law, including natural law, without paying attention to whether it
is valid or not in a specific system of values or accepted by a given
society. Consider for example the following ethical propositions:
“Justice is good,” or “One ought not to be cruel to anyone,” and such
legal propositions as, “Every human has a right to life,” and “No one
must be killed undeservingly.”

There are a variety of views about this subject, and especially in
Western ethical and legal philosophy, it has become an arena of
conflict.

A Review of the Most Famous Opinions
------------------------------------

The most famous opinions on this matter are the following:

**A.** Some of the Western philosophers of ethics and law basically deny
the fundamental and proven principles, especially the positivists, who
consider discussion of them to be vain and meaningless, as they are
metaphysical and unscientific thoughts.

Of course, as much is to be expected from the sympathizers of this
school of so-called positivists, whose eyes are glued to the senses.
With regard to other thinkers who have occasionally raised this kind of
issue, it must be said that the origin of this idea is the change in
legal and ethical values in different societies at different times,
which has led them to believe in the relativity of ethics and law, and
has led them to doubt or deny basic evaluative principles. The roots of
such ideas may be found in explanations of the relativity of ethics and
law.

**B.** Another group of philosophers considers evaluative propositions
to express social values arising from the needs of people and their
inner emotions, which change as they change; hence, they hold that
ethical propositions are outside the realm of rational discussion based
on certain, eternal and necessary principles. On this basis, the
criteria for the truth and falsity of these propositions would be these
same needs and inclinations which are the causes of their validity.

In reply, it must be said that undoubtedly all practical wisdom is
related to the voluntary behavior of man, behavior originating from a
kind of desire and inner inclination directed toward a specific goal and
destination. On this basis, specific non-whatish concepts occur, and
propositions are formed from them. The role of practical wisdom,
however, is to lead man as he is confronted with a choice among diverse
desires and inclinations to the basic and lofty human goal, and it leads
him toward happiness and desired perfection. Such a way does not often
correspond with the desires of most people, who are bound to their
animal desires, to worldly fleeting material pleasures. Rather it forces
them to adjust their instinctual animal desires and to close their eyes
to material worldly pleasures.

Therefore, if by people’s needs and inclinations we mean just individual
and group needs, which are actually always in conflict and interfere
with each other, and cause corruption and the decay of society, then
this is something opposed to the basic goals of ethics and law. If the
meaning is the specific needs and lofty human inclinations which are
latent in most people and are unactualized and dominated by animal
desires and tendencies, this is not incompatible with constancy,
eternity, universality and necessity. These kinds of propositions need
not be dispelled from the realm of demonstrative knowledge. As the
evaluative concepts, which are usually subjects of this kind of
proposition, implicitly contain a sort of figure of speech, this does
not mean that they are without any intellectual basis, as was shown in
Lesson Fifteen.

**C.** The third view is that the principles of ethics and law stem from
self-evident propositions of practical reason, and like the self-evident
propositions of theoretical reason, they arise from the nature of the
intellect, and are without need of proof or argument. The criterion for
their truth and falsity is agreement and opposition to human conscience.

The roots of this view lie in the thoughts of the ancient Greek
philosophers, and most Eastern and Western philosophers have accepted
it. Among them, Kant has emphasized it. Of all the views, it is the most
dignified one, and the one closest to the truth. But at the same time,
it is open to subtle objections, some of which will be indicated.

1. On the surface, this view asserts the multiplicity of intellects and
the separation of their percepts, which may be denied.

2. The difficulty which is related to innateness of percepts of the
theoretical intellect also applies to this view.

3. The principles of ethics and law are imagined in this view to be
without need of reasoning and justification. Even the most universal of
them, the good of justice and the evil of injustice, are in need of
proof, as will be indicated.

Inquiry about a Problem
-----------------------

In order to make the truth clear regarding this question, several brief
introductory remarks will be mentioned. Their detailed explanation will
be left for the philosophy of ethics and law.

1. Ethical and legal propositions are related to the voluntary behavior
of man, behavior which is the means to obtain desired goals. Their value
derives from the fact that they are means and instruments to those
desired goals.

2. The goals man attempts to achieve are either to secure natural
worldly needs, and satisfying animal desires, or for securing social
welfare and the prevention of corruption and anarchy, or for the
achievement of eternal felicity and spiritual perfection. The natural
and animal goals are not the source of values for the primary movement
toward them. Of themselves, they have no relation to ethics and law.
However, social interests, whether or not they conflict with individual
interests and pleasures, are one of the sources from which value arises.
Another source from which value arises is the view toward eternal
happiness, for the sake of which one must cover one’s eyes from some
material and worldly desires. Above all, as motivation

for behavior, is the desire to reach human perfection, which, in the
view of Islam, is to be close to God the Most High. Therefore, it can be
said that value in all cases arises from putting aside one’s desires for
the sake of reaching higher desires.

3. Regarding the law, different goals have been presented, the most
universal and most inclusive of which is securing social interests,
which has various branches. On the other hand, different ideals have
been mentioned for ethics. Above all of them is the extreme perfection
of being in the shadow of those close to God the Most High. If this goal
is the motivation of man’s behavior, either individually or socially, it
will have ethical value. Therefore, behavior regarding the law can also
be included under the umbrella of ethics, on the condition that the
motivation be ethical.

4. The mentioned goals have two aspects. One is their desirability for
man such that it causes man to close his eyes to base desires. On this
view, these goals are related to the innate desires of man to achieve
happiness and perfection. This aspect is psychological. It is
subordinate to scientific and perceptual principles and knowledge. The
other aspect is ontological (*takwīnī* ), which is completely objective
and independent of individual inclinations, desires, recognition and
knowledge. If an action is considered in relation to its desired goal,
from the point of view of its desirability, the concept of value may be
abstracted from it. If it is considered with respect to its ontological
relation, with the consequences which result from it, the concepts of
obligation and permissibility are obtained from it. In philosophical
language, such obligation is interpreted as relative necessity (*ḍarurat
bil-qiyās* ).

Now, with regard to this introduction, we can come to the conclusion
that the criterion of truth and falsity and correctness and error in
ethical and legal propositions is their effect in achieving the desired
goals. The effect which is not subordinate to one’s inclinations,
desires, tastes and opinion. Like other causal relations, it arises from
the reality of the case itself. Of course, in recognizing the ultimate
goal, and the intermediate goals, it is possible to make mistakes, so
that, for example, someone on the basis of his materialistic outlook
will limit man’s goal to worldly luxuries. Likewise, it is possible to
make mistakes in recognition of the ways in which a man achieves real
goals. But none of these mistakes are harmful to the causal relation
between voluntary actions and their results, nor do they cause their
exclusion from the realm of intellectual discussions and rational
arguments. The errors of philosophers do not imply a denial of
intellectual realities independent from opinion and thought.
Controversies among scientists about the rules of experimental knowledge
do not mean that there is no such knowledge to be gained.

In conclusion, the principles of ethics and law are philosophical
propositions that can be proven by intellectual arguments, although the
intellect of the common man in its subdivisions and particularities is
deficient and is unable to deduce a judgment for every particular
proposition from the universal principles because of the complexity of
the formulas, the abundance of factors and variables, and due to lack of
proficiency. In these cases, there is no alternative but to rely on
revelation.

Therefore, it cannot be said that ethical and legal propositions depend
on the inclinations, desires, tastes and opinions of individuals or
groups, and hence that definitive and universal principles are not
acceptable; nor can it be said that ethical and legal propositions
depend on the needs and changing conditions of the time and place, and
that rational proofs do not apply to them but only to universal, eternal
and necessary propositions. It is also wrong to claim that these
propositions pertain to an intellect other than the theoretical
intellect, and that therefore reasoning about them with philosophical
premises related to the theoretical intellect is incorrect.

Answer to an Objection
----------------------

An objection may be raised here on the grounds that this view
contradicts the opinion of all the logicians, an opinion which is also
accepted by the Islamic philosophers. In logic, it is mentioned that a
dialectical argument (*jadal* ) is composed of indemonstrable
indisputable premises, but on the contrary, a proof (*burhān* ) is
composed of certain premises, and an example of an indemonstrable
premise is, “Truth is good,” which is an ethical proposition.

In response, it must be stated that the greatest logicians of Islam, Ibn
Sīnā and Khwajah Naṣīr al-Dīn Ṭūsī, have suggested that these
propositions in this universal and absolute form, are considered
indemonstrable, and may only be employed in dialectical arguments, not
in proofs. They have hidden and special restrictions which are obtained
from the relation between and actions and its desired result. Hence, it
is not correct to tell the truth when it leads to someone’s murder.
Therefore, if this kind of proposition in this absolute and universal
form is applied in a syllogism on the basis of its general acceptance,
the proposition will be dialectical. However, it is possible that this
same proposition may be transformed into a certain proposition by taking
into account rational standards, subtle relations and hidden
restrictions. For such propositions proofs may be constructed, and their
conclusions may be used in other proofs.

Relativism in Ethics and Law
----------------------------

As was mentioned, most value propositions, especially legal
propositions, have exceptions, and even the goodness of truth telling is
not universal. One the other hand, sometimes a single subject really may
be the locus of two topics to which conflicting judgments apply. In case
the criteria utilized for them are equal, one is free to use either. In
case the importance of one of the criteria is preferred over another,
one ought to defer to the more important criterion. In practice, the
other is then mooted. Likewise, it is seen that some legal judgments
have temporal restrictions, and after a while they are abrogated.
Attention to this point has brought about the idea of the absolute
relativity of the value propositions, and the idea that they do not
apply generally to all individuals at all times. Schools of thought with
positivistic inclinations also consider differences in value systems in
different societies and times to provide reason for relativism with
respect to all value propositions.

But the truth is that this kind of relativism can be found in the laws
of the empirical sciences, and the universality of empirical laws is
based on the

satisfaction of conditions and the nonexistence of obstacles. From a
philosophical point of view, these restrictions are due to the
complexity of the causes of phenomena. With the lack of one of the
conditions, the effect is also annulled.

Therefore, if the causes of ethical and legal judgments are precisely
determined, and the conditions and restrictions of their subjects are
completely accounted for, we will see that ethical and legal principles,
in the limits of these standards and final causes, are general and
absolute. In this respect, they are no different from the other
scientific laws.

It must be mentioned that in this discussion other focus has been on the
universal principles of ethics and law; but some particularities, such
as traffic regulations and the like, fall outside the scope of this
discussion.

The Difference between Legal and Ethical Propositions
-----------------------------------------------------

Now that we have come to the end of this discussions, we had better
mention the difference between legal and ethical propositions. Of
course, there are numerous differences between these two groups of
propositions which must be discussed in legal and ethical philosophy.
Here we simply point out one of these differences which is more
important and basic, the difference in their goals.

As we know, the basic goal of the law is the social happiness of the
people in worldly life, which is determined by legal rules with the
guarantee of government enforcement. However, the ultimate goal of
ethics is eternal happiness and spiritual perfection, and its compass is
wider than that of social conditions. Hence, legal and ethical subjects
overlap. A proposition, insofar as it is related to the social happiness
of man supported by government is legal, and insofar as it effects the
eternal happiness and spiritual perfection of man, it is ethical, such
as the existence of repayment of loans and the prohibition against
treason. In such cases, if the observance of the rule is only motivated
by fear of governmental punishment, it has no ethical value, even if it
is in agreement with legal regulations. If the deed is motivated by a
higher goal, which is an ethical goal, it will also be ethical.

It must be mentioned that these differences accord with a view which is
accepted in ethics, and there are also other views, for information
about which one must refer to books on ethics and the philosophy of law.


