Lesson Twenty-One: Introduction to Ontology
===========================================

Introduction to the Lesson
--------------------------

Part I of this work began with an overview of the history of
philosophical thought, followed by some remarks on philosophical
terminology, and a brief discussion of the relation among philosophy,
the sciences, and*‘irfān* . This part ended with a declaration of the
need for and importance of philosophical inquiry.

In Part II, on Epistemology, an account was presented of the roles
played by reason and experience in the formation of ideas and their
relations to their instances. The aim of this account was to establish
the ‘value of knowledge’, showing that the intellect has the ability to
solve the problems of philosophy and metaphysics.

In this, the third part, we are to employ the God-given power of reason,
one of the greatest of divine blessings, to survey the problems of
metaphysics. Metaphysics is called ‘the mother of the sciences’, and is
said to hold the key to the most important questions man faces in life,
questions which play a most fundamental role in human destiny, regarding
eternal felicity or damnation.

In this part one will find a discussion of the truth (*ḥaqīqah* ) of
existence, the ways in which it is manifested, and the relation all
existents have to one another. Prior to these discussions, however, some
issues must be explained concerning concepts and the relation between
concepts and their instances, and concerning words and the relation
between words and their meanings, as well as some related matters.

Warnings about Concepts
-----------------------

It is obvious that the employment of the intellect requires the use of
concepts. Concepts are irreplaceable tools of thought which must be used
whenever one engages in thinking or reasoning. Even knowledge by
presence, when it is to be used in thinking or reasoning, must be used
by means of mental concepts which are obtained from it. When we indicate
entified existence in the external world, and the attention of the mind
is turned to that which lies beyond it, we use ‘entified’ and
‘objective’ concepts, which play the role of mirrors, or symbols and
signs for the entified realities (*ḥaqāyiq* ).

All uses of concepts in thought and reasoning are not equal. The
variation in the uses of concepts stems from the essential differences
among the concepts themselves. For example, there exist differences
among whatish, philosophical and logical concepts, and each of these
types must be further specified in a particular branch of the sciences,
for these differences in the concepts pertain to the different
characteristics of their employment and the ways in which the mind
attends to them. For example, the concept ‘universal’ cannot be
understood as a mirror or sign for something objective and entified, for
objective things are always existents in the form of individuals. It is
impossible to apply the property of universality to an objective
existent. It is with respect to this point that it is said, “Existence
is equivalent to individuality.” Thus, the inapplicability of the
concept of universality as a mirror or sign for something objective is
due to the

essential characteristics of this concept itself, which, like other
logical concepts, can only be used for other mental concepts.
Philosophical and whatish concepts, on the other hand, may be used to
describe objective things.

In our discussions of epistemology, we divided concepts into two kinds,
universal and particular. Each particular concept is a looking glass for
a particular individual, and is unable to describe anything but its own
individual instance. To the contrary, universal concepts have the
ability to act as mirrors for countless individuals. This bifurcation is
related to the mirror-like referential and conceptual capacities of the
concepts. Universal concepts themselves, however, have other aspects
pertaining to their existential aspects in the mind. In this respect,
things such as the existence of particular concepts and such as
existences outside the mind are considered as cases of individuality, as
was said in Lesson Fourteen.

The group of universal concepts which have objective instances, which in
technical terms are said to have ‘objective characterization’ (*ittiṣāf
khārijī* ), may also be further subdivided into two groups: whatish
concepts, which group together equivalent cases and specify their
whatish limits; and philosophical concepts, which refer to fundamental
being and existential relations, as well as to deficiency and
nothingness, but which do not represent specific whatnesses. The
concepts of the first group naturally refer to common whatnesses among
individuals, or, in other words, they refer to equivalent limits among
existents. The members of the second group, however, are not applied to
things in this way, for their abstraction depends upon a specific
intellectual point of view. In technical terms, the occurrence (*‘urūḍ*
) of philosophical concepts is mental and their application to numerous
different cases shows the unity of the point of view which the intellect
takes toward them, however different these cases are with respect to
their whatnesses and the limits of their existence, as, for example, in
the case of cause, which may be applied both to material and abstract
instances despite their whatish differences.

Of course, the abstraction of the concept cause from various different
instances is not meaningless, but the unity of the concept does not
provide reason in support of the unity of the reality (*ḥaqīqah* ) of
its instances. It is enough that all of the instances have a certain
aspect in common, that other existents depend upon them, an aspect which
is determined with the effort of the intellect. For this reason, this
kind of intellectual aspect must not be confused with objective aspects
and existential limits. It would be better to use the expression
‘existential manners and aspects’ instead of ‘existential limits’
regarding the philosophical concepts. For example, we should say, “The
unity of the concept of causation indicates the participation in a
manner of existence, or the participation of several existents in a
single aspect, that is, they are all participants in the respect that
other existents are their effects, or that other existents depend upon
them.”

Likewise, the multiplicity of philosophical concepts, or the number of
philosophical and whatish concepts which apply in a given case, does not
indicate a multiplicity of the objective aspects of the case, just as it
is known to us that there is but a single simple subject of our various
states of

consciousness and of presentational knowledge. The mind obtains numerous
concepts, and it reflects them in the form compound propositions.

Also, the application of a single philosophical concept to an object,
such as the concept of causation, does not provide reason to deny the
application of its opposite, contrary to the case for whatish concepts.
For example, if the concept of white is applied to a body, then the
concept of black will not apply in the same state at the same point. To
the contrary, one may attribute to a single thing the concept of being
the cause of an existent in the very state in which one attributes to it
the concept of being the effect of another existent. In technical terms:
contrariety in philosophical concepts requires the unity of both the
aspect and what is added to it.

We have learned that one must pay attention to two points regarding the
employment of concepts. First, one must take into consideration the
specific characteristics of each kind of concept, so as to avoid over
generalization from one kind of concept to another, and in this respect
one must especially pay attention to the characteristics specific to
each of these three kinds of concepts: whatish, philosophical and
logical, for many philosophical difficulties are the effect of confusion
about them. The other point is that one must not fall into the trap of
the fallacy of confusing concepts with their instances, either by
attributing the characteristics of concepts to their instances, or the
reverse, attributing the characteristics of the instances to the
concepts which apply to them.

Warnings about Language
-----------------------

We know that the fundamental instruments of thought and reasoning are
concepts and the intelligibles, however, the communication of our
thoughts and understanding is by means of words. In the same way that
concepts play the role of mirrors for the objects of the external world,
words also play this same role in relation to concepts. There exists
such a strong relationship between concepts and words that often when
one thinks it is words which convey concepts to the mind, and on this
basis, words are said to be the ‘verbal existence’ of things, just as
concepts are considered to be their ‘mental existence’. Some have
exaggerated this point to such an extent that they would reduce thinking
to a kind of mental speaking, and proponents of this sort of view have
been found among advocates of ‘linguistic analysis’ and ‘analytic
philosophy’ who imagine that philosophical concepts have no reality
beyond that of words, so that philosophical discussions are to be
reduced to topics in some branch of linguistics. The shallowness of this
idea was indicated to some extent in our discussions of epistemology.

Analogous confusions to those warned against with respect to concepts
are possible regarding language. Sometimes the equivocal use of a word
is taken to indicate a single meaning or concept, while sometimes the
opposite mistake occurs and participation in a single meaning is viewed
as a merely nominal agreement. Then again, sometimes the key to the
solution of a philosophical difficulty is sought in distinctions among
various linguistic features, reference and metaphor, or other figures of
speech. Concepts are sometimes expressed by a single word or expression
because of the closeness of their meanings, and there is confusion here
with the phenomenon of equivocation, as was mentioned in the fourth
lesson. In this

respect one must be very careful not to mix up verbal questions with
questions of real meaning, and also not to confuse the principles of
language with those of meanings. In every discussion, the intended
meanings must be fully specified so as to avoid mistakes due to
equivocation.

The Self-evidence (Badāhat) of the Concept of Existence
-------------------------------------------------------

In Part I, we observed that prior to beginning on the questions of any
science, we must first become acquainted with its topics so as to obtain
correct ideas about them. Also, in every true science (i.e., science
which is not simply conventional) we must become aware of the true
existence of its subjects, for otherwise the discussions which pivot on
this axis will be without basis or foundation and so will be unable to
get anywhere. In case the existence of the subject is not evident
(*badīhī* ), it must be proven by means of one of the confirming sources
of science, which is usually the function of another science which
requires philosophical discussion.

We must now see how the subject of philosophy itself fares with respect
to idea and assertion.

According to the basic definition of first philosophy or metaphysics,
the subject of this science is the ‘absolute existent’ or ‘being*qua*
being’. However, the concept of ‘existent’ is one of the most
self-evident concepts abstracted by the mind from all existents. A
definition of it is neither needed nor is it possible, for just as it
was said that no concept can be found which is any clearer than the
concept of knowledge (*‘ilm* ), which could be used to explain it, so
too, it may be argued in this case.

One of the clear indications of the self-evidence of the concept of
existence is this: during our discussion of epistemology we came to know
that when an item of presentational knowledge is pictured in the mind,
of necessity, it takes the form of a simple proposition (*halliyyah
basīṭah* ), the predicate of which is “existent”, [e.g. “I am an
existent”, or “Fear is an existent”]. This is an action performed by the
mind with respect to the most easy and most elementary findings which
are present to it and witnessed by it. This action would not be possible
if a clear concept were not obtained of existent and existence.

Reasons for doubt have been suggested regarding the concept of
‘existent’ or ‘existence’, and have given rise to heated discussions in
both Western and Islamic philosophies, which will be indicated briefly
below.

The Relation between Existence and Perception
---------------------------------------------

Among the discussions about the concept of existence is that of
Berkeley, who claimed that the meaning of ‘existence’ is nothing more
than ‘perceiving or being perceived’, while other philosophers have
given it different meanings, about which they have engaged in fruitless
discussions whose source is the misuse of this expression [‘existence’].
Berkeley, however, insists on his claim, and considers it one of the
fundamental principles of his philosophy.

The truth is that Berkeley is deserving of this charge, for this
expression and its synonyms in all languages (like*hastī* in Farsi) have
no ambiguity, and are never understood as meaning ‘perceiving or being
perceived’. If it so happens that in some language a synonym for
‘existence’ and a synonym

for ‘perception’ have the same root, this should not interfere with its
known meaning.1

Among the indications of the invalidity of this claim is that existence
does not have more than one meaning, while perceiving and being
perceived are two different meanings. Also, the meaning of existence is
a single concept in itself in which there is no relation to a subject or
object. For the same reason, it is applied to the existence of Almighty
God with respect to which there is no room for imagining a subject and
object, whereas, to the contrary, the meaning of perception includes a
relation to subject and object.

Actually, this proposal of Berkeley’s is an example of mistaking a
concept for its instances. Here it is a double mistake, for he confuses
the level of subsistence (*thubūt* ) with the level of proof for
subsistence (*ithbāt* ) and he relates the implications of being able to
prove the subsistence of an entity, perceiving or being perceived, to
the subsistence of the entity as it is in itself.

Therefore, the concept of existence and the concept of perception are
two distinct concepts, and the concept of neither of them is to be
obtained through the analysis of the other. And the only thing which can
be said is that after proving the existence of God and His omniscience,
it can be said that every existent is either a perceiver or is
perceived, for if an existent is not a perceiver, at least it may be
said that it is subsumed under divine knowledge. However, this
[extensional] equivalence of instances, which requires proof, has no
relation to the [intensional] equivalence between the concept of
existence and the concept of perception.

Reference
---------

1 The root of the Arabic word for*existence, wujūd* means*to be found* .
[Tr.]
