Lesson Twenty-Two: The Concept of Existence
===========================================

The Unity of the Concept of Existence
-------------------------------------

Another discussion which has been raised about the concept of existence
is whether existence applies to all existents with a single meaning,
with an unequivocal meaning, or with different meanings, with a kind of
equivocation.

The origin of this discussion is that a group of theologians imagined
that the sense in which existence is used for creatures could not be
used for God the Almighty. For this reason, some said that when
existence is related to a thing, it takes the meaning of that to which
it is related. For example, in the case of man it will have the meaning
of man, and in the case of tree, the meaning of tree. Some others, in
this respect, posited two meanings, one specifically for God the
Almighty, and the other for all other created things.

This sort of doubt may be traced to confusion between concepts and their
instances, that is, that which cannot be compared pertaining to God the
Almighty and to creatures is the instance of existence, not its concept.
Differences among instances do not require differences in concept.

We also can understand the source of this confusion as being due to
confusion between whatish concepts and philosophical concepts.
Commonality of concept indicates a common essence among instances only
when the concept is a kind of whatish concept. However, the concept of
existence is a kind of philosophical concept, and its unity only
indicates an aspectival unity, which the intellect considers in order to
abstract [the concept of existence], and that aspect is that of the lack
of nothingness.

In their refutation of the first position, Islamic philosophers have
made several claims, including the following: “If existence had the same
meaning as every subject to which it is applied, this would require that
in simple propositions the predication, which is a kind of common
predication, should be turned into a primary predication and be
self-evident. Also, knowledge of their subject and predicate would be
equivalent, so that if one did not understand the meaning of the
subject, he would not understand the meaning of the predicate either.”

For the refutation of the second position there is an explanation which
amounts to this: If the meaning of existence with respect to God the
Almighty were anything other than its meaning with respect to contingent
things, this would necessitate that the contradictory meaning of each
would correspond to the other, because there is nothing of which one of
two contradictories is not true. For example, each thing is either man
or non-man. The contradictory of the meaning of existence among
contingent things is nothingness. So, if existence in this sense,
opposed to nothingness, is not related to God, nothingness is related to
the Creator, and the existence which is related to Him would really be
an instance of nothingness!

In any case, one whose mind is not confused with such doubts will have
no qualms about the fact that the words ‘existence’ and ‘being’ are used
with one meaning in all cases, and the necessity of the unity of the
concept of existence is not that all existents have a common essence.

The Substantival Concept and the Copulative Concept of Existence
----------------------------------------------------------------

The third discussion regarding the concept of existence is about
equivocation regarding existence between the substantival independent
sense and the copulative relative meaning.

It is explained that in logical propositions, in addition to two
substantival and independent concepts (subject and predicate), there is
another concept regarding the relation between them, and in Farsi this
is indicated by the word*ast* (in English,*is* ). But in Arabic there is
no equivalent, and a kind of sentence structure is used for this purpose
(equational sentences). This concept is a kind of verbal concept, such
as the concepts indicated by prepositions, which cannot be independently
imagined, but must be understood in the context of a sentence. Logicians
call this verbal meaning ‘relational existence’ (*wujūd rabṭī* or*wujūd
rābiṭ* ). This meaning of ‘existence’ is contrasted with its
substantival meaning, which can be a real predicate, and which for this
reason is called ‘predicative existence’ (*wujūd maḥmūlī* ).

Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn (Mullā Ṣadrā) mentions in the*Asfār* that the use
of the word ‘existence’ with its copulative meaning is a special term
with a meaning other than that with which it is commonly used, while its
ordinary meaning is substantival and independent, and therefore using
the word ‘existence’ with these two meanings must be considered a kind
of equivocation.

Some have not taken note of this point, and have considered the concept
of existence to be absolutely univocal. They have even gone so far as to
try to establish entified relational existence by these concepts,
explaining that, for example, when we say, “Ali is a scientist,” the
expression “Ali” refers to a specific person, and for the word
“scientist” there exists its science, which exists in the external
world. Therefore, the concept of the relation of the proposition which
is indicated by the word “is” refers to a objective relation between
science and Ali. Hence, in the context of the external world there also
is established a kind of relational existence.

There is a confusion here between the concepts and principles of logic
with the concepts and principles of philosophy, and the principles of
propositions which are about mental concepts contaminate the objective
instances. On this basis, they deny the existence of the relation in the
‘simple question’ (*halliyyah basīṭah,* i.e., of the form ‘x exists’),
for one cannot imagine a relation between a thing itself and its
existence. But the existence of a relation in a proposition which refers
to a simple thing does not require the objective existence of the
relation in its instance, rather, basically, one can never consider the
relation to be a entified objective thing. What can finally be said
about it is that the relation in a ‘simple question’ is a sign of the
unity of the instance of the subject and the predicate, and in ‘compound
questions’ it is the sign of their entified unity.

It is strange that some of the Western philosophers have denied the
substantival meaning of existence (predicative existence), and they have
limited the concept of existence to the copulative meaning, considering
it to be a relation between the subject and the predicate. For this
reason, they

consider 'simple questions' to be pseudo-propositions, not real
propositions, for they suppose that in reality such propositions doe not
have predicates!

The truth is that this kind of position results from weakness of mental
powers of philosophical analysis, otherwise the substantival and
independent concept of existence is not something to be denied, rather
the copulative meaning is that which can only be established with
difficulty, especially for someone in whose language there is no
particular equivalent for it [the copulative meaning of existence, which
has no equivalent in Arabic].

It is possible that the reason for the denial of the substantival
meaning of existence is that in the language of the deniers, there is
but one word which is the equivalent of the copulative and substantival
meanings of existence, unlike Farsi, in which the word “*hastī* ”
(*being* ) is used for the substantival meaning, and the word “*ast* ”
(*is* ) is used for the copulative meaning. That is why this ambiguity
has arisen such that the meaning of existence is absolutely limited to
the copulative meaning.

Again we emphasize that philosophical discussions must not rely upon
linguistic ones, and the principles of grammar and linguistics must not
be taken as the basis for the solution of philosophical problems. We
should always be careful not to allow ourselves to be misled by the
features of words from the way to the precise knowledge of concepts, nor
to make mistakes about knowledge of the principles of entified
existents.

Existence and Existents
-----------------------

Another point worth mentioning about the expressions for existence and
its concept is that since the word*wujūd* (*existence* ) is the source
from which*mawjūd* (*existent* ) is derived, it is an infinitive [Arabic
words are typically derived from infinitives] and includes the meaning
occurrence, and it is related to a subject or object, and the equivalent
to it in Farsi is the word*būdan* (*to be* ). Likewise, from the
grammatical point of view, the expression*mawjūd* (*existent* ) is a
passive participle and includes the meaning of the action of the verb
upon the essence. Sometimes from the word*mawjūd* (*existent* ) an
artificial infinitive is obtained in the form of*mawjūdiyat* (*being an
existent* ), and is used as an equivalent to*wujūd* (*existence* ).

A word in the Arabic language which is used in an infinitive form is
sometimes divested of its meaning relative to a subject or object and is
used in the form of a verbal noun (*ism maṣdar* ) which indicates the
action of the verb itself. Therefore, with regard to*wujūd* (*existence*
) one may also consider this sort of meaning.

On the other hand, the meaning pertaining to the action of the verb
which indicates motion, or at least indicates a state or quality, cannot
be directly predicated of things. For example, one cannot
predicate*raftan* (*to go* ), which is an infinitive, or*raftār*
(*going* ), which is a verbal noun, to a thing or person, rather, either
a derivation must be obtained from it, for example, the word*ravandeh*
(*goer* ) may be a predicate for it, or another word which includes a
derived meaning should be added to it, for example,*ṣāḥib-e raftār*
(*one who is going* ). The first type is technically called*hū hū* (*it
it* ) predication, and the second type is called*dhū hū* (*possessor of
it* )

predication. For instance, the predication of ‘animal’ to ‘man’ is*hū
hū* predication, while the predication of ‘life’ to it is called*dhū hū*
predication.

This discussion, as has been observed, is basically related to grammar,
whose rules are conventional and differ from one language to another.
Some languages are richer than others with regard to vocabulary and
rules of grammar while others are more limited. However, since it is
possible that the relations between words and meanings may lead to
mistakes in philosophical discussions, it is necessary to mention that
in the usage of the expressions*wujūd* (*existence* ) and*mawjūd*
(*existent* ) in philosophical discussions, we must not merely attend to
linguistic features, but rather, basically attention to them distracts
the mind from discerning the intended meanings.

In philosophy, when the word*wujūd* ( *existence* ) is used, the
intended meaning is not that of an infinitive or the action of a verb,
nor, when the word *mawjūd* (existent) is used is the intended meaning
the respectival one of the passive participle. For example, when it is
said of God, the Exalted, that He is “sheer existence”, is this to be
interpreted in terms of the action of a verb or the relation to a
subject and object, or as meaning a quality or state and its relation to
the essence? Are we to quibble over how the word *wujūd* ( *existence* )
is to be applied to God, the Exalted, when the predication of an
infinitive to an essence is not correct? When the word *mawjūd* (
*existent* ) is applied to all realities and these include the Necessary
Existent as well as contingent existents, is this to be understood in
terms of the meaning of a passive participle? Is it to be argued on this
basis that since a passive participle requires a subject that God also
requires a subject? Or to the contrary, is it incorrect to apply it to
the Necessary Existent because of that meaning, so that it may not be
said that God is an existent?!

It is obvious that this sort of linguistic discussion has no place in
philosophy, and not only is one unable to solve even one of the problems
of philosophy by engaging in such discussion, it increases the problems
and yields nothing but distortions in thought. In order to avoid
misunderstandings and fallacies, one must pay exact attention to the
technical meanings of expressions, and in cases where these do not
correspond to the ordinary literal meanings or a technical meanings in
other sciences, this difference must be given full consideration so that
one does not become the victim of confusion and error.

It follows that the philosophical concept of*wujūd* (*existence* ) is
equivalent to absolute reality, and on this point is the opposite of
nothingness, and in technical terms is its contradictory. It includes
all things from the sacred divine essence to abstract and material
realities, from substances to accidents and from essences to states.
When these very same entified realities are reflected in the mind in the
form of propositions, at least two substantival concepts of them are
obtained, one of which is associated with the subject, and is usually a
whatish concept, while the other is the concept of ‘*mawjūd* ’
(*existent* ), which is a philosophical concept, and is associated with
the predicate, since its being respectival requires its being a
predicate.


