Lesson Twenty-Three: Entified Reality
=====================================

The Self-evidence (Badāhat) of Entified Reality
-----------------------------------------------

The subject of philosophy is considered to be the ‘existent’, as was
explained in the two previous lessons. Now, we shall present the
explanation of the self-evidence of the belief in the entified reality
of being.

The truth is this, that existence is like*‘ilm* (knowledge) both with
regard to its concept and with regard to its objective reality. And just
as that concept requires no definition, its entified reality also is
self-evident and without need of proof. No intelligent person imagines
that the world of being is nothing but nothing, and that no person
exists nor any other existent. Even the Sophists who considered man to
be the measure of all things, at least accepted the existence of man!
There is only one sentence from Gorgias who is considered to be the most
extreme of the Sophists, which apparently is an absolute denial of all
existence, as was mentioned in the discussion of epistemology. However,
it does not seem that his intention—assuming that it has been correctly
narrated—is that of the apparent meaning of his words, such that it
would include his own existence and that of his speech, unless he was
severely afflicted with mental illness, or uttered the words out of
spite.

In Lesson Twelve about doubts leading to the denial of knowledge, we
said that these doubts themselves presupposed knowledge, to which we may
add here that this same doubt requires the acceptance of some existents
which correspond to the mentioned knowledge. However, if someone would
deny his own existence and the existence of his denial, he would be like
the one whom, in the previous problem, denies the existence of his own
doubt, and he must be treated practically to make him accept reality.

In any case, an intelligent person whose mind has not been polluted with
the doubts of the Sophists and skeptics, not only accepts his own
existence, the existence of his perceptive powers, mental images and
concepts, and his own psychic activities, but also is certain of the
existence of other people, and the external world, and for this reason
when he becomes hungry, he eats food of the external world, and when he
becomes hot or cold, he decides to make use of things in the external
world. When he faces an enemy, or feels himself to be in some other
danger, he thinks about defense and seeks some solution for it, and if
he is able he will rise up and fight, and if not he may prefer to
escape. When he has feelings of friendship, he decides to become
intimate with a friend in the external world, and establishes friendly
relations with him, and similarly with other facets of life. And do not
imagine that the Sophists and idealists behaved any differently, for
otherwise they would not have lived very long; they would either die of
hunger or thirst, or some calamity or disaster would afflict them.

For this reason it is said that belief in entified existence is self
evident and natural. But this discussion must be expanded and elaborated
in more detail, and we will do this to the extent required. But before
presenting this subject, it is worth giving an account of the ways in
which reality is denied, so that we can take an appropriate position
regarding each of them.

Ways to Deny Reality
--------------------

The denial of entified reality appears in various forms, which can be
divided into five categories:

1. The absolute denial of being such that for the concept of existence
which is the subject of philosophy, there remains no instance, as
required by the apparent words of Gorgias which were narrated. It is
clear that with such an assumption there not only remains no place for
philosophical or scientific discussions, but also the door to speech and
hearing must be absolutely closed. And for such claims, a logical
response is inapplicable, and they must be treated practically.

2. The denial of the being of anything but “I, the perceiver”, such that
only one instance of “existent” remains. This position is not as silly
as the previous one, but on the basis of it, its proponent has no right
to speak or debate, for he does not accept the existence of another
person with whom to converse or debate. If such a person is in a
position to be debated, he must first be charged with having violated
his own claim, and this violation requires the rejection of his
assumption.

3. The denial of being beyond that of humanity, as has been reported of
some Sophists. On the basis of this position, instances of “existent”
will be limited to humans. This claim, which is relatively more moderate
than those mentioned above, opens the door to discussion and debate.
There is room for asking the proponent for reasons in favor of his own
existence and that of other people which will oblige him to accept some
self-evident propositions. Then, on the basis of the self-evident
propositions, some other theoretical points may also be proven.

4. The denial of the being of material existents, as is understood from
the words of Berkeley, for he considered being an existent equivalent
with being a perceiver or something perceived, and perceivers include
God and non-material existents. So, it is decided that perceived things
are to be limited to perceptible forms (essentially known (*ma‘lūmāt
bil-dhāt* )) which are realized within the perceiver himself, not
outside him. In this way there is no room for the objective existence of
material things.

Other idealists, like Hegel, may be joined to those mentioned above, for
they imagine the world to have the form of thoughts for absolute spirit,
which are considered to be subject to the laws of logic (but not of
cause and effect).

5. There is room to include along with the idealists, who deny a part of
reality, that is, material reality, the materialists, who are also
deniers of reality, and they truly deny the greater part of reality.
Moreover, the idealists are more logical than the materialists, for
their position rests on knowledge by presence and internal experience
which have absolute value, however much their inferences may be
erroneous. However, the position of the materialists rests on that which
is given by the senses, which is the source of most perceptual errors.

By attending to the various types of denial of reality, we reach the
conclusion that only the first hypothesis implies an absolute denial of
reality, and each of the other hypotheses implies merely a denial of a
part of reality and a limitation of its circle.

On the other hand, for each of the five kinds of hypothesis, there is
another hypothesis which appears in the form of doubt in absolute
reality or with respect to specific realities. If these doubts are
mingled with a denial of the possibility of knowledge, that is, if in
addition to presenting his own doubt he claims that logically no one can
have knowledge, this sort of claim is related to epistemology, and the
answer to it is given in its own place. However, if the presentation of
doubt is not mingled with a denial of the possibility of knowledge, the
answer to it may be found in ontology. Basically, the clarification of
philosophical questions is to remove doubts and to provide defense
against them.

The Secret of the Self-Evidence of Entified Reality
---------------------------------------------------

As we indicated at the beginning of this lesson, the absolute denial of
reality, the view that the world is nothing, is not something which
would be claimed by any conscious intelligent person without some
ulterior motive, just as it is regarding the absolute denial of
knowledge and apparent doubt about everything, even about the existence
of the doubt and doubter. Assuming that someone expresses these sorts of
claims, one cannot reason with him logically; rather he must be given a
practical response.

On the other hand, the existence of every particular reality is not
self-evident, and proof for many of them requires reasons and arguments,
and, as has been indicated, one of the most important duties of
philosophy is proof of the specific kinds of realities.

Now the following question will be raised: What is the mystery of the
self-evidence of the basis of reality?

Perhaps an answer will be given for the affirmation of the existence of
entified reality by way of summary, and the affirmation of material
reality will be definitive and specific, corresponding to the nature of
the intellect, and evidence for this is the existence of such beliefs in
all men, as is confirmed by their practical behavior. In this way, four
of the methods of denying reality, with the exception of the fifth way,
are shown to be invalid.

But this discussion is not sufficiently logical, for, as was mention in
lessons seventeen and nineteen, for in this way the correctness of this
subject cannot be guaranteed, and there is room to ask whether our
intellects would not understand in some other way if they had been
created differently. Moreover, to seek confirmation on the basis of the
views and behavior of men, in reality is a defective method of inductive
inference, which is of no logical value at all.

Perhaps it will be said that these affirmations are primary self-evident
truths (*badīhiyyāt* *awwaliyyah* ), for which the mere imagining of
their subjects and predicates suffices to produce assent.

But this claim is also incorrect, for if we assume that a proposition is
in the form of a ‘primary predication’, it is clear that its purport
will not be anything but the conceptual unity of subject and predicate.
If we suppose that it is in the form of a ‘common predication’ and we
consider its subject to refer to external instances, and we consider it
to be what in logical terminology is called*essential necessity* (
*ḍarūriyyāt dhātiyyah* ), then the truth of such a proposition will be
conditional on the existence of the subject in the external world, while
this means that its objective existence would be

proved by this proposition. In other words, propositions about reality
are like conditional propositions in that their purport is that whenever
an instance of the subject obtains in the external world, the predicate
for it will be proven. For example, the famous self-evident proposition,
“Every whole is greater than its own part,” is not able to prove the
existence of whole and part in the external world. Rather, its meaning
is that whenever a whole obtains in the external world, it will be
greater than its own part.

The invalidity of this claim in relation to external reality is clear,
for it is not forbidden to imagine the non-existence of the material
world. If God had not had the appropriate will, such a world would not
have come into existence. Likewise, after its creation, whenever He
willed, it would be destroyed.

The truth is this: the self-evidence of reality first takes shape
regarding things in consciousness and which are understood by infallible
knowledge by presence, and then with the abstraction of the concepts of
‘existent’ and ‘reality’ from their subjects they take the form of a
proposition called*qaḍiyyah muhmalah* 1 which refers to the principle of
reality as such [without quantification], and in this way the principle
of entified reality summarily (*ijmālan* ) takes the form of a
self-evident proposition.

The Source of Belief in Material Reality
----------------------------------------

The conclusion of our last discussion was that the source of belief in
the basis of entified reality is just knowledge by presence of the
realities of conscience, and hence knowledge of other realities,
including ‘material’ realities, cannot be considered self-evident
(*badīhī* ). For, as was said in Lesson Eighteen, that which is really
self-evident and can be known independently of any sort of argument are
objects of consciousness and primary self-evident propositions, while
the existence of material realities belongs to neither of these two
groups. Therefore, the following question may be posed: What is the
source of the dogmatic belief in material realities? And how is it that
every person automatically accepts their existence, and that the
behavior of each person is firmly based on this?

The answer to this question is that the source of a person’s belief in
material reality is an ‘spontaneous’ (*irtikāzī* ) but half conscious
argument, and it is really a proposition which is close to being
self-evident, which is sometimes called ‘innate’ ( *fiṭrī* ).

This may be explained by the fact that in most cases, on the basis of
the awareness which it has acquired, the intellect of a person reaches a
conclusion very quickly and almost automatically without the process of
inference being reflected clearly in the mind. Especially in the period
of childhood when the self-awareness of a person is not yet developed,
this mental process is rather obscure and close to being unconscious.
Therefore, it is considered that this knowledge obtains its conclusion
without a process of thought from its premises, in other words, it is
innate and automatic. But as the self-awareness of man develops, and one
becomes aware of the activities within one’s own mind, the obscurity
decreases, and gradually it assumes the form of conscious logical
reasoning.

The propositions which logicians have called ‘innate’ (*fiṭriyyāt* ) and
which have been defined as propositions which accompany deductions, or

whose middle terms are always present in the mind, are really of this
very sort of ‘spontaneous’ (*irtikāzī* ) proposition, reasoning about
which takes place very quickly and half-consciously.

Knowledge of material reality really is obtained by this very
‘spontaneous’ inference, which, especially during the period of
childhood, is far from the level of awareness. When we want to explain
it in the form of exact logical reasoning, it takes the following form:

Perceptual phenomena (for example the burning of the hand when it comes
into contact with fire) is the effect of a cause, and its cause is
either it itself (= I, the perceiver), or something other than it. But I
myself have not brought it into existence, for I never wanted to burn my
hand; therefore its cause will be something other than my existence.

Of course, in order to strengthen our belief in material things with
material properties, and to refute the probability of the direct effect
of something non-material there is a need to supplement this with other
arguments based on knowing the characteristics of material and
non-material existents. But God the Almighty has put such power in the
mind of man so that before acquiring mastery of exact philosophical
reasoning, he is able to obtain conclusions which are ‘spontaneous’ and
are half-conscious. In this way he is able to secure the needs of his
life.

Reference
---------

1 This is a kind of proposition whose quantity is indeterminate, e.g.,
“Metals expand when heated,” in which it is unclear whether the
proposition is intended to apply to all metals or only some. According
to traditional logic, this is a proposition whose quantity is
unspecified, but it is treated like a particular rather than a universal
proposition. [Tr.]
