Lesson Twenty-Four: Existence and Whatness
==========================================

The Relation between the Topics of Existence and Whatness
---------------------------------------------------------

According to the previous lessons, as was indicated on numerous
occasions, when entified reality is pictured in the mind (the locus of
acquired knowledge), it is pictured in the form of a simple question
(*halliyyah baṣīṭah* ), which is composed of at least two independent
substantive concepts, one of which usually serves as the subject and is
a whatish concept, which can be considered in the conceptual framework
of limits to an existent, and one of which is the predicate, the concept
of ‘existent’, considered to be a secondary philosophical intelligible
which denotes the occurrence of the instance of that essence. In this
way two different concepts are obtained for one simple truth, each of
which has its own rules and characteristics.

With regard to the concept of existence, or existent, philosophers have
contented themselves with mentioning that they are self-evident
intellectual concepts, without saying how the mind obtains this concept.
Only recently has the late ‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī, may Allah be pleased
with him, attempted to explain how it is abstracted.

Regarding the appearance of whatish concepts, there are various
opinions, which were mentioned in the section on epistemology. The
opinion which we accepted was that there is a special mental power
called the intellect which acquires these concepts automatically from
specific percepts. The characteristic of this intellectual picturing is
this very universality and ability to correspond to countless instances.

Many philosophers, especially the Peripatetics, have explained the
acquiring of whatish concepts in a way which has been the source of many
disputes and arguments in the course of the history of philosophy, and
in most philosophical discussions, it has been especially influential.

The result of their explanations is this: when we compare several
persons, for example, we see that these people, despite their
differences in height, weight, skin color and other specific
characteristics, all have a common truth which is the source of the
common effects in them. The specific attributes of each person are
really the particular specification of that person which distinguish him
from others. So, the mind, by deleting the individual specifications
acquires the universal perceptual concept of man, which is called the
essence of human beings.

Therefore, the perception of several individuals of each essence is
required for the direct acquisition of that essence, so that the mind,
attending to individual accidental specifications and the deletion of
them is able to abstract the common whatish aspect from the specific
accidents and extract the universal essence. It is thus except when a
whatness is known by the analysis and composition of other whatnesses
without need of prior knowledge of their own individuals.

Therefore, the essence of everything in the external world is often
mixed with characteristics which cause their specific qualities. Only
the intellect can abstract the essence from the collection of specific
accidents, and obtain the pure, sheer, abstracted essence from the
specifics. Then, that which is

found after the abstraction is that very thing which exists in the
external world concurrent with the individual specifications and
specific accidents, and with the plurality of accidents it becomes
numerous and a multiplicity. But when the mind abstracts it, it is no
longer capable of being multiple. For this reason it is said that a
sheer essence is unrepeatable.

Since a whatness, with that very quality of whatish unity, can
correspond to a countless number of individuals, it is called a natural
universal (*kullī ṭabī‘ī* ), although the characteristic of being
universal only applies to what is in the mind, for otherwise, as was
already stated, in the external world they are realized always as
mixtures with specifying accidents and in the form of individuals and
particulars.

Following this, other topics are presented, such as whether natural
universals themselves also exist in the external world, or is what
obtains in the external world only the individuals, so that the natural
universal occurs only in the mind. There have been many discussions and
disputes about this, and researchers have finally come to the opinion
that in the external world the natural universals in and of themselves
are not existent, but their existence is by the existence of their
individuals, and the individuals play the role of intermediaries for the
occurrence of natural universals.

Here another precise question can be raised, whether the mediation of
the individuals in the occurrence of natural universals is fixed or
accidental. In other words, does the mediation of the individuals cause
the true occurrence of the natural universal with another existence
other than that of the individuals? Does this cause the natural
universal to have the property of being existent as its own true
attribute? Or does the mediation of the individuals cause an accidental
pseudo-attribution of being existent to be related to natural
universals?

Another issue is the problem raised in Islamic philosophy of whether a
universal may be individuated by means of specific accidents. Every
accident in reality also has a whatness to which the mind attributes
universality, and therefore it participates with whatnesses of that
which has accidents in the need to be individuated. And this question
can be repeated with regard to them, as to how they are to be
individuated. How is the addition of a universal essence to cause the
individuation of a universal essence of that which has accidents?

Finally, Fārābī offered the solution that the individuation is an
essential requirement of entified existence. Every essence in reality is
found to be individuated by existence. Specific accidents each of which
is individuated by its own existence are considered mere signs of the
individuation of the essence of that which has accidents, and cannot be
truly considered the cause of the individuation.

It seems that this position of Fārābī is the first sprouting of the
[doctrine of the] fundamentality of existence, which gradually grew
until in the time of Mullā Ṣadrā it took the form of an independent and
fundamental topic in transcendent theosophy (*ḥikmat muta‘āliyyah* ).

With this brief explanation, along with several other indicated topics,
it has become clear that the topic of the fundamentality of existence is
not a topic with which to begin cold in the program of one’s research.
One may

guess why programs in which it is the first topic of philosophy cause
the bewilderment and confusion of students, so that after spending much
time on discussions concerning this, they still do not understand it
correctly. So what was the motivation for this discussion? What
philosophical difficulty can it solve?

In order to find an appropriate place for the problem of the
fundamentality of existence by which it can be elucidated in a clear
manner, we must indicate prior to this some other problems which will
prepare the ground for the presentation and clarification of this
subject. We will choose correct and specific subjects, then we will
present explanations of the terms and concepts needed for these
discussions, and finally we will take up the discussion of the principle
question. In this manner not only will the problem be solved in a clear
fashion, but it will also assist in the solution of other important
philosophical problems.

How the Mind Becomes Acquainted with the Concept of Existence
-------------------------------------------------------------

As has already been indicated, we have no explanation from the ancient
philosophers as to how the concept of existence is abstracted by the
mind, and among Islamic philosophers this subject was presented for the
first time by our late professor (‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī), may Allah be
pleased with him. He has discussions of this in both*Uṣūl-e Falsafah*
and*Nahāyah al-Ḥikmah* , which can be summarized as follows.

Man primarily finds ‘by presence’ the existence of a relation in
propositions which is really an action of the soul, and the mind, from
this, obtains a nominal concept (*mafhūm-e ḥarfī* ), which in Farsi is
expressed by the word ‘ *ast’* ( *is* ). After that, it is viewed in an
independent form, and the substantival concept of existence is
abstracted ‘in the possessive case’. Afterward, that qualification is
deleted, and it is understood in an absolute form. For example, in the
sentence, “Ali is wise”, at first the meaning of ‘is’ is obtained by a
judgment of the soul to affix wisdom to Ali, so that the meaning of ‘is’
is copulative, and no idea of it is possible except through the
sentence. Then it is considered in an independent form, just as the
preposition ‘from’ is considered independently and interpreted as
meaning ‘origin’. It is said, the word ‘from’ refers to ‘origin’. In
this way, the meaning of ‘the attribution of wisdom to Ali’ which is a
possessive concept, is obtained, which includes a relational meaning.
Then the possessive and relational aspect is deleted and the independent
and absolute meaning of ‘existence’ is obtained.

But perhaps an easier explanation can be presented for how the mind
becomes acquainted with the concept of existence and other philosophical
concepts. An example of this will be mentioned here, and allusion will
be made to it in some other cases as well.

When the soul observes within itself a non-material quality, such as
fear, and after it is removed it compares two of its states: the state
of fear and the state of a lack of fear. The mind then becomes disposed
to abstract from the first state the concept of the ‘existence of fear’
and from the second state the concept of the ‘absence of fear’. After
the possessive and relational

qualification is deleted by abstraction, the absolute concepts of
‘existence’ and ‘ nothingness’ are obtained.

This method is also used to abstract other philosophical concepts, and
by comparing two existents from a special point of view, two opposite
concepts are abstracted. From this the secret of the pairing of these
concepts is revealed, such as the concepts of cause and effect,
objective and subjective (*khārijī va dhinī* ), potential and actual,
fixed and changing. In Lesson Fifteen we explained that one of the
differences between whatish concepts and philosophical concepts is that
the first group is reflected in the mind automatically, while the second
group requires mental activity and comparison and analysis, and here we
also saw how the mind finds the disposition to abstract the two opposite
concepts of existence and nothingness by comparing two states of the
soul.

How the Mind Becomes Acquainted with Whatness
---------------------------------------------

Aside from the position of the Platonists, according to whom the
perception of whatnesses is by observing abstract truths or by
remembering previous observations of them, and some other positions,
most philosophers agree that the perception of whatnesses occurs by
abstraction from specific objects of perception and from individuating
accidents. On this basis they consider necessary the priority of the
perception of several specific and particular things. However, first,
this question can be raised, how this abstraction is accomplished for
kinds for which there is only one individual? Second, regarding the
accidents themselves, which they admit have whatnesses, what is to be
said? For it cannot be said that for every accident that it itself has
individuating accidents, so that by abstracting and peeling them off
(*taqshīr* ) universal whatnesses are obtained.

Hence, some of the scholars have said that this philosophical exposition
is metaphorical and is only used as an approach to the subject for new
students to philosophy.

The truth is that a whatish concept is a passive perception which is
obtained by the intellect, and an individual perception is sufficient
for obtaining it, with no other condition. In like manner, an imaginary
perception, which is an individual passive perception, is obtained by
the faculty of the imagination (*khayāl* ) after a single sensory
perception.

For example, when our eyes see something of a white color, an imaginary
form of it is reflected in the faculty of the imagination, and its
universal concept in the intellect is interpreted as the essence
‘whiteness’, and likewise for other sensory and specific perceptions.

That which causes it to be imagined that the perception of a universal
essence is obtained through abstraction and peeling off the accidents is
the fact that in this way an answer is sought to the question regarding
compound things—such as man, whose elements and attributes are known by
different senses and even with the help of scientific instruments,
analysis and mental deduction, from which various intellectual concepts
are naturally abstracted—as to how a single whatness can be related to
them so that all their essences (*dhātiyyāt* ) will be included?

In such cases, it is thought that first one must know the accidental
aspects of them, aspects whose change, alteration or removal does not
cause the

destruction of the principle of that existent. For example, if the skin
color of a man changes from white to black, his humanity is not removed,
and likewise for changes in the height, breadth and other physical
attributes and the psychological states of a man. Hence, all of these
aspects and attributes, in relation to man, are accidental, and in order
to know his essence all of them should be removed. One of the best ways
for knowing which attributes are not essential is seeing whether they
differ in different individuals. So, we must look at several individuals
who have various attributes and accidents, and by means of the
differences among them we find that none of these is essential for man,
until we arrive at concepts such that if they are negated the humanity
of (the individual) will not remain. They are the same essential
concepts which are common among all the individuals and which are the
components of their whatness. In this way, compound whatnesses are
considered to have genera and differentia, each of which indicates a
specific essential aspect in the compound whatness, as is mentioned in
classical logic.

But this subject is based on positive principles which must be discussed
in philosophy. From among them is the question of whether each compound
existent has a single existence and a single existential limit which is
reflected in the mind as a single whatness. What is the standard of
their true unity? How is a multiplicity of elements compatible with that
unity? What is the relation between the parts with each other, and what
is the relation of all of them with the whole? Are all of the parts
actively existent with respect to the whole, or is the existence of all
or some of them potential with respect to the whole? Is that which is
called the parts or elements of a compound existent the preparatory
condition for the appearance of other simple existences, which
constitute the truth of that existent, and which by negligence are all
called single existences?

Suppose that there is a way to solve these and other problems completely
coherent with a logical theory of genus and difference. It will still
only be true of compound whatnesses. The perception of simple whatnesses
can never be justified in this way. Finally, each compound essence is
composed of several simple whatnesses, and the question of knowledge of
the simples will remain.


