Lesson Twenty-Five: Precepts of Whatness
========================================

Respects of Whatness
--------------------

In the previous lesson we narrated from the sages that the essence of
every existent in the external world is a mixed with specific accidents
and pure essence obtains only in the mind. With regard to this point, we
may consider two respectival conceptions of essence: one is the
restricted or mixed essence which occurs in the external world, and the
other is the abstract essence which may only be imagined in the mind.
The first respectival is called*i‘tibār bisharṭ-e shay’* (the
respectival conditional on a thing) and the second is called*i‘tibār
bisharṭ-e lā* (the negatively conditioned respectival). That which is
divided (*maqsam* ) into these two is also considered a respectival of
essence, and it is called*i‘tibār lā bi sharṭ* (the unconditioned
respectival), and it has neither the aspect of being in the external
world, being mixed with accidents (restricted by existence), nor the
aspect of being in the mind with a lack of accidents (not being in the
external world), and it is called a ‘natural universal’ (*kullī ṭabī‘ī*
). It is believed that since natural universals have no restrictions or
conditions, neither the condition of being mixed nor the condition of
being abstract, they are assembled from both respectivals. That is, it
is both in the external world with restricted essence, and also in the
mind with abstract essence. For this reason it is said, “The essence, in
the respect in which it is nothing but itself, is not an existent and
not a non-existent, not a universal and not a particular,” that is, when
we regard the essence itself, and do not consider any other aspect, we
will have only a concept which includes neither the meaning of existence
nor the meaning of nonexistence, neither the meaning of universality nor
the meaning of particularity. For this reason it can be the subject of
the attribute of existence and it can be subject to the attribute of
non-existence, it can be the subject of the attribute of being
universal, and it can be the subject of the attribute of being
particular, but these attributes will be external to its essence. In
other words, all of these attributes are predicated in the form of
common predications upon the unconditioned essence, the natural
universal, and none of these attributes are predicated in the form of
primary predication, for they do not have a conceptual unity with it.

It is necessary to mention that the expressions*lā bi sharṭ*
(unconditioned) and *bi sharṭ lā* (negatively conditioned) are used by
philosophers in a different context to distinguish the concept of genus
and difference from the concept of matter and form. It is explained that
when an existent in the external world is composed of matter and form, a
concept is obtained from each of them, and it is possible that the
essence of a thing is composed of genus and difference. With this
difference in mind, if we consider those concepts as genus and
difference then one may be predicated of the other. For example, in the
case of the genus and difference of man, it can be said that man is a
‘rational animal’. But if the concepts refer to matter and form, then
one cannot be predicated of the other. For instance, one cannot
predicate the spirit of the body. In this regard it is said that what
distinguishes the concept of genus and species from that of matter and
form

is that genus and difference are unconditioned ( *lā bi sharṭ* ) while
matter and form are negatively conditioned ( *bi sharṭ-e lā* ).

This terminology is not related to the previous one, and is simply a
case of homonymity.

It is necessary bear in mind that the diversity and difference of the
‘respectivals of essence’ (*i‘tibārāt māhiyyah* ) are merely mental, and
it is clear from the title that they are respectival, and have no
entified or objective source, and in lieu of them there are no entified
existents, and even if the fundamentality of essence is established,
there will not be in existence this multiplicity of whatnesses.

Natural Universals
------------------

From the review of the different kinds of respectivals of essence, the
definition of ‘natural universal’ may also be obtained, for this is the
same as the divisible (*maqsamī* ) respectival, the ‘unconditioned’
essence, in which there is no kind of restriction, not even that of
being abstract and lacking accidents, nor that of objective existence.
It is called ‘universal’ because it is common among individuals, and it
is called ‘natural’ to distinguish it from ‘logical universals’ and
‘intellectual universals’. By the former is meant a universal which may
have other accidental concepts in the mind, and by the latter, the
\`intellectual universal’ is meant the universal to which accidents are
applied, and which is abstract, ‘negatively conditioned’, which is only
realized in the realm of the intellect and which is the mental instance
of the concept of a logical universal.

We previously pointed out that one of the most frequently discussed
topics in the history of philosophy has been that concerning the
existence of natural universals, whether it can be said that they also
have existence in the external world, or if it must be said that their
existence is only in the mind, only for intellectual universals, that
is, whatnesses abstract of accidents, so that they should be like the
universals for which there are no individuals.

The proponents of the existence of natural universals have explained
that by existence in the external world they do not mean that the
universal obtains in the realm of the external world, but that in the
external world there is something existent in common among individuals,
which objectively occurs in the mind, as well, where it obtains the
attribute of universality.

The proponents of the existence of natural universals have reasoned that
the natural universal is that which is divided into two other
respectivals of essence, the mixed respectival and the abstract
respectival, and the condition of being that which is to be divided is
that both divisions should pertain to what exists. For example, when the
human is divided into two divisions, man and woman, the human, which is
that from which they were divided, exists in both man and woman. So,
natural universals should exist in both intellectual or abstract
whatnesses and mixed or restricted whatnesses. Since the realm of the
existence of mixed whatnesses is the external world, natural universals
exist in the external world.

The soundness of this reasoning should be based on a true interpretation
of mixed whatnesses that does not neglect anything [relevant]. An
existent in the external world is truly a mixture of a whatness which
has accidents

and specific accidents, or is composed of essence and existence, but
this cannot be proved—as was mentioned with regard to the way in which
the mind becomes acquainted with whatnesses—and further explanation of
it will be given in future lessons.

What is intended in speaking of the existence of a natural universal in
the external world and its mixture with individuating accidents or
existence is nothing more than that the intellect is able to abstract
these various concepts from an objective existent, in other words, that
the concept of natural universals and whatnesses are applicable to
objective existents, so that the concepts of accidents and of existents
are predicated of them. But it is not to be supposed that those who deny
the existence of natural universals also deny their existence with this
meaning.

On the other hand, those who deny the existence of natural universals in
the external world have reasoned that in the objective realm there is
nothing but the individual (instances) of whatnesses, therefore, there
is no place for the existence of something else by the name of ‘natural
universal’.

With this reasoning an answer may be given, that every individual of a
whatness you may consider is accompanied by accidents other than the
whatness itself, such as an individual human is accompanied by height,
breadth, color and other accidents. Undoubtedly, these things are not
part of the human whatness, therefore, variation and change in them does
not imply multiplicity and change in whatness. So, in all individuals
there is the common aspect which is the natural universal.

It is clear that in this answer there is confusion between the
individual by essence and the individual by accident. That is, that
which is called the individual human is really a collection of
individuals of various whatnesses, substantial and accidental, which due
to negligence are considered as the individual human. The principle
individual which is human by essence is that same substantial individual
which is the bearer of various accidents, that is, the same thing which
is considered the whatish aspect of man and common among all individuals
(individual accidents), and aside from this there is nothing else which
might be called the ‘natural universal of man’.

Finally, proponents of the existence of natural universals have claimed
that by their existence in the external world it is not meant that aside
from the existence of individuals there is an existence independent and
separate from them, but it is considered that the existence of natural
universals depends upon the existence of their individuals.

As was previously indicated, this position is open to two
interpretations. One is that the existence of the individual is a means
for establishing the existence of natural universals and is the cause of
their occurrence, and in this way the existence of natural universals in
the external world may be truly proven. But such things are not
provable, for in the external world there is nothing but individuals by
accident, including individuals by essence, and there is nothing which
can be considered their effect. Furthermore, universals cannot be
considered the effects of individuals. The other interpretation is that
the mediation of the individual for the occurrence of the natural
universal is a mediation by accidents, that is, the standard for the
predication of the concept of man to persons in the external world

(individuals by accident) is the existence of the human substance
(individual by essence,*dhāt* ) in it. This means that this very aspect
of one’s humanity is a true instance by essence (*bi dhāt* ) for the
concept of man. So we see that the implication of this interpretation is
that it is established that there is nothing other than the individual
by essence (*bi dhāt* ) along with the individual by accident.

The proponents of the existence of natural universals may content
themselves with saying: “Our opinion is [that the existence of natural
universals is] nothing but the correctness of the predication of a
whatness of an individual, and, as has been indicated, such a meaning
would not be disputed by those who deny the existence of natural
universals.”

For this reason some of the great scholars have said that the dispute
between the proponents and opponents of the existence of natural
universals is purely verbal.

The Cause of the Individuation of Whatness
------------------------------------------

As has been explained, natural universals are those whatnesses called
‘unconditioned’ which are considered as having no restrictions on them,
but which can be combined with all sorts of restrictions and conditions,
and for this reason they are combined in the mind with ‘negatively
conditioned’ abstract whatnesses, and the attribute of universality is
applied to them, while in the external world they accompany mixed
whatnesses, and the attribute of particularity is applied to them.

But of course, as has been mentioned in this very lesson, the meaning of
joining a natural universal with an abstract essence or with a mixed
essence is not that two independent whatnesses are joined together with
each other, or are merged with one another, but the view is that two
respectivals are joined, that is, when a whatness becomes established in
the mind, the intellect is able to view it in two ways: in one, the
basis of the concept becomes the object of attention, without
consideration of whether it has or does not have specific accidents, and
this is the ‘unconditioned’ respectival, the natural universal; in the
second it is considered bare of accidents, and this is the ‘negatively
conditioned’ respectival. In the same way the intellect can consider the
essence of the existent in the external world in two ways: first, as the
basis of the essence common between the mind and the external world,
that is the ‘unconditioned’ respectival, the natural universal; and
secondly, with respect to being mixed with accidents, that is, the
restricted ‘negatively conditioned’ respectival.

Now, if those who explain whatnesses and respectivals in this way are
asked what requires the application of a natural universal to a
particular while essentially it is not required to have such
attribution, or, what is the standard for the individuation of essence,
naturally they will answer that what requires the attribution of essence
to particularity and individuation is that very mixture of it with
specific accidents, a requirement of the essence for existence in the
external world, so that what requires the application of the essence to
universality is its lack of these accidents, required by the essence for
existence in the mind. An implication of this answer is that, if an
objective existent were without accidents it would be universal, and

likewise, if mental essence were attached to accidents, it would become
particular.

This answer, however, is by no means convincing, because this question
may be repeated with respect to the essence of each accident: what
causes the particularity and individuation of them, so that the essence
of that which has accidents will also depend upon their specification?
Furthermore, the implication of this answer, that if the mental essence
is attached to accidents it becomes particular and if the objective
essence becomes bare of accidents it becomes universal, is not
acceptable, for the universality of intellectual concepts is their
ability to correspond to numerous instances and to reflect countless
individuals, and this ability is not negated by coming to be attached to
accidents. Also, the external existent is not such that if it is without
accidents it may be supposed that it is able to have countless
instances. Abstract entities are not to be considered universals just
because they do not have accidents, because the characteristic of
denoting countless individuals cannot be found in them.

Thus, some philosophers have decided to search for the standard of
individuation of whatnesses in other things, such as matter, time and
place. But it is clear that having recourse to such things is of no use,
for all of them the problem remains of the standard for the
individuation of the essence of matter, or of time or place. And to
approach an answer to this problem requires the individuation of other
whatnesses.

In conclusion, adding a thousand universal whatnesses lacking
individuation to another universal and unspecific essence will not
individuate it, regardless of whether it is a substantial or accidental
essence.

As far as we know, the correct way to solve the problem of the criterion
for the individuation of whatnesses was first presented by the great
Islamic philosopher, Fārābī. According to this solution, individuation
is the essential necessary result of existence, and whatness is only
made determinate in the shadow of existence. That is, no essence can be
individuated or made determinate by that aspect of it in which it is a
universal concept which can be applied to numerous individuals and
instances, regardless of how many dozens of qualifications are added as
a means to restrict it to a single individual, for, finally, the
intellect will not consider it impossible that this very same qualified
concept can be imagined to apply to numerous other individuals, even if
in the external world there is not more than one such individual.

So, the criterion of individuation cannot be found in the addition and
conjunction of other whatnesses. However, it is entified existence that
essentially cannot be applied to other existents, not even to one other
individual existent. And basically, application and predication and
concepts of this sort are characteristic of concepts.

In conclusion, it is existence that essentially individuates. Every
essence which is attributed to particularity and specification, only
does so in the shadow of unity with existence.

This answer of Fārābī, is the source of the change in the view of the
philosophers, and it truly must be considered as the turning point in
the history of philosophy. For until then, all philosophical
discussions, no

matter how unconsciously, were based on the idea that existence in the
external world could only be known by whatnesses, and in truth,
whatnesses figured as the pivot of all philosophical discussions.
However, since then the attention of philosophers returned to existence,
and they considered entified existence as having special precepts which
cannot be known by means of whatish precepts.

However, unfortunately, the illumination of this point was not able to
penetrate all philosophical discussions rapidly, and change the face of
philosophy very soon. It took centuries until this sprout grew and
finally the great Islamic philosopher, the late Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn
Shīrāzī (Mullā Ṣadrā) officially posed the topic of the fundamentality
of existence as the most basic principle of transcendent theosophy.
However, he also, in most of his discussions, did not abandon the way of
his predecessors. Especially in the presentation of various
philosophical topics, he followed the method of his predecessors. It was
only in the final exposition of views and in drawing conclusions that he
proposed his own opinion based on the fundamentality of existence.

Before concluding this discussion it is necessary to mention that the
subjects discussed in this lesson, concerning the respectivals of
existence and especially the existence of natural universals in the
external world, take on a totally different aspect on the basis of the
fundamentality of existence. Basically, the existence of mixed
whatnesses may also be considered as intellectual respectivals. Perhaps
the aware reader will discover from the subjects of this lesson that the
source of the doctrine of the fundamentality of whatness is really the
belief in the true existence of natural universals.


