Lesson One: A Glance at the Course of Philosophical Thought: (From Its Origins to the Islamic Epoch)
====================================================================================================

The Beginning of Philosophical Thought
--------------------------------------

The history of human thought as well as the creation of man goes back
beyond history. Wherever he has lived, thought has been an inseparable
characteristic of man. Wherever he has placed his feet, he has taken
thinking and intellection with him.

There is no certain and precise information about the unwritten thoughts
of man except that which has been surmised by archaeologists on the
basis of uncovered remains. However, written thought has remained behind
as caravan of history has passed, since the time of written language.

Among the kinds of human thought, that which is related to the knowledge
of existence and to its beginning and end, at first were mixed with
religious beliefs. Therefore it may be said that one must look for the
oldest philosophical thoughts among oriental religious thoughts.

Historians of philosophy believe that the most ancient collections that
are purely philosophical or that are predominantly philosophical are
related to the Greek sages, who lived approximately six centuries before
Christ (peace be with him). Scholars of that time are mentioned who have
tried to come to know existence, and the beginning and end of the
cosmos. In order to interpret the appearance and changes that occur in
existents, they expressed different and occasionally contradictory
opinions, and at the same time, they do not hide the fact that their
thoughts were influenced more or less by oriental religious beliefs and
culture.

In any case, the free atmosphere for discussion and criticism in the
Greece of those days prepared the ground for developing and taking pride
in philosophical thought. That area was turned into a nursery for
philosophy.

Naturally, the beginning thoughts were not properly organized and
arranged, and the problems for research were not precisely categorized,
let alone that each category should have a specific name and title and
characteristic method. In sum, all ideas were called science (*‘ilm* ),
wisdom (*hikmat* ) and knowledge (*ma‘rifat* ), and the like.

The Appearance of Sophism and Skepticism
----------------------------------------

In the fifth century B.C., scholars are mentioned who in the Greek
language were called “sophists”, that is, sage and learned. But in spite
of their vast information they had about the knowledge then current,
they did not believe in fixed truths, and they did not consider any
thing to be definitely known or certain.

As reported by historians of philosophy, they were professional teachers
who taught rhetoric and debate, and they trained defense lawyers for the
courts, for which there was much demand at that time. This profession
required the defense lawyer to be able to establish any claim and to be
able to reject all sorts of opposing claims. Dealing with this sort of
teaching which was often subject to fallacy, gradually brought about a
kind of thinking according to which basically there is no truth beyond
human thought!

You have heard the story of a man who jokingly said that in such and
such a house sweets are being given away. In their simplicity, the
people hurried to crowd around the door of the mentioned house. Little
by little, the speaker himself began to harbor suspicions about the
matter, and so as not to lose out on the chance for free sweets, he
joined the line.

It seems as if the Sophists also were victims of this same fate. By
teaching fallacious methods to establish and deny claims, little by
little such tendencies came to appear in their own thinking, that
basically truth and falsehood depend on human thought, and in conclusion
that there is no truth beyond human thought!

The expression "sophism," which meant sage and learned, due to being
ascribed to such mentioned people, lost its fundamental meaning, and it
came to be used as a symbol and sign for a way of thinking according to
fallacious reasoning. It is this same expression that in Arabic has
taken the form “*sūfisṭī* ” and the term “*safsaṭah* ” is derived from
it.

The Period of the Flourishing of Philosophy
-------------------------------------------

The most famous thinker who stood up against the Sophists and who
criticized their ideas and views was Socrates. It was he who called
himself*philosophus* , that is, a lover of wisdom. It is this same
expression that in Arabic took the form*filsūf* from which the
term*falsafah* is derived.

Historians of philosophy consider there to be two causes for the choice
of this name: one is the humility of Socrates, who always was confessing
his own ignorance, and the other is his objection to the Sophists who
called themselves sages, that is, with the choice of this title, he
wanted to make them understand: You, who for the sake of material and
political aims engage in discussion and debate, teaching and learning,
are not worthy of the name ‘sage’, and even I, who reject your ideas
with the firmest of reasons, do not consider myself worthy of this
title, and I merely call myself a lover of wisdom.

After Socrates, his student, Plato, who for years profited from his
lessons, endeavored to establish the principles of philosophy, and then,
his student, Aristotle, brought philosophy to the pinnacle of its
flourishing, and formalized the principles of thought and reasoning in
the form of the science of logic, as he formulated the pitfalls of
thought in the form of a section on the fallacies.

Ever since Socrates called himself a philosopher, the expression
philosophy has been used as opposed to sophistry, and it embraces all
the real sciences, such as physics, chemistry, medicine, astronomy,
mathematics and theology. Even today in many of the world's most
renowned libraries, the books of physics and chemistry are classified
under*philosophy* , and only conventional disciplines, such as
vocabulary, syntax and grammar, are outside the realm of philosophy.

In this way, philosophy came to be considered as a common noun for all
the real sciences, and it was divided into two general groups:
theoretical sciences and practical sciences. The theoretical sciences
include the natural sciences, mathematics and theology, and the natural
sciences in their turn include the fields of cosmogony, mineralogy,
botany and zoology, and mathematics is divided into arithmetic,
geometry, astronomy and music.

Theology is divided into two parts: metaphysics or general discussions
of existence, and theology proper. The practical sciences are divided
into three branches: morality, domestic economy and politics.


natural sciences: the general principles of bodies,


theoretical

cosmogony, mineralogy, botany, zoology


mathematics: arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, music


theology: the general principles of existence, divinity


philosophy


ethics (regarding the individual)


practical

domestic economy (regarding the family)


politics (regarding the community)

The End of Greek Philosophy
---------------------------

After Plato and Aristotle, for some time their students occupied
themselves with the compilation, arrangement and eaboration on the works
of their masters, and more or less kept the market for philosophy brisk.
It did not take long, however, for this briskness to be replaced by
stagnation, and that prosperity and thriving began to fail, and in
Greece there came to be few customers for the commodities of science and
knowledge. The masters of the arts and sciences came to dwell in
Alexandria, where they engaged in research and education. This city
remained the center of science and philosophy until the fourth century.

But when the Roman emperors converted to Christianity, and propagated
the beliefs of the Church as official beliefs and ideas, they began to
oppose the free realm of thought and science, until finally Justinian,
the Eastern Roman Emperor, in the year A.D. 529, issued the edict to
close the universities and schools of Athens and Alexandria, and the
scholars fled for their lives, and they sought refuge in other cities
and lands. In this reason the gleaming torch of science and philosophy
was extinguished in the Roman Empire.

The Dawn of the Sun of Islam
----------------------------

Simultaneous with the above mentioned process (in the sixth century of
the Christian era), in another corner of the world, the greatest event
of history occurred, and the Arabian peninsula was witness to the birth,
mission and migration of the eminent Prophet of Islam, may the Peace and
Blessings of Allah be with him and with his progeny. He read the message
of Divine guidance in the ear of the consciousness of the world. As a
first step, he called upon people to acquire knowledge,[^1] and he held
reading, writing and learning in the highest regard. He founded the
greatest civilization and most thriving culture in the world. He
encouraged his followers to acquire knowledge and wisdom from the cradle
to the grave

(*min al-mahd ila al-laḥd* ), from the nearest to the furthest points on
the globe (even if to China,*wa law bil-ṣīn* ), and at whatever cost
(*wa law bi-safk al-muhaj wa khawḍ al-lujaj* ).[^2]

The prolific sapling of Islam planted by the powerful hand of the
Messenger of God (ṣ) in the life giving radiance of Divine revelation
and nourished by other cultures grew and yielded fruit. Islam absorbed
the raw material of human thought according to proper Divine standards
and changed them into useful elements in the forge of constructive
criticism, and in a short period it spread its shade over all the
cultures of the world.

In the shade of the encouragement of the Noble Messenger (*ṣ* ) and his
impeccable successors, Muslims began to acquire various sciences, and
the scientific heritages of Greece, Rome and Iran were translated into
Arabic. They absorbed the useful elements and supplemented them with
their own inquiries, and in most fields they were able to make important
discoveries, as in algebra, trigonometry, astronomy, perspective,
physics and chemistry.

Another important factor of the growth of Islamic culture was politics.
The oppressive Ummayyids and Abbasids who illegitimately occupied the
seat of Islamic government felt a severe need for popular approval among
the Muslims, while the Household of the Prophet, the*Ahl al-Bayt* , may
the blessings of Allah be with all of them, that is, those who were the
legitimate guardians ( *awliyah* ) of the peoples, were the source of
knowledge and the treasury of the Divine revelation. The governing
regime had no means to attract people except threats and bribes. Hence,
they tried to make their regime prosper by encouraging scholars and
gathering authorities, and by using the Greek, Roman and Iranian
sciences, they tried to open a shop in opposition to the *Ahl al-Bayt* .

In this way, various philosophical ideas and types of knowledge and
crafts with diverse motivations by means of friends and foes, entered
the Islamic environment, and the Muslims began to inquire about, adopt
and criticize them, and brilliant figures began to appear in the world
of science and philosophy in the Islamic environment, each of whom
developed a branch of the sciences by his own constant endeavors, and
Islamic culture bore fruit.

Among them, the scholars of Islamic theology and doctrine reviewed and
criticized the problems of divine philosophy from different viewpoints,
and however much some of them went to extremes in their criticisms, this
sort of criticism and nit-picking, questioning and raising doubts caused
most of the Islamic thinkers and philosophers to try harder, leading to
the enrichment of intellectual and philosophical thought.

The Development of Philosophy in the Islamic Epoch
--------------------------------------------------

With the widening of the realm of Islamic government and the inclination
of different peoples to this life giving religion, many centers of
learning of the world came to be included within the realm of Islam.
There was a great exchange of ideas among scholars, exchange of books
among libraries and translation of these books from various languages:
Hindi, Farsi, Greek, Latin, Aramaic, Hebrew, etc., into Arabic, which
had become the*de facto* international language of the Muslims, and this
accelerated the pace of the development of philosophy, the sciences and
the crafts. Many books of

the philosophers of Greece and Alexandria, and other reputable centers
of learning were rendered into Arabic.

In the beginning, the lack of a common language and technical terms
agreed upon by the translators, and the discrepancies regarding the
principles of Eastern and Western philosophy made the teaching of
philosophy difficult and made research and selection among these
principles even more difficult. But it was not very long before geniuses
such as Abū Naṣr Fārābī and Ibn Sīnā were able to learn the entire sum
of philosophical thought of that time by their constant efforts. With
God given talents that flourished under the radiance of the light of
revelation and the explanations of the Imams, they were then able to
review and select from among the appropriate philosophical principles
and to present a mature philosophical system, which in addition to
including Platonic and Aristotelian ideas and Neo-Platonic thought from
Alexandria, and the ideas of oriental mystics (*‘urafā* ) also included
new thoughts and was thus able to excel over all the systems of
philosophy of the East and West, although the largest portion of the new
system was Aristotelian, and for this reason their philosophy had an
Aristotelian and peripatetic color.

Later, this philosophical system came under the critical magnifying
glass of thinkers such as Ghazālī, Abū al-Barakāt Baghdādī and Fakhr
Rāzī. On the other hand, taking advantage of the works of the sages of
ancient Iran, and comparing them with the works of Plato, the Stoics and
the Neo-Platonists, Suhravardī founded a new school of philosophy,
called Illuminationist philosophy, which had a more Platonic color. In
this way, new ground was prepared for the encounter among philosophical
ideas and their development and ripening.

Centuries later, great philosophers such as Khwājah Naṣīr al-Dīn Ṭūsī,
Muḥaqqiq Dawānī, Sayyid Sadr al-Dīn Dashtakī, Shaykh Bahā’ī and Mīr
Dāmād were able to supplement the enrichment of Islamic philosophy with
their own brilliant ideas. Then came the turn of Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī who
introduced a new system of philosophy with his own genius and innovation
which was composed of the harmonious elements of peripatetic and
Illuminationist philosophies and mystical disclosures, to which he added
profound thoughts and valuable ideas, and he called it*transcendent
theosophy* (*ḥikmat muta‘āliyyah* ).

References
----------

[^1] Consider the first verses revealed to the Prophet (*ṣ* ), “Read! In
the Name of your Lord Who created… Who taught by the Pen….” (96:1, 4).

[^2] Allusion is made here to several well-known hadiths attributed to
the Prophet (*ṣ* ).
