Lesson Twenty-Six: Introduction to the Fundamentality of Existence
==================================================================

A Brief Look at the History of the Problem
------------------------------------------

As was previously mentioned, prior to Fārābī almost all philosophical
discussions were centered about whatnesses, or at least were
unconsciously based on the fundamentality of whatness, and in statements
reported from the Greek philosophers, no clear indications are to be
found of any tendency toward the fundamentality of existence. But among
the Islamic philosophers, such as Fārābī, Ibn Sīnā, Bahmanyār and Mīr
Dāmād, not only is this tendency to found, but there are also
declarations of position on the topic.

On the other hand, Shaykh al-Ishrāq [Suhravardī], who paid particular
attention to intellectual concepts (*i‘tibārāt ‘aqlī* ), took up a
position against the tendency toward the fundamentality of existence,
and he sought by proofs for the respectival nature of the concept of
existence to invalidate this tendency, although in his own statements
points may be found which are more compatible with the fundamentality of
existence, and which do not properly justify the doctrine of the
fundamentality of whatness.

In any case, Ṣadr al-Muta’ allihīn was the first to place this topic at
the head of discussions of ontology, and he suggested solutions to other
problems on this basis. He says: “At first I myself was a proponent of
the fundamentality of whatness and I defended it vigorously until, by
the grace of God, I found the truth of the matter.”1 He attributed the
doctrine of the fundamentality of existence to the peripatetics and the
doctrine of the fundamentality of whatness to the illuminationists.
However, since the topic of the fundamentality of existence had not
previously been presented as an independent topic and the concept of it
had not been previously explained, philosophers cannot easily be grouped
specifically and definitively in relation to it, so as to characterize
the peripatetics in terms of the doctrine of the fundamentality of
existence and to consider the doctrine of the fundamentality of whatness
as a feature of the illuminationists. Supposing, however, that this
classification is correct, one must not forget that the fundamentality
of existence was not presented by the followers of the peripatetics in
such a way that it could take its proper place among the problems of
philosophy to shed light on the solution of other philosophical
problems. Rather, the peripatetics often presented and explained
philosophical problems in a way which was more compatible with the
doctrine of the fundamentality of whatness.

Explanation of Terms
--------------------

In order to clarify this topic and completely specify the area of
controversy it is first necessary to provide explanations of the terms
used regarding the problem, and then to precisely determine the purport
of the topic and area of conflict.

This problem is usually presented by posing the question of whether
existence is fundamental and whatness respectival or whether whatness is
fundamental and existence respectival? However, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn

himself presented the problem in the following form. Existence possesses
objective reality. The implicit purport of this is that whatness does
not possess objective reality. Thus, the pivotal expressions of this
topic are existence, whatness, fundamentality, respectival, and reality.

However, we have already explained the expression, ‘existence,’ which is
sometimes used as an infinitive (*maṣdar* ) (to be), and sometimes as a
verbal noun (*ism-e* *maṣdar* ) (being), and also sometimes it is used
by logicians with a copulative meaning (is).

It is clear that in this philosophical discussion the copulative meaning
is not under consideration, and likewise the infinitive which indicates
a relation between subject and object is not meant. The meaning of the
verbal noun, in the restricted sense of occurrence, is also not meant,
unless the above restriction is removed so that it may be predicated of
objective realities including the sacred Essence of God.

The expression ‘whatness’ (*māhiyyah* )which is a contrived infinitive
(*maṣdar* *ja‘lī* ) derived from ‘What is it?’ (*mā huwa?* ) is used as
a philosophic term in the form of a verbal noun (*ism-e maṣdar* ,
‘what-is-it-ness’) but with the same condition of dissociation from the
sense of occurrence, so that it may be predicated of an essence.

This term is used in philosophy in two senses, one of which is more
general than the other. The specific sense is defined as “that which is
said in answer to the question ‘What is it?’” and naturally it is
applied in the case of an existent which can be known by the mind, in
technical terms, that which possesses specific limits of existence,
which are reflected in the mind in the form of primary intelligibles
(whatish concepts). For this reason it is said that God the Almighty
does not have a whatness: “There is no whatness of the Necessary
Existent.” Proponents of the fundamentality of existence say with regard
to the objective reality of existence, “Existence itself has no
whatness,” and sometimes that “it does not have an intellectual form.”
But the more general sense is defined as ‘that which the thing itself
is.’ This includes both the objective reality of existence as well as
the sacred Essence of God. It is in accordance with this meaning that it
is said with regard to God Almighty, “The whatness of God is the same as
His identity (*innīyyah* ).”

In this discussion what is meant by the expression ‘whatness’ is the
former meaning, not the concept represented by the word*whatness* itself
in the sense of primary predication. Rather the discussion is about the
instances of this concept, that is,*whatness* in the sense of common
predication, such as ‘man’. For the proponents of the fundamentality of
whatness also admit that this concept itself is a respectival concept.2
In other words, the discussion is about whatish concepts (*mafāhīm
māhuwī* ), not the concept of whatness.

The expression ‘fundamentality’ (*aṣālah* )which is used with the
literal meaning of being a root and is the opposite of ‘*far‘iyyah* ’
which has the meaning of being an offshoot in this context, is employed
with a specific meaning as the opposite of ‘*i‘tibārī* ’ (respectival),
and their precise meanings are jointly clarified.

In Lesson Fifteen several technical meanings of the expression*i‘tibārī*
(respectival) were mentioned, according to some of which, even the
concept of existence was called a respectival concept. But in this
context, the meaning of*i‘tibār* , being the opposite of*aṣīl*
(fundamental), is different. The respectival nature of the concept of
existence, according to the previous meaning, is compatible with the
doctrine of the fundamentality of existence and the ‘respectival’ nature
of whatness according to the meaning appropriate to this context.

What is meant by the two opposite concepts of*aṣīl* and *i‘tibārī* here
pertains to the question as to which of the two, the whatish concepts or
the concept of existence, refers to entified reality in itself (
*dhātan* ) without mediation, in the precise philosophical sense. That
is, after it is accepted that an objective reality is reflected in the
mind in the form of a ‘simple existential proposition’ ( *halliyyah
basīṭah* ), whose subject is a whatish concept and whose predicate is
the concept of existence ( *wujūd* ) which by means of a
[morphologically] derived predicate may be put in the form of the
concept of ‘existent’ ( *mawjūd* ), so that each of these terms will be
predicable of that entified reality, so that it may be said, for
example, “This foreigner is human,” as it can be said, “This person is
existent.” Neither of these is metaphorical from a common or literary
point of view. At the same time, from a precise philosophic point of
view, it may be asked—in view of the unity and simplicity of the
entified reality and the multiplicity of these concepts and aspects,
which is characteristic of the mental realm—whether the entified reality
(of which the concept of existence is predicated with the special
attention of the intellect and by mediation of the whatish concept, and
which [i.e. the concept of existence] for this reason is a secondary and
subordinate aspect) is to be identified with the whatish aspect, or
whether the objective reality is that very aspect denoted by the concept
of existence (so that the whatish concept is merely a mental reflection
of the limits and framework of the reality and objective existence), and
in fact it is the whatish concepts which are secondary and subordinate.

With regard to this question, if we take the first alternative and
understand entified reality to be the unmediated instance of whatness,
we would be upholding the fundamentality of whatness and the
respectivalness of existence. And if we take the second alternative and
understand entified reality to be the unmediated instance of the concept
of existence, and we consider whatish concepts a mental framework
setting the limits for finite realities, we will be proponents of the
fundamentality of existence and the respectivalness of whatness.

The expression*ḥaqīqah* employed by Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn in discussing
this problem is also an expression used in various senses, such as the
following:

1.*Ḥaqīqah* [literal usage] is the use of a word in its literal meaning,
as opposed to*majāz* , its metaphorical usage, i.e., with another
meaning with a sort of relation to the literal meaning. For example, the
use of the word ‘lion’ in the sense of the well-known wild animal
is*ḥaqīqah* , while its use to mean a powerful man is a metaphor.

2.*Ḥaqīqah* [truth] also has the meaning of knowledge that corresponds
to reality, as in the previous discussions of epistemology.

3.*Ḥaqīqah* may have the meaning of whatness, as when it is said of two
individual humans that they are ‘*muttafiq al-ḥaqīqah* ’ [i.e., of a
common reality].

4.*Ḥaqīqah* in the sense of entified reality.

5.*Ḥaqīqah* , in the terminology of mysticism (*\`irfān* ), is used in
the sense of absolute independent existence which is confined to God,
the Supreme, and it is so used in contrast to the existence of
creatures, which is said to be ‘metaphorical’ (*majāzī* ).

6.  *Ḥaqīqah* also has the meaning of core and inner reality (*bāṭin* ),
as when it is said that*ḥaqīqah* of the Divine Essence cannot be
fathomed by the intellect.

It is clear that the intended meaning of*ḥaqīqah* here is that of the
fourth term.

Explanation of the Point of Contention
--------------------------------------

There is no doubt that every existent which has a whatish concept may be
predicated by that concept, as the concept ‘human being’ may be
predicated of persons in the external world. Likewise, there is no doubt
that the concept of existence (in the form of derivative predication
(*ḥaml ishtiqāq* ), e.g.,*mawjūd* , (existent), derived from*wujūd* ,
(existence)) may be predicated of every existent in the external world,
and even in the case of God, the Supreme, Who does not have a whatness,
it may be said that He is existent. In other words, from an intellectual
perspective every existent that has contingent existence has two
aspects: one is the aspect of whatness, and the other is the aspect of
existence. As the philosophers have said: “Every contingent thing is a
composite duality, composed of whatness and existence.” This is the same
matter which we have repeatedly indicated, namely that reflections of
objective realities in the mind take the form of propositions which are
usually (that is, for things with whatnesses) composed of a whatish
concept and the concept of existence.

With regard to this matter, if it is supposed that for each of these two
concepts there exists an objective entified aspect—that the whatish
concept refers to one entified aspect and the concept of existence
refers to the other entified aspect, which are joined together in the
external world—or, in other words, an existent is composed of existence
and whatness, and this composition is objective and entified, the
meaning of this supposition would be that both whatness and existence
are fundamental (*aṣīl* ).

But this supposition is not correct, for if each existent were to
possess two entified aspects, each of them would be reflected in the
mind in the form of a different proposition, which would include two
concepts, and for each of them one would have to suppose another
entified aspect, and this process would be continued without end, and
the result of this would be that every simple existent should be
composed of an infinite number of entified objective aspects! This is
what is meant by the statement of the philosophers that the difference
between existence and whatness is a mental difference: “Existence is an
accident of whatness in conception, and they are united in identity.”

That is, the predication and characterization (*‘urūḍ* ) of existence to
whatness, which requires each of them to be different from the other,
obtains exclusively in the realm of mental conception, otherwise in
external identity (*huwiyyah* ) they are one with each other. So, it
cannot be that both whatness and existence are fundamental and
considered to have entified reality. Likewise, both cannot be viewed as
respectivals. For ultimately, it is that very simple proposition which
denotes entified reality and which must include a concept corresponding
to entified reality. So, there is a choice between whatness being
fundamental and existence being respectival or vice versa. Therefore,
the problem may be posed in the form of two hypotheses based on several
principles:

1. The acceptance of the concept of existence as an independent
substantival concept, in technical terms, the acceptance of ‘predicative
existence’. For if the concept of existence is confined to the
copulative meaning and is relational in propositions it would be
impossible to suppose that it should refer to entified reality, and in
the words of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, that it should possess entified
reality (*ḥaqīqah* *‘ayniyyah* ), and there would be no alternative but
the fundamentality of whatness.

2. Acceptance of the analysis of contingent existents into two
(concepts): the concept of existence and whatish concepts. That is, if
someone imagines that the concept of existence is not something other
than the concept of whatness, as has been reported of some of
the*mutakallimīn* , according to whom the meaning of existence in every
proposition is the same as the meaning of the whatness which makes up
its subject, on this assumption there remains no room for doubt between
the fundamentality of whatness and the fundamentality of existence, and
it would determine the fundamentality of whatness. But the invalidity of
this supposition became clear in Lesson Twenty-Two.

3. Acceptance of the fact that the combination of existence and whatness
is a mental combination, that in the context of the external world there
do not exist two distinct aspects, one of which corresponds to the
whatish concept and the other of which to the concept of existence, that
is, the hypothesis of the fundamentality of both is incorrect, as
explained.

4. On the basis of these three principles, the question may be presented
in this form: Does entified reality principally correspond to the
whatish concept, such that the concept of existence is predicated of it
accidentally, or the reverse, does entified reality principally
correspond to the concept of existence, such that the whatish concept is
predicated of it accidentally? In other words: Is entified reality in
itself an instance of whatness or existence? On the first hypothesis,
knowledge of whatnesses and the principles pertaining to whatness is the
same as knowledge of entified reality; but on the second hypothesis,
knowledge of whatnesses means the knowledge of the framework of
existents and their limits which are reflected in the mind, not
knowledge of their entified contents.

The Benefits of the Discussion
------------------------------

It is possible that one may imagine that the discussion about the
fundamentality of existence or whatness is an academic exercise and that
it has no relevance to the solution of important philosophical problems,
for

these problems have been solved both by the proponents of the
fundamentality of existence as well as the proponents of the
fundamentality of whatness. But this idea is incorrect, for, as will
become clear in the course of future discussions, the solution of many
of the important problems of philosophy depends on the fundamentality of
existence, and the way of solving them through the fundamentality of
whatness is unsatisfactory and leads to a dead end. As we have seen with
regard to the problem of the individuation of whatnesses, there is no
correct solution on the basis of the fundamentality of whatness. Of
course, this problem, compared to more important problems [whose
solutions are] based on the fundamentality of existence, is relatively
minor. If we were to mention all such cases, our discussion would become
too long. Furthermore, the explanation of the relation of these problems
to the fundamentality of existence requires the presentation of these
problems and reference to some sensitive points which must be explained
in their appropriate place.

Here we will only mention two very important problems of philosophy,
each of which in its own turn may serve as a basis for solving other
valuable problems: one of them is the problem of causation and the
reality of the relation between cause and effect, the conclusion of
which, based on the fundamentality of existence, is the dependence of
the effect on the ‘being- granting cause’ (*‘illat-e hastī bakhsh* ), on
the basis of which very important problems can be solved, including the
refutation of*jabr* (predestination) and*tafwīḍ* (libertarianism) and
[explanation of] the unity of [Divine] acts (*tawḥīd* *af‘ālī* ).
Another problem is that of substantial motion, intensifying (*ishtidādī*
) and evolutionary (*takāmulī* ), whose interpretation depends on the
acceptance of the fundamentality of existence, the elaboration of which
will be presented in its proper place.

Therefore, the problem of the fundamentality of existence is one of the
most serious and fundamental which is worthy of study, and must never be
treated in a casual and offhand manner.

References
----------

1*Asfār,* Vol. 1, p. [^49]:

2 Cf. Suhrawardī’s*Muqāwamāt,* p. 175;*Muṭāraḥāt,* p. 361, in Henry
Corbin, ed.,*Shihaboddin Yahya Sohravardi, Œuvres Philosophiques et
Mystiques,* Tome 1 (Tehran: Académie Impériale Iranienne de Philosophie,
1976).
