Lesson Twenty-Seven: The Fundamentality of Existence
====================================================

Arguments for the Fundamentality of Existence
---------------------------------------------

Our aim is to know whether entified reality is the same as that which is
denoted by whatish concepts or whether whatnesses only represent limits
and frameworks for objective realities. If whatnesses only represent
limits of existence, that which denotes the reality itself and the
contents of a conceptual framework is the concept of existence which is
considered to indicate reality itself. The mind, by means of the concept
of existence, understands reality itself. In order to know whether
whatness is fundamental or existence, there are various ways, of which
the easiest is reflection upon these concepts themselves and their
meanings.

When we focus upon a whatish concept, such as the concept of ‘man,’ we
see that existence may be negated of it without changing its meaning, no
matter how many external existents to which it applies, and of which it
may be predicated, where this predication is literal, according to
ordinary language, and not metaphorical. This is a matter upon which
philosophers are agreed, namely, that whatness, in that it is whatness,
is neither an existent nor a nonexistent. It neither requires existence
nor nonexistence (*al-māhiyyah min ḥaythu hiya hiya laysat illā hiya, lā
mawjūdatun wa lā ma‘dūmah* , i.e., Whatness as such is what it is [and
only that], it is neither existent, nor nonexistent). It is for this
same reason that whatness may be both the subject for existence and for
nonexistence. Therefore, whatness in and of itself cannot represent
objective reality, otherwise the predication ‘nonexistent’ to it would
be considered the predication of one of a pair of contradictories to the
other, such as is the case with the predication of existence to
nothingness.

Another reason that whatness does not represent entified reality is that
in order to denote an objective reality we have no choice but to employ
a proposition which includes the concept of existence, and until we
predicate existence of a whatness we will not have spoken of its real
occurrence. And this very point is the best reason for claiming that it
is the concept of existence which denotes entified reality. According to
Bahmanyār, in the book*Al-Taḥṣīl* , “How can existence not possess
entified truth when its meaning is nothing but real occurrence?”1

Some of the advocates of the fundamentality of whatness have said: “It
is true that whatness itself in itself lacks existence and nothingness,
and does not demand either of them, and in this sense can be considered
respectival, but when it is related to the Maker (*Jā‘il* ) it obtains
objective reality. And it is with regard to this matter that it is said
that whatness is fundamental.”

It is clear that a relation which accompanies the occurrence of whatness
in reality is due to causing it to exist, that is, the granting of
existence to it, and this shows that its reality is that very existence
which is granted to it.

Another reason for the respectivalness of whatness is that basically the
analysis of entified reality into two aspects, whatness and existence,
occurs only in the mind through acquired knowledge. In presentational
knowledge no trace of whatness is found. So, if whatness were
fundamental, then it

would have to be realized through presentational knowledge, as well, for
it is in knowledge by presence that entified reality itself is perceived
or observed internally without the intermediary of any mental form or
concept.

It is possible that to this argument the objection will be raised that
just as there is no trace of whatish concepts in knowledge by presence,
we see no trace in it of the concept of existence. In other words, just
as whatish concepts are obtained by mental analysis, the concept of
existence also occurs in the realm of mental analysis. Therefore, it
cannot be said that existence is also fundamental.

In response to this objection, it must be said that there is no doubt
that the two aspects, whatness and existence, can be distinguished from
one another only in the realm of the mind. Their duality is specific to
the realm of mental analysis, and for the same reason the concept of
existence also, insofar as it is a mental concept, is not the same as
objective reality, and is not fundamental. But, nevertheless, this same
concept is a means for denoting that which has objective reality, from
which the whatish concept is abstracted, and this is what is meant by
the fundamentality of existence and its having entified reality.

In addition to this, it became clear in the previous lecture that the
choice between the fundamentality of existence and that of whatness is
exhaustive, so that with the invalidity of the fundamentality of
whatness, the fundamentality of existence is established.

Another argument for the fundamentality of existence and the
respectivalness of whatness is that, as was mentioned in Lesson
Twenty-Five, an essential aspect of whatness is that it is not an
individuating aspect, while the whatish aspect of external realities is
an individuating aspect and is not universal, applicable to [different]
individuals, and no external realities as such can be subjects of the
attribute of universality and the lack of individuality. In other words,
individuality and particularity can only be applied to a whatness when
it has external existence. From this it is to be understood that whatish
aspects are those conceptual and mental aspects that have the capability
of being applied to countless individuals, and entified reality is
specific to existence, that is, entified reality is the essential
instance of existence.

Another argument for the fundamentality of existence also can be raised,
based on that which is accepted by the philosophers, that the sacred
Divine Essence is free of any limitation which could be denoted by
whatish concepts; that is, there is no question of Its having a
whatness, and He is the most fundamental of realities and is the
bestower of reality to all existents. If external reality were an
essential instance of whatness, then the reality of the Divine Essence
would also have to be a whatness like other whatnesses.

Of course, this argument is based on a premise which must be proved in
the section on theology, but since this is accepted by the proponents of
the fundamentality of whatness also, it can also be used here, and at
the very least may be used in argument with them as ‘sound dialectic’.2

Philosophical Metaphor
----------------------

Here it is possible that a doubt will come to mind according to which
the basis of the fundamentality of existence is that entified reality is
an essential

instance of existence, which implies that it will accidentally be an
instance of whatness. This means that the predication of a whatness,
such as man, to individuals external to it will be accidental and by
occurrence (*‘uruḍ* ), and the characterization (*ittiṣāf* ) of this
concept will be metaphorical, which can be negated. Therefore, it must
be that the negation of the concept of man of its individuals in the
external world is correct, and this is nothing but sophistry.

The answer is that just as in the first argument [for the fundamentality
of existence] we mentioned that the predication of every whatness to
individuals external to it, from the ordinary viewpoint and from that of
grammar, is a true predication without any figure of speech; however,
precise philosophical precepts do not follow those of ordinary
[language] and grammar with respect to the literal and the metaphorical.
So the key to their understanding cannot be sought among the rules
related to language. Often these rules will be employed in such a way
that with respect to grammar something will be literal, while with
respect to philosophy, it will be metaphorical, and vice versa.

For example, the scholars of grammar and theoretical jurisprudence
(*uṣūl al-fiqh* ) say that the literal meaning of ‘derivatives’
(*mushtaqqāt* ) is something possessing the whatness of the source of
derivation (*ishtiqāq* ) (“The essential meaning of*mushtaqq*
[derivative] is something with an established source”); for
instance,*‘ālim* (knower) means someone who has*‘ilm* (knowledge)
and*mawjūd* (existent) means something which has*wujūd* (existence). So,
if the expression*mawjūd* (existent) is used for entified existence
(*wujūd* ) itself, then from the point of view of grammar, this would
have to be a metaphorical usage, but from the point of view of
philosophy, it is not.

The same point applies here. From the viewpoint of ordinary usage, there
is no separation between the limit and the limited, and just as a
limited existent is considered to be a real thing, its limits are also
construed to be real entified things, while from the point of view of
philosophy this is not the case, and the limits of existents, in fact,
are abstracted from matters relating to nonexistence. Their being
considered as real is metaphorical and respectival.

In order to make this clearer to the mind, the following example is
given. If we take a piece of paper and from it we cut the various shapes
of a triangle, a square, etc., we will have bits of paper, each of
which, in addition to being paper, will have another attribute by the
name of triangle, or square, etc., such that prior to cutting the paper
they did not have these attributes.

The ordinary construal of this case is that specific forms and
attributes came into existence in the paper, and that aspects of
existence were added to the paper, while nothing came into existence in
the mentioned paper except for edges which are aspects relating to
nonexistence.

In other words, the edges which form the limits and bounds of various
shapes are nothing but the ultimate ends of the surface of various bits
of paper, and even the surface itself is really the ultimate end of the
thickness of the paper. However, these limits and bounds which have the
nature of nonexistence, are construed from the ordinary superficial
perspective as

existing things and entified attributes, and the negation of their
existence is considered a sort of denial of what is self-evident.

We should add that the same is true of the whatish concept (like paper
in the example) in relation to entified reality; that is, it refers to
specific limits of reality (of course, conceptual limits, not
geometrical limits), limits which are considered as the empty molds for
realities, and their contents are composed of entified reality.
Whatnesses are nothing but these very conceptual molds for external
reality. But since they are the means and mirrors for the knowledge of
external existents and cannot be viewed independently, they are
construed as external realities themselves. This is the meaning of the
respectivalness of whatness, that is, whatnesses are supposed to be
realities, or the concepts are considered as the external instances
themselves. Thus, the mind may be compared to a mirror the reflections
appearing in which are whatish concepts by means of which we are
informed of the limits of external realities and kinds of existence. In
this view, [wherein the mind plays the function of] an instrument and
mirror, we do not notice the reflections themselves independently, but
rather by way of them our attention is directed to that which is
reflected, that is, the entified reality. For this reason we suppose
that the reflections are that which is reflected. Likewise, when one
looks at one’ s reflection in a mirror one supposes that one is looking
at oneself while that which is seen in the mirror is a reflection of the
colors and contours of one’ s face, that is, a reflection of limits and
not of that which is limited itself. However, from a superficial point
of view we can say that that which we see in the mirror is our own
faces.

The predication of whatnesses to existents is of the same sort. However
much from the ordinary way of looking at things it is considered to be a
true predication, from the exact perspective of philosophy, it becomes
clear that it is only a reflection of their molds, not of them
themselves. That is why Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn repeatedly emphasized in
his books that \`whatness is a phantom of the mind or intellectual mold
for entified reality.’3

With these explanations it has become clear that the real locus of
whatnesses, insofar as they are whatnesses, is only the mind, and its
entified occurrence is its individual existence. From the exact
perspective of philosophy, the whatness is never in itself that which
entifiedly occurs [that is, as an entity]. So, the existence of mixed
whatnesses, and consequently, the existence of natural universals in the
external world, may also only be accepted as respectival, as was
indicated at the end of Lesson Twenty-Five.

Hence, it may be said that to claim true existence for natural
universals is the same as holding the position of the fundamentality of
whatness, and to claim that the existence of natural universals is
accidental and that individuals are the means of the occurrence (*‘urūḍ*
) of existence for natural universals is really the same position as the
fundamentality of existence; that is, natural universals, which are the
same as whatnesses, are respectival things. Their relation to existence
and occurrence in the external world is accidental and a kind of
philosophical metaphor.

The Resolution of Two Doubts
----------------------------

The proponents of the fundamentality of whatness have raised certain
doubts, among which two of the most important are:

First Objection: If existence were basic and possessed entified reality,
it would have to be predicable by the concept ‘existent,’ and this would
mean that existence possesses existence. So, another entified existence
would have to be posited for it, which in turn would become the subject
of ‘existent.’ This process would continue without end. This implies
that every existent possesses infinite existences! From this it is to be
understood that existence is respectival, and that the repeated
predication of ‘existent’ to it is a product of this mental derivation.

Answer: The origin of this fallacy is reliance on grammatical rules
according to which the word ‘existent’ (*mawjūd* ) with regard to its
being a derivative (*mushtaqq* ), refers to an ‘essence’ which is
posited for the source of the derivation (*mabdā’ ishtiqāq* )
(existence, or*wujūd* in this case). This implies the plurality of
essence and source (*mabdā’* ). Thus, when the concept ‘existent’ is
predicated of entified existence, it must be supposed that it is an
essence for which is established the source of derivation, which is
something else, and so on and so forth.

However, we have repeatedly warned that philosophical problems cannot be
solved or settled on the basis of linguistic rules of grammar and
syntax. The concept of ‘existent’ in philosophical usage is merely an
indicator of entified objective occurrence, regardless of whether the
aspect of objective occurrence in the realm of mental analysis is other
than an aspect of the subject of the proposition or not. For example,
when this concept [i.e., existent] is predicated of a whatness, there is
considered to be a plurality and difference between the subject and
predicate, but when it is predicated of entified existence itself, this
means that objective existence is the very aspect of its being existent.

In other words, the predication of a derivative (*mushtaqq* ) to an
essence is not always an indication of plurality and difference between
the essence and the source of the derivation. Rather, sometimes it
indicates their unity. From this it is to be concluded that the meaning
of the predication of ‘existent’ to entified existence is that it itself
is that very being existent and entified reality and source of
abstraction of the concept ‘existent,’ not that it becomes an existent
by means of some other existence.

Second Objection: The other fallacy is the claim that if entified
reality is an essential instance of existence this would mean that every
reality exists by itself. This implies that every objective reality
would be a necessary existent (*wājib al-wujūd* ), while only God, the
Supreme, is existent-by-Himself.

Answer: The origin of this fallacy is a confusion between two senses of
‘essentially’ (*bi al-dhāt* ), and it is really an error of
equivocation.

To explain, the expression ‘essentially’ (*bi al-dhāt* ,
i.e.,*essentially* or*by itself* ) is sometimes used as the opposite of
‘by another’ (*bi al-ghayr* ), meaning that it has no intermediary by
which it is established, as it is said with respect to God, the Supreme,
that He is ‘existent-by-Himself’ (*mawjūd* *bi al-dhāt* ) or
‘necessarily existent-by-Himself,’ that is, not through something else,
and He is not caused by any creator. To put it differently,

the predication of ‘existent’ or ‘necessary existent’ to Him does not
need any intermediary by which it would be established.

The same expression,*essentially* ( *bi al-dhāt* ), is sometimes also
used as the opposite of *accidentally* ( *bi al-‘araḍ* ), meaning that
the predication of the predicate does not need an intermediary in its
occurrence ( *‘urūḍ* ), even if it does need an intermediary in its
establishment ( *thubūt* ), as, in accordance with the fundamentality of
existence, we say: “Entified reality is an ‘essential’ instance of
existent, but whatness is an accidental instance of it.”

According to the second sense, both the existence of God, the Supreme,
which has no intermediary in its establishment and according to the
first sense is also ‘essential,’ is an essential instance of existence,
and also the existence of creatures, which is established by an
intermediary, caused by the Creator. This means that being an existent
is the true attribute of their existence, not the attribute of their
whatness. From a philosophical point of view, existence is accidentally
attributed to whatnesses.

References
----------

1 Cf.*Al-Taḥṣīl* , p. 286

2 Sound dialectic,*jadal aḥsan* , is argument based on premises that are
not only accepted by toth sides but are also correct. [Tr.]

3 Cf.*Al-Asfār* , Vol. 1, p. 198; Vol. 2, p. [^236]:
