Lesson Twenty-Eight: Unity and Multiplicity
===========================================

Remarks on Some Issues Pertaining to Whatnesses
-----------------------------------------------

Essential concepts are either simple or compound. Two simple whatish
concepts naturally cannot have a common aspect and will be completely
distinct from one another, for it is supposed that there is a common
aspect between them, which would be their own simple whatness, so that
there would be no other aspect by which they could be distinguished,
then they would not be numerically distinct and there would not be more
than a single whatness. If it is supposed that in addition to their
common aspect each of them has a distinguishing aspect, then each of
them would be composed of two whatish aspects, which is contrary to the
supposition that they are simple.

So, two simple whatish concepts must be distinct in their entirety (*bi
tamām al-dhāt* ). However, if one or both of them are compound, they may
be supposed to have different forms.

In classical logic, compound whatnesses have at least two parts, one
common part called the genus, which is a vague and indeterminate
concept, obtained through comparison (*tardīd* ) among several different
species, and one specific part called the *difference* , which causes
the determination of the genus (to a single species). It is said that
the whatness of man is composed of the concept of ‘animal’ and the
concept of ‘rational,’ the first of which is common between the species
of animals, and the second of which is the specific difference of man.

The concept of genus, in turn, can also be compound, having a higher and
more general genus, as the concept of ‘body’ includes animal, vegetable
and mineral. But the concepts of differences are considered simple and
incapable of being compound.

Finally, for all compound whatnesses, ten highest simple genera, or ten
‘categories’ are supposed, as follows: substance (*jawhar* ), quantity
(*kamiyyah* ), quality (*kayfiyyah* ), relation (*iḍāfah* ), posture
(*waḍ‘* ), spatial locus (*ayna* ), temporal locus (*mata* ), possession
(*jadah* ), action (*an yaf‘al* ) (states of gradual effects), passion
(*an yanfa‘il* ) (states of being affected passively and gradually).1

Regarding the number of the categories (the highest genera), and whether
they are all really whatish concepts (first intelligibles), or at least
whether some of them (such as relation and categories which are composed
of relational concepts) are secondary intelligibles, there is
controversy among the philosophers, but we shall not consider this
matter further.

According to the logical apparatus of genus and difference, and based
upon [the idea that] all compound whatnesses lead to some categories,
they may be distinguished in two ways. One is a distinction among them
in their entirety, and that is when two whatnesses pertaining to two
categories are compared there is not even a common genus between them,
for example, the concept of man and the concept of whiteness. Secondly,
their distinction may be partial, in case two whatnesses are compared
from a single category, for example, the concept of horse and the
concept of cow, which are common in animality, corporeality, and
substantiality.

It may be concluded that whole whatnesses (species), if simple, will be
distinguished and distinct from each other in their entirety; likewise
if they are compound and from two categories. Also differences and
highest genera, which are all considered to be simple concepts, are
distinguished from one another in their entireties. No genus may be
supposed to include all whatnesses. Therefore, there is not even one
whatish element which can be considered to be common among all
whatnesses.

On the other hand, the concept of existence, which is a secondary
philosophical intelligible, is considered to be a simple, determinate,
general and absolute concept which when added to a whatness individuates
and limits it. The concept of existence specified and limited in this
way is called a ‘share’ (*ḥissah* , lit. also ‘part,’ ‘quotient’) of the
universal concept of existence.

In this way, expressions such as ‘simplicity,’ ‘composition,’
‘indeterminate,’ ‘determinate,’ ‘common’ and ‘distinct,’ ‘general’ and
‘specified,’ ‘absolute’ and ‘limited,’ have appeared in the cases above,
and the expression ‘individuation’ (*tashakhkhuṣ* ) mentioned in
previous chapters, should be added to them.

But among these there are two pivotal concepts, the concepts of unity
and multiplicity. We now turn to the explanation of these two concepts.

Types of Unity and Multiplicity
-------------------------------

Each specific whatness differs from the others. If two whatnesses are
simple, then they will not even have a single common aspect, and
likewise two compound whatnesses of two categories also will not have a
common aspect. In view of the fact that a whatness may be considered by
itself or along with other whatnesses, two opposite concepts may be
abstracted: ‘one’ and ‘many.’

The unity which is related to each complete whatness is called specific
unity. The reiteration of its form in one or more minds does not damage
its unity, for what is meant is conceptual unity, not the unity of its
mental existence.

Likewise, when we consider a common essential aspect of several compound
whatnesses, another sort of unity is attributed to it, called generic
unity.

In contrast to these two types of unity, there is also numerical unity,
which is predicated to each individual belonging to a whatness. Its
criterion is the same individuation the ancient philosophers considered
to be due to individuating accidents. The correct [position] is that
this individuation and this unity are essential attributes of individual
existence, accidentally attributed to whatness.

The individuals of a whatness which have an essential numerical
multiplicity are called, ‘one by species,’ likewise the species which
are of a single genus and are essentially multiple in species are called
‘one by genus.’ It is clear that these two types of unity are not true
attributes of individuals and species, but are attributed to them
accidentally.

It is to be concluded from this that essential whatish unity is an
attribute of species and genus, and is predicated accidentally to
individuals and species. To the contrary, individual unity is really an
attribute of individual

existence and is attributed accidentally to whatness. On the other hand,
individuals in the external world have numerically distinct existences
to which multiplicity is essentially attributed. However, considering
that they are of a single whatness, they are called ‘one by species,’
and various species which essentially are a multiplicity of species are
called ‘one by genus’ with respect to their unity of genus.

Therefore, each existence in the external world has an individual unity.
When more than one of these is taken into consideration, multiplicity is
attributed to them. Each of these two attributes, which are abstracted
concepts and secondary intelligibles, are abstracted, according to [the
doctrine of] the fundamentality of existence, from the existence of the
existents. Hence, the existence also has unity and multiplicity beyond
whatish unity and multiplicity.

From this it may be guessed that various numbers, which are instances of
multiplicity, are also secondary intelligibles, not primary
intelligibles or whatish categories as most philosophers have held.
Other reasons could also be mentioned in support of this, which shall
not be presented here.

On the other hand, according to the fundamentality of whatness, whatish
multiplicity is always a sign of the multiplicity of entified objective
existents, for each of them by supposition refers to a specific entified
aspect, although the multiplicity of existents in the external world
does not always imply whatish multiplicity, as the multiplicity of
individuals of a single whatness is not incompatible with the unity of
their whatness.

With attention to this point, the question may be raised as to whether
the multiplicity of whatnesses, in accordance with the fundamentality of
existence, reveals the multiplicity of their existences or whether it is
possible that several whatnesses are abstracted from one existence, at
least in different stages.

In this way, other questions about existence may be raised, such as
whether the existences of like complete whatnesses, especially simple
whatnesses, must necessarily also be distinct, isolated and
distinguished from each other, or whether it is possible that they are
governed by a kind of unity specific to existence.

However, prior to beginning the discussion of this subject, an
explanation is necessary about the use of the expression*waḥdah* (unity)
with respect to existence.

The Unity of the Concept of Existence
-------------------------------------

Conceptual unity and multiplicity are not limited to whatnesses, even if
the terms ‘unity of species’ and ‘unity of whatness’ are specific to
them. Every concept, no matter whether it is a philosophical or logical
secondary intelligible, is incompatible with another concept, such that
unity may be attributed to each of them, and multiplicity to the
collection of them. Plurality and multiplicity in equivocal concepts and
conceptual unity in univocal concepts especially have many applications.

The concept of existence, which is also considered as a philosophical
secondary intelligible, is incompatible with other concepts. As was
mentioned in Lesson Twenty-Two, it is a single concept which is univocal
among various instances.

This concept not only is unlike compound whatnesses, which reduce to
genus and difference, but because of being simple it is also devoid of
any other kind of composition. On the other hand, it cannot be
considered a part of any whatness, as genus or difference, for it is not
a whatish concept.

It follows that although the concept of existence has neither unity of
species nor unity of genus, nevertheless, as is required by univocity,
conceptual unity may be attributed to it, as with other secondary
intelligibles. However, the conceptual unity of existence does not mean
that it is equally and uniformly applied to all of its instances.
Rather, it is a ‘graduated’ concept, whose predications to cases differ.
In order to clarify this point, it is necessary to explain the terms
‘graduated’ (*mushakkak* ) and ‘uniform’ (*mutāwaṭī* ).

The Graduated and the Uniform
-----------------------------

Universal concepts, with regard to the quality of application to
instances, are divided into two groups:

Uniform concepts are those whose applications to all individuals are
equal, and the individuals of which have no priority or precedence or
other differences in being instances of that concept. For example, the
concept of body is equally predicated of all its instances. There is no
body which in respect to its corporeality has any preference over other
bodies, although each of the bodies has its own specific [properties]
and some of them have advantages over the others, but with regard to the
application of the concept of body, there is no difference among them.

However, graduated concepts are those whose applications to individuals,
their instances, are different. Some of them have preference over others
with respect to being instances of such concepts, as all lines are not
the same with respect to being instances of length, and the
instantiation of a line of one meter is more than the instantiation of a
line of one centimeter. Or, the concept of black is not predicated
equally to all its instances, some of which are blacker than others.

The concept of existence is of this sort, and the application of
existence to things is not equal. There are priorities and precedences
among them, as in the application of existence to God the Almighty,
which has no kind of limitation and cannot be compared with its
application to other existences.

There are discussions about the mystery of the differences in the
applications of graduated concepts, and about whether whatish concepts
are capable of being graduated in and of themselves or not, and
basically, how many kinds of graduation there are. The proponents of the
fundamentality of whatness have accepted several kinds of graduation,
such as amount (e.g., length) in quantities, and graduation in weakness
and intensity (e.g., color) in qualities. However, proponents of the
fundamentality of existence consider graduation in whatness to be
accidental, and the sources of these differences are presented as
differences in existence.

In addition to this, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn and the followers of his
transcendent theosophy call this sort of graduation ‘common graduation.’
They hold that there is another sort of graduation for the entified
truth of existence which is called \`special graduation,’ a feature of
which is that two instances of existence will not be independent of each
other, but one will be

considered as a level of the other. Some others of a gnostic disposition
also mention another kind of graduation, which need not be explained.

Reference
---------

1 This list is the same as Aristotle’s (and that of Ibn Sīnā). Note that
possession is usually called*milk* in Arabic; here it is*jidah.* Cf.
Parviz Morewedge,*The* Metaphysica*of Avicenna (ibn Sīnā)* (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973), p. [^187]: For a more elaborate treatment
of the Aristotelian categories in Islamic philosophy, see D.
Gutas,*Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition* (Leiden: Brill, 1988).
