Lesson Twenty-Nine: Unity and Multiplicity in Entified Existence
================================================================

Individual Unity
----------------

In the previous lesson there was a discussion of one kind of unity of
entified realities, and that was the unity of each individual that is
individuated from a whatness, that is, when the intellect considers an
individual of a whatness and compares it with the whatness itself, and
the difference is noted that whatness can be applied to individuals but
individuals do not have this feature, ‘individuality’ is abstracted from
the individual. When an individual is compared with several individuals,
and numerousity is not seen in a single individual, unity is abstracted
from it. Hence it is said, ‘‘Existence, individuality and unity are
equivalent, and whatever exists is individuated and a unit in this
respect.” Of course, it should be noted that what is meant by this unity
is individual unity, not absolute unity, and it does not include
specific unity or generic unity.

At this point the question will be raised of how the unity of an
objective existent can be known. How can we be certain that an existent
which we have imagined to be a ‘unit’ is really ‘one existent’ and has
‘one existence’?

Philosophers often dismissively answered this question by an appeal to
its clarity, but there are murky points in the environs of this question
which must be explained properly.

If an existent is simple and unanalyzable, such as the sacred Divine
Essence, and all immaterial things, it will naturally have a single
existence. Of course, the existence of nonmaterial things and their
simplicity are proved by demonstration, and only the existence of the
soul and its simplicity can be consciously discovered through
presentational knowledge. In general it may be said that every simple
existent has a unitary existence.

However, with respect to material and analyzable existents it is not
easy to prove their unity.

Superficially, every existent which is continuous, and the supposed
parts of which are not separated from each other, is considered to be a
unitary existent having a unitary existence. But when we examine this
matter closely, we are faced with two murky points.

One is whether bodies which appear to be continuous and monolithic are
really so, or whether we merely imagine them to be connected due to
visual errors.

Providing an answer to this question is the job of the natural sciences,
and as far as we know, with the help of scientific instruments it has
been proven that bodies are not really continuous and are only
apparently monolithic, and they are composed of very tiny particles
which are separate from each other. From a philosophical point of view,
we may say that since no body lacks extension, each of the particles of
bodies, no matter how tiny, will ultimately be continuous and have unity
of continuity.

The second murky and questionable point, which is more important, is
whether, supposing that the continuity of the parts of a corporeal body
is established, how is it to be known that there is no other sort of
multiplicity in it?

It may be replied that a continuous and monolithic existent will not
have actual multiplicity, however much it may be analyzable and multiple
potentially, but if it is analyzed, other existents will be obtained
each of which will have its own special unity.

This reply, although it may be correct for the geometrical amounts and
quantities of bodies, cannot be considered a complete and comprehensive
answer. For with respect to this question the point may be raised as to
whether, supposing that two different bodies are brought together so
that there remains no space between them and, by way of a rough example,
if two pieces of metal are welded together, can they be considered to be
a unitary existent having unitary existence, or must they be considered
multiple, having several existences?

It is possible that an answer will be given to this question according
to which since two pieces of metal possess two different whatnesses, and
naturally each of them is a different individual from the other,
therefore they cannot be considered to be a single existent.

However, this answer is based on the supposition that the multiplicity
of whatnesses reveals a multiplicity in entified existence, while this
has not been proven.

In other words, the multiplicity which has been established here is
really an attribute of whatness not of existence, while the discussion
concerns unity and plurality of entified existence.

On the other hand, a more precise question may be posed as to how we
know that a continuous existent possessing a continuous unity does not
possess two superimposed existences, such that one rides upon the other
and sense is not able to differentiate their duality?

To explain, just as each of our senses is able to perceive one of the
features of bodies (for example, our eyes see its color, our olfactory
sense smells its scent, and our gustatory sense perceives its taste)
without removing the unity of the body which possesses all of these
senses, in the same way, it is possible that there may be a multiplicity
in bodies which our senses do not have the power to perceive. In other
words, the unity and multiplicity of sensory perceptions does not
provide sufficient reason for the unity and multiplicity of entified
existence. Hence, there remains the possibility that a body which itself
has geometrically continuous unity possesses another multiplicity, as
some philosophers have held with respect to different substantial forms,
for example, an animal is known to possess several forms vertically: an
elemental form, a mineral form, a vegetable form and an animal form.

The answer to this question is to be found in the ensuing lessons, and
here we may say in summary form that the composition of bodies can be
imagined to takes several forms:

1. Composition of quantitative parts which do not have actual existence,
but which come about as a result of analysis. This kind of composition
is not at all contrary to actual unity.

2. Composition of matter and form, under the supposition that the
existence of matter is a potential existence. This form also does not
interfere with unity, and from one view it is similar to the previous
supposition.

3. Composition of matter and form, under the supposition that matter
also has actual existence other than the existence of the form. Also,
composition among forms each of which is vertically above the other.
According to this supposition, an existent is considered a unit because
of the unity of its highest form, and is related to all of them by
accident, and it would be better to call them ‘unified’ rather than a
‘unit.’

4. Composition among several actual existents which are on one plane
horizontally and none of which is a form higher than the others, even if
some kind of continuity and connection exists among them, such as the
composition of the parts of a clock and other machines, which is called
‘mechanical composition.’ Under this assumption, the composed collection
cannot be considered as a ‘unit’ or even ‘unified’ from a philosophical
point of view; rather it must be construed as multiple existents, and as
possessing a conventional (*i‘tibārī* ) unity.

5. Composition among several disjoint existents which are viewed as
having a kind of unity among them, such as composition of a corps of an
army of several divisions, and the composition of a division of several
regiments, and the composition of a regiment of several battalions, and
the composition of a battalion of several companies, and so on to a
number of soldiers. Likewise, the composition of the society into
institutions and social classes and groups, and finally the composition
of these by individual human beings. From the philosophical point of
view, this sort of composition is also based on convention. This sort of
composition cannot be considered to have true unity.

Two other sorts of objective composition may be added to the mentioned
kinds: chemical composition and organic composition, such as the
composition of living existents of several organic and chemical
substances. But from a philosophical point of view, the truth is that
these compositions are not a special kind, but according to some
philosophers belong to the second type, and according to other
philosophers are of the third type. Perhaps the latter view is more
correct, especially with regard to living existents.

In conclusion, we should recall that philosophers consider another kind
of composition which includes all contingent things, and that is the
composition of existence and whatness, which has been discussed.
According to this terminology, simple existence is limited to the sacred
Divine Essence. But this composition is analytical and mental rather
than objective and entified.

It follows that unity may be attributed to material existents in several
forms, some of which are true unity, like the continuous unity of
[subatomic] particles, and the unity of form which has a simple
existence. Some others are conventional unities, like mechanical unity
and social unity. However, regarding the composition of matter and form,
if we hold that matter does not have actual existence and that every
corporeal existent has but one actual existence, which is the very
existence of its form, naturally it will have a real unity. However, if
we hold that matter also has an actual existence, and in other words if
we hold that ‘prime matter’ is not to be accepted as a potential
existent, then we must consider each of them to

have a specific existence, and the collection of them would be called
‘united’ rather than a ‘unit.’ Also if we believe in vertical and
superimposed forms we must consider the collection of them ‘plural,’ and
it is only because of the unity of the highest form that we can regard
all of them as a unit by accident, as we regard the collection of the
human spirit and body as one existent, while in reality its unity is due
to the unity of the spirit.

The Unity of the World
----------------------

The unity which has been established until now for each entified
existent by no means negates the plurality of the collection of them.
However, another unity for the whole world may be proposed which negates
its plurality and multiplicity, as it is well known that philosophers
consider the world as a ‘unit.’ However this opinion can be interpreted
in several ways.

1. [The first interpretation is] the view that the unity of the world is
the continuous unity of the natural world, as philosophers have proposed
in discussions of natural philosophy under the heading ‘the
impossibility of a vacuum,’ and with various explanations they have
tried to prove that between two natural existents a pure vacuum is
impossible, and that in places where it is imagined that there is no
existent, in reality there exist rarefied subtle bodies which are
capable of being perceived by the senses.

On this basis it has been argued that if two or several natural worlds
are supposed, if they were connected and attached to one another they
would have a continuos unity, and they would compose a single world. If
among them a true vacuum were supposed, such that it would completely
separate and isolate them from one another, this would refute the
arguments against the existence of a vacuum.

2. [The second interpretation is] the view that it is the unity of the
system of the natural world, meaning that natural existents are always
effecting and being effected by one another, acting and reacting, and no
natural existent can be found which neither effects other natural
existents nor is effected by them. By their own activities
contemporaneous existents prepare the ground for the appearance of later
existents, and they themselves appear as a result of the activities of
previous existents. Therefore, all of the natural world is ruled by
these relations of material cause and effect, and hence, it can be
considered to have a single system. But it is clear that this unity is
in reality an attribute of the system which does not have a entified
existence independent of the innumerable existents of the world. On this
basis, one cannot prove the true unity of the natural world.

3. [The third interpretation is] the view that unity of the world is in
the shadow of the unity of a form such that all of the parts of the
world are united under its umbrella, just as the parts of a plant or an
animal are united under the shadow of the unity of their own substantial
forms.

The single form which can be supposed for the whole world so that it
also includes living existents such as man and animals, unavoidably will
have another spirit which can be called the universal soul or the spirit
of the world. Some philosophers have gone even further to include
nonmaterial beings and all but God, and in this way they have regarded
the First Intellect or the most perfect contingent existent as a form
for all that is below it. Likewise, many of the gnostics (*‘urafā* )
have called the world the ‘Cosmic

Man.’ However, thus far we have not encountered a proof of this matter,
and particularly, to call a perfectly nonmaterial existent, such as the
First Intellect, the form of the world is not devoid of loose talk.

In any case, this assumption also does not mean the negation of the real
multiplicity of the parts of the world, for this unity, in reality, is
an attribute of that very transcendental form of the world, and is only
accidentally attributed to the whole world, as was said with regard to
the unity of the spirit and the body.

It should not remain unsaid that the acceptance of this unity of the
world requires acceptance of the third mentioned kind of composition,
while the acceptance of that type of composition does not require the
acceptance of such unity.


