Lesson Thirty: The Levels of Existence
======================================

Positions on the Unity and Plurality of Being
---------------------------------------------

We know that the individual unity of every entified existent is not
contrary to the real plurality of all existents. Likewise, the
continuous unity of the material world is not contrary to the plurality
of material existents, a plurality which is obtained in the shadow of
the multiplicity of different forms. We also know that the unity of the
order of the world does not mean its real unity. However, the individual
unity of the world, taken to be a living existent having a spirit,
cannot be established, and on the assumption that it could be
established, it would be an accidental unity. Any way, the subject of
unity in the three mentioned suppositions pertains to the natural world,
or at most, to the world of contingent beings. The question now is
whether or not a unity can be proven for all being, including the sacred
Divine Essence.

In this regard, four positions may be indicated:

1. The position of the ṣūfīs, who consider real existence to be limited
to the sacred Divine Essence, and they consider all other existents to
have a metaphorical existence. This position is known a ‘*waḥdat-e*
*wujūd* *wa mawjūd* ’ (the unity of existence and existent). This
position appears to be contrary to what is obvious and [given by]
consciousness. However, it is possible to give this position some sort
of interpretation, according to which it can be taken as a form of
another position, the fourth position, to be mentioned below.

2. The position of Dawwānī, which considers [unity] to be demanded by
the ‘divine temperament,’ which is known as ‘*waḥdat-e wujūd* *wa
kathrat-e mawjūd* ’ (the unity of existence and the plurality of
existents). According to this position, true existence is specific to
God, the Exalted, while ‘true existent’ also includes creatures, but in
the sense of ‘being related to true existence,’ not in the sense of
‘having true existence.’ Likewise, some [morphological] respectivals
also convey this meaning, for example,*tāmir* , which is derived
from*tamr* (date), which means date-seller and is related to dates, and
the expression*mushammas* , which means something upon which the light
of the sun shines, derives its meaning from*shams* , the sun, and the
relation to the sun here is obvious.

This position is also unacceptable, for despite the fact that the
words*tāmir* and*mushammas* may be related to date selling and sunshine,
this position implies that the expression ‘*mawjūd* ’ has two different
meanings, involving a kind of ambiguity. However, there is no ambiguity
with regard to*wujūd* , so, it is also unacceptable with regard
to*mawjūd* . Moreover, the position mentioned is based on the
fundamentality of whatness with regard to the Creator, which is
incorrect, as became clear in Lesson Twenty-Seven.

3. The third position is related to the peripatetics, and is known as
the ‘plurality of existence and of existent.’ According to this
position, the plurality of existents is undeniable, and necessarily each
of them will have its own specific existence, and since existence is a
simple reality, so, every existence will be completely distinct (*bi
tamām-e dhāt* ) from every other existence.

The following argument can be given for this position: one of these
cases has to be true of existences: [i] all of them are real unitary
individuals; such as individuals of a single kind, [ii] they are of
various kinds of a single genus, such as the participation of various
species of animals in the genus animal; [iii] none of them have any
essential aspect in common, and are completely distinct. This third
alternative corresponds to the third position [mentioned above] which is
currently under consideration, and with the refutation of the other two
alternatives, it would be established.

However, the invalidity of the second position is clear, for it implies
that the reality of existence is composed of a common aspect and a
distinguishing aspect, that is, composed of genus and difference, and it
does not correspond to the simplicity of the reality of existence, and
this goes back to the fact that existence is really itself that common
aspect, and by the addition of something else to it, it takes various
forms of species. But in the world of being, nothing can be found other
than existence which could be added to it as a entified distinguishing
aspect.

However, the first alternative implies that existence, like natural
universals, takes the form of different individuals with the addition of
individuating accidents. But the question may be repeated regarding
these accidents, for they are also existents, and according to our
assumption all existents possess a unitary reality, so how, on the one
hand, can any difference appear between accidents and that which
possesses them, and among accidents themselves, on the other hand, so
that with such differences there should be different individual
existents?

In other words, if it is supposed that there is something in common
among entified existents, this will either be a complete sharing,
meaning that existence has a specific whatness, and has multiple
individuals, or it will be a partial sharing, which implies that
existence has a generic whatness, and has different species. Both
assumptions are invalid. Hence there is no other option but to admit
that entified existences are completely distinct. But this argument is
not perfect, because the threefold alternatives we assumed regarding the
entified reality of existence, were taken from the principles governing
whatness. An effort was made to establish the essential distinction
among existences, like the distinction among simple whatnesses, by
denying that existence is composed of genus and difference, and likewise
by denying that it is composed of specific nature and individuating
accidents. Nevertheless, what is common among existences in the reality
of existence is not a common genus or species, nor is their distinction
of the sort that distinguishes simple species.

It follows that such an argument is unable to refute the
co-participation of entified existences in any form other than that of
having a common species or genus. It will soon become clear that another
kind of unity and participation can be established for entified
realities.

4. The fourth position is one which Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn has ascribed to
the ancient Iranian sages, and is one which he himself has accepted, and
has tried to explain and establish. It has become known as ‘unity in
plurality itself.’ According to this view, entified realities of
existence both have unity and commonness with one another and also have
differences and

distinctions. However that which is held in common and that which
distinguishes them is not of such a kind as to cause composition in
entified existence or to make it analyzable into genus and difference.
Their differences result from weakness and intensity, like the
difference between intense light and weak light, where the weakness and
intensity here is nothing other than the light. Intense light is nothing
but light. Weak light is also nothing but light. At the same time, they
differ with respect to their weakness and intensity. But this difference
does not interfere with the simplicity of the reality of light which is
common among all of them. In other words: entified existences have
graduated differences, and that which distinguishes them results from
that which they have in common.

Of course, the analogy between levels of existence and levels of light
is only to make it easier for the mind to understand, otherwise material
light is not a simple reality (although most of the ancient philosophers
imagined that it was a simple accident). On the other hand, existence
has a special sort of gradualness, contrary to the gradualness of light
which is a more general sort of gradualness. The difference between the
two was clarified in Lesson Twenty-Eight.

However, this position may be interpreted in two ways: first, there is
the difference in the level of existence between one existence and
another existence, which is considered to obtain among individuals of
one whatness or of several whatnesses of the same horizontal level;
second, there is the difference in levels which is considered to obtain
exclusively between real causes and their effects. Since all existents
are directly or indirectly the effects of God, the Exalted, it follows
that the world of being is composed of an absolutely independent
existence and innumerable dependent relative existences, such that each
cause is relatively independent in relation to its effect, and in this
respect is more complete and possesses a higher level of existence, even
if effects on the same horizontal level, which have no relations of
cause and effect among each other, do not have such a gradualness, and
from one point of view, they are reckoned to be completely distinct (*bi
tamām-e dhāt* ). However, the first interpretation is quite far-fetched
and is unacceptable, even though it is apparently indicated in some
places by Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn and his followers.

Let it not remain unsaid that he interpreted the words of the gnostics
(*‘urafā’* ) and ṣūfī researchers to have this same meaning, and
considered what they meant by ‘true [or literal] existent and existence’
( *mawjūd wa* *wujūd-e ḥaqīqī* ) to be the absolute, independent
existent and existence, and he interpreted what they meant by
‘figurative existent and existence’ ( *mawjūd wa wujūd-e majāzī* ) to be
dependent and relative existent and existence.

The First Argument for Graduated Levels of Existence
----------------------------------------------------

Arguments can be given of two sorts for the graduated levels of
existence, one of which corresponds to the first interpretation
[mentioned above] and the other of which corresponds to the second
interpretation. The first argument is that of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn and
his followers which has been discussed in this lesson; the second is
obtained from their explanations of cause and effect.

The first argument, in reality, is about the establishment of that which
is entifiedly in common among objective realities. This may be explained
as meaning that the fourth position may be divided into two cases: one
is that multiplicity is attributed to objective existences and
unavoidably these existences have distinctions among them; the other
case is that that which distinguishes among them is not incompatible
with that which is in common among them, and all of them, in their very
multiplicity, are in possession of that which they have in common, which
is neither inconsistent with their simplicity nor with their
multiplicity. Since the first case is self-evident and undeniable, they
have directed their efforts to proving the second case.

This argument is that from all entified realities a single concept,
which is that very concept of existence, may be abstracted. The
abstraction of this single concept from multiple realities is reason
that there is a entified [reality] in common among them which is the
source of the abstraction of the single concept. If there were not any
unitary aspect among objective existences such a single concept would
not be abstracted.

This argument is based on two premises: one is that the concept of
existence is a single univocal concept. This was proven in Lesson
Twenty-Two. The other premise is that the abstraction of a single
concept from multiple things shows that there is a single common aspect
among them. The reason for this is that if a single aspect were not
necessary for the abstraction of a single concept this would imply that
its abstraction would be without any criterion, and then any concept
could be abstracted from anything, while the invalidity of this is
clear.

In this way it is to be concluded that entified existences possess
something objective in common. Then another premise is added, that
entified existence is simple and has a single entified aspect. It cannot
be considered to be composed of two distinct aspects. So, the
distinctive aspect of entified existences will not be incompatible with
the common aspect of unity among them, that is, the difference among the
existences will be graduated signifying the different levels of a single
reality.

However, this argument appears to be controvertible, for, as was
indicated in Lesson Twenty-One, the unity and multiplicity of secondary
intelligibles is not a decisive reason for the unity and multiplicity of
entified objective aspects; rather, it corresponds to the unity and
multiplicity of viewpoints which the intellect has in abstracting these
kinds of concepts. Often the intellect abstracts numerous concepts from
a single simple reality, as of the sacred Divine Essence, from which it
abstracts the concepts of existence, knowledge, power and life, while no
kind of multiplicity or plurality of entified aspects is conceivable for
that lofty station. And how often the intellect looks at different
realities from a single viewpoint and abstracts from all of them a
single concept, as the concept of unity is abstracted from various
objective realities. The concepts of existence and existent are of the
same sort, as is the abstraction of the concept of accident from the
nine categories; and the abstraction of the whatish concepts, category
and highest genus from all the ten categories, although Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn believed that they had nothing essentially in common
among them.

Therefore, the unity of such concepts merely shows the unity of the
viewpoint the intellect has in abstracting them, not the unity of the
entified aspects in common among them. If there is such an aspect, it
should be proved in some other way.

The Second Argument for Graduated Levels of Existence
-----------------------------------------------------

The second argument is composed of premises which are proved in the
section on cause and effect, and perhaps this has prevented it from
being discussed in this context [pertaining to the grades of existence].
However, due to its importance we shall mention these premises as
something given, while they will be proven in their own proper place.

The first premise is that there is a cause and effect relation among
existents, and there is no existent which falls outside of the chain of
causes and effects. Of course, only ‘being a cause’ (*‘illiyyah* ; lit.,
‘causehood’) is attributed to the existent at the head of the chain, and
only ‘being an effect’ (*ma‘lūliyyah* ; lit., ‘effecthood’) is
attributed to the existent at the end of the chain. In any case, no
existent lacks both the relation of being a cause and of being an effect
to any other existent, such that it is neither a cause nor an effect of
something.

The second premise is that the entified existence of an effect is not
independent of the existence of its creating cause. It is not true that
each of them possesses an independent existence, and that they are
joined by means of a relation external to their existences; rather, the
existence of an effect has no sort of independence whatsoever from its
creating cause. In other words, it is the very relation and dependence
on its cause, not something independent which has a relation with its
cause, as is observed in the relation between an act of will and the
soul. This topic is the noblest of all philosophical topics, and it has
been established by the late Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn. By means of it he has
opened a way to the solution of many philosophical perplexities. Truly,
it must be considered one of the most eminent and exquisite fruits of
Islamic philosophy.

From the addition of these two premises the conclusion is obtained that
the existence of all effects in relation to their creating cause, and
ultimately to the sacred divine Being, which is the source of emanation
of all existences other than Itself, is that very dependence. All
creatures are in reality manifestations of the Divine existence. In
accordance with their own levels they possess intensity and weaknesses,
priority and posteriority, and some of them are relatively independent
of others; but absolute independence is reserved for the sacred Divine
Essence.

Thus, the whole of being is composed of a chain of entified existences,
in which the ‘strength’ (*qiwām* ) of each link, with regard to its
level of existence in relation to it, is more limited and weaker than
that of the link above. This same weakness and limitation is the
criterion for being an effect. [The chain continues upward] until it
reaches the source of being which is of unlimited intensity of existence
and which encompasses all the levels of contingency, and sustains the
existence of all of them. There is no existent which is independent and
without need of It in any aspect or facet, but rather they are all poor,
needy and dependent on Him.

By this existential relation is meant a special sort of unity which
negates the independence of every existent except the Holy Divine
Existence, and the concept of which only applies to entified existence
and is naturally based upon the fundamentality of existence. When one
considers independent being, it will have no other instance than the
infinite Divine Being. For this reason independent being must be
considered unitary, and this is a unity which is not susceptible to
multiplicity. For this reason it is called ‘true unity’ (*waḥdat-e
ḥaqqah* ). When one turns one’s attention to the levels of existence and
its manifestations, multiplicity is attributed to them; however, at the
same time a kind of unity must be admitted among them. For since the
effect is not the cause, it cannot be considered a second to it, but
rather must be considered as being sustained by the cause, and an aspect
from among the aspects of the cause and a manifestation among its
manifestations. By their ‘union’ ( *ittiḥād* ) is meant that in the
context of its own being, one has no independence in relation to the
other, although the expression ‘union’ ( *ittiḥād* ) is vague and
inadequate, and the proper meaning of it is not commonly discerned, and
this leads to misunderstandings.

It is obvious without further comment that this exposition does not
negate the multiplicity of existences at the same level in some links of
the chain, such as the natural universe, and this does not require that
individuals of one or several whatnesses of the same degree differ in
their grades [of being]; rather the differences among them are to be
considered distinctions with the entirety of their simple existences.


