Lesson Thirty-One: Cause and Effect
===================================

Introduction
------------

With the acceptance of a multiplicity of existents, the question arises
as to whether or not different existents have any relation to each
other, and whether or not the existence of some of them depends on the
existence of others. If there is such a relation, how many kinds of
dependence are there? What are the principles and characteristics of
each of them? However, if someone does not accept the real multiplicity
of existents as is the apparent view of some, then there is no room for
discussion about existential relations among various existents, and
likewise there would be no call for discussion of the various kinds of
existence and existents.

In the previous discussion, we indicated that the proof of a special
gradation in existence depends upon a principle which must be
established in the discussion of cause and effect. Now the time has
arrived for us to pay heed to the problems of cause and effect and to
establish the mentioned principles. However, before delving into these
matters some explanation must be given about the concepts of cause and
effect and how the mind becomes acquainted with them.

The Concepts of Cause and Effect
--------------------------------

In philosophical terminology, the word ‘cause’ is used in a general and
in a.specific sense. The general concept of cause is applied to an
existent upon which the realization of another existent depends, even if
it is not sufficient for this realization. The specific concept is
applied to an existent which is sufficient for the realization of
another existent. In other words, in its general sense, a cause is an
existent without which realization of another existent is impossible. In
its specific sense, a cause is an existent whose existence requires the
realization of another existent.

It is noteworthy that the first sense is more general than the second,
because it includes conditions and prerequisites and other incomplete
causes, unlike the second sense. The explanation of complete and
incomplete causes, as well as other kinds of causes, will follow. We
should take note of the point that a dependent existent (i.e. an effect)
is called an effect solely with respect to its aspect of dependence and
in relation to the existent upon which it is dependent, not with respect
to any other aspect nor in relation to any other existent. Likewise,
something is called a cause in virtue of that very aspect in which
another existent depends upon it, and in relation to that very existent,
not with respect to any aspect or any existent.

For example, heat is an effect with respect to the aspect of its
dependence on fire, and in relation to its own cause, not with respect
to other aspects. And fire is called a cause with respect to the aspect
in which it is a source of heat and in relation to that very heat which
it produces, not with respect to another aspect. Therefore, there is no
incompatibility between a certain existent's being a cause in relation
to one thing and an effect in relation to something else. And there is
even no incompatibility between heat being the effect of a specific fire
and being the cause of the occurrence of another fire. Likewise, there
is no incompatibility between an existent’s having other aspects to be
explained in terms of other concepts in addition to the aspects

of cause or effect. For example, in addition to the aspect of causality,
fire possesses other aspects, which are referred to by means of the
concepts of substance, body, changeable, etc., none of which is the same
as its aspect of causality.

The Ways in which the Mind becomes Acquainted with these Concepts
-----------------------------------------------------------------

With the explanation which has been given of cause and effect it has
become clear that these concepts are not whatish concepts or primary
intelligibles, and it is not true that in the external world we have an
existent whose whatness is being a cause or effect. Likewise, the above
concepts are not secondary logical intelligibles, for they become
attributes of entified existents, and in technical terms, their
characterization (*ittiṣāf* ) is external. Hence, these concepts are
secondary philosophical intelligibles, and the best proof of this is
that in order to abstract these concepts one must compare two existents
and take into consideration the aspect of the dependence of one of them
on the other. Until this is done, these concepts will not be abstracted.
Thus, if one sees fire thousands of times but does not compare it with
the heat it produces, and does not consider the relation between them,
he will be unable to relate the concept of cause to fire and the concept
of effect to heat.

Now the question arises as to how our minds basically become acquainted
with these concepts and discover such a relation among existents.

Many Western philosophers have imagined that the concepts of cause and
effect are obtained by observing the regular simultaneity or succession
of two phenomena, that is, when we see that fire and heat always occur
together or successively, we abstract the concepts of cause and effect
from them, and in truth the content of these two concepts is nothing
more than the regular simultaneity or succession of the two phenomena.
However, this speculation is incorrect, because in many cases two
phenomena regularly occur together or successively while neither is to
be counted as the cause of the other. For example, the light and heat of
an electric lamp always appear together, and day and night always occur
successively, but neither of them is the cause of the appearance of the
other.1

It may be said that when a phenomenon is subjected to repeated
experiments, and it is seen that it does not occur without another
existent, in this way the concepts of cause and effect are abstracted
from them. However, we know that prior to beginning an experiment,
experimenters believe that there is a causal relation among phenomena,
and their purpose for performing the experiment is to discover specific
causes and effects, and to find out what is the cause of the appearance
of some phenomenon. So, the question arises as to how, prior to
performing the experiment, they found out about the concepts of cause
and effect. How did they know that such a relation exists among
existents, so as to set out to discover a specific relation of cause and
effect?

It seems that man discovers this relation for the first time within
himself through presentational knowledge. For example, mental actions,
decisions,

and the acquisition of concepts and mental images are considered to be
cases of things one does oneself, and that their existence depends on
one’s own existence, while one’s own existence does not depend on them.
By means of such considerations the concepts of cause and effect are
abstracted and then generalized to other existents.

Types of Cause
--------------

The dependence of one existent upon another takes various forms. For
example, the appearance of a chair, on the one hand, is dependent on the
wood of which it is made, while on the other hand, it depends on the
carpenter who makes it, on the knowledge and skill of the carpenter, and
on his motivation for making it. Corresponding to these, various kinds
of cause may be distinguished. Since the principles of all causes are
not the same, it is necessary to mention the types of cause and the
terminology appropriate to them before discussing the laws of causality
and the principles of cause and effect, so that when we turn to related
problems mistakes are not made.

Cause in its general sense, that is, an existent upon which another
existent is somehow dependent, may be classified in various ways, of
which the following are the most important:

**Complete and Incomplete Causes:** A cause may either be such that it
is sufficient for the realization of the effect, or such that it is not
sufficient for the realization of the effect even though that effect
cannot be realized without it. The former sort of cause is called a
‘complete cause’ and the existence of its effect depends on nothing
other than it. In other words, given the existence of the complete
cause, the existence of its effect is necessary. The latter sort of
cause is called an ‘incomplete cause’ and one or more things must be
added to it before its effect becomes necessary.

**Simple and Compound Causes:** From another point of view, causes can
be divided into the simple and the compound. Simple causes are those
such as things which are completely immaterial, such as God the Exalted,
and intelligible substances (whose existence must be proven at the
appropriate place). Compound causes are those such as material causes
which have different parts.

**Immediate and Mediate Causes:** From another point of view, causes can
be divided into the immediate and the mediate. For example, the
influence of a man on the movement of his own hand may be considered to
be immediate, while his influence on the movement of the pen in his hand
may be considered through one intermediary, and his influence on his
writing as being through two intermediaries, and on the impressions
produced in the mind of the reader as through several intermediaries.

**Irreplaceable and Replaceable Causes:** Sometimes the cause of the
appearance of an effect is the existence of a definite existent, and the
supposed effect cannot come into existence save by means of that
specific cause itself. In this case the above mentioned cause is called
an irreplaceable cause. Sometimes an effect may be brought into
existence by one of several interchangeable things, so that the
existence of one of them necessitates its appearance, such as heat,
which sometimes occurs as a result of the electric current in a wire,
sometimes as the result of motion, and sometimes as a result of a
chemical reaction, and in this case it is called a replaceable cause.

**Internal and External Causes:** Sometimes the cause is such that its
effect is united with it and remains interior to the existence of the
effect, such as the elements which remain interior to the existence of a
plant or an animal. This is called an interior cause. Sometimes the
cause will be external to the existence of its effect, such as the
existence of a craftsman who is external to the existence of his
handiwork. This is called an external cause.

**Real and Preparatory Causes:** Sometimes the concept of cause is
applied to.an existent upon which the existence of an effect is really
dependent, so that the separation of the effect from it is impossible,
such as the causality of the self for the will and mental forms which
cannot be realized or maintained apart from the self. These are called
real causes. Sometimes the concept of cause is applied to an existent
which prepares the way for the appearance of its effect, although the
existence of the effect does not have a real and inseparable dependence
on it, as in the case of the relation of a father to his son. This is
called the preparatory cause or preliminary (*mu‘idd* ).

**Exigent Causes and Conditions:** Sometimes the appearance of an effect
as the result of a cause depends on the existence of a specific state
and quality, in which case the cause itself is called an exigent, and
the necessary state and quality are called conditions. Sometimes a thing
is called a condition when it brings about the above mentioned state, as
the non-being of an obstacle to an effect is called an absence condition
(*sharṭ- e ‘adamī* ).

Conditions are also divided into two groups: one is the condition of the
agency of the agent, that is, something without which the agent is
unable to perform his action, and in fact, it perfects his agency, such
as the influence of knowledge on the voluntary actions of man. The other
is the condition of the capability of the recipient, that is, something
which must be realized in matter in order to receive a new perfection
from the agent, such as the need for a fetus to satisfy some conditions
in order to receive a spirit.

**Material, Formal, Efficient and Final Causes:** Another famous
categorization which is based on induction, divides causes into four
groups: One is the material or elemental cause, which is the ground for
the appearance of the effect and remains interior to it, such as the
elements composing a plant. The second is the formal cause, which means
the form and activity which appears in the matter, and which becomes the
source of the new effects in it, such as the vegetative form. These two
types of cause are internal causes, and together they compose the
existence of the effect. The third type is the efficient cause (or
active cause) by means of which the effect is brought about, such as
someone who creates a form in matter. The fourth type of cause is the
final cause, which is the motivation of the agent for the performance of
the action, such as the aim which a person takes into consideration for
his own voluntary actions and performs the action for the purpose of
achieving that aim. These two last types of cause are considered
external causes.

It is obvious that the material cause and the formal cause are
particular to material effects, composed of matter and form, and it is
fundamentally problematic to apply [the concept of] cause to them.

It should be noted that the efficient cause may be described by means of
two terms: one is the natural agent, which in the natural sciences is
known as the efficient cause, and what is meant by it is the source of
motion and.change in bodies. And another is the divine agent, which is
to be discussed under theology. What is meant by it is an existent which
brings the effect into existence and gives it being. The only example of
it is to be found among nonmaterial objects, because natural functions
are only the source of motion and change in things, and there is no
natural existent which brings another existent from nothingness into
being.

Among the divine creative agents, there is an agent which itself is in
no need of a creator, which is called the True Agent (*Fā‘il-e Ḥaqq* ),
and the example of it is confined to the sacred divine essence.

Another point which must be mentioned at the end of this lesson is that
all of the divisions of cause with the exception of the last are
rational (*‘aqlī* ) and yield mutually exclusive pairs of terms, one
positive and one negative. All of them may be stated as ‘mutually
exclusive disjunctions’ ( *qaḍiyyah munfaṣilah ḥaqīqiyyah* ). 2 However,
the exegent and condition are really two special types of incomplete
cause, and should not be considered as independent types of cause.

References
----------

1 In this regard there will be a further explanation in Lesson
Thirty-Five.

2 A*qaḍiyyah ḥaqīqiyyah* (literally, a verity proposition) is to be
contrasted with a*qaḍiyyah khārijiyyah* (an external proposition). The
latter depends for its truth on the existence of the referent of its
subject in the external world while the former does not so depend.
A*qaḍiyyah munfaṣilah* is a disjunctive proposition, so a*qaḍiyyah
munfaṣilah ḥaqīqiyyah* is a disjunctive proposition whose truth is
independent of conditions in the external world, so that it becomes
necessary that one or the other of its disjuncts be true.
