Lesson Thirty-Two: The Principle of Causation
=============================================

The Importance of the Principle of Causation
--------------------------------------------

As was explained earlier,1 the discovery of causal relations among
phenomena forms the axis of all scientific efforts, and the principle of
causality, as a universal and general principle, is a pillar of all
sciences which deal with the laws of real objects. On the other hand,
every scientific law owes its universality and definiteness to the
rational and philosophical laws of causation, and without them no
universal and definite law of any science could be established. This is
one of the most important ways in which science is in need of
philosophy.

Some of those who deny rationalism and rational principles independent
of experience, or who basically do not believe that philosophical and
metaphysical problems have any scientific or definitive value, try to
prove the validity of the principle of causality by way of experience.
However, as has been repeatedly indicated, these sorts of efforts are
useless and sterile. In order to establish the real existence of a
entified thing outside the self one must rely upon the principle of
causation, and without it there is no way to establish entified
realities, and there will always exist room for doubt as to whether
there exist realities beyond perceptions and mental images which are
subjected to experience. Furthermore, the establishment of a
correspondence between perceptions and external things (after accepting
them), requires subsidiary laws of causation, and as long as these laws
have not been established, there will be room for doubt as to whether
our mental phenomena and perceptions correspond to things in the
external world, so that we may come to know of external realities by
means of these laws. Finally, if there is doubt about the laws of
causation, then one cannot establish the universality and definiteness
of the results of experience, and the attempt to establish the laws of
causation by means of experience involves circular reasoning, that is,
the universality of the results of experience is based on the laws of
causation, and this presupposes that we wish to establish these laws by
means of generalization upon the results of experience and their
universality. In other words, the use of experience is possible only in
case the existence of things as subjects of experience is established
and the results of experience are also definitely known. And both of
these are dependent upon the acceptance of the principle of causality,
before setting out to experiment, for if an experimenter does not
believe in the principle of causality, and he seeks to establish this by
means of an experiment, he will not be able to ascertain the real
existence of things experimented, for it is in the light of this
principle that we ascertain the existence of a cause (an external thing)
by means of the existence of its effect (a perceptual phenomenon), as
was explained in Lesson Twenty-Three.

Furthermore, unless it is established with the help of the laws of
causation that the causes of various changing perceptual phenomena
indicating different dimensions and shapes correspond to material
things, one will not be able to know definitely and certainly the
attributes and characteristics of the objects of experience, so that one
may be able to make

judgments about the results of experiences related to them. Moreover,
the utmost that can be ascertained through sense experience are merely
simultaneity or the regular succession of two phenomena in the realm of
experience. However, we know that simultaneity or the succession of
phenomena are more general than causality, and by means of them the
causal relation cannot be established. Finally, the problem remains that
no matter how many times a sense experience is repeated, it cannot
refute the possibility of an uncaused effect; that is, there will always
remain the possibility that in the case of something not yet experienced
the effect will occur without the cause, or while the cause exists, its
effect does not occur, i.e., sense experience is insufficient to
establish the universal and exigent relation between two phenomena, let
alone establish the universal laws of causality regarding all causes and
effects.

Hence, someone like Hume, who considers causality to amount to the
simultaneity or succession of two phenomena will be unable to escape
from such doubts and misgivings, and for this reason this sort of
philosophical problem has been declared to be unsolvable. Likewise,
those who have inclinations toward positivism and who restrict
themselves to the input of the senses cannot establish any universal and
definite laws in any of the sciences.

Therefore, it is necessary to provide further explanation of the purport
of the principle of causality, its value and its validity.

The Purport of the Principle of Causation
-----------------------------------------

By the principle of causation is meant those propositions which denote
the need of the effect for a cause, and they imply that an effect will
not occur without a cause. This matter can be expounded as a ‘verity
proposition’ (*qaḍiyyah ḥaqīqiyyah* ) in the following form: Every
effect needs a cause. The purport of this is that whenever an effect
occurs in the external world, it will be in need of a cause, and there
is no existent which can be characterized as an effect and which has
come into existence without a cause. So, the existence of an effect
indicates that it has been brought into existence by a cause.

This is an analytic proposition, and the concept of its predicate is
obtained from the concept of its subject, for the concept of being an
effect, as has been explained, consists in being an existent whose
existence is dependent upon another existent of which it is in need.
Hence, the concept of the subject (effect) includes the meaning of need
and dependency on a cause which constitutes the predicate of the
above-mentioned proposition. Thus, it is one of the primary self-evident
propositions (*badīhiyyāt awwaliyyah* ) and has no need for any sort of
reason or proof, and merely imagining the subject and predicate is
sufficient for affirming this proposition.

However, this proposition does not denote the existence of an effect in
the external world, and on the basis of it one cannot establish that in
the world of being there exists an existent which is in need of a cause,
for a verity proposition (*qaḍiyyah ḥaqīqiyyah* ) is considered to be a
conditional proposition, and by itself it is not capable of establishing
the existence of its subject in the external world, and it denotes no
more than that if an existent

with the characteristic of being an effect occurs, then it cannot but
have a cause.

This principle can be presented in another way, such that it denotes the
existence of an instance of the subject in the external world, as in the
following form: Effects which exist in the external world are in need of
causes. This can also be considered to be a self-evident proposition,
for it may be analyzed into two propositions, the first of which is the
same as that mentioned above, and which is a primary self-evident
proposition, and another proposition, which denotes the existence of an
effect in the external world and which can be obtained by means of
presentational knowledge of internal effects, that is to say, it is a
self-evident proposition acquired through consciousness.

However, this proposition is unable to determine which are the instances
of being an effect, and it merely denotes that there are existents in
the external world which are termed ‘effects’ and that they are in need
of causes. But which of the existents in the external world are to be
termed and qualified this way, is not to be obtained from this
proposition.

In any case, the recognition of instances of causes and effects is not
self-evident, except for those comprehended through knowledge by
presence. The others require proof. First, the characteristics of cause
and effect should be determined, and with the application of these to
existents in the external world the instances of cause and effect may be
recognized.

Some of the Western philosophers who have not properly understood the
purport of the principle of causation have imagined that its purport is
that every existent is in need of a cause. Thus, according to their own
speculations they have objected to the proof of the existence of God,
the Exalted, based on the principle of causality. They have objected
that according to the above mentioned principle, God should also have a
creator! They have overlooked the fact that the subject of the principle
of causation is not simply ‘existent,’ but is ‘an existent effect,’ and
since God, the Exalted, is not an effect, He is in no need of a cause or
creator.

The Criterion of the Need for a Cause
-------------------------------------

Islamic philosophers have expounded a topic under the rubric ‘the
criterion of the need for a cause,’ the conclusion of which is the
determination of the subject of the principle of causality, the outcome
of which is as follows.

If the subject of this proposition were simply ‘existent,’ this would
mean that an existent in so far as it is an existent is in need of a
cause, and this would imply that every existent needs a cause. However,
not only is this not self-evident, but there is no reason for it, and
moreover, we have a proof against it, for the proofs for the existence
of God, the Exalted, signify that there also exists an existent which is
not in need of a cause. So, the subject of the above mentioned
proposition must be qualified. Now we must see what this qualification
is.

The*mutakalimīn* (Muslim scholastic theologians) have imagined that the
qualification is ‘*ḥudūth* ’ (the property of having come into
existence), that is, every existent which is*ḥādith* , and which at one
time did not exist and afterward came into existence, will be in need of
a cause. So, being*qadīm*

(eternal) is considered to be confined to God, the Exalted. They argued
that if an existent had existed from eternity (*azalī* ) and had no
previous condition of nothingness, then it would not be in need of
another existent to bring it into existence.

Contrary to them, the philosophers believed that the qualification for
the subject of the noted proposition is contingency (*imkān* ), that is,
every existent which essentially has the possibility of non-being, such
that the supposition of its non-being is not impossible, is in need of a
cause. The shortness of length of its life will not make it needless of
a cause, rather the longer its life the more it will be in need of a
cause, and if it is supposed that its life is infinite, then its need
for a cause will also be infinite. Thus, it is not intellectually
impossible for an existent which is an effect to be eternal.

However, it is to be noted that the contingency which serves to qualify
the subject and is the criterion for needing a cause is the attribute of
a whatness. According to the philosophers, it is the whatness which in
and of itself requires no relation to existence or nothingness. In other
words, its relation to existence and nothingness is equal, and there
must be something else to bring it out of the state of equilibrium. This
thing is the cause. For this reason, the criterion for the need for a
cause is regarded to be essential contingency.

However, this position is homogeneous with the fundamentality of
whatness, and one who accepts the fundamentality of existence would do
better to rest his philosophical discussions on existence. This is why
Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn (Mullā Ṣadrā) claimed that the criterion of the
need of an effect for a cause is the mode of its existence; in other
words the criterion for the need of some existents for a self-sufficient
and needless existence is their ontological poverty and innate
dependence. So, the subject of the above mentioned proposition will be
‘impoverished existent’ (*mawjūd-e faqīr* ) or ‘dependent existent.’
When we take into consideration the levels of gradation of existence, in
which each weaker level is dependent on a stronger level, we may take
the subject of the proposition to be ‘the weak existent’ and the
criterion of the need for a cause to be the weakness of the level of
existence.

By attending to the exposition of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn it is found,
firstly, that the causal relation is to be sought in either the
existence of the cause or the existence of the effect rather than in
their whatnesses. This is a corollary of the position of the
fundamentality of existence. This is contrary to the position of one who
imagines that the cause brings about the whatness of the effect, or that
the cause attributes existence to the whatness of the effect, or in
technical terms, the making (*ja‘l* ) is related to whatness or to the
attribution of whatness to existence. Both of these positions are based
on the fundamentality of whatness, and with the invalidity of this
position, there is no place for such views.

Secondly, being an effect and the dependency of an effect are essential
to its existence. The dependent existence will never be independent and
without need of a cause. In other words, the existence of the effect is
itself the very dependence on and relation to the cause which provides
being. On this basis entified existence may be divided into two parts:
the independent

and the relational. This is the exquisite subject which we mentioned
previously, and it is one of the most valuable fruits of the
transcendent philosophy (of Mullā Ṣadrā). This requires further
explanation.

Reference
---------

1 See Lesson Nine.
