Lesson Thirty-Three: The Causal Relation
========================================

The Reality of the Causal Relation
----------------------------------

When it is said that “the cause provides the effect with existence,” the
mind associates this with someone who gives something to another who
receives it. In this process there are three essences and two actions
(*fi‘l* ). In other words five existents are assumed: one is the essence
of the cause which is the provider of existence, another essence is the
effect which is the receiver of the existence, the third is that very
existence which is obtained by the effect from the cause, the fourth is
the action of giving which is related to the cause, and the fifth is the
action of receiving which is ascribed to the effect.

In truth, in the external world there is nothing but the entity of the
cause and the entity of the effect. Moreover, to be precise, it cannot
be said that the cause provides existence for the whatness, for
whatnesses are respectival (*i‘tibārī* ) and prior to the occurrence of
the effect, its whatness does not have existence even in a figurative or
accidental sense. Likewise the concepts of giving and receiving are
nothing more than mental images, and if giving existence, or creating,
were a real entified thing, then it would be yet another effect and it
would depend on another causal relation between the action and its
agent, and another giving [of existence] would be established, and so on
infinitely. Also, in the case of an effect which has not yet occurred,
there is no receiver to receive anything, and after its occurrence, its
receiving of existence from a cause would also be meaningless. Hence, in
the case of the creation of an effect, there is no real entified
existence other than the existence of the cause and the existence of the
effect.

Now, the following question may be posed. What form does the causal
relation take between the existence of the cause and the existence of
the effect? After the occurrence of the effect, or simultaneous with it,
is there something else by the name of the cause-effect relation? Or
does such a thing exist prior to its occurrence? Or is it fundamentally
a mere mental concept which never has an instance in the external world?
Someone who imagines that the reality of causation consists in the
succession or simultaneity of two phenomena will consider causality to
be a mental concept. He will hold that there are no instances of
causality except for the relation (*iḍāfah* ) of simultaneity or
immediate succession (a relation which is considered to be one of the
nine categories of accidents). However, there are problems with the
interpretation of causality in terms of the relation of simultaneity or
succession, some of which have been indicated, and to these we should
add the following: No relation ever has any entified reality, and
therefore, the interpretation of causality as a kind of relation is
really a denial of causality as a entified objective relation, such as
ventured by Hume and his followers.

Assuming that relations generally or that this particular relation is
entified and based on its two terms, there is still no instance of it
prior to the existence of the effect, for something which depends on two
terms and is parasitic on them cannot occur without the two terms
mentioned above. If it is supposed that the relation comes into
existence after or simultaneous with

the occurrence of the effect, this implies that the effect in its
essence has no relation with the cause, and is connected with it merely
by means of an external relation, as if the above mentioned relation
were a rope binding them together. Furthermore, if this relation were a
entified thing, this thing would inevitably be an effect, and the
question about the quality of its relation to its cause would be
repeated, and there would have to be an infinitude of causal relations!

Hence, none of the mentioned assumptions is correct. In truth, the
existence of the effect is a ray radiated by the existence of the cause,
as well as the relation itself and its very dependence, and the concept
of possession or relation is abstracted from its essence, and in
technical terms it is said that the existence of the effect is an
illuminative relation (*iḍāfah ishrāqiyyah* ) of the existence of the
cause, not a relation to be considered as belonging to one of the
categories abstracted by recurring relations between two things.

In this way, existence may be divided into two parts, one relational and
one independent. Every effect in relation to its creating cause is
relational and dependent. Every cause in relation to the effect it
creates is independent, however much it may itself be the effect of
another existent, and in relation to that, it will be relational and
dependent. The absolutely independent is a cause which is not the effect
of the existence of anything. This is the same topic which was used to
establish the specific graduation of existence.

Knowledge of the Causal Relation
--------------------------------

The causal relation, as analyzed and studied here, is specific to the
creating cause and its effect, and does not include preparatory or
material causes. At this point, two questions may be raised, one about
how one can know the above-mentioned relation between creative agents
and their effects, and the other about how one can prove causal
relations among physical things which are preparatory causes and
effects.

Earlier it was indicated that man discovers some of the instances of
cause and effect within himself by means of knowledge by presence, and
when he considers the direct actions of the self, and compares such
things as willing and the acquiring of mental concepts with his self,
and he finds them to be dependent on the self, he abstracts the concept
of cause and applies it to the self and he abstracts the concept of
effect and applies this to the actions of the self. So, he observes, for
example, that his willing to do some deed depends upon specific cases of
conceptual (*taṣawwurī* ) and propositional (*taṣdīqī* ) knowledge, and
until such cognitions are realized, the act of willing is not produced
by the self. By observing this sort of dependency which exists between
knowledge and willing, the concepts of cause and effect may be further
expanded so that the concept of effect may be applied to everything
which has some sort of dependence upon another. Likewise, the concept of
cause is generalized to everything on which something else depends in
some manner. In this way, the general concepts of cause and effect take
shape.

In other words, the finding of instances of cause and effect disposes
the self to abstract universal concepts from them so as to include
similar individuals, which is characteristic of universal concepts, as
was explained in the discussion of epistemology. For example, the
concept of cause which

is abstracted from the self is not in respect of its specific existence,
and not in respect of its being itself, but because another existent
depends upon it. So, any existent which is like this will be an instance
of the concept of cause, whether it is material or immaterial,
contingent or necessary. Likewise, the concept of effect, which is
abstracted from willing or any other phenomenon, is not so because it
possesses a specific existence or whatness, but rather because it is
dependent upon another existent. Hence it is applied to any other thing
which has some sort of dependence, whether it is material or immaterial,
substance or accident. Therefore, cognition of one or more instances is
sufficient for abstracting a universal concept, but the cognition of a
universal concept is not sufficient for recognizing its instances.
Hence, in order to know the instances which are not known by means of
knowledge by presence, standards and criteria must be found.

Furthermore, the causal relation pertaining to the creating cause which
is abstracted from the essence of its effect, and the existence of the
effect which is considered to be identical with the illuminative
relation (*iḍāfah ishrāqiyyah* ), must be established beyond the self by
means of an argument. That is, the question may be raised about how the
existence of the self is relational and dependent in relation to another
existent. How is it that the existence of the entire world emerged from
another existent, and how do we know that it is not independent in
itself? Such questions may be repeated regarding preparatory relations.
First, how is it to be established that among material existents there
are causal relations? Second, how can one establish a relation of
dependence between one material phenomenon and another?

Considering the fact that creating causes cannot be found among material
things, the knowledge of such causes and such causal relations beyond
the realm of presentational knowledge will only be possible by
intellectual methods. Empirical methods provide no way toward
metaphysics. One cannot expect to be able to know creative causes by
means of experimentation, the alteration of conditions, and controlling
variables. Since, moreover, it is not possible to exclude immaterial
existents, so that their effects could be known by means of their
elimination and inclusion and changing conditions, the only way for the
establishment of the rational properties of such causes and effects is
through pure rational proofs, and by means of them to determine the
instances of each of them. This is contrary to the case of material
causes and effects, which can be known to some extent by empirical
methods.

In conclusion, there are, on the whole, three ways to knowledge of
causal relations: first, through presentational knowledge for cases in
the realm of the self and psychological phenomena; second, through pure
rational proofs for cases of supernatural causes; and third, rational
proofs based on empirical premises for cases of material causes and
effects.

Distinguishing Features of Cause and Effect
-------------------------------------------

The ancient philosophers did not discuss the character of knowledge of
cause and effect as an independent subject. The only thing which we have
obtained from their expositions is that the first cause, a cause which
is not also an effect, has no whatness, contrary to objects which do
have whatnesses. Since a whatness in and of itself has no relation to
existence

and nothingness, it naturally will need a cause to bring it out of its
state of equilibrium. In other words, every existent which has a
whatness and from which a whatish concept may be abstracted will be
contingent and in need of a cause.

However, this exposition, in addition to being appropriate only for the
fundamentality of whatness, is ineffective and fails to resolve our
difficulties, for it is only able to establish whether contingents are
effects, and it fails to present any standard for the recognition of the
causation of some things with respect to others. However, on the basis
of the principles established by Ṣadr al- Muta’allihīn, one can obtain a
very clear standard for the recognition of the creative cause and its
effect. These principles are: the fundamentality of existence, the
relativity of the effect in relation to the creative cause, and the
gradation of the planes of existence.

On the basis of these threefold principles each of which has been
established in the appropriate place, it follows that every effect is at
a weaker level than its creative cause, and its cause, in turn, is at a
weaker level than a more perfect existent which is its creative cause,
until we reach an existent which has no weakness, failure, deficiency or
limitations, and it will be infinitely perfect, so that it will no
longer be the effect of something.

Hence, the distinguishing feature of being an effect is the weakness of
the level of existence in relation to another existent, and conversely,
the distinguishing feature of being a cause is the strength and
intensity of the level of existence in relation to an effect, in
accordance with which the distinguishing feature of the absolute cause
is the infinite intensity and perfection of existence. Even if we cannot
recognize creative causes and effects individually, we can understand
that every creative cause is more perfect than its effect, and in
relation to its creative cause it is more deficient, and wherever there
is weakness and existential limitation, the being of an effect will be
established. Since in the natural world there does not exist any
infinite existent, all corporeal existents will be effects of the
supernatural.

It may be said that what has been obtained from the mentioned principles
is that everywhere we have two existents, one of which is the emanation
of the other and is considered to be a stage of the emanating existence,
it will be its effect. But the question is how can we establish that
there is an existent more perfect than material existents, such that
these existents are to be considered a weaker level of the more perfect
existent, so that they would be effects of it?

The answer to this question is to be obtained from the principle
indicated earlier, according to which being an effect is essential to
the existence of the effect and is inviolable. So, it is not the case
that two assumptions are involved in the realization of an existent: one
that it is the effect of a more perfect existent, and the other that it
is independent and without need of a cause for its occurrence. But if
something has the possibility of being an effect, it is certain to be an
effect. And whenever there is an existent such that a more perfect
existent than it can be imagined, it will have the possibility of being
an effect, and hence it is certain to be an effect and it will no longer
have the possibility of not being an effect, for if the

possibility of not being an effect were also supposed, this would mean
that essentially it does not require being or not being an effect. That
is, if it were an effect, its being an effect would not be essential,
while in the previous discussion it became clear that being an effect is
essential to the existence of the effect. Thus, something which is
capable of being an effect, that is, for which one can suppose a more
perfect existent, will have to be an effect.

At the end of this lesson we should note that the weakness of the level
of existence has some indicators by means of which one can recognize
that an existent is an effect, and among these are limitations in time
and place, limitations in a thing’s effects, changeability, moveability
and destructibility.


