Lesson Thirty-Four: The Causal Relation among Material Things
=============================================================

The Cause of Belief in the Causal Relation among Material Things
----------------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes it is said that the knowledge of the causal relation among all
existents, including material existents, is an innate (*fiṭrī* )
knowledge with which the human intellect has been fashioned, and on the
basis of which specific causes and effects are determined. However, as
has been discussed in the lessons on epistemology, no acquired knowledge
can be proven to be innate, and assuming that it occurs, there would be
no guarantee of its correspondence with reality.

However, as has been mentioned in Lesson Twenty-Three, some knowledge is
near to being self-evident (*bidāhat* ), and in a sense can be
considered to be ‘innate’, such as knowledge of the existence of
material realities, which really has its source in a hidden or
semi-conscious reasoning. The knowledge of the existence of the causal
relation and the dependence of some material existents on others is also
of this sort.

The closer we get to the beginning of infancy, the more unconscious
reasoning becomes, until it becomes similar to the instinctive
perceptions of animals. To the extent that man’s consciousness develops,
reasoning becomes more manifestly conscious, until it takes the form of
logical reasoning. For example, when a child hears a sound
simultaneously with the collision of two objects, he vaguely understands
the dependence of the appearance of the noise on the collision. When he
witnesses the lighting of a lamp along with the flipping of a switch, he
understands there to be another dependence of the same sort. In brief,
his soul becomes thus disposed to understand the existence of the causal
relation among material phenomena. However, he is not able to understand
this relation in the form of a logical proposition or to express it in
exact terms. Eventually he develops sufficient powers of mental analysis
to understand this subject in the form of a logical proposition, and to
expound the hidden foundational reasoning in the form of a logical
proof. Of course, it is possible that at the beginning of this process
one will use a concept which is not sufficiently precise, or one will
present an argument which from a logical point of view is fallacious.
For example, one might speculate that everything depends upon something
else, or that every existent appears in a specific time and place.
However, these unfortunate generalizations and other inadequacies in the
interpretation of percepts and reasonings, are effects of the weakness
of the analytic powers of the mind, and to the extent that one develops
and strengthens the above-mentioned powers by means of logical exercises
and philosophical analysis one will make fewer such mistakes.

In any case, as we have explained repeatedly, the firmest foundation for
belief in the existence of the causal relation is knowledge by presence.
The discovery of instances of causes and effects within the self is
considered to be the most sturdy basis for the abstraction of the
universal concepts of cause and effect and prepares the ground for the
conscious understanding of the principle of causation as a self-evident
(*badīhī* ) proposition. However,

since material instances of cause and effect cannot be known through
knowledge by presence, and on the other hand, as mentioned above, since
it is unacceptable to consider the belief in the causal relation among
material things to be innate, there is no alternative but to consider
the source of such beliefs to lie in a kind of reasoning, which, at its
inception was semi-conscious and spontaneous, and gradually takes the
form of clear logical reasoning.

Since this belief is close to being self-evident it may be called, in a
sense, innate. In order to evaluate this belief one must first state
this proposition in an exact form, and then give a logical explanation
of it.

An Evaluation of the Above-mentioned Belief
-------------------------------------------

The causal relation among material things may be stated in several
forms. One is: “Material existents are dependent upon one another.” This
proposition, which is called ‘unquantified’ (*muhmalah* ) in logic, does
not indicate the universality or particularity of this relation. That
is, it does not mean that all material things have this relation with
one another, nor that only some of them have such a relation. It is
certain that there exists a causal relation among some of them, and
really, it is evaluated as a particular affirmative proposition, the
contradictory of a universal negative proposition, the absolute negation
of causation among material things, which view is associated with the
Ash‘arites.

The second form is: “All material existents have a causal relation with
another material existent.” This means that no material existent is to
be found which is neither a cause nor an effect of another material
existent. This leaves open the possibility that one or more material
existents are merely causes for some phenomena and that they themselves
are not the effects of other material existents (although they may be
the effects of supernatural causes), the possibility also is left open
that they are merely effects of material causes, and that they
themselves are not causes of other material phenomena.

The third form is: “Every material existent has a material cause,” and
the fourth form is: “Every material existent is the cause of another
material existent and is the effect of another material existent.” An
implication of the third proposition is a backward stretching infinite
regress of material causes. An implication of the fourth proposition is
an infinite regress in both directions.

Among these propositions, the first is certain and close to being
self-evident, and it is the one which may be called innate. However,
regarding the other propositions, they have been more or less in dispute
and subject to differences of opinion which are presented in detailed
philosophical texts under various topics.

Just as the principle of the existence of material things is not
self-evident and needs to be proven, the existence of the causal
relation among material things is also not self-evident. The warrant for
this belief is not at the same level as the belief in the universal
principle of causation, in the form of a verity proposition (*qaḍiyyah
ḥaqīqiyyah* ), nor is it on the level of the belief in the existence of
the causal relation for the totality of existents, some of whose
instances are known through knowledge by presence. Rather, its

logical warrant is at the level of speculative certainties (*naẓariyyāt
yaqīnī* ), which on the one hand are based on the self-evident principle
of causality, and on the other hand are based on empirical premises.
That is, after the real existence of material existents is established,
and idealistic doubts are refuted, then with the help of experiences
which establish that some material phenomena do not occur without some
others, it may be concluded that the causal relation in its general
sense, that is, absolute dependency (not a dependency that is absolute),
holds among material existents, and that the material existent, in
addition to having a need for a creative cause at the core of its being,
is also such that its changes and alterations depend on the fulfillment
of various conditions which are provided by other material existents,
conditions which, in reality, serve to prepare matter for the
acquisition of new existential perfections, even if the previous
perfection must then be abandoned.

The Way to the Knowledge of Material Causes
-------------------------------------------

As was indicated, there are many ways with regard to the absolute
knowledge of causes and effects, but the way to the knowledge of
material causes and effects is limited to empirical proof, that is,
proof in which empirical premises have also been employed.

It is sometimes imagined that the repeated observation of two successive
phenomena is reason for the first phenomenon to be the cause of the
second. That is, empirical premises are used for the establishment of
the causation of one material existent for another, in the form: “This
phenomenon repeatedly comes into existence following another
phenomenon.” Then another premise must be added: “For every two
existents which occur in this form, the first is the cause of the
second.” The conclusion obtained is that in the case experienced, the
first phenomenon is the cause of the second phenomenon. However, as has
been shown time and time again, succession or simultaneity are more
general than causation, and cannot be considered to be decisive reasons
for causation, that is, the major premise of this syllogism is not
certain, and therefore neither can its conclusion be certain.

Logicians, when discussing the validity of empirical propositions, have
said that the mutual implication (*talāzum* ) of two phenomena, either
constantly or in most cases, indicates the causal relation between them,
for persistent or nearly persistent simultaneity cannot be accidental.

Regarding this statement it must be said that, first of all, this
proposition implies that something accidental cannot be persistent or
nearly persistent, or in technical terms, that compulsion (*qaṣr* )
which occurs persistently or nearly persistently is impossible.
Secondly, it is nearly impossible to establish the persistent or nearly
persistent mutual implication of two phenomena, and no experimenter can
claim that he has subjected most occurrences of two phenomena to
experiment.

Likewise, another principle is sometimes employed to complement this
proof, that two similar things will have similar effects. (“Judgment
regarding similar cases of what is permissible or impermissible is
one.”) Therefore, regarding cases of experimentation, if one observes
the occurrence of a phenomenon under certain conditions, one will know
that in other conditions which are exactly the same, the above
phenomenon will

also occur. In this way the causal relation between [the conditions and
the phenomenon] is discovered. However, this principle is not of very
much practical efficiency, for the establishment of the complete
similarity of two circumstances is no easy task.

It thus seems that the only way to utilize experience in order to
establish definitively the causal relation between two given phenomena
is to control the conditions for the occurrence of one phenomenon and to
observe which of the controlled elements and conditions when changed
alters this phenomenon, and with the existence of which conditions the
phenomenon remains the same. For example, if in the controlled
environment of the laboratory one observes that only with the connection
of two given wires, a light bulb is lit, and that it goes out when they
are disconnected, one may conclude that the above connection is the
condition for the appearance of light in the bulb (transforming the
electrical energy into light). If the conditions are precisely
controlled, the performance of an experiment a single time will be
sufficient. However, since the precise control of the conditions is no
easy task, in order to be sure, the experiment is often performed
repeatedly.

However, at the same time, it is extremely difficult to establish that
the effective cause of the appearance of a phenomenon is the very
factors identified in the experimental environment and that no other
unidentified and unperceived factor exists. Even more difficult than
this is to establish that it is the only factor and is irreplaceable,
for there is always the possibility that under other conditions the
given phenomenon will occur by means of other factors. Newer and newer
discoveries in physics and chemistry confirm this possibility. This is
why empirical conclusions will never have the value of the self-evident,
and basically cannot produce redoubled certainty (certain beliefs whose
contrary is impossible). Hence, the achievements of the empirical
sciences will never have the value of the conclusions of pure rational
proofs.

We should note that the existence of the mentioned possibilities which
prevent the acquisition of redoubled certainty in relation to the
principles of the empirical sciences is of no harm for the certainty of
the causal relation among material existents, for with simple
experiments it can be established that by excluding one phenomenon,
another phenomenon will be eliminated. This shows that the first
phenomenon is a kind of incomplete cause of the second. For example,
with the setting of the sun, the sky becomes dark; and with the absence
of water, trees become dry. Thousands of other examples can be observed
repeatedly in the daily lives of men. What is difficult is to determine
precisely all the factors and conditions which have an effect on the
occurrence of a material phenomenon. If one were able to precisely
determine all of them, this would not imply a denial of the influence of
a supernatural agent, for the performance of an experiment in the case
of such an agent is not possible. The existence or nonexistence of a
supernatural agent can only be established with pure rational proof.


