Lesson Two: A Glance at the Course of Philosophical Thought (from the Middle Ages to the Eighteenth Century)
============================================================================================================

Scholastic Philosophy
---------------------

After the spread of Christianity in Europe and the combination of the
power of the Church with that of the Roman Empire, the centers of
learning came under the influence of the apparatus of government to such
an extent that by the sixth century (as was indicated previously) the
universities and schools of Athens and Alexandria were closed. This
period, which lasted for about one thousand years, is called the Middle
Ages, and is characterized by the domination of the Church over the
centers of learning and the programs of the schools and universities.

Among the prominent personalities of this era is St. Augustine, who
tried to use philosophical principles, especially the views of Plato and
the Neo-Platonists to explain the dogmas of Christianity. After him, a
number of philosophical discussions were included in the programs of the
schools. However, the attitude toward Aristotelian thought was
unfavorable for it was considered to be opposed to religious beliefs,
and its teaching was prohibited. With the dominion of the Muslims in
al-Andalus (Spain) and the penetration of Islamic thought in Western
Europe, the ideas of Islamic philosophers such as Ibn Sīnā (Avicenna)
and Ibn Rushd (Averroes) were more or less discussed, and the Christian
scholars also became acquainted with Aristotelian views by means of the
books of these philosophers.

Little by little members of the Church could not resist this wave of
philosophical thought, and finally St. Thomas Aquinas accepted most of
Aristotle’s philosophical views which are reflected in his own books,
and gradually, opposition to Aristotle’s philosophy decreased, and even
came to dominate some centers of learning.

In any case, in the Middle Ages philosophy not only developed in Western
lands, but also went through a course of decline, and contrary to the
world of Islam, in which the sciences and learning continually
flourished and became increasingly enriched, in Europe the only
discussions taught in the Church affiliated schools, and which came to
be called scholastic philosophy, were those which could justify the
dogmas of Christianity, dogmas which were not without deviation
themselves. It goes without saying that such philosophy could have no
destiny but death and extinction.

In scholastic philosophy, besides logic, theology, ethics, politics, and
some natural philosophy and astronomy which were accepted by the Church,
grammar and rhetoric were also incorporated into the curricula, and in
this way, the philosophy of this period was considered more broadly
[than at present].

The Renaissance and the Comprehensive Change in Thinking
--------------------------------------------------------

From the fourteenth century the ground was being prepared for a
comprehensive change by means of various factors. One factor was the
flourishing of nominalism (the fundamentality of naming) and the denial
of the existence of universals in England and France. This philosophical

tendency played an effective role in undermining the foundations of
philosophy. Another factor was that the natural philosophy of Aristotle
became a matter of controversy at the University of Paris. Another
factor was the murmurings of the incompatibility of philosophy with
Christian dogma, and in other words, the incompatibility of reason and
religion. Another factor was the manifestation of disagreements between
the temporal rulers and the authorities of the Church, and among the
Christian authorities themselves there were also disputes which led to
the emergence of Protestantism. Yet another factor was the cresting of
humanism and the tendency to deal with the problems of human life while
disregarding metaphysical problems. Finally, in the middle of the
fifteenth century, the Byzantine Empire collapsed, and a complete change
(political, philosophical, literary and religious) appeared throughout
Europe, and the institutions of the papacy were attacked from every
side.

In this course, the weak scholastic philosophy reached its final
destiny.

In the sixteenth century, interest in the natural and empirical sciences
became intense, and the discoveries of Copernicus, Kepler and Galileo
shook the foundations of Ptolemaic astronomy and Aristotelian natural
philosophy. In a word, in Europe all aspects of human affairs were
subjected to disturbance and instability.

The papal institutions were able to withstand these roaring waves for
quite some time, and scientists were brought before the Inquisition with
the excuse of their opposition to religious dogmas, that is, for their
views on natural philosophy and cosmology which were accepted by the
Church for the exegesis of the Bible and religious doctrines. Many were
burnt in the fires of blind fanaticism and selfishness of the
authorities of the Church. However, eventually the Church and papal
institution were forced to withdraw in shame.

The ruthless fanatical behavior of the Catholic Church had no effect but
to give the people a negative attitude toward the authorities of the
Church, and in general toward religion, and likewise the downfall of
scholastic philosophy, that is, the only current philosophy of that
period, brought about an intellectual and philosophical vacuum, and
finally the appearance of modern skepticism. During this process, the
only thing that made progress was humanism, and a desire for natural and
empirical science in the cultural arena, and a tendency toward
liberalism and democracy in the field of politics.

The Second Phase of Skepticism
------------------------------

For centuries, the Church had spread the views and ideas of some
philosophers as religious beliefs, and Christians had accepted them as
certain and sacred, including Aristotelian and Ptolemaic views of
cosmology which were upset by Copernicus, and other unbiased scholars
also realized their invalidity. We have already mentioned that the
dogmatic resistance of the Church and the ruthless behavior of the
authorities of the Church with respect to the scientists brought about
adverse reaction.

This change in thoughts and beliefs and the toppling of the intellectual
and philosophical foundations [of the Middle Ages] brought about a
psychological crises in many of the scholars, and raised doubts in their

minds such as: how can we be sure that other beliefs we hold are not
invalid, and that one day their invalidity will not become evident? How
can we know that newly discovered scientific theories will not also be
invalidated someday? Finally, a great scholar named Montaigne denied the
value of science and knowledge and he explicitly wrote, how can we be
sure that the theory of Copernicus will not be invalidated in the
future? He once more expressed the doubts of the skeptics and sophists
in a new way, and defended skepticism, and thus another phase of
skepticism appeared.

The Peril of Skepticism
-----------------------

The attitude of doubt, in addition to being a painful psychological
plague, also involves great spiritual and material perils for society.
With the denial of the value of knowledge, there can be no hope for the
advancement of the sciences and learning, likewise no room remains for
moral values and their magnificent role in human life, as religion also
loses its intellectual basis. Rather, the greatest blows are directed
toward religious dogmas, beliefs unrelated to material and sensible
affairs. When the flood of doubt flows through the hearts of the people,
naturally, the beliefs about the super natural are the most vulnerable.

Therefore, skepticism is an extremely dangerous plague that threatens
all aspects of human life with destruction, and with its spread no
ethical, legal, political or religious system can remain stable, and it
provides an excuse for all sorts of crimes, injustice and oppression.

For this very reason, the struggle against skepticism is a duty of all
scholars and philosophers, and it is also a responsibility for religious
leaders, and it is also a matter about which counselors, politicians and
social reformers must be diligent.

In the seventeenth century various activities were undertaken to shore
up the ruins of the Renaissance, including struggle against the perils
of skepticism. The Church tended to cut off the dependence of
Christianity on reason and science, and fortified religious doctrines
through the heart and faith. However, philosophers and scholars sought a
firm and unshakable basis for knowledge and value, so that intellectual
fluctuations and social upheavals would not destroy them.

Modern Philosophy
-----------------

The most important effort of this period for salvation from skepticism
and the revitalization of philosophy was that of Rene Descartes, the
French philosopher who is called “the father of modern philosophy”.
After much research and meditation, he devised a plan by which to
bolster the footings of philosophical thought; his principle may be
summarized in his famous proposition: “I doubt, therefore I am,” or “I
think, therefore I am”, that is, if one follows the way of doubt
regarding the existence of everything, one will nonetheless never be
able to doubt one’s own existence. Since doubt is meaningless without
one who doubts, the human existence of doubters and thinkers is also
indubitable. Then he tried to formulate specific laws of thought similar
to mathematical laws and to solve the problems of philosophy on their
basis.

In that period of intellectual tumult, the thought and views of
Descartes were a source of reassurance for many scholars; and other
great thinkers, such as Leibniz, Spinoza and Malebranch, also sought to
reinforce the groundwork of modern philosophy. Nevertheless, these
efforts were unable to bring about a harmonious philosophical system
having certain and consolidated foundations. On the other hand, the
attention of the majority of scholars had turned toward the empirical
sciences, many of whom displayed no interest in research in
philosophical and metaphysical problems. Because of this, a strong, firm
and well-supported philosophical system did not come into existence in
Europe, and although collections of philosophical views and ideas
occasionally were proposed in the form of specific schools of
philosophical thought which within certain limits were able to win more
or less of a following, still none of them was able to become
permanently established, as remains the case.

The Fundamentality of Experience and Modern Skepticism
------------------------------------------------------

While rational philosophy was being revived on the continent of Europe,
and reason was about to find its own place in the understanding of
truth, another tendency was making progress in England, which was based
on the fundamentality of sense and experience, called empiricism.

The beginnings of this tendency go back to the end of the Middle Ages
and to William of Ockham, an English philosopher who was a proponent of
the fundamentality of naming, and was also actually a denier of the
fundamentality of reason. In the sixteenth century, Francis Bacon, and
in the seventeenth century, Hobbes, who were also English, both relied
upon the fundamentality of sense and experience, but those who are known
as empiricists are another three English philosophers: John Locke,
George Berkeley and David Hume, who discussed the problems of knowledge
from the end of the seventeenth century until about one century later,
and while criticizing the views of Descartes regarding “innate
knowledge”, they considered the source of all knowledge to be sense and
experience.

Among them, John Locke was the most moderate and nearest to the
rationalists. Berkeley was an avowed proponent of the fundamentality of
naming, i.e., a nominalist, but (perhaps unconsciously) he resorted to
the principle of causation, which is a rational principle, and likewise
he had other views that were incompatible with the fundamentality of
sense and experience. But Hume remained completely loyal to the
fundamentality of sense and experience, and to its implications and he
bound himself to skepticism regarding the metaphysical, and to an
acceptance of the reality of natural phenomena. In this way, the third
phase of skepticism in the history of Western philosophy took shape.

Kant’s Critical Philosophy
--------------------------

Hume’s thoughts are among those which formed the groundwork for the
philosophical ideas of Kant, and in his own words, “It is Hume who
awakened me from my dogmatic slumber,” and Kant especially found
agreeable Hume’s explanation of the principle of causality, which was
based on the idea that experience cannot establish a necessary relation
between cause and effect.

For many long years Kant thought about the problems of philosophy, and
wrote many essays and books. He offered a specific philosophical view
which in comparison to similar sorts of views was more durable and
acceptable. But he finally arrived at the conclusion that theoretical
reason does not have the ability to solve the problems of metaphysics
and that the rational principles in this field lack scientific value.

He explicitly declared that problems such as the existence of God, the
eternity of the soul and free will could not be established by rational
proofs, but that belief and faith in them is implied by the acceptance
of an ethical system, in other words, it is an accepted principle of the
precepts of practical reason, and that it is ethics which calls us to
faith in the resurrection, not the reverse. For this reason, Kant must
be considered as a reviver of ethical values, which after the
Renaissance were subject to instability and were in danger of fading and
being obliterated. On the other hand, he must be considered to be one of
the destroyers of the foundations of metaphysical philosophy.


