Lesson Thirty-Six: The Relations of Cause and Effect
====================================================

The Homogeneity (Sinkhiyyah) of Cause and Effect
------------------------------------------------

Undoubtedly, not just any effect comes into existence with any cause.
Even among successive or simultaneous phenomena there is not always a
causal relation. Causation is rather a specific relation among certain
existents. In other words, between the cause and effect there must exist
a specific relation, which can be termed the homogeneity (*sinkhiyyah* )
of cause and effect. This principle is also an intuitive proposition
which is close to being self-evident, which may be demonstrated by the
simplest of internal and external experiences.

However, there is a difference between homogeneity and the relation
which is necessary between cause and effect in cases of existence-giving
causes on the one hand and material and preparatory causes on the other.
In the first case, the characteristics of this homogeneity can be
established by rational proof, and its demonstration is as follows:
Since the existence of the effect is emanated by the existence-giving
cause, which can be put roughly by saying that it gives existence to its
own effect, it itself must have that existence which it can then give to
its effect. If it did not possess that, it could not grant or emanate it
(one who gives something cannot lack it). Noting that granting existence
to an effect does not diminish the granter of anything, it becomes clear
that it possesses the above-mentioned existence in a more complete form,
such that the existence of the effect can be considered its radiance and
luminescence.

So, the homogeneity between the existence-giving cause and its effect
means that this cause has the perfection of the effect in a more perfect
form. If a cause in its own essence did not possess a kind of
existential perfection, it would never be able to grant this perfection
to its effect. In other words, every effect is produced by its cause
which has the perfection of its effect in a more perfect form. This
subject becomes more clear with regard to the relational nature of the
effect with respect to its existence-giving cause and the special
gradation between them, which were established in the previous chapters.

Homogeneity does not exist between material or preparatory causes and
their effects, for such causes do not grant or emanate existence. Their
influence is limited to alterations in the existence of their effects.
With regard to the fact that not just anything can bring about any kind
of change, it is summarily obtained that some sort of relation and
homogeneity is also necessary between such causes and effects. However,
the characteristics of this sort of homogeneity cannot be established by
rational proof, rather, it is only through experience that one can
discern what sort of things can be the source of what changes, and under
what conditions and with the aid of what things these changes are
produced.

For example, reason, by means of conceptual analysis, would never be
able to discover whether water is simple or is composed of other
elements, and if the latter, of what and how many elements it is
composed. What conditions are necessary for such a composition? Are
these supposed conditions replaceable or not? Hence, it is only by means
of experience that

it is possible to establish that water is composed in a special way of
two elements, oxygen and hydrogen, that this composition requires a
certain temperature and pressure and that an electrical current can
speed the process of composition.

The Removal of a Doubt
----------------------

We have stated that it follows from a rational proof that every
existence- giving cause must possess the perfection of its effect, for
it is absurd to suppose that the granter lacks that which it grants to
another.

With regard to this topic, the following problem may be raised, that an
implication of this principle is that existence-giving agents have
material existences and their perfections, while an existence-giving
agent can only be an immaterial existent which does not have matter or
the specific attributes of matter. So how can something emanate that
which it itself does not possess?

The answer to this problem is that what is meant by possessing the
perfection of an effect is having a more perfect and higher level than
the existence of the effect, such that the existence of the effect is
considered to be the radiance of the cause, not that the limits of the
existence of the effect are exactly preserved in the cause, and not that
the cause has the same whatness as the effect. It is clear that the
greater perfection of the existence of the cause than the level of the
existence of the effect is not compatible with their whatish unity. One
can never abstract a single whatness from two existents which have
specific gradation, one of which is considered a plane of the existence
of the other and its radiance, because what it means for two existents
to have a single whatness is that their existential limits correspond to
one another. This is impossible in the case of two levels of existence
one of which is more perfect than the other, having fewer limitations
and imperfections. However, lacking the whatness of the effect and the
limits of its existence does not mean lacking its existential
perfection. That which is necessary in the case of the existence-giving
cause is having the existential perfections of the effect in a more
perfect and higher form, not possessing its imperfections and
limitations. If the concept of a body and its implications, such as
being spatial and temporal, being capable of movement and change, are
not true of God, the Exalted, and completely immaterial things, this is
because the above-mentioned concepts imply the imperfections and
limitations of material existents rather than their perfections.

It should be noted that the solution to this problem became possible by
virtue of the fundamentality of existence, and that on the basis of the
fundamentality of whatness there would be no correct solution for it,
because an implication of the fundamentality of whatness is that that
which is in fact emanated from the cause is the external whatness of the
effect, and according to this principle the cause must be in possession
of this whatness. It cannot be said that the cause has the whatness of
the effect in a more perfect form, for such graduation, especially the
specific graduation among whatnesses, is meaningless. As was mentioned
in Lesson Twenty-Eight, all immaterial whatnesses, especially simple
whatnesses, are disparate from one

another. Furthermore, the supposition of a whatness in the case of God,
the Exalted, is incorrect.

Unity of an Effect for Unity of a Cause
---------------------------------------

According to a well-known philosophical principle, from a single cause
nothing can be produced but a single effect, (“The one produces nothing
other than the one”). However, there are disagreements about the purport
of this principle and the cases to which it applies. Among these
disagreements is whether by unity of cause is meant individual unity or
unity of kind, and whether by unity of cause is meant complete
simplicity. For example, there is the meaning chosen by Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn in his “Journey of the Soul” in the*Asfār* , on the
basis of which the above-mentioned principle is considered to be
specific to the sacred divine essence in the existence of whose essence
there is not even analytic complexity, such that the immediate effect of
it can only be one existent, and other creatures must be produced by
means of one or several intermediaries from this first effect.

Other philosophers have understood this principle to cover other cases
more or less as well. Likewise, regarding the concept of ‘production’
(*ṣudūr* ) there are also differences, such as whether it is true of all
causal relations, even conditions and preparatory causes, or whether it
is restricted to efficient causes, or whether it is limited to
existence-giving causes. In other words, can it be said on the basis of
the principle that a preparatory agent cannot have more than one effect,
that one condition will have no more than one consequence, and that one
natural agent will have no more than one action?

In order to determine the cases to which this principle applies, one
should examine carefully the reasons in support of it to discover why it
is required. Philosophers have given different kinds of reasons for this
principle, but the most clear and at the same time firmest of these is a
reason which originates in the principle of homogeneity between cause
and effect, which may be expressed as follows: According to the
principle of the homogeneity of cause and effect, the cause must possess
that which it gives to the effect in a more perfect form. Now, if it is
supposed that the cause possesses just one*sinkh* (root) of existential
perfection (i.e., a homogeneity making factor between cause and effect),
naturally its effect will possess a lower level of that perfection, not
another perfection. If we suppose that two different effects are
produced from one such cause, then, according to the mentioned
principle, the cause must possess two roots of perfection, while it was
assumed that it only possesses one root of existential perfections.

Several conclusions may be derived from a careful study of this
argument.

1. This principle is specific to existence-giving causes, since, as was
mentioned, this feature, that the cause must possess the perfection of
its effect, is specific to existence-giving causes. Therefore, on the
basis of this principle one cannot establish that natural agents, that
is the reasons for changes and alterations in material things, each have
a single effect, or that, for example, there is only one thing which is
the condition for the effect of an agent, or that there is only one
thing which is the preparatory condition for a capability. For example,
heat is a condition for various chemical

actions and reactions, and heat itself comes into existence by means of
various natural factors.

2. This principle is not limited to a single individual, for the above
reason also includes unity of kind, and if we suppose that one kind of
existence- giving cause has several individuals, and that they all
possess one root of existential perfection, then naturally, their
effects will all be of one kind.

3. This principle is limited to causes which possess only one root of
perfection. However, if an existent has several kinds of existential
perfection, or all existential perfections in a simple form, that is, if
its existence possesses the above perfections with that same unity and
simplicity, then this argument will not cover it.

Therefore, the above-mentioned principle does not establish anything
more than the principle of the homogeneity between an existence-giving
cause and its effect. The unity of the first thing produced cannot be
established merely on the basis of this principle, although there is
another way to establish this, which will be presented at the
appropriate point.

Unity of Cause for Unity of Effect
----------------------------------

Another well-known principle is that a single effect cannot be produced
by more than a single cause, (“The one is not produced by other than the
one”).

Regarding this principle, despite differences, all philosophers agree
that a single effect can be produced from a compound cause. So, what is
meant by the unity of the cause in the above principle is not simplicity
and lack of composition. Furthermore, the production of an effect by
several vertical causes, such that each of them is the cause of another,
is undeniable. In other words: neither the multiplicity of mediated
effects, each of which is the effect of another, nor the multiplicity of
mediated causes is contrary to the above principle.

On the other hand, all philosophers agree that an individual effect will
have no more than one complete cause; in technical terms, the
conjunction of several complete causes for a single effect is
impossible, for if all these causes were effective, then necessarily
numerous effects would be brought into existence by them, so the effect
would not be one. If some of these causes were not effective, this would
be contrary to the principle of the mutual implication of cause and
effect or the relative necessity (*wujūb bil-qiyās* ) of the effect with
respect to its complete cause.

That over which differences arise regarding this principle is whether
one kind of effect must always be produced by one kind of cause, or
whether it is possible that some individual cases of a kind of effect
may be produced by one kind of cause, while other individual cases of
the same kind of effect are produced by another kind of cause. It is
here that most people who consider this principle to include unities of
kind as well as individual unities, explicitly state that several kinds
of causes may effect the appearance of a single type of effect, such as
heat, which is sometimes the effect of the radiance of the sun,
sometimes of the burning of fire, and sometimes the effect of motion and
friction.

However, with regard to what was said about the principle of
homogeneity, the existence of the effect may be produced only by a cause

which possesses that same*sinkh (root)* , an existential perfection at a
higher level [than that exhibited by the effect]. An effect will never
be produced by an existence-giving cause which lacks the*sinkh (root)*
which is the perfection of the effect. Therefore, in the case of an
existence-giving cause and its effect it must be said that not only is
it impossible for an individual effect to be produced by two or more
individual existence-giving causes, but a single type of effect also
cannot be brought into existence by two or more types of
existence-giving causes. But in the case of material or preparatory
causes, since there is no rational proof for the quality of their
homogeneity with their effects, it cannot be established that one kind
of effect must have one kind of cause. It is rationally possible that
several kinds of material or preparatory causes should have a single
kind of effect, as the number of conditions and their determinations
cannot be established by rational proof, and all of them depend on
experience.


