Lesson Thirty-Seven: The Principles of Cause and Effect
=======================================================

Some Points regarding Cause and Effect
--------------------------------------

A correct conception of the meaning of cause and effect is sufficient
for knowing that no existent can be the cause of its own existence, for
the meaning of causality rests upon the fact that an existent depends
upon the existence of another, so that with regard to the dependence of
one upon the other, the concepts of cause and effect are abstracted from
them, that is, this is a primary self-evident proposition, and needs no
argument.

Sometimes among the discussions of the philosophers one encounters
statements which may lead to such misconceptions as that an existent may
be the cause of its own existence. For example, regarding God, the
Exalted, it has been said, “The existence of the Necessary Existent is
required by its own essence.” Even regarding the expression ‘the
Necessary Existent by Itself,’ which is used in comparison to ‘the
necessary existent by another,’ it is possible that this may be
misconstrued in such a way that just as in the case of the necessary
existent by another, the ‘other’ is the cause, so too, in the case of
the Necessary Existent by Itself, It Itself is the cause.

The truth is that this kind of discussion is the result of the limits of
language, and the intent is never to establish a causal relation between
the Sacred Divine Essence and Its Own Existence, but rather what is
meant is to deny the ascription of being any sort of effect to that
Exalted Being.

In order to make this more comprehensible, an example from ordinary
(Farsi) language may be mentioned. If someone is asked, “With whose
permission did you do this deed?” And he replies, “I did it with my own
permission.” Here it is not meant that he actually gave himself
permission, but that it did not require anyone’s permission. The
expression ‘by Itself’ and ‘a requirement of essence’ are really used by
the speaker in order to deny causality, not for proving the causality of
the essence.

Another point at which confusion arises is that at which philosophers
consider matter and form to be causes for compound bodies, while there
is really no difference or multiplicity between them, that is, a body is
nothing but the conjunction of matter and form, and this implies the
unity of cause and effect. This problem is presented in philosophical
texts, and it is answered in the following way. That to which causation
is attributed are matter and form themselves, and that to which being an
effect is attributed is the conjunction of them, under the condition
that they are joined and have a compound structure, that is, if matter
and form are viewed apart from being conjoined and being compounded,
each of them may be considered a cause of the ‘whole.’ Whenever they are
considered under the condition of being joined, compounded and in the
form of a whole, we call it the effect of its parts, for the existence
of the whole depends on the existence of its parts.

This answer returns us to the point that the difference between cause
and effect is relative to our perspective and respect (*i‘tibār* ),
while the causal relation is a matter of fact and is independent of
respects (although in another sense in regard to whatish concepts, it is
called respectival (*i‘tibārī* )).

The truth is that the application of [the concept of] cause to matter
and form, and the application of [the concept of] effect to the
conjunction of them is not free from imprecision, as was previously
indicated. And if a body which is apt to take a new form is allowably
called the material cause for the succeeding existent, this is because
it prepares the grounds for the latter’s appearance.

Another point may be made with regard to the fundamentality of
existence. Since the causal relation really holds between two
existences, it is clear that the whatness of something cannot be
considered the cause of its existence, for whatness in itself has no
reality such that it could really be the cause of something. Likewise, a
whatness cannot be considered the cause of another whatness. It is
possible that it will be said that philosophers have divided causes into
two types: causes of whatnesses and causes of existence. An example of
the first type is the causation of line and surface for the whatness of
a triangle, and the causation of matter and form for the whatness of
body. An example of the second type is the causation of the existence of
fire for the existence of heat. Thus it is known that in their view
there exists a kind of causal relation among whatnesses. But this kind
of discussion must be considered to be due to a looseness of the
language, that is, just as, with regard to objective existence and the
external world, the causal relation holds between existents, and the
external existence of the effect depends upon the external existence of
the cause, such a relation can also be imagined in the mental world, in
the case that the conception of a whatness depends upon the conception
of something else, as the conception of a triangle depends on the
conception of line and surface. An implication of this looseness of
language is that one cannot establish that the principles of real and
entified causes and effects also apply to them.

A similar looseness also can be found in the case of secondary
philosophical intelligibles, as when ‘possibility’ is considered to be
‘the cause of need for a cause,’ while neither possibility nor need are
entified things, and between them it is meaningless to suppose that
there is a real causal relation or influence in the external world. One
of these cannot be considered the cause and the other the effect. What
is meant here is that by attending to the possibility of a whatness, the
intellect is led to the recognition of this whatness’s need for a cause,
not that possibility, which is interpreted as the lack of necessity for
existence or nonexistence, has a reality by means of which something
else comes into existence called ‘the need for a cause.’

We can conclude from this that the discussion of cause and effect which
is presented as being one of the most basic philosophical discussions,
in which specific principles for cause and effect are propounded, must
be restricted to causes and effects in the external world, and real
relationships between them. If in other cases the expression ‘causation’
is employed, this is due to imprecision or looseness of language.

The Impossibility of a Causal Circle
------------------------------------

One of the topics which is presented pertaining to the causal relation
is that it is impossible for any existent, with regard to the aspect in
which it is the cause and influence of the appearance of another
existent, should be, in

that very aspect, the effect and in need of that other existent. In
other words, no cause can be the effect of its own effect. From another
perspective, a cause cannot be the cause of its own cause. This may be
put in yet another way by saying that it is impossible for an existent
to be both cause and effect of another existent. This is the proposition
of the impossibility of a circle of causes, which can be considered to
be self-evident, or at least close to being self-evident. If the subject
and predicate of this proposition are properly understood, there will be
no room for doubt about it, for the implication of being a cause is
being without need and the implication of being an effect is being in
need, and the conjunction of being without need and being in need in one
aspect is a contradiction.

It is possible that in this field doubts may arise which result from
lack of precision regarding the meaning of the subject and predicate, as
is the case for many self-evident propositions. For example, one may
imagine that if a man’s own food is obtained only through farming, that
if it were not for the products of his own farming, he would die of
hunger. In this way, the above-mentioned products on the one hand would
be the effects of farming and on the other hand would be the cause of
it. Hence the supposed farmer would be the cause of the cause of
himself, and also the effect of the effect of himself! However, not only
is the farmer not the real cause of the products of farming, and is
merely a preparatory cause for them, and not only are the products of
farming also not the cause of the existence of the farmer, but rather
these products are only elements upon which the continuity of his life
is dependent. In other words, the existence of the farmer during the
times of sowing and reaping, is a cause and not an effect, and later, it
is an effect and not a cause. Likewise, the farm products, at the time
of their growing, are effects, and not causes, but at the times of
feeding the farmer, they are causes, and not effects. Hence being a
cause and being an effect are not with regard to the same aspect. The
only thing that can be said in this regard is that an existent at one
time may be the preparatory cause for something which it will need in
the future.

What is meant by an impossible circle is not this sort of relation;
rather what is meant is that an existent which in the same aspect in
which it is the cause of the appearance of something else cannot be, in
that same aspect of its being an effect, the effect of it and in need of
it. In other words, it gives something to an effect which it needs from
it in order to possess that same thing, and which must be obtained from
this effect.

Another problem is that we see that heat causes the appearance of fire,
while fire is also the cause of the heat. Hence, heat is the cause of
the cause of itself. The solution to this problem is also clear, for the
heat which is the cause of the fire is other than the heat which comes
into existence as an effect of the fire. Although these two heats may be
one in kind, they are multiple with regard to their existence in the
external world. What is meant by unity pertaining to this principle [of
the impossibility of a circle of causes] is individual unity, not
conceptual unity. In reality, this problem is a result of confusion
between conceptual unity and the unity of instances, or is a result of
confusion between two meanings of unity.

Other inconsequential problems have been presented by some materialists
and Marxists, which need not be mentioned if attention is paid to the
concepts of the principle [of the impossibility of a circle of causes]
and the answers to the problems mentioned above.

The Impossibility of an Infinite Regress
----------------------------------------

The literal meaning of regress (*tasalsul* ) is cases following one
another in a chain, whether the links in this chain are finite or
infinite, and whether or not there is a causal relation among them.
However, the technical meaning is restricted to cases in which one or
both directions of the chain are infinite. Philosophers consider an
infinite regress to be impossible under two conditions: First is that
among the links of the chain there should be a real ordering, such that
each link should follow another in reality, not conventionally; the
other is that all of the links should exist at the same time, not such
that when one is destroyed another comes into existence following it.
For this reason, an infinite sequence of events in time is not
considered to be essentially impossible.

At the same time, in the common parlance of philosophy, an infinite
regress is not restricted to causal regresses, and many reasons which
are given for the impossibility of a regress include regresses in which
there is no causal relation among the links, such as the proofs advanced
against actual infinity (*Burhān-e Musāmatah, Burhān-e Taṭbīq, and
Burhān-e Sullamī* ) which are mentioned in the detailed books of
philosophy. In these proofs, some mathematical premises are employed,
although there is dispute about them. However, some proofs are specific
to causal regresses, such as the proof given by Fārābī known as
*Burhān-e Asadd Akhṣar* (‘the firmest and most concise proof’), and it
may be stated as follows:

If it is supposed that each link in a chain of existents is dependent
upon another, such that if a prior link does not exist, the dependent
link would also fail to occur, this implies that this regress as a whole
is dependent on another existent, for it is supposed that all of its
links have this feature (of being dependent on another), and there is no
alternative but to suppose that there is an existent at the head of the
chain which is not itself dependent on something else. Until that
existent occurs, the links of the chain will not come into existence in
succession. Hence, such a chain cannot be infinite in the direction of
its beginning. In other words, an infinite regress of causes is
impossible.

Similar to this is a proof which is founded on the basis of the
principles established by Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn in his transcendent
philosophy for the impossibility of a regress of existence-giving
causes. It may be presented as follows:

According to the fundamentality of existence and the relatedness of the
existence of the effect to the existence-giving cause, every effect in
relation to its creative cause is just that relation and dependence
itself. It has no independence of its own. If a given cause is an effect
in relation to a prior cause, it will have that same state (of
dependence) to the prior cause. Thus, if a chain of causes and effects
is assumed, each of whose causes is the effect of another cause, it will
be a chain of relations and dependencies. It is self-evident that
dependent existence cannot occur without the occurrence of

an independent existence upon which the former depends. Thus, inevitably
there must be an independent existence beyond this chain of relations
and dependencies in the light of which all of them occur. Therefore,
this series cannot be considered to be without a beginning and without
an absolutely independent member.

The difference between these two proofs lies in the fact that the first
proof covers all real causes (causes which must necessarily exist with
their effects), while the second proof is restricted to existence-giving
causes, and which also covers complete causes, as they include
existence-giving causes.


