Lesson Thirty-Eight: The Efficient Cause
========================================

Introduction
------------

One of the most famous classifications of causes (perhaps stated for the
first time by Aristotle) is that of efficient causes, final causes,
material causes and formal causes, of which the first two types are
called external causes and the latter two are called internal causes or
‘causes of subsistence’ (*‘ilal-e qawām* ), and from one perspective are
called causes of whatness. From the previous lessons it has become clear
that the application (of the concept of) cause to the latter two types
involves some imprecision. At the end of Lesson Thirty-One it was
indicated that the material and formal causes are the very matter and
form of the bodies, which are called material and formal causes in
relation to compound bodies and are called matter and form in relation
to each other, and which are naturally specific to material things.
Since we will discuss matter and form later,1 here discussion of them
may be postponed. The section on Causality will be concluded with a
discussion of efficient causes and final causes.

The Efficient Cause and its Types
---------------------------------

By the efficient cause is meant an existent by which another existent
(the effect) is brought about, and in its general sense it also includes
natural agents which have an effect on the movements and changes of
bodies. Ancient philosophers recognized two kinds of actions and
influences in the world: one is willful action (*fi‘l irādī* ) which is
performed willfully by living existents which possess consciousness,
actions such as movement and other properties which accord with the will
of the agent, such as the voluntary (*ikhtiyārī* ) actions of man which
occur in various forms; and the other kind is that of action done by
existents without consciousness and without will which are monotonous
and without variation.

The ancient philosophers held that there was a specific nature for each
kind of corporeal existents which essentially had special requirements.
For instance, each of the four elements, earth, water, air and fire, was
considered to have a propensity for its own natural location and
specific natural qualities, such that, for example, if their locations
were changed by means of some external factor, their natural tendency
would be to move toward their original locations. In this way they
justified the falling of stones, the pouring of rain and the rising of
the flames of fire. They thought of nature as the source of motion.

Later, in view of the fact that occasionally motions and influences of
things occur contrary to their natural propensities, a third kind of
action was established called ‘constrained action’ (*fi‘l qasrī* ). For
example, due to the blowing of the wind, dust may rise toward the sky.
That was related to constrained nature of dust, and it was believed that
dust, which is a kind of earth, rises toward the sky by constrained
motion, and that it returns to the ground by natural motion. In such
cases they believed that the motion would not persist (“*the constrained
is not persistent* ”).

On the other hand, in view of the fact that it is possible for a willful
agent to be forced to move contrary to his own will because of the
domination of a more powerful agent, another kind of agent was posited
by the name of

‘coercive agent’ (*fā‘il jabrī* ), which is to a willful agent as
constrained action is to a natural agent.

Islamic philosophers deeply pondered the issue of willful agents and at
first divided them into two types: one is the intentional agent (*fā‘il
bil-qaṣd* ) and the other is the providential agent (*fā‘il*
*bil-‘ināyah* ). The basis of this division was observation of the
difference between willful agents which sometimes need motivation
additional to their own whatnesses, such as man, who must be motivated
in order to move of his own will from place to place. This kind is
called the intentional agent. Sometimes a willful agent does not require
any motivation, and is called a providential agent. The agency of God,
the Exalted, was considered to be of this second kind.

Later, the Illuminationists with greater precision established another
kind of agent, the knowledgeable (*‘ilmī* ) and voluntary (*ikhtiyārī* )
agent, whose detailed knowledge of his action is the action itself, such
as the detailed (*tafṣīlī* ) knowledge of a man of his own mental forms
is identical with those very forms themselves, and prior to their
occurrence the agent has no detailed knowledge of them, but merely has a
summary (*ijmālī* ) knowledge which is identical with the essence of the
agent. It is not the case that in order to imagine something one needs
to imagine previously what one imagines, and this agency (*fā‘iliyyah* )
is called agency by agreement (*fā‘iliyyah* *bil-riḍā* ), and they
consider divine agency to be of this kind.

Finally, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, under the of inspiration of Qur’ānic
revelation and the sayings of the gnostics, established that there is
another kind of knowledgeable agent. In this kind of agency the agent
has detailed knowledge of the action at the station of his essence, and
has that very knowledge as concise knowledge (*‘ilm ijmālī* ) of its own
essence. This is called the agent by self-disclosure (*fā‘il*
*bil-tajallī* ). The agency of God is considered to be of this kind. In
order to establish this sort of agency, he took advantage of the
principles of his transcendent philosophy, especially of the special
gradation and the possession by an existence-giving cause of the
perfections of its own effects.

Likewise, noting that sometimes two agents along with one another are
effective in the performance of an action, and the more remote agent
performs the deed by means of the more proximate agent, Islamic
philosophers established another kind of agency called subordinative
agency (*fā‘iliyyah bil-taskhīr* ), which may be conjoined with other
kinds of agency. For example, the digestion of food, which is performed
by means of bodily capacities, but which is under the dominion and
direction of the soul, is called a subordinative action. Then, on the
basis of the principles of transcendent philosophy and in view of the
fact that every cause with relation to its own existence-giving cause is
pure relation, an even clearer instance of the subordinative agent is
established, and an even firmer philosophical interpretation may be
given of the relation of an action to numerous vertical agents,
including the relation of the voluntary actions of man to man himself,
and in turn to the higher sources (*mabādī* *‘āliyyah* ), and to God,
the Exalted.

In this way, as stated by Ḥakīm Sabzāvārī, agents can be classified into
eight types: natural agents (*fā‘il* *bil-ṭab‘* ), constrained agents (
*fā‘il* *bil-qasr* ),

intentional agents ( *fā‘il* *bil-qaṣd* ), compelled agents ( *fā‘il*
*bil-jabr* ), subordinate agents ( *fā‘il* *bil-taskhīr* ), providential
agent ( *fā‘il* *bil-‘ināyah* ), agent by agreement ( *fā‘il* *bil-riḍā*
), and the agent by self-disclosure ( *fā‘il* *bil-tajallī* ).

Points Regarding the Types of Agent
-----------------------------------

1. That which was said by the ancient philosophers regarding the natural
and constrained agents depended upon the established principles of
ancient physics, including the theory of the four elements and their
propensities in relation to their natural loci and qualities: wet, dry,
heat and cold, which we now know to be invalid. But in any case, there
is no doubt that corporeal existents influence one another, and that the
appearance of material phenomena depends upon the obtaining of specific
grounds and conditions. Therefore, the existence of material conditions
and means for the realization of corporeal effects has been and will
forever continue to be valid as a philosophical principle.

It is not the job of philosophy to determine the specific means and
natural agents for each phenomenon. These must be established by
empirical methods in the various natural sciences. By way of example, on
the basis of modern scientific theory, spatial movement can be
considered an essential requisite of light, and the forces of attraction
and repulsion may be construed as agents of the compulsory movement of
bodies. In this way, it is more appropriate to relate action to the
compulsory force, and to consider the compelled bodies as merely
passive, despite the fact that according to grammar they may be
considered agents, and we know that the principles of philosophy do not
follow the dictates of grammar.

2. The expression ‘determination’ (*jabr* ) which is used as the
opposite of ‘freedom’ (*ikhtiyār* ) is sometimes seen as the antithesis
of freedom and in this sense it is also applied to natural and
constrained agents, but sometimes it is restricted to cases which have
the capability for freedom. The term ‘determined’ is used only for a
voluntary agent which loses its own freedom in certain conditions under
the influence of powerful external factors. The meaning of ‘compelled
agent’ (*fā‘il bil-jabr* ) is this latter meaning.

It is to be noted that losing freedom has various levels, for example,
the action of someone who is coerced to do something under threat may be
construed as ‘compelled.’ Likewise, someone who in certain conditions
has no alternative but to eat carrion to survive, is also considered.to
perform a ‘compelled’ action. But in cases of compulsion and emergency
freedom is not entirely negated, but the scope of the freedom of the
agent is limited in relation to ordinary circumstances. Apparently, the
sense of [the term]*compelled agent* used by the philosophers does not
cover these cases, but they mean cases in which the freedom of the agent
is totally negated. Thus it may be said that such an action is really
produced by the one who forces, and its relation to the forced
individual is passive, as was mentioned with regard to the case of
constrained action.

3. Before the Islamic philosophers established various kinds of
voluntary agents, including providential agent (*fā‘il* *bil-‘ināyah* ),
agent by agreement ( *fā‘il* *bil-riḍā* ), and the agent by
self-disclosure ( *fā‘il* *bil-tajallī* ), it was imagined that
voluntary agency was limited to intentional agents. Therefore,

some of the *mutakallimīn* have thought of the agency of God, the
Exalted, as being intentional. Even after the Islamic philosophers came
to view the divine realm as being free of agency of this kind, which
implies deficiency and attributes of contingency, some of the
*mutakallimīn* condemned them as deniers of the freedom of the Lord. The
truth is that the highest level of freedom is restricted to the sacred
divine essence, and its lowest level exists in intentional agents. In
order to clarify this subject, it is necessary to explain something
about will and freedom.

Will and Freedom
----------------

The expressions will and freedom have various applications which are
more or less related to one another, but neglect of these differences is
occasion for confusion and mistake. For this reason we will first
indicate the cases in which each of them is used, then we will compare
them with the types of agents.

### Will

###

The expression ‘will’ (*irādah* ) has a general meaning which is roughly
synonymous with desiring and favoring, and with this meaning it is also
used with respect to God, the Exalted, as in the case of man it is
recognized as a spiritual quality (the opposite of repugnance). In this
respect it is similar to knowledge (*‘ilm* ), which on the one hand
includes the essential knowledge of the Divinity, and on the other hand
includes the acquired knowledge of man, which is considered to be a
spiritual quality. God willing, in the section on theology a further
explanation of this will be given. It is to be noted that the expression
[God’s] ‘revealed will’ (*irādah-ye tashrī’ī* ), which is applied to the
voluntary actions of another agent, also is an instance of ‘will’ in its
general meaning.

The second meaning of ‘will’ is that of deciding to perform some deed,
and this depends upon the idea (*taṣawwur* ) of the deed and affirmation
( *taṣdīq* ) of some benefit (including pleasure), and it is considered
to be a ‘real differentia’ ( *faṣl al-ḥaqīqī* ) of animal (that which
moves by will), and it is also considered a characteristic of the
intentional agent. There have been discussions of the true significance
( *ḥaqīqat* ) of ‘will’ and many philosophers have considered it to be a
kind of spiritual quality and the opposite of ‘repugnance.’ However it
seems that ‘will’ in this sense is an action of the soul, and has no
opposite, although with a certain amount of fudging the opposite of it
can be considered to be a state of wonder or vacillation.

A more specific sense of ‘will’ is restricted to rational existents, and
it means a decision which results from rational preference, and in this
sense it is not used for animals. According to this meaning, a willful
action is synonymous with a planned action, and is the opposite of an
instinctive action or one done for pure enjoyment.

### Freedom

###

The term ‘freedom’ also has a general meaning which is the opposite of
pure determinism, and it means that an intelligent agent performs a deed
on the basis of his own desire without being forced by another agent.

The second meaning of ‘freedom’ is that an agent has two opposite
inclinations and prefers one over the other, and in this meaning, it is
equivalent to selection and choice, and it is a criterion for duty,
reward and punishment.

The third meaning is the choice of a deed on the basis of the agent’s
internal inclination, and another person can never exert any influence
on its performance. It is the opposite of ‘compulsory action’ which is
performed under pressure or under the threat of another.

The fourth meaning is the choice of a deed which is not influenced by
the limitations of one’s possibilities or the straits in which the agent
finds himself. It is the opposite of an ‘urgent deed’ which is performed
under the influence of such limitations. According to this meaning,
someone who in time of famine has no choice but to eat carrion in order
to survive, does not act freely, even though he may be called free in
some other sense.

Now, in view of the various meanings of will and freedom, we will review
the types of cognitive agents.

The intentional agent (*fā’il* *bil-qaṣd* ) can be considered an agent
possessing all the three meanings of will, for his deed is favored, is
decided upon, and the decision is made on the basis of rational
preference. Only a group of intentional actions which are done for pure
enjoyment will not be willful. The intentional agent can also have
freedom in all the four senses, although there are some types of
intentional deeds which cannot be considered free in the second, third
or fourth senses; however, all of them will be free in the first sense.
For example, breathing, which man has no inclination to abandon, is not
free in the second sense. A forced deed will not be free in the third
sense. Eating carrion in time of famine is not free in the fourth sense.
Nevertheless, all of these actions are free in the first sense, for it
is not the case that the freedom of the agent is totally negated.

With regard to the providential agent (*fā’il* *bil-’ināyah* ), the
agent by agreement (*fā’il* *bil-riḍā* ), and the agent by
self-disclosure (*fā’il* *bil-tajallī* ), these will be considered
willful only in the first sense, for these agents do not need to think
or decide. Likewise, they are considered to be free in the first, third,
and fourth senses because they do not perform their deeds under
compulsion, the pressure of external factors or conditions. It is only
in the second sense that these agents cannot be considered free, for it
is not necessary for them to choose between opposing motivations. Thus,
it has become clear that will, in the first sense, and freedom, in the
first sense, are always equivalent in extension, but will in the second
and third senses is more specific than freedom in the first, third, and
fourth senses, for it does not apply to the providential agent (*fā’il*
*bil-’ināyah* ), the agent by agreement (*fā’il* *bil-riḍā* ), and the
agent by self-disclosure (*fā’il* *bil-tajallī* ), and the opposite of
freedom in the mentioned meanings can be applied to all these cases. In
this way it becomes clear that the denial of will in the second and
third senses with regard to God, the Exalted, or completely immaterial
things, does not mean the denial of the freedom of such agents.

It has also become clear that will, in the sense of decision to perform
a deed can be considered a free action, although, it is not a kind of
intentional action, and is not based on the will and decision of
another. Perhaps the soul

in relation to the will may be considered an agent by self-disclosure
(*fā’il* *bil-tajallī* ).

Finally, the conclusion is obtained that the highest levels of freedom
are restricted to God, the Exalted, for He is not only free from the
influence of external factors, but is also free of opposing internal
inclinations. Then, completely immaterial things have degrees of
freedom, for they are only under the subordination of the Divine will,
but there is no sort of pressure exerted upon them and they are not
subject to internal conflicts, and they are not subject to the
domination of one inclination over others. However, the souls attached
to matter, such as man, have the lowest level of freedom, and their
wills can be shaped more or less under the influence of external
factors. At the same time all of their free actions are not of the same
level, and, for example, man’s freedom in the creation of mental forms
(which is a sort of action by agreement) is much more free and perfect
than his freedom to perform physical deeds (which are intentional
actions), for the latter deeds are in need of non-voluntary conditions.

Reference
---------

1 In Lesson Forty-Six.
