Lesson Thirty-Nine: The Final Cause
===================================

An Analysis regarding Free Actions
----------------------------------

No free and willful deed (in the general senses of these terms) is
performed without the consciousness and knowledge of the agent,
regardless of whether this knowledge is the very essence of the agent,
as in the case of the agent by self-disclosure (*fā’il* *bil-tajallī* ),
or whether this knowledge is the very action itself, as in the case of
the agent by agreement (*fā’il bil-riḍā* ), or whether this knowledge is
an implication of knowledge of the essence, as is believed in the case
of the providential agent, or whether this knowledge is a separable
accident of the essence, as in the case of the intentional agent.

Likewise there is no free and willful deed in relation to which the
agent does not have some sort of affection (*maḥabbah* ), satisfaction,
inclination and attraction, such that it is done with complete
unwillingness, aversion and disgust. Even in the case of someone who
takes bad tasting medicine with repugnance, or someone who decides to
undergo surgery allowing a part of his body to be cut, the person who
does these things does them because he has an interest in his own
health, and his health is not to be obtained except through taking
bitter medicines or cutting the infected part of the body. In this
respect the taking of the medicine and the losing of one’s hand are
desired. This desire conquers the aversion to the bad taste and the
discomfort of the loss of a limb.

The affection for and desire of a deed differ with the kinds of agents,
and there are various concepts which are applied to them. Sometimes only
the concept of affection is applicable, an affection which is the very
essence of the agent, such as with the agent by self-disclosure.
Sometimes the concept of satisfaction (*riḍā* ) is applicable, such as
with the agent by agreement (*fā’il* *bil-riḍā* ); sometimes the
affection is an implication of the essence, as with the providential
agent; and sometimes it is a kind of spiritual quality and is a
separable accident of the essence, such as yearning (*shawq* ), as with
the intentional agent.

The most inclusive concept which includes all the cases is the concept
of affection in the general sense. Its criterion is the perception of
agreeability and the perfection of the beloved, and it may be termed
desirability. Therefore, it may be said that a voluntary action depends
on the agent’s considering the action to be agreeable with his own
essence, and for this reason he desires it and likes it. At last
sometimes a voluntary agent possesses all of its own perfections, and
his affection pertains to an action in so far as it is an effect of his
own perfection, as in the case of completely immaterial things.
Sometimes its affection pertains to a perfection it lacks, and the
action is performed in order to obtain and reach that perfection, as
with animal and human souls whose own voluntary actions are for the sake
of reaching a state which is agreeable with their essences, and they
obtain pleasure and benefit from it. The difference between these two
sorts is that in the first case the affection for the existing
perfection (*kamāl* - *e* *mawjūd* ) is the source of the performance of
the action. However, in the second case, the affection for the ‘absent
perfection’ ( *kamāl* - *e* *mafqūd* ) and yearning to

obtain it is the source of the activity. Also, in the first case, the
existing perfection is the ‘cause’ of the performance of the action, and
by no means may it be considered an effect, but in the second case the
absent perfection is obtained by means of the action, and it may be
considered a kind of effect of it. However, in both cases, the desire
and affection for perfection is fundamental, and the desire and
affection for the deed is subordinate.

Perfection and Goodness
-----------------------

A point to be noted is that what is meant by perfection here is an
ontological attribute which is agreeable with the essence of the agent,
which is sometimes the source of the performance of a voluntary action,
and sometimes it comes into existence as an effect of the action. A
perfection which is obtained as an effect of a willful action is
sometimes the ultimate perfection of the agent or a preliminary for
reaching it. In this respect it is called real goodness (*khayr-e
ḥaqīqī* ) in philosophical terms. Sometimes it is merely agreeable with
one of the faculties and powers of the agent, however much it may
interfere with other perfections and its ultimate perfection, and, on
balance harm the agent, and in this case it is called imagined goodness
(*khayr-e maẓnūn* ).

For example, a natural result of eating food is a perfection for the
vegetative faculty, which is common to man, animals and plants. The
pleasure which is obtained through it is a perfection for the faculty
which perceives it, and it is common between man and animals. Moreover,
if the eating of food is for a righteous intention, and in order to
obtain power for the performance of one’s divine duty, this will bring
about a human perfection. In this case it will be a means of obtaining
real goodness, as well. However, if it is merely for animal pleasure,
especially if prohibited foods are used, this will merely cause the
perfection of some of a person’s faculties, and will do harm to his
ultimate perfection. In conclusion, it will not yield the real
perfection of man. Hence, it is called ‘fancied goodness’ or ‘imagined
goodness.’ Furthermore, the situations appropriate to the use of the
expressions ‘freedom’ (*ikhtiyār* ) and ‘goodness’ ( *khayr* ) have also
become clear, for every voluntary agent performs only those deeds which
are appropriate to his own perfection, and among the voluntary agents,
intentional agents perform deeds which are means for achieving their own
perfection and good, whether real or fancied, even if the supposed good
is pleasure or escaping from pain and suffering.

It is possible that difficulties may be raised regarding the
universality of this principle, for there may be people who are
uninterested in worldly pleasures who at least perform some voluntary
deeds for the good of others and pay no heed to their own good, and
sometimes they even sacrifice their own lives for others. So it cannot
be said that generally, every intentional agent performs his deeds for
his own good and to reach perfection!. The answer is that these sorts of
deeds, whether they are performed due to the influence of the arousing
of emotions, or for the sake of achieving an eternal reward or the
pleasure of God, ultimately lead to the good of the agent himself; that
is, as a result of such self-sacrifice, he either satisfies his
emotions, or he attains to spiritual and heavenly stations and divine
pleasure. So, the fundamental motivation of the agent is the attainment
of

his own perfection and goodness, and service to others is really a means
for obtaining perfection.

At the utmost sometimes man’s motivations are effective in a conscious
form, sometimes semi-consciously, and sometimes unconsciously. For
example, in cases where the emotions are aroused, the attention of man
is drawn to the interests and benefits of others, and he no longer pays
conscious attention to his own good and perfection, but this does not
mean that it has no relevance at all. The reason is that if he is asked
why do you perform such an act of self-sacrifice? He will answer,
“Because I care,” or “Because this deed is virtuous and humane,” or
“Because it will bring a spiritual reward or will lead to divine
pleasure.” So, the fundamental motivation will be the satisfaction of
one’s emotions, or taking pleasure in service to others, or to attain
human virtue and perfection, or to achieve a heavenly reward and divine
pleasure and nearness to God, even if the agent pays no conscious
attention to this inner motivation when performing his deed.

The End and the Final Cause
---------------------------

From the explanation given regarding voluntary actions, it has become
clear that such deeds in addition to being in need of an agent—their
efficient cause being the essence of the agent—also depend on his
knowledge and will. In the case of intentional agents, imagining such
results of the intended deed as pleasure, benefit, goodness and
perfection, inspires his yearning to perform it. So, the decision to
perform a deed depends on yearning pertaining primarily to the results
of the deed, and secondarily to the deed itself. And the obtaining of
this yearning is conditioned on the imagination of the deed and its
results, and the affirmation of the desirability of the results. Since
the result of the deed is primarily desired (as opposed to the deed
itself which is secondarily desired), it is called the end (*ghāyah* ),
and knowledge of and affection for it are called the final cause
(*‘illat-e ghā’ī* ). On this basis, a kind of cause called the final
cause is established for the performance of a voluntary action.

It is necessary here to mention several important points.

1. The establishment of the final cause for every voluntary action does
not mean that there necessarily occur in the essence of the free agent
such things as knowledge, yearning, and decision. In other words, it is
not necessary that the final cause be other than the efficient cause and
supplementary to it; rather, this difference is specific to intentional
agents,.the source of whose knowledge and yearning is additional to
their essences. However, for some voluntary agents it is possible that
either summary or detailed knowledge of the deed and its end, and also
the primary affection for the end, as well as the secondary and
subordinate affection for the action, be the very essence of the agent,
or implications of it. That which is necessary for all voluntary agents
is knowledge and will in their general senses, whether they are
identical with the essence or are additional to it, and whether the
knowledge is presentational knowledge or acquired knowledge, and whether
the will is the same as love of the essence, and consequently the same
as the essence, or an action or a quality additional to the essence, and
whether it is an implication of the essence, or

a separable accident of it. Hence the absence of a knowledge and will
additional to the essence in some types of voluntary agents does not
mean a negation of a final cause; rather it means the unity of the
efficient cause and the final cause, as in complete immaterial
existents, whose knowledge, affection, and other attributes of
perfection are identical with their essence and are not other than the
essence.

The identity of these attributes with the essence does not amount to a
negation of knowledge, affection, power, life, and similar attributes.

2. Usually philosophers consider knowledge of the desired result or
knowledge of the goodness of a deed to be its final cause, and sometimes
they put this by saying that the imagination of the end or its mental
existence is the final cause, and sometimes they also say that the
whatness of the end which occurs with a mental existence before
performing the deed is the final cause. Likewise, they consider
knowledge as the cause of the appearance of yearning, and say that
knowledge brings about yearning. However, it seems that these
expressions are not free of carelessness and it is best to call the
final cause affection in its broadest sense, which in some cases appears
in the form of agreeability and yearning, for it is the affection for
goodness and perfection which drives the voluntary agent toward the
performance of a deed, and knowledge is really a condition for its
occurrence, not the creative cause of it.

It is clear that considering the whatness of the end as the final cause
is not compatible with the fundamentality of existence, although this
kind of expression can be found among the Peripatetics, who believe in
the fundamentality of existence.

3. The requirement of the agent’s knowledge of and affection for the
result of a voluntary deed does not mean that the agent must have
detailed awareness of the deed and its result, nor does it mean that the
result of the deed must really be the true desire and the real
perfection and goodness of the agent. Rather, a summary attention would
suffice, and an error in determining what is good does not take away
from the fact that the action is voluntary nor does it deprive it of a
final cause. Therefore, for one who becomes accustomed to performing a
deed it is not necessary to pay detailed attention to the deed, the
manner of performing it, or its results. Rather, actions performed by
habit also enjoy a kind of knowledge of desirability, and this amount of
knowledge suffices for them to be voluntary.

Likewise, the origin of actions which are performed on the assumption of
achieving some desired result is in reality affection for goodness, even
if the goodness is merely imaginary, or if due to the influence of
obstacles the desired conclusion is not obtained. In reality, the final
cause for such sorts of deeds is the wish for a kind of pleasure and
goodness and the hope of achieving them.

4. The expression ‘end’ has another meaning which is applied to the
final destination of motion, and equivocation may lead to possible
errors, especially since in cases in which deeds are performed gradually
and with motion, the desired result is obtained when the motion comes to
an end. Among the mistakes which it is possible to make by confusing
these two terms is that one may imagine that the essential end of motion
is the primary

desired goal of the agent itself and the very point at which motion
comes to an end. Since this is the final destination of motion, it
should be the primary desired goal of the agent, while it is possible
that something which is simultaneous with motion’s coming to an end,
which may be considered the accidental end in relation to motion, is the
real primary goal of the agent, and the agent’s first intention pertains
to that very thing. For example, someone who moves in order to meet a
friend has as his primary destination the meeting with his friend—or
rather his basic aim is pleasure which he derives from seeing his
friend—whereas the essential end of the motion is that very point at
which motion comes to an end, and the end of the moving thing as such is
also reaching this same point, and meeting his friend at that location
is considered to be the accidental end of the motion, not to mention the
pleasure or benefit he obtains by it.

5. In view of the causal relation, in its general sense, among phenomena
of the world, it is possible that the end of an action may be a means to
achieve something else. This may also be a means to achieve yet a third
thing. For example, it is possible that in order to acquire knowledge a
person may set out for a center of learning, and he takes the obtaining
of knowledge to be a preliminary for the performance of his divine
duties, and takes the performance of his divine duties as a means for
obtaining nearness to God, the Exalted, which is the final perfection of
man. Such a person from the beginning has set the direction of his
motion toward God, the Exalted, and his final cause is that same
nearness to God, however many intermediate ends he may also have, each
of which in its own turn is a means to a higher.end. However, it is
possible that a person’s motivation for acquiring knowledge is merely to
satisfy his instinct for curiosity. In this case, the final cause will
be that same motivation. It is possible that his primary intention is to
reach wealth or worldly status through the employment of knowledge.
Hence, the final end for each person is that very thing which is taken
into consideration from the outset, and he performs the deed in order to
achieve it. If his deed leads to some other result to which he paid no
attention at all, or attention to which had no effect on the performance
of the deed, then this will not be the final cause of his deed.

From this discussion several conclusions may be obtained, the most
important of which are as follows.

a. For an action, it is possible that there be several aims in series,
and the closer aim will be a means to the following, and so on to the
final aim.

b. Whether the result of an action is the aim does not depend solely on
the causal relation between the action and its result, rather it also
depends upon the attention (the intention) of the agent. From this the
importance of the role of intention in value-laden actions becomes
clear.

c. It is not possible for the various aims of an action to be infinite,
for the intermediate aims depend on the final aim in order for them to
be aims at all, and their desirability takes shape in the shadow of its
desirability. Until the agent pays attention to a final desire, he
cannot take other things to be means for reaching it, for it is assumed
that their desirability depends on the desirability of the final end. If
we suppose that each aim is a means for another aim, all of them will be
dependent, and the supposition of dependent

things without something on which to depend is self-contradictory and
impossible. So, there is no alternative but that something must be
primarily desired, in order for other things to become desirable due to
it.

In the case of human actions the case is clear, for all humans within
themselves find with knowledge by presence that every deed they perform
is for a specific final end. Moreover, man does not have the power for
imagination of and attention to infinite cases, so as to be able to
possess an infinite chain of aims.

6. Another kind of multiplicity can be conceived regarding final causes,
and that is that several motivations all together may be effective in
the performance of the deed, and it is even possible that each of them
would suffice for performing the deed even if the other motivations it
were not present. In other words, it is possible for an agent to perform
a deed for several parallel aims, or as the saying goes, “to kill two
birds with one stone.”1 Therefore, the conjunction of two final causes
for the performance of one action is not impossible, unlike the
conjunction of two parallel complete efficient causes.

Reference
---------

1 The literal Persian is “to hit two targets with one stone.”
