Lesson Forty: The Purposefulness of the Cosmos
==============================================

Introduction
------------

The final cause, in the sense which has been explained, is specific to
voluntary actions, but according to that which has been reported from
Aristotle, it seems that he held that natural actions also have final
causes, and those who followed the Peripatetics also accepted this, and
they considered the denial of final causes for natural actions to be
equal to regarding them as being accidental. Contrary to the assertion
that natural events are accidental, according to a view which has been
attributed in various forms to Democritus, Empedocles, and Epicures,
there is a final cause for all phenomena.

We shall first state the reported position of Aristotle and its
criticism, then we will explain something about chance and accident, and
finally we will state the correct meaning of the ‘purposefulness of the
cosmos.’

Aristotle’s View regarding the Final Cause
------------------------------------------

In the first book of the*Metaphysics* , after mentioning the views of
the ancient philosophers regarding the cause of the appearance of
phenomena, Aristotle asserts that none of them have precisely taken into
consideration the final cause. Then with the analysis of motion and
change of material existents, he concludes that every moving or changing
existent is traveling toward an end which is its perfection, and the
motion itself, which is a prelude for reaching the above-mentioned end,
is considered to be its first perfection. Hence, motion is defined as
“the first perfection of a potential existent*qua* potential.”1 He adds
that every existent has its own specific perfection, and for this
reason, every moving thing has a determinate end which it wants to
reach. This perfection is sometimes the same form which it wants to
take, such as the form of the oak tree for the acorn while it is in the
process of germinating and growing. Sometimes it is one of its
accidents, such as a stone which is moving from the sky to the ground,
in which case coming to rest on the ground is one of its accidents and
perfections.

In conclusion, every natural existent has a specific natural inclination
toward a determinate end, which causes motion in the direction of that
end and destination, and this is the same as the final cause for the
occurrence of motion and the determination of its direction.

Aristotle considered the whole cosmos to be a single existent, whose
nature includes all particular natures (such as mineral, vegetable and
animal), and since its reaching its own perfection is due to a specific
proportion between particular natures, and specific qualities and
quantities in the individuals of each of them, the natural inclination
of the cosmos toward its own perfection causes the establishment of a
special order and arrangement among its phenomena, each of which is
considered to be one of its parts or members.

Criticism
---------

It seems that this position confuses two meanings of end (which were
indicated in the previous lesson), and in any case, it is disputable in
various respects.

1. Assuming that this position is correct, it can establish only the
final cause of the motion and change of corporeal existents, not that of
all effects whether material or immaterial, moving or at rest.

2. In view of the fact that natural agents are ‘agents by nature’
(*fā’il* *bil-ṭab‘* ) and lack consciousness and will, relating ‘natural
inclination’ to them will be no more than metaphorical, just as chemists
consider some elements to have a ‘tendency to form compounds.’ The
assumption of the denial of consciousness and will to agents by nature
and the establishment of true desire and inclination (which implies some
sense of consciousness) for them is a self-contradictory assumption.

However, if ‘natural inclination’ is interpreted as ‘direction of
motion,’ a direction required by the nature of the moving existent, and
is considered to be an expression based on simile and metaphor, in this
case, a fact by the name of ‘final cause’ will not have been
established, and at the most the conclusion which can be obtained is
that every motion which is required by the nature of the moving object,
also has its direction determined by the requirements of its nature.

3. As will be stated in future sections, the fact that the end of motion
is a perfection for all moving objects cannot be established in the
sense that moving objects always become more perfect with their
movement, so that one can interpret motion in the light of this as ‘the
first perfection,’ for many motions and changes are declinings and
decreasings, such as the shrinking motion of plants and animals, the
declining process of which toward dryness and death begins after their
having reached the end of their growth. Likewise the coming to rest of a
stone on the ground and the like cannot be considered to be perfections
of minerals. Therefore, on the assumption that a correct meaning may be
considered for the natural inclination of every existent towards its own
perfection, declining motions and those which are not toward perfection
will still lack final causes.

4. It is extremely difficult to establish the real unity of the natural
cosmos and likewise to establish its natural desire for perfection and
to explain the cause of the design and harmony of the parts of the
cosmos in terms of such desire. Similarly, the assumption of the
existence of a universal soul for the cosmos and the existence of its
spiritual yearning toward perfection is at the very least an ungrounded
assumption, and thus far we have not found any proof to establish it. If
a soul and spiritual yearning are to be established for the natural
cosmos, then its motion must be understood as ‘intentional’ rather than
‘natural,’ and thus the existence of a final cause for its actions will
not be a kind of final cause for natural actions.

The Solution to Several Problems
--------------------------------

Here, it is possible that several problems will come to mind: one is
that if natural actions do not have final causes, then phenomena will be
accidental, while belief in accidentality and chance is invalid. Another
is that with the denial of the final cause for natural phenomena an
intellectual explanation cannot be given for the arrangement of the
wonderful order and harmony

which governs the cosmos. The third is that if among natural actions and
their ends there existed no necessary relation, then no natural
phenomenon would be predictable. For example, it would be rational to
expect that from an acorn an olive tree may grow.

In order to answer the first problem, it is first necessary to explain
something about chance and accident and their several meanings. When it
is said that a certain event occurred by chance or by accident, it is
possible that one may intend any of the following six meanings:

1. The supposed event has no efficient cause. It is self-evident that
chance in this sense is impossible, but this has no relation to the
problem under discussion.

2. It is not expected that the action should have been performed by such
an agent, as it is said, “Such and such a virtuous person accidentally
committed a great sin.” This sort of chance is not impossible, and the
truth of the matter is that in such cases excessive lust or anger
dominated him, and in reality, his avoidance of sin is conditional upon
the absence of such abnormal and rare states. In any case, in this sense
as well, chance has no relation to the subject in question.

3. The willful agent performs the action without purpose, and an
intentional deed takes place without a final cause. This supposition is
also erroneous, for, as was explained in the previous lesson, the final
cause does not always influence [the agent] consciously. In those cases
in which it is imagined that an intentional action has been performed
without a purpose, in reality there was a purpose but it was not
completely conscious.

4. A willful agent has performed a deed for a specific objective, but it
has a result which was not intended, as someone who digs a well in order
to reach water, but by chance discovers a treasure. Such chance is not
impossible, but this does not imply that an intentional action occurs
without a final cause, because the final cause is that for which there
is hope in the soul of the agent. However, the external fulfillment of
that hope does not have any causal relation to the action, but rather is
an effect which results under certain conditions.

5. A phenomenon which is absolutely not intended by anyone. This is the
same opinion advanced by materialists in relation to the appearance of
this cosmos, but in the view of the theists, all the phenomena of the
cosmos occur and will occur on the basis of divine will. This will be
explained in the appropriate place.

6. A phenomenon which does not occur by the intention of the proximate
natural agent. This is the subject at issue. This sort of chance (if one
can call it chance at all) not only is not impossible, but, in view of
the meaning of ‘natural agent’ and the acceptance of its existence, will
be necessary.

Considering the various meanings of chance, it has become clear that the
denial of intention and purpose for natural agents does not mean the
acceptance of chance in an erroneous sense. Moreover, the answer to the
second problem has now become clear as well, for the denial of intention
and purpose for the universal nature of the cosmos (supposing that such
a nature exists) or for particular natures—in Aristotelian terms—does
not imply the denial of the purposefulness of the cosmos.

According to theists, all the agents of the cosmos, whether immaterial
or material, are under the dominion of the divine will, and divine
agency presides over all agencies, and thus, there is no motion or rest
in the cosmos which is not in conformity to the ontological will
[*irādah-ye takwīnī* , as opposed to*irādah-ye tashrī’ī* , the revealed
will] of God, as will be explained in the section on theology, and in
this way the design and harmony of the phenomena of the cosmos will be
more clearly explained.

As to the third problem, it must be said that a constant or frequent
occurrence of specific predictable results is due to the homogeneity
between cause and effect, that is, acorns are homogeneous only with oak
trees, not with other phenomena. Admission of the homogeneity between
them does not mean the acceptance of something called ‘natural
inclination’ in the acorn which we should consider as the final cause of
the oak tree.

The Purposefulness of the Cosmos
--------------------------------

As was indicated, materialist philosophers consider all the phenomena of
the cosmos (except for those which are brought about by means of man and
animals) to be accidental and without purpose (in the fifth sense of
chance mentioned above). However, theistic philosophers deem natural
phenomena to be purposeful, as well, but they explain the purposefulness
of the cosmos in various different ways, among which the main ways are
as follows:

1. Aristotelians hold that for every nature there is specific
inclination toward a determinate end which causes motion towards it, and
likewise for the entire cosmos, they believe it has a nature whose
inclination towards its own perfection causes the proportion, harmony
and coherence of its particular kinds of phenomena. We have already
criticized this theory and have recounted its difficulties.

2. A group of the Neoplatonists, followers of the school of Alexandria,
and*‘urafā* (mystics or gnostics) held that for every existent there is
a kind of consciousness and will, no matter how weak and faint. In this
way they responded to some of the difficulties which were raised
regarding the Aristotelian theory. According to this theory, all the
agents of the cosmos will be intentional agents, and the agent by nature
and by compulsion must be omitted from among the kinds of agents, for
the conjunction of the acceptance of the agent by nature and the
establishment of consciousness and will for each agent (as is implied by
their words) implies a contradiction. Likewise, the establishment of
consciousness for natural agents is not compatible with the necessity
for the knower to be immaterial (as will be explained in the appropriate
place). In any case, the least of the difficulties of this position is
that this matter cannot be established by proof.

3. The third way is that natural agents are subordinated agents and
beyond their agency there is an agency of a higher source and ultimately
the agency of God, the Exalted. In this way, all events have a purpose
and final cause, not within nature but in the essences of the
supernatural agents, and that which occurs in the natural cosmos is the
destination of motion, not final causes!

Basically, according to the theory of the fundamentality of existence,
it must be said that natures in the sense of whatnesses are respectival
and have no implications bearing upon ontological matters. Specific
existents which

are considered to be individuals with unconscious natures have no will
or intention for their own perfection or for the perfection of the
cosmos, nor do they have any intention for the lack of it. Causal
relations connect them with each other to such an extent that it has
brought about this wonderful design, and in this sense, each of them has
a share in the establishment of this design, but not in the sense of
having an intention or will in relation to it, and not in the sense that
the design is imposed on them by compulsion or force (*jabrī* ).

There are more precise discussions regarding the attribution of will and
purpose to God, the Exalted, which, God willing, will be treated in the
discussions of theology.

Reference
---------

1 This definition will be explained in Lesson Fifty-Five.
