Lesson Forty-One: The Material and the Immaterial
=================================================

Introduction
------------

Philosophers have propounded preliminary divisions for all existents,
among which is the distinction between necessary existence and
contingent existence. Considering the fact that this distinction is made
with regard to the relation between whatness and existence (necessity
and contingency are obtained from the ‘matter’ of the proposition in the
form of a ‘simple question’ [e.g., of the form ‘x exists’]), it is more
compatible with the doctrine of the fundamentality of whatness. On the
basis of the fundamentality of existence, all existence may be divided
into the independent and the relational (*rābiṭ* ), or the
self-sufficient (*ghanī* , literally rich) and the poor (*faqīr* ). That
is, if an existent has absolutely no need of another and, in technical
terms, is an ‘existent by itself’ (*mawjūd* *bi* *nafsih* ), it is
self-sufficient and independent, otherwise it is poor and relational.

It is clear that what is meant by self-sufficiency and independence are
absolute self-sufficiency and absolute independence; otherwise, every
cause possesses a relative self-sufficiency and independence in relation
to its own effect.

It is self-evident that there are poor and relational existents, or
contingent existence, which are concomitant with being effects, but that
there is a self-sufficient and absolutely independent existent or a
Necessary Existence in Itself (*bi al-dhāt* ) which is concomitant with
the First Cause is established by proof, a proof which was indicated in
the discussions on cause and effect, and in the discussions of theology
there will be further explanation of this.

Likewise, philosophers have divided the whatnesses of contingent
existents into two groups: substance and accident. They have called a
whatness that is not in need of a subject in order to become an existent
a ‘substance,’ and that which needs a subject, or in other words, a
state or attribute for another existent, is called an ‘accident.’

It was previously indicated that it is well known among philosophers
that accidental whatnesses, according to induction, possess nine higher
genera, and with the addition of substance, this makes ten categories.

It seems that the concepts of substance and accident are secondary
philosophical intelligibles which are obtained by comparing existents
with each other. For example, when one compares the existence of the
states of one’s soul (not their whatnesses) with the existence of the
soul (not with its whatness) he sees that the occurrence of passive
qualities, such as fear, hope, happiness and sadness, etc., depends on
the existence of the soul, so that on the assumption of the absence of
the existence of the soul, no room remains for their existence. This is
opposed to the existence of the soul, which does not need them and can
also occur without them. In view of this comparison, existents are
divided into two groups. The first group is called ‘accident’ and the
second group is called ‘substance.’

If one equates the concept of substance with ‘non-accident,’ one can
divide all existents into substances and accidents so that the Necessary
Existent, Blessed and Exalted, may also be considered an instance of
substance, as with some Western philosophers. In this way the above

mentioned division will be a primary division. But Islamic philosophers
divide contingent existence into substance and accident. For this reason
they do not consider the application of substance to the Necessary
Existent in Itself to be correct.

On the other hand, some Western philosophers have expressed some doubts
about the existence of substance. For example, Berkeley denied the
existence of corporeal substance, and Hume had doubts about the
substance of the soul, as well. However, those who accept the existence
of objective accidents and have denied the existence of their substances
have unwittingly accepted the existence of many sorts of substance in
place of one sort of substance! For example, in case the phenomena of
the soul are not considered accidents of the soul, they will not need
any subject, and in this case each of them will be a particular
substance. Likewise, if the attributes of bodies are not considered
accidents in need of a subject, inevitably they themselves will become
corporeal substances. For what is meant by being a substance is nothing
more than that the existence of a contingent existence does not need a
subject.

Along with these divisions one can consider another general and primary
division for all existents, and that is the division between the
immaterial (*mujarrad* ) and the material; that is, entified existence
is either corporeal and possessing corporeal attributes, in which case
it is called material, or it is not of this class and is called
‘immaterial.’

This classification is not specific to contingent existence, for one of
its classes, the immaterial, includes the Necessary Existent. Likewise,
it is not specific to substance or accident, for both the immaterial and
the material can be substance or accident. For example, souls and
completely immaterial things are non-material substances, and bodies are
in the class of material substances, and qualities of the soul are
immaterial accidents while sensible qualities are material accidents.

In this Part, we are considering this very classification, and after
explaining the concepts of its categories we will state their general
characteristics, and then we will set out to explain their
sub-categories and the principles of these. In addition, we will also
take up the discussion of substance and accident.

The Meaning of ‘Immaterial’ and ‘Material’
------------------------------------------

The term*mujarrad* (immaterial) is the passive participle of*tajrīd*
meaning ‘to be stripped,’ and this meaning brings to mind the idea that
something which has clothing or a skin is peeled and made naked. But in
philosophical terminology this term is used as the opposite of
‘material,’ and what is meant is an existent which does not have the
characteristics of material things, and there is no intention here to
indicate that something was previously material and that it was stripped
of this state or of anything else and it actually means ‘immaterial.’
Hence, in order to understand its exact meaning, the meaning of the term
‘material’ must first be clarified. Considering that this term is
related to ‘matter’ (*māddah* ), we must explain the meaning of the term
‘matter.’

The meaning of*māddah* (matter) is etymologically ‘helper’ ( *madad
konandeh* ) and ‘extender’ ( *imtidād dehandeh* ), and as a scientific
term is employed in several senses.

1. Logicians call the quality of the relation between the subject and
predicate of a proposition with regard to reality (necessity,
contingency, impossibility) the ‘matter’ [mode] of the proposition.

2. Also, the propositions which constitute a syllogism, disregarding
their form and structure, are called the matter of the syllogism.

3. In physics ‘matter’ is used for an existent which possesses specific
attributes such as mass, attraction and repulsion, friction, etc., and
it is used as the opposite of ‘force’ or ‘energy.’

4. In philosophy, ‘matter’ is used for an existent which is the ground
for the appearance of another existent, as soil is the ground for the
appearance of plants and animals. Hence, the philosophical meaning of
this term comprises the meaning of relation, and it is close to the
meaning of ‘*māyeh’* (stuff) in Farsi.

Philosophers call the first stuff of all corporeal existents ‘the matter
of matters’ or ‘*hayūlā ūlā* ’ (prime matter),1 and there are
differences of opinion about its reality. Aristotelians hold that prime
matter has no actuality of its own, and its reality is nothing more than
potentiality and capacity for corporeal actualities. A discussion of
this will come later.

In conclusion, the term ‘material’ in the terminology of philosophy is
used for things related to the matter of the cosmos, and for them to be
existents requires a prior matter or stuff, and sometimes it is used in
a general sense which includes matter itself. With regard to usage, it
is approximately equivalent to corporeal (*jismānī* ). The word
*mujarrad* means immaterial and incorporeal, that is, a thing that is
neither a body nor an attribute or characteristic of a body.

Characteristics of Corporeal and Immaterial Beings
--------------------------------------------------

Body is defined in various ways, the most famous of which are the
following:

1. Body is a substance possessing three dimensions (length, width and
depth). More precisely, it may be said that it is a substance in which
three intersecting lines may be supposed such that the angles formed by
the intersection of the three lines are right angles. The expression
‘supposed’ is added in order to include things like the sphere, for
although there are actually no such lines in the sphere, such lines can
be supposed in it, as one can bring about such lines by cutting the
sphere.

2. It is narrated that the theologians (*mutakallimīn* ) defined body as
a substance which occupies space, in technical terms*shāghil* *ḥayyiz*
(occupier of a domain).

3. In defining it, Shaykh al-Ishrāq (Suhravardī) says: It is a substance
which can be the object of sensible ostension.

There have been discussions about these definitions and whether any of
them is a logically complete definition (*ḥadd tām manṭiqī* ), but it is
not necessary to mention them.

In any case, the clearest characteristic of body is its extension in
three dimensions, and this characteristic has various implications,
including that

bodies are, mentally, infinitely divisible in three directions. Another
is that bodies have locations, but not in the sense of spaces
independent of bodies by which they are filled, but in the sense that
will be explained in the discussion of location. Third is that such
existents are naturally capable of being objects of sensible ostension,
for sensible ostension is performed with regard to location, and
whatever has a location can be the object of sensible ostension.
Finally, corporeal existents possess a fourth dimension which is called
‘time,’ and the discussion of the reality of time will also be
forthcoming.

Corporeality and materiality, in the specific meaning which does not
include body and matter themselves, are subordinate to the existence of
bodies. In other words, they are things which do not occur independently
of bodies. Their most important characteristic is that they, as subjects
to body, are divisible. Therefore, the soul belonging to the body, which
in one sense is united with it, is not corporeal, for even though it is
subject to the body it is not divisible. On the contrary, attributes and
accidents of bodies such as color and shape, which are subject to the
body, are divisible. Hence, they are considered corporeal things.

With regard to the characteristics of bodies and corporeality, their
opposites can be delineated as the characteristics of immaterial things;
that is, immaterial entities cannot be divided, and they have no
location in space or time. There is only one sort of immaterial entity
to which a spatial or temporal location may be related by accident, and
that is the spirit belonging to a body. That is, one can say: the spirit
is in the place where the body is, and the time that the body is
existent is the same time when its spirit is existent. However, this
possession of a location and possession of a time are really attributes
of the body, and as a result of the association and union of the spirit
with the body, loosely speaking and metaphorically one also may relate
these to the spirit.

It is to be noted that the gnostics (*‘urafā* ) and Illuminationist
philosophers also proved that there is a third kind of existent which is
an intermediary and*barzakh* 2 between perfectly immaterial entities and
purely material ones. They are called*imaginal existents,* 3 and in the
terminology of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn and his followers, they are
called*imaginal* and*barzakhī* immaterial entities, and likewise the
term ‘imaginal bodies’ is sometimes applied to them. Further explanation
of this will be given.

References
----------

1 The Arabic*hayūlā* is derived from the Greek term for matter,*hyle* .
[Tr.]

2 In Islamic eschatology, the*barzakh* , literally*isthmus* , is the
phase between death and resurrection. The term is also used for
the*imaginal world* that stands as an isthmus between the physical and
the transcendent domains. [Tr.]

3 The term*mithāl* is also used for the Platonic Ideals or Forms.
Suhravardī uses the same term, which literally means ‘example’ or
‘similitude’, for that which is seen in visions or dreams. [Tr.]
