Lesson Forty-Two: What is Location?
===================================

Introduction
------------

The discussion of time and space is among the most important problems of
philosophy which has always attracted the attention of thinkers and
philosophers, and it has always retained its freshness and vivacity, and
has never become stale or faded. It has not yet been filed away.
Although geniuses in Eastern and Western philosophy have thought and
spoken at length about time and space, and among them the great Eastern
philosopher, Ibn Sīnā has spilled much ink over the details of this
subject in the*Physics* of his*Shifā* , yet there remains room for
profound thinking, research and inquiries in its interstices.

The opinions of philosophers and authorities concerning time and space
are so opposed and contrary to one another and include weird ideas to
such an extent that few philosophical problems can be compared to it.
For example, on the one hand, time and space are considered to be
immaterial substances, while on the other hand, they have been degraded
to such an extent that they are considered illusory and imaginary. Kant,
the famous German philosopher, considered them to be mental, or in his
own terms ‘forms of sensibilities.’ Most philosophers, however, have
considered them to be objective accidents.

In this regard, the great Islamic philosopher, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn
Shīrāzī has won the race against all of them and has presented a very
important and firm view which can be considered the last word on the
subject. This view may also be considered a basis for establishing
substantial motion, the philosophical explanation of which at the very
least is one of the major original innovations of this great
philosopher, as will be made clear in future chapters.

In view of the fact that in the previous lesson the occupation of space
and time have been discussed as properties of material things, we have
seen fit here to present an explanation pertaining to space and time.

The Problem of Space and Time
-----------------------------

In all languages there are expressions for space and time, and all
people believe that material things are related to space and time, which
relations can be stated in various ways: “The sun is in the sky,” “The
sea is where fish live,” “The book is on the table,” and so forth.
Likewise, it is said: “The honorable Prophet of Islam, may the Peace and
Blessings of Allah be with him and with his progeny, was born in the
sixth century. During his time, wars took place between Muslims and
infidels.” “Yesterday, school was closed,” and so on.

In general, the common understanding is that all bodies occupy space.
Rather, most people generalize this judgment and imagine that there is
no existent without a place, as the simple minded imagine that God the
Almighty also has a place in the heavens or beyond them, which, of
course, is not correct, and this will be discussed further at the
appropriate place. The very same line of thought is also applied to time
and its relations to things and phenomena.

Naturally, the philosopher who would know and make known the realities
of things also must answer this question: “What is the reality of space
and time?”, especially since one encounters these concepts in many of
the problems of philosophy, such as in the previous lesson where space
and time were introduced as properties of material things, and in the
discussions of theology we deny that God the Exalted occupies space or
time.

The first difficulty which exists with regard to the explanation of the
reality of space and time, and turns this explanation into a formidable
problem, is that space and time cannot be experienced by the senses and
they never fall into the traps of our sensory organs. They are not seen
by the eye, nor touched, nor are they perceived by any other sense,
although sensible things are related to them such that they are
considered to be of the sensible material world. It is because of
precisely this aspect that Kant presented them as mental channels for
knowledge of entified phenomena, and not as objective entified things
themselves; and another group of thinkers considered them to be illusory
and imaginary. On the other hand, a group of philosophers who could not
deny their objective existence, and who also could not believe them to
be material existents, held that they are immaterial things. Finally,
most philosophers have considered them to be material accidents whose
existences are established through the joint effort of the senses and
reason. Naturally, each group advanced a reason or reasons for its own
view, and criticized the reasons of the others. Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn
affirms the view about space which is attributed to Plato, that is,
space is immaterial, although there is room for doubt about the veracity
of this attribution to Plato and it needs to be researched further.

It is obvious that this work is no place for a review of all the
positions and a criticism of all the relevant reasons. Therefore, we
will confine ourselves to a mention of the most famous positions, and an
explanation of the view we affirm.

The Difference between ‘Space’ and ‘Spatial Location’ and between ‘Time’ and ‘Temporal Location’
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Before discussing the reality of place and time, it is necessary to bear
in mind this point, that philosophers differentiate between space or
place (*makān* ) and spatial location or where (*‘ayn* ), and likewise
between the concepts of time (*zamān* ) and temporal location or when
(*matā* ). The concepts of whereness and whenness are considered to be
relative, obtained by relating a thing to a place and time. In the
Aristotelian table of categories they are placed among the seven
relative accidental categories, although it seems that basically these
kinds of concepts must not be considered whatish concepts or categories.
The reason for this becomes clear with regard to the characteristics of
the kinds of concepts explained in Lesson Fifteen.

In any case, the Aristotelians believed that both the concept of where
and when are independent whatish concepts and specific categories and
have no relation to the whatness of time and space. Others have also had
no doubt that though these kinds of concepts are brought about in
relation to time and space, they are different from the concepts of
space and time. For this

reason, one should be careful not to confuse discussions about space and
time with those about these relational concepts.

The Reality of Space
--------------------

Regarding the whatness of space, a few positions have been reported
which are quite weak and not worth discussing, and no famous
philosophers has held them. For example, there is the position that
space consists of the prime matter of bodies or their forms or
actualities, or that it is an independent corporeal area in which the
cosmos is contained.

Among the positions, two are quite famous: one, which is attributed to
Plato has been affirmed by some Islamic sages, such as Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn; while the other is attributed to Aristotle, and it has
been accepted by the majority of Islamic sages, including Fārābī and Ibn
Sīnā. The view attributed to Plato is that, space is a substantival
immaterial dimension which is identical to the volume of the cosmos.

This position seems strange because an immaterial existent, even if an
imaginal form which is*barzakhī* , has no relation to material
existents, and cannot be considered a locus for them. However, there is
a strong possibility that a mistake has been made in the narration or
translation of this position, or that what is meant here by the term
immaterial (*mujarrad* ) is not the technical sense. This view is
supported by the fact that Mīr Dāmād has denied that Plato held this
position.1 According to this conjecture, one may interpret the position
to claim that space is the volume of the cosmos considered separately
from it (and in this sense is ‘abstracted’ from the cosmos).

As for the view reported to have been held by Aristotle, it is held that
space is the inner surface of a body which makes contact with the outer
surface of another body, like the inner surface of a glass which makes
contact with the outer surface of the water contained in it.

There is a difficulty with this position. If we suppose that a fish is
standing in a flowing river, without a doubt, the surface of water in
contact with the surface of its body is always changing, and so,
according to the position mentioned above, we must say that its space is
constantly changing, although we assumed that it was standing still in
its own place and that there has been no change in its space.

Another precise point which must be taken into consideration is that the
above-mentioned definition is composed of two basic concepts. One is the
inner surface of a containing body, and the other is contact with the
outer surface of the contained body. However, ‘surface’ is a kind of
amount and thus belongs to the category of quantity, while contact,
according to the Aristotelians, is of the category of relation, and by
combining these two categories a third category cannot be brought about.
In addition, contact is an accidental state for the mentioned surface,
and for this reason cannot be the difference by which its essence is
defined. In this way, it would have to be considered a special kind of
category of continuous quantity. In any case, the question of the
category to which space belongs remains unanswered.

It seems that the concept of space is not a non-relational concept
(*mafāhīm-e nafsī* ) such as man, animal, color and shape, but rather it
is a accidental concept which includes a sense of relation to a thing
which has a

space. In order to obtain this concept, two things must be compared to
each other from a specific point of view so that one may be considered
the space of the other. This shows that space is not a kind of whatish
concept included in the categories, but rather is a respectival concept.

Secondly, in order to consider something as the space of another it is
not necessary to take into account its particular whatness or substance.
For example, when we consider a glass as the space of some water, it is
not because its body is made of crystal, and when we call water the
space of a fish, it is not because it is a liquid composed of oxygen and
hydrogen, but because it has the capacity to contain a thing which has a
space, and that which in reality is taken into account is its being a
container, not its substance.

Regarding these two points, one may say that when some of the volume of
the cosmos is considered separately, and it is compared with a body
contained in it, the mentioned volume will be its space.

It must be noted that sometimes *space* is applied to a quantity of
volume which is greater than the capacity of the thing related to it, as
when a house or a city is said to be the space of a person. Giving heed
to this point, philosophers have said that these are not ‘true spaces.’

It is to be concluded that the true space of every thing is the amount
of volume of the cosmos which is equivalent to the volume of the body
related to a space insofar as it contains it.

Among the conclusions obtained from this philosophical analysis is that
space is subordinate to the cosmos, and space does not exist prior to
the appearance of or with the annihilation of the latter. Hence, one
cannot consider the volume and surface of a thing to be independent
existents which must have been created independently. Rather, basically
such concepts as volume and surface are representatives of aspects of
corporeal existence which the mind separates from bodies. For this
reason one can consider these kinds of cases, which are accidents, as
aspects of the existence of material substances. Careful study of this
subject makes clear why space is specific to bodies and may be
considered a property of material existents, for the source of their
abstraction is nothing but the volume of bodies.

Reference
---------

1 Cf.,*Qabasāt* , p. [^164]:
