Lesson Forty-Three: What is Time?
=================================

Discussion about the Reality of Time
------------------------------------

Strange positions have also been reported regarding the reality of time,
to which Ibn Sīnā has referred in the*Physics* of his*Shifā* . However,
it seems that the solution of the problem of time was easier for Muslim
philosophers than the problem of space, for they are almost entirely in
agreement that time is a kind of continuous quantity characterized by
instability and which by means of motion becomes an accident of bodies.
In this way, the position of time in the Aristotelian table of
categories becomes perfectly clear. Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn has also
presented this explanation in numerous places, but in the final analysis
of the problem of motion, he states a new view which is especially
important.

No matter how clear the explanation of time given by the philosophers
is, if one is precise about it one will encounter ambiguous and
questionable points which require deep thought. Perhaps it is these
which attracted the fine and insightful attention of Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn, and led him to present a new theory of time.

In order to explain these points something must be mentioned about the
principles of the philosophers related to this question, even though
this is not really the place to discuss and research them.

Philosophers normally introduce motion as an ‘accident,’ but do not
explain this any further. Only some of them have regarded it as of the
category of ‘that which acts’ or ‘that which is acted upon.’ Shaykh
al-Ishrāq considered it to be an independent category alongside
substance, quantity, quality and relation. In this way, he limited the
number of categories to five, and he considered the others as types of
relation. Perhaps one may infer from the words of other philosophers
that they have not considered motion itself to be among the categories.

Another principle is that motion is confined to four categories
(quantity, quality, position, and place), and they consider transferal
to be a motion in the category of place. They imagined that motion in
the other categories, including substance, was impossible. Therefore,
motion, considered to be an intermediary between bodies and time, was
inevitably taken to be motion in one of the four categories of
accidents.

On the other hand, all of them accepted the theory of the ninefold
celestial spheres as axiomatic, and they related the appearance of time
to the circular rotation of the highest firmament. This point is also
presented in some places by Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn.

Regarding these principles and points, questions may be raised about the
famous definitions of time, among the most important of which are the
following:

1. There is no doubt that time is extended and divisible, and hence is
considered to be a kind of quantity or to possess a kind of quantity,
but why should it be considered as a quantity of motion?

The simple answer which is given to this question is that time is
flowing and not fixed, such that not even two moments of it coexist, and
necessarily one part of it must pass before the following part may come
into existence.

This sort of quantity can only be related to something which is
inherently flowing and not fixed, and that would be nothing other than
motion.

As was indicated, this answer depends on the fact that gradualness, flux
and instability are particular to motion, a motion which is presumed to
be specified to the four categories of accidents, and for this reason
they deny the possibility that time could be a quantity for corporeal
substance. But is this doctrine correct? If it is supposed that there
were no accidental motion in the world, would there then be no room for
the concept of motion?

2. Motion is an intermediary between bodies and time, but what kind of
intermediary is it? Is it a fixed intermediary (*wāsiṭah dar thubūt* ),1
from which it could be concluded that bodies themselves really possess
time by means of motion, or is it an accidental intermediary (*wāsiṭah
dar ‘urūḍ* ), such that bodies themselves never really possess time? In
other words, is the attribution of corporeal substance to time an
accidental characterization (*ittiṣāf bil-‘araḍ* )?

Perhaps the answer which must be given on the basis of the principles
[of the mentioned philosophers] to this question is to accept the second
alternative. But is it correct to accept that bodies themselves do not
possess time, regardless of their continuous and gradual changes? If we
suppose that all changes are instantaneous but successive, will there be
no precedence and posteriority among them?

Let us assume that they consider motion to be a fixed intermediary and
that the true attribution of possessing time by bodies is considered to
be posterior to the occurrence of motion. This assumption implies that
bodies essentially have the capacity for the attribution of this
quantity which results from motion, although prior to the occurrence of
motion bodies do not have this attribution actually. Before it takes the
form of a ball or cube, wax has such a capability, for it possesses
extension and volume. However, the ancient philosophers did not see any
way for the influence of flux and motion in the essences of bodies, so
how could they accept the attribution to such existents of an attribute
which is flux and instability itself? This is just like the case in
which we want to relate line, surface and volume, even if by means of a
cause, to an abstract existent which lacks extension, in a way that
these qualities will really be attributed to it!

3. Another question is what kind of relation is that between motion and
time? Is motion the cause for the appearance of time, as so many of the
philosophers seem to hold, or is it merely that which serves as the
subject of the accidental attribution of time? In any case, in what
category should motion itself be included? How is its attribution to
time to be determined?

It was previously indicated that some of the philosophers, such as
Shaykh al-Ishrāq, considered motion to be an independent category of
accidents. Others considered motion to be two-sided: they considered the
side related to its agent [i.e., the mover] to be in the category of
that which acts, and they considered the side related to its object, the
moved, to be in the category of that which is acted upon. Other
philosophers have given no clear explanation. In any case, the answer to
this part of the question requires greater precision. However, the
application of cause and effect to motion

and time may be considered a kind of development of the terminology of
causality, similar to what was indicated in Lesson Thirty-Seven.

4. Another question which can be raised is that if the standard for
relating time to motion is its essential instability, this is found in
all motions; so why do the philosophers relate time to the rotation of
the Sphere of Atlas [the highest of the celestial spheres of traditional
cosmology]? And if there were no Sphere of Atlas or it had no motion,
would the other phenomena of the cosmos not posses temporal priority or
posteriority? And basically, how can an accident which


