Lesson Forty-Four: Kinds of Substances
======================================

Theories about the Kinds of Substances
--------------------------------------

There are differences of opinion among philosophers about the kinds of
material and immaterial substances. The Peripatetics divided substances
into five types:

1. Intellectual substances are completely immaterial, and in addition to
having no spatial or temporal dimensions by nature, they are not
attached to any material or corporeal existents. It must be noted that
the application of ‘intellect’ to such existents is unrelated to
intellect in the sense of the power which perceives universal concepts,
and the employment of the term ‘intellect’ regarding completely
immaterial substances is a sort of homonymity, as is the employment of
‘intellect’ by scholars of ethics in yet a third sense.

2. Psychic substances are essentially immaterial, but are attached to
bodies (corporeal existents), and without a body they have no
possibility of coming about, although it is possible that after coming
about their attachment to a body may be cut off, and after the death of
the body they may persist.

3. Corporeal substances have spatial and temporal dimensions, and we
sense their appearances in the form of accidents of color and shape,
while we prove their existences by reason. The Peripatetics considered
every corporeal substance to be composed of two other substances by the
name of ‘matter’ and ‘form.’

4. Matter or*hayūlā* is also an indefinite substance without actuality
according to the Peripatetics. It exists in all bodies, including the
celestial spheres and the elements. However, the matter of each
celestial sphere takes its own specific form, and for this reason, as
they speculated, generation and corruption, and tearing and mending are
impossible for them. However, elemental matter takes different kinds of
forms (except for that of the celestial spheres), and in this regard the
world of elements is the world of alterations and transformations, of
generation and corruption.

5. Form is the aspect of actuality for every corporeal existent and is
the source of the particular effects of every kind of matter. There are
various kinds of forms, and among them is the form of corporeality which
exists in all corporeal substances and is inseparable from*hayūlā* .
There are other forms which also occur successively concomitant with the
form of corporeality in the different types of corporeal things and are
capable of change, transformation, generation and corruption, such as
the elemental forms, mineral forms, vegetable forms and animal forms.

On the other hand, Shaykh al-Ishrāq denied the existence of*hayūlā* as a
substance without actuality as a part of corporeal substance. He took
the form of corporeality to be the corporeal substance itself and he
accepted other elemental, mineral and vegetable forms as accidents of
corporeal substance. Of the five kinds of substances posited by the
Peripatetics, he accepted only three (intellectual substance, psychic
substance and corporeal substance), but he also attested to another kind
of existent as an intermediary between the completely immaterial and the
purely material by

the name of ‘immaterial phantoms’ ( *ashbāḥ mujarradah* ) or ‘suspended
forms’ ( *ṣuwar mu’allaqah* ) which he later introduced in the
terminology of more recent philosophers as ‘imaginal’ ( *mithālī* ) or
‘intermediary’ ( *barzakhī* ) substance.

Earlier it was mentioned that Berkeley denied the existence of corporeal
substances and consequently, matter and material forms. He believed that
what we perceive as material things are really forms which God the
Exalted has brought into existence in our psychic world, and that their
realities are psychic realities, and that there exists no material world
beyond the soul.

It was also mentioned that Hume also considered psychic substance to be
doubtful and announced that we can only decisively prove psychic
phenomena (accidents), for these are the only things which can be
directly experienced.

Corporeal Substances
--------------------

In Lesson Twenty-Three we proved the existence of a material reality,
and it was explained that it is incorrect to imagine that the material
world exists only in the psychic world and in the realm of man’s
perception, for by means of presentational knowledge man finds that he
does not bring sensible forms into existence himself. Hence, there is no
other alternative but that they are brought about by a cause external to
him which somehow influences his sensory perceptions.

The hypothesis that God the Exalted made these perceptual forms to
appear in our souls without intermediary—as was held by Berkeley—is also
an incorrect assumption, because the relations between an immaterial
agent and all souls and all times and places are equal. Hence, the
appearance of specific phenomena at a definite time without the
mediation of preparatory agents and specific temporal and spatial
conditions cannot take place, although the entire world of being is the
creation of God the Exalted, and He is the only one who gives being to
existents, as will be explained in the proper place. Moreover, with the
denial of the existence of matter, no room remains for the soul as a
substance attached to matter, and it would have to be considered an
intellectual substance and a completely immaterial thing, while
completely immaterial things cannot be the objects of accidents or of
alterations.

It is to be concluded that the belief in a material world, in addition
to being spontaneous (*irtikāzī* ) and in a sense ‘innate’ (*fiṭrī* ),
is also necessitated by rational proof.

In this regard, some Western thinkers have proclaimed that what is
provable about the material world is only those accidents which may be
the objects of sense experience, and that corporeal substance is not
provable. For example, when an apple is the object of sense perception,
by means of the eyes we see its color and shape, we smell its fragrance,
by touching it we perceive its smoothness, and by eating it, its taste,
but there is no sense by which we perceive that there is something
called the substance of apple, the locus of its accidents, in addition
to the color, shape, smell, taste and things like that.

In retort to them it must be said that although we do not have a sense
for perceiving substance, by reason itself we understand that objective
existents

are either accidents or substances, where by accident is meant a state
or attribute for something else, something that needs a subject to which
the attribute applies, while a substance is something which does not
need an objective subject of attribution. Hence, if that which relates
to sense perceptions is an accident, inevitably it will be in need of a
substantial subject, and if it does not need a subject, then it itself
will be a substance. In any case, there is no rational alternative to
accepting the existence of material substance. However, it is another
matter to identify objective substances and accidents which we presently
have no intention to investigate.

Psychic Substances
------------------

In Lesson Thirteen we mentioned that presentational knowledge of the
soul is the same as the existence of the soul itself, and that every
human being possesses this knowledge to a greater or lesser extent. But
this knowledge has degrees, and at the beginning a weak level occurs,
which correlates with the weakness of the existence of the soul. For
this reason, it is not an object of awareness. Gradually, a weak
awareness of it appears, but not to the extent that a clear mental
interpretation of it may be formed. For this reason it is confused with
the body. The more the existence of the soul is perfected, and the level
of its immateriality is raised, the more its awareness of itself will be
increased until it reaches the point that it becomes clear that it is an
immaterial substance which is independent of the body. However, such
knowledge will be obtained by none but those who advance through levels
of spiritual perfection. Therefore, the majority of people are in need
of proof to obtain conscious knowledge of the immateriality of the soul.

There are various ways to prove the immateriality of the soul, the
examination of which merits an independent book of its own. Among them
there are reasons given from dreams, the summoning of spirits,
hypnotism, and likewise from the works of yogis, miracles of the friends
of God (*awliyā* ), and such things. Some of their premises are
established by reports for those who do not have direct information of
such things, and in truth these sorts of reports are corroborated way
beyond what is required for credibility.

Another group of reasons makes use of premises which must be proven in
the empirical sciences, especially psychology and biology, such as the
premise that all organs and cells of the body are gradually replaced,
and even the cells of the brain are altered as a result of dissolution
and nourishment with fresh material, while the soul has a fixed
individual existence which survives through dozens of years, and every
man is aware of his own individual identity.

Purely philosophical arguments for the immateriality of the soul are
also divided into two groups: one group of arguments are those which are
obtained by the analysis of ordinary knowledge by presence; the other
group of arguments first establish the immateriality of psychic
phenomena such as perception, will and affection, then they prove the
immateriality of their subject, the soul. Since we will discuss the
immateriality of the qualities of the soul in the future, especially the
immateriality of knowledge and

perception, here we will content ourselves with some arguments which
directly establish the immateriality of the soul.

Two Proofs for the Immateriality of the Soul
--------------------------------------------

1. Ibn Sīnā, in his*Ishārāt* , presents an argument for the
immateriality of the soul that may be summarized as follows. If one is
placed in an environment in which his attention is not distracted by
external things, and the condition of his body is such that he does not
notice it, that is, he does not suffer from hunger, thirst, cold, heat,
pain or any other discomfort, and even the weather is completely still
so that the blowing of the wind does not attract his attention, and in
the words of Ibn Sīnā, there is ‘balmy weather,’ in such a situation if
one focuses one’s attention on oneself, that is, on the ‘I, the
perceiver,’ so that one has no attention on anything corporal, he will
find his soul, while he will not find any of his bodily organs. What he
finds is different from what he does not find, and hence the soul is
other than the material body.

This argument, as we have considered it, is an aid to enable the mind to
have a correct interpretation of presentational knowledge of the soul.
The conditions mentioned by Ibn Sīnā are really a guide for the common
man to be able to focus his attention so that material factors do not
attract his attention to the body and things related to it. It was
previously indicated that those who are advanced in the stages of
spiritual perfection are able to turn their own attention completely
toward the soul and to observe the reality of it, but the common man
must observe such conditions in order to divert his attention from
material things to some extent.

2. Another argument for the immateriality of the soul is that when we
pay precise attention to our own existence, the ‘I, the perceiver,’ we
see that the existence of ‘I’ is a simple indivisible thing. For
example, it cannot be divided into two ‘half I’s,’ while the most
fundamental characteristic of body is divisibility, as was explained in
Lesson Forty-One. However, such a characteristic cannot be found in the
soul, and it is not subject to the body in being divisible. So, there is
no other alternative but its immateriality. The most that can be said is
that the soul is attached to the body and has a special existential
relation to it, so that it influences the body, as the body moves with
the will of the soul, and it is affected by the body, as it suffers
hunger and thirst and is influenced by and influences the body in many
other ways that must be taken up in discussions of the mind-body
problem.


