Lesson Forty-Five: Continuation of the Discussion of the Kinds of Substance
===========================================================================

Intellectual Substance
----------------------

The ancient philosophers took quite tortuous routes to establish the
existence of intellectual substance. For example, they all resorted to
the ‘principle of the unit’ (i.e., the unity of the effect given the
unity of its direct cause) in order to prove the existence of the first
intellect which is the most simple and most perfect of the contingent
existents. On the other hand, they introduced the active intellect as
the proximate agent of the elemental world (i.e., the sublunary world),
and they also presented it as that which emanates the intellectual
concepts to man and to his treasury of intelligibles, and they mentioned
various different ways to prove its existence. Also, to prove the
existence of the tenfold vertical intellects they sought the assistance
of the hypothesis of nine celestial spheres. They imagined that the nine
intellects were to be obtained as the proximate causes for the nine
celestial spheres, and they also imagined these intellects to be the
ends of the motions subject to the volitions of the souls of the
spheres. These nine intellects together with the active intellect were
taken to compose the ten intellects. Likewise, the philosophers, in
order for to establish the existence of the world of the intellects, and
especially the Illuminationists (*Ishrāqiyyīn* ), in order to establish
the existence of the horizontal intellects (i.e., the Platonic Forms),
relied upon the ‘Doctrine of the Nobler Contingent’ and they formulated
various reasons for the validity of this doctrine. But, this is not the
occasion for a review and criticism of their explanations and arguments.

However, by focusing on the fundamentality of existence, the graduated
levels of existence and the reality of the causal relation, which are
established in the philosophy of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, there emerges a
simpler and at the same time more certain way to prove that there is a
world of intellects which can be considered to be a new explanation of
the doctrine of the nobler contingent. Hence, first we will explain
something about the above-mentioned doctrine, and then we shall describe
the conclusions for the present discussion which may be drawn from it.

The Doctrine of the Nobler Contingent
-------------------------------------

The purport of this doctrine is that if we consider two contingent
existents, one of which is nobler than the other, the nobler one must
occur at a level prior to that of the less noble one, and the nobler
must be the cause of the less noble. So, if the nobler is not known to
us, we can discover it by means of the existence of the less noble. The
way this doctrine is used in the present discussion is as follows:
intellectual substance is nobler than other substances, so, according to
this doctrine, it must occur at a level prior to that of the others, so
that there will be a means for their existences. Hence, the existence of
other substances is a means to discover the existence of that which is
at a prior level to them.

This doctrine came to be especially favored since the time of Shaykh
al-Ishrāq, and the following proof was used to establish it.

If the nobler existent does not exist at a prior level to the less
noble, then it must be at the same level, a lower level, or not existing
at all. If it existed at the same level—as, for example, if intellectual
substance together with corporeal substance were produced by the first
cause—then the ‘principle of the unit’ would be violated. If the nobler
existed at a posterior level—as, for example, if intellectual substance
came into existence after corporeal substance, and corporeal substance
were a means for the production of intellectual substance—this would
imply that the existence of the cause were baser than the existence of
its effect. If it never came into existence at all, this would mean that
something which has the capability to cause the nobler has no existence,
that is, that the first cause would also lack the capability to create
it! So, the only correct assumption is that the nobler existent exists
at a level prior to the less noble and is a means for its production.

Later, this argument, which rests on the doctrine of the unit, was
challenged and criticized by some, and defended by others, such as Mīr
Dāmād who offered other arguments in its defense, as well, the review of
which is not appropriate here.

As we indicated, however, this doctrine may be more firmly established
on the basis of the principles of the philosophy of Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn, as follows.

The causal relation between a cause and its effect is an essential and
unalterable relation; that is, the existence of the effect is
essentially dependent on the existence of the efficient cause, and it is
impossible that the positions of cause and effect should be changed so
that the existence of the cause should be dependent on the existence of
the effect. So, it is impossible that an effect should be produced by
something on which it is not dependent. The causal relation is also a
necessary relation, and it is impossible for the existential dependency
of the effect on the cause to vanish, so that the effect could occur
without the cause. Hence, the possibility of being an effect is equal to
its necessity. In other words, the causal relation between two existents
can never be considered to be merely possible (*imkān khāṣṣ* , the
negation of the necessity of the terms of the relation), so that it is
possible for one of the two existents both to be and not to be an effect
of the other with neither of them being necessary. So, if it is not
impossible for one thing to be the effect of another, it will be
necessary for it to be the effect of the other, and without the other it
would not come into existence.

On the other hand, in the discussions of cause and effect it was
established that the criterion for being an effect is weakness of
existence. Therefore, this supposition will be necessary wherever a more
perfect and more powerful existent can be supposed, so that the weaker
existent may be considered to radiate from its existence, not being
independent of it.

By attending to these two premises, the above-mentioned doctrine may be
obtained as follows: If we suppose that there are a number of existents
each of which is more powerful than another, so that the former may be
considered the cause of the existence of the latter; in other words, if
a special gradation is posited among them, then each of the more
powerful

existents will be at a prior level to the weaker existents, and
necessarily will be the cause in relation to them, until one arrives at
an existent for which it is impossible to suppose a more perfect one,
and which cannot possibly be the effect of any of the other existents.

According to this doctrine, the existence of intellectual substance,
which is more perfect than other substances and can be the cause for
their existences, is established. This will be an intermediary between
the level of infinite intensity of existence (i.e. God, the Exalted) and
the lower levels of existence.

On this basis, the existence of horizontal intellects may also be
established, that is, one can suppose a number of intellectual
substances none of which is the cause of another of them, but each of
which is the cause for a species of lower existents and merely possesses
the perfection of that very species in a more perfect and simpler form.

Several points must be observed: one is that horizontal intellects will
be the effects of one or several intellects more perfect than they, for
an intellect may be supposed which possesses the perfections of all of
them, and which stands in the chain of their causes. Earlier it was
mentioned that the possibility of being a cause is equal to its
necessity.

The second point is that none of the horizontal intellects will have a
whatness common with the species of existent from which it is produced,
for the abstraction of a whatness of a single species from different
levels of existence is impossible. Even two intellectual substances
which are taken to be vertically related so that one is the cause of the
other, will not have a single whatness.

The third point is that this doctrine is not capable of establishing the
number of intellects, and there is no way to prove how many
intermediaries exist between the first intellect and the horizontal
intellects. Since the hypothesis of there being ten intellects is based
on the hypothesis of there being nine celestial spheres, with the
invalidity of the latter, the former also becomes invalid.

Imaginal Substance
------------------

As was mentioned in the previous lesson, the Illuminationists proved the
existence of another world called the world of ‘immaterial phantoms’
(*ashbāḥ mujarradah* ) or of ‘suspended forms’ (*ṣuwar mu’allaqah* ),
which is an intermediary between the intellectual world and the
corporeal world, and in this regard, in the language of the later
philosophers this was called the world of the isthmus (*barzakh* ), or
the imaginal world (*ālam-e mithāl* ).

Probably the Illuminationists either were inspired to use this term by
the mystics (*‘urafā* ), or they themselves found it through mystical
disclosures. In religious texts some topics may be found, especially
about the world of the isthmus and the questions of Nakīr and Munkar1
and the like which can be explained by means of the imaginal world.

It is necessary to note that Shaykh al-Ishrāq does not use the term
‘isthmus’ (*barzakh* ) for the imaginal world of forms, but applies this
term to the material world. It is also to be mentioned that the
expression *mithāl* [image or form] is used for this world in a sense
different from the Platonic Forms, for the latter are completely
immaterial and a kind of intellectual

substance, while imaginal substances are another kind of existent unlike
intellectual substances, which are completely lacking in corporeal
attributes and limits, and are unlike corporeal substances, which are
divisible and possess location. Rather, they are of the kind of imaginal
forms which are drawn in the minds of men. For example, in order to
halve them in the imagination, one must bring into existence two smaller
forms in the mind, not that a larger form is to be divided into two
halves.

Likewise, it must be kept in mind that expressions such as ‘phantoms’
regarding this world are not used in the sense that the entities of this
world are faint forms of corporeal existents nor that they are weaker in
the level of their existence than bodies. Rather, this expression shows
that there exist fixed and unchangeable forms in that world, which are
not only no less weak than material entities, but are considered to be
more powerful than them.

Shaykh al-Ishrāq considered the forms which are seen in a mirror to be
sorts of abstract phantoms, and he also related genies and the forms
which are seen in dreams to this world. Furthermore, he held that
sensory perception is also the observation of Imaginal forms which exist
in this world. However, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn held that sensory
perception is related to the Imaginal plane of the soul, as will be
explained in the appropriate place. As for the forms which are seen in a
mirror, they are brought into existence by the reflection of light, and
have no relation to the imaginal world. Likewise, according to the
exoteric meaning of the Qur’ān and sunnah, the genies are subtle
corporeal existents, which in the words of the Noble Qur’ān are created
of ‘fire,’ and have corporeal characteristics, and are even like man in
having responsibilities, rewards and punishments, although because of
their subtlety, ordinary people cannot sense them.

In any case, the existence of immaterial phantoms is undeniable, and in
the sacred traditions one comes across expressions like ‘phantoms’
(*ashbāḥ* ) and ‘shadows’ (*aḍlāl* ), which are comparable to immaterial
phantoms. There are few people who have taken a few steps down the road
of spiritual wayfaring who have not observed these sorts of existents.
However, it is not very easy to establish their existence by means of
rational proof.

Some philosophers have attempted to prove the existence of this world by
employing the doctrine of the nobler contingent, while Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn took advantage of another doctrine, which he himself
founded, called the doctrine of the baser contingent (*imkān-e akhass*
). However, the difficulty here is that one cannot definitively prove
that there is a specific gradation from intellectual substance to
imaginal substance to corporeal substance so that one may consider the
corporeal world to radiate from the Imaginal world and the latter to be
an intermediary for the creation of the material world. At the most one
may say that immaterial substance may be considered as the source for
the sensory and imaginary forms which occur in the souls of men, that
is, the immaterial substances may emanate these forms while they lack
intellectual levels. In this way, on the basis of the Doctrine of the
Nobler Contingent, their existence is established.

It may be concluded that the most plausible way to establish the
existence of Imaginal substance is through mystical disclosures and the
words of the Infallibles, Peace and salutations to all of them.

At the end of these discussions it is to be noted that the division of
existence into the material and immaterial is a rational division which
is comprehensive and exclusive; however, the confinement of the
immaterial worlds to the intellectual, psychic, and imaginal is not a
rational comprehensive and exclusive division. The addition of the
imaginal world of the Illuminationists to the other worlds shows that it
is not irrational to suppose that one or more other worlds exist of
whose characteristics we are unaware.

Reference
---------

1 Nakīr and Munkar are the names of the two angels who interrogate a
person immediately following his death and burial about his religious
beliefs. [Tr.]
