Lesson Forty-Six: Matter and Form
=================================

Views of the Philosophers on Matter and Form
--------------------------------------------

We have thus far taken up the discussion of three kinds of immaterial
substance and one kind of material substance, and we have established
their existence. However, we previously reported that the Aristotelians
held that corporeal substances are composed of two other substances
called matter and form, the former being the aspect of the potentiality
of bodies and the latter being the aspect of the actuality of bodies. We
shall now review this theory.

Before anything, we must bear in mind that matter, in the sense of the
ground for the appearance of a new existent and that which receives its
actuality, is accepted by nearly all philosophers, as, for example,
water is said to be the matter for steam, soil for plants and animals,
and grains and pits for their plants. An existent which is the matter
for other existents but which does not itself appear from some prior
matter, in technical terms is said to possess ‘original existence’
(*wujūd ibdā‘ī* ) and to be without need of a material cause, and it is
called the ‘matter of matters’ (*māddat al-mawādd* ) or prime matter
(*hayūlā* *ūlā* ). The difference of opinion between the Aristotelians
and others is over whether prime matter is a substance possessing
actuality which can be considered a kind of corporeal substance, or is a
pure potentiality without any kind of actuality whose only property is
the ability to accept corporeal forms. The opinion of the Aristotelians
is the latter, and this was also accepted by most of the great Islamic
philosophers, including Fārābī, Ibn Sīnā and Mīr Dāmād. In many
instances, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn has followed the same line, but in some
cases he called*hayūlā* a ‘privative thing’ (*amr ‘adamī* ) and in some
cases he referred to it as a shadow which the intellect considers for
corporeal existents, but which does not have true existence, as the
concept of ‘shadow’ is abstracted from weak luminescence and has no
existence beyond that of light.1 There are also some scholars who
consider it incorrect to attribute the above-mentioned position to
Aristotle.2

On the assumption of the existence of prime matter as a substance
lacking actuality, it would seem inappropriate to consider matter and
form alongside bodies all equivalently as kinds of substances. Perhaps
it would be better if matter and form were considered to be two kinds of
material substances, with the explanation that prime matter is
inseparable from corporeal form, and that the combination of them is
called ‘body.’ The main problem is that the existence of a substance
which essentially lacks any kind of actuality cannot be established, and
it seems that, with regard to this problem, the correct position is that
of Shaykh al-Ishrāq, ‘Allāmah Ṭūsī and other philosophers who have
denied the existence of this sort of substance.

With the denial of prime matter as a substance lacking any sort of
actuality, no room remains for establishing the existence of another
sort of substance which is the first form for prime matter and that
which grants it actuality, for according to this view, which is
attributed to the Platonists, the first matter is a substance possessing
actuality, but which is not composed of matter and form. However, new
forms occur in it either alternatively or

simultaneously, such that a specific elemental form appears in it, and
with its removal, it is replaced by another elemental form. However, the
elemental form comes into existence simultaneously with the mineral form
or vegetable form, and altogether they are incarnated in the substance
of the body, that is, their parts correspond precisely to one another.
However, through all these alterations, the body always remains as a
substance which possesses actuality, despite the denials by some
philosophers that the new forms are substances. These philosophers only
accept them as accidents for the body.

Given the denial of matter without actuality, and the acceptance of the
forms of species, as kinds of substance, corporeal substances may be
divided into two general kinds: one is that of a substance which does
not need a location at which to be incarnated, and this is the same as
body; the other is a substance which needs another substance to be
incarnated in it and impressed in it, and this substance is the form of
a species, such as the elemental, mineral and vegetable forms. However,
with the denial that these sorts of forms are substances, the corporeal
and material substances will be confined to bodies. This seems to
indicate the difference between primary and secondary substances in
Aristotle. The primary substances are not incarnated, only the secondary
ones are.

An Argument for the Aristotelian Theory
---------------------------------------

The Aristotelians, who believe in prime matter as substance devoid of
actuality, have offered for their position two arguments which were
originally close to one another: one of these is called the ‘proof from
potentiality and actuality’ and the other is called the ‘proof from
union and separation.’ They may be summarized as follows.

There are transformations in bodies which are unions and separations, as
well as substantial and accidental changes; for example, a continuous
unified body may be transformed into two separate bodies, water changes
into steam, the seed of a tree changes into a tree. Without a doubt,
these various changes do not take place in such a way that the first
substance is completely obliterated and one or more other existents are
brought into existence from pure nothingness. Rather, certainly
something from the prior existent remains in the later existent.
However, that which remains is not the form and actuality of the prior
existent; hence there is no other alternative but that another substance
exists in them which preserves the existential relation between them.
This in itself essentially and necessarily must have no actuality, and
for this reason, it accepts various sorts of actuality. In this way it
is established that there is a substance which has no actuality, and
which is characterized by the acceptance of forms, and, in philosophical
terms, it is called pure potentiality.

In other words, every corporeal existent possesses two aspects: one is
the aspect of actuality and the possession of properties, and the other
is the aspect of potentiality and privation in relation to future
actualities. These two aspects are different from each other, and so,
every corporeal existent is composed of two different objective things.
And since it is not possible for the existence of a substance to be
composed of two accidents or of a substance and an accident, there is no
other choice but that they must be

composed of two substantial parts, one which is the aspect of actuality,
and the other the aspect of potentiality.

This argument can also be put in the following form, or the following
may be considered as another argument. It is possible for all bodies to
change into another kind of body, such as the change of one element into
another, or the transformation of one or more elements into minerals,
vegetables or animals (potentiality and actuality). Likewise, all bodies
have the possibility to be changed into two or several other bodies of
the same kind (union and separation). This possibility for change and
transformation is a kind of quality which is called the ‘quality of
preparedness’ (*kayfiyyat isti‘dādī* ) or ‘possibility of preparedness’
(*imkān isti‘dādī* ). This is capable of intensity and weakness,
perfection and deficiency, as the preparedness of a fetus to change into
an existent which possesses a spirit is greater than that of a zygote.

This accident needs a substantial subject which cannot be considered to
be a substance possessing actuality, since this substance has to have
the possibility for the appearance of this quality, and the supposed
possibility will be another quality dependent on a third possibility,
and likewise to infinity. This implies that in order for any existent to
be transformed into another, and for the appearance of every new
substance or accident an infinity of accidents must occur each of which
has temporal priority to another! Hence, it is inevitable that these
accidents must be borne by a substance which is the potentiality,
possibility and preparedness itself and which has no sort of actuality
at all.

Critique
--------

The mentioned arguments are not firm enough, and all of them are more or
less controversial. However, since the pivotal concept in all of them is
the concept of ‘change,’ we would do well to provide a brief explanation
of it, although a more detailed discussion will come under the topics of
change and motion.3

Change and transformation may be imagined in a number of forms. Of those
relevant to this topic, the following are the most important:

1. Accidental change, such as the change of the color of an apple from
green to yellow and from yellow to red.

It must be noted that according to philosophers such as Shaykh
al-Ishrāq, changes of species are of this sort, for they considered
specific forms to be accidents. Likewise, according to modern
physicists, the change of water into steam and vice versa are sorts of
gathering together and separating of molecules, not a sort of
substantial change.

2. The appearance of a new substantial form in matter, such as the
appearance of vegetable form in soil, according to the position of the
Aristotelians who consider specific forms to be substances.

3. The obliteration of a temporally contingent substantial form from
matter, such as the change from vegetable to soil, according to the
Aristotelians.

4. The obliteration of a previous substantial form and the appearance of
another substantial form, such as the change of an element into another
element, according to the Aristotelians.

5. The substantial attachment of an immaterial thing to matter without
being incarnated in it (for incarnation is characteristic of matter),
such as the attachment of spirit to body.

6. The cutting off of the above-mentioned attachment, such as the death
of an animal or man.

By attending to the above classification, the weakness of the first
argument becomes clear, for if change is related to accidents of the
body, corporeal substance will be preserved with its actuality, and
there will be no need for the assumption of a substance without
actuality. Likewise, if there is a sort of attachment of the soul to the
body, or its detachment (the fifth or sixth cases) the substance of the
body with its own actuality remains.

Also in the second and third cases, in which a new substantial form is
incarnated in a body or is separated from it, the previous substance is
preserved. It is only in the fourth case that it is conceivable that
with the obliteration of the previous form, a substance possessing
actuality does not remain, hence, the thing which is in common between
them is a substance which lacks actuality.

But we must remember that according to the philosophers, the corporeal
form is never corrupted or obliterated, and if the existence of prime
matter were also established, it would persist along with the corporeal
form (regardless of substantial motion, which will be discussed in its
own place). With regard to this point, a question that may be posed is,
what rational objections would arise if body is considered a simple
substance (i.e., not composed of matter and form) in which another form
is incarnated or from which another form is detached?

Perhaps the second explanation may be considered as the answer to this
question, that is, body with its own actuality cannot take a new form,
but it must possess another part whose essential property is
receptivity, and essentially requires no actuality.

The second explanation is based on the notion that the aspects of
potentiality and actuality are two entified aspects, each of which has
specific objective instances. Since the existence of a body cannot be
considered to be composed of two accidents or one substance and one
accident, there is no other choice but that they must be considered to
be composed of two substances instead of these two aspects.

This notion is debatable, for the concepts of actuality and
potentiality, like other fundamental philosophical concepts, are
secondary philosophical intelligibles, which are abstracted by the
intellect with a specific attention.4 In other words, when we take two
corporeal things into consideration, one of which lacks the other (as
the seed of a tree lacks the fruit of the tree), but which can come to
possess it, then the concept of potentiality or receptivity is related
to the first existent, and when it comes to possess the other, the
concept of actuality is abstracted from it. Hence, these concepts are
abstracted concepts, which are obtained by the comparison of two things,
and they do not have entified instances. There is no reason to consider
the aspects of potentiality or receptivity to be entified things on the
basis of which the existence of a substance or even an accident may be
established, the whatness of which is the whatness of potentiality and
receptivity.

Likewise the establishment of the causal relation among existents does
not require that there be an existent whose whatness is being a cause or
being an effect. This is another example of how first and second
intelligibles are confused.

It is to be concluded that when a corporeal substance is compared to
another substance or to an accident which is capable of being incarnated
in it, it is called ‘potential’ (*bil quwwah* ) in relation to this
incarnation, but this does not mean that it possesses an objective part
called ‘potentiality.’

Secondly, the second premise may be disputed, for it is possible that
one may consider the objective existence of a body (not its whatness) to
be composed of substance and a number of accidents. Especially according
to the position of those who consider accidents to be aspects and levels
of the existence of substance. Hence, supposing that each of the two
aspects of potentiality and actuality possess objective instances, one
can consider the instance of the aspect of actuality to be corporeal
substance and the instance of the aspect of potentiality to be one of
its accidents.

The third explanation also has two basic premises. One is that the
possibility of preparedness is a kind of objective accident and is a
whatish concept. The other is that the characterization (*‘urūḍ* ) of
this accident requires potentiality and a prior possibility, and hence
in order to avoid an infinite regress a substance should be posited
which itself is the very potentiality, possibility and preparedness.

This explanation is also flawed, for, first of all, preparedness is an
abstracted concept which cannot have entified instances. For example, to
say that the seed of a tree has the preparedness to turn into a tree
means that the seed of the tree has the preparedness for turning into a
tree, and if water and warmth and the other necessary conditions obtain,
gradually it will develop and roots, leaves and branches will appear. So
that which is entified is the seed, water, warmth, etc., but there is no
additional entified existent by the name of ‘preparedness,’ and
consequently, preparedness cannot be considered a kind of objective
accident.

Secondly, on the assumption that preparedness is a entified quality, one
may consider the first preparedness to be the effect of corporeal
substance. In this way infinite regress may be avoided without need for
positing a substantial potentiality (matter lacking actuality).

There is another problem with this position, which will not be mentioned
in order to avoid prolonging the discussion. We merely indicate that
being an existent corresponds to being actual, and moreover, they are in
truth the same.

Hence, basically the supposition that an existent lacks actuality seems
to be incorrect. The assumption that matter obtains actuality only in
the shadow of a form is not coherent with the essential property
attributed to matter of lacking actuality and being pure potentiality.

Perhaps it will be said that the pure potentiality of matter is like the
essential possibility of every whatness which is inseparable from it. At
the same time, in the shadow of causality, it becomes necessary ‘by
another.’

However, it must be noted that the essential possibility of a whatness
is a purely intellectual attribute which has no objective instances, as
whatness

itself is a respectival concept. But in the case of matter, it is
assumed that this is an objective substance whose existence is pure
potentiality. Perhaps it is for this reason that Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn
called prime matter an intellectual and privative thing (*amr ‘aqlī wa
‘adamī* ). (Take note.)

References
----------

1 Cf.,*Asfār* , Vol. 5, p. 146, and*Mabdā wa Ma’ād* , p. [^265]:

2 Cf., Abū al-Barakāt,*Mu’tabar* , Vol. 3, p. [^200]:

3 Cf., Lesson Fifty-One.

4 Cf., Lesson Fifty-Two.
