Lesson Forty-Seven: Accidents
=============================

Views of Philosophers about Accidents
-------------------------------------

As was previously indicated, it is well known among philosophers that
substance is a highest genus, and it is a specific category which has
various species. However, accident is not a specific category, but is a
general concept abstracted from nine categories, and the predication of
it to each of them is accidental, not essential.

In contrast to this position, three other positions may be indicated.
One is the position of Mīr Dāmād who considered accident, like
substance, to be a category and a highest genus, and those which others
take to be accidental categories, he considered to be species of
accidents. Another position is that the categories are: substance,
quantity, quality, and relation, and other accidental categories,
according to this position, are considered to be kinds of relations.
Finally, the position of Shaykh al-Ishrāq (Suhravardī) is that the
categories consist of the four mentioned above in addition to motion.1

It seems that, first of all, substance and accident are types of
secondary philosophical intelligibles, none of which can be considered a
highest genus and whatish category. Secondly, as has been proclaimed by
Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, motion is an ontological concept and is neither
itself a category, nor is it included in any whatish category. Thirdly,
many things which are called objective accidents and are taken to be
categories or types of categories (including all of the seven relational
categories) are abstracted concepts, and none of them are objective
accidents to be considered as independent whatish categories or types of
categories.

It is clear that the presentation, criticism, and review of all of these
positions requires more detailed discussion which is not very useful.
For this reason a short discussion will suffice for this topic.

Quantity
--------

The category of quantity may be defined in this way: it is an accident
which is essentially capable of being divided; and the modifier
‘essentially’ is used in order to exclude from the definition divisions
of other categories, because their divisions are obtained subordinate to
the divisions of quantity.

Quantity may be generally divided into two kinds: continuous (i. e.,
geometrical quantity) and discrete (i. e., number), each of which
includes different kinds which are discussed in the two sciences of
geometry and arithmetic.

It should be noted that the philosophers consider the first number to be
two, which is divisible into two units. One is considered to be the
source of the numbers, although it is not held to be a kind of number.
It seems that it can easily be accepted that number is not a whatish
concept, and that in the external world there is nothing by the name of
‘number’ but only things which have the attributes of being unities or
pluralities (numbered). For example, when an individual person is
located somewhere, nothing is brought into existence called unity over
and above his own existence. However, attending to the fact that there
is no one beside him, the concept of unit will be abstracted from him.
Likewise, when another individual is located beside him, the second
individual is also a unit, but we consider

them together and relate the concept of two to them, although there is
no objective accident between them by the name of the number two. By the
way, how can a single accident (the number two) subsist in two
subjects?! (Take note.) And also, when a third individual sits beside
the other two, the number three is abstracted from the set of them.
However it is not the case that a entified accident called two has been
destroyed and that another one called three has been brought into
existence. In this very same situation we can consider the first two
individuals and relate the number two to them, as we can consider one of
them along with the newly entered individual and call them two persons.

Further evidence that the concept of number is respectival (*i‘tibārī* )
is that it is an accident of the numbers themselves, their fractions,
and sets, and if number were something entified, an infinite number
would occur in limited subjects!

Likewise, number is equally related to immaterial and material things,
to the real and to the fictitious. Are we to consider number to be an
immaterial accident when related to immaterial things and a material
accident when related to material things?! Are we to consider number to
be real when it is related to real things, and consider it respectival
when the same number is predicated to a respectival thing? Or are we to
allow that something respectival has a real entified attribute and
accident?!

Regarding continuous quantities, as was made clear in the discussions of
time and space, they are aspects of the existence of bodies, and they
have no existence apart from the existence of bodies. In technical
terms, composite making (*ja‘l ta’līfī* ) and independent creation do
not apply to them, even if the mind is able to consider them as
independent whatnesses. Considering this point, there is a sense in
which they can be taken to be accidents of bodies, but accidents whose
existence is the very existence of the body, and all of their whatnesses
exist by one existence. In other words, the existence of these kinds of
accidents is an aspect of the existence of substances.

Relational Categories
---------------------

Among the ten categories, there are seven each of which is regarded as
possessing some kind of relation, and for this reason they are called
the ‘relational categories,’ and some philosophers have taken them to be
species of the category of relation (*nisbah* or*iḍāfah* ). The
relational categories are as follows:

1. The category of relation (*iḍāfah* ), which is obtained from the
occurrence of a relation between two existents, and is divided into
those which have similar terms, and those which have opposite terms. The
former kind is like the relation ‘being the brother of’ which holds
between two brothers, or the relation of simultaneity between two things
which exist at one time. The latter kind is like the relation of a
father to his child, or the relation of priority and posteriority
between two parts of time, or two phenomena which come into existence at
two times.

2. The category of where (*‘ayn* ), which is obtained from the relation
between a material thing and its location.

3. The category of when (*matā* ), which is obtained from the relation
between a material existent and its time.

4. The category of position (*waḍ‘* ), which is obtained from the
relation among the parts of a thing to each other, considering their
directions, such as the condition of standing, a posture in which the
parts of the body are located over one another so that the head is on
top, or the condition of reclining, which is abstracted from the
location of the parts of the body next to one another in a horizontal
form.

5. The category of possession (*jidah* or*milk* ), which is obtained
from the relation of one thing to another which more or less encompasses
it, like the condition of the body being covered by its clothes, or the
head being covered by a hat.

6. The category of activity (*an yaf’al* ), which describes the gradual
influence of a material agent on the matter acted upon, such as the sun
which gradually warms water.

7. The category of passivity (*an yanfa’il* ), which describes passive
matter which is gradually affected by a material agent, such as water
which is gradually warmed by the sun.

It should be noted that all of these categories, except for that of
relation, are specific to material things, since they possess time and
place, and the relations between parts and considerations of direction
are conceivable only for bodies. Likewise, the encompassing of clothing
and the like is also peculiar to material existents. Also, gradual
affecting and being affected by occur only among material things.
However, the category of relation is common between material and
immaterial things. Examples of it can be found among material things,
such as the relation of above and below between two stories of a
building, and relation can be found to hold between immaterial things,
such as the divine eternal priority (*taqaddum sarmadī* ) to other
immaterial things, and the temporal simultaneity among the intellects.
Likewise, one can consider one term of a relation to be an immaterial
existent and the other term to be a material existent, such as the
ontological priority of an immaterial cause to its material effect.

It seems that none of these are primary intelligible whatish concepts.
The best reason for this is that relating one existent to another
depends on one who relates them, who compares them with one another, and
a concept dependent on comparing and relating cannot describe a thing
which is entified and independent of mental respects.

For example, the relation between two brothers, or the relation between
a father and his children, is not a entified thing which exists between
the related terms; rather, by considering two individuals who have come
into existence by means of one father and mother, and who share this
respect, the mind abstracts a relation with similar terms called
brotherhood. Considering that the father is the preparatory cause for
the appearance of his child and not the reverse, the mind abstracts a
relation with opposite terms called fatherhood. It is not the case that
with the birth of a child another entified thing comes about called the
relation of fatherhood, and that after the birth of a second child yet
another objective thing called brotherhood appears between the two
children. Likewise, the concepts of greater and smaller, closer and
farther, equality and simultaneity, etc., are all concepts which are
obtained by comparison, and none of them has a entified instance,
although

each of them has a specific source of abstraction, and one cannot
attribute relational concepts in an arbitrary manner.

Among the evidence for the respectival nature of relation is that, on
the one hand, it is applied to the relation between God Almighty and His
creatures, while on the other hand, it can hold between two nonentified
things, between an existent and a nonexistent, and even between two
impossible objects. It is clear that God Almighty cannot be the subject
of any accident, and likewise, a nonentified thing and a nonexistent
cannot be characterized by entified objective properties.

By examining other relational categories it becomes clear that except
for the two terms of the relation, which are the source of abstraction
for these concepts, there is no other entified object in existence by
the name of the objective relation, let alone that a certain
configuration should appear in the subject due to the influence of the
relation. The attribution (*ittiṣāf* ) of these concepts to objective
things is no reason for their existence as entified objects, as is the
case with regard to all secondary philosophical intelligibles.

Reference
---------

1 Cf., Suhravardī,*Talwīḥāt,* p. [^11]:
