Lesson Forty-Nine: The Reality of Knowledge
===========================================

Introduction
------------

Many issues, most of which have to do with epistemology, can be raised
regarding knowledge, and in this book, as well, the most important of
them were mentioned in the part on epistemology. However, other
discussions of knowledge are also possible from an ontological
perspective, and philosophers have mentioned these in various places in
their philosophical discussions. Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn has set
discussions about knowledge as an independent topic. Among these
discussions is that of the immateriality of knowledge and the knower,
which is appropriate to discussion of the ‘immaterial and material,’ and
for this reason we mention it in this section, and following this, we
take up the problem of the unity of the knower and the known.

Regarding the ontology of knowledge several questions may be raised,
such as, what is the reality of knowledge and whether all types of
knowledge have a single whatness, or at the very least, whether they all
belong to a single specific category, and whether all types of knowledge
are immaterial or whether they are all material, or are some of them
immaterial and others material?

In order to answer such questions it is first necessary to take a glance
at the types of knowledge, which were discussed to some extent in the
part on epistemology.

A Review of the Types of Knowledge
----------------------------------

Awareness of an existent is either obtained without the intermediary of
a form or concept, in which case it is called ‘presentational
knowledge,’ or it occurs through the intermediary of a sensory or
imaginary form or through a rational or prehensive (*wahmī* ) concept,
in which case it is called ‘acquired knowledge’ and is specific to souls
attached to matter. A level of the existence of the soul called ‘mind’
(*dhin* ) is considered to be like a receptacle for acquired knowledge,
and mind is said to have various levels and aspects. Some of its levels
oversee others, so that the lower levels obtain judgments concerning
external reality in relation to the mind and another knowledge
corresponding to this is then obtained, as discussed in Lesson Nineteen.

Human awareness of a single real state of affairs (*nafs al-amr* ) is
reflected in the mind in the form of a proposition, the simplest form of
which is a predicative proposition which in turn may be divided into
simple existential propositions (*halliyyah basīṭah* ), compound
propositions (*halliyyah murakkabah* ), and other sorts of propositions.

In a predicative proposition there are at least two mental concepts, one
of which is the subject and the other the predicate, and man takes into
consideration the relation between them and makes a judgment of
establishment (*thubūt* ) for affirmative propositions ( *qaḍiyyah
mūjabah* ) or of absence of establishment for negative propositions,
although there are differences of opinion in this field which were
indicated in Lesson Fourteen.

Judgment or assertion (in technical terms) is obtained when a person
believes in the purport of the proposition, even if the belief is mere
opinion.

The belief of a person does not always correspond to reality, and
sometimes one may have beliefs about which one is convinced and definite
but which are contrary to reality, cases of which are called compound
ignorance.

Considering these points, acquired knowledge may be investigated along
various lines, and each case may be discussed separately, but that which
is usually taken up as a topic of discussion is the immateriality of
perception, especially rational perception.

The Reality of Knowledge by Presence
------------------------------------

In presentational knowledge, the essence of the known is present to the
knower, and the knower perceives a entified existence, and this
perceiving is not something external to the essence of the knower, but
rather is an aspect of his existence, and is similar to the analytical
accidents of a body which are considered to be aspects of its existence.
In other words, just as extension is not something separate from the
existence of a body, but is a concept which the mind obtains through its
own analysis, so too, knowledge by presence does not have an existence
separate from the existence of the knower. The concepts of knowledge and
knower are obtained through mental analysis of the existence of the
knower. An instance of it in the case of God Almighty is His Sacred
Essence, which is neither substance nor accident, and in the case of
creatures, is their rational or spiritual substance itself. Naturally,
such knowledge will be neither an accident nor a quality.

Knowledge by presence may be divided into kinds, about some of which all
of the Islamic philosophers are in agreement, and there is disagreement
about others.

To explain, the known in presentational knowledge is sometimes the
essence of the knower himself, such as self-knowledge in the case of
souls and complete immaterial existents. In these cases the knower and
the known do not have numerically different existences, and the
difference between being the knower and being the known is respectival
(*i‘tibarī* ) and will depend on mental respect. This is the kind of
knowledge by presence about which there is general agreement among
philosophers, including the Peripatetics and the Illuminationists.
Sometimes the knower and known have numerically distinct existences, but
not in the sense that one of them is completely separate and independent
of the other, but is the very dependence and relation to the other, such
as the knowledge of the existence-giving cause for its effect and vice
versa. In this way two other kinds of presentational knowledge are
obtained, one is the knowledge of the emanating cause for its effect and
the other is the knowledge of the effect for the cause.

These two kinds are accepted by the Illuminationists and by Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn and his followers. All of them agree that the effect’s
presentational knowledge of its cause is specific to immaterial effects,
for material existence is diffusion itself in the realm of space and
time, and has no presence by which to perceive the essence of its cause.
However, with regard to the cause’s presentational knowledge of its
effect, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn and some of his followers believed that in
this case as well, the effect must be immaterial, and that basically
knowledge about material existence insofar as it is material is not
obtained, for particulars diffused in

time and space have no presence that the essence of the knower might
perceive. However, others such as Muḥaqqiq Sabzavārī, do not accept this
condition for this kind of knowledge. They hold that the absence of
material particulars from one another is not incompatible with their
having a presence in relation to an existent which existentially
encompasses them, as the diffusion of temporal existents in the realm of
time is not incompatible with their collection in relation to the realm
of perpetuity (*dahr* ) and the existents encompassing time, and this is
the correct position.

A fourth kind of knowledge by presence is also imaginable, and this is
the knowledge of one another of two immaterial effects at the same
level, but to establish that there is such a kind of knowledge by proof
is difficult. It is to be concluded that in all the kinds of knowledge
by presence, knowledge is the essence of the knower himself and is
immaterial, and naturally it is not a kind of psychic accident or
quality, although it is possible for the known to be a substance or an
accident, and according to the endorsed position, will be either
immaterial or material.

The Nature of Acquired Knowledge
--------------------------------

Without a doubt, knowledge in the sense of definite belief, as opposed
to opinion and doubt, is nevertheless similar to opinion and doubt in
that it is a mental state or quality, and like other types of mental
qualities, it is devoid of matter, for it does not make sense to suppose
that a material accident occurs in an immaterial subject. However,
judgment about knowledge in the sense of logical propositions and their
parts, requires further attention, for as was indicated, a proposition
is composed of different parts which generally cannot all be considered
psychic qualities. Perhaps the reason for differences of opinion among
some philosophers is that in some cases they consider one part of a
proposition and in other cases another.

In any case, the pillars of a predicative proposition, which are its
subject and predicate, are two independent concepts, each of which is
separately conceivable and without need of conceiving something else.
But the case is different regarding relation and judgment, for they
cannot occur without conceiving the subject and predicate, and their
concepts have prepositional and relative meanings. On the other hand,
the concept of subject and predicate refer to substances and accidents,
essences and objective attributes and states of affairs (*nafs al-amr*
). However, relation is something related to the one who relates, and
does not refer to an objective instance. Likewise, judgment is the
activity of the one who judges, and can only refer to a kind of unity or
union between the instance of the subject and the instance of the
predicate, but it itself does not have an instance in the external
world. (Take note. )

For this reason it may be said that relating something to another thing
is a mental activity, and the soul is the creative agent of the
relation. Likewise, the judgment upon which the strength of a
proposition rests and by means of which an assertive proposition becomes
distinct from a mere collection of ideas is the action of the soul.
However, the idea of the subject or of the predicate does not depend on
the action of the soul, and it is possible that it may appear in the
mind involuntarily, although it requires a kind of attention of the
soul.

It may be concluded that the dependence of relation and judgment on the
soul is a ‘productive dependence’ (*qiyām* *ṣudūrī* ); however, the
dependence of the idea of the subject and predicate may be considered a
‘dissolving dependence’ (*qiyām* *ḥulūlī* ), and their existence can be
interpreted as a kind of ‘impression in the mind.’ However, it must be
noted that this impression and engraving is not like the drawing of a
picture on paper or some other material subject; rather it is a quality
of the soul, and is immaterial. For material accidents have a relation
of position to their subjects, are ostensible by the senses, and are
divisible subordinate to their subjects, while such things are not
possible for the soul and things pertaining to it.

The productive dependence of relation and judgment [on the soul], though
by itself not a reason for their being immaterial, nevertheless,
observing that existence is parasitic on the existence of the subject
and predicate, their immateriality is also established. In addition to
this, their indivisibility is the best reason for their being
immaterial.

The Immateriality of Perception
-------------------------------

Reviewing the types of knowledge and observing the unity of knowledge by
presence with the essence of the immaterial knower, and that knowledge,
in the sense of belief and mental forms and concepts, is a psychic
quality, and observing that relation and judgment play the role of
intermediaries among them, the immateriality of all the types of
knowledge becomes clear. In reality, their immateriality is proven by
way of the immateriality of the knower. However, there are also other
ways of proving the immateriality of knowledge and perception, some of
which will be mentioned. But first, we should point out that the terms
knowledge and perception in these discussions are used as synonyms and
include sensation, imagination and reasoning.

1. The first argument for the immateriality of perception, namely, ‘the
argument of the impossibility of impressing the larger in the smaller,’
is famous, and one version of it is the following.

Sensory vision is the lowest kind of perception which is imagined to be
material, and materialists have interpreted it as physio-chemical and
physiological actions and reactions. However, by paying precise
attention to this very kind of perception it becomes clear that the
perception itself cannot be considered to be material, and the material
actions and reactions can be accepted only as preparatory conditions,
for we see large forms which cover an area of dozens of square meters
which are several times larger than the area of our entire bodies, let
alone the visual organs or the brain! If these perceptual forms were
material and projected in the organs of vision or other organs of the
body, these forms could never be larger than the size of their
locations, for material projection and impression without correspondence
to a location is impossible. Observing that we see these perceptual
forms within ourselves, we cannot but accept that they are related to a
plane of the soul (*martabah-ye mithālī-ye nafs* , the imaginal plane of
the soul), and in this way, both their own immateriality and that of the
soul are proven.

Some materialists have replied that what we see are little pictures like
microfilms which come into existence in the nervous system, and that
with the help of context and making relative comparisons we find out
their real

sizes. But this nostrum will not solve the problem, for, first of all,
knowing the size of that which is represented by a form is different
from seeing a large form, and secondly, assuming that the visible form
is very little, and that we enlarge it with skills obtained from
experience and through the use of context and by making relative
comparisons, as if they were put under a magnifying glass of the mind,
finally we still find the enlarged form in the mind, and the
above-mentioned reason would be exactly repeated regarding this mental
or imaginary form.

2. Another argument is that if sensory perception were a kind of
material action and reaction, it would always occur whenever the
material conditions were satisfied, while most of the time despite the
satisfaction of the material conditions, the perception does not occur
because of the attention of the soul to another matter. Hence, it may be
concluded that having perceptions depends on the attention of the soul
and cannot be considered a kind of material action and reaction, even
though these actions and reactions play an introductory role for the
occurrence of perception, and as a result of the attachment of the soul
to the body, the soul is in need of material grounds and preparatory
conditions.

3. The third argument is that we can perceive two visible forms together
and compare them with each other, so as to find, for example, that they
are distinct, similar or identical to each other, or that one is larger
than the other. Assuming that each of them is impressed in a part of the
body, and that their perception is that very impression, this implies
that every part of the perceptual organ perceives that very form
impressed in itself and is unaware of the other forms. So, what
perceptual faculty perceives them together and compares them? If it is
assumed that there is another material organ which perceives them
together, the same problem will be repeated, for each material organ
possesses parts, and if perception means the impression of forms in a
material location each part will perceive the form impressed in it, and
in conclusion, no comparison will be performed. So, there is no other
alternative but to accept that a simple perceptual faculty perceives
both of them, and finds both of them with its own unity and simplicity.
Such a faculty can be neither a material substance nor a material
accident

Therefore, perception will not be the impression of a form in a material
location. With this argument, it is also proved that perception and the
perceiver are both immaterial.

4. The fourth argument is that we sometimes perceive something and
remember it after the passage of many years. If it is assumed that past
perception is a special sort of material effect in one of the organs of
the body, then after the passage of dozens of years it would have to be
erased or changed, especially given the fact that the cells of the body
change every so many years. Even if the cells remained, due to
metabolism and the absorption of new nutrients, they will have changed,
so how can we remember exactly that very form, or compare a new form
with it, and perceive their similarities?

It is possible that it will be said that every cell, or every new
material part inherits the effects of the previous parts and retains
them. But even under

this assumption the question will remain as to what faculty perceives
the unity or similarity of the previous and present forms.

It is clear that without this comparison and perception, remembrance and
recognition could not take place. This argument becomes clearer with
attention to the doctrines of substantial motion and the continual
passing away of material things, and in one respect is similar to the
argument given in Lesson Forty-Four, where scientific and empirical
premises were employed for the establishment of the immateriality of the
soul.


