Lesson Fifty: The Union of the Knower and the Known
===================================================

Introduction
------------

In his books the*Shifā* 1 and the*Ishārāt* ,2 Shaykh al-Ra’īs (Ibn Sīnā)
quotes several Greek philosophers to the effect that when a rational
existent apprehends something it becomes united with it. He also reports
that Porphyry has written an essay on the topic. However, he himself
criticizes this theory and takes it to be impossible.

On the other hand, in his*Asfār* and other works, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn
confirms it and insists on the correctness of this theory, and he
generalizes it to include all kinds of knowledge, even sensory
perception.

This strange disagreement between the two great philosophers on this
topic naturally arouses one’s curiosity and interest in solving the
problem and deciding between the two sides of the conflict. For this
reason, at the end of this section we devote a lesson to this topic.

The Controversy
---------------

In the previous lesson we learned that in presentational knowledge of
the self there is no numerical difference or distinction between the
knower and the known. For this reason it should be called the unity
(*waḥdat* ) of knowledge, knower and known. It was indicated that this
knowledge by presence is accepted by the Peripatetics, including Ibn
Sīnā. Hence, there can be no disagreement about the union (*ittiḥād* )
of the knower and the known concerning this case, especially as the
expression ‘union,’ as opposed to the expression ‘unity’ (*waḥdat* ), is
used in places where there is a kind of numerical difference and
duality, though in the knowledge of the self there is no sort of
numerical difference whatsoever, except for conceptual respect
(*i‘tibār* ).

Apparently, Ibn Sīnā holds that those who accept the union of knower and
known confine the discussion to intellection, as opposed to imagination
(*takhayyul* ) and sensation. At the most it can be extended to
knowledge by presence, for in the language of the philosophers, the term
‘intellect’ ( *‘aql* ) and its respectivals are used repeatedly with
regard to knowledge by presence. However, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn expanded
the scope of the discussion to include knowledge and perception without
qualification, including acquired as well as presential knowledge, and
including reasoning, imagination and sensation, and in all these cases
he subscribed to the union of knower and known.

Explanation of the Topic
------------------------

Before dealing with the core of the problem, the concept of ‘union’
(*ittiḥād* ) must be made clear. We must see precisely what is intended
by those who accept the union of the rational agent (*‘āqil* ) with the
intelligible (*ma‘qūl* ) or the union of the knower with the known.
Perhaps the correct perception of this meaning will provide considerable
help in solving the problem.

The union of two existents will be either a union with respect to their
whatnesses or with respect to their existences, or with respect to the

existence of one and the whatness of the other. However, the union of
two complete whatnesses implies a transformation in whatness which is a
contradiction, for the assumption of a complete whatness is the
assumption of a specific conceptual mold which does not correspond to
any other conceptual mold, and the union of two complete whatnesses
would imply the correspondence of two distinct molds, such as the union
of a circle and a triangle, to use an example of sensibles to illustrate
the case regarding intelligibles.

The union of a complete specific whatness with an incomplete whatness
(genus and difference), according to Aristotle’s apparatus of genus and
difference, is unobjectionable and ubiquitous, but this has no relation
to intellection and perception. In intellection, such union does not
occur. In addition, sometimes man intellects a whatness completely
distinct from the whatness of man and such that there is no shared
whatish property between them.

Therefore, if one were to believe that in perception the whatness of the
perceiving existent becomes united with the whatness of the perceived
existent, and, for example, that the whatness of man becomes one with
the whatness of a tree or an animal, this would be contradictory and
impossible.

Likewise, the union of the existence of the perceiver with the whatness
of the perceived and the reverse are also impossible, and even if the
union between existence and whatness is in some sense correct, it is the
union of the existence of a single existent with its own whatness, not
with the whatness of another existent. Hence, the only hypothesis that
can be maintained regarding the union of the subject and object of
intellection is that of the union of their existences. Now we must see
whether the union between two existences is possible or not. If it is
possible, in how many ways can it occur?

Types of Union of Existence
---------------------------

The union of two or more entified existences, in the sense of a kind of
dependence or interdependence between them, is possible, and may occur
in several ways.

a. The union of substance and accident, in view of the fact that an
accident is dependent on a substance and cannot be independent of its
subject. This union may be more firmly established on the basis the
position of those who hold that an accident is an aspect or level of the
existence of the substance.

b. The union of matter and form, for the form cannot be separated from
its locus and continue independently with its own existence. This kind
of union is sometimes generalized to body and soul, given that it is not
possible for the soul to come about without a body, although it may
survive independently.

c. The union of several matters in the shadow of a unitary form to which
they are attached, such as the union of the elements which compose a
plant or animal. This kind of union is really an accidental union, and a
true union would only be obtained with the union of each element with
the form.

d. The union of prime matter, assumed to lack any sort of actuality,
with the form which grants it actuality. Sometimes this kind of union is

considered to be a real union. However, with the rejection of prime
matter as a entified substance lacking actuality, there is no room left
for this kind of union.

e. Another kind of union can be held to occur between two effects of a
single emanating cause, considering each of them to be united with the
cause, such that separation between them is not possible, although
calling such relations ‘union’ is not without imprecision.

f. The union between the existence-granting cause and its effect which
is the relation itself and dependence on it. There is a specific sort of
gradation between such a cause and its effects. This sort of union,
according to the fundamentality of existence and its gradation, is
called the ‘union of the real with the diluted’ (*ittiḥād ḥaqīqah wa
raqīqah* ).

It must be noted that the union under discussion is a union obtained as
a result of perception, and this is the union of the knower with the
existence of the known-in-itself (*ma’lūm bi al-dhāt* ), that is, the
very perceptual form which occurs in the mind, not union with an
objective existent. Therefore, the union of matter and form, or
objective substance and accident is irrelevant to this problem.

Considering the kinds of union and that philosophers hold acquired
knowledge to be a psychic quality, it is easy to accept the first kind
of union, and, naturally, those like Ibn Sīnā would not deny this sort
of union. However, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn did not like this kind of union
and he tried to prove another kind similar to the union of matter and
form; that is, he considers the relation between the soul and perceptual
forms to be like that of prime matter and its forms. Just as the
actuality of prime matter is obtained in the shadow of its union with a
form, actual intellection occurs for the soul in the shadow of union
with intellectual forms.

A Review of the Theory of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn
----------------------------------------------

In order to make clear the theory of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, an excerpt
from his own words is presented here:

The existence of the form which is actually intellected is the same as
the existence of the intellecting faculty (*‘āqiliyyah* ) for the soul
(and in technical terms, its existence-in-itself is the same as its
existence-for-the-other), and if it is supposed that the perceptual form
has another existence, and that the relation of it to the perceiving
existent in only the relation of an object and its locus, then one would
have to be able to posit that each of them has an existence independent
of the other, while the intellected form does not have an existence
apart from this very aspect of being intellected, an aspect which is its
very essence itself, whether or not the one who intellects it is outside
of this essence. Previously we said that correlatives (and among them
the subject and object of intellection) are partners with respect to the
degree of their existence. This judgment also holds for sensible forms.

…Others say: Psychic substance has a passive state in relation to
intellectual form and that intellection is nothing other than this
passivity. However, how can something essentially devoid of intellectual
light perceive the intellectual form that essentially possesses the
property of being intellected? Is it possible for a blind eye to see
something?!

…In reality, the actual intellecting faculty (*‘āqiliyyah* ) of the soul
is like the actualization of prime matter by means of a corporeal form,
and just as matter in and of itself is not determinate, the soul in and
of itself does not intellect, and becomes an actual subject of
intellection in the shadow of union with the intellectual form.3

There are several controversial points in this explanation:

1. Regarding his statement, “if the relation between the perceptual form
and the perceiver is a relation of an object and its locus, then it must
be possible to consider separate existences for each of them,” it may be
asked what is meant by ‘separate existences.’ If what is meant is that
the perceptual form can exist without a location, this implication would
be incorrect because no accident or form which is in need of a location
can occur without it. If what is meant is that the intellect can
consider them separately, this is also possible in the case of
perceptual forms. In addition to this, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn himself
considers the existence of accidents to be aspects of the existence of
substance, and he does not accept their independent existence. So, what
would be wrong with considering knowledge a kind of accident and an
aspect of the existence of the knower?

2. Regarding his claim, “Being actually intellected is an essential
property of intellectual forms, whether or not there is an intellect
outside of its essence,” it must be said that the terms ‘being known’
and ‘being intellected’ are relational, and the supposition of one
without the supposition of an existent which is knower is impossible. At
most it may be said that these two terms may at times apply to a single
existent, such as knowledge of the self, and sometimes the term knower
corresponds to an existent outside of the essence of the known. The mere
applicability of the term ‘object of intellection’ (*ma‘qūl* ) to
something is no reason to suppose that the term ‘subject of
intellection’ (*‘āqil* ) is also true of the whatness or existence of
that very thing. In other words, the additional concept of ‘object of
intellection’ cannot be considered to be essential for something
(whether ‘essential’ is understood in accordance with the*Isagoge* , or
in accordance with the*Kitāb al-Burhān* [Aristotle’s logic]) so that
with the help of the principle of ‘the equality of correlatives’ the
property of being ‘subject of intellection’ may be established for its
essence. Moreover, a requirement of the above-mentioned principle, as
Shaykh al-Ra’īs (Ibn Sīnā ) states in his*Ta‘līqāt* , is ‘equality in
implication, not in the level of existence. ’4

It may be concluded that the actuality of the property of being an
object of intellection for a perceptual form does not require anything
beyond that it possess an actual intellecting subject, whether in its
own essence or outside of it.

3. As to the analogy between the passivity of the soul for perceptual
forms and a blind eye, it must be said that, firstly, it is possible for
a person to consider the soul the agent of the perceptual form, as in
the cases of judgment and abstracted concepts and all logical and
philosophical secondary intelligibles; secondly, why not compare the
soul with a seeing eye which obtains actual vision when faced with a
visible object?

As for the analogy between the soul and prime matter, according to the
accepted theory, which denies prime matter that lacks actuality, there
is no need for further explanation of it.

Inquiry into a Problem
----------------------

Careful attention to the points mentioned makes clear that the relation
between the knower and the known cannot be explained in one way for all
cases; rather, giving due consideration to the kinds of knowledge
involved, each case must be reviewed separately to determine the
relation. We now list the conclusions reached thus far:

1. In the case of presentational knowledge of an essence, the knowledge,
the knower, and the known have a single existence, and there is no sort
of numerical difference to be found among them, except according to
differences in rational respects. If the expression ‘union’ (*ittiḥād* )
is applied in such cases it is because of the numerical differences
among the respects suggested; otherwise, we would have to use the
expression ‘unity’ (*waḥdat* ). And there is general agreement on the
unity of the knower and the known in this case.

2. What is meant by those who believe in the union of the knower and the
known is not the union of the knower and the accidentally known (*ma‘lūm
bi al-‘araḍ* ), but the union of the knower and the known-by-essence (
*ma‘lūm bi al-dhāt* ; i.e., the perceptual form).

3. Likewise, what they mean is not the union of the whatnesses of the
knower and known, for this would require a change in whatness, a
contradiction in terms.

4. The union of the existence of one thing with the whatness of another
is also obviously incorrect.

5. In the knowledge by presence that the emanating cause has of its
effect and vice versa, a ‘union of the real with the diluted,’ or, in
other words, a graded union of levels of existence, is obtained, for the
existence of one of them is the very relation and dependence on the
other and is not independent in itself.

6. The knowledge by presence that two immaterial effects have of one
another, assuming that there is such knowledge, can be considered an
accidental union between the knower and the known, for each of them has
an essential union with its emanating cause.

7. In acquired knowledge of the type which is considered to be the
action of the soul, in which the soul is considered to be an agent by
self-disclosure (*f‘il bi al-tajjalī* ), an agent by agreement (*f‘il bi
al-riḍā* ) or an agent by foreknowledge (*f‘il bi al-‘ināyah* ), the
union here may also be taken to be a kind of graded union of levels of
existence.

8. In the type of acquired knowledge which is considered to be a quality
of the soul, the sort of union which holds between that which is
known-by-essence—a specific quality of the soul—and the substance of the
soul is one between a substance and accident.

References
----------

1 Cf.,*Al-Shifā* , ‘Ṭabī‘āt,’ fann 6, maqālah 5, bāb [^6]:

2 Cf.,*Ishārāt,* namaṭ [^7]:

3 Cf.,*Asfār,* Vol. 3, pp. 313-320; Vol. 6, pp. 165-[^168]:

4 Cf.,*Ta‘līqāt,* pp. 76, 91, [^95]:
