Lesson Fifty-Two: The Potential and the Actual
==============================================

Introduction
------------

Man has always been a witness to changes and alterations in bodies and
in souls attached to matter, so that it may be claimed that there is no
material existent nor existent attached to matter which is not subject
to some kind of change or alteration. In the appropriate place the
necessity of substantial motion will be proved for all material things,
implying that changes in their accidents are subordinate to substantial
motion.

On the other hand, the scope of the alteration of an existent into
another existent such that each of them possesses an independent
whatness becomes so broad that it may be supposed that each material
existent can change into another material existent. Hence, from the
earliest times it has been held that there is a single principle for the
world which changes into different things with the transformations which
occur in this principle. Many philosophers have held that the only
exceptions to this doctrine are the celestial bodies. In other words,
the subjects to which this doctrine applies are limited to elemental
bodies.

Aside from the invalidity of the assumption of unchangeable celestial
spheres (*aflāk* ), by rational proof one cannot deny the possibility
that there might be a kind of material existent in some unknown corner
of the world which cannot be changed into another material existent,
although this possibility seems extremely weak and farfetched. We know
that in modern physics the commonly accepted theory is that matter and
energy and even types of energy can change into one another.

Despite the generality of alteration in relation to all material things,
and the breadth of the scope of changes, practical experience shows that
not every thing may be directly changed into anything else. Even if all
material existents could be changed into one another, this could never
be accomplished directly and without mediation. For example, a stone
cannot directly change into a plant or an animal. In order to be
transformed into a plant or animal it must go through several stages and
alterations must take place until it is prepared for such
transformations.

Such thoughts have led philosophers to think that only an existent can
change into another existent when it possesses the potentiality of the
existence of the other. In this way the term potential and actual
appeared in philosophy, and change came to be interpreted as emergence
from potentiality to actuality. If this occurs instantaneously without a
temporal gap it is called ‘generation and corruption.’ If it occurs
gradually and with temporal gaps, it is called motion.

An Explanation of the Concepts of the Potential and the Actual
--------------------------------------------------------------

The word potential (*quwwah* ), whose literal meaning is power and
ability, has various technical meanings in the sciences, and in
philosophy it is used in several senses. The first is the potentiality
of an agent who is the source of the production of an action. It seems
that this is the first sense which was noticed by philosophers and whose
relation to ‘action’ is clear. It

was then imagined that just as prior to performing a deed the agent has
the ability to accomplish it, matter must also possess ability,
readiness for acceptance and passivity in advance. In this way a second
meaning appeared for potential. This can be called passive potential
(*quwwah* *infi‘ālī* ), and in this discussion it is this sense which is
intended.

The third meaning of potential is resistance to an external factor, such
as the resistance of the body to disease, and the opposite of this is
called lack of potential (*lā quwwah* ), and these are two kinds of
dispositional qualities.

It should be noted that the use of ‘potential’ by philosophers is more
general than disposition (*isti‘dād* ), for the term potential is also
applicable to substance, contrary to disposition which is a kind of
accident. However, it was previously mentioned that substantial
potential (prime matter) is not provable, and disposition is also an
abstract concept, not an essential concept.

Likewise, the concept of passive potential is abstracted by the
comparison of two existents, prior and posterior, since the prior
existent lacks the posterior existent and it is possible for the prior
to possess the later. Therefore, at the very least a part of the prior
existent must remain and have a kind of composition and union with the
posterior existent. Contrary to this, the expression ‘actuality’ is used
as a result of abstraction from occurrence of the posterior existent.
Hence, potentiality and actuality are two abstracted concepts neither of
which is to be considered an essential concept.

Sometimes the expression actual (*bil-fi‘l* ) is used in a broader sense
to include even existents which have no previous potentiality, and it is
in this sense that complete immaterial existents are called actual
existents.

We should remind the reader that in some philosophical discussions, the
existence of something shared between the potential and actual existents
is neglected, and, for example, the earlier parts of time and motion are
called potential in relation to the later parts, and it seems that this
usage is not free from imprecision.

The Division of Existents into the Actual and the Potential
-----------------------------------------------------------

If the expression ‘actual’ is taken in its general sense which includes
immaterial existents, then another primary division of existents may be
considered between actual existents and potential existents. The
potential existents are to be found among materials, while actual
existence embraces immaterial existents and the actual aspects of
material things. However, it must be observed that this division is
similar in some respects to the division of existents into causes and
effects or objective existents and mental existents, and not like the
division of existence into the immaterial and the material.

This is explained by the fact that sometimes a division is made by
adding two or more absolute (*nafsī* , i.e., not relative) concepts to
that which is divided so that the subdivisions do not overlap, as in the
division of existents into the immaterial and material; that is, a
material existent can never in any way be considered an immaterial
existent and the immaterial can never be viewed as material. In other
cases, a division is made through the use of relative concepts, and
therefore it is possible for some things in

one subdivision to be considered as being in the other, as in the
division between cause and effect, that is, an existent may be
considered a cause with respect to one thing and with respect to another
an effect. The same is the case for mental concepts which are called
mental existents with regard to the standard of objectivity, but are
considered objective existents in so far as they exist in the realm of
the mind.

The division of existents into the actual and the potential is of the
same sort, for a potential existent in relation to an actuality which it
can possess is called potential, even though with respect to the
actuality which it possesses at present it will be an actual existent.
Hence, the aspects of potentiality and actuality are not entified
aspects, and their concepts are not to be considered absolute (*nafsī*
). Rather they are relational concepts which refer to intellectual and
comparative aspects. This is an important point which we indicated in
our criticism of the proof of the Aristotelians for prime matter.

Another issue is that there is a difference between the division of
existence into cause and effect and the division into the mental and the
objective, for in the division of cause and effect, a cause may be
considered which is in no way any sort of an effect, such as the Sacred
Divine Essence, and one can also imagine an effect which is completely
free of causal agency. However, other than these, existents will be
causes in one respect and effects in another. This is contrary to the
case for the division of existents into the objective and the mental,
for no existent can be found which has no kind of objectivity
whatsoever, but rather all mental existents, aside from the fact that
they refer to other things, are objective existents.

Now the question will be raised as to which of these two sorts of
divisions is that between actual and potential existents. The answer is
that the Aristotelians assumed that this division was like that between
cause and effect, for they viewed complete immaterial existents to be
actual without any potentiality, prime matter as potentiality without
any actuality, and bodies as possessing aspects of both potentiality and
actuality. However, those who do not accept a matter which lacks all
actuality, as is required by the principle of ‘the equivalence of
actuality and existence,’ will therefore view the division as entirely
similar to that between the mental and the objective.

The Relation between the Potential and the Actual
-------------------------------------------------

As we have learned, the concepts of potentiality and actuality are
abstracted concepts, and aside from the sources from which they are
abstracted, they have no other entified instances. Hence, the relation
between the potential and the actual is really a relation between two
existents which are the sources of the abstraction of these concepts. In
other words, what should be considered is the relation between the
potential and actual existents. This relation occurs in one of two
forms: first, when a potential existent remains completely within the
actual existent, and in this case, the actual existent will be more
perfect than the potential one, as the plant is more perfect than the
soil of which it is brought into existence; second, when only a part of
a potential existent remains within the actual existent, in which case
it is possible that the destroyed part is replaced by another part which
regarding its level of existence is equal to, less perfect

than, or more perfect than the previous one, and as a result, in some
changes, the actual existent will be less perfect, or equal to the
potential existent.

To be more precise, a potential existent is really the same part that
remains, and therefore, the actual existent is always more perfect than
or equal to the part that is really the potential existent.

Some have imagined that the potential existent is always less perfect
than the actual existent, because the potential aspect is an aspect of
lacking or absence while the aspect of actuality is the aspect of
possession and presence. When a potential existent is transformed into
an actual existent it comes to possess something existent which it
previously lacked. On this basis they have denied equivalent and
declining motions. On the other hand, the return from actuality to
potentiality has been considered impossible, because return is a kind of
change, and all change is a transformation of earlier potential into
later actuality, but not the reverse. From this it has been concluded
that if a spirit obtains all its perfections so that it is not potential
with respect to any further perfection, it will leave the body, and in
other words, natural death will occur, and the spirit will never return
to the body, for the return of such a spirit to the body would be a
return from actuality to potentiality.

Given the explanation of the relation between the potential and the
actual existent, it is clear that the aspects of potentiality and
actuality are not two entified aspects between which a comparison can be
made. However, the actual existent, that is, the collection of that
which remains of the previous existent plus the actuality which is newly
obtained, will be more perfect than the part which remains. But it is
not necessary that the totality of the actual existent will always be
more perfect than the totality of the potential existent, just as one
cannot consider water or steam to be more perfect than the other,
although they are alternatively transformed into each other.

Regarding equivalent and declining motions, these will be discussed in
the appropriate place. 1 Regarding the return of the spirit to the body,
this has no relation to the return from actuality to potentiality,
because the potential has temporal priority to the actual, and with the
passage of time it too passes and does not return, regardless of whether
the past existence was more perfect, less perfect, or equal to the later
existence. In reality, body has the potentiality for the renewed
acceptance of the spirit, and with attachment to it, it obtains a new
actuality.

Indeed, this mistake originates in the assumption that the aspect of
potentiality is the whatness of or a level of the previous existence,
for this reason it is supposed that if the level of existence of the
later existent were the same as the previous level, a return from
actuality to potentiality would occur, while if the later level were
weaker than the previous, a return from potentiality to potentiality
would occur. In case the source of abstraction of potentiality is the
previous existent itself (and not a kind or level of its existence), the
previous existence itself passes with the passage of time and has no
possibility for return at all, and the source of the abstraction of the
actuality is the later existent itself, regardless of whether the level
of its

existence and its specific whatness is equal or equivalent to, more
perfect than, or less perfect than that of the previous existent.

Reference
---------

1 Cf., Lesson Fifty-Seven.
