Lesson Four: The Technical Meanings of “Science” and “Philosophy”
=================================================================

Introduction
------------

In the first lesson it was indicated that the expression “philosophy”
was applied from the beginning as a general term for all the true
sciences (as opposed to conventional sciences), and in the second lesson
we indicated that in the Middle Ages the realm of philosophy was
extended to include some of the conventional sciences such as literature
and rhetoric. In the third lesson we learned that the positivists set
scientific knowledge in opposition to philosophical and metaphysical
knowledge, and they considered only the empirical science to be worthy
of the name “scientific”.

According to the first meaning, which was also prevalent in the Islamic
period, philosophy has various divisions, each of which is called a
special science, and naturally there was no conflict between science and
philosophy. However, the second meaning appeared in Europe during the
Middle Ages, and was abandoned by the end of that period.

According to the third meaning, which is presently current in the West,
philosophy and metaphysics are set in opposition to science. Since this
meaning also has gained currency to some extent in Eastern countries, it
is necessary to explain something about science, philosophy and
metaphysics and the relations among them. Additionally, the divisions of
the sciences and their classification will be mentioned.

After the treatment of this topic, we will remark on some especially
important points about equivocation, differences in meaning and the
technical meanings of a word, neglect of which is a cause of much
confusion and fallacy.

Homonymity
----------

In all languages (as far as it is known), words can be found each of
which has a literal meaning, a commonly accepted meaning and a technical
meaning. This is called homonymity,*ishtirāk al-lafẓī* . For example, in
Farsi, the term*dūsh* has the meaning of ‘last night’, ‘shoulder’ and
‘shower’, and the term*shīr* is used for ‘lion’, ‘milk’ and ‘faucet’.

The existence of homonymity plays an important role in literature and
poetry, but in science, and particularly in philosophy, it brings about
many difficulties, especially since the different meanings for a word
are often so close to each other that distinguishing them becomes
difficult. Many errors are made due to this sort of homonymity, and
occasionally even authorities fall into this trap.

For this reason, some of the great philosophers, such as Ibn Sīnā,
obliged themselves to clarify the meanings of various terms and
differences among their technical senses before engaging in precise
philosophical discussion in order to prevent confusion and error.

By way of example we will mention a case of homonymity which has many
applications and often leads to misunderstandings, and that is the
term*jabr* .

The literal meaning of*jabr* is to compensate or remove a deficiency,
later is was used with the meaning of “bone setting”, and perhaps it
assumed this meaning because bone setting is a way of compensating a
kind of deficiency, and possibly it was first used for bone setting and
later was generalized to the compensation of any sort of deficiency.

A third meaning of this word is to force or place under pressure, and
perhaps it assumed this meaning as a result of generalization of a
requirement of bone setting, that is, since bone setting usually
requires that the broken member be placed under pressure in order that
the bone may be fit together, this meaning was generalized to include
any pressure exerted by someone on another which forces the other to do
something involuntarily. Perhaps this was first used for cases of
physical pressure and then for cases of mental pressure, and finally
this concept was expanded to include any sort of feeling of pressure,
even when not brought about by another person.

Up to this point we have reviewed the concept of*jabr* from the
perspective of its literal and commonly accepted meanings. Now we should
introduce the technical meaning of this expression in science and
philosophy.

One of the scientific meanings of*jabr* is that which is used in
mathematics, that is, a kind of calculation in which instead of numerals
letters are used, and perhaps this meaning was coined because in
algebraic calculations positive and negative quantities compensate each
other, or because the unknown quantity on one side of an equation
becomes known by attending to the other side or by transferring its
members, which is a kind of compensating.

Another technical meaning is related to psychology, which is used as the
opposite of free will. Similar to this is the problem of ‘free will and
determinism’ which is studied in theology. This term is also used in
ethics, law and*fiqh* , the explanation of which would take too long.

Since the distant past the concept of*jabr* (as opposed to free will)
has been confused with certainty, necessity and philosophical necessity
( *wujūb falsafī* ). In reality, the term was mistakenly used for
certainty and necessity, as in foreign languages “determinism” is viewed
as equivalent to it. In conclusion, the illusion is created that every
case in which the necessity of cause and effect is accepted, there
cannot be free will, and conversely, the denial of necessity and
certainty are taken to imply free will. The effect of this illusion on
several philosophical problems is manifest, among which is that the
[early] theologians denied causal necessity in the case of voluntary
agents, and following this, they accursed philosophers of failing to
consider God the Exalted as voluntary. On the other hand, the
*jabriyyūn* (determinists) considered the existence of a certain fate as
a reason for their own position, and opposing them, the Mu\`tazilites,
who believed in the free will of man, denied that there is a certain
destiny. Although the certainty of destiny is irrelevant to *jabr* , in
reality these disputes, which have a long history, occurred because of
confusion between the concept of *jabr* and that of necessity.

Another unfortunate example is that some physicists have raised doubts
about or denied causal necessity in the case of some phenomena of

microphysics, and opposing them, some Western theists have attempted to
prove the existence of the Will of God on the basis of the denial of
necessity for these phenomena, imagining that the denial of necessity
and rejection of determinism in these cases would imply the proof a free
power!

In conclusion, the existence of homonymity, especially in cases in which
the meanings are near to or similar to one another, brings about
problems in philosophical discussions. These difficulties are redoubled
when in a single science a term has many technical meanings, as in the
case of the expression ‘intellect’ ( *‘aql* ) in philosophy, and the
terms ‘essential’ ( *dhātī* ) and ‘accidental’ ( *‘araḍī* ) in logic.
Therefore, the need to explain meanings and to determine the intended
meaning in every discussion is clear.

The Technical Meaning of “Science”
----------------------------------

Among the expressions which have various and confusing applications is
the term*‘ilm* (science, knowledge). The literal meaning of this word
and of its synonyms in other languages, such as*dānesh* and*dānestan* in
Farsi, are clear and require no explanation; but*‘ilm* has various
technical meanings, among which the most important are:

1. Certain belief corresponding to reality, which is the opposite of
simple and compound ignorance, even if used in a single proposition.

2. The set of propositions considered to be relevant to one another,
even if the propositions are singular and specific. And it is in this
sense that*‘ilm* is also applied to the science of history (knowing
specific historical events), the science of geography (knowing the
specific conditions of different areas on the globe), the science
of*rijāl* [the study of the transmitters of hadiths] and biography.

3. The set of universal propositions which are considered pivotal in
some field, each of which is applicable to numerous instances, even if
these propositions are conventional, and it is in this sense that*‘ilm*
is applied to conventional as opposed to ‘real’ (*ḥaqīqī* ) sciences,
such as vocabulary and grammar. However, singular and specific
propositions, such as those mentioned above, are not considered*‘ilm* in
this sense.

4. The set of universal ‘real’ (*ḥaqīqī* ) (i.e. not conventional)
propositions which are pivotal in some field. This sense includes all
the theoretical and practical sciences, including theology and
metaphysics, but it does not apply to singular and conventional
propositions.

5. The set of real propositions which can be justified by sense
experience. This is the very sense in which the positivists employ the
term, and on this basis the non-empirical sciences and learning are not
considered to be*‘ilm* (science).

The restriction of the expression ‘science’ (*‘ilm* ) to the empirical
sciences is not a matter of controversy as far as this merely concerns
the coining of terms and fixing terminology, however, the fixing of this
term by the positivists is based on the particular view of those who
imagine that the scope of certain and real human knowledge is limited to
sensible and empirical things. They consider thinking which goes beyond
this to be meaningless and fruitless. However, unfortunately, this sense
has come to prevail across the surface of the earth, according to which
science is set in opposition to philosophy.

The scope of certain knowledge, the refutation of positivism and the
proof that there is real knowledge beyond the realm of sense and
experience shall be postponed until the discussion of epistemology. We
next turn to the explanation of the concept of philosophy and
metaphysics.

The Technical Meaning of “Philosophy”
-------------------------------------

Thus far we have become acquainted with three technical meanings
of*philosophy* : the first meaning includes all of the real sciences;
the second meaning additionally includes some of the conventional
sciences; the third meaning is specific to non-empirical knowledge and
is used for the opposite of science (in the sense of empirical
knowledge).

In this sense, philosophy includes logic, epistemology, ontology
(metaphysics), theology, theoretical psychology (as opposed to empirical
psychology), aesthetics, ethics and politics, even if in this area there
are more or less differences of opinion and sometimes it is employed
only for first philosophy or metaphysics, and this may be considered a
fourth technical meaning of “philosophy”.1

The expression “philosophy” also has other technical uses, which usually
occur modified by an adjective or a genitive construction, as in
“scientific philosophy” and “the philosophy of the sciences”.

Scientific Philosophy
---------------------

This expression is also used in various ways.

A. Positivism. Auguste Compte, after condemning philosophical thought
and metaphysics and denying universal rational principles, divided the
basic positive sciences into six fundamental branches, each of which has
its own characteristic laws, as follows: mathematics, astronomy,
physics, chemistry, biology and sociology. He wrote a book called*Course
of Positive Philosophy* in six volumes, and he treated the totality of
the sixfold sciences in accordance with his so-called positive method.
He devoted three volumes of the set to sociology, even though the basis
of this positive philosophy lies in some dogmatic non-positive claims!

In any case, the contents of this book, which is in fact program for the
investigation of the sciences and especially the social sciences, is
called*positive philosophy* , or *scientific philosophy* .

B. Dialectical Materialism. Marxists, contrary to positivists,
emphasized the necessity of philosophy and the existence of universal
laws. However, they hold that these laws are obtained from the
generalization of the laws of the empirical sciences, not from rational
and metaphysical thought. Hence, they called the philosophy of
dialectical materialism “scientific philosophy”, for, according to their
own claims, it is obtained from the achievements of the empirical
sciences, even if it is no more scientific than the philosophy of
positivism. Basically, scientific philosophy (if “scientific” is taken
to mean “empirical”) is an oxymoron, such as “a clean shaven man with a
beard”, and in comparative discussions, their claims have been subject
to criticism.

C. Another sense of scientific philosophy is synonymous to
“methodology”. It is clear that every science depending on its sort of
problems, requires its own specific methods of research and
verification. For example, the problems of history cannot be solved in
the laboratory by

means of the analysis and synthesis of various elements, and likewise,
no philosopher can establish the year in which Napoleon attacked Russia
or whether he was victorious or defeated by means of philosophical and
mental analysis and inference. These sorts of problems are to be solved
by means of review of the relevant documents and the evaluation of their
validity.

In general, science in the general sense may be divided in to three
types according to the methods of research and inquiry used for solving
their problems: intellectual sciences, empirical sciences, and narrative
and historical sciences.

A science by the name of ‘methodology’ has appeared in order to review
the kinds and levels of the sciences and to determine the general and
specific methods of each of the three types of science, which is
occasionally called scientific philosophy, as it is also sometimes
called practical logic.

Reference
---------

1 Cf.*Falsafah ‘Umūmī yā Mā ba‘d al-Ṭabī‘ah,* the Farsi translation of
Paul Foulquie,*Traité élémentaire de philosophie,* (Paris: 1951),*Vol.
3, Métaphysique, Ch. 6, "The Fundamental Problems of Metaphysics";
Khulāsah-ye Falsafah,*
