Lesson Fifty-Three: A Continuation of the Discussion of the Potential and the Actual
====================================================================================

The Correspondence of Potentiality and Actuality in the Case of Change
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Focusing on the concepts of potentiality and actuality, it is clear that
three conditions are necessary for their abstraction:

1. Two existences are to be compared with one another. Therefore,
nothingness cannot be considered an instance of potentiality or
actuality.

2. One of the two existences must be temporally prior to the other in
order for potentiality to be ascribed to it. Therefore, two simultaneous
existents cannot be potential or actual with regard to each other.

3. The potential existent, or at least a part of it, must remain in the
actual existent. For this reason, an existent which is completely
destroyed cannot be considered to be potential in relation to a later
existent.

Given these points, it is clear that the first of the types of change
[mentioned in Lesson Fifty-Two] is not a kind of transformation from
potentiality to actuality, because the earlier condition is nothingness
while the potential is to be abstracted from existence.

Likewise, the second type of change is irrelevant to potentiality and
actuality because the earlier condition is nothingness and actuality is
not abstracted from nothingness.

In the third type, although one existent replaces another, since there
is no common factor between them, one cannot be considered potential
with regard to the other.

In the fourth type, the earlier existent is entirely potential with
respect to the later existent and remains within it; hence, the actual
existent is more perfect than the potential existent.

In the fifth type, the actual existent is less perfect than the
potential existent, because only part of the earlier existent remains
and nothing is added to it.

In the sixth type, the superiority, inferiority or equality in
perfection of the actual existent in comparison to the potential
existent depends upon whether the part which is substituted for the
destroyed part is more, less, or equally perfect in its level of
existence.

However, in the seventh type, potentiality and actuality are the
beginning and end of motion, and motion is this gradual progression from
potentiality to actuality, and in the context of motion, actual parts do
not exist so that some may be considered potential with respect to
others. However, regarding the fact that motion is continuous, and
whatever is continuous may be infinitely divided into parts, potential
parts of it may be taken into consideration in the sense that if, for
example, a single motion were divided into two halves, in such a way
that a specific midway point appeared, the amount of each of the two
parts of the motion would be equal to one half of the amount of the
entire motion. Particular attention should be paid to the fact that this
way of viewing potential existence for the parts of motion, is other
than the way the potentiality of an earlier part was viewed with respect
to a later part.

The same point applies to type thirteen (accidental motion), although
normally the expressions ‘actual’ and ‘potential’ are applied to
substantial existents, even though potentiality as a dispositional
quality (*kayf isti‘dādī* ) is considered to be a kind of accident.

Types eight, nine and ten may be considered like types one, two and
three, with the difference that in types eight, nine and ten substantial
subjects may be considered to be potential with regard to the
attribution of accidents.

Likewise types eleven and twelve as well as fourteen and fifteen may be
considered analogous to types four and five.

It may be concluded that for all the types of change except for the
first three, the changed thing may be considered potential and that into
which it changes may be considered actual. Indeed, the basis of the
position of those who deny the existence of these three types is that
they consider change to be equal to a transfer from the potential to the
actual. Therefore it is necessary to investigate this problem to see
whether instances can be found for the three above-mentioned posits.

Infinite Regresses of Material Events
-------------------------------------

In the language of philosophy, it is well known that every material
phenomenon is preceded by matter and time. A general requirement of this
principle is that the appearance of a material existent from pure
nothingness is considered to be impossible. Accordingly, the first and
third of the fifteen types of change will be denied. Since prime matter
is considered to possess infinite potentiality, an infinite regress of
events extending into the future is considered to be possible, the
occurrence of which is proven on the basis of absolute divine grace and
the absence of stinginess in the higher sources (*mabādī ‘āliyah* ),
which imply the denial of the second type of change.

On the other hand, the*mutakallimīn* and some of the philosophers, such
as Mīr Dāmād, hold that the material world has a temporal beginning. In
order to refute the hypothesis of an infinite regress of events into the
past they rely on the claim that an infinite regress is invalid.
Likewise, the above-mentioned claim is used to prove the temporal end of
the material world. Accordingly, this problem is related to the problem
of the temporal creation of the world, even though there is no
implication between them, and it is possible that one might hold that
the world has no temporal beginning while at the same time holding that
it is not impossible for a material existent to appear without a
preexistent matter. It is also possible for one to hold that the
material world will exist eternally, without considering it impossible
for a material phenomenon to be destroyed entirely, positing the
infinite series of events from pre-eternity to post-eternity on the
basis of constant divine generosity.

Here we will first investigate the principle of ‘the necessity of the
priority of matter for every material phenomenon’ and then we will refer
to the problem of the temporal eternity and creation of the world.

The Principle of the Necessity of the Priority of Matter to Material Events
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

It was previously indicated that on the basis of innumerable
observations, various transformations are always taking place in
material things, and new phenomena replace the previous phenomena, so
that the relation of potentiality and actuality occurs among them.
However, complete induction with regard to all material events is not
possible, for no human being has existed from the beginning of the world
and no one has yet experienced the end of the world. One cannot discover
the definite cause of the priority of matter from the cases which have
been observed and consider this principle to be an empirical one. For
this reason, philosophers have sought to establish this principle
rationally, as with the following proof.

Prior to becoming an existent, every material phenomenon has a
possibility for existence; if there were not such a possibility the
assumed phenomenon would be either a necessary or an impossible
existent. Since this possibility is not substantial, there must be a
substance to which the possibility is attributed, and this is what is
called ‘matter.’ So, the priority of matter for every material
phenomenon is necessary.

Several aspects of this explanation are debatable.

1. In this explanation it is assumed that for every material phenomenon
there is a previous time for which the possibility of the existence of
the assumed phenomenon is proved, while time is one of the dimensions of
material existence and does not have an existence separate from that of
material existents. If the series of events had a temporal beginning,
there would be no time prior to it.

2. With the denial that a material event can be a necessary or an
impossible existent, its contingency is established, and this is an
essential contingency which is abstracted from the whatness of a thing.
It is not something entified which could be the subject of predication.

3. In Lesson Forty-Eight it was proved that dispositional possibility is
also something abstracted from the availability of conditions of
existence and nonexistence prior to the occurrence of the phenomenon.
However, for the first material phenomenon no prior conditions can be
considered; and in the discussions of cause and effect it was shown that
material causes and conditions can only be established through
experience, and we do not have sufficient experience to establish the
necessity of prior conditions for all phenomena.

The Temporal Creation of the Material World
-------------------------------------------

The problem of the temporal creation of the material world is one of the
most controversial problems of philosophy, which has always been a topic
of conflict and debate. The*mutakallimīn* were especially insistent on
proving it and considered it to be implied by the principle of
causality. As was indicated in the discussions of cause and effect, they
considered newness (*ḥudūth* ) to be the criterion for needing a cause.

On the other hand, most of the philosophers believed in the temporal
pre-eternity of the material world, and have given reasons for their own
views, including reliance on the above-mentioned principle whose
inadequacy has become clear.

Another reason given by them is based on the pre-eternity of divine
grace and the absence of stinginess in the higher sources. However, this
reason

will be useful only in case the possibility of the pre-eternity of the
world is proved and its occurrence dependent on divine grace. Hence,
those who believe in the temporal creation of the world have tried to
prove the impossibility of the pre-eternity of the world, and they have
tried to reject the possibility of an infinite series of events
extending into the past by means of the invalidity of infinite
regresses.

Philosophers accept the proofs for the impossibility of infinite
regresses only in cases in which the links of the regresses exist
simultaneously together and a true ordering exists among them.
Therefore, they allow the infinity of successive events and exclude
simultaneous events which are not truly ordered from the proofs of the
impossibility of infinite regresses.

With the acceptance of these two conditions, Mīr Dāmād considered the
collection of successive events in the [meta-temporal] realm of
perpetuity (*dahr* ) to be sufficient for an infinite regress proof. For
this reason, he has denied the possibility of a series of events
extending infinitely into the past. If the collection of the links of
the regress in perpetuity is sufficient, then one can also deny a series
of events extending infinitely into the future.

But the main point is that there is controversy about proofs for the
impossibility of infinite regresses produced with links other than true
causes, but this is not the occasion to pursue the matter further. For
this reason, it is extremely difficult to set up a proof either for the
possibility or impossibility of an infinite regress of events, whether
extending into the past or the future.

It may be concluded that although divine effusion (*fayḍ,* grace) does
not require any sort of limitation, the bestowal of divine effusion
hinges on the capability and possibility of receiving it. Perhaps the
material world does not have the capability for receiving pre-eternal
and post-eternal effusion. But just as philosophers have not considered
limitations on the volume of the world to be incompatible with the
extension of divine effusion, its temporal finitude must not be
considered incompatible with the constancy of divine effusion.

In truth, we have found a rational proof neither for the temporal nor
the spatial finitude of the world, nor have we found one for the absence
of temporal or spatial finitude. For this reason, we place this problem
in the ‘court of probable possibility’1 until we see a definitive reason
in favor of one side or the other.

Reference
---------

1 An allusion to the advice of Ibn Sīnā at the end of his*Ishārāt* :
“Beware that your smartness and detachment from the vulgar do not make
you go on denying everything, for that is rashness and weakness. Your
strong rejection of that whose clarity is not yet made evident to you is
no less a mistake than your strong belief in that whose evidence does
not lie in your hands. Rather you must hold on to the line of suspending
judgment—even if you are disturbed by the denieal of what your hearing
recognizes as true—as long as its impossibility is not demonstrable for
you. Thus, it is appropriate that you relegate such a thing to the*court
of possibility* , unless you have firm proof otherwise.” Cf., Shams
Inati,*Ibn Sīnā and Mysticism* (London: Kegan Paul International, 1996),
p. [^107]:
