Lesson Fifty-Four: Generation and Corruption
============================================

Introduction
------------

Among the fifteen kinds of change which we assumed, there were three of
them (kinds one through three) whose existence is doubtful. We were
unable to offer a definite opinion about them. Two other kinds (the
eleventh and twelfth) depend on the increasing and decreasing of number,
and these were considered to be respectival, and not in need of any
further discussion.

Of the ten remaining kinds, two of them (the seventh and the thirteenth)
are gradual changes, and must be taken up in the discussion of motion.
However, the other eight kinds are instantaneous changes in which the
potential existent is transformed into the actual existent
instantaneously, without any temporal gap. The expression ‘generation
and corruption’ is more or less used with regard to these changes. There
is, however, some ambiguity about them which must be explained.

Therefore, this lesson is devoted to a discussion of these eight kinds
of instantaneous change and applicability of the term ‘generation and
corruption’ to them.

The Concepts of Generation and Corruption
-----------------------------------------

The expression*‘kawn’* in Arabic has the meaning of being, and in
philosophical terminology it is used to mean coming about and is
approximately synonymous to*‘ḥudūth’* (newness, coming into existence in
time), and the expression*‘fasād’* (corruption) is used as its opposite,
meaning the destruction of a phenomenon. In this way, the term
‘generation’ is more specific than ‘existence,’ because it is not used
for immutable existents.

These two expressions are usually used together, and a clear example of
it is the sixth of the mentioned kinds of change, that is, the
destruction of a part of a substantial existent and appearance of
another part. However, it can be generalized to some other types. If an
instance can be found for the third kind, the expressions generation and
corruption may be applied there. Likewise, the succession of opposites
(which is the tenth kind of change) can be considered generation and
corruption in accidents, although this terminology is usually associated
with substances.

However, the fourth kind, that is, the addition of a substantial part
without the destruction of another part, can be called ‘generation
without corruption.’ And the reverse may be said of the fifth type, that
is, the destruction of a substantial part without the appearance of a
part to replace it, can be called ‘corruption without generation.’

Likewise, the eighth kind, the appearance of new accidents, can be
considered ‘generation without corruption’ and the ninth kind, the
destruction of accidents, can be considered ‘corruption without
generation.’

The attachment of the soul to the body can also be considered a kind of
generation, in view of the fact that the attribute of life thereby
appears in the body. The reverse, dying, can be considered a kind of
corruption, in view of the fact that the life of the body is destroyed,
though not in the sense that the spirit is destroyed, for the spirit is
indestructible.

Whether or not generation without corruption can be imagined in types
four and fourteen, and corruption without generation in types five and
fifteen, hinges on whether the presence of two forms in a single matter
is considered permissible and on whether it is held that the prior form
remains when a new substantial form appears, and in the case of the
destruction of a higher form, whether the lower form existed together
with the higher form and continues. If we hold that two forms cannot be
present in a single thing, then we will be compelled to hold, in types
four and fourteen, that the earlier form is destroyed, and in types five
and fifteen that a new form is freshly brought about. In this case these
types will also be considered types of generation and corruption, not as
cases of mere generation and mere corruption.

Therefore, the problem which must be investigated is whether the
presence of two forms in a single thing is permitted so that the
assumption of the occurrence of two actual substantial forms in a
potential existent and the continuation of one of them in an actual
existent is allowed in cases five and fifteen, and the presence of two
substantial forms in an actual existent and the persistence of the
earlier form in types four and fourteen may be correct.

The Presence of Two Forms in a Single Matter
--------------------------------------------

In types four and fourteen of the assumed types of change, the whole
potential existent remains in the actual existent, and another substance
is added as a new part to it, and a kind of union between them obtains,
with this difference that in type four the form is incarnated in the
matter, and the matter is the locus of this form. But in type fourteen,
the soul is attached to the body, and the body is not considered its
locus.

Now the question arises as to whether the form of the earlier existent
vanishes and is corrupted and in place of it a more perfect form is
brought about which possesses the perfections of the previous form, or
in the new circumstances there really exist two forms, one of which is
above the other vertically, not that the earlier form is destroyed.

For example, when a vegetable form comes into existence in a collection
of elements, do these elements remain in the vegetable with their own
actualities? Can it be said that in this plant oxygen, hydrogen,
nitrogen, carbon, etc., actually exist, and that the vegetable form has
become unified with the collection of them? Or should one say that the
only form which exists in it is the vegetable form, and the mentioned
elements exist only potentially?

Can it be said that when an animal soul attaches to specific materials,
they preserve their specific existences and that they have actual
existence within the animal existence, or should it be said that what
has actuality is the form (soul) of the animal and that its body exists
potentially? Do the materials which compose the human body and each of
its millions of living cells have a specific form and actuality, and
does the human soul attach to them as a higher form, or is that which is
actual in a living human only his spirit, and does his body only exist
potentially?

Likewise, in the case of the fifth and fifteenth types in which a part
of the previous existent is destroyed or is separated from it, is it the
case that from

the beginning there were two substantial actualities and that later one
of them leaves while the other remains with its previous actuality, or
is it the case that at the beginning there exists a complete form, and
with its detachment a less perfect form appears?

For example, when a plant withers and turns to dust, does the form of
dust actually exist in the form of the plant and remain with that same
actuality, or in the earlier circumstances was there only a complete
vegetable form and with its passing does the form of dust newly appear?

Regarding the case of the detachment of the animal or human spirit from
the animal or human body, do the materials actually exist previously,
and after separation of the spirit do they remain with the same previous
actuality, or in the previous circumstances is actuality restricted to
the spirit and after its detachment new forms freshly appear?

Therefore, that which these discussions pivot upon regarding these types
of change is whether the presence of two forms in a single existent is
allowed or not. That is, if the presence of two forms in the later
existent is allowed, types four and fourteen are considered to be a kind
of generation without corruption, and if the presence of two forms in
the earlier existent is allowed, then types five and fifteen will be
considered cases of corruption without generation. However, if the
presence of two forms is impossible, all of these types will be cases of
generation and corruption.

Some philosophers do not allow the presence of two forms in a single
thing and have reasoned that the form is the very actuality and
thingness of a thing, and that the numerical identity of the form
implies the numerical identity of the thing, while their unity is
assumed.

This reasoning is unsatisfactory, for, firstly, the unity of a composite
existent, as was indicated in Lesson Twenty-Nine, is an accidental unity
because of the unity of the higher form, and, in fact, the composite
existent is the existents which are somehow united with each other, not
that they are really a single existent. Secondly, the problem can be
posed as follows: Is the presence of two forms in a single matter
permissible or not?, as noted in the title of the discussion. It is
obvious that the real issues here cannot be resolved on the basis of
terminology and language.

In any case, the question is whether the composing materials of
vegetables, animals, and humans have an actual form other than vegetable
form, and animal and human souls, or do the earlier materials lose their
own forms and actualities when the vegetable form comes into existence
in the previous materials, or the animal or human soul attaches to a
body, and in technical terms, are their forms corrupted and do new forms
come about for the materials after the death of a plant, animal or man,
and its transformation into elemental materials?

It seems that there should not be any doubt that the earlier forms
remain, and that the new forms come about vertically, and are somehow
unified with them, and then after corruption or detachment the earlier
actualities remain and no other new form appears for them.

This is confirmed by the fact that many elemental particles and organic
and mineral materials are separately visible by optical devices, and
billions of living existents, including white and red blood cells can be
observed in

man’s body, and they can be removed from the body and preserved under
certain conditions, and hence, not only minerals and organic materials
exist with their own actualities and specific forms within the existence
of the vegetable, animal or human, but there also actually exist
innumerable vegetable and animal existents within a higher animal or
man. The animal and human spirit occur as higher forms at a higher
vertical level.

Is it acceptable to say that the bodies of man and animals have no
actual existence apart from the existence of the spirit while the spirit
is attached to the body, and that when the animal or man dies and the
spirit is separated from its body, the body obtains an actual existence
and a new form appears in it?!

Therefore, there should be no doubt about the possibility of coexistence
of two or more vertical forms in a single matter, for, indeed, this
occurs frequently. That which is not possible is the coexistence of two
contrary forms in a single matter which are in a horizontal position
with respect to one another.

Here the question will be raised as to how one can distinguish vertical
from horizontal forms.

The answer is that vertical and horizontal forms can only be
distinguished by means of experience; that is, any form which experience
proves to be incapable of coexisting with another form is horizontal,
and any form which is capable of coexisting with another will be
vertical. Some examples of horizontal forms which are contrary to each
other are the forms of water and steam and the forms of the various
elements. However, the forms of the elements can coexist with vegetable,
animal or human forms, and therefore they are considered to be vertical
forms. Likewise, the lower forms of life, such as cells and corpuscles,
can coexist with higher forms, such as the forms of higher animals and
humans. For this reason, the forms of higher animals and of man are in a
vertical relation to other forms.

Given this difference between forms, they can be divided into two
groups: those forms which are successive, contrary to one another, and
horizontal, and those which are superimposed or vertical. It is clear
that this is a relative and relational division, and therefore it is
possible for a form to be successive in relation to a certain form, but
to be considered superimposing relative to another.

The Relation of Generation and Corruption to Motion
---------------------------------------------------

It is clear that generation and corruption is specific to instantaneous
changes and motion is a feature of gradual changes. Therefore, in this
respect one cannot include both of them in a single kind of change.
However, the absence of coexistence between generation and corruption
and motion does not mean that there is no room for generation and
corruption anywhere that motion exists. Rather it is possible for a
moving thing to be characterized by generation or corruption from
another angle.

To explain: it is possible for an existent to possess motion which ends
in a single instant, and at that very moment for another motion to
appear in it. For example, the motion of an airplane which moves by the
power of an engine is the effect of that power, and so, with the
shutting down of that engine, the motion produced by it sooner or later
comes to an end, and when

a second engine starts working, another power is produced which causes a
new motion for the plane. Now, if it is supposed that the second motion
begins the very moment that the first motion ends, although the motion
of the plane is not interrupted there will actually be two motions, one
of which is the effect of the power of the first engine and another
which is the effect of the power of the second. Here, in addition to
gradual change there is also an instantaneous change, which is the
ending of the first motion and its transformation into the second
motion. This change can be called generation and corruption.

Likewise, when two successive forms appear in a matter, and one of them
is corrupted and the other takes its place, the substantial motion of
the earlier form ends, and at that very moment the substantial motion of
the later form begins. This transformation of forms and succession of
substantial motions also should be considered a kind of generation and
corruption, for it is accomplished in one instant and without any
temporal gap.

Therefore, the assumption of the continuation of motion in a single
existent is compatible with the occurrence of generation and corruption
in it, because it is in fact possible for two alternating motions to
have occurred in it which superficially are considered to be a single
motion. The only case in which generation and corruption is incompatible
with motion is under the assumption of a single real motion. If the
material world possessed a single unitary existence and it were supposed
that it had a single substantial motion, then there would be no room for
generation or corruption. However, this assumption is not correct, as
will be explained in the appropriate place.


