Lesson Fifty-Five: Motion
=========================

The Concept of Motion
---------------------

During the previous discussions the concept of motion became clear, and
a simple definition of it was obtained: gradual change. Other
definitions of motion have been given, some of which were mentioned in
the course of the preceding discussions, including ‘the gradual
emergence of a thing from potentiality to actuality,’ and another
definition ascribed to Aristotle, that is, ‘the first perfection of a
potential existent*qua* potential,’ which was mentioned in Lesson Forty
and which means that an existent which possesses the potentiality and
capacity for a perfection but lacks it at present, will advance toward
it under certain conditions, and this advancing is preparatory to the
achievement of the sought perfection. And the phrase ‘*qua* potential’
is added in order to exclude the specific form of the moving existent,
because every potential existent has a specific form anyway, which may
be considered its first perfection, but this first perfection is with
respect to its actuality rather than its potentiality, and is irrelevant
to motion.

The perfection of motion for a body pertains to its potentiality, and
its being ‘first’ pertains to its priority for attaining its end.
However, the first definition is to be preferred because it is more
concise and conceptually clear, although none of them may be considered
what in logical terminology is called a ‘complete definition’ (*ḥadd-e
tāmm* ), because a complete definition is specific to whatnesses, which
possess a genus and difference, while the concept of motion is a
secondary philosophical intelligible abstracted from the manner of the
moving existent, and in the external world there is no substance nor
accident called motion; rather motion is the being gradual of the
existence of a substance or accident and its flowing through the
extension of time. Even according to Shaykh al-Ishrāq, who considered
motion to be of the category of accidents, a complete definition cannot
be given for it, because its category is a highest genus and does not
possess genus and difference.

Another point we should mention is that instantaneous changes are
abstracted from two existences, or at the least from the existence and
nonexistence of a single thing, while motion is abstracted from a single
existent and its extension through time. Numerical difference between
something which changes and that into which it changes pertains only to
its potential parts which continually become existent and nonexistent,
although none of them has actual existence. In other words, motion is
not a collection of existents which come into existence one after the
other, rather it is abstracted from the extension of a single existent
and it is infinitely divisible, although the division of it in the
external world involves the appearance of rest and the destruction of
its unity.

The Existence of Motion
-----------------------

In Lesson Fifty-One it was mentioned that a group of ancient Greek
philosophers, such as Parmenides and Zeno of Elea denied that there was
gradual change or motion. This position seems strange at first, and the
question immediately arises in the mind of the reader or hearer as to
whether they did not observe all these various motions?! Did they not
themselves

move around?! But by examining their words more carefully it becomes
clear that the matter is not quite so simple. Even the positions of some
of those who believe in motion and stubbornly defend it (such as some
Marxists) originate with the Eleatics!

The secret of the matter is that they considered the changes called
motion to be a collection of successive instantaneous changes. For
example, the motion of a body from one point to another was considered
to be the successive resting of the body at the points between the two
assumed points. In other words, they did not accept motion as something
gradual and continuous, but rather as a collection of successive rests.
Therefore, if someone else holds that motion has actual parts, in
reality he has joined the ranks of those who deny motion.

The truth is that the existence of motion as a single gradual thing is
undeniable. Even some instances of it, such as the gradual changes of
psychic qualities, can be perceived by infallible presentational
knowledge. The source of the error of the Eleatics are doubts that run
counter to consciousness and self-evidence, and no uncertainty remains
once these doubts are dispelled.

Problems Raised by those who Deny the Existence of Motion and their Solution
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Those who have denied the existence of motion in the external world and
who have considered it to be a mental concept which refers to a
succession of rests have resorted to dubious notions the most important
of which are the following two:

1. If motion exists as a single continuous thing in the external world,
it must be considered as having parts, and since each of its parts
possesses extension, each of these in turn will be divisible into other
parts, and this division will continue infinitely. This implies that
finite motion must be infinite.

Aristotle responded to this difficulty by claiming that motion does not
have actual parts which could be finite or infinite, but rather that it
can be divided into two parts, for example, in which case there will be
two motions, not a single motion. Likewise, each part may be divided
into two or more parts, and with each division performed in the external
world a number of actual existents will come about. These divisions may
be continued without end, and hence the supposed motion itself will be
finite, although its potential parts will be infinite. No contradiction
exists between these two propositions, because one of the conditions for
a contradiction is the unity of the actual and the potential which does
not obtain in this case, for being finite is the attribute of the motion
as a whole, while being infinite is the attribute of its potential
parts.

But it is better to ask one who reasons in this way what do you mean by
finite motion being infinite? If what is meant by being infinite is the
number of its parts, this number does not actually exist in any motion,
and the appearance of any number, whether finite or infinite, in motion
is due to its objective division, in which case a single motion will not
exist. Likewise, everything which is divisible into two halves is
presently a unit, but

whenever it is divided, it becomes two units, but this divisibility does
not imply that it is both one and two!

If what is meant is that the infinite divisibility of motion implies
that the continuous amount and quantity (rather than number) is finite
from one side and infinite from another, because every part of its
infinite parts will have a quantity, and the collection of these amounts
will be infinite, the answer to this is that even if every extension is
divisible into an infinite number of parts, the amount of any extension
will still be a fraction of the amount of the whole. Hence, the sum of
the quantities of the infinite fractions of motion will be the finite
amount of the motion itself: (1/¥ ´ ¥=1).

It must be mentioned that this problem is not specific to motion, but
covers all extensions, such as line and time. For this reason, those who
raise these doubts consider every limited line to be composed of a
limited number of extensionless points, and every limited portion of
time to be composed of a determinate number of instants. They believe
that although the points are not extended, a collection of several
points could bring a line into existence: though an instant has no
length or extension, a set of several of them brings about a portion of
time; likewise, a collection of rests brings about motion; in reality,
that which has objective existence are points, instants and rests. Line,
time and motion are concepts abstracted from their collections.

In other words, they believe in ‘indivisible parts’ (*juz’ lā yatajazzā*
), that is, every extension is capable of being divided into limited
parts, and they believe that the last division leads to parts which are
no longer divisible. This is a problem about which philosophers have
spoken much, and they have given numerous reasons for the invalidity of
the notion of ‘indivisible parts,’ but this is not the place to review
them.

2. The other problem is that when a body moves from point A towards
point C, for example, at the first instant it is at point A, and at the
third instant it is at point C, so, there is no other alternative but
that at the second instant it must pass some point B which is between
the other two, otherwise there could be no motion. Now, if it is assumed
that the above-mentioned body is at point B at the second instant, this
would imply that its motion is a collection of three rests, for rest is
nothing but the residence of a body in a place, and if it did not reside
there this would imply that there was no motion, for motion without
passing the second point is impossible. Therefore, motion implies a
contradiction (being and not being at an intermediate point).

The answer is that in this example three corresponding extensions are
assumed: time, space and motion. If we consider three extended parts for
each of them, it can be said that in the first part of time, the moving
body has been in the first part of the space and that the first part of
its motion corresponds to them, and likewise for the second and third
parts. However, the occurrence of every part of the motion in the
corresponding parts of time and space does not mean that the body is
ever at rest. However, if we take points and moments in their real
meaning, as lacking extension, it would have to be said that actual
instants and points do not exist in time and space, and the assumption
of an actual point in a line means its division into two line segments,
such that the said point is the end of one segment and the

beginning of another. It is the same for the assumption of an instant in
time and the assumption of a rest in motion. What it means for a body to
be at a certain instant at a point in space is that if the extensions of
time, space and motion were cut, their points of division would
correspond to each other. This does not imply the existence of rest in
the midst of motion, just as it does not imply the existence of points
in a line or the existence of instants in time.

In reality, the source of this problem is that, on the one hand, being
is considered to be equivalent to fixation, rest and residence, while on
the other hand, time is assumed to be composed of instants and line
composed of points. They attempted to present the extension of motion as
a composition of atoms of rest by means of a comparison to the
extensions of time and space, while being includes both fixed and
flowing beings. Moments and points are ends of extensions of time and
line, and are not considered to be parts of them. Likewise, rest appears
as the stopping of motion, not as something that exists in the midst of
a single motion so as to be considered a part of it.


