Lesson Fifty-Six: Properties of Motion
======================================

The Constituent Factors of Motion
---------------------------------

Noting that which has already been discussed regarding motion, it
becomes clear that the occurrence of motion hinges on three things which
may be called the constituents of motion:

1. The unity of the source of abstraction of motion. Contrary to other
types of change, motion is abstracted from a single existent. Hence,
every motion is a single entity in which no actual parts are to be
found.

2. The fluidity and extension of motion in the expanse of time. Since
that which is gradual does not occur without a correspondence to time,
motion is not abstracted from instantaneous things and fixed existents,
which are outside the realm of time, and it is not attributed to them.

3. Infinite divisibility. Just as every extension is infinitely
divisible, so too is motion. Each potential part of motion is the
changing predecessor (*mutaghayyir* ) in relation to the potential part
which follows it, and the part which follows, with respect to the part
which precedes it, is its changed successor (*mutaghayyirun ilayh* ).

The Features of Motion
----------------------

In addition to the three things mentioned above, which are grasped
through meditation on the essence of motion, and which are necessary for
all motions, there are other things which may be called the features of
motion. Noting the differences among them, specific kinds of motion may
be considered, the most important of which are the following:

1.**The channel of motion.** It is possible for an existent to have
numerous aspects of capacity for change. For example, it is possible for
an apple to fall from a tree with a spatial or translative motion, and
likewise it is possible for it to rotate or to gradually change color.
However, each of these motions has its own specific ‘channel’ (*bastar*
) which distinguishes it from other motions. For example, the channel
for the motion of the apple toward the ground is space, and this motion
is spatial or one of displacement, or motion in the category of where
(*‘ayn* ). The channel for the gradual change in its hue is color, and
this is considered to be a change in the category of quality. The
channel for its rotation is position, and it is taken to be a change in
the category of position.

2.**The course of motion.** It is possible for something to move in
various ways through a single channel. For example, the spatial movement
or displacement of a star is possible in either a circular or an
elliptical shape, or the motion of a ball from one point to another may
be in a straight or a curved line. In this way another concept may be
obtained which is more specific than the previous one, and this may be
called the course (*madār* ; literally, orbit, here used in the sense of
the course of motion) of motion. However, it must be noted that the
expression*madār* has a broader meaning here than its literal meaning,
the place of circling, just as the expression ‘curve’ has a broader
meaning in mathematics than in ordinary usage, and it is possible for
the curve which shows the course of a given change to be a straight
line.

3.**The direction of motion.** It is also possible for motion in a
single course to take place in various ways. For example, the motion of
a top rotating on its axis may be from left to right or from right to
left. Therefore, another feature must be considered for motion, and this
is called the direction of motion.

4.**The speed of motion.** Speed is a concept which is obtained from the
relation between the time and displacement of motion. For example, it is
possible for a body to travel a certain distance in one minute or in two
minutes. The distinguishing aspect between these two motions is speed.

5.**Acceleration** . It is possible for the speed of motion to gradually
increase or decrease, as it is possible for the speed to remain
constant. In the first case, the motion is becoming faster, or possesses
a positive acceleration. In the second case it is becoming slower or
possesses a negative acceleration, while in the third case it is said to
be constant, or without acceleration, or as possessing zero
acceleration.

6.**The agent of motion.** Among the things which differentiate types of
motion is difference in the type of agent of motion. For example, there
is a difference in kind between motions which have voluntary agents and
those with natural agents, although there may be no difference
externally. Likewise, multiple individual agents cause multiple
individual motions, just as the multiple forces which successively come
about by the two engines of an airplane causes the multiplicity of its
motions, even if the two above mentioned motions are contiguous and
without any temporal gap, and from a superficial point of view there
seems to be but a single motion.

The Requirements of Motion
--------------------------

Philosophers have considered six things to be requirements of motion:
origin (*mabdā’* ), end (*muntahā* ), time, distance, subject
(*mutaḥarrak* ) and agent (*muharrik* ).

1 & 2.**Origin and end.** Some of the definitions of motion suffice to
warrant the requirement of an origin and end for every motion. For
example, ‘the gradual emergence of actuality from potentiality’ implies
that at the beginning a potentiality should exist and at the end of the
motion an actuality. Hence, potentiality and actuality may be considered
the origin and end of motion.

It appears that motion does not essentially require a relation to an
origin or end, and hence, the assumption of infinite motion without
beginning or end is not an irrational one. Accordingly, some ancient
philosophers considered the motions of the celestial spheres to be
without beginning or end in time, and so they had to take quite some
pains to associate some origin and end with them. It may be said that
origin or end are specific to limited motions, and that origin or end
are implied by their limits, not implied by the motion itself, as every
limited extension has an origin or end. Perhaps the source of the
plausibility of considering motion to have an origin or end is that a
means is thereby sought to determine the direction of motion.

Anyway, origin or end cannot be considered requirements of all motions.

It is necessary to mention that those who consider motion to require an
origin or end do not take them to be within the motion itself, because
every

part of motion is extended, and no matter how small a part is imagined,
it will be divisible, and again it will have to have a beginning part.
If a part of motion is called the origin or end of motion, this will be
a relative attribution to the motion itself.

Taking potentiality and actuality as the origin and end of motion
involves a certain laxity, for the terms origin and end are abstracted
from the limits of motion, like point for line and moment for time, and
they are considered to have an aspect of non-being. This is contrary to
potentiality and actuality (especially the latter) which cannot be
considered cases in which there are aspects of non-being.

Furthermore, the requirement of potentiality and actuality has not been
established for motion, and it may be said that in order to abstract the
concept of motion it is not necessary to take into account anything more
than the gradual existence of a substance or accident. Therefore,
another distinctive aspect of the first definition of motion (gradual
change) is established.

3.**Time** . It was previously indicated that it is impossible for a
thing to be gradual without a correspondence to time. For this reason,
the corresponding extension in time was considered to be one of the
fundamentals of motion. Since time and motion are analytic accidents of
fluid existence, they may be considered to be two sides of the same
coin.

4.**Distance** . By the ‘distance’ of motion philosophers mean a
category to which the motion is related, such as the relation of
rotation to the category of position, and the relation of translative
motion to the category of space.

Distance is like a canal through which a moving thing flows. If it is
assumed that the extension of motion is cut, and it comes to rest, then
it may be said that the mentioned body is in the canal. Therefore,
distance corresponds to the channel of motion. However, a subtle
distinction may be drawn between distance and the channel of motion,
namely, that the channel of motion is also applied to the specific
whatness, such that every supposed part of motion can be considered to
be an individual of that species. However, distance is commonly used as
a term for the highest genus or category, and it is like an extended
canal which embraces partial canals.

To explain further, motion as we know it is obtained from the extension
of the existence of a substance or accident through the expanse of time,
and it is possible that the existent which is the source of the
abstraction of motion is perfected through the process of motion, such
that from a part of it a specific whatness is abstracted, and from
another part, another whatness. For example, if it is assumed that the
color of an apple gradually changes from green to red, from a part of
this motion the accidental whatness of green will be abstracted, while
from another part the accidental whatness of red is abstracted, both of
which are considered kinds of color. Color in turn is considered a
sensory quality, and sensory quality belongs to the category of
‘quality.’ The distance of this motion is the very category of quality.
But the channel of the motion is also applied in the case of the
transformation of an individual of one specific quality to another
individual. For example, the motion of a body from one place to another
does not require the occurrence of kinds within the category of place,
rather, one individual is constantly

transformed into another individual, regardless of the laxity in the use
of ‘individual’ for the potential parts of motion, and likewise the
laxity in the use of ‘category’ for the abstracted concept of place.

In any case, observing that changes from one kind to another in the
process of motion are not permissible, philosophers considered
categories to be channels of a general sort for motion, for motion never
violates the limits of the categories, and they called the channels
‘distance.’

It should not be left unsaid that some philosophers considered specific
difference between potential parts of motion to be not only permissible
but necessary. However, it seems that specific difference can only be
taken to obtain at the beginning or end of motion, because the
abstraction of several whatnesses from the potential parts of motion
implies the ability to consider a definite boundary for each of them.
This indicates that the given motion is really a composite of several
motions, however much it may seem superficially to be a single motion.
For example, although the transformation of the color of an apple from
green to yellow and from yellow to red seems to be a single process, if
these colors and perhaps other colors which are intermediaries between
them were different in kind, certain cut-off points in the motion would
be abstracted, and the assumption of numerous cut-off points is like the
assumption of the appearance of points in a line and implies numerous
cuts even if no temporal separation between the cut-off points is
assumed.

5.**Subject** : Another thing philosophers have considered to be
necessary for motion is the subject of motion or the object moved
(*mutaḥarrik* ). However, it must be noted that the expression ‘subject’
(*mawḍū‘* ) is employed in the intellectual sciences in various senses,
the most well known of which are indicated by the logical term, which is
usually contrasted with ‘predicate,’ and the philosophical term, which
is used in the case of substance insofar as it is the locus of
accidents.

The first term is a secondary logical intelligible, and is applied to
the first part of every predicative proposition, and even the concept of
‘contradiction’ in the proposition ‘contradictions are impossible’ is
the subject of the proposition. It is clear that ‘subject’ in this sense
is not relevant to the present discussion.

The second term is specific to the subjects of accidents, and if motion
is also an objective accident, as was imagined by Shaykh Ishrāq, it will
be in need of a subject. However, we have come to know that motion is
not a kind of objective accident, but a kind of analytic accident of
flowing existence. Hence, the establishment of a subject for all motions
will only be correct in a third sense, which includes the source of the
abstraction of analytical accidents. According to a famous expression in
philosophy, a subject is only needed in the case of accidental motion in
the respect in which it is an accident and not in the respect in which
it possesses motion.

6.**The Agent or Mover:** The sixth thing which philosophers have
considered to be necessary for motion is a mover or agent of motion.
However, it must be borne in mind that the agent, meaning the generative
cause (*‘illat-e hastī bakhsh,* literally, ‘existence granting cause’)
is not specific to motion. Every existent which is an effect needs a
generative

cause. Basically, motion has no entified specific referent beyond the
existence of the substance or accident abstracted from it, and it is the
existence of the substance or accident which requires a generative
cause. The concept of motion is abstracted from the manner of its
existence, and ‘composite making’ (*ja‘l ta’līfī* ) does not apply to
it. In other words, the creation of a flowing substance or accident is
the very creation of substantial or accidental motion. However, a
natural agent, which is not a producer or creator, and is considered in
another sense to be a preparatory cause, is specific to material
phenomena all of which possess a kind of change, alteration or motion.
But such an agent can only be assumed in the case of accidental motions,
and in the appropriate place it will be explained that substantial
motion does not need this sort of agent.


