Lesson Fifty-Seven: Divisions of Motion
=======================================

Introduction
------------

We have learned that the constituents of motion exist in all motions and
are invariable, and there is no difference on the basis of which
different types of motion may be conceived. However, the characteristics
and implications of motion are more or less different, and on the basis
of these various kinds of motion can be differentiated. For example,
differences in the course of transfer are completely sensible and the
different forms for it which may be imagined cause differences in the
related motions. But, on the one hand, the differences in courses are
not limited to a certain number of types, and on the other hand, no
specific philosophical conclusions are to be obtained on the basis of
such differences. Hence, a categorization of motions on the basis of
differences in their courses will not be of much benefit.

Likewise, the directions of motion, even if they are generally divided
into six main well known directions [will not provide for a useful
categorization]. First, this division is conventional; second, the
division of motion on the basis of these differences yields no
philosophical fruit. Also the speeds of motion are innumerable, but
these differences are inconsequential for philosophical analysis.

The division of motion on the basis of differences among its agents is
really subordinate to the types of agents which have been indicated in
Lesson Thirty-Eight. In general, motions may be divided into two kinds,
natural and voluntary, for every intentional agent (*fā‘il bil-qaṣd* ),
providential agent (*fā‘il bil-‘ināyah* ), agent by agreement (*fā‘il
bil-riḍā* ) and agent by self-disclosure (*fā‘il bil-tajallī* ) is a
voluntary agent. Compelled agents (*fā‘il bil-jabr* ) and subordinate
agents (*fā‘il bil-taskhīr* ) are also considered to be particular
states of voluntary agents, just as the constrained agent (*fā‘il qasrī*
) is considered to be a specific state of the natural agent.

Among all the properties of motion, the most important thing about which
the philosophical discussions of the categories of motion turn are the
channel and the distance of motion. However, prior to the presentation
of these discussions, it would be worthwhile to have a short discussion
of a division of motion on the basis of differences in acceleration and
at the same time to review the problem of the evolutionary nature of
motion and its relation to acceleration.

Divisions of Motion on the Basis of Acceleration
------------------------------------------------

Consider an automobile the needle of whose speedometer gradually
increases from zero to one hundred kilometers per hour. It goes up, then
stays there for a while, and then gradually returns to zero. This
automobile is transferred during the period of its motion from point*A*
to point*B* , and this motion is translative and occurs in the channel
of space. However, in this process, two other gradual changes are
observed. One is the change of the speed from zero to one hundred
k.p.h., and the other is the change from one hundred to zero. From a
philosophical point of view, this change is also to be included in the
definition of motion. It may be considered a kind of

motion in quality, since acceleration and deceleration are two qualities
specific to motion which are also accidents of the quantities of the
speeds.

The same can be said for other types of changes or motions, so that one
motion in quality may be attributed to another motion in quality from a
different point of view. For example, suppose that a colorless body
gradually becomes black and retains that state of blackness for a while,
then its color gradually fades and it becomes colorless again.
Undoubtedly, a change in the color of a body is a motion in the category
of quality. It is possible that the degree of blackening or fading is
not uniform through all parts of time. For example, the speed of
blackening might gradually increase and then decrease in the same
manner. This change in speed is different from the change itself in
color, and for this reason it may be considered a motion which rides
upon the other motion. Likewise, one may consider a constant motion to
lack this sort of change, and its speed will be fixed.

Therefore, from the perspective of constancy or change in speed, motion
can be divided into three kinds:

1. Constant motion without acceleration and a fixed speed.

2. Motion with increasing speed or positive acceleration.

3. Motion with decreasing speed or negative acceleration.

The existence of motion with increasing speed and of motion with
decreasing speed and likewise of motion with constant speed are observed
by the senses and are undeniable. One can even find instances of them by
means of presentational knowledge, such as changes in subjective
qualities and states which gradually increase and decrease in speed or
are constant. Without a doubt, one may consider the decrease in the
speed of a motion as a kind of decline, gradual weakness and
imperfection in the motion. In this way a kind of weakening and
declining motion is established.

It is at this point that we confront the question of whether the
existence of slowing motion conflicts with some of the definitions of
motion, such as, ‘the gradual emergence of a thing from potentiality to
actuality’ or ‘the first perfection of a potential existent insofar as
it is potential.’

In order to answer this question, two aspects of the discussion must be
distinguished, one is the perfection of the motion and the other is the
perfection of the moving existent.

It is possible that the moving object obtains new perfections through
the course of its motion, while there are differences in the speed of
these attainments. That is, in some times the speed of perfection may
increase while at other times it decreases and at yet a third time this
speed may be constant. The constancy or even the decrease in the speed
of attaining perfection in no way detracts from the fact that the moving
object is becoming perfected. For example, a body whose rate of
blackening decreases will still be ever more black from one moment to
the next, although the change in color will occur more slowly. Hence,
there is no contradiction between the assumption that motion leads to
the greater perfection of the moving existent and the assumption of a
negative acceleration for the speed of perfection.

If someone were to claim that every motion becomes more perfect insofar
as it is motion, this claim will not be compatible with the acceptance

of constant motion and motion without acceleration, and it is clear that
such a claim will be contrary to introspection and self-evidence.
Recourse to some definitions of motion will not enable one to prove such
a claim. Furthermore, the mentioned definitions do not prove such a
claim because at most what can be concluded from them is the fact that
the moving existent under the influence of motion obtains new perfection
and actuality, and as was indicated, the perfection of a moving thing
does not conflict with the decrease of the speed of its motion.

The next question we shall take up is that of whether every motion leads
to the perfection of the moving thing or not.

The Evolution of the Moved due to Motion
----------------------------------------

We have learned that the perfecting of motion, in the sense of
acceleration and increasing intensity, is not universal. None of the
definitions of motion indicate this. However, in the sense of the
perfection of the moved under the influence of motion, it is possible to
infer from the two mentioned definitions that since the moved achieves a
new actuality and perfection by means of motion, it is necessary that
every motion will be an intensification and lead to the perfection of
the moved.

One who reasons in this way must confront a great problem: many things
gradually weaken, wilt and perish. Their gradual change and motion not
only fail to increase their perfections but constantly decrease their
perfections, and bring them close to death and destruction. Plants and
animals, after passing through the periods of growth and flourishing,
enter the stage of old age and decrepitude, and their withering and
declining motion begins.

In order to escape this difficulty they have sought to find an
alternative in the claim that these kinds of declining and decaying
motions are accompanied by the motions of other existents which are
growing. For example, while an apple rots due to affliction by a worm,
the worm grows in it, and the real motion is the perfecting motion of
the worm, which brings about the decrease in perfection of the apple,
and its wilting and rotting are its accidental motions.

Not only is there no way to prove that in all cases the declining motion
of a moving thing is accompanied by the intensifying motion of another
moving thing, but also one cannot ignore the gradual declining change of
an existent and dismiss it as ‘accidental.’ Finally, this question
remains, what is the philosophical significance of this gradual
declining process in the wilting existent?

Reliance on the mentioned definitions in order to deny non-perfecting
motions cannot explain their undeniable existence. Assuming that the
purport of the definitions is not compatible with declining motion, one
must raise doubts about the correctness and universality of the
definitions, instead of relying on the authority of the definitions to
justify something which is unacceptable. At the same time, however, it
is possible to interpret these definitions in such a way that they do
not imply a denial of non-perfecting motions.

As was explained in Lesson Fifty-Two, actual and potential are two
concepts which are abstracted by comparing the priority of one existent
to

another, and the inclusion in the second existent of the whole or part
of the first existent. This by no means implies that the second whole is
more perfect than the first. Likewise, considering the motion to be a
preparatory perfection for the attainment of a major perfection does not
imply the perseverance of all of the previous perfections in the present
existent, for it is possible that a requirement for motion and the
attainment of a perfection whose conclusion is being considered is that
the moving object must lose some of its other perfections. The
perfection which is obtained as a result of motion may be equivalent to
or even less than the lost perfection.

Therefore, the correspondence of Aristotle’s definition to various types
of motions does not imply that the perfection which is obtained through
motion is ontologically superior to the perfection lost by the moving
object. It cannot be concluded that the moving existent necessarily
becomes more perfect, comparing its present station with its previous
condition.

It is not basically necessary to depend on the concepts of actuality and
potentiality and the concept of perfection in the definition of motion,
for these concepts, which themselves are in need of explanation and
interpretation, cannot remove any ambiguity from the concept of motion.

Is it really acceptable to say that everything which moves from one
place to another thereby becomes more perfect and attains new
perfections superior to those it had possessed? Can it really be proved
that the wilting and declining processes of every vegetable and animal
are the results of the perfection of another existent?

Perhaps it will be asked, if motion does not bring about the perfection
of the moved, then why does the moved undertake the motion? What
motivation could it have?

The answer is that, first, not every motion arises from the
consciousness and motivation of the moved, as was mentioned regarding
natural and constrained motions. Second, it is possible for a conscious
existent to perform a motion in order to attain a real or imaginary
pleasure, but out of negligence for the natural consequences or due to
the intensity of the desire for the mentioned pleasure, this motion
leads to the loss of more valuable perfections. Anyway, the
irrationality and imprudence of such a motion does not imply that it is
impossible.

It is possible to say that if the resultant of the motions of the world
is not positive and that the result of the collection of all their
motions is not the obtaining of more perfection for existents in this
world, then the creation of such a world would be vain and useless.

The answer is that on the basis of divine wisdom we can prove that the
creation of the world is not vain and useless and its results are wise.
However, the positive character of the resultant of the motions does not
imply that every motion necessarily is perfecting and causes more
perfection for the moved itself.

It may be concluded that there is no reason to hold that every moving
thing under the influence of motion achieves a perfection superior to
its previous perfection, regarding its ontological level. Innumerable
experiences show that not only is there constant motion, but also
declining and weakening motion exist, in the sense that the moved
gradually loses its

present perfections or possesses perfections which are not superior to
those it has lost. If some definitions of motion are not compatible with
such motions, they must be considered to lack universality. The
perfecting character of every motion can be accepted only in the sense
that the existence of the moving thing attains to something existing,
which it previously lacked, although it previously may have possessed
something similar or more perfect, as was mentioned regarding the
relation between the potential and the actual.


