Lesson Fifty-Nine: Motion in Substance
======================================

Introduction
------------

As was indicated, philosophers of the past, including Aristotelians and
Illuminationists, considered motion to be specific to accidents. Not
only did they fail to establish substantial motion, but they imagined it
to be impossible. Also, among the ancient Greek philosophers none are to
be found who explicitly discuss substantial motion or establish it. The
only position which is comparable to substantial motion is that reported
to have been held by Heraclitus (540-470 B.C.). Other than those Islamic
and non-Islamic philosophers and theologians who believed in constant
renewing creation, none are found to whom a tendency toward substantial
motion can be ascribed. However, contrary to the famous philosophers of
the world, the one who explicitly established substantial motion and
boldly insisted on it was the great Islamic philosopher, Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn Shīrāzī.

Here, we shall first present the objections raised by those who deny
substantial motion and answer them, then we shall explain the theory of
Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn and the arguments he has put forth to prove it.

Objections to Substantial Motion
--------------------------------

The discussions of those who imagine substantial motion to be impossible
turn on the notion that one of the prerequisites, or rather one of the
constituents, of every motion, is the existence of the moved, or in
technical terms, the subject of motion. When we say that the earth
rotates on its axis and revolves around the sun, or that an apple turns
from green to yellow and then to red, or that a sapling or a baby animal
or human grows and develops, in each of these cases we have a fixed
essence whose attributes and states gradually change. However, if it is
said that the essence itself is not fixed, and just as its attributes
and accidents change, its substance also is transformed, then to what
are we to relate this change? In other words, substantial motion will be
a motion without a thing moved and an attribute without a thing to which
attribution is made. This is not rational.

### Answers to the Objections

###

The origin of this objection is a defect in the analysis of motion. As a
result, some philosophers, such as al-Shaykh al-Ishrāq, have consciously
considered motion to belong to the category of extraneous accidents,
while others have unconsciously considered it so. Hence, they considered
it necessary for there to be a entified independent subject of motion
and attribution which remains fixed through the process of motion, and
to which motion and change are related as accidents and attributes.

However, as was previously made clear, motion is that very flowing of
the existence of substances and accidents, not an accident alongside
other accidents. In other words, the concept of motion is not a whatish
concept, rather it is a secondary philosophical intelligible. To put it
still differently, motion is an analytic accident of existence, not an
extraneous accident of existents. These sorts of concepts do not need a
subject in the sense which has been established for accidents. The only
thing that can be considered as the source of abstraction of motion is
the flowing substantial or accidental

existence itself, in the sense of a subject related to analytic
accidents, that is, a subject whose objective existence is identical
with an accident, and any distinction between them is impossible except
in the realm of mental analysis.

Therefore, when we say, ‘A substance has changed,’ it is as if we were
to say, ‘the color of the apple (and not the apple itself) has changed.’
It is clear that in the process of a transformation in color, there is
no fixed color to which the transformation is attributed. Even an
independent subject is related to accidental motions only because of its
being an accident, not because it is motion. Therefore, even if the
accident pertaining to the motion were to remain unchanged, it would
still need a subject, as the apple itself is needed whether its color is
fixed or changing.

It is to be concluded that motion and immutability are two analytic
attributions for flowing and immutable existence, and such attributions
do not require entified subjects of attribution independent of the
attribution itself. In the same way as immutability is not an accident
of an existent in external reality in such a way that it would lack
immutability without that accident, likewise, the attribute of motion is
not is not an extraneous accident of a particular existent so that
without it, it should be characterized with immutability and lack of
motion. In technical terms, analytic accidents do not require
independent subjects; rather their existence is identical with the
existence of their subjects.

It is worth noting the subtle point that according to the fundamentality
of existence, motion must be related to existence as an analytic
accident, and the relating of it to the whatness of a substance or
accident is an accidental relation.

Arguments for the Existence of Substantial Motion
-------------------------------------------------

Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn offered three lines of argument to establish
substantial motion.

1. The first argument for substantial motion has two premises. One is
that accidental changes in a thing are the effects of the substantial
nature of that thing. The second premise is that the natural cause of
motion must be a moving thing. From this it is concluded that a
substance which is the cause of motion in accidents must be a moving
thing.

As for the first premise, this is the famous principle indicated in the
previous lesson, that is, the proximate and immediate agent of all
motions is nature, and no motion can be directly related to an
immaterial agent.

As for the second premise, it may be further explained that if the
proximate and immediate cause of an effect were a stationary object, its
result would also be a stationary. In order to make this easier to
understand, the following example may be used: if a lamp were in a fixed
place the light which radiates from it would illuminate all within a
specific radius, but if the lamp were in motion, the extent of its
illumination would gradually advance. Hence, the process of moving
accidents which advance in the realm of time shows that their cause also
is in process along with them.

Perhaps it will be asked, if the nature of a substance is essentially in
motion, then why are its effects, which are accidents, sometimes without

motion? And why cannot the immobility of accidents be reason for the
immobility of the nature of a substance?

These question can be answered as follows. The nature of a substance is
not a complete cause of motion, rather, its effectiveness depends on
specific conditions whose satisfaction brings about motions in
accidents, and motion is an action which requires a natural agent, even
if the agent is not the complete cause of its occurrence. Immobility, to
the contrary, is a negative thing (the absence of motion), and cannot be
considered to be an action in need of an agent.

On the other hand, it may be asked whether the proponents of substantial
motion are not forced to relate substantial motion to immaterial agents,
which are fixed, unchangeable and devoid of motion. Why do they not
accept accidental motion for fixed substances as valid?

The answer is that substantial motion is the very existence of the
substance, and is merely in need of a divine generative agent, and the
granting of existence to the substance is the same as the granting of
existence to the substantial motion. However, the granting of existence
to the substance is not the same as the granting of existence to
accidents and to motion in accidents. For this reason, the motion in
accidents is related to substantial nature, and is considered an action
for it. Such an action is in need of a natural agent whose
transformation shows a transformation in its agent.

Another very precise objection can also be raised against this argument,
the answer to which is not as easy as the answer to the previous two
objections. According to Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn’s own explanation, motion
is not a entified object independent of its source of abstraction, the
flowing existence of a substance or accident. Hence, whether it is
assumed to be in a substance or in an accident, motion will be the same
as the existence of that substance or accident, and its cause will be
the cause of the existence of that substance or accident. Therefore,
what prevents us from relating the flowing existence of an accident
directly to a divine or metaphysical agent and to consider the role of
substance in its occurrence as the role of matter for the occurrence of
form rather than as the efficient cause (*‘illat fā‘ilī* )? If this
assumption is correct, there will be no way to infer substantial motion
from the agency of substance for its accidents and their motions. In
fact, this objection arises from doubts about the first premise. But, in
any case, this argument at most will be of benefit to those who consider
the agency of substantial nature for their accidents and motions to be
debatable.

2. The second argument also has two premises. One is that accidents do
not have existence independent of their subjects, but rather they are
really aspects of the existence of substance. The second premise is that
every kind of change that occurs in an aspect of an existent, is a
change in the existent itself, and indicates its own internal and
essential change. It is concluded that motions in accidents indicate
changes in the existence of a substance.

In explaining this argument, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn says that every
corporeal existent has a single existence which is in itself determinate
and individual (as was explained in Lesson Twenty-Five). The accidents
of every substance are appearances or rays of its existence, which may
be

considered signs of individuation (*‘alāmāt tashakhkhuṣ* ) for it and
not as causes of its individuation. Therefore, a change in these signs
indicates a change in that which bears the sign; hence, motion in
accidents indicates motion in the existence of a substance.

This argument does not depend on the assumption that motion in accidents
is an effect of substantial nature, but rather accidents are introduced
as appearances and aspects of the existence of a substance. This
position is acceptable in the case of continuous quantities because the
dimensions and extensions of corporeal existents are nothing but their
visages, as was explained in Lesson Forty-Seven. It can also be applied
in the case of qualities specific to quantity, such as geometrical
shapes. However, relative categories, as was mentioned repeatedly, are
abstract concepts and only the source of abstraction of some of them,
such as time and space, can be considered to be aspects of the existence
of substance, which reduce to continuous quantities. The existence of
psychic (*nafsānī* ) qualities (which in a precise sense are objective
accidents, although in a sense they may be considered to be appearances
and aspects of the psyche) is not the same as the existence of the
psyche. Rather, there is a sort of union (not unity) between these
qualities and the psyche, and for this reason, the application of this
argument for such accidents is difficult.

3. The third argument given by Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn for substantial
motion is obtained from knowledge of the reality of time as a flowing
and passing dimension of material existents, and the logical form of
this argument is as follows.

All material existents are in time and have a temporal dimension. Every
existent which has a temporal dimension has gradual existence. In
conclusion, the existence of a material substance will be gradual, that
is, possessing motion.

The first premise was made clear in Forty-Three, from which it may be
concluded that time is the passing extension of corporeal existence, not
an independent vessel in which they are contained. If material phenomena
did not have such a passing extension, they could not be measured with
temporal scales, such as clocks, days, months and years. Likewise, if
they did not have spatial extensions and geometrical dimensions, they
could not be measured by length, area and volume. Basically, the
measurement of everything by a specific scale shows the homogeneity
between them. Therefore, the weight of something can never be measured
by the scale of length or vice versa. It is for this reason that
completely immaterial things do not have a temporal duration, and they
cannot be considered temporally prior to or posterior to an event, for
their immutable existences are not homogeneous with the passing and
renewing extension of time.

The second premise can be explained as follows. Time is passing so that
its potential parts are brought about successively. One part of it does
not occur until another part passes, while the entirety of its supposed
parts have a single existence. It we understand the nature (*ḥaqīqat* )
of time, we will readily discover that every existent which possesses
this sort of extension in its essence will have a gradual existence and
will have parts spread out in the channel of time. Its temporal
extension is divisible into successive

potential parts no two of which can be brought together. Until one of
them passes and is annihilated another part will not be brought into
existence.

Given these two premises, it can be concluded that the existence of a
corporeal substance is gradual, passing, and constantly renewed, and
this is the meaning of substantial motion.

In explaining this argument, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn says that just as a
material substance has geometrical and spatial dimensions, it also has
another continuous quantity called time (which constitutes its fourth
dimension), and just as its instantaneous extension is an essential
attribute of its existence, and has no existence separate from that of
the material substance, likewise its gradual extension is an inseparable
and essential attribute for it. And just as the individual ipseity of a
corporeal substance is never brought about without geometrical
dimensions, likewise it cannot occur without the temporal dimension. No
corporeal substance can be imagined to be fixed and detached from time,
and therefore as related equally to all times. So, time is a constituent
of the existence of every corporeal substance. This implies that the
existence of every corporeal substance is gradual and that its supposed
parts are brought into existence successively and by constant renewal.
This argument is the firmest of the arguments for substantial motion,
and there appear to be no problems with it.


