Lesson Sixty: Further Discussion of Substantial Motion
======================================================

A Reminder of Some Points
-------------------------

An important problem regarding substantial motion has been raised which
will be reviewed at the end of this section, but prior to this, there
are several points which should be borne in mind.

1. Substantial motion is really the instant to instant renewal of the
existence of a substance, and bears no relation to the motion of the
stars, galaxies and nebula, nor to the motions of atoms and molecules or
the motion of particles around the nuclei of atoms. Even if motion
within the nucleus is assumed, this will have no relation to substantial
motion, because these motions are spatial and accidental, while
substantial motion is basically a philosophical and intellectual notion
and not a scientific or empirical one.

2. Accidents which appear to be stationary and motionless have constant
imperceptible motion, for their existences are also extended in the
channel of time, and until one of their temporal parts is annihilated,
another part will not appear. Therefore, all the material world is
continuously being annihilated and renewed. No stationary and immobile
existent is to be found. In other words, the existence of immobility is
relative and absolute immobility does not exist.

3. It is possible for a material existent to possess numerous motions at
a single time, as the planet earth, like all material substances, has
substantial motion, and on that basis, its existence is constantly being
renewed and likewise all its attributes and accidents are continuously
being renewed in existence. Furthermore, it rotates on its axis while it
revolves around the sun, and it also has other motions which have been
established by astrophysicists.

Likewise, it is possible for a body subordinate to another moving body
to possess one or more subordinate motions. For example, as the
existents on the earth are subordinate to it, they possess motion
subordinate to it, even if they do not move independently, just as the
earth itself has a motion subordinate to that of the solar system in the
galaxy, it also has a motion in space subordinate to that of the galaxy.
Therefore, the unity of a moving thing is no reason for the unity of
motion, although the individual unity of motion would be meaningless
without the unity of the moving object.

4. Sometimes, numerous motions are directly attributed to a moving
object, but sometimes, motion occurs in a moving object by means of
another motion, without which it could not occur, as in the serpentine
motion of the earth which is obtained by means of its revolutions, which
is in fact an attribute of this motion, or the motion of an automobile
which is attributed to the gradual increase or decrease of its speed
(acceleration), or the substantial motion of bodies, which are
attributed with intensity and perfection. These sorts of motions are
called*motions superimposed on motions* .

5. As was previously said, the concept of speed is obtained through the
relation between time and distance. Hence, speed is not attributed to
time

itself, and naturally, acceleration or the increase and decrease in
speed will also have no meaning for time. Therefore, when it is said
that time has passed quickly or slowly, this is called ‘psychological
time’ and is a loose way of speaking, and it depends on the quality of
the perception of the passage of time. Such ideas may also be applied to
physical time.

Types of Substantial Motion
---------------------------

Substantial motion, like other kinds of motion does not by itself
necessitate perfection and intensity, and the arguments for its
existence do not prove anything more than gradual change and renewal of
the existence of a substance. Therefore, as in the case of accidental
motion, three states may be posited for it, or it may be divided into
three types:

1. Constant motion in which all the potential parts of the substance are
equal with respect to perfection and level of existence.

2. Intensifying motion in which every assumed part is more perfect than
the previous part.

3. Weakening or declining motion in which every part is weaker and more
defective than its predecessor.

Intensifying and weakening motions can be considered to be composed of
two motions: (1) one which occurs to the moving thing by means of
another; (2) motion without an intermediary, which represents the
persistence of a substance, whereas the mediated motion represents its
perfection or decline. It is like accelerating motion, whose increase or
decrease in speed is considered an ascending or declining motion over
spatial or another kind of motion. A motion that begins with positive
acceleration and then has negative acceleration can be represented in
the form of a straight line over which from the beginning a curve rises
and then falls back to meet the straight line at its end point. The
ascending curve represents positive acceleration, and the descending
curve represents negative acceleration.

This picture has a clearer instance in the case of substances which
possess two compound forms, in such a way that the underlying form
possesses a constant substantial motion, whose level of existence does
not become more perfect nor decline, while the higher form possesses
rising and declining motion. For example, the component elements of a
plant remain in the same condition in which they began, while the
vegetable form gradually becomes more perfect, and then enters the state
of withering and decaying, and at last it rots and is destroyed. This is
the point at which the descending curve joins the straight line.

Those who rely on some other definitions of motion have inferred the
necessity of its becoming perfect, and so, in the case of substantial
motion, they have also held that its intensification and becoming more
perfect are necessary, even if our senses are not able to perceive this
intensification. In the same way, they have considered declining or
weakening motions to be accidental. In Lesson Fifty-Seven, this
inference was criticized and its weakness was made clear. There is no
reason to repeat it again.

The Relation between Substantial Motion and Actuality and Potentiality
----------------------------------------------------------------------

As was previously explained, the potential and the actual are two
abstract concepts abstracted from the relation between two successive
existents, and from the persistence of the previous existent or a part
of it in the following existent. Now, regarding the fact that all
material existents are constantly in a state of renewal and coming about
and passing away, the question will be raised as to how the existence of
the previous existent can be imagined, and how the definition of
potential and actual can apply to the beginning and end of the motion.

Sometimes the answer is given that although the previous existent does
not itself remain, the perfection of its existence is preserved in the
following existent. It is concluded that every motion is a becoming
perfect and intensification. However, not only does this conclusion fail
to agree with entified reality, but the answer itself does not solve the
basic problem, for given the annihilation of the previous existent, the
preservation of its perfections can mean only that the succeeding
existent is more perfect than the previous one, and this reduces to the
fact that the preservation of something from a potential existent in an
actual existent is not necessary. This meaning is compatible with the
assumption of the succession of numerous existents each of which is more
perfect than the other, and with the interpretation of motion as a
succession of actualities which is governed by the principle of ‘a
succession of rests.’

It might be said that according to the position of the constancy of
motion, the earlier and later parts are not numerically different in
actuality, but all of them are an existent with a single existence. This
is contrary to the position of a succession of rests, according to which
each of the temporal parts will have a specific actual existence.
According to the former position, a single flowing existence is
infinitely analyzable, contrary to the latter position which is based on
finite unanalyzable parts.

However, the discussion is not about the potential parts of motion, but
about the potential and actual as the beginnings and ends of motion
which are outside the scope of the motion itself. This may be explained
further by pointing out that motion has been defined as the gradual
process of the emergence of the actual from the potential, such that the
potential is the beginning of the motion and the actual is its end.
However, to call the earlier part of motion potential in relation to a
later part is to use a specialized expression, according to which the
perseverance of something from the earlier part is not considered
necessary, and in this way there no longer remains room for a gradual
process from potentiality to actuality and a temporal gap between them.

It seems that the application of the above definition to substantial
motion is extremely difficult. It is only in the case of the compound
forms whose underlying form is a previous existent that it can be
considered potential in relation to the occurrence of the higher form,
which is the substantial motion itself, although this higher form is the
very motion, for the perseverance of a part of its motion is sufficient
during the occurrence of the higher form. However, in the case of simple
and constant substantial motion the potential and actual cannot be
proven to be two existents outside the scope of motion as its beginning
and end.

If we assume that there is nothing but a simple body in the world, and
throughout time it remains with the same constant level of existence,
and that its potential parts continuously come into existence and are
annihilated, is it necessary for there to exist an existent prior to or
after it as its beginning or end?

Therefore, it becomes clear why it is preferable to define motion
generally as ‘gradual change’ rather than in the other ways proposed.

The Continuity of Substantial Motion
------------------------------------

In Lesson Twenty-Nine, the unity of the world was discussed, and
different meanings which have been assumed for it were reviewed.
However, the establishment of unity in none of the mentioned senses
depended on the establishment of substantial motion. Sometimes,
substantial motion is used as a justification to establish the unity of
the material world, and the unity of the world is even considered to be
one of the conclusions of the doctrine of substantial motion. It is said
that with the establishment of substantial motion, the entire material
world will be a single substantial motion, from each of whose slices a
specific whatness is abstracted, and the multiplicity of material
existents depends upon the numerical differences among these essences.

This subject may be interpreted to mean that the accidents and motions
of a material existent are aspects and representations of the existence
of a substance. In fact, their existences are derived from the existence
of the substance. The material substances themselves are in fact
continuous substantial motions which can be considered a single existent
given their attachment to each other. On this basis it may be claimed
that the entire material cosmos is a single continuous existent.

The continuity of substantial motions may be interpreted in two ways:
one is the continuity of motions which are brought about successively
during time, which may be called vertical continuity; and the other is
the continuity of simultaneous motions which occur along with each
other, which may be called horizontal continuity. Therefore, each of the
two forms will be discussed separately.

Vertical Continuity
-------------------

Regarding the vertical continuity of material existents and their
substantial motions, it can be said that every particular material
existent which may be considered is a particular substantial motion
which appears in matter. For example, the existence of a plant is a
substantial motion which occurs in its component elements. But its prior
matter also has a substantial motion in its own turn. Likewise, however
far we go back we always reach another substantial motion, and among
them there is never any gap brought about by rest. Therefore, it can be
said that successive phenomena are a single substantial motion
possessing numerous slices, from each of which specific whatnesses are
abstracted.

This explanation is debatable in two respects. First, it is not the case
that each of the particular slices possess a single existence and a
single substantial motion; rather it is possible that a compound
existent may be

compound in several ways and possess several substantial motions, as was
established in Lesson Fifty-Four.

Second, the continuity of two successive substantial motions will have
unity in a real sense when there is no distinctive boundary between
them, while the transformation of one material existent to another is
not like this. The reason for this is that there are various effects for
each of them. For example, vegetative effects, that is, growth and
reproduction, are new effects which appear in matter, and there is no
precedent for this in lifeless matter, and it begins when the vegetable
form occurs in matter. Even if the vegetable form is the same as the
vegetable substantial motion, it possesses a determinate boundary which
separates it from the substantial motion of the previous matter. In
other words, in the extension of the substantial motion of matter there
are points which are boundaries between mineral and vegetable, and from
these points new substantial motions appear which can be shown by a
curved line which meets the underlying straight line at two points.
Therefore, successive substantial motions are continuous linear
fragments which are distinguished from one another by specific points,
each of which linear fragments possesses its own characteristics.

Since these points are drawn by means of the higher lines, the
underlying straight line which continues through time can be considered
a single line which shows the continuous unity of the prime matter of
the cosmos through time. And it is only in this sense that the unity of
the material cosmos can be established.

Horizontal Continuity
---------------------

Regarding the horizontal continuity of material existents and their
substantial motion, it may be said that since nothingness has not made
any gaps between the parts of matter, and there is no pure vacuum
between them, all of them possess a unity of continuity, and this
unified thing possesses a single substantial motion.

Aside from the fact that in the above explanation the continuity of
substantial motion is inferred from the unity of matter, not that the
unity of the cosmos is established through the unity of substantial
motion, there is another problem with this view, that is, the unity of
continuity for the matter of the cosmos is no reason for the unity of
its forms and the unity of their substantial motions, for it is obvious
that each of the forms possesses a distinctive boundary and particular
effects which have no relation to the effects of the common matter.
Therefore, the correctness of the doctrine of the horizontal continuity
of material existents and their substantial motion is merely due to the
unity and continuity of their matter. This sort of unity and continuity
is not incompatible with the multiplicity of forms and their generation
and corruption.


