Lesson Sixty-One: The Way to Know God
=====================================

Introduction
------------

The concept which common people have about Almighty God and the meaning
which is understood upon hearing the word ‘God’ or its synonyms in
various languages is that of an existent which has created the cosmos.
In other words, God is known as ‘the Creator.’ Probably other concepts,
such as the Lord and the One Who is worthy of worship are also borne in
mind. In fact, God is known as the agent of the work of creation and its
consequences.

With regard to the fact that these sorts of concepts are abstracted from
divine action and sometimes from the deeds of creatures, such as
worship, philosophers have attempted to use a concept which refers to
the sacred divine essence, without need to consider God’s deeds or
creatures’. In this way, they have selected the concept of the Necessary
Existent (*wājib al-wujūd* ), that is, one whose being is necessary and
indestructible.

This concept is universal and essentially is a common term which can be
applied to numerous instances. Therefore, Allah, which is a proper name
(*‘alam-e shakhṣī* ), must be considered the best name or word [for
God]. Perhaps this noble name was first propounded by the prophets and
religious leaders.

In order to understand the meaning of a proper name, it is necessary to
know the named person. Such knowledge is obtained through sensory
perception in the case of sensory objects, and in the case of
non-sensory objects it can only be obtained through knowledge by
presence. When an existent is imperceptible, the way to know the person
is limited to knowledge by presence. Although the establishment of such
knowledge is related to philosophy, the knowledge itself is not obtained
through philosophical discussions. That which is obtained through
intellectual efforts and philosophical demonstrations will be naturally
limited to intellectual universal concepts. At his point the reason for
the selection by the divine sages of the expression ‘the Necessary
Existent’ becomes clear.

In the chapters of this part we shall discuss to what extent and by what
means Allah basically can be known. However, the subject of these
discussions will be God, that is, the Necessary Existent, in accordance
with philosophical and theological tradition.

The Science of Theology and its Subject
---------------------------------------

The science of theology is the noblest and most valuable of
philosophical sciences. Without knowledge of Allah, the true perfection
of man is not possible, because, as was proven in its own place, the
true perfection of man occurs only in the shadow of divine proximity. It
is obvious that proximity to Almighty God without knowledge of Him will
be impossible.

Although the establishment of the subject of a science is not considered
a topic within that science itself, and if a scientific subject needs to
be established, according to certain principles, this must be done in
another science which is prior to it in rank, sometimes the existence of
the subject of a science is discussed in its introduction as one of its
principles. Among them, discussions of the existence of Almighty God are
traditionally found

in theology itself. Therefore, although we have provided a satisfactory
discussion of this in the chapters on cause and effect, especially in
Lesson Thirty-Seven, in accordance with the tradition of the
theologians, this topic will be discussed independently at the beginning
of this part.

Before presenting the reasoning involved, two points should be observed.
One is that a number of outstanding figures have claimed that knowledge
of Almighty God is something innate and without need of philosophical
reasoning. The other point is that some philosophers have expressed the
view that the demonstrations for the existence of God are invalid.1
Therefore, it is necessary first to review these two issues.

The Innateness of Knowledge of God
----------------------------------

The expression ‘innate’ (*fiṭrī* ) is used for entities which depend on
innate disposition (*fiṭrat* ), that is, the way in which an entity has
been created. Therefore, innate things have two characteristics: first,
that they need not be taught or learned; and second, that they cannot be
changed or transformed. To these, a third may be added, that the innate
things for every kind of existent may be found among all the individuals
of that kind to a greater or lesser degree.

Those things that are called innate in the case of man may be divided
into two general classes: first, a knowledge that is implied in human
existence; and second, desires and inclinations that result from the
creation of human beings. But sometimes the term ‘innate’ is used
specifically for humans, in contrast to ‘instinctive,’ which is also
used for animals.

With regard to Almighty God, it is sometimes said that knowledge of God
is innate, and is among the first class of innate things. Sometimes it
is also said that the quest for God and worship of God are due to human
nature, and counted among the second class of innate things. But here,
the topic is knowledge of God.

What is meant by innate knowledge of God is either knowledge by
presence, some degree of which exists in all humans, and perhaps there
is an allusion to this in the noble*āyah* : ‘Am I not your Lord? They
said: Yes.’ (7:176). It was mentioned in Lesson Forty-Nine that an
effect which possesses a degree of immateriality will have a degree of
presentational knowledge of its creative cause, even though it may be
unconscious or semiconscious and, due to its weakness, improperly
interpreted by the mind.2

This knowledge becomes stronger due to the perfection of the soul and
the concentration of the attention of the heart on the sacred divine
presence and by means of good deeds and worship. And among the Friends
(*awliyā’* ) of God it reaches such a degree of clarity that they see
God more clearly than anything else, as is found in the *Supplication of
‘Arafah* : “Has anything other than You a manifestation that You lack,
so that it may manifest You?!” Sometimes what is meant by innate
knowledge of God is acquired knowledge. Innate acquired knowledge is
either of a primary self-evident proposition, which is related to the
nature of the intellect, or it is of a secondary self-evident
proposition, which are what logicians call ‘innate things.’ Sometimes
the term is also used in a general way for theoretical propositions (
*naẓariyyāt* ) which come close to being self-evident, because

anyone can understand them with his God-given intellect, and there is no
need for complicated technical demonstrations.

Likewise, people who are illiterate and unlearned also can discover the
existence of Almighty God with simple reasoning.

It may be concluded that innate knowledge of God in the sense of
presentational knowledge of Almighty God has degrees, the lowest of
which exists in all people, even if they are not completely aware of it,
and the highest degrees are restricted to perfect believers and Friends
of God. No degree of this knowledge is obtained by means of intellectual
or philosophical demonstration. However, in the sense of acquired
knowledge close to being self-evident, this is obtained by means of the
intellect and reasoning. Its closeness to self-evidence and simplicity
of reasoning does not mean that it is not in need of demonstration.

The Possibility of Demonstrating the Existence of God
-----------------------------------------------------

Another topic which must be discussed here is whether a rational logical
demonstration for the existence of Almighty God can be formulated or
not. If so, how can one justify the claim of some of the great
metaphysicians, such as Ibn Sīnā, who hold that it is incorrect to
formulate demonstrations for the existence of God Almighty? If not, then
how can the existence of Almighty God be established?

The answer is that without any doubt, acquired knowledge of Almighty God
by means of rational philosophical demonstration is possible, and all
the philosophers and theologians, including Ibn Sīnā himself, have
formulated numerous demonstrations for this matter. But, sometimes
philosophers and logicians restrict the use of the term ‘demonstration’
(*burhān* ) to demonstrations from cause to effect (*burhān limmī* ).
Therefore, it is possible that what is meant by those who deny that a
demonstration can be formulated for the existence of God is that there
is no demonstration from cause to effect for this, for such a
demonstration is formulated to prove something whose cause is known, and
by way of knowledge of the cause, the existence of the effect is
established. However, the existence of Almighty God is not the effect of
any cause, so as to be established by knowledge of its cause. Evidence
in favor of this reading is to be found in the*Shifā’* , in which it is
said: “There is no demonstration for it because there is no cause for
it.”

It is also possible that what is meant by the denial of there being any
demonstration for the existence of Almighty God is that no demonstration
can lead us to the entified individual existence of God. The utmost that
can be obtained by demonstration are universal terms such as ‘the
Necessary Existent’ and ‘the cause of all causes,’ and the like. As was
mentioned in the introduction to this lesson, knowledge of the
individual immaterial thing is impossible except through knowledge by
presence.

Another sense can also be mentioned, that what is meant by
demonstrations for the existence of God is that creatures have a
Creator, or existents which are effects have a cause of causes, or that
contingent existents are in need of the Necessary Existent. So, these
demonstrations basically demonstrate predicates to be true of creatures,
not directly the existence of the Creator or the Necessary Existent.
This reading is more

compatible with those who claim: “There is no demonstration of the
Necessary Existent by essence but only by accidents.”

Demonstrations from Cause to Effect and from Effect to Cause
------------------------------------------------------------

Given the first reading, the question arises that if there is no
demonstration from cause to effect for the existence of God, then why is
this term used for some of the demonstrations regarding this problem?
Doesn’t the fact that a demonstration is not from cause to effect harm
its validity?

A sufficiently detailed answer to this question requires research into
the kinds of demonstrations, which would divert us from our goal. That
which we can briefly say here is that if we define demonstration from
cause to effect as is done below, then not only in other areas of
philosophy, but also in the case of God Almighty, we can formulate a
demonstration from cause to effect:

A demonstration from cause to effect is a demonstration whose middle
term is the cause for the application of the predicate to the subject of
the conclusion, whether or not it is also the cause of the predicate
itself, and whether the cause is objective and real or analytic and
intellectual.

According to this definition, if the middle term of the demonstration is
a concept of a contingent and one ontologically impoverished (*faqr-e
wujūdī* ), and the like, it can be considered a demonstration from cause
to effect, for according to philosophers, “The cause of the need of an
effect for a cause is essential contingency or ontological poverty.”3
Hence, the establishment of the Necessary Existent for contingent
entities may be accomplished by means of something which, according to
intellectual analysis, is the cause of their need for the Necessary
Existent.

It may be concluded that although the essence of the Necessary Existent
is not the effect of any cause, dependence on the Necessary Existent can
be attributed to contingent entities because of their essential
contingency or ontological poverty, and as has been indicated, this is
the purport of the demonstrations regarding this problem.

However, if one requires that in a demonstration from cause to effect
the middle term must be an objective or real cause, then not only in the
case of the Necessary Existent, but regarding most philosophical
problems, this sort of demonstration will not be found.

In any case, philosophical demonstrations based on the rational
implications between the terms of the demonstration, whether they are
called*limmī* (from cause to effect) or*innī* (from effect to cause),
are of sufficient logical worth. To call a demonstration*‘innī’* does
not detract from its validity and worth. Rather, it may be said that
every demonstration from cause to effect involves a demonstration from
effect to cause that has as its major premise the impossibility of the
detachment of an effect from its complete cause. Take note.

References
----------

1 Cf.,*Ilahhiyyāt Shifā’, maqālah 8, fasl 4;* and*Ta‘līqāt* , p. [^70]:

2 Cf., Lesson Thirteen.

3 Cf., Lesson Thirty-Two.
