Lesson Five: Philosophy and The Sciences
========================================

The Philosophy of the Sciences
------------------------------

In the previous lesson we mentioned that sometimes the term “philosophy”
is used in genitive constructions such as “philosophy of morals”,
“philosophy of law”, etc..

We shall now explain this sort of usage.

This sort of expression is sometimes used by those who restrict the term
“science” to the empirical sciences, and who use the term “philosophy”
for fields of the human sciences which are not susceptible to proof by
sensory experience. Instead of saying, “the science of theology”, for
example, such people say “the philosophy of theology”, that is, the use
of “philosophy” in the genetic construction is merely for the sake of
indicating the kind of matter under discussion and its topics.

Likewise, those who consider problems which are both scientific and
evaluative to be “unscientific”, and who hold that there is no objective
basis in reality for them but consider them to be merely governed by the
desires and inclinations of people, sometimes consider these sorts of
problems to belong to the realm of philosophy. So, for example, instead
of speaking of the “science of morals” they say, “the philosophy of
morals”, and instead of speaking of “the science of politics” they say,
“the philosophy of politics”.

Sometimes this sort of expression is used in another sense, and that is
to explain the principles of other sciences. In addition, matters such
as the history, founders, goals, methods of research, and the course of
development of a science are also discussed under this rubric.

This sort of expression is not peculiar to the positivists and those of
like mind to them, but those who consider philosophical and evaluative
knowledge to be “science” and who consider their methods of research and
inquiry to be “scientific”, also use this sort of expression. Sometimes,
in order to avoid confusion with the previous usage, they add the word
“science” to the genetic construction. For example, they say, “the
philosophy of the science of history” in contrast to “the philosophy of
history”, or they say, “the philosophy of the science of morals” in
contrast to “the philosophy of morals” in the previous sense.

Metaphysics
-----------

One of the terms which is used in contrast to “science” is the term
“metaphysics”. Hence, it is necessary to explain something about this
word.

This term is derived from the Greek*metataphysica* by dropping the
extra*ta* and transforming the*physica* to “physics”, to take the form
“metaphysics”. It has been translated into Arabic as*mā ba‘d al-ṭabī‘ah*
(that which is after physics).

According to that which has been narrated by the historians of
philosophy, this word was first used as a name for one of the books of
Aristotle, which occurred following his*Physics* , and which included
general discussions of existence. In the Islamic Age this came to be
called*umūr ‘ammah* (general affairs), and some of the Islamic
philosophers have considered it suitable to use the expression*mā qabl
al-ṭabī‘ah* (that which is prior to physics).

Apparently, this discussion is different from that of*theology* or
*uthūlūjiyyah* . But in the books of the Islamic philosophers, these
discussions are combined, and together they are given the name “divinity
in the general sense”. Likewise, theology is specified by the name
“divinity in the specific sense”.

Some have taken the term metaphysics to be equivalent to
“trans-physical”, meaning that which is beyond physics, and they
consider the use of this name for this part of ancient philosophy to be
an instance of using a general name for something more specific, for in
divinity, in the general sense, God and abstract things (beyond physics)
are also discussed. However, it seems that the first meaning is the
correct one.

In any case, metaphysics is used for a collection of theoretical
intellectual problems, which are a part of philosophy (in the general
sense). Nowadays, the term philosophy is sometimes restricted to these
problems, and one of the new meanings of “philosophy” is metaphysics.
The reason that the positivists considered these kinds of problems to be
unscientific is that they are susceptible to verification by sensory
experience. Likewise, Kant considered theoretical reason to be
insufficient for the verification of these problems and he called them
“dialectical” or debatable from two standpoints.

Science, Philosophy, Metaphysics and The Relations among Them
-------------------------------------------------------------

Keeping in mind the different meanings mentioned for science and
philosophy, it becomes clear that the relation among science, philosophy
and metaphysics differs in accordance with these different meanings. If
“science” is used for awareness, in an unqualified sense, or if it is
used for a group of related propositions, it becomes more general than
philosophy, for it would then include particular propositions and the
conventional sciences. If it is used in the sense of real universal
propositions, it becomes equivalent to philosophy in its ancient sense.
If it is used in the sense of empirical propositions, it becomes more
specific than philosophy in the ancient sense, and it contradicts the
modern meaning of philosophy (i.e., the set of nonempirical
propositions). Likewise, metaphysics is a part of philosophy in the
ancient sense, and is equivalent to it in one of its modern meanings.

It should be noted that the contrast between science and philosophy in
the modern sense, as is intended by the positivists and those similar to
them, is used to denigrate the value of philosophical problems and to
deny the nobility and station of reason and the value of intellectual
understanding, while this is not correct. In discussions of epistemology
it will be made clear that the value of intellectual understanding is
not merely no less than that of sensory and experiential knowledge, but
is even of an even higher level than these. Even the value of
experiential knowledge itself will be found to be due to the value of
intellectual understanding and philosophical propositions.

Therefore, the restriction of the term science for empirical knowledge
and the term philosophy to that which is non-empirical is acceptable if
merely a matter of terminology, but one must not misuse the contrast

between these terms to pretend that the problems of philosophy and
metaphysics are just idle speculation. Likewise, the label “scientific”
does not establish any advantage for any sort of philosophical tendency,
and basically, this label is like a patch which does not match the
fabric of philosophy, and it can be considered a sign of the ignorance
and demagoguery of those who affix it. The claim that the principles of
a philosophy such as those of dialectical materialism are obtained from
empirical laws is wrong, for the laws of no science are generalizable to
any other science, let alone to all of existence. For example, the laws
of psychology and biology cannot be generalized to physics or chemistry
or mathematics, and vice versa. The laws of these sciences have no use
outside their own realms.

The Division and Classification of the Sciences
-----------------------------------------------

The question will be posed here concerning what basically is the
motivation for the separation of the science from one another. The
answer is that recognizable problems form a broad spectrum, and although
within this spectrum some problems have a close relation to one another,
others are completely alien to one another.

On the other hand, the acquisition of some kinds of knowledge is
dependent on that of others, and at least the understanding of one kind
may help in the understanding of another, while for other sorts of
knowledge this sort of relation does not exist.

With regard to the fact that the acquisition of all the kinds of
knowledge is impossible for a student, and assuming that it would be
feasible, not all people have the motivation for it. Likewise, the
talents and tastes of individuals with regard to the acquisition to
different sorts of subjects are different, and given that some sorts of
knowledge are related to one another and that the acquisition of some
are dependent on others, for this reason, teachers since long ago have
decided to classify appropriately related topics together, and to so
determine the specific sciences and types of knowledge. Different
sciences are categorized and the need of each science for others is
clarified, and consequently their relative priorities are determined so
that, firstly, one who has a specific talent and taste will be able to
find that which he seeks from among the masses of innumerable problems
and he may find the way to reach his goal. Secondly, one who would
acquire a different field of knowledge should be able to find where to
begin, so that the way may be prepared for knowledge of this other field
and to facilitate its acquisition.

In this way, the sciences have been divided into various parts, and each
part, in turn, has been placed in a specific category and level, which
include a general division into the theoretical and practical sciences,
and the theoretical sciences are divided into the natural sciences,
mathematics and divinity, while the practical sciences are divided into
ethics, household economics and politics, which were mentioned before.

The Standard for Distinguishing among the Sciences
--------------------------------------------------

Now that the necessity for classifying the sciences has become clear,
another question may be posed. What are the criteria and standards for
the categorization of the sciences and for distinguishing among them?

The answer is that the sciences may be classified according to various
standards, the most important of which are:

1. According to the methods and procedures of research. Earlier we
indicated that all problems cannot be the object of study and research
by a single method, and we also indicated that all sciences, with regard
to their general methods of inquiry, can be divided into three groups:

A. The rational sciences, which may be investigated by means of rational
proofs and mental inferences alone, as with logic and divine philosophy.

B. The empirical sciences, which are verifiable by empirical methods,
such as physics, chemistry and biology.

C. Narrative sciences, which can be investigated on the basis of
narrated and historical documentation, such as history, biography
(*\`ilm al-rijal* ) and Islamic jurisprudence (*\`ilm al-fiqh* ).

2. According to the goal and telos. Another standard on the basis of
which the sciences may be classified is the benefits and consequences
which result from them. These are the goals and ends which the student
takes into consideration when learning them, such as material and
spiritual goals, or individual and social goals.

It is obvious that one who desires to find the way for the realization
of his own spiritual perfection needs to study various matters which are
not needed by one who is interested in obtaining wealth through
agriculture or industry. Likewise, a leader of society needs another
kind of knowledge. Hence, the sciences may be classified in accordance
with these various goals.

3. According to the subject matter. The third standard according to
which the sciences may be distinguished and separated is their subject
matter. With regard to the fact that every problem has a subject, and a
number of problems are collected under an inclusive topic, this
inclusive topic may serve as that about which the various subordinate
questions pivot, as numbers are the subject of arithmetic, volume
(continuous quantities) is the subject of geometry and the human body is
the subject of the science of medicine.

The classification of the sciences in accordance with their subject
matters provides a better way to secure the goal and motivation for
separating the sciences since by using this method the internal
relations and harmony among problems and their order and arrangement is
better preserved. For this reason, since long ago it has been noted by
great philosophers and scientists. However, in subdivisions other
standards may be taken into consideration. For example, one may
establish a science called theology, whose problems turn about the
subject of God the Almighty. Then it may be subdivided into branches
which are philosophical, gnostic, or religious, each of which may be
investigated by a specific procedure. In reality, the standard for this
subdivision would be the method of research. In the same way, the
subject of mathematics may be divided into various branches each of
which may be indicated on the basis of a specific goal, such as the
mathematics of physics and the mathematics of economics. In this way,
the composition of different standards is brought about.

Whole and Universal
-------------------

The inclusive topic which is taken into consideration for the subjects
of a problem and on the basis of which science appears with the meaning
of a collection of related problems, sometimes is a universal topic and
has many individual instances, and sometimes it takes the form of a
whole and has numerous parts. An example of the first kind is the topic
of number or amount, which has various types and classes each of which
is composed of the subject of a specific problem. An example of the
second kind is the body of man which has numerous organs, limbs and
parts, each of which is the subject of a section of the science of
medicine.

The basic difference between these two sorts of subjects is that in the
first kind, the topic of the subject of the science is applied
individually to the subjects of its problems which are its particulars,
as opposed to the second sort in which the topic of the subject is not
applied individually to the subjects of the problems, but rather is
predicated to the collection of parts.

The Branches of the Sciences
----------------------------

From what has already been explained, it has been found that the
classification of the sciences is for the sake of facilitating teaching,
and to fulfill the aims of education to the extent possible. In the
beginning when human knowledge was limited it was possible to classify
all of it into a few groups. For example, it was possible to consider
zoology to be a single science and it would even include problems
related to man. However, gradually when the circle of problems expanded,
especially after various scientific instruments were made for the
investigation of empirical problems, the empirical sciences more than
others, were divided into various branches, and every science was
divided into more particular sciences. This process is still increasing.

In general, the subdivision of the sciences takes several forms:

1. One form is that in which the small parts are taken from the subject
as a whole, and each part becomes the subject of a new branch taken from
the mother science, as endocrinology and genetics. It is clear that this
kind of division is specified to sciences in which the relation between
the subject of the science and the subject of the problems is the
relation between a whole and its parts.

2. Another form is that in which more particular types and more limited
classes are taken from the universal topic, as entomology and
bacteriology. This sort of subdivision occurs in sciences in which the
relation between the subject of the science and the subject of the
problems is that between universal and particular, not between a whole
and its parts.

3. Another form is that in which the various methods of research are
considered a secondary criteria and while retaining the unity of the
subject, new branches appear. This occurs in cases in which the problems
of a science may be investigated and solved in different ways, as in
philosophical theology, mystical theology and religious theology.

4. Another form is that in which different goal may be considered as
subcriteria and problems appropriate to each goal are introduced as a
specific branch of the mother science, as was mentioned in the case of
mathematics.


