Lesson Sixty-Two: Demonstrations of the Necessary Existent
==========================================================

Introduction
------------

The arguments given to establish the existence of Almighty God are
copious and of various styles, and in general they can be divided into
three groups:

The first group proceeds from reasons which are established on the basis
of observations of divine effects and signs in the cosmos, such as the
argument from design and providence, which on the basis of the discovery
of the existence of a wise design, purpose and plan from the coherence,
interdependence and propriety of phenomena, establishes that there is a
wise designer and a knowing planner of the cosmos. While these arguments
are clear and pleasing, they do not provide answers to all doubts and
misgivings, and in reality, they mostly play the role of awakening that
which is inherent and bringing about an awareness of innate knowledge
(*ma‘rifah* ).

The second group consists of arguments which establish the existence of
a needless Creator by way of the needs of the cosmos, such as the
argument from temporal beginning (*burhān-e ḥudūth* ), which proceeds
from the posteriority of phenomena to nonexistence and nothingness to
prove their essential need, and then, with the help of the impossibility
of a circle or regress, proves that there is a needless Creator, or the
argument from motion, which from the need of motion for a mover and the
impossibility of an infinite regress of movers, proves the existence of
God as the first originator of motion in the cosmos, or the arguments
which prove the existence of a needless creative cause from the origin
of the soul or substantial forms and the impossibility of their
production from natural and material agents. These arguments also more
or less are in need of sensory and empirical premises.

The third group consists of purely philosophical arguments which are
formed from utterly rational premises, such as the demonstration from
contingency and the Demonstration of the Sincere (*burhn-e ṣiddīqīn* ).
This group of demonstrations has some special features: first, that they
do not require sensory or empirical premises; second, the doubts and
misgivings which surround the other arguments have no way here, and in
other words, they have greater logical validity; and third, the premises
of these demonstrations are also more or less needed in other arguments,
for example, when the first designer and planner or originator or mover
is established, their essential needlessness and necessity of existence
must be proven on the basis of premises which are also used in the third
group of arguments.

Nevertheless, the other arguments have advantages which the third group
lacks, that is, the arguments of the third group merely establish that
there is an existent which is the Necessary Existent, and other
demonstrations are needed to establish that He has knowledge, power,
wisdom, and even that He is not a body and is distinct from the material
world.

Here, it shall suffice to mention some of the arguments of the third
group; and first, to prove the Necessary Existent and then to explain
His attributes.

First Demonstration (The Argument from Contingency)
---------------------------------------------------

One of the famous philosophical demonstrations to establish the
Necessary Existent is a demonstration called ‘the demonstration from
contingency’ (*burhān-e imkān* ) or ‘the demonstration from contingency
and necessity,’ and it is formed from four premises:

1. No contingent existent essentially has necessary existence, that is,
when the intellect considers its whatness, it sees it as equal in
relation to existence and nonexistence, and disregarding the existence
of the cause, the necessity for its existence will not be seen.

This premise is self-evident (*badīhī* ) and without need of
demonstration, for its predicate is obtained through the analysis of the
concept of its subject, and the assumption of being contingent is the
same as the assumption of lacking necessity of existence.

2. No existent becomes real without the attribution of necessity, that
is, until all the ways of nonexistence to it are blocked, it will not
come into existence. As the philosophers say, ‘That which is not made
necessary is not brought into existence’ (*al-shay’ mā lam yajib lam
yūjad* ). In other words: an existent will be either essentially a
necessary existent, having necessary existence by itself, or it will be
a contingent existent, and such existents only come about when
necessitated by a cause, and their existence reaches the level of
necessity, that is, it comes to shed the possibility of nonexistence.
This premise is both certain and indubitable.

3. When the attribution of necessity is not required of the essence of
an existent, there is no other alternative but that it is brought about
by another existent, that is, a complete cause makes the existence of
the effect ‘necessary by another’ (*ḍarūrī bil-ghayr* ).

This premise is also self-evident and indubitable, for every attribution
must be in one of two states: by itself (*bil-dhāt* ) or by another (
*bil-ghayr* ). If it is not by itself it must be by another. Hence, if
the attribution of necessity required of any existent is not essential,
it must derive from another existent called the cause.

4. Circles and regresses of causes are impossible. This premise is also
certain and was explained in Lesson Thirty-Seven.

Given these premises, the argument from contingency may be formulated as
follows: the existents of the cosmos are all brought about with the
attribution of necessity by another, because, on the one hand, they are
contingent existents, and do not have the attribution of necessity
essentially (the first premise). On the other hand, no existent occurs
without the attribution of necessity (the second premise), hence, they
must be necessary by another, and the existence of each of them is
required by a cause (the third premise).

Now if we assume that their existences are required by each other, this
implies a circle of causes, and if we assume that the chain of causes
extends infinitely, this implies an infinite regress of causes. Both of
these are invalid and impossible (the fourth premise). Hence, there is
no alternative but to

accept that at the head of the chain of causes there is an existent
which by itself necessitates existence, that is, which is the Necessary
Existent.

This demonstration may also be formulated in another version which does
not require the fourth premise (the invalidity of the circle and
regress), as follows. For the set of contingents, no matter how
imagined, necessity will not be realized in any of them without the
existence of the essentially Necessary Existent. In conclusion, none of
them comes into existence, for none of them by itself possesses
necessity so that the others could derive necessity from it. In other
words, the necessity of existence in every contingent existent is a
borrowed necessity, and as long as there is no essential necessity,
there will be no room for borrowed necessities.

This can also be formulated in a more concise version: an existent is
either essentially a necessary existent or is a necessary existent by
another, and every necessary existent by another unavoidably will
ultimately lead to an essentially necessary existent: ‘Everything which
is by another ultimately leads to that which is essential.’ Hence, the
essentially Necessary Existent is established.

The Second Demonstration (Ibn Sīnā’s Demonstration)
---------------------------------------------------

The second demonstration is originally close to the first demonstration,
and it is formulated with three premises:

1. The existents of this cosmos are contingent existents, and they do
not essentially require existence, for if one of them were the Necessary
Existent, the argument would be finished. This premise is like the first
premise of the previous demonstration, with one subtle difference. In
the previous demonstration the stress was on the necessity of existence
and the denial of it for contingents, while here the stress is on
existence itself.

2. To become existent every contingent existent is in need of a cause
that brings it about. This premise is another way of putting the point
that every effect is in need of an efficient cause, which was proven in
the discussions of cause and effect, and it is like the third premise in
the previous demonstration, with the same difference as was indicated.

3. It is impossible for there to be a circle or regress of causes. This
is the very same as premise four in the previous demonstration.

Given these premises the demonstration may be formulated as follows.
Every existent in this world, which is assumed to be a contingent
existent, needs an efficient cause. It is impossible for the chain of
causes to proceed infinitely, or for there to be a circular relation
among them. Hence, the chain of causes unavoidably leads to an ultimate
cause at the beginning, which itself is without need of a cause, which
is the Necessary Existent.

This demonstration was formulated by Ibn Sīnā (Shaykh al-Ra’īs) in
his*Ishārāt* as follows. An existent is either the Necessary Existent or
a contingent existent. If it is the Necessary Existent, the point is
proven, and if it is a contingent existent, it must ultimately lead to
the Necessary Existent in order to avoid a circle or regress. He
considered this to be the firmest demonstration and called it the
‘Demonstration of the Sincere’ (*burhān-e ṣiddīqīn* ).

What is outstanding about this version is that not only does it not
require recourse to the attributes of creatures and a demonstration that
they have a

temporal origin or motion or some other attribute, it does not require a
demonstration of the existence of creatures at all, for the first
premise is propounded in the form of an assumption.

In other words: the procedure of this demonstration turns upon nothing
more than the acceptance of the principle of entified existence, which
is self-evident and indubitable. Only those who would deny the most
self-evident and most intuitive things, including the presentational
knowledge of themselves, who would absolutely never accept the existence
of any existent, not even their own existences, thoughts and words would
deny this principle!

However, to those who accept the principle of entified existence it will
be said: entified existence is either necessary existence or contingent
existence, and there is no third alternative. In the first case, the
Necessary Existent is proven, and in the second case, unavoidably one
must accept the existence of the Necessary Existent because contingent
existents need a cause and in order to avoid a circle or regress, the
chain of causes must end with the Necessary Existent.

In these two demonstrations, as was noted, there is recourse to the
contingency of existents, which is an intellectual attribute for their
whatnesses, and by means of this attribute their need for the Necessary
Existent is established. Hence, in a sense each may be considered to be
a*burhān limmī* (demonstration from cause to effect), as was explained
in the previous lesson. However, reliance of the discussion upon
whatnesses and whatish contingency is not entirely in keeping with the
position of the fundamentality of existence. For this reason, Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn has formulated another demonstration which has its own
particular advantages, and this he calls the ‘Demonstration of the
Sincere,’ and he considered the demonstration of Ibn Sīnā to possess a
mere resemblance to the Demonstration of the Sincere.

The Third Demonstration (Mullā Ṣadrā’s Demonstration)
-----------------------------------------------------

This demonstration was formulated by Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn on the basis
of the principles of transcendent theosophy (*ḥikmat-e muta‘āliyyah* )
which he himself had propounded, and he considered it to be the firmest
demonstration and most deserving of the name ‘the Demonstration of the
sincere.’

This demonstration has been formulated in a number of different
versions, but it seems that the strongest of them is the one he himself
formulated, whose presentation is composed of three premises:

1. The fundamentality of existence and the respectivalness of whatness,
which was proved in Lesson Twenty-Seven.

2. The possession of levels for existence and its particular gradation
(*tashkīk-e khāṣṣ* ) between cause and effect, such that the existence
of the effect does not have independence from the existence of its
existence-granting cause.1

3. The criterion of the need of the effect for the cause is the being
relative and dependence of its existence on the cause; in other words,
it is the weakness of the level of its existence, and as long as there
is the least

amount of weakness in an existent it will necessarily be an effect and
in need of a higher existent and it will have no sort of independence
from it.2

Given these premises, the Demonstration of the Sincere can be formulated
in accordance with the taste of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn as follows:

The levels of existence—except for its highest level, which possesses
infinite perfection and absolute needlessness and independence—are the
very relation and dependence itself, and if the highest level did not
occur, neither would the other levels, because what is implied by the
assumption of the occurrence of the other levels without the occurrence
of the highest level of existence is that the mentioned levels would be
independent and without need of it, while their existential aspect is
the relation itself and poverty and need.

In addition to the fact that it possesses the advantages of the
demonstration of Ibn Sīnā, this demonstration also has several other
excellences.

One is that this demonstration relies upon the concept of existence, and
neither whatnesses nor whatish contingencies are mentioned. It is clear
that such a demonstration is more suitable to the doctrine of the
fundamentality of existence.

The second is that it does not require a rejection of the circle or
infinite regress, but rather it itself is a demonstration for the
incorrectness of the assumption of an infinite regress of efficient
causes.3

The third is that with the help of this same demonstration, not only
unity, but also some of the other attributes of perfection of Almighty
God may be established, as will be indicated in the appropriate place.

References
----------

1 Cf., Lesson Thirty.

2 Cf., Lesson Thirty-Three.

3 Cf., Lesson Thirty-Seven.
