Lesson Sixty-Three: Tawhīd
==========================

The Meaning of Tawhīd
---------------------

*Tawḥīd* and the oneness of God Almighty have various senses in
philosophy,*kalām* (scholastic theology), and*‘irfān* (gnosis or
mysticism). The most important of the philosophical meanings are as
follows:

1.*Tawḥīd* in the necessity of existence, that is, no existent other
than the sacred divine essence is essentially the Necessary Existent.

2.*Tawḥīd* in the sense of simplicity and lack of composition, which has
three subsidiary meanings:

Absence of composition of actual parts.

Absence of composition of potential parts.

Absence of composition of whatness and existence.

3.*Tawḥīd* in the sense of the negation of any difference between
attributes and essence, that is, the attributes which are related to God
Almighty are not like the attributes of material things, which are
accidental, and do not occur in His essence, in technical terms, as
‘additions to essence’, but rather their instances are the same as the
sacred divine essence, and they are all identical to one another and to
the essence.

4.*Tawḥīd* in being the Creator and Lord, that is, God the Almighty does
not have partners in the creation and management of the universe.

5.*Tawḥīd* in true actuality, that is, every effect which emerges from
an agent or cause, ultimately can be traced back to God, the Supreme,
and no agent is independently influential: ‘There is no influence in
existence, but Allah’ ( *Lā mu’aththir fī al-wujūd illā Allāh* ).

Tawhīd in the Necessity of Existence
------------------------------------

In order to prove the unity and oneness of the essence of the Necessary
Existent, the metaphysicians have formulated some arguments, the most
certain of which is formed with the employment of the Demonstration of
the Sincere (in the version of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn), which may be
presented as follows:

Existence has a level than which it is not possible for there to be any
more perfect one; that is, it possesses a limitless perfection, and such
an entity cannot be numerous. In technical terms, it possesses ‘*waḥdat
ḥaqqah ḥaqīqiyyah* ’ (lit. ‘a true real unity’). The conclusion is that
the existence of God, the Supreme, cannot be multiple.

The first premise of this demonstration is really the conclusion of the
Demonstration of the Sincere, for from the above demonstration it was
concluded that the chain of levels of existence must terminate in a
level which is the highest and most perfect in which there is no
weakness or imperfection, that is, it possesses infinite perfection.

With a bit of attention, the second premise becomes clear, for if it is
assumed that such an existent is numerous, this would imply that each of
them lacks entified perfections of the other, that is, the perfections
of each of them would be limited and finite, while according to the
first premise, the perfections of the Necessary Existent are infinite.

It might be imagined that the infinity of the perfections of the
Necessary Existent implies that no other existent occurs at all, for the
occurrence of

any other existent would mean the possession of a part of the
perfections of existence.

The answer to this objection is that the perfections of other levels,
all of which are created by the Necessary Existent, are the rays of His
perfections and their existences do not interfere with the infinite
perfections of the Necessary Existent. However, if another Necessary
Existent is assumed, the perfections of their existences would interfere
with one another, because each of them possesses a perfection which is
original and independent, and neither of them would be a radiance of or
subordinate to the other.

In other words, two objective perfections will interfere with one
another when it is assumed that they are of the same level, but if one
is vertically above another it will not interfere with it. Therefore,
the existence of creatures does not contradict the infinity of the
perfections of the Creator. It is not the case that when a perfection is
added to a creature, it is given up by the Creator and the Creator
Himself comes to lack it. But the assumption of the existence of two
Necessary Existents, or the infinity of their perfections are
contradictory.

This point also can be made as follows: the assumption of two
independent objective perfections is incompatible with the assumption
that each of them is infinite. However, if one of them is the very
dependency and relation to the other or is considered to be the radiance
and manifestation of the other, there will be no contradiction with the
infinity of the other that possesses independence and absolute
needlessness.

The Negation of Actual Parts
----------------------------

If it is assumed that the sacred essence of God is composed of actually
existing parts (God forbid), then all of the assumed parts will be
either necessary existents or at least some of them will be contingent
existents. If all of them are necessary existents, and none of them is
in need of any of the others, this assumption leads to a multiplicity of
necessary existents, which was refuted in the previous section. If it is
assumed that they are in need of one another, this would be incompatible
with the assumption that they are necessary existents. If it is assumed
that one of them is without need of the others, the Necessary Existent
will be that needless one, and the assumed composition will not have any
reality as a composition of true parts, for every true composition is in
need of its parts.

If it is assumed that some of its parts are contingent existents, the
assumed part which is a contingent existent unavoidably will be an
effect. If it is now assumed that it is the effect of another part, it
becomes clear that the other one is in fact the Necessary Existent
possessing independent existence, and that the assumption of a true
composition among them is incorrect. If it is assumed that the part
which is the contingent existent is the effect of another necessary
existent, this would imply a multiplicity of necessary existents, whose
invalidity was established.

Hence, the assumption of the composition of the essence of the Necessary
Existent from actual parts will never be correct.

The Negation of Potential Parts, Time and Space in God
------------------------------------------------------

What is meant by the existence of the potential parts of an existent is
that it actually has a single integrated existence, and none of its
parts possesses actuality and individuality and determinate boundaries,
but intellectually it is possible to analyze them and separate them from
one another, and whenever such an analysis is carried out, the single
existent will change into several existents each of which will possess
individuality and determinate boundaries. If the potential parts can be
collected, this means that their compound existent possesses spatial
extension (length, width and depth). If they cannot be collected, and
each of them is brought about by the destruction of another, this means
that it possesses temporal extension. Both types of extensions are
specific to bodies, as was previously explained.1

Hence, the denial of potential parts in God is in fact the denial of His
corporeality, and it implies that He has neither time nor place.

However, the argument for the rejection of potential parts for the
essence of the Necessary Existent is that, as was indicated, an existent
which possesses potential parts may be divided intellectually into
several other existents, and in conclusion, it will be possible for it
to be annihilated, while the existence of the Necessary Existent is
necessary and indestructible.

Another argument is that the potential parts of every existent are
homogeneous with that same existent, just as the parts of a line or a
plane or volume are of the same kinds respectively. Now, if it assumed
that the Necessary Existent possesses potential parts which are
contingent existents, this would imply that the parts are not
homogeneous with their whole. If it is assumed that the supposed parts
are also necessary existents, this would imply the possibility of a
multiplicity of necessary existents. On the other hand, it would imply
that necessary existents which are brought into existence through
analysis and division, for the time being, are not existents, that is,
that their existences are not necessary, while the existence of the
Necessary Existent is necessary and has no possibility for non-being at
any time.

The Refutation of Analytic Parts
--------------------------------

The ancient metaphysicians commenced discussions under the heading of
‘the negation of a whatness for the Necessary Existent,’ and proved it
by several arguments, and they took advantage of this for various
theological problems. The simplest argument is that the aspect of having
a whatness is one of being indifferent to existence and nothingness, and
there is no place for such an aspect in the sacred essence of God. In
other words, whatness and contingency are twins, and just as contingency
has absolutely no place in the divine essence, whatness also has no
place in God’s sacred Being.

However, on the basis of the principles of transcendent theosophy this
issue may be explained in another way which will lead to more important
and more brilliant conclusions. It is that whatness is basically
abstracted from the limits of finite existents, and as was earlier
mentioned, it is a conceptual frame that corresponds to finite
existents, and since the existence of God Almighty is free from any sort
of limitation, no sort of whatness can be abstracted from Him.

In other words, the intellect can only analyze limited existents into
two aspects, whatness and existence. “All contingents are composed of
whatness

and existence.” However, the existence of God Almighty is pure existence
and the intellect cannot relate any whatness to it.

In this way, simplicity is proven for Almighty God in a more exact
sense, which implies the denial of any kind of composition in the holy
presence of God, even composition from intellected analytic parts.

Among the conclusions that follow from the simplicity of the existence
of God, the Supreme, in the sense of pureness and infinity, is that no
perfection can be denied of God. In other words, all of the attributes
of perfection are established for the essence of the Necessary Existent
without being considered additions to the essence, and in conclusion,
the unity (*tawḥīd* ) of the attributes is established.

Reference
---------

1 Cf., Lesson Forty-One to Forty-Three.
