Lesson Sixty-Four: The Unity of Divine Actions
==============================================

Introduction
------------

In the previous lesson we explained Unity (*tawḥīd* ) in the sense of
the denial of partners in the necessity of existence, and also in the
sense of the denial of multiplicity within the essence of God.
Meanwhile, we indicated the denial of difference between the attributes
and the essence of God, which will be explained in the discussion of the
attributes of God. However, a polytheism (*shirk* ) which was and is
common among different groups of polytheists is polytheism regarding
creation, and especially regarding the management of the cosmos. The
previous discussions are not sufficient to refute this, for it is
possible that in accepting Unity in the previous sense one believes that
the unique Necessary Existent created only one or several creatures and
has no other role in the creation of other creatures and the management
of their affairs, which is performed by those who are not themselves
necessary existents, and that they are independent and needless of God
for the creation and management of other phenomena. Therefore, it is
necessary to discuss Unity in creation and lordship separately.

Unity in Creation and Lordship
------------------------------

In order to prove Unity in creation and to deny partners with God in the
creation and management of the cosmos, the ancient philosophers reasoned
that creation is not restricted to direct and immediate creation, and
God, who creates the first creature directly and immediately, also
creates its actions and creations by the mediation of it. Even if there
are hundreds of intermediaries, all of them are also created by God
through mediation. In philosophical terms: “the cause of the cause is
also the cause, and the effect of the effect is also the effect.” In
reality, by adding this premise to the demonstrations for the Necessary
Existent, they established that the entire cosmos is His effect.

However, on the basis of the principles of transcendent theosophy, and
especially regarding the principle of the dependence of the existence of
the effect and lack of independence in relation to the creative cause,
this issue becomes clearer and stronger. It is concluded that although
every cause possesses a kind of relative independence in relation to its
effect, all causes and effects in relation to Almighty God are poverty
itself, dependence and need, and do not possess any sort of
independence. Therefore, true and independent creativity is restricted
to God Almighty, and all existents are in need of Him in all their own
aspects and in all states and times. It is impossible for an existent to
be needless of Him in any of its existential aspects or to be able to do
anything independently.

This is one of the most brilliant and valuable outcomes of Islamic
philosophy, which was presented to the world of philosophy in the
blessed and radiant thought of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn.

Likewise, philosophers have constructed other demonstrations for unity
in creation and lordship which are based on numerous theoretical
premises, and in order to prevent prolongation of the discussion, they
will be ignored. A demonstration from the Noble Qur’ān will suffice:

If there had been in them any gods except Allah, they [i.e. the heavens
and earth] would both have certainly been in a state of disorder.
(21:22).

This demonstration has been presented in several versions, and among the
clearest and closest to the purport of the āyah is the one presented
below:

This argument is composed of two premises:

1. The existence of every effect is dependent on its own cause. In other
words, every effect obtains its existence with all its aspects and
associations from its own creative cause. If it needs conditions or
preparation their existence must also depend on its creative cause.
Therefore, if two or several creative causes are assumed to be on the
same level, the effects of each of them will be dependent on its own
cause, and will not possess any sort of dependence on other causes or on
their effects. In this way, there will be no relation or dependence
among their effects.

2. The design of the observable world (the heavens and the earth and
their phenomena) is a single design in which all phenomena, whether they
are simultaneous or not, are related and dependent on each other. The
relations among simultaneous phenomena are various mutual causal
influences which cause changes and alterations in them, and these are
absolutely undeniable. The relations among the phenomena of the past,
present and future are such that the past phenomena prepare the ground
for the appearance of the present phenomena, and the present phenomena,
in turn, prepare the ground for the appearance of future phenomena. If
the causal and preparatory relations among the phenomena of the cosmos
were removed, no cosmos would remain at all, and no other phenomena
could take place. Just as, if the relation between the existence of man
with the air, light, water and nourishment were cut off, man would no
longer survive. He would no longer be able to prepare the ground for the
appearance of other men or other phenomena.

From the combination of these two premises it may be concluded that the
design of this cosmos, which includes a collection of uncountable
phenomena of the past, present and future, is the creation of a single
Creator, and under the wise control of a single Lord. For if there were
one or more other creators, there would be no relation among them, and
no single design would be decreed by them. Rather, every creature would
be brought about by its own creator, and would grow up with the help of
other creatures of that same creator. In conclusion, numerous and
independent designs would be brought about, and no relations would hold
among them, while the present design of the cosmos is a single and
interconnected design the connections among whose phenomena are
observed.

Finally, the point must be noted that creation and lordship are
inseparable, and the nurture and control of a single existent is not
separate from its creation and the creation of the things it needs. For
example, providing for man is not something separate from creating his
digestive system, the creation of nourishment and a livable environment.
In other words, these kinds of concepts are abstracted from the
relations between creatures and have no instances other than their
creation. Therefore, by proving unity in [the act of] creation, Unity in
controlling affairs and other aspects of lordship are established.

Unity in the Emanation of Existence
-----------------------------------

Likewise, another meaning of Unity is the restriction of independent
influence and the emanation of existence to the sacred divine essence,
for which there is much evidence in the verses of the Qur’ān and
narrations from the Prophet (*ṣ* ) and Imams (*‘a* ), and this is
established by attending to the demonstration which is formulated on the
basis of the principles of transcendent theosophy for the Unity of
creation and lordship. However, some misunderstandings exist in this
area which must be attended to in order to keep from going to extremes.

On the one hand, a group of theologians (Ash‘arites) deny that
intermediate causes have any efficacy at all, on the basis of the
literal meaning of a group of verses of the Qur’ān and narrations from
the Prophet (*ṣ* ). They basically deny the causality and effectiveness
of these causes, and they consider God to be the direct agent of all
phenomena. They hold that divine habits bring determinate phenomena into
existence in certain circumstances, otherwise other things and
conditions have no effect on their coming about.

On the other hand, another group of theologians (Mu‘tazilites) hold that
there is a kind of independence in the effectiveness [of intermediate
causes], especially for those agents which are considered to be
voluntary. They consider it to be incorrect to relate the voluntary
actions of man to God. This is one of the most basic differences between
these two schools of thought.

Although philosophers considered it correct to relate phenomena through
intermediaries—even the voluntary actions of man—to God, they justified
it only on the basis of the fact that the Necessary Existent is the
cause of all causes, until Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn provided the correct
explanation of causal relations and proved that since intermediary
causes themselves are the effects of God, they possess no independence,
and basically, the emanation of existence, in the precise meaning of the
word, is specific to God Almighty. Other causes are like the channels of
the emanation of existence; possessing different levels they play the
role of intermediaries between the main source of existence and other
creatures. Therefore, the meaning of the famous expression, “There is no
influence in existence but Allah,” will be that independent influence
and emanation of existence is specific to God Almighty. It is this fact
which is explained in the language of the verses of the Qur’ān and
narrations from the Prophet (*ṣ* ) and Imams (*‘a* ) as the dependence
of all things, even the voluntary actions of man, on the divine will,
permission, decree and ordinance. In fact, these cases show the
different stages which are considered by the intellect in order to trace
phenomena to the sacred divine essence. In a sense, these explanations
can be considered stages of teaching, for the understanding of the
precise meaning of Unity in actions by those who are not sufficiently
trained in intellectual problems is no easy matter, and the best method
of teaching it is one which includes several stages.

The Refutation of Compulsion and Delegation
-------------------------------------------

One of the problems which have caused the Mu‘tazilites to deny that the
voluntary actions of man can be traced to God is that they have supposed

that otherwise man would have to be necessarily compelled in absolutely
all his actions. In addition to the fact that it is counterintuitive and
contrary to what is self-evident, this assumption leaves no room for
duty and guidance nor reward and punishment. All of these would be empty
notions. In this way the problem of compulsion and delegation has been
presented in Islamic theology (*kalām* ). The two sides of the issue
have been the subject of numerous discussions, a review of all of which
would require an independent book. Here we shall review only that which
is relevant to our discussion.

The mentioned problem can be presented in the following version. Every
voluntary action has an agent which performs it by its own will and
volition. It is impossible for a single action to be performed by two
agents and to be dependent on the wills of each of them. Now, if the
actions of man are dependent on his own will and volition, there will
remain no room for them to depend on Almighty God, unless in the sense
that God is the Creator of man, and if He had not created him and had
not given him the power of will and volition, man’s voluntary actions
would not occur. But if we consider them to be dependent on the divine
will, we must deny their dependence on man’s will. Man will be
considered as merely an involuntary subject for the occurrence of divine
actions. This is compulsion, which is invalid and unacceptable.

The answer is that taking a single action to depend on the will of two
agents is impossible only in case both of the agents are assumed to
influence its performance on the same level as each other, in technical
terms, they would be ‘parallel agents.’ But if both agents are
vertically related to each other, the dependence of an action on both of
them is unproblematic. The dependence [of an action] on two agents which
are vertically related does not merely mean that the principle of the
existence of the immediate agent depends on a mediating agent, but in
addition to this, that every aspect of the existence of the immediate
agent depends on the creative agent, and that even in the performance of
voluntary actions they are not without need of Him. At every moment they
obtain their existences and all the aspects of their existences from
Him. This is the correct meaning of the saying: “No compulsion and no
delegation, but something in between these two things” (*Lā jabr wa lā
tafwīḍ, bal amr bayn al-amrayn* ). As was earlier mentioned, the correct
understanding of this saying is possible in the shadow of the correct
understanding of the causal relation and the dependence of the existence
of the effect, whose originality is one of the merits of the explanation
given by Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn.


