Lesson Sixty-Five: The Divine Attributes
========================================

Introduction
------------

Regarding the limits of human abilities to know God, and the attributes
which can be attributed to the divine essence there are various
tendencies, some of which go to one extreme and some to another. For
example, relying on some ambiguous verses of the Qur’ān and narrations
attributed to the Prophet (*ṣ* ), some relate attributes and actions of
material existents, such as sadness, happiness, going and coming, and
sitting and rising, to God the Supreme. They are called in technical
terms*mujassimah* (those who believe in corporeal attributes)
and*mushabbihah* (those who believe in the similarity between God and
creatures). Others have absolutely denied the power of man to know the
essence and attributes of Almighty God. They rely on another set of
narrations and verses of the Qur’ān, and they take the attributes and
actions related to God Almighty to be negative. For example, they have
interpreted knowledge as the negation of ignorance and power as the
negation of weakness. Some have even expressed the view that attribution
of existence to God, the Supreme, does not mean anything but the denial
of nothingness!

In the midst of this, there exists a third tendency which chooses a way
between the extremes of similarity and abstraction. This tendency is
agreeable to reason and is confirmed by the Immaculate Imams (Peace be
upon them). We shall explain something about this tendency.

The Limits to Knowing God
-------------------------

It was previously said that knowledge of God, the Supreme, may be
divided into two types: presentational intuitive knowledge, and acquired
intellectual knowledge. Presentational knowledge has different levels,
the lowest of which exists in every human being, and with the perfection
of the soul and focusing the attention of the heart, it becomes
strengthened, until it reaches the level of the knowledge possessed by
the Friends of God (*awliyā’* ) who see Him with the eye of the heart
more clearly than any thing and prior to every thing. But, in any case,
the presentational knowledge of any*‘ārif* (gnostic, mystic) is measured
by his existential relation and the relation of his heart to God, the
Supreme. No one is ever able to completely comprehend the divine essence
and know Him as He Himself knows Himself. The reason for this is clear,
because every existent other than the sacred divine essence is limited
in its ontological level, even if it is infinite with respect to time or
in some other ontological aspects. The comprehension of the infinite by
the finite is impossible.

Acquired intellectual knowledge is obtained by mental concepts and its
level is subordinate to the power of the mind to precisely analyze and
understand subtle intellectual concepts. It is this kind of knowledge
that can be perfected by learning the rational sciences. At the same
time, the clarity of the soul, purification of the heart, refinement of
morals and elimination of materialistic and animalistic pollutions play
an important role in elevating this knowledge. Anyway, all intellectual
and spiritual perfections are due to the grace of God.

The Role of Reason in Knowing God
---------------------------------

Undoubtedly, the tools for the work of the intellect are mental
concepts, and basically, the intellect is that power which understands
universal concepts. As was explained in the section on epistemology,
intellectual concepts are divided into two general groups: one group is
that of whatish concepts or primary intelligibles, which are
automatically abstracted from particular individual objects of
perception, and which denote their ontological limits; another group is
that of concepts which are obtained through the activities of the
intellect itself, and although they may originate in some kind of
individual and presentational perceptions, these concepts are not
limited to the framework given by the perceptions, and they can be
extended or limited.

All intellectual knowledge about existence and its levels and about
everything which is not of whatness, and which is about metaphysics is
obtained with the help of these concepts, just as the concepts of
nothingness and negation are of this sort.

With this point it becomes clear that whatish concepts, which are
representations of the limitations of contingent existents, are not
applicable to God, but other intellectual concepts can be considered
means for knowing the divine attributes and actions on the condition
that they possess sufficient breadth and universality and are free from
the taint of imperfection and contingency, as are the concepts of the
Necessary Existent, the Creator, the Lord, and the other most beautiful
divine names. It must be observed that these kinds of concepts are
graded and possess multiple instances, and there is an incomparable and
immeasurable difference between the instances of such concepts in the
case of God and in the case of their other instances, for it is a
difference between the finite and the infinite.

It is for this reason that when they taught about the attributes of God,
the Supreme, the immaculate Imams, Peace be upon them, used these
concepts with the proviso of transcendence and denial of similarity to
the attributes of created entities. For example, they said, “He is the
Knower, but not as we know, the Powerful, but not as we are powerful,”
and this is the meaning of the words of Almighty God:

There is nothing like Him. (42:11)

Positive and Negative Attributes
--------------------------------

Concepts can be divided generally into the positive and the negative.
Positive concepts sometimes denote limited existents or their aspects of
limitation and deficiency, so that if their aspects of limitation and
deficiency were neglected they would change into other concepts, such as
all whatish concepts and a set of non-essential concepts which indicate
the weakness of the level of existence and its deficiency and
limitedness, such as the concepts of potentiality and disposition. It is
self-evident that such concepts cannot be posited of God, the Supreme,
but their negations can be considered as negative attributes, such as
the negation of partners with God, composition, corporeality, and time
and space.

Another set of positive concepts denote the perfection of existence, and
do not include any aspect of deficiency or limitation, although it is
possible

for them to be applied to limited instances, as well, like the concepts
of knowledge, power and life. These kinds of concepts can be related to
God, the Supreme, as positive attributes on the condition that the
instance is considered devoid of limitation. Their negations would be
incorrect because this would imply the negation of perfection of a
perfect infinite existent.

Therefore, all of the concepts which denote ontological perfections and
do not include a sense of deficiency or limitation can be established as
positive attributes for God, the Supreme. Likewise, the negation of all
concepts which include a kind of deficiency and limitation can be
considered as negative attributes of the Necessary Existent. If the
absence of the application of false names to God, the Supreme, is
emphasized, this is for the sake of preventing the application of
concepts which include a sense of deficiency or limitation.

Those who interpret the positive attributes of God, the Supreme, in a
negative sense, have imagined that in this way they can achieve an
absolute transcendence and prevent the relation to God of concepts which
are applied to contingent existents, while, firstly, the negation of one
of two contradictories is the affirmation of the other, and if they are
not willing to commit themselves to the affirmation of one of these
imperfections, they will have to allow that neither of two
contradictories is true, and secondly, when, for example, knowledge is
interpreted as the denial of ignorance, in fact, the sense of non-being
in ignorance is negated from the divine arena, and the assumption of the
sense of non-being is impossible without the assumption of its opposite,
knowledge. Hence, they must have posited knowledge at a prior level.

Attributes of Essence and Attributes of Action
----------------------------------------------

Attributes related to God, the Supreme, are either concepts which are
abstracted from the divine essence by focusing on a kind of ontological
perfection, such as knowledge, power and life, or they are concepts
which are abstracted by the intellect through a comparison between the
divine essence and His creatures, focusing on a kind of ontological
relation, such as being the Creator or Lord. The first group of concepts
are called attributes of essence, while the second group of concepts are
called attributes of action. Sometimes the attributes of essence are
defined as those attributes which are abstracted from the station of the
essence, and the attributes of action are defined as attributes
abstracted from the station of action.

Relating the attributes of essence to God, the Supreme, does not mean
that there exists something other than the divine essence, within it or
outside it, so that the essence could be considered separate from and in
lack of these attributes, contrary to the case of material entities, for
example, which can be imagined to lack some specific color, odor or
shape. In other words, the divine attributes are not additional to nor
other than the essence, but rather, when the intellect considers one of
the ontological perfections, such as knowledge or power, it posits the
highest level of this perfection for the divine essence, since His
existence, in its very simplicity and unity, possesses all of the
infinite perfections, and no perfection can be negated of Him. In a
third sense, the attributes of essence of the Necessary Existent are
intellectual concepts abstracted from a single instance without
indicating

any kind of multiplicity or plurality for the divine essence. This fact
is sometimes expressed in these words: ‘The perfection of*tawḥīd* is the
denial of attributes for Him’ (*Kamāl al-tawḥīd nafy al-ṣifāt ‘anhu* )
as is narrated from the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Alī, Peace be with
him.

In this field there are two extremist tendencies. On one hand there are
the Ash‘arites who imagined that the divine attributes are entities
outside the essence, and at the same time uncreated, so they held that
there are ‘eight preeternal things’ (*qudamā’ thamāniyyah* ). On the
other hand, the Mu‘tazilites held that attributes are to be negated, and
that their attribution to God is figurative.

However, the first position implies that, God forbid, either they accept
partnership in the necessity of existence, or they believe in the
existence of existents which are neither necessary nor contingent
existence!

The second position implies that the divine essence lacks ontological
perfections, unless their statements are interpreted as arising from
inadequacy of expression and they are taken to have meant the negation
of attributes being additional to the essence.

Likewise, ascribing attributes of action to God does not mean that aside
from the existence of God and that of His creatures, there are other
entified things called attributes of action and that they are attributed
to God, the Supreme. Rather, all of these attributes are additional
concepts which are abstracted by the intellect by a special comparison
between the existence of God, the Supreme, and the existence of His
creatures. For example, when the dependence of the existence of
creatures on God is considered, the concepts of the Creator, the
Originator, and the Initiator are abstracted from a certain perspective.

Therefore, the characteristic of the attributes of action is that in
order to abstract them, the existence of creatures must be taken into
consideration from a certain perspective. In other words, these
attributes rest on a relation and the consideration of the connection
between God and creatures. This relation rests on both its terms and
with the negation of one of them it would not occur. Therefore,
sometimes these attributes are called relational attributes (*ṣifāt
iḍāfiyyah* ).

It may be concluded that the attributes of action cannot be considered
the same as the divine essence, just as they cannot be considered
specific entified entities.

A noteworthy point is that material phenomena possess temporal and
spatial limits and conditions, and these limits and conditions influence
the relations which are taken to hold between them and God, and as a
result, the actions which are dependent on them are in one sense
conditioned by time and space. For example, it is said that God, the
Supreme, created the existent*x* at time*t* and location*l* , but these
conditions and limits in fact refer to creatures and are considered to
be the receptacle for the occurrence of the creature and its aspects.
They do not imply the ascription of time and space to God.

In other words, divine actions, which are dependent on time and space,
possess two aspects: one is the aspect relating to creatures, due to
which time and space are attributed to them; the other aspect is related
to God, the

Supreme, with respect to which the actions of God are free of time and
space. This point is worthy of much attention, and is the key to the
solution of many problems.

Another point is that if the attributes of action are considered in
terms of their source, and, for example, by the ‘Creator’ is meant one
who has the power to create (*Kawn al-wājib ḥayth yakhluq idhā shā’* ),
but not one who has performed the act of creation, in that case, they
will be reduced to attributes of essence.


