Lesson Sixty-Six: Attributes of Essence
=======================================

Introduction
------------

As indicated in the previous lesson, the concepts which refer to
ontological perfections and do not denote any kind of deficiency or
limitation are applicable to the sacred divine essence. All of them can
be considered to be attributes of the divine essence, such as Light
(*nūr* ), Magnificence (*bahā’* ), Beauty (*jamāl* ), Perfection
(*kamāl* ), Love (*ḥubb* ), Bliss (*bahjah* ), and other Names and
attributes which are presented in the noble verses of the Qur’ān, the
sacred narrations and the supplications of the Infallible Ones (*‘a* ),
which do not refer to the station of action.

However, what are usually mentioned as attributes of essence are Life
(*ḥayāt* ), Knowledge ( *‘ilm* ) and Power ( *qudrah* ), and most
*mutakallamīn* have added other attributes, such as Hearing ( *samī‘* ),
Seeing ( *baṣīr* ), Willing ( *murīd* ) and Speaking ( *mutakallim* ).
There are discussions about whether these concepts are attributes of
essence or attributes of action, which would require a very lengthy
review. Here we shall present a discussion of the threefold attributes
of essence, followed by a discussion of some of the other well known
attributes.

Life
----

Existents which are familiar to man may be divided into two general
groups, the living and the non-living. The attribute called life
(*ḥayāt* ) is attributed to living existents which are conscious and
possess voluntary movement, and in the Arabic language the word*ḥayawān*
(animate) is appropriately applied to living existents. However, if we
are precise, it becomes clear that the application of the attribute life
to material existents is a kind of ‘*waṣf bi ḥāl muta‘allaq* ’
(description of something in terms of another thing on which it is
dependent), and actually, life is an essential description of their
souls, and is accidentally related to their bodies.

After learning that animal souls have a degree of immateriality
(*tajarrud* ) (although this is an imaginal immateriality), we come to
the conclusion that life implies immateriality, and furthermore that
life is more expressive than immateriality, because immateriality, as
was previously indicated, is a negative concept.

In other words, just as extension is an essential characteristic of
material existents, life is an essential characteristic of immaterial
existence. Likewise, knowledge and will, which are also implied by life,
are immaterial.

Therefore, the concept of life denotes an ontological perfection, which
can be extended to existents which are not attached to matter. Hence,
all immaterial things possess the essential attribute of life, the
highest level of which is specific to the sacred divine essence. Hence,
given that the divine essence is immaterial, there is no need for
further demonstration to establish that life is one of the essential
attributes of God, the Supreme.

Here, several points should be mentioned.

One is that sometimes*life* and*living* are used in another sense, which
includes plants, but this sense includes an aspect of imperfection, for
it

implies growth and reproduction which are characteristics of material
things, and in this discussion such a sense is not intended.

Another point is that although life in the intended sense implies
knowledge, will and power, this implication does not entail conceptual
identity. The best evidence for this is that life is a self-contained
concept without any sort of relation, as opposed to the other concepts
mentioned for which there is a relation to their own objects (the known,
the willed, that over which one has power), which are considered
concepts involving relation. Therefore, if life is defined as knowledge,
power and will, this will be a definition in terms of its implications.

The third point is that it is possible that the life of God, the
Supreme, may be established in this way: life is one of the ontological
perfections of creatures, and it is impossible for the creative cause to
lack a perfection which emanates to its own creatures, but rather, the
creative cause should necessarily possess that perfection in a more
perfect form. Furthermore, after knowledge and power are established for
God, the Supreme, life, which is implied by them, will also be
established.

Knowledge
---------

The discussion of the knowledge of God is one of the most difficult in
metaphysics, and it is for this reason that philosophers
and*mutakallimīn* have many differences of opinion in this area, which
are presented, discussed and criticized in the detailed works of*kalām*
and philosophy. For example, some philosophers consider both knowledge
of His essence and knowledge of His creatures to be the same as the
divine essence. Others consider knowledge of the essence to be the same
as the essence, but knowledge of creatures to be forms dependent on but
external to the essence. Yet others, have considered knowledge of
creatures to be the same as their existences. Various and sometimes
strange views have been narrated from the*mutakallimīn* , some even
denying God’s knowledge of His own sacred essence! The fact is that the
divine essence in its very unity and simplicity is both the same as His
knowledge of His own essence and knowledge of all creatures, including
the immaterial and material ones.

Knowledge of Essence
--------------------

One who is aware of the incorporeality and immateriality of the divine
essence can easily understand that His sacred essence is the same as His
knowledge of Himself, just as is true for every independent immaterial
(non-accidental) existent.

If one has any doubt about the necessity of knowledge of one’s essence
for all immaterial existents, in the case of God, the Supreme, the
following argument can be employed. Knowledge of essence is an
ontological perfection which can be found in some existents, such as
man, and God, the Supreme, possesses all ontological perfections
infinitely; so He also possesses this one in its highest level.

Anyway, the demonstration of God’s knowledge of His sacred essence on
the basis of the principles of transcendent theosophy (*ḥikmat
muta‘āliyah* ) is an easy task.

Knowledge of Creatures
----------------------

The demonstration of knowledge of creatures, especially prior to their
appearance, and its philosophical explanation is not so easy. In this
regard there are various positions and views, the most important of
which are the following:

1. The position of the Peripatetics is based on the idea that knowledge
of creatures is by means of intellectual forms, which are concomitants
(*lawāzim* ) of the divine essence.

This position has some notable problems, for, if these forms are assumed
to be the same as the divine essence, this implies the existence of
multiplicity in the simple divine essence. If they are external to the
essence—as is understood from the expression*lawāzim al-dhāt*
(concomitants of essence)—then they will be unavoidably the effects and
creatures of God, the Supreme. This implies that, aside from these
intellectual forms, the divine existence at the station of His essence,
does not possess knowledge of His creatures and He has created these
forms without any knowledge!

Moreover, the knowledge obtained through intellectual forms will be
acquired knowledge. The establishment of such knowledge for God, the
Supreme, would imply the establishment of a mind in the divine essence,
while mind and acquired knowledge are specific to souls attached to
matter.

2. The position of the Illuminationists (*Ishārqiyyin* ) is based on the
idea that divine knowledge of creatures is the same as their existence,
and the relation of creatures to the divine essence is like the relation
of mental forms to the soul, whose existence is the same as the
knowledge of them.

Although this position does not imply relating acquired knowledge to
God, the Supreme, with the previous position it shares the difficulty of
the denial of detailed divine knowledge at the station of essence.

3. The position of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn is based on the idea that
knowledge of the essence is identical to presentational knowledge of
creatures. The most important principle for the explanation of this
position is the principle of the specific gradation of existence,
according to which the existence of an effect is considered to be the
radiance and unveiling of the existence of the cause, and the
existence-granting cause in its own essence possesses the perfection of
its effects, therefore, the presence of the essence to itself will be
identical to their presence.

However, he believes that there can be no direct knowledge of material
existence, and just as immateriality is the condition for being a
knower, it is also a condition for being known in essence (*ma‘lūm
bil-dhāt* ). But as was indicated in Lesson Forty-Nine, the hiddenness
of spatial and temporal parts of material entities from one another does
not contradict the presence of all of them for their existence-granting
cause.1 Therefore, God, the Supreme, possesses presentational knowledge
of all creatures, including immaterial and material ones, a knowledge
which is the same as His sacred essence.

A point which should be mentioned here is that there is no way for time
and space to enter into the arena of divine holiness. The sacred divine
existence encompasses all times and spaces, and in relation to Him,
past, present and future are the same. Therefore, just as the priority
of His

existence to creatures cannot be considered as a kind of temporal
priority, the priority of His knowledge to the existence of creatures
cannot be considered to be a temporal priority. Rather, what is meant by
the priority of His knowledge is an eternal priority (*taqaddum sarmadī*
), just as the existence and knowledge of other immaterial things in
relation to the material world have a perpetual priority ( *taqaddum
dahrī* ). 2

Power
-----

An existent which lacks a certain perfection cannot give it to another;
in other words, the production of an action by an agent which does not
have ontological homogeneity (*sinkhiyyat* ) with it is impossible. But
the production of an action by an agent which possesses its perfection
will be possible, and in the case of such an agent, it is said that it
possesses the power and ability for performing the action (i.e., the
power of agency (*quwwah f‘ilī* )). When this concept is restricted to a
living agent (possessing consciousness and will) and these are limited
to voluntary agents (intentional agents, providential agents, agents by
agreement, and agents by self-disclosure), the concept of power is
obtained. Therefore, power means a living voluntary agent being the
origin (*mabda’iyyat* ) of its actions. If such an agent possesses
infinite perfections, it will possess infinite power. Given this
analysis, there is no need for another demonstration to establish the
infinite power of the sacred divine essence.

According to this explanation, power is a graded concept whose instances
possess different levels. This concept includes the power of animals,
men, completely immaterial entities, and the power of God, and the same
goes for the concepts of existence, life and knowledge, etc., which were
previously mentioned. It was previously indicated that the application
of these kinds of concepts to God, the Supreme, does not mean that the
concomitants (*lawāzim* ) of their imperfect instances are also
established for the sacred divine essence. Rather, the concepts should
be abstracted in such a way that these concomitants are omitted.

For example, the power of animals and men to perform their voluntary
actions (i.e., agency (*mabda’iyyat f‘ilī* )) is conditioned by idea (
*taṣawwur* ), assertion ( *taṣdīq* ), and the appearance of
psychological motivation for the performance of the act. However, these
sorts of cases are inseparable attributes of souls attached to matter,
and none of these things—acquired knowledge, idea, assertion and
motive—are found in addition to essence at the station of completely
immaterial entities, especially the divine Being. However, that which is
valid in all cases of power is the existence of knowledge and love in
their general senses, the most highest instances of which are the
knowledge and love which are identical to the sacred divine essence.

A point that must be mentioned here is that the establishment of power
for God, the Supreme, requires the affirmation of volition, for power,
as was indicated, implies knowledge and volition, and is restricted to
living voluntary agents. It was explained in Lesson Thirty-Eight that
the highest level of volition is specific to the sacred divine essence
which is not influenced by any internal or external factor.

Another point is that the power of God is infinite, and includes all
contingent beings, but being within the power of God does not imply
occurrence, and the only things which occur are those whose creation is
willed. In other words, the meaning of the Omnipotent (*qādir* ) is not
that He performs everything He is able to do; rather, it means that He
performs everything He wants to do. Therefore, essentially impossible
things are outside the ambit of things His power can bring about. The
question of whether the power of God covers these things is incorrect.
On the other hand, not all the things within His power will be subjects
of the divine will to be brought into existence. Hence, the domain of
the objects of His will and of existence will be smaller than that of
the objects of His power. However, the reason why the divine will does
not cover some contingents will be clarified in future chapters.

References
----------

1 Cf., Lesson Forty-Nine.

2 Cf., Lesson Forty-Three.
