Lesson Sixty-Seven: Attributes of Action
========================================

Introduction
------------

As was made clear in Lesson Sixty-Five, the criterion according to which
an attribute is counted as an attribute of essence or an attribute of
action is that if the concept of refers to an existence outside the
essence, it will be an attribute of action, and otherwise it will be an
attribute of essence.

Therefore, if we consider the concept of knowledge in such a way that it
implies the existence of an external object of knowledge, it will be an
attribute of action, as in verses of the following sort:

And verily We will try you until We know which of you are mujāhidīn
(those who struggle) and patient. (47:31)

This verse refers to the occurrence of knowledge at a specific time, and
so, the concept of knowledge contained in it bears the meaning of
reference to something external to the essence, and its temporal
qualification is due to the temporality of the object of knowledge.

On the other hand, if we consider the concept of an attribute of action
in such a way that it does not imply an external existence, it becomes
an attribute of essence, as is the case with the concept Creator which
refers to the power to create.

Given this standard, we shall review several well-known attributes.

Hearing and Seeing
------------------

These two attributes are usually considered to be attributes of essence,
while it seems that according to the above-mentioned standard, they
should be considered to be attributes of action, for the concepts of
audition and vision still refer to an awareness of audible and visible
existents, even after one divests them of material requirements such as
having ears, eyes and knowledge acquired through the senses. Their
application to cases in which the objects of hearing and seeing do not
have actual existence is contrary to ordinary language, although they
can be so applied if they are interpreted as knowledge of audible and
visible things or the ability for hearing and seeing, and the other
attributes of action can be similarly interpreted.

Speaking
--------

Speech (*kalām* ) in ordinary usage is a word which on the basis of
convention refers to a determinate meaning, and a speaker (*mutakallim*
) uses it in order to convey his intentions to others. This requires the
possession of a larynx, vocal chords, a mouth and the exhalation of air
through the vocal tract, as well as the previous existence of
conventions. No matter how we develop this concept and delete the
characteristics of its instances we cannot ignore the properties of
conveying a meaning to a person addressed. For example, gesticulation
can also be considered a kind of speech, while it possesses none of the
mentioned characteristics, and even creating a meaning in the mind of
the person addressed can be considered a kind of speaking. But, if these
properties are not considered, it will not agree with common parlance
(*‘urf* ). Even though philosophical and intellectual truths are not
subordinate to language and common understanding, here the

discussion is about the employment of concepts for divine attributes,
which are defined by means of language.

It may be concluded that the concept of speaking includes the existence
of the person addressed and the speech which is communicated to him, and
hence it should be considered an attribute of action. However, one may
interpret it as the power for speech, or as something else, so that it
will also become an attribute of essence.

Will
----

Another of the most difficult problems of philosophical theology is that
of God’s will, which has raised many differences of opinion among
philosophers and sectarian differences among theologians and has brought
about abundant debates and discussion, a complete review of which
requires an independent book. On the one hand, one group considers the
divine will to be an attribute of essence additional to the essence,
while on the other hand, another group considers it to be the same as
the essence itself, reducing it to knowledge of the best. Some have
imagined it to be an accident of essence, like human will, which appears
in the soul of man. Others have considered it to be the first creature
of God, by means of which other creatures are brought into existence.
Finally, some have considered it to be an attribute of action abstracted
from the plane of action. There are other minor differences about such
things as whether the divine will is one or many, created or
pre-eternal, etc.

In order to solve this problem, first, the meaning of will should be
explained precisely, and then its proper place among the attributes of
essence and action should be determined and its principles and
implications should be discovered.

The Concept of Will
-------------------

As was explained in Lesson Thirty-Eight, the expression will (*irādah* )
is employed in at least two senses: one is wishing or desiring and the
other is deciding to perform an action. The objects of a person’s desire
and affection may be objective things, but may even be beyond the range
of one’s power and ability, such as man’s affection for the beautiful
and enjoyable things of the world (“*you desire the frail goods of this
world* ” (8:67)), or they may be one’s own voluntary actions, such as
loving the good and worthy deeds which one performs, called generative
will (*irādeh-ye takwīnī* ), or they may be the voluntary actions of
other people, such as desiring that another voluntary agent perform some
deed by his own will, in which case they would be called cases of
legislative will (*irādeh-ye tashrī‘ī* ). However, the will to order and
to establish rules and regulations are in fact cases of the will to
legislate rather than legislative will, and should be considered a kind
of generative will. (Take note.)

The Reality of Will
-------------------

Will, in the sense of wanting and loving, are psychic qualities of
animals and men, but in the sense abstracted from this, it denotes
aspects of the existence of immaterial things which may also be related
to completely immaterial entities and to God, the Supreme. As was
previously indicated,

love can be considered one of the essential attributes of God, which is
basically directed toward the essence itself, and subordinate to this,
to the effects of the essence in that they are good and perfect.
Therefore, in this sense will can be considered an attribute of essence
the reality of which is nothing but divine love, which is identical to
His essence.

Will in the sense of making decisions is a passive quality in souls
attached to matter, or one of the actions of the soul, and in either
case, it is a created thing in the soul, originating in idea and
assertion and desire. Such a thing cannot be attributed to completely
immaterial things, especially not to God, the Supreme, for the sacred
divine Being is free of the occurrence of accidents and psychic
qualities. However, it can be considered to apply to God, the Supreme,
as a relational attribute of action (such as creation, providence, and
ordering, etc.) which is abstracted by comparing the actions of
creatures to the divine essence in that He possesses love of good and
perfection. Since one of the terms of the relation possesses temporal
and spatial qualifications, these qualifications can be considered to
apply to the divine will, as well, from the viewpoint of the objects of
the will. As was explained in Lesson Sixty-Six, expressions such as:
“*His command when He wills a thing is only to say to it, Be, so it is*
” (36:82), bear the same sort of meaning as was given for knowledge of
created things.

It is to be concluded that divine generative will can be taken in two
senses: one in the sense of love directed toward His own voluntary
actions, which is a single pre-eternal essential attribute identical to
the essence, whose relation to actions and objective entities is like
essential knowledge, which basically is of the sacred divine essence,
and subordinately of His effects and manifestations. Likewise, divine
love basically is directed toward His own sacred essence and
subordinately toward the effects of His existence in that they overflow
from the divine goodness and perfection, and this is why it is called
will.

The second sense of generative will is a relational attribute which is
abstracted by comparison between divine actions and His attributes of
essence, and because it is subordinate to the newness (*ḥudūth* ) and
multiplicity of actions, temporality and multiplicity are attributed to
it.

Likewise, the divine legislative will which is directed to the
production of good deeds by voluntary agents, will be an attribute of
essence in the sense of liking these actions because of their goodness,
which is a manifestation of the goodness of the divine essence; it will
be an attribute of action and be temporal in the sense of relation of
legislation, which occurs in the temporal realm, by essential love.

Wisdom and the Best Order
-------------------------

Another of the divine attributes of action is the attribute of wisdom,
whose essential origin is love of goodness and perfection, and knowledge
of them. That is, since God, the Supreme, loves goodness and perfection,
and also is aware of the aspects of goodness and perfection of
existents,1 He creates creatures in such a way that they may possess as
much goodness and perfection as possible. Of course, divine love is
fundamentally directed to His own sacred essence, and subordinately to
His creatures. The same fundamental and subordinate relations exist
among creatures, as well, that

is, a creature without any imperfection other than that of being
contingent and created and possessing all contingent perfections
characterized by unity and simplicity, will be in the first rank of
being loved and favored, and other creatures will be in the succeeding
ranks according to their ontological ranks and perfections, until the
level of material things is reached, where there is conflict among their
ontological perfections. On the one hand, the continuation of existents
that exist at a specific time slice conflicts with the appearance of the
succeeding existents, and on the other hand, the perfection of some of
them depends on the transformation and obliteration of others, as the
growth and development of an animal or man is obtained by means of
nourishment by vegetables and some other animals. The more perfect an
existent is the more favored it will be.

It is here that divine wisdom requires an order that causes the
occurrence of more and higher ontological perfections, that is, the
chain of material causes and effects is created in such a way that to
the extent possible the maximum number of creatures partake of the best
perfections. This is what is called ‘the best order’ (*niẓām-e aḥsan* )
in the language of philosophy, and the attribute which necessitates this
is called ‘providence’ (*‘ināyah* ).

The divine sages have proved that the order of creation is the best in
two ways: one is from cause to effect (*limmī* ): divine love for
perfection and goodness requires that the order of creation possess
maximum perfection and goodness and that the imperfections and
corruptions which are necessary for a material world and the
interferences among corporeal existents be reduced to a minimum. In
other words, it can be said that if God, the Supreme, had not created
the world with the best order, this would be due to the fact that He
lacked knowledge of the best order, or because He did not like it, or
because He lacked the power to create it, or because He was stingy. In
the case of God, the Wise and Gracious, none of these assumptions is
correct. So, it is proven that the world possesses the best order.

The second way is from effect to cause (*innī* ): through the study of
creation and inquiry into the secrets and wisdom and exigencies which
are observed in their qualities and quantities. To the extent that human
knowledge increases, awareness of the wisdom of creation also increases.

In view of divine wisdom, it becomes clear why the divine will is
directed to specific cases, and in conclusion, the realm of things that
are willed is more limited than the realm of things within divine power.
This was the question which was raised at the end of the previous
lesson. The answer is that only the cases within the perimeter of the
best order are objects of divine will. This topic will become clearer in
subsequent lessons. The position of those who have claimed that the
divine will is only directed to those things which possess exigency, and
that it is exigency which limits the divine will, should be interpreted
in this way, otherwise, exigency is not an objective and entified thing
to have an effect on the divine will, and the effects of an action
cannot have an influence on its cause. Also, those who say that divine
power, mercy, and will are conditioned by His wisdom should be
interpreted in this way, otherwise, in the sacred divine essence it

does not make sense to say that there is a plurality of faculties or an
interference among the attributes.

Reference
---------

1 Cf., Lesson Thirty-Nine, in which there was an explanation of goodness
and perfection.
