Lesson Sixty-Eight: The Purpose of Creation
===========================================

Introduction
------------

One of the important problems of metaphysics and theology (*kalām* ) is
the problem of the purpose of creation, which has been the subject of
discussions and different views. On the one hand, some experts have
denied that divine deeds have a purpose or final cause. On the other
hand, there are those who consider the divine purpose to be to profit
creatures; and there is a third group which believe in the unity of the
efficient and final cause of immaterial entities.

In general, in this area there have been many views the citation and
critique of which would become overlong. Therefore, first we will
explain the concept of purpose and other similar philosophical
expressions, then we will mention some useful introductory points in
order to explain the problem and remove doubts about it, and finally, we
will explain the correct meaning of divine purposefulness.

Purpose and Final Cause
-----------------------

The literal meaning of the word*hadaf* (purpose) is target. In common
conversation, it means the result of a voluntary action which is the aim
of a voluntary agent from the beginning and for the sake of which the
action is performed, so that if the result of the action had not been
taken into account, the action would not have been performed.

The result of an action is called the end (*ghāyah* ) insofar as it is
the terminus of the action; it is called the purpose (*hadaf* or*gharaḍ*
) insofar as it is taken into consideration and intended by the agent
from the beginning; and it is called the final cause (*‘illat-e ghā’ī* )
insofar as the result of the action is desired and this desire is the
cause for the will of the agent to be directed toward the performance of
the action. However, that which really influences the performance of the
action is knowledge and the love of the result, not its objective
existence; rather, the objective result is the effect of the action, not
its cause.

The term*ghāyah* (end) is usually used in the sense of the terminus of a
motion, and the relation between its instances and those of *hadaf*
(purpose) is that of partial overlapping ( *‘umūm wa khuṣūṣ min wajh* ),
for, on the one hand, in natural motion no purpose can be considered for
a natural agent, while the application of the concept of *ghāyah* to its
terminus is correct. On the other hand, in creative acts in which there
is no motion, the concept of final cause and effect can be correctly
applied although there is no place here for *ghāyah* to have the sense
of a terminus of motion. However, sometimes it is used in the sense of
the final cause, and here one must take care not to confuse these two
senses, and not to relate the characteristics of one to the other.

The relation between agent, action and result has been the topic of
numerous philosophical discussions, some of which are presented in
Lesson Thirty-Nine. Now we shall begin to explain some issues pertaining
to the present discussion and which are useful for explaining the
correct meaning of the divine purpose of creation.

Some Points
-----------

1. Usually, the voluntary actions of human beings are performed in this
way: first, there appears the idea of the action and its result, an
assent of the priority of the act for obtaining the result and the
benefit accruing therefrom, followed by a yearning in the soul for the
good, perfection and benefit resulting from that act. When requisite
conditions obtain and obstacles are removed, one decides to perform the
action, and, in fact, the main factor and stimulus for the performance
of an action is the yearning for its benefits. Therefore, the final
cause must be considered to be this yearning. That to which the yearning
is directed is figuratively and accidentally called the final cause.

It must not be imagined that this process is necessary in all voluntary
actions nor that if an agent lacks acquired knowledge and a yearning of
the soul, his action will not be voluntary or lack a final cause.
Rather, what is necessary in any voluntary action is knowledge and
yearning in general, regardless of whether the knowledge is by presence
or acquired, and whether the yearning is added to the essence or is the
essence itself.

Therefore, the final cause of complete immaterial things is the same as
the love of their own essences, which is subordinately directed to their
effects as well, a love which is identical to the essence of its agent.

Therefore, for such cases, the efficient cause and the final cause is
the essence of the agent.

2. As was indicated, an action is desired subordinate to the desire of
the goodness and perfection that result from it. Therefore, the
desirability of the purpose is prior to the desirability of the act, and
the desirability of the act is subordinate and respectival.

However, the purpose taken into consideration in performing an action
may itself be a preliminary for the achievement of a higher purpose and
its desirability may take shape in the radiance of the desirability of
another thing. But, ultimately, every agent will have a final and
fundamental purpose and the intermediary and proximate purposes, and the
preliminaries and means, all obtain their desirability in its radiance.

Anyway, the desirability of an action is subordinate and respectival,
while the priority of purpose depends on the view, intention and
motivation of the agent such that it is possible for a determined
purpose to be intermediary for one agent and to be the final and
fundamental purpose of another agent.

3. The fundamental desirability of a purpose, and the respectival
desirability of an action and means appear in the form of a yearning in
the soul, and the object of this yearning is an absent perfection
realizable as an effect of the action. However, for completely
immaterial entities, all of whose possible perfections actually exist,
no lack of goodness or perfection can be imagined which might be
attained by means of an action. In reality, it is the love of the
existent perfections which is directed subordinately to its effects
which causes the emanation of these effects, that is, it causes the
performance of a creative action. Hence, the desirability of action of
immaterial existents is respectival and subordinate, but subordinate to
an existent perfection not to the desirability of an absent perfection.

4. The deeds one performs may have numerous effects, not all of which
one is conscious of or motivated to acquire. Therefore, one usually
performs an action in order to acquire one of its effects or results,
although it is also possible that a deed may be performed for several
parallel purposes.

However, in the case of completely immaterial entities, every good
effect which results from an action is considered and desired, although
the desirability of each of them may be subordinate to the desirability
of an existent perfection in it. But it is possible that among the
subordinate desirabilities there is a relation of relative priority and
subordination. For example, although the existence of the cosmos and the
existence of man, insofar as they are radiances from divine perfection,
are subordinately desired by God, the Supreme, since man possesses more
and higher perfections and the appearance of the cosmos is a preparation
for man’s appearance, therefore, the desirability of man can be
considered fundamental in relation to the desirability of the cosmos.

The Purposefulness of God, the Supreme
--------------------------------------

Given the points already made, it becomes clear that the existence of a
final cause for every voluntary action is necessary, whether it is
creative or preparatory, whether it is instantaneous or gradual, and
whether the agency is intentional, by agreement, providential or
manifesting.

In reality, the final cause is something in the essence of the agent,
not an external result of the deed, and the application of the concept
of final cause to an external result is figurative and accidental,
because the love, satisfaction or yearning of the agent is directed
toward the obtaining of it, and the finality of the external result of
preparatory gradual deed, in the sense of being the terminus of motion,
has no relation to a final cause. The essential end of motion is not the
same as the essential final cause. (Take note.)

Therefore, divine deeds, insofar as they are voluntary, possess final
causes and the fact that the divine Being is free of acquired knowledge
and yearnings of the soul does not imply that the divine essence is
without final causes. Likewise, this does not imply any lack of
knowledge or love in the divine essence.

In other words, the denial of a motive and final cause additional to the
essence for completely immaterial entities and for agents by providence,
by agreement, and by manifestation, does not mean the absolute denial of
purpose for them, nor that purpose is to be restricted to intentional
agents. Just as the intellect obtains concepts from the attributes of
the perfections of creatures, and after divesting them of their
limitations and their material and contingent implications relates them
to God, the Supreme, as positive attributes, the intellect also
abstracts love of the good and perfection after divesting them of
imperfection and contingency and establishes them for the divine essence
and considers them final causes for His actions. Since all the divine
attributes of essence are the same as His sacred essence, this attribute
of love which is considered to be the final cause for creation and the
source of His actual will, is the same as His essence, and, in
conclusion, the efficient cause and the final cause for divine actions
are the very same as His sacred essence.

Just as divine knowledge applies fundamentally to His sacred essence and
subordinately to His creatures, which are aspects of His existence with
differences in level and grade, divine love also applies fundamentally
to His sacred essence and subordinately to the good and perfection of
His creatures, and among them there is also a relative priority and
subordination in being loved and desired. That is, the divine love for
creatures applies in the first degree to the most perfect of them which
is the first creature and then to other creatures, the most perfect
[love] for the most perfect [creature],*al-akmal fal-akmal* . Even among
material and corporeal entities among which there is no specific
gradation, one may consider the more perfect to be the purpose for the
creation of the less perfect, and conversely, one may consider material
things to be preparatory to the appearance of man, “*It is He who
created for you all that is in the earth.* ” (2:29) Finally, one can
consider the love for the Perfect Man to be the final cause for the
creation of the material cosmos. In this sense, it may be said that God,
the Supreme, has created the material world for the perfection of
corporeal existents and for the attainment of their actual good and
perfection, for every existent which possesses different levels of
perfection and imperfection, the most perfect level has a relative
priority in being loved and desired. However, this does not imply that
imperfect existents or the levels that are less perfect than the
existence of some existent have no level of desirability at all.

In this way, one may consider there to be vertical purposes for the
creation of man. That is, the final purpose is the attainment of the
ultimate level of perfection, nearness to God, benefiting from the
highest and most lasting emanation, eternal mercy and God’s pleasure.
The intermediary purpose is the realization of worship of and obedience
to God, the Supreme, which are means to the attainment of the higher
stations and final purpose. The proximate purpose is the preparation of
the material and social conditions and realization of the necessary
knowledge for free choice of the right way of life and the spread of the
worship of God in society.

For this reason, after emphasis that the creation of man and the world
are not vain and absurd, and possess wisdom of purpose,1 one finds in
the Qur’ān that, on the one hand, the purpose of the creation of the
cosmos is to prepare the grounds for the free choice and trial of man,2
and on the other hand, the purpose of the creation of man is declared to
be the worship of God, the Supreme.3 Finally, the ultimate purpose is
considered to be proximity to the divine mercy and to benefit from
eternal triumph, welfare and felicity.4

Considering that which has been said, a common approach among the three
mentioned positions may be formulated. That is, what is meant by those
who consider the final cause to be only the sacred divine essence is
that the essential and fundamental object of desire for God, the
Supreme, is nothing but His sacred essence which is absolute goodness
and possesses infinite perfections. And what is meant by those who deny
that divine actions have final causes is that the motive for them is not
something additional to the essence, and His agency is not a kind of
intentional agency. And what is meant by those who declare that the
final cause and the purpose

of creation is the welfare of creatures or their perfection is that they
wanted to explain the respectival and subordinate purposes. It may be
concluded that one who holds any of these positions may interpret the
other two in a way that is acceptable.

A point which must be indicated at the end of this lesson is that in
discussions of will, wisdom, and the purpose of creation, we have relied
upon the aspects of goodness and perfection of creatures. For this
reason, the question arises as to how to justify their evils and
imperfections. The answer to this question will be found in the last
lesson of this section.

References
----------

1 See 3:191; 38:27; 21:16-17; 44:38-39; 45:22; 14:19; 15:85; 16:3;
29:44; 30:8; 23:[^115]:

2 See 11:7; 67:2; 18:[^7]:

3 See 51:56; 36:[^61]:

4 See 11:108, 119; 45:22; 3:15; 9:[^72]:
