Lesson Sixty-Nine: Divine Decree and Destiny
============================================

Introduction
------------

One of the problems raised in heavenly religions, especially in the
sacred religion of Islam, in the field of theology, which has been
explained intellectually and philosophically by theologians
(*mutakallimīn* ) and metaphysicians, is the problem of decree and
destiny (*qaḍā’ wa qadar* ), which is one of the most complicated
problems in theology and at the core of whose complexity is its relation
to man’s free will in his voluntary actions, that is, how can one
believe in divine decree and destiny while accepting the free will of
man and man’s role in determining his own destiny?

Here, some have accepted the inclusiveness of the divine decree and
destiny with respect to the voluntary actions of man but have denied
true human freedom. Others have restricted the scope of decree and
destiny to involuntary matters, and they consider the voluntary actions
of man to be outside the limits of destiny and decree. A third group has
tried to combine the inclusion of the voluntary actions of man in
destiny and decree with a demonstration of man’s freedom and volition in
choosing his own destiny. They have presented different views the review
of which would require an independent book.

For this reason, here we shall first present a short explanation of the
concept of decree and destiny, and then provide a philosophical analysis
and explanation of the relation between destiny and man’s voluntary
actions. Finally, we will explain the benefits of this discussion and
the reasons for its emphasis in divine religions.

The Concepts of Destiny and Decree
----------------------------------

The term*qaḍā’* (decree) means passing, bringing to an end, finishing,
and also means judgment (which, figuratively, is a kind of finishing).
The terms*qadar* and*taqdīr* mean measurement and measuring and building
something to a determinate size. Sometimes*qaḍā’* and*qadar* are used as
synonyms in the sense of [the Persian]*sarnevesht* , destiny. It seems
that the reason why the term*nevesht* (written) is used in the
translation of the Arabic terms is that, according to religious
teachings, the destinies (*qaḍā’ wa qadar* ) of existents are written in
a book or tablet.

Regarding the difference between the literal meanings of*qaḍā’* and
*qadar* , one can consider the stage of *qadar* to be prior to *qaḍā’* ,
because until the measure of something is determined it does not come to
completion, and this is the point which is indicated in many noble
*aḥādīth* .

A Philosophical Explanation of Destiny and Decree
-------------------------------------------------

Some of the great scholars have identified destiny and decree with the
causal relation among existents and have considered*qadar* to be ‘the
contingent relation between a thing and its incomplete causes,’
and*qaḍā’* to be ‘the necessary relation between and effect and its
complete cause.’ That is, when an effect is compared with each of the
parts of its complete cause or with all of them, except for the last
part, the relation will be one of contingency by analogy (*imkān
bil-qiyās* ), and when it is compared to the

entire complete cause, the relation will be one of necessity by analogy
(*ḍarūrat bil-qiyās* ), the former being called*qadar* and the
latter*qaḍā’* .

Although in itself this identification is acceptable, that which
requires more attention here is the relation of causes and effects to
God, the Supreme, for*qaḍā’* and *qadar* are basically divine attributes
of action, and must be discussed as such.

In order to clarify the place of these attributes among the divine
attributes, some points must be made about the levels which the
intellect considers for the realization of an action.

Levels of Action
----------------

Whenever the intellect considers an whatness which does not have to
exist or not exist, in other words, whose relations to existence and
nothingness are equal, it judges that in order to escape this
indifference another existent is needed, which is called its cause. This
is the issue about which the philosophers have said, ‘the criterion of
the need for a cause by an effect is whatish contingency (*imkān-e
māhuwī* ).’ It was previously said that according to the fundamentality
of existence, contingency of whatness must be replaced by ontological
poverty (*faqr wujūdī* ).

If a cause is compounded of several things, all of its parts must be
obtained in order for the effect to occur, for the assumption of the
occurrence of an effect without one of the parts of its complete cause
would mean the lack of efficiency of the absent part, and this would be
contrary to the assumption that it is a part of the complete cause.
Hence, when all the parts of a complete cause obtain, the existence of
the effect due to its cause becomes “necessary by another” (*wujūb
bil-ghayr* ), and it is here that the cause creates its effect and the
effect comes into existence.

These stages, all of which are obtained by means of rational analysis,
are explained in the language of the philosophers as follows: “Whatness
is contingent, then in need, then is made necessary, then becomes
necessary, then is made to exist, then comes to exist” (*al-māhiyyatu
amkanat, fa’ḥtājat, fa-ūjibat, fa-wajibat, fa-ūjidat, fa-wujidat* ). The
succession of stages of each of these concepts is distinguished by the
“then” ( *fa* ) of succession.

On the other hand, we know that in intentional agents, the will of the
agent is the last part of the complete cause, that is, although all the
preparations for an action may be provided, the deed will not be
performed until the agent wills to perform it. The occurrence of will
depends on ideas and assertions and the acquisition of a fundamental
yearning for the conclusion of the deed and a secondary yearning for the
deed itself. Therefore, here a succession may be posited of idea,
assertion, yearning for the conclusion, yearning for the deed, and
finally the decision to perform the action, in which the idea and
assertion include considering the characteristics, limits and
preparations for the deed.

Although this succession in the origination of the will is specific to
intentional agents, by divesting it of the aspects of imperfection it
can be considered to be a rational succession including knowledge,
fundamental love for the result and secondary love for the action in any
voluntary agent. It can be concluded that every voluntary agent has
knowledge of his own

action and its characteristics, and likes its consequence, and because
of them performs the action.

Now, if we consider a deed which must be performed gradually and by
bringing about causes and means and making preparations, it is necessary
to consider the relation between the action and its preparations and
temporal and spatial conditions. The preparations must be arranged in
such a way that the action is performed with specific limits and
characteristics so the desired result is obtained.

This review, evaluation, and estimation and the determination of limits
and characteristics may be called the determination of the action
(*taqdīr-e kār* ), which in the realm of knowledge is called epistemic-
determination (*taqdīr-e ‘ilmī* ), and in the realm of the external
world is called objective determination (*taqdīr-e ‘aynī* ). Likewise,
the final stage may be called ‘decree’ (*qaḍā’* ), which in the realm of
knowledge is called ‘epistemic-decree’ and in the realm of the external
world is called ‘objective decree’.

Given these introductory remarks, we should heed the following noble
verse: “*When He decrees an affair He only says to it, ‘Be’ and then it
is* ” (2:117). In this noble verse, the existence of every creature,
which is denoted by the sentence “then it is,” succeeds the command “Be”
of the Supreme Creator, which is similar to the succession of existence
( *wujūd* ) after being made existent ( *ījād* ) in the words of the
divine sages. Likewise, making existent ( *ījād* ) succeeds the divine
decree, which naturally will result in being the object of decree, and
these two concepts (decreeing and becoming the object of the decree) may
be compared to the terms ‘being made necessary’ and ‘becoming
necessary.’ Since making necessary depends on the completion of the
cause, and the last part of the cause of a voluntary action is the will
of the agent, the level of will must be considered to be prior to the
level of decree. “ *His command, when He wills anything, is only to say
to it: ‘Be,’ then it is* ” (36:82).

The point to be noticed here is that, as was explained in previous
chapters, action and the attributes of action, insofar as they are
related to God, the Supreme, are free from temporal and spatial
restrictions, but these restrictions are attributed to actions and
attributes of actions insofar as they are related to temporal, gradual,
material creatures. Therefore, there is no contradiction in saying that
divine bringing into existence is instantaneous and without duration,
but the existence of creatures is gradual and temporal. (Note
carefully.)

In this way, a series of attributes of action is obtained at the head of
which is knowledge and then will, then decree and finally making
existent (*ījād* ) (*imḍā’* , execution). The position of permission
(*idhn* ) and divine will (*mashiyyat* ) can be considered as being
between knowledge and will, just as*taqdīr* (destining) can be inserted
between will and decree, and this accords with the noble narrations
[from the Prophet and Imams (*‘a* )]. It should be added that
determination of the term (temporal limits of existents) is also
considered a part of destiny.

Given that the real bringing into existence is specific to God, the
Supreme, and the existence of every existent is ultimately traced back
to Him, we may conclude that everything (even man’s voluntary actions)
is

included in divine decree and destiny, and here the main problem
displays itself, that is, how can one combine decree and destiny with
human volition?

The Relation of Destiny and Decree to Human Volition:
-----------------------------------------------------

The problem of how to combine divine destiny and decree with human
volition is the same problem which is raised with even greater intensity
with regard to the unity of divine acts (*tawḥīd* *af‘ālī* ) in the
sense of unity in the emanation of existence, whose solution was dealt
with in Lesson Sixty-Four.

The conclusion drawn from the answer to this problem was that tracing an
action to a proximate and direct agent and to God, the Supreme, has two
levels, and divine agency is placed in a vertical position above man’s
agency. It is not the case that the actions done by humans must either
be traced to them or to God, the Supreme, but rather these actions,
while they are traced to the will and volition of man, at a higher
level, are traced to God, the Supreme. If it were not for the divine
will, there would be no humans, no knowledge or power, no will or
volition, and no action or consequence of any action. The existence of
all of them in relation to God, the Supreme, is their very relation and
attachment and dependency on Him. None of them has any sort of
independence of their own.

In other words, the voluntary actions of man, with the attribution of
being voluntary, are objects of divine decree (*qaḍā’* ), and their
being voluntary is part of characteristics and aspects of their being
destined (*taqdīr* ). Hence, if they occur deterministically, that would
be a violation of the divine decree.

The main source of the problem is that it is imagined that if a deed
depends on divine decree and destiny, there will be no room for the
agent’s volition and choice, while a voluntary action, disregarding the
agent’s will, will not become necessary, and every effect depends upon
divine decree and destiny only through its own causes.

It may be concluded that destiny and decree in the realm of knowledge
are two levels of actual knowledge, one of which (epistemic-destiny) is
abstracted from the discovery of the relation between the effect and its
incomplete causes. The other (epistemic-decree) is abstracted from the
discovery of the relation between the effect and its complete cause, and
according to what is inferred from the verses of the Qur’ān and*aḥādīth*
, the level of epistemic-destiny is related to ‘the tablet of clearing
and establishing’ (*lawḥ maḥw wa ithbāt* ), and the level of
epistemic-decree is related to ‘the guarded tablet’ (*lawḥ maḥfūẓ* ),
and those who are able to become aware of these tablets will be aware of
the knowledge related to them.

Objective destiny (*taqdīr-e ‘aynī* ) is the regulation of creatures so
that they will be subject to specific phenomena and effects, and
naturally, this destiny will be different for phenomena according to
their proximity and distance, just as it will be different in relation
to genus, species, individuals, and the states of individuals. For
example, the destiny of the human species is to live on the earth from a
determined time of origin to a determinate termination. The destiny of
every individual is such that he comes into existence from a determinate
mother and father in a limited slice of time. Likewise, the destinies of
his livelihood and the various aspects of his life,

and his voluntary actions, amount to the availability of specific
conditions for each of them.

The objective decree (*qaḍā’-e ‘aynī* ) is the attainment of every
effect to the limits of ontological necessity through the occurrence of
its complete cause, including the attainment of voluntary actions to
their limits of necessity, by means of the will of their proximate
agents. Since no creature is independent in existence and its
ontological effects, naturally the necessitation of all phenomena may be
traced back to God, the Supreme, Who possesses absolute self-sufficience
and independence.

It must be noted that decree (*qaḍā’* ), in this sense, is unchangeable.
Therefore, that which is stated in some noble narrations about the
change in ‘decree,’ means that the word ‘decree’ is used for destiny
(*taqdīr* ), whose decisiveness is relative.

Meanwhile, it has become clear that the objective destiny, insofar as it
is related to special relations among phenomena, is changeable. It is
this sort of change in destinies which, in religious texts, is
called*badā’* (surprise). 1 It is related to the tablet of clearing and
establishing: “ *Allah clears away and establishes what He wills, and
with Him is the Mother of the Book.* ” (13:39). Subordinate to objective
destiny, epistemic-destiny is also changeable, for epistemic-destiny is
knowledge of contingent relations and the conditional occurrence of
phenomena, not knowledge of necessary relations and the absolute
occurrence of phenomena.

The Benefits of this Discussion
-------------------------------

Given the emphasis which is placed on decree and destiny in religious
teachings, the question arises as to why so much emphasis is placed on
it.

The answer is that the belief in decree and destiny has two important
benefits, theoretical and practical. Its theoretical benefit is an
increase in the level of man’s spiritual knowledge with respect to the
divine plan of things, and a preparation to understand the unity of
divine actions in the sense of unity in the emanation of existence, and
attention to the divine presence in the ordering of all aspects of the
cosmos and man. The effects of this understanding are profound in the
perfection of the soul in its intellectual dimension. Basically, the
deeper and firmer man’s knowledge of divine attributes and actions is,
the more perfect the soul is.

From the practical aspect, there are two important benefits to this
doctrine: one is that when man knows that all the events of the cosmos
appear on the basis of decree and destiny, and the wise ordering of God,
he will bear with difficulties and hardships more easily, and will not
give up in calamity and crisis, but he will be well prepared to acquire
virtuous characteristics such as patience, gratitude, reliance on God,
contentedness and submission.

Secondly, he will not become inebriated and conceited with the pleasures
and joys of life, and he will not be enamored or infatuated with worldly
pleasures and negligence of God. “*So that you may not grieve for what
has escaped you, nor be exultant at what He has given you; and Allah
does not love any arrogant boaster* ” (57:23).

Anyway, care must be taken so that the problem of decree and destiny is
not incorrectly interpreted so as to provide an excuse for laziness,

complacency and a negation of one’s responsibilities, for this sort of
misinterpretation of religious knowledge is the ultimate desire of the
satans among men and genies. It causes one to fall into the deepest and
most dangerous valleys of wretchedness in the world and in the
hereafter. Perhaps it is for this reason that according to many
narrations, entrance into this sort of problem for those who are
incapable is forbidden.

Reference
---------

1 See W. Madelung, “Badā’” in*Encyclopedia Iranica,* 3:354-5, and Martin
J. McDermott,*The Theology of Al-Shaykh Al-Mufīd* (Beirut: Dar
el-Machreq, 1978), pps. 329-[^338]:
