Lesson Six: What is Philosophy?
===============================

The Relation between Subjects and Problems
------------------------------------------

We have thus far become acquainted with various philosophical terms, and
now it is time to clarify the subject of discussion of this book, and to
explain what we mean by philosophy and what problems are to be discussed
in this book. Before defining philosophy and giving a brief introduction
to its problems, it is good to provide some further explanation about
“subject”, “problem” and “principles” of the sciences and the relations
among them.

In the previous lessons we said that the term “science” according to
four of the five mentioned meanings is applied to a collection of
propositions which are considered to be interrelated. Furthermore, it
became clear that different relations distinguish the separate sciences.
It has also become evident that the best relation among different
problems to be considered as a standard for distinguishing among the
sciences is the relevance among their subjects, that is, the problems
whose subjects comprise the parts of a whole or the particulars of a
universal take the form of a single science.

Therefore, the problems of a science consist of propositions whose
subjects are under the umbrella of an inclusive topic (whole or
universal). The subject of a science is that very inclusive topic which
embraces the subjects of its problems.

Here we had better mention that it is possible for a topic to be the
subject of two or more sciences, and that the differences among them may
be due to their goals or methods of research. However, another point
must not be overlooked, which is that sometimes a topic which is
considered for the subject of a science is not absolutely the subject of
that science, and in reality it has a specific restriction, and the
differences among these restrictions for a single subject causes the
appearance of several sciences and the differences among them. For
example, “matter”, with regard to its internal composition and
characteristics related to synthesis and analysis of elements becomes
the subject of the science of chemistry, and with regard to its outward
changes and the characteristics appropriate to them it becomes the
subject of the science of physics. Another example is “word”, which with
regard to changes which occur in its construction becomes the subject of
the science of morphology, and with regard to the changes in inflection
it becomes the subject of the science of syntax.

Therefore, one should be careful about whether the inclusive topic is
the subject of a certain science absolutely, or with specific
restrictions and qualifications. How often an inclusive topic becomes
the subject of a general science absolutely, and then with the addition
of restrictions it takes the form of subjects for specific sciences. For
example, in the well known classification of philosophy according to the
ancients, body is the subject of all the natural sciences, and by adding
restrictions it takes the form of the subjects of mineralogy, botany and
zoology, etc. Regarding the quality of the branches of the sciences, it
was indicated that some divisions are obtained by restricting the scope
of a subject and by adding qualifications to the topic of the mother
subject.

Among the possible qualifications to add to the topic of the subject is
“the restriction of absoluteness” (*qayd iṭlāq* ), which means that in
that science principles are discussed which are proved for the essence
of the subject generally, or absolutely, without considering any
specific characteristics. In conclusion, it is to include all
individuals of the subject. For example, the principles and
qualifications are established for body in general, absolutely, whether
mineral or organic, whether vegetable or animal or human. In this way
one can determine the subject to be “absolute body”, and this sort of
problem may be further specified to specific sciences. The sages have
thus specified the first section of physics to cover such principles
with the names*samā‘ ṭabī‘ī* (elementary general physics) and*samā‘
al-kiyān* (elementary general astronomy), then they specified the groups
of bodies for specific sciences such as cosmology, mineralogy, botany
and zoology.

This same work can be done for more particular subdivisions of the
sciences. For example, the problems related to all animals can be taken
as a specific science whose subject is the animal, absolutely, or animal
qua animal. Then specific principles may be discussed for each kind of
animal in other more specialized sciences.

In this way, body in general makes up the subject matter for the section
of ancient philosophy called natural science, and absolute body makes up
the subject of the first part of physics*samā‘ ṭabī‘ī* (elementary
general physics). Each of the specific bodies, such as the cosmic
bodies, the mineral bodies and living bodies make up the subjects of
cosmology, mineralogy and biology. In the same way, living body in
general makes up the subject of the science of general biology, and
absolute living body makes up the subject of a science which discusses
the principles of all living existents. and the kinds of living
existents form the subjects of the particular branches of biology.

Here a question may be posed as to if a principle is common among
several kinds of universal subjects, but does not include all of them,
in which science should such principles be investigated? For example, if
something is common among several kinds of living existents, it cannot
be considered an accidental property of living body absolutely, for it
does not include all living existents, but on the other hand, to abandon
it to any of the relevant particular sciences would be repetitive. So,
where must it be placed?

The answer is that usually this sort of problem is also discussed in a
science whose subject of discussion is absolute, and the principles of
absolute subjects (‘*awāriḍ dhātiyah* , essential accidents) are defined
as follows: a principle which is established for the essence of the
subject before being modified by the qualifications of the particular
sciences. Really, the looseness of this definition is preferable to the
repetition of the problem. As in the case of first philosophy or
metaphysics, some philosophers have said that in it precepts and
accidents are discussed which are established for an absolute existent
(or an existent*qua* existent), prior to being qualified by the
qualification of ‘natural’ or ‘mathematical’.

The Principles of the Sciences and their Relationships with Subjects and Problems
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have found that in each science a series of appropriately related
propositions, and in reality, the proximate aim and motivation for
learning and teaching that science is to analyze those propositions,
that is to prove that their predicates are true of their subjects. So,
in every science it is assumed that a subject exists, and that
predicates may be proved true of parts or individuals of this subject.

Therefore, before dealing with the presentation and analysis of the
problems of any science, one needs to have prior knowledge of a series
of things:

1. knowledge of the whatness and concept of the subject,

2. knowledge of the existence of the subject,

3. knowledge of principles by means of which the problems of that
science are solved.

Such knowledge is sometimes self evident and without need of exposition
or acquisition, in which case there would be no difficulty. But
sometimes this knowledge is not self evident and needs exposition and
proof. For example, it is possible that the existence of a subject (such
as the spirit of man) is a matter of controversy, and it is considered
possible that it is a fantasy and unreal, and in such a case its real
existence must be proven. Likewise, it is possible for there to be some
doubt about the principles on the basis of which the problems of a
science are solved, and so it is necessary that these principles are
first proven, otherwise the conclusions which are derived from them will
not have scientific value and certainty.

These sorts of matters are called “the principles of the sciences”
(*mabādī ‘ulūm* ), and they are divided into conceptual (*taṣawwur* *ī*
) principles and assertive (*taṣdīqī* ) principles.

The conceptual principles which consist of the definitions and
expositions of the whatnesses of the things under discussion, are
usually presented in the science itself in the form of an introduction.
However, the assertive principles of a science are different. Often they
are discussed in other sciences. As was previously indicated, the
philosophy of each science is really another science which undertakes
the explanation and establishment of the principles of that science.
Finally, the most general principles of the sciences are discussed and
investigated in first philosophy or metaphysics.

Among them, one may mention the “principle of causality ” which is
relied upon by the scholars of all the empirical sciences. Basically,
scientific research is done with the prior acceptance of this principle,
for this research revolves around the discovery of causal relations
among phenomena, but this principle itself is not provable in any
empirical science, and the discussion of this principle takes place in
philosophy.

The Subjects and Problems of Philosophy
---------------------------------------

From what has been said it follows that the best way to define a science
is by specifying its subject, and if it has restrictions, they should be
subject

to exact attention. Then the problems of that science may be introduced
as propositions which revolve about the above mentioned subjects.

On the other hand, the specification of a subject and its qualifications
depends on determining the problems which are intended for the
exposition of a science, that is, it is to a certain extent dependent on
convention and agreement. For example, if we consider the topic
“existent”, which is the most general concept for a real thing, we will
see that all the subjects of real problems come under its umbrella. If
we consider the subject of science, it will include all the problems of
the real sciences, and this science is philosophy itself, in the sense
of the ancients.

The presentation of such an inclusive science is not compatible with the
aims of the classification of the sciences. There is no choice but to
consider the subjects in a more limited way in order to fulfill the
mentioned goals. The ancient teachers first considered two groups of
theoretical problems each of which revolved about its own specific set
of issues. One group of them was called physics and the other was called
mathematics. Then each of these was divided into more particular
sciences. A third group of theoretical problems about God also could be
presented, and it is called theology (*ma‘rifat al-rubūbiyyah* ).
However, another group of theoretical intellectual problems remains,
whose subjects go beyond those already mentioned, and it is not
specified to any particular subject.

It seems that for these problems they did not find any particular name
to be appropriate, and since it was discussed after physics it was
called metaphysics (*mā ba‘d al-ṭabī‘ah* ). The position of these
problems in relation to the other problems of the theoretical sciences
is the same as the position of elementary physics with relation to the
natural sciences, and just as the subject of the former is “the absolute
body”, the subject of metaphysics is “the absolute existent” or “the
existent qua existent”, so that only problems which are not specified to
the subjects of any particular science are presented under it, although
these problems (of metaphysics) do not include all existents.

In this way the specific science called metaphysics came to exist, and
later was called “the universal science” (‘*ilm kullī* ) or “first
philosophy” (*falsafah ūlā* ).

As we previously indicated, during the Islamic era the problems of
metaphysics were assimilated to the problems of theology and was called
divinity in the general sense (*ilāhiyyāt bi al-ma\`nā al-a‘m* ). Oc-
casionally other problems, such as those of resurrection and the means
to man’s eternal felicity, and even some problems concerning prophecy
and imamate also are appended to it, as is seen in the section on
divinity in (Ibn Sīnā ’s) *Shifā‘* . If all of these problems are
considered to be the main problems of one science, and none of them are
impositions or digressions, then the subject of this science would have
to be considered very broadly. The determination of a single subject for
such various problems would be no easy task. For the same reason,
various attempts have been made to determine the subject and to explain
that all of these predicates are essential properties ( *awāriḍ
dhātiyyah* ) of it, though it has not been very successful.

Anyway, there are three alternatives: either, theoretical problems other
than physics and mathematics may be considered as a single science with
a single affected subject, or the standards and criteria of their
coherence and unity is to be taken as the unity of their aims and ends,
or every group of problems which has a specific subject is to be taken
as a specific science, including the universal problems of existence,
which are discussed under “first philosophy”, according to one of the
specific senses of “philosophy”.

It seems that this last is the most suitable of the alternatives, and
that therefore the various problems in Islamic philosophy which are
presented as philosophy and*ḥikmat* , are considered to be several
specific sciences. In other words, we will have a series of
philosophical sciences all of which share a rational method, but we will
apply the term absolute philosophy to “first philosophy”, and the main
purpose of this book is to present the problems of first philosophy.
However, since their solutions depend on the problems of knowledge, we
must first present epistemology and then we may review the problems of
ontology and metaphysics.

The Definition of Philosophy
----------------------------

Considering that philosophy is equivalent to first philosophy or
metaphysics, and its subject is the absolute existent (not the existent
absolutely), we can define it as follows: a science which discusses the
states of the absolute existent; or a science which addresses the
general states of existence; or a set of propositions and problems
regarding the existent in so far as it is an existent.

Several characteristics of philosophy have been mentioned, among the
most important of which are the following.

1. Contrary to the empirical and narrative sciences, the method for
solving the problems of philosophy is the rational method, although this
method is also employed in logic, theology, philosophical psychology and
some other sciences such as ethics, and even in mathematics. Therefore,
this method is not particular to first philosophy.

2. Philosophy undertakes to prove the assertions which are the
principles of the other sciences, and this is one of the ways in which
the other sciences stand in need of philosophy. Hence, philosophy is
called the mother of the sciences.

3. In philosophy a criterion is obtained for distinguishing true states
of affairs from imaginary and spurious ones, and hence, the main purpose
of philosophy is sometimes considered to be knowledge of true states of
affairs and the distinction of them from illusion, but it is better to
consider this as the purpose of epistemology.

4. The characteristic of philosophical concepts is that they are not
obtained from the senses or experience, such as the concepts of cause
and effect, necessary and contingent, material and immaterial. These
concepts are technically called philosophical secondary intelligibles,
and they are explained in the section on epistemology.

In view of these characteristics one can find out why philosophical
problems only can be proved by the rational method, and why
philosophical laws are not obtained by way of generalizing from the laws
of the empirical sciences.


