Lesson Seven: The Position of Philosophy
========================================

The Essence of the Problems of Philosophy
-----------------------------------------

In the previous lesson a definition of philosophy was presented, and it
was concluded in brief that this science discusses the general states of
existence. However, this is not sufficient to discover the essence of
philosophical problems. Of course, the exact understanding of these
problems is achieved when they are in practice investigated in detail,
and naturally, the more deeply one delves into them and comprehends
them, the better one will know the truth about them. However, before
beginning, if we are able to obtain a clearer view of the problems of
philosophy, we will be better able to understand the benefits of
philosophy, we will proceed with more insight and vision and with
increased eagerness and interest.

For this purpose, we begin by mentioning some examples of other problems
of the philosophical sciences, indicated the difference between them and
the problems of other sciences. Finally, we will deal with the
explanation of the essence of first philosophy and the characteristics
of its problems.

For every man, this basic and vital question is presented: Is his life
ended with death, and after it is there nothing left but the decayed
parts of his body, or is there a life after death?

It is clear that the answer to this question cannot be obtained from any
of the empirical sciences such as physics, chemistry, geology, botany,
biology, and others like them. Likewise the calculations of mathematics
and the equations of algebra contain no answers to these questions.
Hence, another science is needed to investigate these and similar
problems with its own methodology, and to clarify whether man is merely
this physical body or whether he has another reality which cannot be
sensed called the spirit. On the hypothesis that there is a spirit, is
it able to persist after death or not?

It is obvious that the investigation of this sort of problem is not
possible by the methods of the empirical sciences. Rather, one should
use rational methods to solve such problems. Naturally, another science
is needed to investigate such nonempirical problems. This is*‘ilm
al-nafs* , or philosophical psychology.

Likewise, other problems, such as those of the will, and volition which
are the basis of human responsibility, must be established in this
science.

The existence of such a science and the value of the ways of solving
problems presented in it depend upon the proof of the existence of the
reason and the value of rational knowledge. Therefore, another science
is needed to investigate the sorts of knowledge and to evaluate them
until it becomes known what intellectual perceptions are, and what value
they may have, and what problems they can solve. This is also another
philosophical science called epistemology.

Regarding the practical sciences, such as morals and politics, there are
also basic and important problems which the empirical sciences cannot
solve, including the recognition of the truth of moral good and evil,
virtue and vice, and the standards for determining and distinguishing
praiseworthy

and blameworthy deeds. Inquiry into this sort of question needs a
specific philosophical science or sciences, which in turn are in need of
epistemology.

With more careful attention it becomes clear that these problems are
interrelated, and as a whole are related to the problems of theology,
the study of the God Who has created the body and spirit of man and all
existents of the world; the God Who manages the cosmos with a special
order; the God Who causes people to die and again will raise them to
life to be rewarded or punished for their good and bad deeds, good and
bad deeds which are performed with volition and free will, etc..

Knowledge of God the Almighty and His attributes and deeds form a series
of problems which will be investigated in the science of theology
(divinity in the specific sense).

All of these problems are based on a series of more general and more
universal problems, whose scope also embraces sensory and material
affairs, such as the following.

Existents are in need of one another for their generation and
persistence, and among them there are passive and active relations,
actions and reactions, and causes and effects. All existents which are
within the range of man’s sense and experience are perishable, but there
must be another existent which is imperishable, and rather for which
nothingness and imperfection are barred. The arena of being is not
restricted to material and sensible existents, nor is it restricted to
changing, altering and moving existents, rather there are other kinds of
existents which do not have these characteristics and are not in need of
time and place.

The discussion about whether change, alteration, perishability and
dependency are implications of being, in other words whether there is a
stable, fixed, imperishable and independent existent, is a discussion
whose positive resolution leads to a classification of existents into
the material and the immaterial, the stable and changing, the Necessary
Existence and contingent existence, etc.. Until this sort of problem is
solved, for example, until necessary existence and immaterial existences
are established, sciences such as theology, philosophical psychology and
the like will have no basis or foundation. It is not only the solution
to such problems which requires rational argument, but if one wishes to
disprove these matters this also requires the employment of rational
methods, for just as sensation and experience by themselves are unable
to prove these things, they are also unable to disprove or deny them.

In this way, it has become clear that there is a series of important and
basic problems for man which cannot be answered by any of the specific
sciences, not even by the specific philosophical sciences. There must be
another science by which to inquire into them, and this is metaphysics,
the general science, first philosophy whose subject is not specific to a
kind of existent or determined and particular essence. Inevitably, its
subject must be the most universal concept which is applicable to all
real and objective things, and this is the term “existent”. Of course,
what is meant is not existent in that respect in which it is material,
and not in that respect in which it is immaterial, but rather in that
respect in which it is an existent,

that is, the absolute existent, or existent in so far as it is an
existent. Such a science has the position of being what is called “the
mother of the sciences”.

The Principles of Philosophy
----------------------------

In the previous lesson it was said that before beginning to solve the
problems of any science, one should recognize the principles of that
science. So, we may now ask, “What are the principles of philosophy?”
“And in what science should these be determined?”

The answer is that the recognition of the conceptual principles of the
sciences, that is, the knowledge of the concept and essence of the
subject of the science, and the concepts of the subjects of the problems
of the science usually are obtained in that very science itself. In this
way, the definition of the subject is presented in the introduction to
the text, and the definitions of the particular subjects of the problems
are defined in the introductions to each discussion. However, the
subject of philosophy (existent) and its concept are self-evident and in
no need of definition. Therefore, philosophy has no need for these
conceptual principles. However, the subjects of its problems, as in
other sciences, are defined at the beginning of every discussion.

The assertive principles of the sciences are divided into two groups:
one is the affirmation of the existence of the subject, and the other is
the principles which are employed for the establishment and
determination of the problems of the science. However, the existence of
the subject of philosophy has no need of being established, for the
principle of being is self-evident, and is undeniable by any rational
person. At least every one is aware of the existence of themselves, and
this suffices for knowing that the concept of “existent” has an
instance. Hence, other instances may be discussed and investigated. In
this way a problem appears for philosophy about which the sophists,
skeptics and idealists on the one hand, and other philosophers on the
other hand have disagreed.

As for the second group of assertive principles, that is the principles
which are the basis for solving problems, these are divided into two
groups: one is the theoretical principles (i.e., not self-evident),
which must be proved in another science, and are called the conventional
principles, and as was previously indicated the most general
conventional principles are established in first philosophy, that is,
some of the philosophical problems are used to establish the
conventional principles of other sciences. First philosophy itself
basically has no need for such conventional principles, although it is
possible that in other philosophical sciences, such as theology,
philosophical psychology, and ethics, principles may be employed which
are established in first philosophy or in some other philosophical
science, or even in an empirical science.

The second group of principles are self-evident propositions which have
no need to be proven or explained, such as the proposition of the
impossibility of a contradiction. The problems of first philosophy need
nothing more than such principles, and these principles do not need to
be proven, let alone to be proven in another science. Therefore, first
philosophy has no need for any other science, whether rational or
empirical or narrative. This is one of the most important
characteristics of this science, although

logic and epistemology are exceptions, because the reasoning for the
establishment of philosophical problems is on the basis of the
principles of logic, and it is on this basis that philosophical truths
are capable of being known rationally, that is, the existence of the
intellect and its ability to solve the problems of philosophy be
settled. But it may be said that what is basically needed by philosophy
are the self-evident principles of logic and epistemology, which cannot
really be considered “problems” and to be in need of proving, and the
explanation which are given of them are really explanations for
admonition. Further explanation of this is to be found in Lesson Eleven.

The Aim of Philosophy
---------------------

The proximate and immediate aim of any science is the awareness of man
of the problems which are presented in that science, and the quenching
of man’s innate thirst for understanding the truth. For one of the basic
human instincts is the instinct to search for the truth or unquenchable
limitless curiosity. The satisfaction of this instinct fulfills one of
man’s psychological needs, although this instinct is not equally active
and animated in all individuals, but in no individual is it completely
dormant and ineffective.

Normally every science has indirect benefits and consequences which
somehow influence man’s material and spiritual life and fulfills man’s
other natural and innate desires. For example, the natural sciences
prepare the ground for the greater exploitation of nature and a better
material life, and are related by a single intermediary to man’s natural
and animal life. The mathematical sciences are two removes from these
aims, although they may also have influence in another way on the
spiritual life and human dimension of man, and this is when they are
mingled with knowledge of philosophy and divinity and gnostic (*‘irfānī*
) attention of the heart, and when they present the phenomena of nature
in the form of effects of the power, greatness, wisdom and mercy of God.

The relation of the spiritual and human dimensions of man to the
philosophical sciences is closer than the relation to the natural
sciences, and, as was indicated, the natural sciences are also related
to the human dimension of man with the aid of the philosophical
sciences. This relation is manifested in theology and then in
philosophical psychology and ethics more than in others. For divine
philosophy acquaints us with God, the Supreme, and we become aware of
the attributes of beauty and majesty, which prepares the ground for our
relation to the source of infinite knowledge, power and beauty. The
philosophical science of the soul (*‘ilm al-nafs* ) facilitates
knowledge of the spirit and its attributes and characteristics, and
makes us aware of the essence ( *jawhar* ) of humanity, and extends our
vision in relation to the truth of our own selves, and leads us beyond
nature and beyond the limited bounds of time and place, and it brings us
to understand that man’s life is not limited and restricted to narrow
dark framework of worldly and material life. Ethics and morals show the
general way to the adornment and trimming of the spirit and heart, and
the acquisition of eternal felicity and ultimate perfection.

As was previously indicated, in order to obtain all of this valuable
knowledge, the problems of epistemology and ontology must be solved.
Hence, first philosophy is the key to these precious and unending
treasures which promise felicity and eternal benefits. It is the blessed
root of the “good tree” which produced the fruits of various spiritual
and intellectual virtues and boundless spiritual and divine perfections.
It plays the largest role in preparing the ground for human perfection
and sublimity.

In addition to this, philosophy provides worthy help with the avoidance
of Satanic temptations and the rejection of materialism and atheism. It
safeguards one from intellectual perversions, lapses and deviations. It
provides one with undefeatable arms in the arena of the combat of ideas.
It enables one to defend correct views and tendencies and to attack and
charge invalid and incorrect thoughts.

Therefore, in addition to playing a positive and uniquely constructive
role, philosophy also has an irreplaceable defensive and combative role.
In the expansion of Islamic culture and the destruction of anti-Islamic
cultures, it is highly effective.


