Abstract:
=========

Although the Islamic revival movement has been struggling since 15th
century, it has not resulted in significant changes in the Islamic
world. It should be of great attention for Moslem intellectuals to
engage in analytical studies on the history of Islam. By doing so they
are able to step into and to direct some of the stages of Islamic
revival, without losing the path in the course of it, and to predict its
continuing course. In this article I would like to apply this analytical
study of history to observe the dialectical thinking within the
Muhammadiyah concerning its early opposition to Sufi sm and more
recently to its acceptance of it. Data has been collected from
historical resources as well as from Muhammadiyah followersâ€™ works for
validity.

Recently Indonesia is more exposed to materialism so that it requires a
new balance in spirituality. This new sociological situation and
condition propels the dialectical thinking in Muhammadiyah. At first it
ignored spirituality and involve d itself intimately in modernity for
long time, but now it pays more attention to spirituality ( Sufism ).
Another factor perpetuat ing to the dialectical process is more related
to the historical continuity of tradition in Moslem communities as a
whole. By doing so recently, Muhammadiyah has been able to spread its
missionaries into rural areas, not like before when its normative
approach to the Koran was well suited only for Moslem s in the urban
areas.

This dialectical approach could have occurred a long time ago if
Muhammadiyah had become involved in comparative histor ical studies to
other societ ies which had already been exposed intensely to
materialism. This dialectical approach was used by Mohamed the Prophet
PBUH in preaching the Islamic mission. Ibn Khaldun had explained in
his*Muqaddimah* that any thing that persists in this world is the
changes itself.

Key words:**revivalism, Muhammadiyah, history, spirituality,
materialism.**


