A. Introduction
===============

Religious thinking as an interpretation of Islam in worldly life by
Moslem s has not answered modernity problems clearly. Indeed, it is very
difficult to encounter the effects of Western civilization because some
Moslem s are often impressed by the more glaring facets of modernization
and they do not adopt the more positive ones. Really, it is difficult to
achieve Islamic revivalism in the face of West ern supremacy. West ern
supremacy was made very clear in 19th century when most Moslem countries
were colonized. We will persist in our stand if we know how the West
supersedes Islamic civilization. The West also took a long time to do
this , namely from Renaissance in 16th century (Kuntowijoyo, 1999: 44) .

We can take a lesson from the early history of Islam, which was able to
supersede Gre co-Roman civilization so that it replaced Islam as world
civilization. At that time, the Moslem s were not afraid of studying new
things from other civilization s because they felt sure about their
belief s They did not underscore other civilization s so that they had a
strong spirit for study. They believed that Islam would not become a
great civilization if they did not take the positive aspects from other
civilization s in the world. This positive view toward other
civilization s can be traced to Mohamed PBUH[^2] ’s saying that “I was
appointed by the God to complete people’s appropriate behaviors”. It
implies that other civilizations also have conducted some appropriate
behaviors, so that they are civilized people. It is also relevant to
cite Mohamed PBUH’s saying that Moslem s should pursue science and
technology although it then existed in China.

Now the Moslem should be brave enough to adopt good values of modernity
to reform Islamic civilization itself. This implies that Moslem s should
catch up the advancement of West ern civilization by pursuing science
and technology. By doing so, Moslem s also can participates innovate the
modern civilization, which has not created universal human being and to
the contrary ha s created World War s twice. If Moslem s are able to do
both, Islam will be respected by other civilization because Islam can
present itself as an alternative to modern decadency.

In Indonesia there are two major Moslem groups, Muhammadiyah and
Nahdhatul Ulama (NU), who try to reform Moslem community. Both adopt the
modern nation state, however they differed themselves in which
Muhammadiyah claims itself as modern Islam group and NU represents the
traditional one. Muhammadiyah was established earlier in 1912 than NU in
1926, however larger Moslem associates with NU which was established to
preserve the common feature of Indonesian Moslem. After the independence
of Indonesia on August 17 th , 1945, both have a great influence over
political life in Indonesia, even compare with political parties. Both
also play major roles in reforming Islamic societies which often mark by
tensions, however actually they are also making dialectical approach in
reforming Islamic life within their own groups.

This article will address Islamic reformation in Indonesia, especially
within Muhammadiyah , concerning the dialectical process between Islam
and modernization. It follows the ways of modernization in Egypt
introduced by Muhammad Abduh (1849-1905). This movement was

intended as a revival for all Islamic groups. In fact it was supported
by Moslem s in the large cit ies It happened because the movement
started from the base of normative Islam (rational aspect) and neglected
the realities of various Islamic cultures. Most Moslems who lived in the
country areas were influenced much by tradition, so they were reluctant
to follow this radical innovation. It passes for quite long time and now
it appears as a dialectical approach between these two groups. In this
short article I would like to focus on the*Sufi* [^3] issue, which has
become the major issue between these two groups.


