B. Modern Structural transcendental Approach
============================================

Muhammadiyah was established on November 18th 1912 by KH Ahmad Dahlan.
Muhammadiyah is a modern Islamic movement in the ways of the Islam
modernists of 19th century such as Jamaluddin al-Afghani (1838-1897),
Muhammad Abduh (1849-1905), Rasyid Ridla (1856-1935). Modernists claimed
that this movement was the continuation of the “*salaf* ”[^4] movement
from Ibn Taimiyah and his follower Qoyyim al-Jauziyah (1292-1350) and
then continued by Muhammad bin Abdul Wahab (1703-1787) who tried to open
the gate of*ijtihad* [^5] (Kamal, 1994: 6-7).

However we should analysis further these statements of*salaf*
and*ijtihad* and confront them to historical facts. Muhammadiyah
used*salaf* to justify its spirit to open the gate of*ijtihad*
(religious reformation) and to offend those who were accused to be the
supporters of*taqlid* (following tradition) and the later then organized
themselves into Nahdlatul Ulama (NU). However NU also claimed its rights
of*salaf* because it followed the true Islam as interpreted Muhammad the
Prophet’s followers of His era, the next generation, and the following
generation. In 1924 the dispute over*salaf* was settled in the
conference of Al-Islam in Surabaya. Both agreed that*salaf* is only to
those who live up to the third century of Hijrah, out of them do not
belong to*salaf* (Hadar, 1998: 52). It implied that Muhammad denied that
it follows Muhammad bin Abdul Wahab’s movement in Saudi Arabia, although
both have the same characteristics as stated above by Kamal,
Muhammadiyah intellectualist.

Muhammadiyah and Abduh are also different in some respects. They have
different orientation in reforming Islamic society. Muhammadiyah tended
to follow Muhammad Abdul Wahab’s purification movement than of Abduh’s
modernization. It meant that Muhammadiyah emphasized on the belief
aspect of Islam, meanwhile Abduh called for*ijtihad* in*muamalah*
(social aspect of Islam) such as in politic, education, and sciences and
technology. As results, Muhammadiyah’s reformation faced the great
opposition from the traditionalist group which then joined in NU in 1926
so that the movement was not able to progress smoothly, especially in
the rural area (Haidar, 1998: 50).

Muhammadiyah tried to modernize Islamic thinking in Indonesia by
adopting the structural approach of modern ideas originated from the
West. This meant that Muhammadiyah want to implement the social
principles of the Koran during the early history of Islam into the new
social condition of modernization. Prof. Dr. Kuntowijoyo (2001: 9-29), a
prominent Muhammadiyah thinker, confirms that Muhammadiyah had imitated
the modern structure of state and society to implement Islamic social
principles. In deed, it ha s been relatively success ful in fill ing in
the modern structures of Indonesia in such areas as bureaucracy,
education, and military.

Muhammadiyah also adopted the modern cultural ideas of growth and
progress as a derivation of materialism. It tried to introduce
materialism into Islamic society, which had been ignoring this worldly
life and had fallen down into the inappropriate practices of Sufism.
Another characteristic of this systematic approach to worldly life is a
result of rationalization of religious interpretation. This is not only
an intellectual movement but also

modern organization covering all aspects of living. Within Muhammadiyah
there has developed many autonomous organizations to support worldly
living, besides religious bod ies to develop religious interpretation s
.

Abdul Munir Mulkan (2000, v-xiv), a vice-secretary of Muhammadiyah,
mentions that two kinds of expenses should be paid for following the
modern approaches. The first is elitism, in which religious
interpretation only fit s well for the Moslem middle-upper class es by
excluding the interest s of the Moslem majority who live in the rural
areas. Second is the tendency of diverting from a social-religious
movement into a formally religious interpretation. Both consequences are
a result of the modernist misusing of materialism and of rationalism as
an ideology instead of a methodological framework.

Moreover, Kuntowijoyo argues that Muhammadiyah lacks a cultural movement
so that it is not able to attract the majority of Moslem s He traces
that this cultural senseless ness is rooted in the sociological
structure of Muhammadiyah’s followers at the time of its establishment.
They come from urban society with the main attention to fulfill ing the
material needs of modernity. That is why they are pragmatic by
fulfilling the temporal demands of modern society while ignoring
ultimate human desires. They think that life is a matter of material
needs, which can be fulfilled by technical and organizational means
alone .


