C. Dialectic with Traditional Realities
=======================================

KH Ahmad Dahlan (1912-1923) had accomplished momentous jump in raising
man power qualities by establishing an organization of socio-religious
activities, not an Islamic political party. He tried to choose
organization as a means of spreading Islamic views because the
impediment of political parties, as this tended to divide the people and
the Dutch government tended to encounter its development. His decision
to adopt modern ways of living was due to not having studied a lot about
religion. That is why he did not produce numerous religious books
because he emphasized practical efforts to fulfill the worldly life.
Prof. Dr. M. Amin Abdullah (1995: 27) argues that:

*…this choice was not based on the in-depth studies on classical Islamic
literatures and he did not got inspiration in the conceptual framework
of theology which already well-developed in the classical intellectual
literatures.*

KH Ahmad Dahlan tried to criticize S ufi establishment with social
activities, by transforming Sufi with social ethics.*Zikir* or*wirid* ,
kinds of rememberance of the God, which was common amongst students in
the traditional religious schools was replaced with serious thinking
such as how to help the poor, to cure the ill, and giving religious
advice. All activities promulgated into a grand concept of “*amar ma’ruf
nahi munkar”* (to encourage to the proper behaviors and protect from
improper behaviors) (Abdullah, 1996: 156).

Ahmad Dahlan’s criticism to the malpractices of Sufism were very
essential of Muhammadiyah, based on the theology of monotheism. However
he was very tolerant to the existing tradition in society because he
wanted to conduct wise religious teaching. It was fact that some years
after his death, that Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), the countering organization
of traditionalism, was established in 31 January 1926 (Ricklefs, 1994:
269-270). Furthermore critics to Sufisms’ malpractices, were not
monopolized by modernist group of Muhammadiyah. KH Hasyim Asy’ari, one
of the founders and the leader of NU, also criticized Sufi’s
malpractices which had paralyzed Moslem society. However, he did not
want to discard Sufism and tried to reform it from within.

Incidentally, Muhammadiyah’s efforts to reform Islamic life, especially
with the regard to the Sufi’s malpractices, have contributed also to the
disruption of some of the Moslem’s spiritual aspects from its depth and
its originality. That is why people acknowledge more Muhammadiyah the
anti-TBC (Tahayul, Bid’ah, Churafat) movements than the socio-religious
reformation (Mulkhan, 2000: ix). It is due to Muhammadiyah’s reformation
based solely on the normative values of the Koran and Hadits and its
failure to accommodate the socio-cultural realities of the Moslem
societies as its missionary target. This stigma lasted for a long time
until there occurred the constructive dialogue with its counterpart, the
NU.

The dialogue was hindered for long time because Muhammadiyah disregarded
NU as tolerating “impure Islamic practices of TBC” so that it viewed the
NU as having diverted from Islamic monotheism. Islam is in nature is not
theology-minded religion comparable to Christianity, however

theology has been perceived deeply by some Moslems ever since the early
history of Islam, so that this hinders constructive dialogues amongst
Islamic groups. Some Moslems make use of theology to judge the people
either as Moslem or non-Moslem. Here more precisely it is used to judge
other Moslem groups either true-Moslem (*kaffah* ) or not. Most Moslem
groups in Indonesia fall into the Sunni sect, however sub-divisions
(*furu* ) amongst them often make it difficult to develop an open
dialogue because they are often related improperly to the sub-division
into theological judgment. Consequently each group assumes itself as
practicing true Islam and views others as not-truly practicing Islam.

It lasted for long time and then some of Muhammadiyah’s followers become
aware of their stagnant religious thinking. One of them, M. Thoyibi
(2000: 160-163), evaluates correctly that this is due to overconfidence,
religious orthodoxy, and contact avoidance with development outside.
Recently all impediments have resulted in another stigma that its claim
as a modern Islamic group often contradicts with its conservative views
as to modernization. It is not surprising given its reference only to
the Koran and Hadist, while ignoring the Islamic history and Moslem
societies sociologically. As further consequence, its membership is
limited to urban areas and the majority of Moslems are still associated
with NU.

There are two currents propelling Muhammadiyah into more intense
dialogue with NU. First, some of the followers are aware of the above
stagnancies. Second, some of them are persisting in their previous
tradition associated to NU. Furthermore Muhammadiyah try to make use of
tradition to increase its followers in rural areas. It should not
relieve its normative standard and follow the common Moslem, but instead
should develop a dialectical approach to reform Islamic societies by
considering sociologically Moslem societies. It should cooperate with
other Moslem groups to reform Islamic societies and develop constructive
dialogues with them to understand more thoroughly the conditions of
Moslem societies.

This does not mean that they should fuse into one group because each
group has its own social basis. It is not surprising that all the groups
differ in their attention as well as their capabilities to reforming
their Islamic societies. About the necessity of pluralistic groups to
fulfill the human being multi-faced demands, Nasr (1994: 147) argues
convincingly that:

Since every religion addresses a collectivity with varying psychological
and spiritual temperaments, it must possess within itself the
possibility of different interpretations. By bearing within itself,
providentially, several modes of interpretation of the same truth it is
able to integrate a multiplicity into unity and to create a religious
civilisation.

Recently some Muhammadiyah followers such as Munir Mulkhan (2000),
Thoyibi (2000), and Kuntowijoyo (1991) are consolidating themselves to
address some stagnant features within Muhammadiyah. This started during
its 42nd*muktamar* [^6] , held between 15-19 of December 1990, in
Yogyakarta when they agreed to reform the organization and its
leadership system. Then in the 43rd*muktamar* in Aceh in 1995 they were
able to reform the theological foundation s to accommodating both
Islamic tradition and local tradition. This decision changed the most
important

organization body of the Committee of Religious Matters (*Majelis
Tarjih* ) into the Committee of Religious Matters and the Development of
Islamic Thinking (Mulkhan, 2002: 31-32). As a result, Muhammadiyah tried
to develop systematically an inclusive theology which respects other
group ’s theologies. Subsequently it formulate d a thematic
interpretation categorizing all religions*ahl al-kitab* (people of
knowledge, such as Jew s and Christian s ).


