D. Historically and Structurally transcendental Approach
========================================================

Muhammadiyah developed this approach after it encountered the realities
within pluralistic societies, and even within Moslem society itself. By
doing so Muhammadiyah tried to transform a normative-subjective standard
of transcendental concepts into empirically historic concepts.
Accounting for historical and sociological realities, it is re consider
ing its missionary targets and its position within global network as
whole. Here the missionary target is not expansive to other religions,
but within the Moslem community itself. Indeed it is very important to
consider historical and sociological realities in order to understand
the culture by which it has been able to reach an epistemological
structure of knowledge with its norm and values of the society.

The importance of grasping culture had proved, in the Islamic missionary
organization of*walisanga* , a monumental success in Islamizing
Indonesia in the early 16th century, considering Islam had entered
Indonesia in 674 AD. It took a very long time for missionaries to
understand the Indonesian culture and to coordinate suitable Islamic
programs. The great people converting to Moslem happened just after the
missionaries were able to innovating local culture and surpassed it. Two
factors that improved the chance of success are simultaneously the
events of the collapse of the Hind kingdom of Majapahit and the
emergence of threat en ing power of the West. The collapse of Majapahit
enabled them to establish an Islamic state in the center of political
power in Indonesia and to grasp all of Indonesia. Indeed some Islamic
states which acknowledged the supreme power of Majapahit had already
existed in the periphery as early as the twelfth century such as Pasai
and Samudra Pasai Meanwhile the emerging threat en ing from the West
encouraged the people to identify with Islam to encounter the West.

Some Moslems preserved fanatically the products of Walisanga’s
innovation of traditions so that it hindered them from doing Islamic
mission to persist in reforming the Moslem societies. Missionaries
should be able in innovate the culture in the face of modernization so
that Moslems are able to respond positively to these trends of
modernization and globalization. As I mentioned above, culture is very
important because it can be used as means of internalizing modern
Islamic ideas into societies, as well as of reflecting religious
awareness upon them.

Up to now Muhammadiyah ’s followers’ attitudes toward tradition is still
far from monolithic because they have not able to formulate their
anti-TBC movement objectively and empirically in various socio-cultural
contexts (Kuntowijoyo, 1991: 269). In the view of Kuntowijoyo (1995:
86-87), the Muhammadiyah’s classical view of anti-TBC is based on
rational thinking (deductive reasoning) and should be supplemented with
inductive reasoning based on empiric and historic facts. I agree with
his idea to reform the classical view of anti-TBC. Accordingly Fazlur
Rahman, the conceptualist of neo-modern Islam, believes that it is not
taboo for reinterpreting theology as it is a result of thinking efforts.
Moreover the formulation of theology often took shape with political
interests in a matter of worldly life, besides its limitation by given a
time and space.

After observing the dialectical approach within Muhammadiyah I would
like to make note of Sufi st matters amongst its followers. As I mention
above that Muhammadiyah considered Sufi beliefs to be malpractices
related to theology, so it is necessary to shed light on it here.
Recently they try to study and accept Sufi sm as an opposite attitude
into Muhammadiyah mainstream. It is of course coincidental with their
inclusive approach to further propel their modern Islamic ideas. However
it may be that there are some important events which draw Muhammadiyah
into this path of Sufi sm Then I like to analyze the dialectical
approach to Sufi sm in order to better understand religious phenomenon
within a different time and space. By doing so I will address some
related questions as to why they just recently adopted Sufi sm Is it
because of different situation s and condition s between the lapsing
time? Does recent Sufi sm differ from the old Sufi sm ? What are the
similarities the old Sufi sm and recent Sufi sm ?

Here I would like to analyze Muhammadiyah’s scholars’ work on Sufism at
these different times in order to understand their growing knowledge
about Sufism. At first Muhammadiyah was opposed to Sufi malpractices.
More precisely, it did not develop Sufism, but recently it accepts Sufi.
These contradictory features are sometimes very difficult to be
understood by common people, but for those who know about history is not
surprising because it can be put into order within the dialectical
approach of thesis-antithesis-synthesis.   Ibn Khaldun, a well-know
Moslem historian, has proposed the law of history that the only still
persisting thing in the world is continuing change itself. The recent
acceptance of Sufism, of course, is related to the changes of historical
context, or to put into simple terms, the changes of situation and
condition between the time of Muhammadiyah’s onset in 1912 until recent
time.

Now, materialism has deeply influenced Indonesian society so that
Muhammadiyah’s followers feel great needs of a spiritual aspect which
only can be fulfilled by Sufism. These trends have been a common feature
amongst Moslem scholars in the West for long time before. This is the
case of Hamid Algar and Maryamm Jameelah, who bring up in the
materialistic society in the West. They grew bored with the
materialistic life and converted to Islam in the path of Sufism.
Furthermore they criticize Moslem modernists such as Jamaluddin
al-Afghani and Muhammad Abduh and accused them of selling the religion
to secularism. They are more blatantly categorizing modernists as
pragmatists (Madjid (ed.), 1984: 77). Here I do not mean that we should
be opposed to modern Islamic ideas, but we should take into account the
spiritual aspect of our tradition.

Some Muhammadiyah scholars have written books about Sufism. The first
amongst them is Prof. Dr. Hamka who has written a book titled*Tasauf
Modern* (Modern Sufi) and has been published several times. The book
resulted from a collection of articles written for*Pedoman Masyarakat*
magazine (recently*Panji Masyarakat* magazine) so that it did not have
an integrated structure about Sufism as a kind of creative thinking
effort related to emotional aspects of human beings in their personal
communication with God. Hamka gave his modern interpretation of Sufism
by emphasizing the

role of morals amongst the people so that it will be compatible to the
modern era characterized by materialism.

Anther distinguished scholar is Prof. Dr. Simuh who has already written
numerous books such as*Mistik Islam Kejawen Raden Ngabehi Ranggawarsita,
Suatu Studi Terhadap Serat Wirid Hidayat Jati* (1988);*Sufisme Jawa:
Transformasi Tasawuf Islam ke Mistik Jawa* (1999 cet-4); and*Tasawuf dan
Perkembangannya dalam Islam* (1997cet-2). He considers that Sufism is
very important to encounter negative effects of a materialistic modern
civilization. He offers Sufism to be the basis of morals. Here he refers
to a Sufism which is different from the complicated mystical practices
such as in Javanese mystic and*tareqat* [^7] *.* He accepts Sufism in
conjunction with Ibn Khaldun, that Islamic Sufism is to teach the
student become*‘abid* (devoted Moslem),*zahid* (not greedy), and*laku*
(take a distant with improperly world desires) (Simuh, 1999: 31) Of
course, it is also supplement to law enforcement.

All the above mentioned concepts are very important and they are
sufficient for general purposes, however they are not complete for those
who want to obtain spiritual feeling. One p opular method to obtain
spiritual feeling is to join with*tareqat* , although one can also try
by oneself By joining together with others, some people are led by the
authoritative master try to obtain spiritual feeling. They should follow
the given fixed-instructions which divide one*tareqat* from
others.*Tareqat* differs from intellectual efforts so it is possible for
everyone because it makes uses of emotion/feeling to transmit the
religious feeling.*Tareqat* or spiritual feeling enables all people to
have the same feeling as human beings. Being the case that all people
will feel sad if their member family is died , his feeling is very
important as a basis of morality.

This practical Sufi sm is not enough for those who are in charge to
develop intellectual efforts. We also should remember one other thing in
adopting practical Sufi sm in order to encounter the dark history of
Sufi malpractices causing the stagna tion within Moslem communities. The
important thing we should remember in doing something is to make it
balance with other elements. For instance, we should make the emotional
aspect of Sufi sm in balance with the intellectual aspect of ratio.
Emotional feeling is very important in order to obtain spiritual
feeling. It enables us to strengthen rational considerations and to
contemplate intellectual efforts. Sometimes it is also difficult to have
a strong religious belief just by rational efforts alone , as you may
see that rational thinking is limited by the strong bond s of time,
space, and history.

All religions have a general feature of focusing on personal
relationship s with the Absolute or Ultimate Reality, in which man ac
knowledge s the supremacy of the Absolute so that he try to adjust to
the Absolute’s laws. As I mention above that there are two paths to
communicate with the God, and those are intellectually and emotionally.
Furthermore Islam views communication with the God a s the foundation of
Islamic philosophy relating to concept of Oneness (*tawhid* ). It means
that man should surrender solely to God’s Will and should not surrender
or depend on others’ power (Rajaee, 1983: 36-38). From the above
explanation we can infer that

emotional communication either by oneself or via Sufi sm is very
important to obtain spiritual feeling, however Islam also orders us to
make intellectual efforts in order to have a better life in this world,
with the main intention of establish ing God’s Laws in the world.

Armstrong (2002) categorizing Islam together with Judiasm and
Christianity into the West ern religion s which have the general feature
of a personal religion because they give great role s to man to manage
and order the world for the sake of human beings. As mentioned in the
Koran (al-Baqarah: 30) man is ordered by God to become the leader in the
world for establishing peace, welfare, and justice. It is not only a
monopoly of Islam, but for all people. That is why the task of
establishing civilization in this world the responsibility of all
people, so that we should be able to cooperate with each other in order
for all human beings to be able to live properly N ot like now, where
there are still some starving people in other parts of the world. It is
not because we are un able to produce enough food, but that we are still
not able to manage the world properly.

In Indonesia, we should be able to establish cooperation amongst all
religions. This is a formidable job because officially we have six
religions and one traditional belief, with various sub-divisions. All
should be able to formulate a coherent relationship within religious,
cultural, and political aspects. Moslem s can take the example of the
life of Muhammad the Prophet who was able to create pluralistic
societies based on the Madinah Charter. Recently our political discourse
of the Madinah Societies should be filled with real efforts to establish
the open society. For this purpose, it may be useful to introduce
Fritjof Schuon’s concept of religion of the heart (Schuon, 1994: vii and
91) to reform our already challenging concept of*Trilogi Kerukunan*
(Threefold Tolerations) introduced in 1978 by ex-Minister of Religions
H. Alamsyah Ratu Prawiranegara. By doing so, we can enlarge from a
co-existence principle into a truly understanding principle of all
religions. For that purpose, we already have the institute of DIAN
(*Dialog Antar Iman* ) for encouraging dialogue amongst the religion s ,
however we can try to introduce the concept of ‘passing over’ in order
to develop a spiritual feeling (Hidayat and Ahmad Gaus AF, 1998: xiv)


