Lesson 1 : the Islamic Vision
=============================

Youth is the most important period in the life of a human being. This
is because it marks that stage when an individual passes out of the
first stage of life i.e. childhood and begins the journey to the last
stage i.e. adulthood.

Childhood is a dependant period. Every child requires guidance from
elders and moral support to make and maintain correct decisions. In the
early years of life, the hand of another leads a child but as
adolescence and youth begin to emerge, the child learns to pull away and
walk by himself.

During this period enormous physical, mental and emotional changes
occur. It is a metamorphosis of character and intellect and could be
likened to an explosion, rejuvenating all parts of an individual.
Dormant inclinations awake in the youth and new horizons are sighted.

To the person experiencing this change, it seems as if yesterday he was
living in a child's dream and today he sees the world through the window
of reality.

It is at this time, that a human being seeks purpose of his existence
and forms the principles that will guide him through the rest of his
life. Thus, the period of youth is one that must be nurtured and
nourished well both by the young individual himself and by the adults
surrounding him.

**Seeking Independence**

One of the most important inclinations during this stage is that of
seeking independence. This tendency plays a major role in the life of a
human being. It is prompted by the need to break completely away from
childhood, which as we mentioned is dominated by dependency.

When a youth realizes that he is growing he feels that he must prove
himself to be unique. He can only do this if he breaks free of the bonds
of childhood and the reliance he has developed on parents, siblings etc.
This searching for independence also signals the beginning of
intellectual maturity as the youth begins to think for himself and make
his own decisions.

Seeking independence is a positive step and should be encouraged so
that the youth can grow into a strong and firm adult. However, the
journey towards independence must be accompanied by a sense of
awareness - a conscious knowledge of what is ahead and what must be
done.

This awareness is essential before anything else because it guards a
youth from choosing the wrong path. A young person who is eager to
achieve his independence can easily be tempted to adopt a selfish
attitude and drown in a sea of mistakes. The child in him still has some
hold over his thinking and without making a conscious effort to control
his emotions, he cannot expect to succeed against it.

This consciousness also helps to develop and strengthen intellectual
powers as it encourages a young person to question his thinking and
prevents him from following concepts blindly.

In the period of youth, brain efficiency enters a new stage and special
talents are fully explored. It is for this reason that pathologists
refer to this stage as the beginning of the brain.The brain begins to
ask many new questions and satisfactory answers to these must be
provided.

**What Action to Take?**

When we embark upon any task in our life, the result is positive or
negative depending on the conscious choices we make along the
way.Basically, this means that the manner in which we think about
situations and the decisions we make in regards to them are what form
the deciding factors of our success or failure.

We can immediately make out how well developed the consciousness of an
individual by looking at the actions that result from them. The
behaviour of a human being shows others the extent and maturity of his
thinking.

Many scholars regard intellect as the human's basic superiority over
animals. That is why man is called a 'Thinking Animal'. This title
clearly implies that if man does not put his power of thinking into
action, he is no better than an animal that relies on instinct for
survival.

The stronger a man's thinking power is, the better he can utilize it in
solving complex issues.We can develop our intellect by beginning with
the implementation of the following essential factors:

**1. Intensity of Thought**

Before making any decisions, we must of course think about what we are
doing, why we are undertaking it and the possible results of any
decision we are tempted to make. The more deeply we ponder on these
issues, the more we are likely to understand the issue. This prevents
hasty decisions made on superficial grounds.

**2. Sound Thinking**

Our contemplation must be based on reason and logic. For this purpose
we require a balance in our consciousness. The more precise a man's
awareness is, the more his thoughts will be capable of understanding.

We can illustrate this by imagining that our decision-making ability is
a factory, whose raw material is the conscious. Without raw materials,
the factory will not be able to produce anything.

A thing to be careful about is that our thinking should be based on
facts, not guesses or assumptions. The latter not only obstructs
intellectual power in the situation at hand but also prevents future
development of the mind.

**3. Seeking the Truth**


In any attempt to analyse or contemplate, we must train ourselves to
seek out the truth. Nothing should be of more importance that this.

Accepting ideas and opinions without searching for flaws or solid
foundations leads to hasty actions. Such decisions may provide immediate
satisfaction of our desires but in the long wrong, they will only harm
us. If we do not form the habit of seeking out the truth in every
circumstance then we will lower our level of thinking and never learn
how to differentiate truth from falsehood.

**Islamic Point of View**

In Islam, the necessity of intellect has been given great emphasis. The
Holy Qur'an cautions people against following things blindly. " (O Man)
Do not follow that which you have no knowledge of â€¦" Sura Bani Isra'il,
Verse 36

In this verse, we can see that Islam encourage man to think and
research on information before accepting it as the truth. This emphasis
is so immense, that the accepting of the tenets of faith i.e. Tawheed,
Nubuwwat, Imamat and Qiyamat, blindly is not allowed. An individual must
ponder upon and be convinced of the truth before his belief is accepted.
From the viewpoint of Islam, a person who has attained maturity is one
who is intellectually advanced.

According to Allah (S.W.T.), if a person guides his thoughts towards
seeking out the truth then he will easily be able to identify it from
falsehood. This is why there is no force in religion - anyone who truly
seeks God will find Him. The Qur'an says:

"There is no compulsion in religion. Guidance is distinguishable from
error" Sura Baqara, Verse 256

From this verse, we understand that the cause of man's deviation from
the Right Path is his lack of thinking and contemplation and his
tendency towards hasty decisions.

**Hasty Decisions**

If Muslims would be satisfied with judgments based on weak arguments
then they would find themselves confusing religious teachings with
superstition and innovation - a problem that faces many other faiths.
Islam requires that every argument and action be founded on solid
reasoning and sound judgment. The Qur'an acknowledges men of knowledge
as those who respect the Laws of God.

"Only the realistic and visionary men are obedient to Allah." Sura
Fatir, Verse 28

To better understand the-long term effects of making hasty decisions,
we can outline two different examples:

**a. Vulnerability Towards Disagreeing Views**

It is a fact that various cultures exist in the world and that the
Muslim Ummah is composed of members who come from these differing social
systems.However, Islam demands that every culture should take second
place when there is a choice between it and religion.

If an individual does not think deeply about the norms of his society,
he may find himself following traditional values that have no place in
Islam or worse still, contradict it.

An adult who can analyse the reasons for adopting a practice and
compare them to religious laws, is able to choose and decide what to
keep and what to discard. Such people allow the various cultures to
co-exist and the Islamic culture to take top priority in all cases.

**b. Lack of General Knowledge**

As a child grows into an adult, many questions arise in his mind.
regard daily activities while others about more philosophical issues.

**Some**

To most young people, life is the most important of all issues. What is
our aim in life? What are our goals? How do we lead a happy and
successful life?

These and other similar questions keep coming forward and must be
answered in order to allow the youth to base his character and
principles on.

Although these are the main questions, we must realize that the answers
to these questions are based many a time in our more common activities
and the manners that govern them. How to eat, what to wear, what kind of
company to keep, all these are directly or indirectly connected to the
bigger issues mentioned above. The way in which we behave guides the way
in which we look at the world and the manner in which we make our
decisions.

In order to mature successfully, we have to study the knowledge
available to us - both Islamic and Secular. As we study the rules and
laws set out by Allah (S.W.T.) and observe the lives of people who have
followed or rejected these laws, we learn what we must do in order to
succeed.

It is clear to understand that if we try to live our lives based on
ignorance and do things hastily, as we feel inclined to, then we will
surely end up failing in whatever we attempt.


**Lesson 2 : Ideology and Doctrine**

In the previous lesson, we discussed about the importance of general
knowledge. Let us further expound on this subject.

Say for example that you intend to travel to a foreign city that you
have never been to for a holiday. You would first begin by choosing the
city you wish to see. This decision is based on what you want to
achieve. It may be something you saw on television, read in a book or
even the recommendation of friends.

Next, to ensure that you are able to make the most of your stay there,
you will ensure that your travel arrangements are all well organized.
The most sensible thing to do would be to study brochures and find out
what means of transport would best suit you in terms of speed and
finance, what the weather conditions are going to be like at the time
you visit, what sites there are to see, health risks etc.

By the time you actually set out, it will be true to say that the
schedule of your holiday is based on the knowledge, which you have
equipped yourself with.

**Be Aware Of Your Aim**

From the example above, we can see that we make choices based on our
goals or aspirations. Once this is determined then we work on how to
achieve it i.e. the program, based on knowledge that we research and
gather. Remember, our brains undertake all these processes
voluntarily.

We can therefore divide any final achievement into three basic
elements:

1. Awareness of the situation.
2. Determining the aim.
3. Laying out a program based on knowledge gathered.

Even something as simple as choosing how to get to work is based on
these stages. We are first aware of the situation i.e. that we need to
get to work. Then we determine the aim which is to get there as fast as
possible and before the time given by the employer. Finally, we choose a
mode of transport (the program) based on information that we gather
about travel fare, timetables and time spent on the road.

**Worldview, Ideology And Doctrine**

The human being also seeks the greater truths in life, following this
method. Man wants to know what is in the universe that he lives in
(Awareness), he then chooses his goals in life (Aim) and lastly decides
the action required to achieve those goals (Program).

The general awareness that we have about the world we live in is called
the Global Outlook, Global Perspective or Worldview. It allows us to
have a birds- eye view of the world - including animate and inanimate
objects - but has nothing to do with any major matters in the philosophy
of life e.g., one may learn about rivers or forests, but this has no
effect on our outlook towards the world.

However, the general awareness of our surroundings allows us to realize
that the world must be under the control of a Supreme Being and this has
a strong effect on how we perceive life. As we try to learn more about
the world, we begin to determine our aims and seek programs to fulfill
them.

It is during this stage that we are able to decide for ourselves what
our obligations are. We can distinguish what we must do and not do, in
order to reach our final aims. These programs (set of rules) that we
discover are called Ideologies. Therefore, an ideology can be described
as a group of Must's and Must-not's that guide us towards noble ends.

The concepts of Worldview (Global Outlook) and Ideology together are
called a Doctrine (School of Thought). Thus, every doctrine has two
basic factors: its world outlook and its aims and programs.

**Relationship Of Worldview to Ideology**

We have seen that if you intend to spend quality time in a city, you
must be prepared with the relevant information regarding that place and
your trip to it. When your information is doubtful or incorrect, you
will not be able to effectively benefit from it.

Similarly, the more our knowledge about the world we live in, the
better our chances of spending a life of quality in it. We can take full
advantage of our short lives if we seek and obtain correct information
about it.

**Different Worldviews = Different Ideologies**

Every doctrine has its peculiarities. This means that every school of
thought has it own set of Must's and Must-not's and its own unique
outlook on the world. With this in mind, it can be said that every
individual should strive to attain the correct vision of the world and
build his outlook on firm and strong pillars.

**Basic Worldview Issues**

The issues raised from different world outlooks normally are in regards
to the following three factors:

1. The world in which we live in and its mortality i.e. did it come
into existence by itself or was it created? The answer to this question
deals with knowing God.

2. Is man's life confined to this world or is there a possibility of
another life after death? This normally tackles the issues of
resurrection and eternal life.

3. Can man administrate his own affairs in life or does he need God's
guidance? This can be associated with the issue of Nubuwwat
(Prophethood).

Because the most basic views of any doctrine rely on these concepts,
Islam emphasizes them as being the Usul - e - Deen (Roots of Religion).
Acceptance of Tawheed (Monotheism), Nubuwwat (Prophethood) and Ma'ad
(Day of Reckoning) are the pre-requisites of being a Muslim. Neglecting
or discrediting any of these excludes a person from Islam.

From the answers of the above three questions, two broad types of world
outlooks are derived:

**1. Materialistic / World Worldview**

This is based on the belief that stability equals wealth and that man
is a materialistic being. This view regards life to be a temporary
period and death to be final. The materialistic worldview says that man
came on earth by chance and that life has no deeper meaning. Such an
outlook prevents the development of any long-term or noble aims. It is
an existence without hope.

**2. Divine Worldview**

The other view confirms that the world belongs to a Creator. It also
believes in an everlasting life after this short worldly one. It looks
upon the time spent in this world as a means of constructing ones
destiny in the hereafter. This leads to the belief that there exists a
certain code of life to attain the success and people who are sent by
the Creator to teach it.

If we ponder on this we can see that the belief or disbelief in God
results in the acceptance or rejection, respectively, for the other two
factors i.e. Prophethood and Resurrection. This is why the first is more
fundamentally important then latter.

**Considering a Doctrine**

In conclusion we can say that when examining any doctrine (School of
Thought), we must first study its world outlook. Its basic principle
i.e. concerning its position towards the issue of God is the most
important when trying to establish its authenticity.

We will in the course of this text, discuss the issues of knowing God
and then the Islamic World Outlook.


