Lesson 15 : Philosophy of Prayer Part 1
=======================================

The most important act of ebadat (Worship) in Islam is Salaat (Prayer).
It is an expression of total submission to Allah (S.W.T.) and a means of
communication between the Creator and His servants.

Imam Ali ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) has said about prayer:

"Know that every action you do will depend on you salaat."

From this we know for a fact that is our salaat is accepted then all
other actions are also accepted and if our salaat is rejected then so
are our other deeds. "The prayer is what differentiates Mo'meen from
Unbeliever. Whoever leaves it and claims to have belief, his own actions
belie him and will be a witness against him." "Remind yourselves that
every action from you must be from the mediator of Salaat."

Salaat greatly affects the lives of those who perform it. It keeps the
soul of a person free from idolatry and when carried out sincerely, it
also helps to cure moral diseases such as infidelity, hypocrisy, pride,
dishonesty etc.

By praying at the specified times, a person learns to be both
disciplined and punctual. It gives a purpose to the lives of people and
has a stabilising effect. In times of stress, salaat provides a oasis of
peace where a person can forget all worries and cares and rest his weary
head on the doorstep of Allah (S.W.T.).

the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) used to say to Bilal, who was the mu'adhin
of the Muslims, "Comfort me, O Bilal!" meaning that he should recite the
adhaan and call out for prayer.

Salaat is a source of piety and perfection. Through is performance a
person can discover the hidden secrets of his soul and its amazing
relationship with Allah (S.W.T.). All those acts that surround it or are
related to it also fall under its special influence.

For this reason we shall look at the things connected to and performed
within Salaat and study the philosophy behind each. This will help us
better appreciate why we perform it in the manner we do.

**1. Qiblah**

During the first years of prophethood, Mecca was still the centre of
idol worshipping and the Kuffar had filled the Holy Ka'aba with idols
that they used to pray to. Thus, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and the
Muslims used to pray facing Baytul Muqaddas i.e. Masjidul Aqsa in
Jerusalem. They did this for 13 years in Mecca and the first few in
Medina.

At this time, the Jews began to mock the Muslims saying that they were
using Jewish holy sites for their religious prayers. The people also
began to ask the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) why they did not face the Ka'aba.
They said that if the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) truly preached the same faith
as Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.)'s then they should have faced the Ka'aba built
by him.

It was soon after this that Allah (S.W.T.) told the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
to change Qiblah:

"Indeed We see the turning of your face to heaven, so We shall surely
turn you to a Qiblah which you shall like. Turn then your face towards
the sacred mosque."

The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) received this verse when he had completed two
rakaats of a four rakaat prayer facing Baytul Muqaddas and he
immediately turned towards the Ka'aba to complete the remaining two.

Unfortunately, even after this, there were some who criticised this
change and so Allah (S.W.T.) revealed another verse saying: "Any
direction you face in your prayers, indeed you are facing Allah."

We should keep in mind that the Ka'aba was chosen as qiblah to make the
Muslims independent of the Jews. Allah (S.W.T.) did not wish for them to
have to rely on others for a holy site. The Ka'aba provides a central
point for all Muslims. They turn towards it not only in prayer and dua
but, at all times: when eating, sleeping, in death, when slaughtering an
animal etc.

The Ka'aba provides an external and physical qiblah. It acts as a
symbol of unity of the Muslim ummah. A Believers true qiblah, though,
lies in his heart, which faces and submits to Allah (S.W.T.) in
prayer.

**2. Adhaan**

Adhaan is the call to prayer and a mustahab pre-requisite to Salaat. It
begins with the professing of ones belief in Allah (S.W.T.) and ends
with the same. In between, one acknowledges the tenets of Nubuwwat and
Imamat.

Adhaan prepares a person for Salaat by reminding him of his basic
beliefs and brings him closer to Allah (S.W.T.) before he actually
begins his communication with the Almighty.

Its beauty in words and depth in meaning not only enhance the spirit of
the reciter but also give him strength of conviction.

**3. Place and Dress**

When praying, a person must ensure that his clothes and the place of
prayer are clean and Taahir. Neither should be Ghasbi. Also, any money
used to obtain either should be pure i.e. khums and zakaat should have
been paid on it and it should not have been earned in a haram manner.

Concerning the kind of clothes, it is recommended that they be white in
colour and new if possible. The Ma'soomeen also encouraged application
of perfume before prayers are undertaken. The basic aim of all this
being to consciously purify oneself for a meeting with one's Lord. The
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) has told us, "The Key of acceptance of prayers
is only through purity."

When you physically purify yourself, it is natural that you will also
try and clear your thoughts from any evil or immorality. It is necessary
to achieve both types of cleanliness - internal and external - in order
for prayers to be accepted. It is for this reason that the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) also said, "Allah (S.W.T.) never accepts a prayer if the
man's heart is not present with his body."

Other rules regarding the place of worship is that it should be
somewhere stable. If the area does not allow normal standing or correct
performance of ruku/sajdah then one cannot pray there. In the case of
travelling, whether it is by plane, ship or train, one should pray and
try to remain still as much as possible.

Also, when performing sajdah, the distance between the place where ones
forehead rests and the level of ones toes, should not be higher than a
span of four fingers.

Praying in a place where there are pictures, sculptures or statues is
makrooh. It is also makrooh for na-Mahram men and women to pray together
in the same room.

**4. Wudhoo**

We have discussed the performing of wudhoo in previous books. In this
lesson we only wish to discuss its philosophy. According to Imam Redha
(a.s.) wudhoo has three important aspects:

- Spiritual motivation and
- Gaining nearness to Allah (S.W.T.)
- Bodily cleanliness.

When performing wudhoo, it is recommended to use cold water because
this refreshes and motivates a person. Wudhoo is meant to act as a
cleanser on the soul, washing away minor sins. It is thus, highly
recommended to stay in wudhoo at all times especially when studying or
performing any constructive task. By creating an atmosphere of purity
around a person, it helps him to avoid committing sins.

It is important that while performing wudhoo, we should not waste the
water we use. Israaf (Extravagance) is a great sin and Imam al-Sadiq
(a.s.) has said, "To throw remaining food or water is Israaf â€¦"


