Lesson 3 : Knowing God
======================

Before we begin to study the ways in which we can know God, it is
necessary that we first look at the various methods we, as human beings,
use to gather any kind of information or knowledge.

**Capturing Knowledge**

We know that one of man's specialties is that he is always in search of
gaining more information about the world he lives in. He yearns to know
about anything that is related to both his internal and external world.
Because the knowledge he seeks comes in different forms, he is equipped
with different skills to deal with this variety.

There are four main skills a human being uses:

**1. Senses (Direct Capture)**

The most ancient and transparent way of gaining knowledge is through
use of our five basic senses. We see the different colours and shapes
that fill our world; we listen to birds singing and babies crying; we
learn the variety of flavours available through our sense of taste; we
smell the aromas that things give off and finally feel textures through
touch. The information we get in these ways is direct because the
particular sense sends the message straightaway to the brain.

**2. Experiments (Indirect Capture)**

Despite the fact that many obvious things are learnt through direct
capture, there are many aspects of our universe that cannot be
discovered by using any of the five senses. For example, we cannot
observe the actual flow of electricity in a live wire with any of our
sense our senses. We cannot use our senses to discover things such as
atoms, electrons and magnetism.

Our conclusions on these subjects are a result of indirect methods of
discovery. Instead of seeing the actual object in question, we base our
knowledge on the effect it has on other things, e.g. we know that there
is a flow of electricity when we see the resulting light.

Another clear example is in regards to people's thoughts. We cannot
discover what goes on in another's mind with any of our senses, but
through that persons speech we are able to judge his thoughts and
character.

When talking of indirect methods of gaining knowledge, we can refer to
it as an 'intellectually-based' approach because it relies on the brain
to process the information and apply it to the knowledge being searched
for. Many of the achievements in science are achieved through this
system.

**3. Intellect**

The use of intellect to gain knowledge has been separated from the
indirect approach because of a fundamental difference that exist between
the two. In the indirect method of capturing knowledge, a human being
reasons based on the result of his senses, but the use of intellect does
not rely on the senses to provide the raw information with which to
work.

An example of this is the science of Mathematics. When we study other
sciences such as chemistry and physic, we know that we must carry out
experiments, capture information with our five senses and then apply
this using theories that we have come up with. This is not so in
mathematics.

Mathematics depends solely on thought processes of the brain. In this
science, you can get a thousand results from a few basic sources,
without need for any experiments. Here the foundation stone of the
knowledge is based on the brain.

**4. Emotion**

Our internal understanding is another way in which we gain knowledge.
We are capable of feeling sorrow, happiness, fear, courage, love and
hatred. These feelings are direct, meaning we can experience them
without any interference of outside influences.

If we are happy, we don't achieve this state with the help of any of
the five senses, or the brain. The condition is directly felt in our
heart. This is a result of an inner instinct that illuminates various
ways for man.

**Unseen Does not mean Unavailable**

From the above methods, it is obvious to see that the existence of
something does not depend on our being able to sense it. Many people
deny God because that cannot see Him. To them what cannot be seen does
not exist. However, if this were truly the case then we would also have
to deny much of the useful scientific achievements that have been
accomplished so far.

Our reasoning demands proof of existence so likewise we should also
have proof of inexistence. When we have a lack of proof, we can say that
we do not have knowledge about the subject but this is not the same as
saying the subject does not exist.

To judge the presence or absence of anything, we need to first get
information about it. If it happens to be unseen, then that will not
automatically mean it is absent. If we do not manage to get enough
reasons to prove either its presence or absence, then the phrase "I
don't know" can be used to show that neither opinion has been
sufficiently verified. This will also leave the door open to future
discovery and argument in favour of either the present or absent
stand.

To explain this concept better, let us take the following example.
Suppose you are standing in your home and somebody asks you if your best
friend is standing at a certain corner in town, which is out of your
sight. What would you say? Would you deny that your friend is there just
because you cannot see him?

Or would you say you don't know? The first is obviously an illogical
answer. The second would be more sensible and would allow you to confirm
later on whether your friend was on that corner or not.

From this we can conclude that not seeing something is not a sign of
its absence.

**How to Know God**

Having looked at the various methods we use to gather and absorb
information, we can now see how a human being using these skills to
learn about God and His existence. It is clear that God cannot be found
using the direct capture system, because He does not have a material or
physical form. Since our senses cannot detect Him, we must turn to the
other ways. Each of these can help us better understand God and prove He
exists.

1. Indirect capture. In the same way we use experiments, sign and
effects to prove Laws and theories in this world, we can observe the
system around us and from its signs seek the path that will lead us to
God.

2. Use of intellect. This is the most complete method for solving the
issue of knowing God. By using our intellectual power we can prove the
existence of the Creator. The causes of effects (See Book Three) are the
main intellectual reasons used to prove the existence of God.

3. By relying on our emotional understanding we can also discover God.
This kind of knowledge is called spiritual knowledge and will be dealt
with in more detail later.


**Lesson 4 : Using The System As Proof Of God**

**Part I**

One of the ways of knowing God is through the study of the system that
is the universe. This has been called the 'Proving System' because it
helps us to prove the necessity of a Maker and Caretaker for such a
complex structure. In this lesson let us look briefly at how we can use
this proof.

**Systems**

A group of components that work together to achieve a common goal is
referred to as a system. In our ancient universe, there are many groups
of things that can be classified as being either arranged systematically
or non-systematically.

A single object in itself cannot be called a system. From its very
definition we know that for a system to exist, it must involve a number
of objects even though these may be varied in the nature of their
structure and function.

Another important point is that the objects that are part of a system
must all work together to directly or indirectly fulfill a common aim.
The most amazing and obvious example of this is the human body. Every
organ in the body has a particular function: providing and allowing
nourishment, protecting against viruses, dealing with wounds, cleansing
blood, etc. But in the end all these activities are meant to do only one
thing and that is to preserve life.

Of course, this means that it is necessary that every part of the
system perform its duties correctly, or else it may disrupt or destroy
the whole. In some cases, a component may be dispensable and if this is
the case, it will be removed by the other components. However, in the
case of essential components, the system is doomed if one small mishap
occurs.

**Qualities of the Parts In A System**

For any system to survive, its elements or components must fulfill
certain conditions. We will use examples from the human body to explain
these:

**1. Structure**

Each element must possess the required structure or capability to carry
out its specific function correctly and efficiently. For example, the
structure of each bone in the body is such that it corresponds to the
bones around it in order to form the skeleton with its joints.

**2. Co-operation**

Every part of a system must co-operate with the rest of the group.
Thus, each component is a supplement to the others and together they
form a united functioning whole.

**3. Size**

The size and measurement of every element must be suited to its
function. For example, if our fingers were either bigger or smaller than
they are then they would not be able to perform their duties so well.

**4. Position**

Every part of a system must have a special position within it. Try and
imagine what would happen if our eyes were positioned on the top of our
heads or if our ears were at the ends of our legs!

**Survival of Systems**

In order for a system to be maintained over a period of time, it must
adequately meet its own needs. Two types of needs exist in such a
group.

a. Practical needs: These are those necessities that are required
directly by the components to survive. In the case of human beings, it
would refer to things such as oxygen, food and water. If we do not eat
or drink for a long period of time, then our body recognizes this lack
of nourishment through the feelings of hunger/thirst. The body (system)
then uses its senses to search for and consume food or water, which it
needs to survive.

b. Future needs: These refer to the long-term needs that a system has
in order to assure its continuity in the future. This is usually dealt
with by the various components in a manner that can be best described as
foresight. Amongst humans, an example could be the need that every
individual has to procreate and thus perpetuate their species through
reproduction.


