Lesson 5 : Using the System As Proof of God
===========================================

**Part II**

In the previous lesson we reached a conclusion that in any system,
every part has its own special duty, but that each parts is varied in
shape, size, position and function. We also saw that a particular
element may be excluded due to lack of functionality or efficiency.

Having said this, we can ask the following questions:

- Why is it that from all the different things in the world, only
certain entities have been assembled in a particular group?

- And in addition to this, why have elements with certain qualities and
functions been selected above the countless other varieties available?

When we contemplate the details of an orderly group, our intellect will
show us that the creator of the group must have had an aim to begin
with. In order to achieve this aim, he then laid down a design or plan
for what would have to been done.

Based on this plan, he would choose special components to perform the
functions required. However, the choices would have to be made by an
expert in the field so that each part would perform up to the standard
desired.

From the above assessment we can derive four principles that every
organized system must be based upon:

1. Aim
2. Plan/Design
3. Choice of parts/elements
4. Expert advice on choices

**Qualities Of A Maker**

Of course, it is now obvious that the Maker or Creator of a system must
have an Aim to begin with, design the system, select its components and
have the relevant knowledge at hand to make these selections wisely and
correctly.

However, despite having these abilities, if he does not possess one
fundamental quality then the others are void/useless.This basic quality
is that of consciousness. If the Maker is not aware then the system
cannot survive.

Would you expect a child who is unaware of any of the laws governing
this world to produce an article explaining the workings of his remote
control car? Hardly! Or try to imagine that this book you are holding is
the result of a series of coincidences where a sudden reaction of gases
and matter created the paper and then brought together atoms in pattern
that just happened to form characters into sensible sentences. A little
too farfetched, is it not?

Thus, for anything to exist and especially those things that are
related to the intellect, there has to be some sort of pre-planned
program that has been set into action. Logic cannot accept that anything
remotely organized can 'just happen'.

The world around us is full of information and the very fat that we get
much of our knowledge from it shows that it was created by an
intelligent entity that was capable of not only creating a complex,
working system but also hiding knowledge within it for us to find.

The universe is more complicated in itself than all the technology that
man has discovered in the past thousands of years! Many inventors have
got their inspiration for their discoveries and inventions from the
natural systems around them, thus it is possible to say that the efforts
of mankind are only a weak reflection of the natural world around us.

**Inspiration From Nature**

One of the wonders of our natural world is the ability that bats have
to hunt and move about in darkness. Man, through observation and
experiment, discovered that this is not due to extremely sharp vision
(as was first believed) but rather is a result of an echo-signal that
the bat uses to detect objects in its path.

The bat send out high pitched squeaks all the time as it flies and its
extra sensitive hearing picks up on any echoes that bounce back,
indicating a physical obstacle.

Based on this phenomenon, Man developed his radar systems which is a
similar process, in that radio signals are sent out and radio echoes
detected and translated to show where obstacles are. Sonar is even
closer to the example set by the bat because it uses sound echoes and
can be used under water and for deep geological research where radar
does not work.

Once they realized how much there was to be learned from nature,
scholars founded a new science with the name BIONIC which is aimed at
examining and researching living organisms and applying their techniques
to our computerized systems.

**Borrowing From The Solar System**

Isaac Newton is a famous 17th Century scholar. He was known to have
made a model of the solar system using marbles, ropes and belts that
showed the position and movement of the planets. Once a friend who did
not believe in God came to visit him and saw the model for the first
time. Amazed by the structure, he asked Newton: "Who made this model?"
Newton replied: "Nobody."

The man was surprised at this answer and asked him again, "Didn't you
understand my question? I asked who made that?" Again Newton replied,
"It brought itself into existence."

The man stared at him. "Do you think I am crazy?" he asked. "Someone
must have made this model and from its complexity it must have been a
genius! I would like to know him."

At that Newton said to him, "My friend, this model is a small imitation
of our entire solar system. It shows the earth we live on as a simple,
small marble and yet you say it needs a creator to have made it and call
him a genius.

"How can you then believe that this magnificent world came into
existence without a creator?"

This is an extremely solid argument that can be presented to prove the
need and existence of a God. We need to realize that we have studied
this nature around us for centuries and have managed to barely scratch
the surface of the wonders hidden in it. We then need to ask
ourselves:

- If all the efforts of the best minds of our species have taken so
long produced so little, how is it possible for the very source of this
knowledge to be an accidental one?

- How can we derive so much law and order from something we consider a
product of chaos?

- Why do our theories hold steady and our laws of science provide
foundations for more laws to be derived from them? Surely, if the world
came about as a result of coincidences then there should be flaws in the
system.

Francis Beacon, who is known in history as the Father of New Science
says: "I can not accept that the constructor of this world, created it
without consciousness and intelligence. This philosophy can lead a man
to infidelity, but profound philosophy guides man towards the
realization of religion."

**Theology And Its Development Theories**

When man became well versed with the sciences, he began to believe that
there was no need for a superior power in this world. His ego prompted
him to develop a theory that would allow him to be the highest
intellectual in the universe and leave him free to do as he wished with
no accountability to anyone else. This theory is that of evolution.

The idea of evolution is based on the belief that things that exist
today first began in a different raw form. Through the times, these
basic simple forms then developed and adapted in the innumerable
varieties of organisms and species that we see today. The people who
hold this concept to be true believe that such an explanation of our
origins would remove the necessity of having a Planner and Creator.
Thus, their fight is not against any one faith but against religion in
its entirety.

To prove them wrong we do not need to go out and search for more
information. Just developing their concept to its full meaning allows us
to see that the argument actually proves the need for a Creator rather
than disapproving it! Consider the following:

1. The theory of evolution may have an answer to how we came to be
today and explain this saying that it is the result of gradual
development through the millennia. However, if we go back as far as the
origins, there still remains the question of "Where did that origin come
from?" Continuity is possible once a system is started but to set the
system into action, you require a Creator. We see plenty of automatic
machines in the world that work on their own, but that does not cause us
to believe that they came to be without a creator or designer.

2. To accept that the amazingly complicated systems that exist today
came to be through coincidental changes along the years is to ask human
beings to accept something without using their intellect and logic.How
can it be possible that just the right change should occur in the right
order to result in the different perfect structures? The probabilities
we would have to rely on in each case are unbelievable!

Let us take an extremely simple example to illustrate this point. Say a
man wants to walk from his house to particular building across the town.
He has to cross certain streets and take certain roads in order to reach
it.

If you see him when he is on this walk, you would not understand why he
was taking the corners he chose and wonder at them. On the other hand,
if you happen to know his purpose then you immediately understand that
he chose the particular route in order to reach his destination.

Now, ask yourself, if he had begun walking without thought and crossed
streets and roads at random, what were the chances that he would reach
that building at all? At every point, his choices would have had one
right one and numerous wrong ones. Had he chosen a wrong turn even once,
he would have deviated from his path and with every choice after that,
he would have moved further away from the right road.

It is the same with nature. Even according to evolution, for us to be
who we are today, there must have been a pre-planned route that we would
have to follow. Even the smallest disorder would have had a totally
different and most probably chaotic result. This means that we have to
accept the existence of a Plan and therefore of a Planner.

From the above we can see that gradual development theory does not
really cause any hindrance to the Proving System and its arguments.

**The Creator is One**

In the world around us there are systems that work in different manners
on different principles. Two basic kinds are as follows:

1. The systems we create in our factories e.g. clocks, cameras,
binoculars, computers, etc. In such systems, the different parts of the
whole are created individually and then set together in a special way in
order to make them work in co-ordination.

2. The system we see in man's words through speech or writing. In this
case, we do not just pick words and then arrange them. Rather we think
of what it is that we want to say or express and then use or create the
words required giving them a link to each other and thus forming a
system. Writing is the same where we place every word and sentence in a
particular place to give them meaning. This changes depending on our
aim.

The system in the world of nature is of the second type. The various
parts within it were not created once and organized in a fixed manner to
perform a function. All the things created have their special place in
the universe and changes do occur in order to meet the final aim of the
Creator of the system.

Just as when speaking, it is a person alone who expresses himself, the
Expresser of the system is also One and Alone in His creation.


**Lesson 6 : God in The Mirror Of Nature**

**What is Nature?**

The qualities that man possesses are of two types. Firstly, those that
are gained through instruction like reading, writing, driving, sports
etc. The second are those qualities that are inborn in him and require
no training like affection for friends and family, curiosity, sympathy,
self-preservation and the like.

The second type of qualities may be categorized as instinct and while
some them are found in both humans and other lower animals, others are
specific to man alone. These include love of knowledge, hope of
attaining perfection and inclination towards good.

These qualities are part of the Natural tendencies. They are found in
animals and some are particular to man and most importantly they are not
acquired.

**God In Man's Nature**

It is in this nature of man discussed above that he should seek out and
accept God. Although, the actual knowledge and proof comes later in life
when he can speak, read and think consciously, Man has this information
imprinted in him from birth.

It is his inclination to submit to a Power worth obeying and worship
that Supreme entity. Every individual seeks this entity and that is why
we must put a conscious effort to learn about and know God. This will
allow us to fulfill our inner desire and complete our goal.

While it is true that such feelings exist within a human being, a
person has the right to ask for proof for such statements. So, how can
we prove that the inclination towards God is inbred in the human
character? There are several ways but we will explain only two:

**I . Reaction in Danger**

One of the clear signs of theology (religion) being natural in human
being is that when a person finds himself helpless and has no hope of
protection against impending danger, he finds himself instinctively
calling out to a Someone - a higher power - who can save him when no one
else can.

This is usually the most sincere call a human ever experiences because
he is faced with his own finite and weak self and realizes how little he
can control the things that influence him. If the knowledge of God was
not in his self, then how would this hope and plea arise?

One day a man came to visit Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.) and asked him to
prove the existence of Allah (S.W.T.). Imam (a.s.) asked him a question
in return. "Have you ever traveled by ship?" he said.

The man replied, "Yes, I have."
"And have you ever been caught in a storm that you did not believe you
would survive?" the Imam (a.s.) asked him.

"Yes, I have experienced that too," the man replied. "At that moment of
despair, did you give up all hope and resign to your death?" The man
thought about this and then told Imam (a.s.), "No, I did not, O Imam! I
had a hope that somehow I would survive through some miracle."

Imam (a.s.) immediately told him, "That hope, my friend, and the one
you expected to perform the miracle was no other than Allah (S.W.T.) who
is always in your heart and comes to your help when you call."

There are also several verses in the Holy Qur'an that explain that in
times of hardship, man tends to remember Allah (S.W.T.) and when his
difficulties are removed, he forgets Him.

"In that situation when the sea waves stack on them, they supplicate to
God with pure and sincere hearts, but when they reach the sea-shore
safely, a group of them put moderation aside (and the other group
deviates) and other than those who are ungrateful, nobody can not deny
the signs of God." Sura Luqman, Verse 32

The Qur'an speaks of these people as those with whom Allah (S.W.T.) is
displeased. Remembering God at times of distress is a sign of being
aware of Him, but if we remember Him only at these times then it also
indicates our ungratefulness and negligence.

**II. Endurance in History**

The second proof we can use in our argument that knowing and needing
God is in man's nature is that of the endurance of theology. Man's needs
and desires control the existence, invention and lasting quality of
anything he come sin contact with.

We know that as times pass, man looks to improve on what he has and
with the coming of new things, the older models become rare and
obsolete. Examples of such object are everywhere like the carts of long
ago that have been replaced with cars and buses, or the use of
electricity over the old kerosene lamps.

However, those things that are inbred in man do not change. They remain
the same through the ages. Man's desire for peace and happiness, his
loving nature, his eagerness to learn and need of perfection have always
been present and will continue to be because they are qualities in his
nature.Nothing substitutes these and even if people have abandoned them
in history sometimes, they always come back later to seek them out
again.

The inclination to believe in a supreme deity is one of these natural
qualities and has existed since the dawn of human history. Archeological
investigations show that even during the days when language and society
barely had any solid structure, the worship of God prevailed even in the
form of idols.

It is believed by some faiths that worship began with that of one God
but later with civilization, polytheism developed.

This endurance shows that the belief is so well ingrained in the nature
of man that despite all his progress and advancement, it has not been
removed from his nature to this day.

What the Qur'an has to say The Holy Qur'an introduces piety and the
inclination to God as rising from within man:

"Then set your purpose (O Muhammad) for religion as a man by nature
upright - the nature made by Allah (S.W.T.), in which He has made men.
There is no altering of Allah (S.W.T.)'s creation. That is the right
religion, but most people do not know." Sura al-Rum, Verse 30

Several points are found in this verse.

1. God has created mankind with the inclination of seeking Him.

2. Man's nature is unalterable and thus the seeking of God cannot be
separated from him.

3. Most people are unaware of this reality and come up with doctrines
that have no foundation according to their nature.

**The Secret of the Prophets**

We know that Prophets greatly influenced human history and that they
did this with no great force at their liberty. Most were simple
shepherds without any material wealth or power. Despite this, they
managed to transform the world in their respective time, destroying
great tyrannical empires and establishing new cultures.

Where did they get the ability to achieve all this? It is obvious that
they did not force or bribe the people to accept their message and
neither did they hypnotize them. Instead, they used the very power of
the people themselves to bring about their revolutions.

By encouraging people to become familiar with God within themselves and
rely only on Him, they made them aware of the fires hidden within their
nature. This was what led to their amazing success.

The prophets only brought messages to remind the people of what they
already had. This is why the Qur'an calls them Reminders and Warners.

"Remind them for you are but a reminder. You are not dominant over
them." Sura Ghashiyah, Verses 21 & 22

The Prophets could not create the desire to seek God in men, this he
had the capability to do himself. Rather, they showed the ways in which
to use this desire and guided their strong inclinations in the right
direction. The Prophets were sent to stop deviation towards idol worship
and other wrong means of worship and the tendencies of man led him
astray when he had no guide to help. Why do Some go Against this
Nature?

Having established that the inclination to God is a natural desire, why
then do some people turn against it and deny God? Do they lack this
quality? Why does it not push them towards God?

The reasons for this may include:

1. Man's different tendencies. Each individual gives priority to
different desires and those wants that dominate in his personality
overshadow those that do not. For example, you will always see in a
class some students who spend their time on their lessons and others who
concentrate only on enjoyment and do not bother about studying. Thus,
while some people search for the truth, others deny it.

2. The natural qualities in any man need conditional assistance for
their progress. If the family and social atmosphere around a child is
not positive for the nurturing his character then these qualities may be
suppressed or distorted.

\* Note that this is a probability and there are cases when a person
has the inclination to turn to God even when he has been brought up in
an environment that was against this or vice versa.

In conclusion, we can say that all worshipping systems that exist
preach humility and submission to One Supreme Being. This conforms to
the nature of humanity.


