Lesson 9 : the Effect of Faith in Life
======================================

When a person truly declares his belief in God, the effects of this
faith cannot be confined to one or a few specific instances in his life.
The belief that God is creator of the entire universe consequently
affects all areas of his life and influences his choices and decisions.
It sets out a path for him to follow in order to conform to this
faith.

Let us look at a few areas that the belief in One God influences in a
persons life. There are many and perhaps after reading this chapter, you
will be able to research and find the others.

**1] Idleness**

The word idle can be used to describe two states that have different
meaning in the picture of life:

a) That first is when a person has no specific goal in life. His
existence is then considered useless, because what gives meaning to the
life of a man is the aim he has to achieve.

b) The second would refer to a state that is not individual like the
one above but covers mankind as a whole. Those who do not believe in
God, as a consequence do not believe that man has a noble aim to achieve
and that he will be accountable for his actions one day.

In such a persons opinion, man is here to live life to its fullest and
enjoy the luxuries of the world with no thought of what is to come in
the hereafter. Such a person believes that humanity came into existence
for an idle purpose i.e. no defined purpose at all.

Comparing this second state of idleness with the state of those who do
believe in God, we see that the latter not only believe that man has an
aim but that all of creation has a role to fulfill and is significant in
some way to the Plan of God. Such people then set out to discover these
goals, with the help of divine Books and Messengers, and then to attain
them. The ultimate goal is the attaining eternal bliss and closeness to
Divine Mercy.

For those who do not believe in God or have a distorted faith, the only
way to live is to create worldly goals whenever they find a chance.
Following success, wealth, family, material happiness, reputation and
the like, they believe that they will succeed in fulfilling their aim in
life. It is clear though, that such goals have nothing to do with the
true aim of life and they only succeed in taking man away from his real
purpose.

Any happiness that a person feels he has as a result of achieving
worldly success is a false one and will last only as long as this
temporary world. Many others find themselves still searching for more
even after they attain their aims because it does not satisfy their
inner needs.

**2] Spiritual tranquility**

Obtaining spiritual tranquility is amongst the most important effects
that faith has on a person. We know that it is in man's disposition to
believe in God. His nature searches to fulfill this need and he is not
fully and completely satisfied until he realizes his quest.

Once he achieves this state of faith, he finds himself free of anxiety.
Achieving other goals may appease the desire for a while but will not
replace the actual need. Only when a man finds God and develops a
spiritual connection with Him, does he find satisfaction and comfort in
his inner self.

On the other hand, a person who does not believe in God will naturally
concentrate of fulfilling his need with the glamour of this world. This
will eventually cause him to be troubled by the things he has and their
possible loss and about things he cannot have but desires. Such a person
will never gain peace in his life.

The Holy Qur'an cautions those who live aloof from the Almighty and
says: " Whosoever turns away from Me will indeed face a hard life." Sura
Taha, Verse 124

It is important to note that such people will always remain anxious,
impatient and in despair.

A believer on the other hand is a free spirit who lives only to gain
the favours of the Almighty. His soul is constantly in communication
with his Lord and finds peace in this remembrance of his Beloved. The
Qur'an confirms this saying:

" Only through remembrance of Allah (S.W.T.) do hearts become
tranquil."

In another verse, Allah (S.W.T.) tells us:

"He it is, Who sent down tranquility into the hearts of the Faithful
that they might add further faith to their faith; and Allah (S.W.T.)'s
are the hosts of the Heavens and the earth and Allah (S.W.T.) is
All-Knowing, All-wise."

From all this, we can conclude that faith and spiritual peace are
connected and that tranquility of the soul can only be achieved by
strengthening our Imaan (Faith), as Allah (S.W.T.) has told us in His
Book.

**3] Responsibility**

A person who firmly believes in God realizes that He is monitoring all
his actions. He knows that he will be held accountable for his deeds -
both minor and major.

When one understands the concept of life in this manner, then he
naturally feels obliged to perform his responsibilities. A person who
truly professes faith in one God cannot free himself from a code of
conduct and the duties that come with it.

Belief in Allah (S.W.T.) means that a person acknowledges His Favours
and Mercy on him and feels that he is answerable to Him. Such a Believer
finds Freedom in the sense that he is free to do the right thing i.e.
follow the principles set down by his Lord. He becomes responsible in
his attitude, lifestyle etc. and is a stable character who can be relied
on to do what is right under any circumstance.

A person who does not believe in God ends up becoming a slave to his
own desires. While searching for freedom, he finds himself caught in the
trap of lust and greed and unable to make the decision to stay away from
such evil. They may speak of human rights, oppression and sympathy but
their slogans are empty and superficial.

In depth, they hold no foundation and crumble at the slightest
challenge. Responsibility does not come naturally to these people as it
does to the Believer.

**4] Training the Self**

Faith in One God does not only affect the individual as shown in the
three examples above, but also spreads to the society.It helps to create
an atmosphere of harmony in social life. Belief in Allah (S.W.T.),
creates feelings of concern, compassion and care between human beings.

In the countries that have abandoned God, we see the moral decay that
eats away at their core. Violation of human rights, crimes, suicides,
heartache, loneliness, broken families, abuse, all this and more is
abundant in such communities. People lead selfish lives, putting
themselves first before anyone else and searching to satisfy their
personal desires at any cost - even that of others.

Individuals within these communities have begun to realize that their
members are losing basic humanity and compassion. Some have written
about the moral decadence as a plague - corrupt and destructive, blaming
it on a widespread loss of spiritual values.

While a Believer finds solidity in his faith and can overcome all
problems with the help of fellow brothers, a disbeliever is reduced to
being overwhelmed by the smallest difficulty and finds himself having to
seek help from strangers in the form of psychiatrists and counselors -
and that even at a fee!

**5] Social - Political Effects**

We have discussed and mentioned that faith in Tawhid is not restricted
to the physical act of prostration. It also extends to the aspects of
submission and obedience.

In a society where Tawhid is not fully practiced i.e. where faith is
weak, we find that one group of people may feel superior to another and
try and rule over them. This is the beginning of oppression and goes
against the grain of monotheism. Such power-seekers are referred to as
Taaghoot.

Tawhid rids a society of such evil because all its members submit to
one Power only and that is God. Knowing that only He has the right to
rule and command makes them all equal. This was the aim of Islam through
the ages, to create such an equal and harmonious society throughout the
world. The Qur'an says:

"And certainly, We have raised in every nation an apostle saying:
'Serve Allah and shun the Devilâ€¦" Sura Nahl, Verse 36

This was why the prophets sent by Allah (S.W.T.) were rejected. People
were so used to their power over others that they did not like the
message of equality.This system though, provides the perfect foundation
for a prosperous nation. Its citizens can concentrate on development, as
they are not distracted by greed for wealth or power.

Knowing that they are all equal, they can work side by side without
hostility and in fact with harmony and co- operation since they will be
striving towards the same goal. Having discussed some of the positive
effects that faith in God

has on an individual and the society as a whole, we are in a position
to confidently say that belief and action go hand in hand and the former
cannot be present without the latter.

Those who claim to be Believers but show no effects of their faith in
their lives are either pretending to have Imaan or are weak in their
belief. It is for this reason that the Qur'an mentions "those who
believe and do good deeds" in one sentence, showing that the one is the
result of the other.

According to Imam Ali ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), "Belief means appreciation
with the heart, acknowledgement with the tongue and action with the
limbs."

This saying sums up the conditions of faith beautifully, leaving no
doubt that it must encompass all aspects of human nature.

Belief and action complement each other in that belief shows itself in
action while sincerity of action strengthens belief. Nurturing either or
both elements makes it possible for a person to truly perfect his
faith.


**Lesson 10 : Character Bulding**

There is no doubt that character building plays a very significant role
at both individual and society levels. If a civilization tries to
advance technologically without also building on its morals and conduct,
it will be like trying to construct a building on sand, the slightest
shift would cause the entire structure to crumble.

Unfortunately, this is exactly what we are doing in today's times.
Moral decadence is everywhere. Drugs, alcohol, lust, dysfunctional
families and crimes are words that have become common in our daily
vocabulary.

Apart from being dangers to themselves and their societies, people are
becoming a danger to countries around them. The strong feed on the weak
and the rich on the poor. A common example is the prevailing situation
of poverty, hunger and disease that attacking most Third world
countries.

While the richer nations are capable of solving the issues once and for
all, they only make a show of offering help and then leave the dying
people to fend for themselves.

Albert Einstein saw the sign of these dire circumstances long before
they became evident. He is quoted as having said:

"The modern and civilized world with the advancement of
industrialization, instead of serving human beings and societies have in
fact destroyed the roots of humanity â€¦"

**A Peaceful Life**

In order to understand why Islam puts such an emphasis on self-building
and perfecting ones Akhlaq, it is necessary to look at our society and
community. The environment around us at home, at work, in school and
even on our streets can only be peaceful if every person behaves in a
moral and polite manner.

When people do not struggle to have good conduct then they will begin
to fight with each other for petty reasons. Selfishness will lead to
pride, inconsideration and greed. A community whose members do not
respect each other is a community based on hostility and animosity. It
is a destructive environment and has no hope for progressing.

Imagine a community where you can trust others to keep your secrets,
where you can rely on many for help and support, where you are treated
as an individual and your opinion is respected and upheld. Now imagine
the opposite. This is the difference between a truly Islamic society and
one that has abandoned Allah (S.W.T.).

**Balance in Desires**

Allah (S.W.T.) created a variety of desires in the human nature and as
such He also provided for them. In order to live a healthy life, we need
to fulfill these desires when they arise and there is nothing wrong in
doing so.

We must, however, maintain a balance in our lives and it is for this
reason that Allah (S.W.T.) has, in His infinite Knowledge, also set
certain parameters within which these desires can be indulged. This is
to prevent man from either depriving himself of them or oppressing
himself under their demand. The boundaries for all actions are defined
by 5 terms in Islam:

1. Wajib (Compulsory)
2. Haraam (Forbidden)
3. Mustahab (Recommended)
4. Makrooh (Discouraged)
5. Mubah (Permissible)

Going beyond the imitations set by Allah (S.W.T.) is a sin and affects
our spiritual balance negatively.

Amongst the people who have not recognized the true faith of Allah
(S.W.T.), a great confusion arises in regards to the desires available
and how to satisfy them.

One group believes that the only way to reach the Almighty is to detach
oneself from this world and their nature. They live in seclusion and
deny themselves all normal needs such as proper eating and sleeping,
companionship of friends and family, sexual needs etc. For them, staying
away from these things and immersing oneself in meditation and worship
is the only way to gain success in the hereafter.

The other extreme are those people whom we have discussed before - the
materialistically inclined. These individuals believe that life is to be
lived with all desires being satisfied without second thought. Instead
of learning to control the desires and channeling them constructively,
they indulge in them excessively and at the cost of their character.

Islam supports neither the first view nor the second. Instead it
teaches us that we can satisfy our desires but within limits and in
moderation. The rules that are set upon these needs allow us to control
our desires rather than our desires to control us.

**Developing the Soul**

The soul is easily influenced by our environment and actions if not
guarded carefully. We have discussed that it possible - and not very
difficult - for a monotheist to find himself committing a form of
indistinct shirk with only a little change in his character or ideas.
Developing this further, we can also say that through our actions, our
soul either strengthens or weakens.

When a person first commits a bad deed, his soul may feel regret since
it is in the nature of human beings to rebel against evil but the same
deed committed again and again desensitizes the soul and it hardens.
When it is used to the sin, it will no longer feel that something wrong
is being done, let alone experience regret or guilt!

On the other hand, a person who guards against sins and performs good,
strengthens his soul. When he sins and feels guilty, he immediately
repents and tries never to repeat the act. Such a soul grows solid in
its foundation and becomes healthier with every right choice.

The development of a soul begins from infancy in the laps of a mother
and continues to be influenced by the home environment, school, work and
society. This is why we must be very careful what we expose ourselves
and our children to in this world.

**Self-Control in Youth**

In the beginning of this text we spoke of the period of youth and its
importance in a person's life. It is the time when characters are made
or destroyed and thus an extremely sensitive issue. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) has said:

"A person who obeys Allah (S.W.T.) in youth compared to those who
worship in old age is like comparing the prophets to the ordinary
people." What a noble position a pious youth holds in the eyes of Allah
(S.W.T.)! how great his status!

This hadith should prompt the youth to strive even harder to attain
such a rank. Remember, when you grow old, you lose this opportunity that
is reserved for the youth. Seeking forgiveness for all ones wrong-doing
and setting out determined to stick to the Right Path is the first step
in this journey. When a person realizes the true benefits of
self-control and Islam, this decision becomes an easy one to make.

While there are many distractions that a young person has to fight
against when walking on the straight path, the biggest of these is
perhaps that of physical desire. This is the temptation that has been
known to destroy the best period in life of many, many young people. It
is also the tool used by oppressors to weaken the strength of those they
want to overpower.

By introducing lust into a community and concentrating on exposing the
youth to it, many a cunning power has achieved its aim and distracted
the community from rebelling. Giving in to lust has the effect of
reducing the dignity and honour of an individual and leaving him with no
self-respect to stand up for.

**How does Islam deal with this issue?**

As we said earlier in this lesson, Islam has set down boundaries for
human beings in regards to wants and this includes physical desires.
While Islam recognizes that sexual needs must be met by a human being,
it lays down the following rules concerning it:

1. These desires can only lawfully be fulfilled within the bond of
marriage. Involving oneself in sexual activities outside of marriage is
forbidden and will likely have negative effects on both the individuals
in question and the society.

2. For those who are not married, self-control is the essence of their
struggle. These people must place their trust in Allah (S.W.T.) and have
a strong faith that they are doing what is right. By abstaining from
indulging in sexual activities until they are married, they ensure that
their souls remain pure and clean from such a vice as lust.

3. Islam has controlled the interaction of men and women in the
society. Men and women are commanded to respect each other in their
manners and to instill within themselves the Love for Allah (S.W.T.)
first and foremost.

When this love is well established then fighting against ones desires
becomes easy because they take second priority to Him. On the other
hand, men and women are also instructed not to have any kind of physical
contact (except for certain relatives) with each other.

Men are not supposed to look women lustfully and neither are women
supposed to invite such looks. When such a level of respect exists
within a society then the value of both genders is raised in the eyes of
the other and there is no question of stooping to make a person the
object of another's lust. With the removal of temptation, the situation
is controlled more easily.

**Chastity and Simplicity**

Expounding on the last point, we can say that in order to make it
easier for men and women to control their desire, Islam has set up a
mode of dressing, walking, talking and basically associating with the
opposite gender.

The Holy Qur'an says :

"And say to the Believing women that they cast down their gaze and
guard their private parts and display not their adornment save what is
apparent of it; and to draw their veils over their bosoms â€¦" Sura Noor,
Verse 31

Similarly, it says to the wives of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.): "O you
wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other women. If you keep your
duty (to Allah) then be not soft in your speech â€¦" Sura Ahzaab, Verse
32

Another important verse is:

"O (Our) Prophet (Muhammad)! Say unto your wives and your daughters and
the women of the Believers that they draw their cover garments (cloaks)
around them; that they may be known, so that they will not be troubled,
God is Ever Forgiving, Merciful." Sura Ahzaab, Verse 59

According to Islamic Sheriat, women must cover themselves when in the
presence of Na-Mahram men, in a modest manner that will not invite or
attract attention. They may leave their face and hands exposed as long
as these are not decorated i.e. with makeup and excessive jewelry.

Imam Khomeini (May the Almighty be pleased with his soul) in his book
of laws says:

"Women should avoid any kind of dressing that can provoke (attract)
men. To wear the chadar is highly recommended."

He also says:

"Even covering the face and hands will become unnecessary only if they
are simple and chaste."

**Philosophy of Hijaab**

Upholding modesty through the observation of Hijaab has the following
effects on society:

1. Prevention of corrupt conduct

Through keeping up the barriers imposed by hijaab, both men and women
will be saved from adopting conduct that is immoral and corrupt.
Uncontrolled lust will not exist in such an environment and
responsibility will prevail.

2. Security for women

When some women and men become immoral in a society then all women are
at risk. A man who cannot respect the chastity and sanctity of a woman
will give in to his desires and expect any woman to fulfill them for
him. All women in that community face the threat and this can be seen
especially in the West where abuse of this kind against women is so
abundant that it can no longer be controlled by the law. Hijaab secures
the dignity and modesty of women and of the men around them.

3. Status of Women

It is a common complaint in the West and other non-Islamic countries
that women have a lower status in society than men. Women are
complaining that they are being treated as objects and not as
intelligent individual. This is a result of the picture they present to
the society. When a women dresses and speaks in seductive manner, then
she will obviously be viewed a source of such pleasures.

Through hijaab, Islam ensures that women are seen a human beings and
not toys. It is the person within who is presented to the world not the
body without.

4. Productivity

Although this is an aspect that is not commonly advertised, it is
nonetheless amongst the most important effects that hijaab has on a
community. Bu observing modesty and keeping wayward desires under check,
the productivity levels of a society - both in social and working
environments - increases drastically.

Instead of being distracted by thoughts of how to impress or attract
each other, the men and women can concentrate fully on the work at hand
and increase output.

5. Value of women

By observing hijaab, a woman becomes a symbol of respect and dignity.
Not only will her self respect increase but her value in the eyes on men
also increases. Because she represents a person who is serving Allah
(S.W.T.) above all else, her principles and stand in life are clear for
all to see. Does Hijaab restrict Freedom?

Of course, despite all that has been said, the accusation that arises
most often is that Hijaab inhibits the freedom that a women has by
forcing her to conform to it limits.

Firstly, we must understand that it is the responsibility of an
individual to behave in a manner that will harm neither his self nor
those surrounding him, and that he should attempt to do what will
benefit them. Much as we would like to believe that the choice to do
something is entirely ours, this is not true. Every act that we perform
affects those around us and we must consider them before we decide what
to do.

Freedom is not the right to do as you wish but the responsibility to
live your life without infringing on another persons privileges. Islam
is not against human rights rather it promotes them. Hijaab, however, is
a responsibility that must be upheld by individuals within a society if
that society is to prosper.


