Lesson 11 : Friendship
======================

One of the emotional needs of a human being is that of companionship or
friendship. A friend is a person with whom you have a strong bond based
on love. Two good friends become pillars of support for each other,
helping each other, sharing problems and providing sympathy,
understanding and affection for each other. They become assets in the
each other's lives.

Without friends, a human being is destined to live a life of solitude.
Emptiness fills the heart of such a person and he finds himself alone in
times of need. The emotional burden involved is great and is recognized
as pitiful by all people.

Islam as a complete code of life, recognizes this need for friends and
encourages it followers to not only maintain cordial relations with all
people but to also seek and develop constructive friendships with those
who connect with us on an emotional level.

Friendships should be developed from childhood and youth. A friend
influences you in many ways and therefore the kind of company you keep
is extremely important. You will have realized that friend is someone
special on whom you have a deeper trust then your other acquaintances.

Friends tend to share ideas, opinions, likes and dislikes. They enjoy
and prefer each other's company above all else, and as their friendship
grows, so does their respect and love for each other.

Because of this strong emotional attachment, a friend may also
influence and sway the opinions or decisions that the other makes.
People have made decisions that affect their entire lives based on the
advice of a friend and it is for this reason that Islam tell us to be
careful in our choice of companions.

It best to have friends who think like you and who possess good
qualities that you can hope to adopt from them. If you choose a pious
and principled friend, chances are that he or she will give you good
advice when you are confused and prevent you from making hasty decisions
that you may later regret.

Imam Ali (a.s.) has said:

"Avoid friendship with bad (character) people because you will be
affected by them although you may be influenced without your
knowledge."

Once you have bonded with a person, it is difficult to realize their
faults and chance are that even if someone points them out to you, you
will deny it. For this reason, it is recommended to assess the character
of a potential friend before you allow yourself to become too close and
emotion overrides logic.

We read in many books that a common problem amongst teenagers and youth
today is that of Peer pressure. This just means the influence that your
age-mates have over you. Hundreds of young people adopt vices like
drugs, alcohol, smoking etc. only because their friends tell them it is
'cool' to do so. They want to fit in and feel pressured into joining the
majority. By the time they want to stop, they may have wasted years of
their life or worse it may be too late to break free of the habit.

Islam deals with this by instructing a youth to be aware of who is and
why he exists. Once a young person realizes that his aim in life is to
gain the pleasure of Allah (S.W.T.) then the groups and gangs hold no
attraction for him and he does not feel the need to be accepted them.

In addition to this, he will avoid them because he knows that Islam
recommends friends of good morals and character and people with such
vices do not make good constructive friends.

The emphasis on the quality of the friend you choose is so great that
although isolation is not a pleasing state, many ahadith of our Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) and Aimmah (a.s.) tell us that in the event of being unable
to find a moral friend, one should choose to maintain solitude rather
than keep the company of immoral individuals.

**First Test then Trust**

Friendships built hastily on first impressions can easily collapse at
the first sign of problems. Make sure that you first get to know the
person you want to befriend before trusting him otherwise you may find
that the secrets you share with him are exposed to the world.

Talking with people, seeing how they react in different circumstance,
how well they associate with others all helps you to assess their
character. It has been mentioned in ahadith that if you observe that a
person has reason to be angry and maintains his composure at such a
time, doing this on three separate occasions then he deserves to be a
friend. Of course this is only one admirable quality and friendship must
be based on others in addition to this.

Imam Ali (a.s.) has said:

"Whoever chooses his friend after knowing him will be able to continue
the friendship (i.e. it will last)"

**I. Seeking a Friend**

We have spoken of the good moral character that a friend should possess
but let us also emphasize that the person we choose must also be
spiritually and emotionally inclined towards Allah (S.W.T.). There are
plenty of people - non- Muslims, Polytheists and even Atheists - who
have good manners and loyal characters but the spiritual influence such
people would have close friends is destructive to our Imaan.

Sometimes a person who has been deprived of affection and love in his
family may latch onto the first individual who offers him this warmth.
Such a step may cause him more harm than good if the person he befriends
takes him away from Allah (S.W.T.). Remember to ask yourself if such or
similar emotions are prompting you to make a friend who is otherwise
unsuitable for you.

A true friend is one you can trust to always warn you when you stray
away from Allah (S.W.T.) and who will walk upright with you on the Path
towards ultimate success.

**A. Qualities to look for**

Because Allah (S.W.T.) has created the human nature and the feeling of
friendship between people, He is also the Best suited to advise us on
how to recognize a person who will make a good friend. Therefore, we
have been told to look for these qualities in a potential friend:

1. Wisdom and Knowledge:

A friend must be Aaqil (wise) according to Islam. Those who are not
wise may through their ideas and action harm you and put your dignity at
risk together with their own.

Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) advised his son saying:

" Avoid friendship with an ignorant person because he may want to
benefit you but because of his ignorance, he will end up harming you."

Islam cautions us to avoid friendship with characters who are rash,
unreasonable, short tempered and unstable in their emotions. When in
school or college, it is a good idea to avoid those who do not take
their studies seriously no matter how popular they are.

Remember, after you leave the school each of you will go your own way
and how you perform your studies will affect the rest of your life and
career. Ask yourself whether failing will be worth the few hours of
popularity you may have.

2. Sincerity and Good Principles.

The person you choose to befriend should be sincere in his actions and
uphold the principles of Islam. If he is the sort of person who
compromises his relationship with Allah (S.W.T.) then what is to say
that he would not compromise your relationship which is infinitely less
important when compared to Him?

A principled friend will know his duties to you and respect and uphold
both because you are a fellow brother and because you are a friend. His
loyalty will be unquestionable.

3. Pleasant Character

A pleasant character is a most appealing quality in an individual.
Someone who is kind, gentle, polite, faithful, reliable and fun to be
with is usually the description most people will give of a friend.

It is advisable to seek friends who are good company to be with and
with whom you can enjoy the time you spend together. You should share
some common interests if your friendship is to survive.

Of course all this does not mean that you should only search for a
perfect person to be friends with. It may be impossible to find someone
who has all these good qualities and noble attributes and we must be
realistic in our assessment of people.

These criteria only serve to give us guideline on what we should look
out for and what qualities we should incorporate in ourselves if we are
to be good friends also.

Our 6th Imam, Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

"A good friend gives comfort to the spirit of a human being and grants
him success in this world and in the hereafter, just as cool water
quenches the thirst of a parched throat."

We should strive to be like this cool water to our friends if we expect
them to the same for us.

**B. Qualities to Avoid**

Just as there are certain basic good manners we should search for in
our friends, so we must avoid both befriending those with the following
bad qualities and having these qualities ourselves.

1. Selfishness

A selfish person will always think of himself before you. He will do
whatever benefits him without thinking of its consequence on you and
such a person does not deserve to have friends.

Our Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) has said of such people:

"There is no good in a person who does not like for you what he likes
for himself."

2. Pride

People who are proud can never be true friends because they will always
think themselves as being superior than you. They will look down upon
you and your ideas if these disagree with their views and try to demean
you. Such a friendship will have no equality or loyalty in it since the
proud person will believe they are always right and will think that they
are doing you a favour by being your friend.

3. Wickedness

People who cannot control themselves and who commit sins constantly
without hesitation are on a downward spiral towards self-destruction.
Avoid them or else you might find yourself caught up in the flow and
unable to escape.

These people bring nothing into a friendship except empty promises and
negative influences. Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s.) has warned us: " Such
wicked people are similar to a poisoned sword which looks beautiful but
leaves behind a harmful (dangerous) influence."

4. Gossip

We have been warned to avoid friendship with gossips as they can speak
about us and disclose our secrets to others just as easily as they tell
us about other peoples affairs.

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

"Keep aloof from slanderers because those who speak ill of others in
front of you may one day speak ill of you to others." In this group of
gossips are also included liars, flatterers, traitors, misers and those
who have a rude manner and speak in abusive language.

**II. Duties of a Friend**

Having described the qualities we should look for and avoid in a
friend, let us know look at the relationship of friends and see what
duties Islam has laid down to ensure that a friendship is as equal and
beneficial to both parties involved as possible. Some of these duties
include:

1. Respecting each others rights

It is necessary for a person to consider his friend as an extension of
himself. He must like for him what he likes for himself and the same
with his dislikes. Misusing the friendship and taking advantage of a
friend's emotional or physical rights is not encouraged.

In his Wasiyat (Will), Imam Ali (a.s.) said to his son Imam Hassan
(a.s.): "Do not take advantage of the rights of your brother by misusing
the name of friendship because this can ultimately lead to loosing him
as a friend. By taking advantage of his rights, your brother in faith
will no longer remain your brother."

One of the definite rights of a friend over you is that you respect his
opinions. While there may be no barriers in your friendship, this
respect must be maintained. As long as your friend is acting according
to Islam, you should not ridicule his ideas.

Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) says:

"As it is the duty of your friend to respect you, it is also your duty
to respect him."

2. Extending a helping hand

The adage "A friend in need is a friend indeed" goes perfectly with
what Islam advises in a friendship. A friend should be the kind of
person who is always willing to help you in anyway possible even it is
with providing a sympathetic ear. In turn, you too should be willing to
sacrifice time, energy and finance to help a friend.

3. Do not demand

Speaking of the aspect of sacrifice, we must realize that while we can
ask for help and support from a friend, we should not impose our needs
on them. Expecting too much or demanding more than your friend can
conveniently offer is a sign of selfishness.

4. Being Loyal

Loyalty is the glue that holds a friendship together. It is what
supports a relationship through thick and thin. To be a true friend, you
must be loyal. It goes without saying this does not mean that you should
put your loyalty to your friend above your loyalty to Allah (S.W.T.).

Once, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was walking and came across an old
man.

He stopped to greet him ad inquired about his health. When his
companions saw this, they asked him why he had treated the strange man
in this manner.

The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) replied, "When Khadija was alive, this man used
to visit us." He continued by saying that one of the signs of Imaan is
to respect one's old friends.

As a conclusion to the duties of a friend let us study a hadith of Imam
Ja'far al- Sadiq (a.s.) where he says:

" There are certain conditions to being a good friend. Whoever
qualifies in all of them is indeed considered to be a noble companion
and whosoever does not qualify in even one of them cannot be considered
a true friend. They are:

a) His interior (character) and exterior (actions) should be the same
i.e. he should not be a hypocrite.

b) He should be able to evaluate your goodness as his own goodness and
your faults as his own faults.

c) If he attains more power, wealth or status, he attitude towards you
should not change.

d) Whatever your friendship requires, he should try his utmost to give
to it. e) He should not abandon you in times of difficulty."

**III. Limits in Friendship**

As in all things in Islam, friendship too must have its moderate
boundaries. Exceeding these may lead to regret if things don't work out.
Every friendship must be based on rational thought. Getting carried away
by our emotions - which may very easily happen especially in youth -
leads us to do foolish things. The following three things should be
avoided in any friendship:

1. Excessive Trust

We discussed earlier that when selecting a friend, we must first test
the character of person and then trust them. When we take this second
step, however, we must do it gradually and with care. No matter how much
we observe a person before becoming close to them, we can never know
them fully.

Trust must come in small things first and then more delicate issues.
And even then, Islam advises never to tell EVERYTHING to a friend. You
do not what the future holds for you and it possible that if your friend
knows your deepest secret, he may use them against you in anger or that
your friendship may break and he may use the information against you in
spite.

Keep your innermost secrets between yourself and your Lord because you
cannot trust anyone as much as Him. Imam Ali (a.s.) says:

"Show all kindness to your friend but do not show him full trust.
Assist him as much as you can but do not reveal all your secrets to
him."

2. Fanaticism

It is easy to be blind to the faults of a good friend. We should take
great care not to fall into this trap. All humans are imperfect and just
as we recognize that we are not perfect, we must also realize that our
friends too possess flaws. While we should not hunt for the weaknesses
of our friends, we cannot ignore them and pretend they do not exist -
especially when they are in regards to morals and Islamic principles.

Imam Ali (a.s.) has warned us:

"Loving something (one) makes you blind and deaf (to its faults)." In
another hadith of the Aimmah (a.s.) we are told: "A believer is a mirror
to his fellow being." This basically means that we must reflect to our
friends what hey are to us and when they fall short we must be there to
warn them and help them up. We should expect the same of them.

Friends are complements, helping each other to reach perfection and
making the task easier by providing companionship. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) has said: "Two good friends are like a pair of hands; as they
wash, they clean each other."

On the other hand, we should also not try to expose the faults of our
friends or their shortcomings to others. During the absence of a friend
do not speak ill or ridicule him. Harith ibn Awar once came to Imam Ali
(a.s.) and said, "O Ameerul Mo'mineen! I am your friend!" Imam (a.s.)
then explained a few things a person must abstain from in a friendship.
These are:

- Do not dispute with or be hostile towards a friend.
- Do not ridicule him.
- Do not quarrel with him.
- Do not crack indecent jokes with him.
- Do not consider him to be lower than yourself.

3. Excessive Attachment

Friendship bonds formed in youth (and especially between females)
usually tend be extremely strong. This is due to excessive loyalty and
attachment. It should be avoided because it can have harmful effects on
one or both parties e.g.

Concentrating on the friendship may distract the friends from other
important issues like school work, family responsibilities, wajibaats
etc. If one friend is more attached than the other and the feelings are
not equally reciprocated then that person may end up emotionally
effected. Being obsessed with a friend makes a person more easily
influenced and thus he looses the ability to make logical and unbiased
decisions on his own.

The only solution to this is to have a moderate and realistic
friendship. Imam Ali (a.s.) in one of his sermons says:

"Your friendship with your friend should be within the limits of
moderation because it is possible that one day that friend may become
your enemy."


