Lesson 12 : Akhlaq of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
=================================================

**Part I**

When trying to instill morals in a person, it is necessary to present a
role model who can be followed. Without such a practical example, akhlaq
(etiquette) is just a set of theories that written down in books.

In secular systems, such models do not exist. No human is perfect and
as such there in nobody who can be looked up to and followed as an
example or moral excellence. This makes it difficult for such systems to
encourage or convince its followers to strive towards good conduct.

Divine schools of thought are the opposite and rely on their guides as
examples of perfect conduct. In Islam, this guide is the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) whom the Holy Qur'an calls Uswatun - Hassanah (The Perfect
Example). It says:

" Indeed there is for you an apostle from Allah (S.W.T.), an excellent
role model." Sura Ahzaab, Verse 21

Having such a perfect example as a model to follow, allows Muslims to
ignore the false leaders and to lead a life directed at achieving the
perfect character. If we do not study the life of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
and his seerah, we risk the danger of not being able to differentiate
between tradition, culture and Islam. It is this lack of knowledge and
interest that leads people astray and causes them to commit wrong doings
in the name of Islam.

We must study the life and sunnah of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and try our
best to follow it as well as we can. It is impossible to fully
appreciate his flawless character and equally impossible to achieve the
state of perfection that he had either morally or spiritually.

We must however, try to emulate his manners because if we succeed in
adopting even a minute aspect of his personality into our own then we
will find ourselves above all others in this world and on the road
towards success.

Using Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.w.)'s life as our example and source, let
us study some of the akhlaq that we should attempt to have in our
individual and social lives. We will deal with the individual aspect in
this chapter and the social in the next.

**A. Individual Morals**

1. Prayers

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was often heard to say, "My happiness is in
prayers."

One day, while sitting with his companions, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
asked them that if they lived near a river where they could go and bathe
five times day, would any dirt remain upon their bodies? They all
answered to the negative. Hearing this, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) then told
them, "Five times a day, through Salaat, Allah (S.W.T.) purifies a
persons soul, washing away all diseases of the Nafs and removing all
stains of sin."

In another incident, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) entered the mosque and
noticed a man praying, who was careless in his performance of Ruku and
Sajdah. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) watched him and then said that if the man
died not having corrected this flaw, he would not die a Muslim.

Another famous hadith of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) regarding Salaat is as
follows: "Prayer is like a pillar of a fortress. If the pillar is firm,
the whole fortress will stand upright but if the pillar breaks then the
entire structure would collapse."

Thus, we can say that pillar is a foundation of our relationship with
Allah (S.W.T.) and every other aspect is based on it.

A final hadith regarding the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) will perhaps drive home
the true status of prayer in the life of a Muslim. One of the wives of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) says:

"The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) used to converse with us but as soon as the
time for prayer dawned, he would change as though he did not recognize
us and hatily proceed towards Salaat. When he stood for prayer, the
colour of his face would become pale in awe of Allah (S.W.T.). Humility
and fear would reflect on his expression and he would stand for hours on
end, praying, reciting du'a and munajaat."

**2. Hard work**

Since his childhood, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.w.) was a very active
person. When he was still with his foster mother - Halima - he once saw
her other sons going out and asked her, "Where are my brothers going?"

Halima explained that they were going to graze the sheep and the
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) immediately insister that he wanted to join them.
After that he would go out often and graze the sheep with them.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) had no respect for people who chose to be
idle despite having the capability to work. A group of his companions
once came across the following words in the Holy Qur'an:

"Whoever obtains piety, Allah will open ways for him to solve his
problems and bless him with sustenance."

Upon reading this, they all stopped working and began to concentrate on
praying. When the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) heard of this, he asked them why
they had done such a thing and the companions answered that it was
because of the ayat they had read. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) said to
them:

" Whoever sits idle and does not perform his duties, Allah (S.W.T.)
will not even accept his dua and salaat. Work hard and while working
place your trust in Him, then he will give you blessings and rizq from
that effort." He looked at the companions and added, " Whoever is lazy
in striving for his worldly life will surely be more lazy in striving
for his hereafter."

In another hadith, our Prophet (s.a.w.w.) says:

"Worship has 70 parts and the best of them is seeking a lawful
livelihood." Another story that shows us the importance of hard work is
when the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was sitting with his companions and they
happened to see a young man busy working in the early hours of the
morning.

The companions watched him and commented on how beneficial it would be
if he put his effort in worshipping Allah (S.W.T.) instead. When he
heard this, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) said to them:

" Do not say that! Because he is working to be independent and self
sufficient, it is in the way of Allah (S.W.T.). Even if he were striving
to earn a living in order to support his family, it would still be a
noble act. It is only when a person takes pride in his efforts and money
that he is working in way of Shaytan."

Our Aimmah (a.s.) followed the footsteps of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
and worked extremely hard themselves to set an example for the people.
They valued it so much that Imam Ali (a.s.) used to say, "There is no
joy better than hard work."

**3. Simplicity**

One of the most outstanding qualities of our Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
was his simplicity. He lived in the most basic of houses and his food
and dress were minimal at best.

The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) neither coveted luxuries, nor did he accept them
from others. At all times he preferred to live an uncomplicated life and
advised his companions to do the same.

Although towards the end of his life, he was in essence a King over the
Muslim Empire, his lifestyle never changed in the slightest. He expected
no great tributes from his followers and never rode while those around
him were walking. It was his aim to make no one feel uncomfortable or
awed in his presence just because of his status.

Once, when some of his wives complained that they were tired of having
no luxuries and wanted a greater share of the war booty, he politely
explained to them that he lived a simple life and could not do this. He
told them living in such a manner was best in the eyes of Allah (S.W.T.)
but if they did not think they could bear it then he was willing to give
them back their mahr and part with them amicably. This shows that he was
not willing to be swayed from his principles even for his family.

Our Aimmah (a.s.) also lead simple lives. Note that Islam does not
advocate poverty - only simplicity. Money can be used to help the poor
and in ways to help the Muslim Ummah and Islam.

Finally, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was heard to say:

"The most successful person amongst the Believers in the one who
expects less in life and is steadfast in prayer."

**4. Cleanliness**

As we have said, the simplicity of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was not equal
to poverty. Now we can add that it was far removed from untidiness
either. Rather, he was known for being an extremely neat and clean
person. He liked to be well-groomed and presentable at all times.

Once when a man came to visit him, he neatened his clothes before going
to greet him. One of his wives, seeing this, asked him why he was doing
so when he was the Prophet of Allah (S.W.T.) and had no need to impress
others. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) replied, "Allah (S.W.T.) had
recommended highly to the Believers that they be well-dressed and
presentable before going to meet with their brethren in faith."

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) always encouraged his companions to keep
themselves clean and their houses tidy and organized. On Fridays
especially, he would tell them to perform Ghusl-e-Jumu'ah, dress in good
clothes, apply perfume or attar and then proceed to prayers. He himself
did this with great pleasure.

He also used to brush his teeth several times a day, including when he
woke up, before going to bed and before every prayer. He would say to
his companions, "Remember to keep the paths of Qur'an clean." And when
they asked him what he meant by the paths of Qur'an, he told them that
it was their mouths that he referring to. "How can we do this?" they
asked. "By brushing your teeth," he replied.

These four qualities that we as individuals can adopt are only a few of
the excellent habits that the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) not only encouraged in
others but also possessed himself. As we mentioned in the beginning, it
is only by studying his life that we find the others and try to practice
them too.


