Lesson 13 : Akhalaq of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) Part Ii
==========================================================

We studied some of the examples of personal good habits that the
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) propagated; let us now discuss morals that he had on
a social level i.e. in relation to others.

**B. Social Morals**

1. Politeness and Loyalty

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) paid great attention in the way he spoke
and dealt with other people. He would maintain good relations with all
and never forget a friend or anyone who had shown him kindness.

During his stay in Medina, there was a lady who used to sweep the
mosque and keep it clean. She was there every day and slept in the
mosque at night. On day, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) passed by and did not
see her. Asking where she was, he was told that she had died and been
buried already.

Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.w.) was extremely saddened that no one had told
him the news and he immediately made his way to the graveyard where he
prayed at her grave and asked Allah (S.W.T.) to pardon her sins. His
appreciation of her efforts show us that even if we do not people
personally, we should still understand how they affect our lives and be
grateful for them.

In another incident, Halima, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)'s foster mother
came to meet him many years after he had left her care. When the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) saw her approach, he quickly stood up and spread his cloak
for her to walk upon and sit.

After showing her great respect, he asked her how she was and when she
explained that she and her village were experiencing great drought and
famine, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) organized for plenty of food to be taken
back with her so that it may ease the burden of the people.

This affection is what made him so endearing to people. They knew that
he would nor forget or ignore them once he had befriended them.

**2. Humility**

The humility of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was so great that Abu Dhar says
when strangers would come to visit him, they would not be able to tell
him apart from the ordinary people and ask " Which one is Muhammad?"

A famous story about humility is one of the poor and rich man who lived
in Medina. Once the poor man came to visit the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and
sat amongst the group around him. He happened to take a place near a
rich man who instinctively moved his fine clothes out of the way.

The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was not pleased by this action and asked the
rich man for its reason. The man had already realized his mistake and he
apologized to both the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and the poor man offering the
latter half of his wealth in compensation.

The poor man accepted his apology but rejected his money. When asked
for his reason, he replied: "I fear that by becoming rich I too will
behave the way this man did I so not want his money."

**3. Forgiveness**

Overlooking the mistakes of others and forgiving them was a great
quality of our Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.). He would forgiven not only his
friends and Believers but also others who had shown him no kindness.

When he conquered Mecca and entered the city as its ruler, the people
were sure that he would take revenge for all the hardships he had
suffered at their hands. Yet he stood in front of them and asked them, "
What do you expect from me?"

The people knew they were at his mercy and replied, "Nothing except
goodness. You are our generous brother and the son of a great brother of
ours. Power is in your hands and it is for you to decide how to deal
with us." Hearing this the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was greatly moved and he
wept, telling them, "I say to you what my brother Yusuf said to his
brothers: 'Go I set you free'."

Many Meccan's accepted Islam after this because they were so impressed
by the values and compassion its leader practiced.

The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was so kind and forgiving that after he
experience the grief caused by the Mushrikeen when they trampled the
body of his uncle Hamza in Ohad, he ordered that no Muslim should treat
the body of an enemy in the same manner and cause them the same pain.

In matters of Islam, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) excused only those who
repented sincerely and changed their ways and to these he showed great
forgiveness and gave them hope to expect the same from their Lord.

**4. Dealing with people**

Although he had come as a guide, mentor and teacher to the people, the
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) never created any barriers between himself and them.
One would expect that being their leader and King, he had every
opportunity to keep himself aloof and surround himself with guards and
servants but this was not in his character.

As he preached equality to all, he practiced it himself. When people
would visit him, he would sit with them and spend time talking to them
not only about religion, but also about their lives. Offering
encouragement, sympathy and advice, he gained the love of the general
public so that they constantly turned to him for comfort. They knew that
he would equally share their laughter and grief.

Many people think that the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) concentrated only on
preaching laws and fact. What they do not know is that he also spoke of
general matters and made jokes with his friends. He lived a normal life
as people do but within the limits of Islam and of his dignity.

The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was known never to criticize or listen to
criticism about people, as he did not want to be prejudiced against
anyone. He never chose a particular place in public gatherings but sat
where he found space. He was very much saddened by those who spoke ill
of others or publicized their shortcomings. One day, he asked his
companions, "Do you know who is the worst amongst men?"

His companions said yes, they would want to know this so they could
avoid the habits of such a person. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) then told
them, "He is the one who creates Fitna and who find faults in
God-conscious people."

We can say that in following the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) we must treat
others with the utmost respect and consideration and always be on the
lookout to avoid hurting them in any way.

**5. Avoid arguing**

The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) greatly discouraged disputes and squabbles
amongst his followers and never indulged in such behaviour himself. One
day he passed a group of Muslims who were arguing amongst themselves and
he stopped them saying, "I remind you that many past nations have been
destroyed due to squabbles - this ugly act prevented them from
progressing.

I advise you to disputing amongst yourselves for Allah (S.W.T.) hates
this act! Remember, on the Day of Judgement, I will not intercede for
such people. After idol-worship, the first prohibited habit was that of
quarrelling."

**6. Rights of Neighbours**

When the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was setting off towards Tabuk, he had
announced that all those who knew that they had hurt their neighbours at
home in anyway should not accompany him. This was the extent to which he
disliked such manners. Islam is a religion that came to harbour and
nurture harmony amongst people and the most important of our close
relations, after family, are our neighbours.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) has said:

"Whoever believes in Allah (S.W.T.) and in the Day of Resurrection must
respect his neighbours. The right of neighbours upon a person is like
the right of a mother upon her children."

In another incident, when his companions spoke highly of a woman who
was well known for her fasting and praying, he told them, "Although she
fasts and prays, she will be from the dwellers of the fire of Hell,
because someone cannot be a Mo'meen unless he is good to his
neighboursâ€¦"

**7. Rights of Animals**

Cruelty to animals is forbidden in Islam. As much as we treat our
fellow humans with respect, we must also handle all other living things
with kindness, especially those for whom we are responsible. Allah
(S.W.T.) created animals to serve us and provide us with our various
needs and we should be grateful for that and treat them well.

There are many incidents where the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) showed this
kind of gentleness to animals. On of the famous ones was the time when a
cat gave birth to a litter of kittens on one end of his cloak. Instead
of chasing them away, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) took a knife and cut off
the area they were on, leaving a large piece as blanket for them.

At another time, he was walking when he saw a group of people torturing
an animal with a hot iron. He told them to stop straightaway and warned
them that those who indulged such inhuman acts were cursed by Allah
(S.W.T.). The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) emphasised good treatment of animals by
telling his companions the following story.

"One day, a man was travelling in the desert. The heat was extreme and
he was very thirsty. Suddenly he came across a well and pleased with his
find, he quickly drew up some water and drank it. Having quenched his
thirst, he was about to walk away when he noticed a dog nearby who was
parched.

Thinking that he would help it, he drew up some more water and gave it
to the dog to drink. In return for this one act one kindness, Allah
(S.W.T.) forgave all his sins!"

The companions were surprised and asked the Prophet (s.a.w.w.), "If we
treat animals well, will we be rewarded also?"

He replied, "Yes! For every good action you do, you will certainly be
rewarded!" He then told them that they should be so considerate that
even when hunting, they should kill their prey quickly and prevent it
from suffering more agony that it already has.

Below are some of the rights that animals have over their owners
according to Islam:

a) Animals should always be offered their own kind of food to eat and
not be forced to eat what the owner is eating.

b) When travelling, if they reach water, the owner should allow the
animal to quench its thirst first.

c) When encouraging an animal to move i.e. beasts of burden then one
should not hit it on the face or head.

d) When riders stop to talk to each other, they should dismount so that
the beast is not tired by their weight.

e) Animals should not be forced to carry more than they can.

f) The owners should not make their animals walk on rough or uneven
ground.

We can see that while societies have begun to fight for the rights of
animals in the recent years, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) introduced this
over 1400 years ago to his followers!

**8. Rights of Human Beings**

When Islam has so greatly propagated the rights of animals, do you
think that it would ignore those of human beings? Definitely not! Apart
from the rights that believers have socially one each other, there are
other rights that apply at a more basic level and relate to humanity as
a whole. We will briefly mention them below.

It is against the laws of Islam to torture another human being or usurp
his rights. Life is sacred in Islam and as such Muslims are not allowed
to end another life without justification.

When dealing with people, we must especially be considerate when
dealing with women, children, old people, the sick and wounded. The
honour and chastity of women must be protected at all times.

Another vice that is disliked is that of harming others or the
environment through ones actions. Things like pollution, smoking,
gossip, loud noises, foul language, inconsiderate driving all fall under
the above category.

To a Muslim, a home is a private refuge and should be treated as such.
Breaking into peoples houses and violating their privacy is a sin.
Violating a person's dignity through ridicule and mockery is also
despised and the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) has said, "A Muslim is one from
whose tongue and hand others are safe."

He also said, "Whosoever hurts a Mo'meen hurts me and whosoever hurts
me has hurt Allah (S.W.T.) and whosoever hurts Allah (S.W.T.) is indeed
cursed by Him, His angels and all people."

**9. Avoid Burdening Others**

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) always performed all his own work and even
helped out in household chores. He used to say, "May the curse of Allah
(S.W.T.) be upon those who burden others with their own affairs."

Once the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was travelling with his companions and they
stopped by a pool of water to rest and pray at noon. Having left their
animals in the shade, they went to the pond to perform wudhoo. Suddenly,
the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) left them and walked back to the camels.

His companions were surprised by this and thought that perhaps the
place did not suit him. They turned to follow him and ask if they should
move, when they saw to their surprise that the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
reached the shade, tied up his camel and then began walking back towards
them.

When he reached them, they asked him why he had taken the trouble to go
back when he could have sent anyone of them to tie up his camel for him.
He smiled and said, "Do not seek unnecessary help from your brother even
if it is in very small matters."

This policy was one that he always upheld and encouraged all his
followers to also.

We now come to the end of our discussion regarding Akhlaq. We should
remind ourselves yet again that these morals and virtues outlined in the
past two lessons are only a few guidelines and that our character must
incorporate many other finer points in order to reach the stage of
perfection for which it was created.


