The Author
==========

Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahheri, born 1920, was one of the most versatile
Islamic scholars and prolific writers of recent times. He was deeply
rooted in traditional learning and enamoured of its exponents. He was a
thinker who had fully absorbed a rigorous philosophical training. His
work is marked by a philosophical clarity that particularly qualified
him to deal with the fundamental problem of religious thought that forms
the subject-matter of this book.

Ayatullah Mutahhery received his elementary education in theology from
his father, Shaykh Muhammad Husayn in his home town, Fariman. When the
Ayatullah was twelve years of age he joined the Educational Centre at
Mashad and pursued his studies there for five years. Then he proceeded
to Qum, the great centre of Islamic education. He stayed there for
fifteen years and completed his education in Islamic Beliefs and
Jurisprudence under the supervision of the renowned philosopher Allama
Muhammad Husayn Tabatabai, Imam Khomayni and many other distinguished
scholars. Then he migrated to Tehran.

During the period of his education the Ayatullah felt that the
communists wanted to change the sacred religion of Islam and destroy its
very spirit by mixing their atheistic views with the Islamic philosophy
and interpreting the verses of the Qur'an in a materialistic manner. Of
course, communism was not the only thing which received Ayatullah's
attention. He also wrote on exegesis of the Qur'an, philosophy, ethics,
sociology, history and many other subjects. In all his writings the real
object he had in view was to give replies to the objections raised by
others against Islam, to point out the shortcomings of other schools of
thought and to manifest the greatness of Islam. He believed that in
order to prove the falsity of Marxism and other ideologies like it, it
was necessary not only to comment on them in a scholarly manner but also
to present the real image of Islam.

Ayatullah Mutahheri wrote assiduously and continuously from his student
days right up to 1979, the year of his assassination. Much of his work
has been published in and outside Iran. He has written a number of books
not in accordance with his personal interest or predilection but with
his perception of its need. Wherever a book was lacking in some vital
topic of contemporary Islamic interest Mutahheri sought to supply it.

The activities of the Ayatullah were intolerable for the followers of
the atheistic schools and they, therefore, decided to remove him from
the scene by terroristic methods. Eventually they succeeded on the 1st
of May, 1979. His martyrdom was a great tragedy. When the sad news was
conveyed to Imam Khomayni he could not control his tears. In his
condolence message he said: "I have been deprived of a dear son of mine.
I am lamenting upon the death of one who was the fruit of my life."

Thousands of Muslims escorted his funeral. He was laid to rest in Qum
in the precincts of the Holy shrine of Lady Fatimah Ma'sumah.

Ayatullah Mutahhery was a popular figure in the religious and literary
circles of Iran. He served in the Tehran University as the Head of the
Department of Theology and Islamic Learnings.

At the time of his martyrdom he was the president of the Constitutional
Council of the Islamic Republic of Iran and was performing his duties in
a very befitting manner.

His works have been translated and published in French, Arabic,
Turkish, Urdu and English. The Islamic Seminary has had the honour of
publishing some of them.

