Inheritance
===========

In the ancient world woman inherited nothing and, even when she
inherited, she was treated like a minor. She had no independent legal
personality. According to certain ancient legal systems, a daughter
received an inheritance but her children did not. On the other hand, a
son not only received an inheritance himself, but his children also
inherited the property left by their grandfather. Certain other legal
systems allowed woman to inherit but not in the form of a definitely
prescribed share, or in the language of the Qur'an 'an appointed share'.
They simply allowed a progenitor to make a bequest in her favour, if he
so desired.

Historians and investigators have given detailed accounts of the
various laws of inheritance found in the ancient world, but we need not
go into all their details. For our purpose, the above given summary is
enough.

**WHY WOMAN WAS DEPRIVED OF INHERITANCE?**

The main reason of the deprivation of woman of inheritance was the
prevention of transfer of wealth from one family to another. According
to the old belief, the women's role in procreation was insignificant.
The mothers served only as receptacles, where the seed of the father
developed into a child. On this account, they believed that the children
of a man's son were his own children and a part of his family, but the
children of a man's daughter were not a part of his family, for they
were a part of the family of their paternal grandfather. Thus, had a
daughter received an inheritance, that would have meant the transfer of
property to her children, who belonged to a family unconnected with that
of the deceased.

The late Dr. Musa 'Ameed says that in the olden days religion, and not
any natural relationship, was the basis of the formation of a family.
The grandfather, besides being the social head of his children and
grandchildren, used to be their religious head also. The execution of
religious ceremonies and rituals was handed down to succeeding
generations through the male descendants only. The ancients regarded
only men as the means of preserving progeny. The father of the family
not only gave life to his son, but also passed to him his religious
beliefs and rituals. According to the Hindu Vedas and the Greek and the
Roman laws, the power of procreation was confined to men only, and hence
family religions were the monopoly of men, and women had no hand in
religious affairs except through their fathers or husbands. As they
could not take part in the execution of religious ceremonies, they were
naturally deprived of all family privileges. Hence, when the system of
inheritance came into being, they were excluded.

The exclusion of woman from inheritance had other reasons also, one of
them being that she was not fit to be a good soldier. In a society in
which great value was attached to the heroic deeds and the power of
fighting, and a warrior was regarded superior to a hundred thousand
non-fighters, woman was deprived of inheritance, because she lacked the
fighting capacity.

For this very reason, the pre-Islamic Arabs were opposed to inheritance
by woman, who could not inherit as long as a male member of the family,
howsoever distant, existed. That is why they were greatly surprised,
when the Qur'an expressly said: "For men is a share of what the parents
and the near relatives leave, and for women is a share of what the
parents and the near relatives leave, whether it be little or much - an
appointed share', (Surah an-Nisa, 4:32)

It so happened that the brother of Hassan bin Thabit, the famous poet,
died in those very days, leaving behind a wife and several daughters.
His paternal cousins appropriated all his property and did not give
anything to his widow or daughters. The widow complained to the Holy
Prophet who called her deceased husband's cousins. They said that a
woman was unable to carry arms and to fight the enemy. It was the men
who defended themselves and the women. Hence, they alone had the right
to inherit the property. Thereupon, the Holy Prophet conveyed to them
the command of Allah, as revealed in the above quoted verse.

**INHERITANCE OF AN ADOPTED SON**

The pre- Islamic Arabs sometimes adopted someone as their son. The
adopted son like a real son, was considered to be an heir. The custom of
adoption existed among other nations also, including the ancient Romans
and the Iranians. The adopted son, being considered to be just like a
real son, enjoyed such privileges as were not allowed to the lineal
daughters. These privileges included the right of inheritance.
Similarly, marriage with the wife of an adopted son was prohibited. The
Holy Qur'an abolished these customs.

**INHERITANCE OF AN ALLY**

Another custom, which was common among the pre-Islamic Arabs and was
abolished by the Qur'an, was that of alliance. Two persons unrelated to
each other, used to enter into an alliance, committing to each other by
oath: "Your blood is my blood; any aggression against you will be an
aggression against me; you will inherit from me and I from you".
According to this alliance, both of them defended each other during
their lifetime, and whosoever died first the other took his property.

**WIFE, A PART OF INHERITANCE**

Sometimes the pre-Islamic Arabs counted a widow to be a part of her
deceased husband's property and appropriated her accordingly. If the
deceased had a son from another wife, he could throw a piece of cloth on
the widow as a mark of acquiring her. Then he could dispose her at his
will and pleasure. He had the option of either marrying her himself, or
giving her in marriage to someone else and taking her dower. This
custom, which was not peculiar to the Arabs, was abolished by the
Qur'an.

In regard to inheritance, many aspects of the ancient Indian, Japanese,
Roman, Greek and Iranian laws also were objectionable and
discriminating. For lack of space we cannot reproduce all that has been
written by the experts in this respect.

**INHERITANCE OF WOMAN DURING THE SASANIAN PERIOD**

The late Saeed Nafisi in his book, 'Social History of Iran from the
Sasanian times to the end of the Umayyad period", writes: "Another
interesting feature of the Sasanian culture was that, when a boy reached
the age of puberty, his father married him to one of his own numerous
wives. During that period, woman had no legal personality. The father
and the husband had vast powers over her property. It was the duty of
the father or the head of the family to marry a girl when she reached
the age of 15 But the age of marriage for the boys was 20. After being
married, a girl was not entitled to receive any inheritance from her
father or guardian. She had no right to choose her husband herself, but
she could contract an unlawful marriage if her father failed to marry
her when she reached the age of puberty. In that event also she did not
inherit from her father.

The number of women a man could marry was unlimited. The Greek sources
mention cases, where a man had several hundred women in his house. The
Zoroastrian religious books show that the rules of marriage during the
Sasanian period were complex and confused.

**WOMAN'S INHERITANCE IN ISLAM**

The Islamic law of inheritance is free from all the short-comings and
defects of the past. The only thing, which is objectionable in the eyes
of the upholders of equality between man and woman, is that the share of
woman is half that of man. According to the Islamic law, a son receives
twice as much as a daughter, a brother twice as much as a sister and a
husband twice as much as a wife. The case of father and mother is the
only exception.

If a deceased has children and his parents are also alive, each of his
parents will get one-sixth of the property left by him. It is because of
woman's special position with regard to dower, maintenance, military
service and some of the criminal laws, that her share has been fixed at
half that of man.

For reasons mentioned earlier, Islam considers dower and maintenance
essential and effective in the consolidation of a marriage. They ensure
domestic harmony and coherence. The abolition of them is likely to shake
the family structure and to push woman to prostitution. The dower and
maintenance being compulsory, naturally woman's financial commitments
have been reduced and man's burden has proportionately increased. To
compensate man for his extra burden, his share in inheritance has been
fixed at twice that of woman. It is dower and maintenance which have
reduced woman's share.

**OBJECTION OF THE WESTERNISED**

Some Westerners, while criticising woman's lesser share in inheritance
and using it as a propaganda weapon against Islam, assert that, after
all, there is no necessity of lessening woman's share in inheritance and
compensating her for the loss by allowing her dower and maintenance. Is
there any need of going into bylanes and adopting out-of-the-way
methods? Why should not woman's share, from the beginning, be equal to
that of man so that we may not he compelled to compensate her by
allowing her dower and maintenance?

The gentlemen, who happen to be more royalists than the king, have
mistaken the cause for the effect and the effect for the cause. They
think that the dower and the maintenance are the effects of women's
peculiar position with regard to inheritance, whereas the real position
is just the reverse. Further, they seem to be under the impression that
the financial aspect is the only consideration. Had that been the only
consideration, obviously there would have been neither the need of the
system of dower and maintenance nor that of disparity between the shares
of man and woman. As we have mentioned earlier, Islam has taken into
consideration many aspects, some of them natural and others
psychological. It has considered woman's special needs, arising out of
her procreative function. Man naturally has no such needs. Besides, on
the one hand, woman's earning capacity is less than that of man and, on
the other, her consumption of wealth is more. In addition, there are
several other finer aspects of their respective mental make-up. For
example, man always wants to spend for the sake of the woman of his
choice. Other psychological and social aspects, which help in the
consolidation of the domestic relations have also been considered.
Taking all these points into consideration, Islam has made dower and
maintenance obligatory. Thus, it is not simply a financial question, so
that it may be said that there is no need of reducing woman's share at
one place and compensating her at another.

**OBJECTION OF THE HERETICS OF THE EARLY ISLAMIC ERA**

We have said that the dower and the maintenance are a cause and the
peculiar position of woman with regard to inheritance is its effect.
This point is not a new discovery. It came up even in the early days of
Islam.

In the second century of the Hijri era there lived a man named Ibn Abi
al-'Awja, who did not believe in religion. Taking advantage of the
religious freedom of that period, he openly gave expression to his
atheistic ideas. Sometimes he even came to the Masjid al-Haram (in
Mecca) or Masjid al-Nabi (in Madina) and engaged in arguments on the
principles of Islam with the scholars of that time. One of his
objections against Islam concerned inheritance. He used to say: "What is
the fault of the poor woman that she gets one share whereas the man gets
two". According to him, this was injustice to woman, the Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq (P), in reply to him, said that it was so, because woman was
exempted from performing military service. Further, Islam had enjoined
upon man to pay her dower and maintenance and, in certain criminal cases
where the kinsmen of the offender had to contribute to the blood-money,
she was exempted from such payment. These were the reasons why her share
had been reduced. Thus Imam Sadiq expressly attributed woman's peculiar
position, with regard to inheritance, to the existence of the law
regarding dower and maintenance and her exemption from military service
and the payment of blood- money.

The other Imams also answered likewise when a similar question was put
to them.

