Divorce
=======

**DIVORCE - I**

In no age other than ours has so much attention been paid to the danger
of the disintegration of the family and its harmful consequences, and
again, in no age other than ours has man been faced with the real danger
of such a disintegration.

**THE GROWTH OF DIVORCE IN MODERN LIFE**

In the past much attention was not paid to the problem of divorce, its
causes and its harmful effects, nor were any measures devised to prevent
its incidence, yet the cases of divorce were few and far between. There
is no doubt that the difference between the past and the present is due
to the fact that now the causes, which lead to divorce, have increased.
The social life has taken such a turn that now there are more chances of
the disruption of the family bond, and that is why the efforts of the
intellectuals and the public-spirited people have, so far, borne no
fruit. Regrettably, the future bodes more danger.
The American magazine, 'Newsweek' in an interesting article under the
heading, 'Divorce in America', writes that it is easier in America, to
get a divorce than to get a taxi.

'Newsweek' further writes that two proverbs about divorce are better
known among the American people than any other. One is that "the hardest
conciliation between husband and wife is better than divorce". It is 400
years old. The other which represents a diametrically opposite view has
gained currency during the second-half of the 20th century. It says that
"the second love is more pleasant than the first".

The article shows that the second proverb is more operative in America.
The illusion of divorce attracts to itself, not only the newly-wed, but
even their mothers, and the couple who were married a long time ago.
Since the Second World War onward, on an average, the number of cases of
divorce has not been less than 400,000 per annum. Out of the dissolved
marriages, 40% had remained intact for 10 years or more and 13% for more
than 20 years. The average age of two million women divorces was 45
years. Some 62% of them had children under 18 at the time of the
dissolution of their marriages. These women, in fact form a special
generation.

Though the American woman feels quite free after divorce, yet the
divorced, whether young or the middle- aged, are not happy. Their
unhappiness can be gauged from the ever-increasing number of women who
call on the psychiatrists or have recourse to alcoholism. Out of every
four women divorcees, one is an alcoholic. The average cases of suicide
among these women are three times more than among women having husbands.
In short as soon as a woman comes victorious out of a divorce court she
realises that life after divorce is not a bed of roses. The world can
hardly have a good opinion of a woman who dissolves her marriage, the
strongest form of human relationship. Society may respect such a woman
and even envy her, but cannot look upon her as a person who entered the
life of another and brought about happiness.

In the course of this article in Newsweek the question has been raised
whether the ever-growing cases of divorce are mostly due to
temperamental incompatibility between husband and wife, or some other
causes. The writer of the article says that even if incompatibility is
accepted to be the cause of separation among the newly-wed couples, how
can one explain the cases of those who had been leading a married life
for a long time. Taking into consideration the facilities which the
American law provides in connection with divorce it may be said that
incompatibility is not the reason of separation in the case of a
marriage which has lasted out for 10 or 20 years. In the age of
contraceptive pills, sexual revolution and improvement in their legal
status, many women have come to believe that delight and pleasure are
preferable to the stability of married life. You often see that a
husband and a wife live together for years, have children, share each
others' joy and grief and then suddenly the wife seeks a divorce,
without any palpable change having taken place in the material or
conventional position of the husband. The reason is that, till
yesterday, the woman was willing to bear the boredom of life, but today
she is not inclined to do so.
The increase in the cases of divorce is not confined to America.
Wherever the modern Western ways have permeated to a considerable
degree, the figures of divorce have gone up. Even in the East, divorce
is far more common in the modernised big cities than in the small towns
and the countryside.

**THE DIVORCE-GENERATING ATMOSPHERE OF AMERICA**

We have already quoted Newsweek as saying that the American woman gives
preference to merry-making over the stability of domestic life. Now let
us take a step forward and see why she has adopted such an attitude. It
is certain that this attitude is not natural and inherent. It has
certain social reasons behind it. It is the American atmosphere which
has given this mentality to the American woman. Some Westerners are
working hard to push the woman of the East to the way the American women
have gone. If they succeed, the fate of the Eastern woman and the
Eastern family will not be different from that of the American woman and
the American family.

A prominent French daily writes that in more than 200 restaurants and
cabaret houses in California waitresses work in topless outfits. The
topless swimming costume has been recognised as the working-dress in San
Francisco and Los Angeles. In the city of New York there are many cinema
halls which show only sexy films and the nude pictures of women can be
seen displayed in front of their entrances. The names of sexy films are
of this kind: "The men who swap their wives", "The girls who are
immoral", 'The dress which does not hide anything". ~ the libraries
there are very few fiction books which do not bear a nude photo of a
woman on their covers. Even the classical books are no exception. Such
titles as "Sexual Behaviour of American Husbands", "Sexual Behaviour of
a Man of the West", ' Sexual Behaviour of Young Men Below 20", "New
Sexual Methods Based on the Latest Information", are very common. The
writer of the article in the French daily asks with surprise and
apprehension: "Whither America?"

In such an atmosphere, if the American woman has lost her balance and
gives preference to pleasure-seeking over faithfulness to her husband
and family she is not to blame. It is the social atmosphere which has
struck at the very root of the sacred family system.

It is surprising that the leaders of our age give, on the one hand, an
impetus to the causes of divorce and the disintegration of family life
and, on the other, raise a hue and cry that the rate of divorce has gone
up so high. This is just like putting a man to sweep a chimney and then
asking him not to stain his clothes.

**FIVE THEORIES**

Now let us see whether, in principle, divorce is good or bad.

The question is whether it is good to keep the door to divorce wide
open, even at the risk of the disintegration of family life? If it is
good, there is no harm if the rate of divorce goes up. In case, however
it is not advisable, should a total ban be imposed on divorce, and
conjugal union be made eternal? The third alternative is that divorce
should not be banned legally, for in certain circumstances it is
unavoidable, but at the same time society should take every possible
action to do away with the causes of friction and separation between the
husbands and the wives, and save the children from becoming homeless.
Obviously, the law can do nothing if society itself encourages the
causes which lead to divorce.

If divorce is not to be totally banned, in what form should it be
allowed? Who should exercise the right of divorce, should only man or
only woman, or both? In the last alternative, should man and woman have
the same procedure for severing the bond of marriage, or should each sex
have a separate procedure?

In all, these are the five theories in respect of divorce:
(1) Free divorce without any legal or moral restriction. There are
those who look at marriage only from a viewpoint of pleasure-seeking;
who attach no sanctity to it; and who do not take into consideration the
social value of home and family. They think that the sooner the bonds of
marriage are removed and replaced, the more pleasure will be afforded to
man and woman. He who says that the second love is more pleasant
supports this theory. In this theory not only has the social value of
the family been forgotten, but also the delight and satisfaction, which
the stability of a conjugal union affords, has been ignored. So, this
theory is the most puerile and immature.

(2) Marriage is a sacred undertaking. It is a union of hearts and souls
which must be kept safe and intact. The word divorce should be expunged
from the dictionary of human society. The woman and the man who marry
each other should know that, except for death, nothing can separate
them.

This is the same theory, which for centuries has been advocated by the
Catholic Church, and is still being advocated.

The supporters of this theory are on the decrease in the world. Now
only Italy and the Catholic Spain adhere to it. We often hear that, even
in Italy, men and women are raising their voices against this law and
efforts are being made that the law of divorce should be officially
recognised. Many people are no longer willing to continue to suffer the
boredom of their unsuccessful marriages.

Some years ago, the Daily Express published an article under the
heading, "Marriage in Italy Means Bondage for Woman". This article said
that, at present, owing to the non-existence of divorce, many people in
Italy have to resort to unlawful sexual relations. More than five
million Italians believed that their lives were nothing but sin.

An Italian daily wrote that the prohibition of divorce had created a
big problem for the Italian people. Many of them had renounced their
Italian nationality for that very reason. When an Italian agency
organised an opinion-poll, 97% of the women replied in the negative to
the question whether divorce was repugnant to the religious
principles.

Still the Church sticks to its view and continues to adduce arguments
in support of it.

There is no doubt that marriage is a sacred bond and it should be
lasting and durable. But it can last only as long as both the spouses
co-operate with each other. There are situations when a mutual
understanding between a wife and her husband is not possible. In such
circumstances the forces of law cannot be used to keep them attached to
each other in the name of a conjugal bond. The theory of the Church has
been a complete failure. It is not unlikely that the Church itself may
be compelled soon to revise its views. Hence, we need not discuss this
theory any further.
(3) Marriage is dissoluble by man and not by woman. In the ancient
world many people held such a view, but now we do not think it has any
supporters. So we need not discuss it also.

(4) Marriage is a sacred institution and the domestic system is
respectable, but the way to divorce, with certain conditions, should be
open to both the spouses and the procedure of dissolving a marriage
should be the same for both of them.

The upholders of similarity of family rights, wrongly called equality
of rights between man and woman, support this theory. According to these
people the same conditions, the same limits and the same restrictions as
exist in the case of woman, should also exist in the case of man and the
same ways, to get out of the deadlock, as are open to man should be open
to woman also. They reject any other solution, which is unjust and
discriminating.

(5) No doubt the marriage institution is sacred, the domestic system is
respectable, divorce is abominable and it is an essential duty of
society to remove the causes which lead to divorce, yet divorce cannot
be totally banned and the way out of a deadlock must be kept open to
both man and woman. Anyhow, the procedure to be adopted for the
dissolution of marriage should be different in their respective cases.
Divorce is one of the instances of dissimilar rights of man and woman.

This is the theory which represents the Islamic point of view, and the
Muslim countries are partially following it.

**DIVORCE (II)**

In our age divorce has become a world problem as all grumble and
complain about it. Those whose laws prohibit divorce totally complain of
the non-existence of a way to escape from unsuccessful and unsuitable
marriages. On the other hand, those who have opened the door of divorce,
equally for both man and woman, complain about the growing rate of
divorce and the instability of domestic life, and its harmful effects.
Those who have given the right of divorce to men only express their
dissatisfaction on two accounts:

Firstly, some mean people, after years of married life, unexpectedly
divorce their old wives who had spent the best part of their youth with
them, simply because they suddenly feel eager to have a new wife.

Secondly, some unchivalrous people refuse to divorce a wife, with whom
there is absolutely no possibility of a mutual understanding and a
continued joint life.

It often happens that, for some reasons, the differences between a
husband and a wife reach such a stage that no possibility of
reconciliation is left, and they practically separate from each other.
In such circumstances, the only sensible way is to sever, legally, the
relations which have already been practically severed, and to allow both
of them to choose new partners-in-life. But some men, to harass their
wives and to deprive them of enjoying a conjugal life, decline to
divorce them. They leave the woman, in the words of the Qur'an, "in a
state of hanging".
Such people are far away from the teachings of Islam, though they use
the authority of the Islamic law for their improper behaviour. Their
conduct gives an impression to those who are not acquainted with the
depth and the spirit of the teachings of Islam, that this is the way
Islam wants divorce to be.

The critics ask sarcastically whether Islam has really allowed men to
harass their wives as much as they like, sometimes by divorcing them and
sometimes withholding divorce, and at the same time to have the mental
satisfaction that they have only used their lawful and legal right.

The critics say that such an action constitutes a glaring example of
injustice and cruelty. They ask "If it is true, as the Muslims claim,
that the Islamic laws have been organised on the basis of justice and
righteousness, what measures have Islam taken to prevent this kind of
injustice?"

About the cruelty and injustice of such acts there can be no doubt.
Islam, as we shall show, has taken cognisance of this situation and has
thought of measures to counteract it. The important question is: What is
the proper way of preventing this injustice and cruelty? Are the acts of
injustice due to any inherent defect in the law of divorce, or should
their real cause be looked for somewhere else? Can they be stopped by
modifying the law or are some other measures required?
Islam has its own view as to the solution of the social problems. Some
people think that they can be solved either by framing a new law or by
changing the existing one. But Islam realises that a law has its own
limits. It can be effective only within the range of the dry contractual
relations. As for the sentimental relations, it alone cannot do much,
and we should have recourse to other measures also.

As we shall show latter, Islam has fully utilised the force of law as
far as it can be effective. It has not failed in this respect.

**IGNOBLE DIVORCES**

First, we take up the present day problem of ignoble divorces.

As a matter of principle, Islam is strongly opposed to divorce. It
wants that it should not take place as far as practicable. It allows it
only as a last resort in the cases where separation is unavoidable.
Those who frequently take a new wife and divorce the old one are
denounced by Islam as the enemies of Allah.

The well-known book of traditions, al-Kafi, narrates the following
story:

The Holy Prophet asked a man: "What have you done with your wife?"

"I have divorced her", he said.

'Did you find her doing anything wrong?"

"No, I didn't"

The man married again. The Holy Prophet asked him:

"Have you taken another wife in marriage?
"Yes".

Some time later, the Holy Prophet asked him again:
"What have you done with the new wife?"

"I have divorced her".

"Had she done anything wrong?"

"No. She hadn't".

The man married a third time. The Prophet asked him again if he had
taken in marriage a new wife. He replied in the affirmative.

After some time the Prophet asked him again:

"What have you done with this wife?"

"I have divorced her also".

"Did you find anything wrong with her?"
No, I didn't"

The Holy Prophet said that Allah dislikes and hates the man who
regularly changes his wives, and the woman who regularly changes her
husbands. Such people are the enemies of Allah.

It was reported to the Holy Prophet that Abu Ayyub Ansari had decided
to divorce his wife. The Prophet knew the woman personally. He also knew
that Abu Ayyub's decision was not justified. He said: "Divorcing Umme
Ayyub (Abu Ayyub's wife) is a deadly sin".

The Holy Prophet said that Gabriel had exhorted and counselled him so
much in respect of women that he felt that it was not permissible to
divorce a woman, except when she was guilty of adultery.

Imam Sadiq (P) has reported that the Holy Prophet said:

"There is nothing more pleasing to Allah than the house where a
marriage takes place, and nothing is more displeasing to Him than the
house where it is severed by divorce"

Imam Sadiq (P) has also said that the word 'divorce' has been mentioned
in the Qur'an time and again and its details have been given because
Allah hates separation of couples.

AI-Tabarsi in the Makarim al-Aklaq has quoted the Prophet as saying:
"Do marry but do not divorce, for divorce shakes the throne of Allah".
Imam Sadiq (P) has said: "No permissible act is more displeasing to
Allah than divorce. Allah dislikes those who resort to divorce again and
again".

Similar traditions are found in the Sunni books also. Abu Daud in his
book, 'Sunan' has reported the Prophet as having said: "Allah has not
permitted anything more hateful than divorce' . In other words, though
Allah has permitted divorce, He dislikes it the most.

The great religious leaders (Imams) have abstained from divorcing, as
far as possible. In their lives the cases of divorce were extremely
rare. They resorted to such an action only when they had very solid
grounds for it. For instance, Imam Baqir (P) married a woman. She became
his favourite, but on one occasion he noticed that the woman was
inimical to Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib and cherished malice against him in
her heart. He had to divorce her.

In reply to the question as to why he had divorced her when he liked
her so much, the Imam said that he did not want to have a piece of the
fire of Hell by his side.

**A BASELESS RUMOUR**

It is worthwhile to refer here to a baseless rumour fabricated by the
unscrupulous Abbasid caliphs. It gained so much currency that it was
recorded by a number of prominent writers in their books. According to
this rumour, Imam Hasan Mujtaba (P), son of Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (P)
was one of those who took many wives and divorced them. The rumour was
spread nearly a century after the demise of the Imam. It was given
currency so vehemently that even many of his devotees believed it,
without paying attention to the fact that such an obnoxious act was not
worthy of the great Imam and could not be expected of a person who used
to go on pilgrimage on foot, and who, more than twenty times,
distributed 50% of his entire wealth and property among the poor.

As we know, unlike the descendants of Imam Husayn (P) who were headed
at that time by Imam Sadiq (P), the descendants of Imam Hasan (P)
co-operated with the Abbasids, during their insurrection against the
Umayyads. In the beginning the Abbasids acknowledged their fidelity and
devotion to the descendants of Imam Hasan (P), but on becoming
successful in seizing power, they betrayed them and put most of them out
of their way, either by killing them or by imprisoning them. In
pursuance of their policy, the Abbasids started a propaganda campaign
against the descendants of Imam Hasan (P), in the course of which they
invented many calumnies, one of them being the charge that Imam Hasan's
grandfather and the Holy Prophet's uncle, Abu Talib (P), did not embrace
Islam and died as an infidel. They wanted to bring out that they
themselves, being the descendants of the Prophet's other uncle, who had
embraced Islam, were more deserving of being the caliphs. To achieve
their purpose they spent huge amounts of money and fabricated a number
of stories. A section of the Sunnis, influenced by this propaganda,
still believes that Abu Talib was a disbeliever. Though the latest
research by some Sunni scholars have clarified the position to a great
extent, yet some doubts still linger among a section of them.

Another calumny, fabricated by the Abbasids, was that Imam Hasan (P)
succeeded to the caliphate after his father, but, being a licentious
person, he could not acquit himself well and had to surrender the
caliphate to his keenest rival, Mu'awiyah, from whom he took money, and
made himself busy with marrying and divorcing.

Luckily, the research scholars of our age have exposed the source of
this fabrication. The first known person who uttered this lie was a Qazi
appointed by Caliph Mansur, and detailed by him to concoct and spread
rumours against the Imam. A historian, commenting on this lie, observes
that if it is true that Imam Hasan (P) took so many women in marriage,
then where are his children? Why is their number so small? After all,
the Imam was not sterile and contraception and abortion also was not
customary at that time.

We wonder at the simplicity of some of the compilers of the Shi'ah
traditions. How could they write that Imam Hasan (P) was in the habit of
divorcing women, when they themselves report that the Holy Prophet and
the Imams have said that Allah dislikes and denounces a man who
habitually divorces their wives. It never occurred to these gentlemen
that they had to choose one out of the following three alternatives: (i)
Divorce is not a bad thing; (ii) Imam Hasan (P) was not a habitual
divorcer or (ii) Imam Hasan (P) did not adhere to the teachings of
Islam. But they, strangely, not only believe in the authenticity of the
traditions, saying that divorce is detestable to Allah, but also, at the
same time, despite being devotees of the Imam, quote the reports that he
was a habitual divorcer. They skip over such reports without making any
comments on them.

Some of the traditionalists have gone to such an extent that they have
reported that Imam Ali (P) was not happy with the way his son behaved.
In a public speech he asked the people not to give their daughters in
marriage to him, for he was in the habit of divorcing them. But, it is
said, the people replied that it was a matter of pride for them that
their daughters could become the marriage-partners of a descendant of
the Prophet even for a short time.
It appears that some people are of the opinion that divorce is not bad,
if the woman concerned and her family consent to it. They think that
divorce is loathsome only if the other party does not agree to it, but
there can be no objection to it if the woman is content to pass only a
few days with the man in whom she takes pride.

Anyhow, that is not the real position. The consent of the woman or her
parents does not mitigate the detestableness of divorce. It is
detestable because Islam wants marriage to be lasting and the family
life to be stable. The consent of the couple concerned does not make the
position any different. Islam does not consider divorce to be loathsome
only for the sake of any particular class of women. It is a matter of
principle.

We have dealt with the question of Imam Hasan (P), not only with a view
to repeating a false historical charge against a historical personality,
but so to warn those unconscientious people who may indulge in such acts
and then to justify their behaviour, may try to cite Imam Hasan (P) as
an authority.

There is no denying the fact that divorce as such is loathsome and
detestable in Islam.

**WHY ISLAM HAS NOT PROHIBITED DIVORCE**

Here a few other questions arise. If divorce is so loathsome and so
disliked by Allah, why has it not been totally prohibited by Islam?
Islam could at least lay down certain conditions for its validity. In
that case anybody who wanted to divorce his wife, would have been
judicially bound to justify his intended action before a court of law.

The second question is: What does the sentence, "Out of all permissible
things, divorce is most detestable to Allah" mean? If it is permissible,
it cannot be detestable and, if it is detestable, it cannot be
permissible. These are two contradictory terms.

Lastly, has the judiciary, which represents the society, the right to
intervene in the matter of divorce to the extent of withholding its
implementation till either the husband takes back his decision or it
becomes clear that no reconciliation is possible, and hence there is no
alternative but to sever the conjugal bond?

**DIVORCE (III)**

We have said that, from the Islamic point of view, divorce is
absolutely detestable. Islam wants the marriage-union to be strong and
lasting. At that stage we raised the question that if divorce is so
detestable, why has Islam not banned it? Has not Islam prohibited every
detestable act like taking wine, gambling, cruelty etc? If the reply is
in the affirmative then why has it not totally prohibited divorce by
law? It is basically illogical to say that divorce is permissible, but
at the same time detestable. If it is permissible, how can it be
detestable? If it is detestable, why should it be permissible? Islam, on
the one hand, frowns at the man who divorces his wife and, on the other
puts no legal obstacle in his way; why?

It is a very pertinent question, and is the key to all the secrets of
the problem of divorce. In fact, marriage is a natural and not a
contractual relationship. Nature has laid down special rules for it.
Other social contracts like sale, hire, mortgage, peace, attorneyship
etc. are mere social agreements. Nature and instinct have nothing to do
with them. There exists no natural law in respect of them. In contrast,
a marriage contract has a special mechanism. It is to be organised on
the natural desire of the two parties.

Hence, it is not surprising that a marriage contract has special rules
which are different from those of all other contracts.

**NATURAL LAWS IN RESPECT OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE**

In a civil society the only natural law is the law of liberty and
equality, on the basis of which all social rules should be framed. But
in respect of a conjugal contract, besides the general principles of
liberty and equality, nature has prescribed certain other laws also,
which must be adhered to in the case of marriage, dower, maintenance and
the last stage of the process, that is divorce. It is of no use to
bypass nature. As Alexis Carrel has pointed out, the biological and
other laws of life are as hard, ruthless and irresistible as the
astronomical laws.

Marriage means attachment and union, and divorce means separation.

Nature has designed the law of marriage in such a way that man acts
with a view to appropriate woman, and woman withdraws with a view to
fascinate and mislead man. Man wants to take possession of the body of
woman and woman wants to captivate the heart of man. The foundation of
marriage is laid on love, union and fellow-feeling, and not on mere
co-operation and companionship. In the family structure, the fair sex
occupies the central position, and her opposite sex the peripheral one.
From all this it automatically follows that nature must have had special
rules for the dissolution of family life also.

We have quoted earlier an intellectual as saying that mateseeking means
an attack on the part of man for the purpose of appropriation and a
withdrawal on the part of woman for the purpose of enchantment and
deception. Man being instinctively a hunting animal, his action is
offensive and for him woman is a trophy which he must win. Mate-seeking
is a battle and a struggle and marriage is appropriation and
domination.

A contract which is based on love and the feeling of oneness is not
enforceable by compulsion. The law can compel two people to respect
their contract on the basis of equality, and to co-operate with each
other, but it cannot force them to love each other, to be sincere to
each other, to make sacrifices for the sake of each other and to share
each other's happiness.

If we want to maintain such a relationship between two people we have
to adopt some measures other than legal.

According to the natural mechanism of marriage, on which Islamic laws
are based, a wife occupies the position of a person deserving love and
respect in the family order. If, for some reason, she loses that
position and is deprived of the love and attention of her husband, the
base of the family structure falls off and the natural order is
deranged. Islam looks at such a situation with regret, but it cannot
assume marriage to be alive and constant even after the disintegration
of its natural basis.
Islam has taken special steps to ensure that the family life retains
its natural form, which means that the wife should be loved and sought
after, and the husband should feel attached to her and be ready to serve
her.

Islam has urged woman to beautify herself to please her husband, to
give a display of her accomplishments for his sake, to satiate his
natural desires and not to annoy him by disobedience. It has also
exhorted man to love his wife, to show kindness and attachment to her,
and not to conceal from her his love for her. These steps have been
taken to make the sexual enjoyment limited to the domestic atmosphere,
and to keep the wider society a field of work and activities other than
sexual. Islam wants that extra-marital contacts between man and woman
should be pure and unpolluted. All these steps have been taken with a
view to keeping the family organisation free from the danger of
dissolution and disintegration.

**NATURAL POSITION OF MAN IN THE DOMESTIC LIFE**

From the Islamic point of view, it is extremely insulting to a woman
that the law should force her to live with a husband who does not like
her. The law can force a woman to live with a particular man, but it
cannot secure for her the position of a beloved and central figure in
the household, which she should have. The law can force a man to support
his wife, but it cannot force him to be a devoted husband.

Hence, when man's love and attachment cools down the marriage becomes
ineffective from the natural point of view.

Here another question arises. If the wife's love cools down, will the
domestic life be affected? Will it continue as it is or will it come to
an end? If it will remain intact, then how is it that the lack of love,
on the part of the husband, terminates the domestic life and on the part
of the wife it does not?
Is there any difference between man and woman? If the lack of love on
the part of the wife also terminates the domestic life, then naturally
women should also have the right of divorce like men.

In fact, the success of the domestic life depends on the mutual
attachment of both the husband and the wife. But as we mentioned
earlier, there is a difference between the mentality of man and that of
woman. We have already quoted the views of the scientists on this point.
Nature has so arranged that woman's true and lasting love comes up only
as a reaction of man's attachment to her. Hence, woman's attachment to
man is the result of man's attachment to her. Nature has placed the key
of their mutual love within the control of man. If man loves woman and
is faithful to her, woman also loves him and remains faithful to him.
Woman's faithlessness is definitely a reaction of man's faithlessness.

Nature has put the dissolution of marriage in the hands of man. It is
man's apathy and faithlessness that cools down woman's love. On the
other hand, woman's indifference and apathy does not affect man. Hence
man's indifference to woman unlike the latter's indifference to him
leads to woman's in-difference. Man's frigidity is the end of conjugal
life, but woman's is not so. If man is sensible and faithful, he can
always regain his wife's love by showing affection and kindness to her.
It is not insulting to him to compel his annoyed sweetheart by force of
law, to continue to live with him, and to pacify her gradually. But it
is unbearable for a wife to resort to the force of law to retain her
protector and the object of her love.
Of course, this is the case when woman's indifference is not due to the
immorality or cruelty of man. If man shows cruelty, the case is
different. He cannot be allowed to misuse his position and to harass or
ill-treat his wife. We shall discuss this point separately.

Anyway man is in need of the body of woman and woman is in need of the
heart of man. That is the difference between the two. Marriage is
unbearable for woman if she does not enjoy her husband's genuine
protection and sincere love.

**VIEWS OF A LADY PSYCHOLOGIST**

Recently an article has been published by a French lady psychologist,
Beatrice Maryo, who holds a doctorate in psycho-logy and works as a
psychiatrist in a hospital of Paris. She herself is a mother of three
children.

In this article she has explained very well how a pregnant or a nursing
woman needs the kindness and affection of her husband.

She says: "From the time a woman feels that she is going to be a mother
soon, she begins to search her body. She repeatedly looks at it and
smells it, especially if she is expecting her first child. She feels so
inquisitive as if she were a stranger to herself and wants to discover
herself for the first time. When she feels the first movements of her
tiny little child in her womb, she begins to listen attentively to every
sound of her body. The presence of another being in her body makes her
so happy that she feels inclined to seclusion and retirement. She wants
to be alone with her tiny little child, who has not yet come into this
world
"Men, during the period of the pregnancy of their wives, have important
duties to perform, but very regretfully they often shirk their
responsibility. The future mother is in need of the feeling that her
husband understands her, likes her, and protects her. Otherwise, when
she finds that her belly has swollen up; her attractiveness has gone,
the morning sickness has commenced, and she is afraid of childbirth
pains, she would blame her husband, who had impregnated her, for all her
troubles and discomforts. It is the duty of the husband to keep himself,
more than ever, at the side of his wife during the months of her
pregnancy. The whole family requires a kind and considerate father to
whom the wife and the children may talk of their problems, their griefs
and their joys. Even if their talk be meaningless or boring, it is still
important."

"A pregnant woman very much wants others to talk to her of her child. A
woman takes all the pride in becoming a mother. But when she finds that
her husband is indifferent to the child, her sense of pride turns into a
sense of contempt. She becomes sick of motherhood and pregnancy, and it
becomes a sort of mortification to her. It is known that such women
suffer a great deal on account of child-birth pangs The relation between
mother and child is not a bilateral one. It is a trilateral relation:
mother, child, and father. Even if the father is not present (as in the
case of divorce), he has an important role in the internal life of the
mother, that is in her thoughts and imagination, as well as in her sense
of motherhood .

This is what a lady intellectual, who is both a psychologist and a
mother, has said.
**A STRUCTURE BUILT ON THE BASIS OF SENTIMENTS**

A woman depends so much on the sincerity, kindness and protection of
her husband that without his earnest co-operation even a child has
little sense for her. She can endure the hardships of life only with his
help. In such circumstances, how can it be possible to compel her, by
the force of law, to remain attached to a man who is not willing to
accept her?

Is it not ironical that, on the one hand, we create an atmosphere in
which men pay little attention to their wives and sow their wild oats
elsewhere and, on the other, we try to thrust their wives on them by the
force of law? As a matter of policy, Islam wants that man himself should
seek a woman and should like her. It does not want to thrust a woman on
him.

As a general rule, where there is a question of love, devotion and
sincerity, there can be no question of legal compulsion. If a husband
dislikes his wife, it may be a matter of regret, but no force can be
used to make him like her.

Let us give an example. As we know, in the congregational prayers there
is a condition that the leader of the prayers can be only that person
who is pious and in whose piety the followers have faith. In this case,
the relationship between the leader and the followers is based on the
piety of the former, and the faith and devotion of the latter. If the
body of the followers loses faith in a particular leader, whether
rightly or wrongly, this relationship is severed. The law cannot
guarantee its continuity. As it is a matter of feelings and sentiments,
nobody can be compelled legally to have faith in a particular person.
Even if a leader of the prayers possesses the highest degree of piety
and virtue, he cannot compel others to offer prayers behind him. It will
be highly ridiculous to file a suit in a court of law in this respect.
It is even derogatory to the position of the leader of the
congregational prayers to try to force people to offer prayers behind
him.

The same is the case with the relationship between the voters and the
candidate for election. The people will vote for a candidate in whom
they have confidence. If they do not elect a particular candidate,
howsoever fit and suitable he may be, he cannot sue them.

The only thing which should be done in such cases is to train the
people on the correct lines and to raise their intellectual level, so
that when they perform their religious duty, they may find out the
really righteous people to follow and, when they perform their social
duty, they may select the really deserving people to vote for. If, by
chance, the people change their opinion subsequently without any rhyme
or reason, that can only be a matter of regret, but there can he no
question of compulsion or legal action in the matter.

The domestic duty is exactly like the above-mentioned religious and
social duties. Islam regards the family as a natural society, for the
smooth running of which it has prescribed a particular procedure to be
followed strictly.

It is the greatest achievement of Islam that it has prescribed this
procedure, for the West has not so far been able to solve its family
problems. Not only that, but problems are multiplying and new problems
are being added daily to the old ones. Fortunately, as the result of
scientific investigations, the position is gradually becoming clear. We
are fully convinced that the Western world will gradually accept the
Islamic principles and precepts regarding the family laws. Anyhow, we do
not believe that the real Islamic teachings are identical with what is
being practised today as such.

**WHAT CONSOLIDATES THE FAMILY STRUCTURE IS MORE THAN EQUALITY**

The present day Western world is enamoured of 'equality', not knowing
that the question of relationship between man and woman was solved by
Islam 14 centuries ago. As far as the family system is concerned, there
exists something higher than equality. For civil society nature has laid
down only the law of equality, but for the domestic society it has laid
down other laws also. Family relations cannot be organised on the basis
of equality alone. All other laws of nature, which govern these
relations, should be recognised and adhered to.

**EQUALITY IN CORRUPTION**

Unfortunately the word 'equality' has been used so much and so often
that its true sense has been blurred. It seldom occurs to anyone that
equality means equality in rights. The principle of equality cannot be
applied everywhere indiscriminately. It will be most ridiculous to say
that everything has become all right, because in the past only men told
lies to their wives and now women also tell lies to their husbands. Can
we rejoice and proclaim that equality has been established, because in
the past only 10% of the marriages ended in divorce and separation, and
now, in certain parts of the world, 40% of the marriages end in divorce,
and in 50% of the cases, it is the women who initiate the divorce
action? In the past it was men who betrayed their wives and indulged in
adultery, and women were mostly faithful to their husbands, but today
women also betray their husbands and no longer observe chastity. Is this
any improvement? Can this be called equality? In the past men often
showed cruelty and callousness to their wives. They abandoned their
wives and children and ran after mistresses. Now even mothers of several
children, after having been married a long time ago, leave their homes
to satisfy their lust, following a brief introduction to a stranger at a
dance party. Does this mean the establishment of equality?

That is how, instead of seeking the cure of the social ills and
consolidating the family life, we are weakening the domestic system and
shaking its foundations. Into the bargain, we are happy that we are
advancing on the path of equality. If this situation continues, woman
will soon surpass man in corruption, perversion and callousness.

Now it is clear why Islam, though it considers divorce most detestable,
has placed no legal bar on it. It is also clear how a thing which is
permissible can, at the same time, be detestable and loathsome.

**DIVORCE (IV)**

It is evident from the discussion so far made that Islam is opposed to
divorce and the dissolution of family life. It has taken every moral and
social step to save it from the danger of dissolution, but it has not
resorted to compulsion and has not used the force of law. It is opposed
to the use of legal force for preventing man from divorcing his wife and
to constrain woman to continue to live with her husband. Islam considers
such steps to be unsuited to the position of woman in the family, for
sentiments and emotions are the cornerstone of family life.

It is woman who receives the warmth of the tender feelings of her
husband and passes them on to her children. If the husband loses
interest in his wife, the domestic atmosphere becomes cold and dingy.
Even woman's motherly feelings towards her children largely depend upon
her husband's attitude to her. According to an eminent psychologist,
motherly affection is not an instinct in the sense that it is not
subject to increase or decrease. The love and consideration which a man
shows to his wife has a considerable impact on her motherly feelings.

In short, woman is to be inspired by man's sentiments and tender
feelings to be able to extend her feelings to her children.

Man can be compared to a mountain, woman to a spring and children to
plants. The spring must receive rain from the mountain and absorb it to
be able to put it out in the form of pure life-giving water for the
irrigation of flowers and plants. If rain does not fall on the mountain
or it is not absorbed by the earth the spring will become dry and the
plants will wither.

Just as rain is vital for the fertility of the soil, and for the
thriving of vegetable life, the sentiments and feelings of man towards
his wife are vital to the prosperity and happy life of the children as
well as for their mother.

When the feelings and sentiments of the husband are so important for
the success of family life, how can the force of law be used as a weapon
against him?

Islam is strongly opposed to the ignoble action of those who divorce
their old wives to have new ones. But, in the opinion of Islam, it is no
remedy to force an unchivalrous man to keep his wife against his will.
Such an action is not in keeping with the natural law of family life.

If the woman tries to return to the house of her husband by force of
law and with the help of the executive authority, her occupation of the
house will be tantamount to a military occupation. In such a case she
cannot become the lady of the household, nor can she become the
sentimental link between her husband and her children. She also cannot
satisfy her own emotional need for love and attention.

Islam has taken steps to eliminate cases of divorce, but, as a
law-giver, it does not like to force the woman, who is the centre of the
family system, to live with an unchivalrous man who does not want her.

The action taken by Islam is just the opposite of what the West has
done and is doing. Islam fights against the factors which lead to
faithlessness and licentiousness, but it is not willing to force woman
to live with a faithless husband. In contrast, the West encourages the
factors leading to faithlessness and, at the same time, wants to force
the woman to continue to live with a faithless and licentious husband.

Islam has utilised all its efforts to keep alive the spirit of humanity
and chivalry, and though it does not force an unchivalrous man to keep
his wife, it has succeeded practically in reducing the cases of
unchivalrous divorce to a considerable extent. Others do not pay
attention to these points and seek happiness by force and at the point
of a bayonet and they have seldom succeeded.

Apart from the cases of divorce, which take place in the West on the
demand of women because of incompatibility and, as described by
Newsweek, love of pleasure, the number of cases, which have occurred
there and are occurring there and are occurring because of the
licentiousness of men, is far higher than the number of similar cases in
the East.

