The Nature of Domestic Peace Is Different From That of Other Kinds of Peace
===========================================================================

There is no doubt that there should be peace and harmony between the
husband and wife, but the peace and harmony which should prevail in
conjugal life is very different from the peace which should exist
between two colleagues, two partners, two neighbours and two
neighbouring countries. Peace and harmony in conjugal life is similar to
the peace and harmony which should exist between the parents and the
children. It is equivalent to tolerance, sacrifice, interest in the
destiny of one another, breaking the barrier of duality and sharing the
happiness and grief of each other. In contrast, peace and harmony
between two colleagues, two partners, two neighbours or two neighbouring
countries simply mean non-encroachment on the rights of each other.
Between the two disputing countries even armed peace is enough. Should a
third power intervene and set up a buffer zone between two countries to
prevent a direct clash between their armed forces, peace is secured, for
political peace means only non-aggression and no clash.

But domestic peace is different from political peace. In this case
non-encroachment on the rights of each other is not enough. Armed peace
is of no use. What is required is the union of souls, which is something
higher and more basic. The same is the case with the peace and harmony
between the parents and the children. In that case also something higher
than non -aggression is necessary. Unfortunately, for historical and
sometimes even regional reasons, the West does not realise the
importance of the sentiments. For it, there is no difference between
domestic peace and political or social peace. The people of the West
think that as peace between two countries can be ensured by the
concentration of the forces of a third power on their common border,
similarly peace between a husband and a wife can be established by
concentrating judicial force on the border of their life. They forget
that the success of the domestic life depends on the complete
disappearance of all borders.

The Westernised people of the East, instead of taking pride in their
own system and pointing out to the people of the West the defects and
shortcomings of their (the Westerners') family system, are so absorbed
in imitation that they are unable to distinguish between right and
wrong. But it will not be too long before the East gets rid of the yoke
of the West completely, rediscovers its own personality and learns
self-reliance. Here it is necessary to mention two points.

**ISLAM WELCOMES EVERY FACTOR WHICH HELPS CHECKING DIVORCE**

From what we have written some people may wrongly conclude that we are
in favour of allowing men to divorce their wives at their will and
pleasure. Of course, that is not the idea. What we mean is that Islam
does not want to use legal force against the husband. Otherwise, Islam
welcomes every action which may dissuade him from divorce. Islam has
intentionally prescribed such a procedure and has laid down such
conditions for the validity of divorce that they automatically delay the
dissolution of marriage and, in many cases, persuade the husband to give
up the whole idea of separation.

Islam has advised those who pronounce the divorce formula, and the
witnesses and others, to do their best to dissuade the husband from the
idea of divorce. Furthermore, a divorce is not valid unless it is
pronounced in the presence of two qualified 'Adil" (Just) witnesses, who
are expected to make their utmost efforts to reconcile the couple.

The present day custom that the divorce formula is often pronounced in
the presence of two just persons, who may not even know the couple
concerned except their names, is totally un-Islamic.

Anyhow, the necessity of the presence of two qualified witnesses is one
of those factors which may dissuade the husband from divorce, provided
this condition is observed strictly in its true sense. Islam does not
regard the presence of two qualified witnesses as an essential condition
for the validity of marriage, which is the beginning of the marital
contract, because it does not want to delay a good deed. But it regards
the presence of two qualified just witnesses necessary for divorce,
which is the end of the contract.

Similarly, according to Islam, divorce is not effective during the
woman's menstrual period, though there is no objection to the
solemnisation of marriage during that period. Apparently menstruation,
being a hindrance in sexual intercourse, should affect marriage and not
divorce. But as Islam encourages union and discourages separation, it
has allowed marriage during the monthly period and has disallowed
divorce during that period. In certain circumstances, it is necessary to
wait for three months before a divorce is allowed.

All these hindrances and obstacles are meant to allow enough time for
the tension, which had led to the decision of divorce, to subside, and
to enable the husband and the wife to resume their normal life.

Furthermore, in the case of revocable divorce, the husband is permitted
to resume conjugal relations during the period of probation iddah
(waiting period).

Islam has placed another obstacle in the way of the husband, by
imposing on him the expenses of marriage as well as those of the period
of post-divorce probation for wife and of the care of children. If a man
wants to divorce his wife and marry another woman, he has first to pay
the maintenance of the first wife, to undertake the responsibility to
bear the expenses of the children, and to fix the dower of the new wife.
Furthermore, he has to shoulder the responsibility of supporting the
second wife and the children which may subsequently be born.

Apart from the responsibility of looking after the children, their
woeful plight offers the husband a fearful prospect and prevents him
from taking a decision to resort to divorce.

In addition to all this, Islam regards it necessary that in the case of
the apprehension of breach and dissolution of family life, a family
court consisting of two arbiters, one representing the husband and the
other representing the wife, is constituted to arbitrate between them.

The arbiters should do their utmost to settle the dispute between the
husband and the wife and, if necessary, they should consult them for
this purpose. They can dissolve the marriage only if they find that
reconciliation is impossible. As far as practicable, the arbiters should
be selected from among the relatives of the couple, provided suitable
people are available among them.

The Holy Qur'an says: "If you fear a breach between the two, appoint an
arbiter from his relatives and another from hers. If they both desire
compromise, Allah will afford harmony between them. Surely Allah is
Ever-Knowing, Aware', (Surah an-Nisa, 4 : 35).

The author of the Kashshaf, explaining the word, 'arbiter' says that
the person selected to arbitrate should be trustworthy, eloquent and
capable of bringing about a reconciliation and doing justice to both the
parties. He further says that it is preferable to select the arbiters
from among the relatives of the couple because they are expected to know
the causes of the dispute better and both the parties can talk to them
freely and repose confidence in them.

The jurists differ on the question whether arbitration is obligatory or
only desirable. The most eminent among them are of the view that it is
the job of the government to appoint the arbiters. Shaheed Thani in his
book, 'Masalik' has formally expressed the legal opinion that
arbitration is obligatory and it is to be arranged by the government.

Sayyid Muhammad Rashid Riza, the author of the Qur'anic Commentary,
'Al-Manar', after giving the opinion that arbitration is obligatory,
refers to the difference of opinion among the jurists on this question
and says that, practically, the Muslims do not follow this wise rule and
thus are deprived of its unlimited benefits. The scholars unnecessarily
waste their energy on arguing whether arbitration is obligatory or only
desirable, while nobody takes steps to implement it. If a rule is not to
be implemented, then what difference does it make whether it is
obligatory or desirable?

Regarding the conditions which the arbiters can impose on the husband
to secure a reconciliation, Shaheed Thani says that they can for example
bind him to keep his wife in a particular town or a particular house;
not to accommodate his mother or his other wife in the same house not
even in a separate room; to make prompt cash payment of the dower fixed
at the time of marriage; or to make immediate payment of any loan he
might have taken from his wife.

In short, any suitable action to dissuade the husband from repudiating
the marriage bond is valid and desirable.

This is the answer to the question we raised earlier i.e. whether or
not, the judiciary which represents society has the right to intervene
and prevent the dissolution of marriage.

The judiciary can intervene because the husband's decision to divorce
his wife is not, in all cases, a sign of the final collapse of the
conjugal bond. Such a decision may be taken in a fit of rage or may be
the result of some misunderstanding. Any action taken by the society to
prevent the implementation of such a decision is welcomed by Islam.

A court of arbitration, being the representative of the society, can
direct the divorce offices not to finalise the action on a divorce case,
till the court intimates them of its failure in bringing about peace and
harmony between the husband and the wife.

**THE WIFE'S PREVIOUS SERVICE TO THE HOUSEHOLD**

The unchivalrous divorce, besides dissolving the sacred family life,
creates such other positive problems for the wife that they cannot be
ignored. Suppose a woman lives in the house of her husband for years,
takes his house to be her own and most sincerely works hard to build it
up and give it a shape. She, as is the case with most of the women with
the exception of those belonging to the modern urban society, cuts down
the expenses on food and clothing, sometimes even to the annoyance of
her husband, and hesitates to engage a servant to help her in the
household work. She sacrifices her youth, energy and health for the sake
of her husband and her household. Now, if the husband of such a woman,
after years of a joint life, wants to divorce her to marry another
woman, he not only wants to bring to nought all the efforts and
aspirations of his wife, but also wants to indulge in sexual pleasure at
her expense.

This is not simply a case of the dissolution of mental life, and hence,
it cannot be said that it is below the natural position and dignity of
woman to thrust herself on a man who does not want her.

Here other questions are also involved the question of becoming
homeless for the wife, the question of handing over one's house to a
rival and the question of the wastage of all her efforts and services in
the past.

Every human being wants a home of his or her own and feels attached to
the home built by his or her own hands. If you try to turn a bird out of
the nest it has built, it will certainly resist and defend itself.

In our opinion, the problem is fully worth considering. In such cases,
divorce not only means the dissolution of marriage, but also brings
women to complete ruin.

Anyhow, the question of home is distinct from that of divorce, and the
two questions should be considered separately. From the Islamic point of
view, normally this problem should not arise. It arises owing to the
ignorance of Islamic rules and regulations and the exploitation of
women's goodwill and faithfulness, by men.

Most of the people suppose that all the fruits of woman's labour belong
to her husband. They even think that the husband can force his wife to
work for him and she has to obey all his orders like a slave. This wrong
notion is the root-cause of all the trouble. As we have repeatedly
pointed out, woman has full freedom as regards her work and activity.
Whatever she earns belongs exclusively to her. Islam has given her
economic independence. In addition, it has made the husband responsible
to bear the expenses of his wife and children. Thus, Islam has provided
woman enough opportunities, from the financial point of view, to lead a
respectable life independent of man. Divorce and separation should not
cause her any anxiety in this respect. All the things which she might
have collected to build up her home belong to her and her husband has no
right to seize them. Such apprehensions are justified only in the
systems, which force woman to work in the house of her husband and
regard the fruits of her labour as belonging to him. The misgivings
which exist among our people are probably due to their own ignorance of
the law.

Another cause of the trouble is the exploitation of the faithfulness of
woman by man. Some women make sacrifices, not because they are unaware
of the law of Islam, but because they are over confident of the
sincerity of their husbands. They want that there should be no question
of 'my money and your money'. They do not care to take advantage of the
opportunity given to them by. Islam. They are suddenly disillusioned and
find that they have wasted their lives in making sacrifices for an
unfaithful man and have lost the opportunity given to them by their
religion.

If a wife is expected to give up her legal right of keeping a separate
account of her money and her earnings, the husband is also expected
that, in consideration of her sacrifice and the service rendered by her,
he should make presents to her and offer her gifts. The Qur'an says:
"When you are greeted with a greeting, greet with one better than it or
at least as kind"

(Surah an Nisa, 4:86). It has always been customary among the good
people to present the wife with valuable articles, like a house or other
property, as a gift.

Anyhow, what we mean is that the problem of becoming homeless is not
related to divorce and that it cannot be rectified by changing the
concerned law. This problem is related to the question of economic
independence of woman and that question has already been solved by
Islam. This problem has arisen because of the ignorance of some women,
and the simplicity of others, and will automatically be solved if women
know the teachings of Islam on this point and do not show too much
simplicity while dealing with their husbands.

**DIVORCE (V)**

We have said earlier that there are two aspects of divorce which cause
all the hardships. One of them is that there are cases of divorce, which
are due to the unfaithfulness, and unchivalrous attitude of some
husbands. The other aspect is that, even when there is no chance of
harmony between a husband and a wife, some husbands withhold divorce,
not with a view to living with the wife but with a view to harassing
her.

We have mentioned before that Islam welcomes every means of preventing
unchivalrous divorce and has taken its own measures to eliminate it as
far as possible. Anyhow, Islam is opposed to the application of force
for the purpose of maintaining conjugal relations.

Islam regards the family as a living unit, and endeavours to keep it
alive. But if it dies, Islam's verdict is that it should be buried.
Islam does not like it to be mummified and kept active artificially.

We have learnt that the reason why man has the right of divorce is that
the conjugal bond is based on a natural relationship which has its own
natural rules. Nature has put the key of its consolidation or
destruction into the hands of man. The husband and the wife, each has,
by nature, a specific position, which cannot be changed, nor can their
positions be unified. This specific position gives rise to certain
rights and obligations, the right of divorce being one of them. In other
words this right is due to the special and specific role which man and
woman, each plays in seeking a partner in life.

**RIGHT OF DIVORCE IS DUE TO MAN'S SPECIAL ROLE AND NOT TO ANY
PROPRIETARY RIGHTS**

Now you can easily assess the value of the propaganda which is carried
out by anti-Islamic elements. They allege that Islam has given the right
of divorce to man, because it does not recognise woman to have free
will, or to possess any desires or aspirations. They say that Islam
includes woman in the category of non-living objects, and not in that of
living people. That is why it has given man proprietorial rights over
woman. Naturally such rights include the right of emancipation.

We have shown that the Islamic family law is not based on the
masterhood of man and the serfdom of woman. Islam's philosophy is more
subtle and far higher than the intellectual level of these writers.
Through divine inspiration Islam has grasped the very essence of the
basis and structure of the family system. Science is now unravelling
some of the mysteries solved by Islam 14 centuries ago.

**DIVORCE IS RELEASE IN A SENSE**

The anti-Islamic elements say that divorce should definitely have a
judicial form and not that of a release or relief. The fact is that
divorce has an aspect of release, because marriage has an aspect of
appropriation. It is not possible to change the law of mate-seeking,
according to which male and female have separate roles, and the natural
state of marriage apparently resembles appropriation. As far as sexual
relations are concerned, nature has prescribed distinct roles to a male
and a female, both in the case of human beings and animals. Divorce
could have been deprived of its aspect of release only if it had been
possible to change the law of nature.

A critic says that generally the Shiah jurists describe the marriage
contract as a binding contract, but it appears that according to Islamic
law it is binding only in the case of the wife, for the husband can
annul it at his will and pleasure. He adds that it is disgraceful to
give the husband the right of divorce during this age of the atom,
artificial moons and democracy.

It appears that this gentleman and others, who think on similar lines,
do not differentiate between annulment of a marriage and divorce. When
it is said that the contract of marriage is a binding contract, it means
that neither the husband nor the wife has the right to annul it. If a
marriage is annulled (as it happens in certain exceptional cases) it is
treated as if it was never contracted and no legal effects flow from it.
The woman cannot claim her dower. The man has no responsibility to
support her during the period of probation. On the other hand, in the
case of divorce, the marriage bond is dissolved, but its legal effects
are not totally nullified. For instance, if a man divorces his wife
after even one day's conjugal life, he has to pay the full dower and has
to maintain her during the period of probation. In case he divorces
after contracting the marriage, but before its consummation, he will
have to pay half the dower. As in this case woman has no period of
probation and the question of maintenance does not, therefore, arise.
Thus, it is clear that divorce does not nullify all the legal effects of
a marriage contract. It is also clear that divorce is different from the
annulment of a marriage and that the right of divorce is not
contradictory to the fact that a marriage contract is binding. There are
two aspects specified in Islam annulment of marriage and divorce. A
marriage may be annulled owing to a serious physical defect being
discovered in either husband or wife. In this regard, both of them have
equal rights. Only the right of divorce belongs exclusively to man.

The fact that there are separate rules for divorce and the annulment of
marriage shows that Islam has not accorded the right of divorce to man
because it wanted to give him any preferential treatment.

**PENALTY FOR DIVORCE**

With a view to preventing divorce, certain legal systems prescribed a
penalty. We do not know whether any such law still exists anywhere in
the world. Anyhow, the historians say that the Christian Emperors of
Rome imposed a fine on those who divorced their wives without any valid
reason.

Obviously it is another form of the use of force for the maintenance of
family life, and hence cannot be of much avail.

**DELEGATION OF THE RIGHT OF DIVORCE TO WIFE**

We have so far dealt with the natural right of divorce which belongs
exclusively to the husband. But he can confer the power of divorce on
the wife. This delegation of power can either be general or limited to
certain specified circumstances. To make it irrevocable it is included
in the marriage contract as a binding clause, according to which the
wife is empowered to dissolve the marriage in the specified
circumstances already agreed upon.

It has been customary since the olden days that the women, who feel, in
any way, apprehensive of the conduct of their husbands, insist on the
inclusion of such a clause in the marriage contract and exercise the
power delegated to them, if necessary.

Thus, according to the Islamic law, though woman does not have the
natural right of divorce, she can have the contractual right of the
dissolution of marriage.

Hence, it is not correct to say that the right of divorce is unilateral
and Islam has given it only to man.

**JUDICIAL DIVORCE**

Judicial divorce means the dissolution of marriage by a judge and not
by the husband. In a large number of countries only a court is competent
to effect divorce and to dissolve marriage. According to this system,
every divorce is a judicial divorce. We have already made it clear that,
in view of the spirit of marriage, the aim of the formation of a family
and the position held by woman in the family, a divorce, which runs its
normal course, cannot depend upon the decision of a judge.

Now we would like to see whether, from the Islamic point of view, a
judge has no power to effect a divorce or there are any circumstances,
howsoever exceptional, in which he can do so.

Divorce is the natural right of the husband, provided his relation with
his wife run their normal course. Normally, if he wants to live with
her, he should look after her, discharge all the rights belonging to her
and treat her kindly. If he finds it impossible to live with her
smoothly, he should pay up all her dues and part with her. Besides her
dues, he is also required to pay her an additional sum as a token of
goodwill and gratitude. The Holy Qur'an says: "Provide for them, the
rich according to his means, and the strained according to his means, a
fair provision', (Surah al-Baqarah, 2 : 236)

But there may be cases when the conjugal life does not run its normal
course. There may be a man who neither wants to live happily with his
wife nor would he agree to divorce her.

Natural divorce may be compared to a natural child-birth, which
automatically takes its normal course. But the divorce by a man, who is
not willing to discharge his duty and does not agree to divorce, of his
own accord, is comparable to an abnormal delivery which requires a
caesarean operation by a surgeon.

**ARE CERTAIN CASES OF MARRIAGE INCURABLE LIKE CANCER?**

In such cases divorce does not depend on the will and pleasure of the
husband. If such a man is not willing to divorce, the woman cannot be
allowed to endure the agony without having a remedy. Islam does not play
the role of a silent spectator in such cases.

Many people are under the false impression that from the Islamic point
of view, such a situation is incurable. They think that it is a sort of
cancer which afflicts some unfortunate people, but cannot be cured and
so the woman has no alternative but to continue to suffer patiently till
she dies.

In our view this mode of thinking is repugnant to the principles of
Islam. Islam is a religion which always upholds justice. The
establishment of a just society has been the basic aim of all the
Prophets. The Holy Qur'an says: Certainly we sent Our Messengers with
clear proofs and sent down with them the Book and the Balance, so that
humankind may conduct itself with equity. (Surah al-Hadid, 57:25) Islam
cannot tolerate such a flagrant injustice, nor can it be imagined that
it would formulate a law which may cause a malady comparable to
cancer.

It is regrettable that some people, who admit that Islam is a religion
of justice, still hold such a view. If one 'black law' can be attributed
to Islam and accepted as a cancer, there can be no valid objection to
regarding some other 'cruel' laws as tetanus, tuberculosis, paralysis
etc.

Such an allegation is against the principle of justice, which is a
cardinal principle of Islamic law.

Further, if it is possible to remove the cancer by a simple operation,
will it not be wise to take prompt action and relieve the patient of his
disease?

Take the case of a woman who joins a man in all earnestness as his
partner in life, but subsequently the man ceases to take interest in
her. If the man misuses his powers, does not divorce her and keeps her,
in the words of the Qur'an, 'hanging', not because he wants her to live
with him as his wife, but just to prevent her from seeking another
suitable husband, such a woman is really afflicted with a cancer. But
this cancer is easily operable, and after one operation the patient is
expected to recover fully. This operation can be performed by a
qualified judge only.

As stated earlier, it is a big problem of our society that some callous
husbands refuse to divorce, and thus perpetrate a grave injustice. They
use religion as a pretext to justify their highly objectionable conduct.
When they say that woman should bear patiently their high-handedness as
an incurable cancer, they certainly bring a bad name to Islam.

Though the subject is rather technical, yet we propose to discuss it
briefly, to remove the doubts of the evil-minded persons and to
elucidate the teachings of Islam in this respect.


Some deadlocks are not peculiar to the questions of marriage and
divorce. They appear in other spheres also, such as those related to the
financial problems. Let us first see how Islam has dealt with the
deadlocks in these areas. Has it removed them or accepted them as an
irremediable phenomenon?

Suppose two people, through inheritance or some other way, come to own
an indivisible article such as a diamond, a ring, a vehicle or a
painting and they are not willing to use it jointly or by turns. Neither
of them is also ready to sell his share to the other partner. They also
do not agree on any other formula for its use. The article is being
wasted, because obviously neither of them can use it without the consent
of the other. What is to be done in such a case? Should the problem be
left unsolved and the article be allowed to remain un-utilised? Has
Islam found a way out of such an impasse?

The fact is that Islamic law does not regard such questions as
insoluble. It does not admit that the right of ownership can lead to the
non-utilisation of any property. It allows the courts of law to
intervene in such cases and put things right. Even if the parties
concerned do not want to submit the matter for adjudication, the court
can still order the article in question to be let out or sold. The hire
charges or the sale price will, of course, be divided between the
owners, but the court can take action with or without their consent.

In such cases the right of ownership is not taken into consideration
because of the involvement of another principle, namely, the. prevention
of wastage. The right of ownership is to be waived in such cases,
because it is to be respected only so far as it does not lead to the
total loss and sheer wastage of the property.

Suppose two persons own a diamond, a sword, or something else of that
sort. Neither of them is willing to sell his share to the other, but
both of them agree to divide it into two pieces so that each of them may
take one-half of it. Obviously a diamond, a sword or a car, when divided
into pieces, becomes useless and loses its value. Islam does not allow
such wastage.

A great jurist, Allamah Hilli, says that the legal authorities should
not allow anyone to resort to such an action. The fact that an agreement
exists between the owners of the article concerned will not do in such
cases.

**DILEMMA OF DIVORCE**

Now let us see what is to be done about the question of divorce. If a
husband is uncompromising and does not discharge all or some of his
financial (maintenance), moral (good-fellowship) and sexual (right of
co-habitation and intercourse) duties and obligations, enjoined upon him
by Islam, and at the same time, is not willing to divorce his wife, what
action is to be taken? Does there exist sufficient cause to allow the
judicial authority to intervene?

**VIEW OF AYATULLAH HILLI**

A great jurist of recent times, Ayatullah (Shaykh Husayn) Hilli of
Najaf (Iraq) has dealt with this point in his treatise, 'Conjugal
Rights'. Here is the summary of his views:

Marriage is a sacred contract and at the same time a sort of
partnership between two persons who make certain commitments to each
other, the execution of which ensures their happiness. That is not all.
In fact, the felicity of the whole society depends upon the success of
their relations.

The main rights of the wife consist of maintenance, cohabitation and
good fellowship.

If the husband avoids carrying out his commitments and also abstains
from divorcing his wife what should a woman do and how should she behave
towards her husband? There are two possible alternatives. Either a
Muslim judicial authority should intervene and pronounce the divorce ex
parte, or the wife should also refuse to carry out her commitments.

The first alternative is supported by the following verses of the Holy
Qur'an: Divorce may be pronounced twice: then either a woman must be
retained in good fellowship or released in kindness. (Surah al-Baqarah,
2 : 229). In other words, the right of divorce and its revocation can be
exercised twice only. Thereafter, there are only two alternatives,
either magnanimous retention or release in kindness.

Again in the Surah al-Baqarah, (2 : 232) the Qur'an says:

When you have divorced your wives, and they have reached their
prescribed term, either retain them with honour or release them in
kindness; Do not retain them by force to harm them. Whoever does that
wrongs himself

From these verses, a general rule can be deduced. A husband has either
to retain his wife and carry out all his duties and obligations
magnanimously, or to release her and sever the conjugal bond. From the
Islamic point of view there is no third alternative. The words, "do not
retain them by force to harm them" deny the third alternative of neither
divorcing the woman nor retaining her justly or magnanimously. These
words, in a more general sense, include the cases of both doing harm to
the woman intentionally and simply ignoring her rights and interests by
not divorcing her.

These verses expressly refer to the question of the revocation of
divorce and lay down that the revocation should be on a solid basis,
with a view to keeping the woman as a partner in life and not with a
view to doing harm to her. But, in their scope, the verses are not
limited to this question only. They lay down a general rule applicable
to the rights of wife at all times and in all circumstances. As a
general rule, the husband has to choose one of the above two
alternatives throughout his married life. There exists no third
alternative for him.

Some jurists have wrongly limited the scope of these verses. They are
of the view that they are applicable only to those husbands who want to
revoke their divorce during the period of probation (iddah). In fact,
this view is not correct. Apart from the context of these verses, the
Holy Imams, as authority, have quoted them in other cases also. For
instance, Imam Baqir (P) has said that a husband who swears that he has
nothing to do with his wife and in pursuance of such an oath (ila')
abstains from her society, has only two alternatives at the expiry of a
period of four months. Either he should break his oath and make
atonement (kaffarah) for his improper behaviour, or he must immediately
divorce his wife, for Allah says: Either retain her (the woman) in good
fellowship or release her in kindness. (Surah al-Baqarah 2 : 229)

On another occasion, when a man had appointed an agent to contract a
marriage and fix the dower on his behalf, and later the principle denied
the delegation of such powers, Imam Sadiq (P) said that the woman could
choose another husband for herself. When the man knew in his heart that
he had appointed an agent and delegated him the power to contract a
marriage, but later denied it, then he must pronounce divorce, so that
his conscience might be cleared, for Allah has said: "Either retain a
woman in good fellowship or release her in kindness". These instances
show that the Imams believed the verse to constitute a general
principle.
In case a husband neither carries out his conjugal obligations nor does
he divorce his wife the religious court should summon him and call upon
him to pronounce divorce. If he declines, the court itself can declare
the marriage to be dissolved. According to a tradition, Abu Basir has
reported that Imam Sadiq (P) said: "If a husband does not maintain his
wife, it is the duty of the court to dissolve their marriage, by
enforcing a divorce." This in a nutshell is the view of a jurist of the
first rank of the present age. He who wants to know its details should
consult the book Huquq-uz-Zawjiyyah" which consists of the lessons of
the grand author.

As you must have observed, the verse, 'Either retain in good fellowship
or release in kindness' constitutes a principle, within the framework of
which Islam has prescribed the rights of the wife. According to this
principle and the strict order contained in the sentence: 'Retain them
not for injury, 'Islam does not allow any wicked man to misuse his
powers and to keep any woman in straits to prevent her from marrying any
other person.
Besides the above arguments quoted from the treatise, 'Conjugal
Rights', there exist other arguments also, which support the view that
the verse, 'Either retain in good fellowship or release in kindness' is
from the Islamic point of view, a general rule which covers all the
rights of the wife. The more one looks at the various aspects of this
rule, the more he realises the soundness of the teachings of Islam.

In al-Kafi, Vol. V, Imam Sadiq (P), is reported to have said that when
a man wants to marry a woman, he should say:

"I acknowledge the pledge taken by Allah 'Either retain in good
fellowship or release in kindness'."

The Holy Qur'an says: How can you take it (the dower) back, when you
have intimated with each other, and they (wives) have taken from you a
strong pledge (of making a full payment of dower to them). (Surah
an-Nisa, 4:21) The commentators of the Holy Qur'an, both the Shiah and
the Sunni, admit that here a 'strong pledge' denotes the verse, 'Either
retain in good fellowship or release in kindness.' This is the pledge to
which Imam Sadiq (P) referred, when he called on the people to
acknowledge the pledge of Allah at the time of marriage.

Both the Shiah and the Sunni sources report that on the occasion of the
Farewell Pilgrimage (his last pilgrimage) the Holy Prophet said: "Fear
Allah in respect of women, for you hold them in trust for Allah, and you
have been allowed to enjoy them by His word."

The well- known historian - theologian, Ibn al-Athir, writes that the
'word of Allah' in this saying of the Prophet refers to the Qur'anic
verse - "Either retain them in good fellowship or release them in
kindness."

**VIEW OF SHAYKH TUSI**

Shaykh Tusi, expressing his views regarding the cases of impotence,
says that after it is proved that the husband is sexually impotent, the
wife has the option of dissolving the marriage. He says that all the
jurists are unanimous on this point and in support of their view they
cite the verse: Retain in good fellowship or release in kindness. An
impotent man, being unable to perform his conjugal duties, cannot keep
his wife in good fellowship and should, therefore, release her.

The views quoted above, on the whole, prove that Islam does not allow
any man to misuse his right of divorce and keep his wife as a prisoner.
Anyhow, it should be noted that every judge is not competent to
intervene in such matters. Islam has laid down very hard and fast
qualifications for a judge (Qazi).
It is worth noting that the cases of judicial divorce should be
exceptionally rare, because Islam is anxious to preserve the family life
as far as practicable. Islam cannot allow the divorce to take the form
that it has taken in Europe and America, the instances of which we daily
read in the newspapers. For example, a woman demanded a divorce because
her husband did not like the film she liked. Another woman wanted a
divorce on the plea that her husband did not kiss her beloved dog. Many
other similarly ridiculous and flimsy pleas are advanced daily. They
only reflect the decline of humanity.

In a preceding chapter we mentioned, in the following order, five
theories regarding divorce:

(1) There should be no moral or social restrictions on divorce;

(2) Marriage constitutes an eternal bond. Divorce should be totally
banned; (View of the Catholic Church)

(3) Marriage is dissolvable by man and not by woman;
(4) Marriage is dissolvable both by man and woman but with certain
conditions. The procedure of its dissolution is the same for both of
them; (View of the supporters of equality of rights).

(5) The way to divorce is open for both man and woman, but their way
out is separate.

As we said in the above mentioned chapter, Islam supports the last
theory. From what we have said about the possibility of the delegation
of the power of divorce to the wife, as an integral condition of the
marriage contract and the possibility of judicial divorce, it is evident
that though Islam does not recognise that woman has any natural right of
divorce, yet it has not completely slammed the door of exit to her.
The question of judicial divorce can be discussed further, especially
with reference to the views of the jurists of various schools of law,
but we think that for our present purpose we need not go into further
details.

