Geographical Factors
====================

Montesquieu and Gustav Leobeon insist that climatic conditions are the
main cause of the development of polygamy. These intellectuals believe
that the climate of the East is such that this custom is inevitable
there. In the Eastern countries puberty and old age in females commence
earlier and, therefore, a man requires a second and a third wife.
Moreover, they think that one woman cannot satisfy the sexual needs of a
man brought up in the Eastern climate.

Gustav Leobeon in his book, History of Islamic and Arab culture says:
"The custom of polygamy was not introduced by religion. It is an outcome
of the climatic conditions, the racial characteristics and other causes
related to life in the East. It needs not be emphasised that these are
very strong and effective factors. Furthermore, their physical and
temperamental traits, their nursing of children and their ailments and
diseases often

force the women of the East to keep themselves aloof from their
husbands. As the climatic conditions and the national characteristics of
men in the East are such that they cannot bear even temporary
separation, polygamy has become customary".

Montesquieu in his book, the Spirit of Law says: 'In tropical countries
women attain puberty at the age of eight, nine or ten years and after
being married, soon become pregnant. It may be said that in tropical
countries, pregnancy immediately follows marriage".

Predo, giving an account of the life of the Prophet of Islam, states
that he married Khadijah, at the age of five and consummated the
marriage at the age of eight. Because of a very early marriage, women in
the tropics become old at the age of twenty. He says that before they
become mature, they are already old. In the countries having a temperate
climate women retain their charm and beauty for a long time. They attain
puberty at a later age and they are more mature and experienced at the
time of their marriage. They have children at a comparatively advanced
age and the husband and the wife become old almost at the same time.
That is how equality between man and woman is established and men do not
need to have more than one wife.

Thus it is because of the climatic conditions that the law prohibits
polygamy in Europe and allows it in Asia.

The above explanation is in no way correct. The custom of polygamy is
not confined to tropical regions in the East. During the pre-Islamic
period this custom was common in Iran, where the climate is temperate.
It is purely fictitious to say that in the tropics, women get old at the
age of twenty, as alleged by Montesquieu. It is even more fantastic to
say that the Prophet of Islam, married Khadijah at the age of five and
consummated it at the age of eight. Everyone knows that at the time of
their marriage Khadijah was forty and the Prophet was twenty -five.

Secondly, if it is accepted that the early onset of old age in women
and the intense virility in men are the causes of this custom, why did
the people of the East not adopt the practice of free love and
debauchery, as the people of the West did both during the Middle Ages
and in the modern times. In the West, as Gustav Leabeon has pointed out,
monogamy is found only in the legal books and there is no trace of it in
daily life.

Again, in the East polygamy exists in its legal form. The man has to
accept the woman as his legal wife and has to bear the responsibility of
her children. In the West, it exists in an illegal and clandestine form.
Man indulges in free love and escapes all matrimonial responsibility.

**POLYGAMY IN THE WEST**

We deem it necessary to give a brief account of polygamy in Europe
during the Middle Ages, as described by an eminent Western historian.
This account should convince those who criticise the East for polygamy
that in spite of all its defects it is much more dignified than what
existed in Europe.

Will Durant in his book, History of Civilization, vol.17, gives an
interesting account of the state of morality in Italy during the
renaissance. We give below a summary of what he has said under the
heading 'Morals in Sexual Relations'.

In the course of his brief introduction he says that before describing
the morals of the laity it may be pointed out that by nature man is
polygamous. Only strict moral restrictions, an adequate amount of hard
work and poverty, and a continuous vigilance of the wife can compel him
to maintain monogamy.

Then he says that adultery was not uncommon during the Middle Ages,
prior to the Renaissance. As during the Middle Ages the guilt of
adultery was extenuated by chivalry, similarly, during the Renaissance
period, it was watered down among the educated classes by the craving
for the polished manners and the refined spirit of the females. Girls
belonging to respectable families were, to a certain extent, kept
segregated from the males not connected with their own family and were
taught the merits of pre -marital chastity. Sometimes these instructions
were exceptionally effective. It is reported that a young woman, after
being assaulted, drowned herself. That must have been an exceptional
case, because a bishop took the trouble of installing her statue after
her death to commemorate her chastity.

The number of pre-marital affairs must have been considerable, because
there were innumerable children born of illegitimate relations in every
town of Italy. It was a matter of pride not to have an illegitimate
child, but to have one was not a matter of shame. Usually a husband
persuaded his wife at the time of the marriage to bring her illegitimate
child with her, to be brought up along with his children. Illegitimacy
was not a slur on the reputation of anyone. Furthermore, a certificate
of legitimacy could easily be obtained by bribing a clergyman. In the
absence of other lawful or eligible heirs, an illegitimate son could
inherit property and even a crown, as Frante-I, succeeded Alfonso-I,
King of Naples. When in 1459 Pius-II came to Bavaria, he was received by
seven princes, all of whom were illegitimate. Rivalry between the
legitimate and illegitimate sons was an important cause of a long series
of commotions during the Renaissance period. As far as homosexuality is
concerned, it was only a revival of the ancient Greek tradition.

San Bernardino found this sort of perversion so common in Naples that
he thought it to be threatened with the fate of Sodom. Artino found the
perversion equally prevalent in Rome. The same thing can be said about
prostitution. In 1490, out of a total population of 90,000, there were
6,800 registered prostitutes in Rome. Of course, this figure does not
include clandestine and unofficial prostitutes. According to the
statistics of 1509, out of a population of 300,000 of that city, there
were 11,654 prostitutes. In the 15th century, a girl who had reached the
age of 15 without having a husband, was regarded as a slur on the fair
name of her family. In the 16th century, the 'age of disgrace' was
extended up to 17 years, to enable the girls to receive higher
education. Men, who enjoyed all the facilities provided by widespread
prostitution, were attracted to marriage only if the woman concerned
promised to bring a considerable dowry. According to the system of the
Middle Ages, husband and wife were expected to love each other and share
each other's joy and grief. Apparently in many cases this expectation
came true, but still adultery was rampant. Most of the marriages of the
upper classes were diplomatic unions contracted for political and
economic gains. Many husbands regarded it as their right to have a
mistress. The wife might feel dejected, but usually connived at the
situation.

Among the middle classes, some people thought that adultery was a
lawful pastime. Machiavelli and his friends apparently did not feel
uneasy about the stories of their unfaithfulness which they exchanged
with each other. When in such cases, the wife followed the example of
her husband to wreak vengeance upon him, he usually connived at her
behaviour and did not feel jealous or perturbed.

This was a specimen of the life of the people who regard polygamy as an
unpardonable crime of the East and have occasionally blamed its climate
for this supposedly inhuman custom. As far as their own climate is
concerned, it does not allow them to be unfaithful to the wives and to
exceed the limits of monogamy!

By the way, it should be remembered that the absence of lawful polygamy
among the Europeans, whether good or bad, has nothing to do with the
religion of Christ, who never prohibited it. On the other hand, it
confirms the rules of the old Testament, which expressly recognise
polygamy. Thus we can say that, in fact, the religion of Christ allows
polygamy, and the ancient Christians have actually practised it. Hence,
the legal abstinence of the Europeans from it must have some other
reason or reasons.

**MENSES**

Some others attribute polygamy to woman's menstrual periods and her
aversion to sex during that time as well as to her exhaustion after
child-birth and her desire to avoid sexual intercourse during the
nursing period.

Will Durant says that in the primitive societies women grow old
quickly. That is why, in order to be able to nurse their children for a
longer period, to lengthen the interval between their own pregnancies,
without interrupting the husband's desire to have children, and to
enable him to satisfy his sexual urge, they encourage their husbands to
have a new wife. It has been often observed that the first wife, with a
view to making her own burden lighter, has persuaded her husband to
contract another marriage in order to have more children and to acquire
more wealth.

There is no doubt that woman's menstrual periods and her exhaustion as
the result of child-bearing place man and woman, sexually, in dissimilar
positions.

These reasons often make men turn to another woman, but they alone
cannot be a sufficient cause of polygamy, unless there exists some
social or moral impediment preventing man from indulging in free love.
The above factors can be effective only when man is not free in the
pursuit of his sexual desires.

**LIMITATION OF THE PERIOD OF FECUNDITY IN FEMALES**

Some believe that the limitation of the period of fecundity of a woman
and her menopause, are one of the causes which gave rise to polygamy,
for it may happen that a woman reaches this age without being able to
bear enough number of children. It is also possible that her children
may have died.

In such cases, if the husband does not like to divorce his first wife
and at the same time wants to have more children, he has no alternative
but to have a second, or sometimes even a third wife. Similarly, the
sterility of the first wife may be another reason for the husband in
contracting a second marriage.

**ECONOMIC FACTORS**

Some economic factors have also been mentioned as the cause of
polygamy. It is said that in ancient times, several wives and a large
number of children were regarded as an economic asset. Man extracted
work from his wife and children and treated them like slaves. Sometimes
he even sold them out. Most of the slaves were not captured in battles,
but were sold by their fathers.

This may be a cause of polygamy, because man can have children only by
accepting the woman as his legal wife. Free love cannot ensure this
advantage. Anyhow, this cause cannot explain all the cases of
polygamy.

Some primitive people had several wives with this idea. But that was
not the case with all the people. In the ancient world polygamy was
customary among the classes which lived with dignity and decorum. The
kings, the princes, the chiefs, the divines and the merchants had
several wives.

As we know, these classes never exploited economically their wives and
children.

**NUMBER OF MEMBERS OF A FAMILY**

Interest in the numerical increase of the children and the expansion of
the family has been another cause of polygamy. The position of a man and
a woman with regard to the number of children each of them can have is
different. The number of children a woman can bear is very limited,
whether she has one husband or several husbands. But the number of
children which a man can beget depends on the number of women he has at
his disposal. It is theoretically possible that a man may have thousands
of children by hundreds of wives. Unlike the modern world, in the
ancient world the number of family members was counted as an important
social factor. The tribes and the clans did all they could to increase
their numbers It was a matter of pride for the ancient people to have a
large tribe. It is obvious that polygamy was the only means of achieving
that end.

**NUMERICAL SUPERIORITY**

The last and the most important factor, which has contributed to the
emergence of the custom of polygamy, is that women have always
outnumbered men. It is not that the birth-rate of females is greater
than that of males. If occasionally in certain places more females are
born, in other places more males are born. But still the number of the
women eligible for marriage is always higher than the number of men so
eligible. The reason is that the mortality rate among men has always
been higher. It is possible that, in case monogamy is enforced strictly,
a large number of women will go without having legal husbands, legal
children and a household life.

There can be no doubt that at least in the primitive societies this was
the position. We have already quoted Will Durant, who says that in
primitive societies the life of man was constantly in danger because he
was always busy with hunting and fighting, and that is why the rate of
mortality among men was higher than among women. As the number of women
increased, there were only two alternatives: either to adopt polygamy or
to force a large number of women to pass their entire life as
spinsters.

**RECAPITULATION**
We have described above all the causes which can be presumed to be the
source of polygamy. As you must have observed, some of these causes such
as climate are actually no causes at all. Hence we ignore them. Other
causes can be classified into three categories. The first category
includes those causes which might have been effective in persuading man
to adopt polygamy, but they provide no justification for his action.
They have an aspect of oppression, high-handedness and cruelty. The
economic causes come under this category.
It is evident that the sale of children is one of the most cruel and
barbaric human acts. To resort to polygamy for this purpose is as
unlawful as this act itself.

The second category includes those causes which may be regarded as a
justification as far as the husband or society is concerned. Sterility
of the first wife, her reaching the age of menopause while the husband
still requires a child or the need of a large body of people by the
tribe or the country, are such causes. As a general rule, all causes,
which emanate from the dissimilarity between husband and wife as regards
their sexual needs or procreation power, have a justifying aspect.

The third category consists of a cause which, if it is admitted that it
ever existed or still exists, not only provides a justification for
polygamy, but also makes it obligatory. In this case, polygamy is a
woman's right which man and the society must discharge. This cause is
the numerical superiority of women over men. In case the number of women
eligible for marriage is larger than the number of such men, polygamy
becomes an obligation of men and a right of woman, for, in the case of
legally enforced monogamy, a number of women are bound to be deprived of
their right of family life.

The right of marriage is a basic human right and no one can be deprived
of it under any pretext. Society cannot take any action which may
deprive a section of the people of this right.

The right of marriage is as natural a right as the right of freedom,
the right to work and the right to get food, shelter and education.
Hence, the law of monogamy is repugnant to the natural human rights in
the case of the existence of a larger number of women eligible for
marriage than the number of available men.

This, at least, has been the case in the past. In the next chapter we
shall see whether there still exist circumstances which not only justify
polygamy, but also create a woman's right to it. And if such
circumstances do exist what is the position of this right vis-a-vis the
right of the first wife?

**RIGHT OF WOMAN IN "MORE-THAN-ONE" MARRIAGE**

We have explained the causes of the failure of polyandry and the
prevailing of polygamy and have shown that multifarious causes have
contributed to the origin of the latter custom. Some of the causes
originated from the man's spirit of oppression and domination and others
from the disparity between man and woman as regards the duration of
their power or procreation and the number of children which each of them
can beget. The latter type of causes can be regarded as a justification
for polygamy. But its main cause, throughout history has been the
numerical superiority of women eligible for marriage over such men. This
cause leads to the creation of a right of woman and an obligation of
man.

To avoid a lengthy discussion, we skip over those causes which can be
regarded merely as a justification for polygamy and confine our
attention to its main cause which, when in existence, turns it into a
right of the fair sex.

To prove the case two preliminary points have to be established. First
it is to be proved that according to the reliable statistics the women
eligible for marriage actually outnumber such men. The second point to
be proved is that the actual existence of circumstances creates a right
which married men and women owe to the women who have been deprived of
marriage.

As for the first point, fortunately almost authentic statistics exist
in the modern world. A census is taken in every country periodically. In
the advanced countries not only are the total figures of males and
females collected, but the number of men and women in various age groups
is also shown. These figures are regularly published by the United
Nations in its annual reports on world population.(We have before us the
1964 report, republished in 1965.)

It may be pointed out that for our purpose it is not enough to know the
total number of males and females in any given country. Simultaneously,
we should also know the ratio between the number of men and the number
of women eligible for marriage. In most cases this ratio is different
from that which exists between the total population of males and the
total population of females. There are two reasons for this difference.
One is that the onset of puberty in females is earlier. That is why in
most countries the legal age of consent in the case of girls is lower
than in the case of boys. Practically in most of the countries of the
world the husband is on an average five years older than the wife.

The other and the more important reason is that the mortality rate
among the boys is higher than among the girls, with the result that
during the marriageable age the balance between them is upset. Sometimes
the disparity becomes very marked. It may be that the total number of
males and females in a country is almost equal, or even the number of
males is higher, but still the girls of marriageable age far exceed the
boys of the corresponding age group.

The United Nations Population Report for the year 1964 bears witness to
this fact.

For instance, according to this report, the total population of the
Republic of Korea is 26,277,635 people. Out of this total 13,145,289 are
males and 13,132,346 are females. Thus the number of males is 12,943
more than that of females. This ratio is maintained in the children of
less than one year, of 1 to 4 years, of 5 to 9 years, of 12 to 14 years
and of 15 to 19 years.

Statistics show that in all these age groups the number of males is
larger than that of females. But in the age group of 20 to 24, the ratio
changes. In this age group the total number of males is 1,083,364 and
the total number of females is 1,110,051. In all the higher age groups,
which are the groups of marriageable age, the number of females is
greater.

Still the case of the Republic of Korea, where the total number of
males is greater than females, is exceptional. In almost all other
countries, not only in marriageable age groups but also in the total
population, the females outnumber the males. For instance, the total
population of the Soviet Union, is 216,101,000 and out of this total
97,840,000 are males and 118,261,000 are females. This disparity is
maintained throughout all age groups, pre-marriageable as well as
marriageable, that is from 20 years to 24 years, from 25 years to 29
years, from 30 years to 34 years and even from 80 years to 84 years.

The same is the case with other countries, such as England, France,
West Germany, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Rumania, Hungary,
U.S.A., Japan etc. Of course at certain places, such as West Berlin and
East Berlin, the disparity between the number of males and the number of
females is abnormally large.

In India, in the marriageable age group the number of men exceeds the
number of women. Only in the age group of 50 and above, the number of
women is greater. Apparently the supposed paucity of women is due to the
fact that many people in that country do not like to mention the names
of their young wives and young daughters at the time of census.

According to the figures of the last census, Iran is one of the
exceptional countries, where the number of males exceeds the number of
females.

It is surprising that some critics insist that the law allowing
polygamy should be abolished at least in those countries where the
number of men exceeds the number of women. In the first instance, this
law is universal. It is not meant for any particular country. Secondly
it is not enough to know the ratio of males and females in the total
population. We have seen that in the Republic of Korea, though the
number of males is greater in the total population, there are more
females in the marriageable age group. Furthermore, the census figures
are not very reliable in many countries. For example, we know for
definite that though polygamy has been customary in Iran, both in the
urban and the rural areas, yet never has a shortage of would-be brides
been felt there. This fact speaks better than the census figures.

Ashley Montague, in his book, 'Woman the Superior Sex', admits that
throughout the world the number of women in the marriageable age exceeds
the number of men.

The statistics of 1950 show that the number of women of marriageable
age in America exceeded the number of men by about one million four
hundred and thirty thousand.

Bertrand Russell in his book, 'Marriage and Morality' says that, in the
present day England, more than two million women exceed men. According
to the custom they should forever remain childless, which is a big
privation for them.

Some years ago a news item appeared in the press. It said that
following much pressure by those German women, who were unable to get
husbands and family life, because of the huge German casualties in the
Second World War, the German Government had approached Al-Azhar
University to provide it with the formula of polygamy. Later it was
learnt that following serious opposition by the Church the proposal had
to be dropped. The Church preferred the privation of women and the
spread of licentiousness to the system of polygamy, because this system
is Eastern and Islamic.

**WHY ARE THERE MORE WOMEN OF MARRIAGEABLE AGE THAN MEN?**

Though the birth rate of girls is not higher than that of boys, yet
there are more women of marriageable age than men. The reason is clear.
The mortality rate of men is higher. Deaths usually occur at the age
when man should normally be the head of a family. If we take into
consideration the deaths which occur following accidents such as, wars,
drowning, falls, motor collisions etc. we shall find that most of the
victims are men.

It is seldom found that woman is among the victims. Whether it is a
case of a clash between human beings or between man and nature, most of
the victims are male adults To know why the balance between men and
women of marriageable age is upset it is enough to realise that since
the beginning of human history there has not been a single day when wars
have not been waged and men have not perished.

The casualties resulting from wars in the industrial age are a hundred
times more than those which occurred in the hunting age or in the age of
agriculture. During the last World War, the casualties numbered about
seven million. You will agree with us if you calculate the casualties of
the regional wars in the Far East, the Middle East and Africa during the
past decade only.

Will Durant says that several factors have contributed to the decline
of this custom (polygamy). Stable agricultural life has lessened the
hardships and perils of the life of men, with the result that the number
of men and women has almost equalised.

What Will Durant has said is quite amazing. Had the losses of human
life been confined to the struggle of men against nature, there would
have been a difference between the hunting age and the agricultural age.
But the wars have taken a greater toll of men's lives and the number of
war casualties has not gone down in any age. Further, the main reason
why women have suffered less casualties is that men have always
protected them and have themselves shouldered the most dangerous jobs.
Thus like the hunting age disequilibrium has continued during the
agricultural age also.

Will Durant has not uttered a word about the industrial age, though
this is the period which has witnessed the greatest killings of men and
during which the balance has been badly upset.

**WOMAN HAS A GREATER POWER OF RESISTANCE AGAINST DISEASES**

It has been lately discovered that man possesses lesser power of
resistance against disease than women. This is another reason why the
mortality rate among men is higher.

Some years ago, the French Bureau of Statistics reported that in
France, 105 boys were born against every 100 girls and the number of
women exceeded the number of men by one million, seven hundred and
fifty-eight thousand. It attributed the difference to the female power
of resistance against disease.

Not long ago an article was published in the illustrated UNESCO
magazine, Courier. According to this article, woman is intellectually
superior to man. Her average longevity is more. Usually she is healthier
than man and has a greater power of resistance against disease. She is
cured earlier. Against one stammering woman there are five stammering
men. Against one colour-blind woman there are 16 colour-blind men.
Haemorrhage is almost confined to men. Women are more immune against
accidents. During the last World War it was proved that, in similar
circumstances, woman could bear the hardships of blockades, prisons and
concentration camps better than man. Almost in all countries the cases
of suicide by men are three times those by women.

Ashley Montague has mentioned his theory of woman's greater power of
resistance against disease in his book, 'Woman - the Superior Sex'.
If by chance one day man decides to wreak his vengeance upon woman and
succeeds in plunging her into the most dangerous and fatal jobs or
pushes her into the battlefield to face the guns and the bombs, even
then the balance between men and women will not be restored, because she
has a greater power of resistance against disease.

This much is about the first point viz. numerical superiority of the
women of marriageable age over the men of marriageable age. We know that
this superiority is an actual fact. We also know its causes. And its
cause or causes from the beginning of the human history do exist even
now.

**RIGHT OF WOMAN IN POLYGAMY**

The second point is that the numerical majority of women of
marriageable age not only creates a right for them but also an
obligation for men and married women.

There is no denying the fact that marriage is one of the most natural
and most basic rights of human beings. Everybody, whether man or woman,
has the right to lead a family life and have children. This right is
similar to that of doing work, having a house, receiving education,
utilising the health services and enjoying freedom and security.

It is the duty of the society not to place any obstacles in the way of
the enjoyment of this right. On the other hand, it should provide all
possible facilities for this purpose.

In our opinion it is a big drawback of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights that it has not paid any attention to this right. It has
recognised the right of liberty and security, the right of approaching
competent national tribunals, the right of having a nationality and
changing it, the right to marry without any limitation of race or
religion, the right to own property, the right to form an assembly, and
the right of rest and leisure, but it does not mention the right of
leading a legal family life.

For a woman this right is of utmost importance, for she needs a family
life more than a man. As we have already said, to a man the material
aspect of marriage is more important and to a woman its spiritual and
sentimental aspect. If man has no family, he can at least partially
fulfil his needs by indulging in free love and debauchery. But to a
woman a family has a greater importance. Debauchery cannot even
partially fulfil her material and sentimental needs.

To a man the right of having a family means the right to satisfy his
lust, the right to have a partner in life and the right to have legal
children. But to a woman it also means the right to have a protector and
patron and the one from whom she may draw moral support.

After the establishment of the two premises, viz. the number of women
eligible for marriage is larger than the number of men and it is a
natural human right to have a family life, it is easy to draw the
conclusion that if monogamy is regarded as the only legal form of
marriage, a large number of women are bound to be deprived of their
natural right, and it is only polygamy, which of course with specific
conditions, can restore it.

It is the duty of liberal-minded Muslim women that they, in the name of
defending the just rights of women at large, in the name of protecting
morality and in the name of protecting the human race, call upon the
U.N. Commission for Human Rights to recognise officially the Islamic
system of plurality of wives as a human right, and thus render a great
service to the fair sex and to morality. The fact that a formula has
come from the East and the West has to follow it, should not be regarded
as a sin.

**RUSSELL'S THEORY**

As pointed out earlier, Bertrand Russell was conscious of the fact that
in the case of monogamy being the sole form of marriage, a large number
of women are to be deprived of their right. He has suggested a very
simple solution to the problem. He wanted women to be allowed to entice
men and bear father-less children. As the father usually supports the
children, the government should take his place and give a subsidy to the
unmarried mothers.

Russell says that at present, in Britain, there are more than two
million surplus women who cannot ever hope to have children because of
the law of monogamy. This is a big privation. He says that the system of
monogamy is based on the presumption of approximate numerical equality
between men and women, but where no such equality exists it gives a raw
deal to those women who, in accordance with mathematical law, are doomed
to remain unmarried. Anyhow, if it is desired to increase the
population, such a raw deal is not even in the public interest, let
alone in the private interest.
This is the solution of this social problem, as suggested by a great
philosopher of the 20th century. But, according to Islam, the whole
problem is solved if an adequate number of men having the necessary
financial, moral and physical qualifications agree to bear the
responsibility of more than one legal wife showing no distinction
between her and his first wife and between the children by both of them.
The first wife should accept the second one cheerfully with the spirit
of doing a social duty, which is most necessary and the best form of
morality.

Contrary to the Islamic mode of thinking, this philosopher advises the
deprived women to steal the husbands of other women and call upon the
government to support the children born of such illicit connections.

It appears that this philosopher of the 20th century maintains that
woman needs marriage only for three reasons:

to satisfy her sexual needs, to get children and to meet her economic
requirements. The first two needs can be met on the sly. As for the
third one, it should be looked after by the government. He forgets that
woman also has some sentimental needs. She wants that she should be
under the protection of a loving husband and that her contact with him
should not be merely of a sexual nature. Another point to which this
philosopher attaches no importance, is the position of the children born
of illicit connections. Every child needs well-recognised parents and
their sincere love and affection. Experience has shown that the mother
seldom shows affection to that child of hers whose father is not known.
How can the lack of this love be compensated? Can the government do
anything in this respect?

Lord Russell regrets that a large number of women will have to remain
childless unless his proposal is given a legal form. But he should have
known that the British women cannot wait for any law. They themselves
have already solved the problem of maidenhood and the fatherless
child.
In the annual report for 1958, prepared by Dr. Z.A. Scott, head of the
Medical Department of the London Council, it was pointed out that out of
every ten children born in the previous year one was illegitimate. The
report further said that illegitimate births were constantly on the
increase. The figures of illegitimate births shot up from 33,838 in 1957
to 53,433 in the following year.

It appears that the British people have solved their problem without
waiting for the enactment of Lord Russell's suggestion.

**POLYGAMY PROHIBITED, HOMOSEXUALITY PERMITTED!**

The British Government instead of acting upon the advice of Lord
Russell and solving the problem of unmarried woman has taken a step in
the opposite direction. It has more than ever deprived woman of the male
sex by legalising homosexuality. At present polygamy is prohibited in
Britain, but homosexuality is lawful.

In the eyes of the British people it is inhuman to have a woman as a
second wife. But if the second "wife" happens to be a male, then there
is no harm. They regard homosexuality to be a dignified act in
conformity with the requirements of the 20th century. According to the
verdict of the British authorities, plurality of wives is not
objectionable provided the wives other than the first one have whiskers.
It is said that the Western world has solved the sexual and family
problems, and we should follow its example. This is how it has solved
them.

This Western action is not surprising in the least, for it is a logical
outcome of the way the West is going.

What is surprising is that our people, especially the educated young
men, have lost their power of independent thinking and analysing
problems. They have lost their personalities. They are too credulous. If
they have a diamond in their hand and the people from the other side of
the world say it is a walnut, they throw it away. But if they see a
walnut in the hand of an alien and are told that it is diamond, they
readily believe that.

**IS MAN POLYGAMOUS BY NATURE?**

You will be surprised if you are told that the psychologists and the
social philosophers in the West believe that man is born polygamous and
monogamy is against his nature.

Will Durant, explaining the present day moral chaos, says that much of
it is due to our incurable interest in variety. Man by nature cannot be
content with one woman.

He says that by nature man is polygamous. Only the strongest moral
restrictions and an appropriate amount of poverty and hard work, along
with the external vigilance of the wife, can impose monogamy on him.

The German professor, Schmidt, says that throughout history man has
been unfaithful to his wife. There are indications that even during the
Middle Ages the young men changed their sweet-hearts again and again,
and 50% of the married men were unfaithful to their wives. Robert Kinsey
in his report, known as the Kinsey Report, says that American men and
women surpass all other nations in unfaithfulness. In another section of
the report he says that, unlike man, woman dislikes diversity and that
is why she often does not submit to his overtures, but man regards
diversity as an adventure. What is more important is that he is more
interested in physical pleasure than in spiritual and sentimental
pleasure. Man pretends to have a purely sentimental and spiritual
relation only so long as he does not get an opportunity to have physical
contact. A famous physician told Kinsey that obviously man was
polygamous and woman monogamous, because millions of sperm developed in
man while one ovum was produced in the ovary of woman during each period
of fecundity. Apart from the theory of Kinsey, it will not be a bad idea
if we ask ourselves whether it is difficult for a man to be faithful.

A French sociologist answering this question says that for a man to be
faithful is not merely difficult but it is impossible. One woman is born
for one man, but one man is born for all women, If a man is unfaithful
and betrays his wife, he is not to blame. It is the fault of nature,
which has put all the forces of unfaithfulness in him.

A French magazine under the heading, "French way of Love and Marriage",
writes that French couples have solved this problem. They know the rules
of the game. So long as the husband does not exceed the limits, his
occasional affairs with other women are of little importance. As a rule
a husband can in no case remain faithful after two years of married
life. It is somewhat different in the case of women and fortunately they
are aware of this difference. In France, a wife does not feel offended
if her husband commits adultery

She consoles herself by saying that he might have taken his body to
another woman, but his soul and sentiments continue to be her own.

Some years ago there was a controversy on the views expressed by a
biologist named Dr. Russell Lee. He was of the view that a man's
contentment with one wife weakened his progeny and hence this action
amounted to an act of treachery against the human race. He thought that
the system of multi-relations made the children healthy and strong.

We believe that the above description of the nature of man is not
correct at all. These thinkers appear to have been inspired by the
particular atmosphere prevailing in their own part of the world.

Anyhow, we believe that both biologically and psychologically man and
woman are dissimilar to each other and nature has purposely made them
so. Therefore, the equality of their rights should not be used as a
pretext for the uniformity of their rights. Even from the viewpoint of
those who support monogamy, the spirit of woman is different from that
of man. Woman is monogamous by nature. Polyandry is against her spirit
and does not conform to what she expects of her husband. But man is not
monogamous by nature in the sense that polygamy is not against his
spirit and is not inconsistent with what he expects of his wife.

But we do not agree with the view that the spirit of man does not
conform to monogamy. It is absolutely incorrect to say that his passion
for diversity is incurable. We also do not believe that man cannot be
faithful, or that one woman is born for one man and one man is born for
all women.

To our belief the causes of man's unfaithfulness are related to the
social atmosphere and man's nature is not responsible for it. Factors
causing unfaithfulness stem from that atmosphere which, on the one hand,
encourages woman to employ all sorts of temptations and seductions to
lead a stranger astray and, on the other hand, deprives millions of
women of their right of marriage by enforcing the law of monogamy.

In the Muslim East, prior to the introduction of Western ways and
manners, 90% of the men adhered to monogamy in the real sense. They
neither had more than one legal wife nor did they indulge in
concubinage.

