Polygamy As the Factor Saving Monogamy
======================================

You will be surprised if we say that polygamy was the most important
factor which served monogamy in the East. Its legality is really the
biggest saving factor, in case the number of women requiring marriage
exceeds the number of men eligible for it, because if the right of the
surplus women to marriage is not recognised and the morally, financially
and physically well-qualified men are not allowed to have more than one
wife, free love and concubinage are bound to become rampant, destroying
the very basis of real monogamy.

In the Muslim East, on the one hand polygamy was permissible and, on
the other, temptations and provocations to immorality did not exist.
Therefore, true monogamy prevailed in most of the families. Concubinage
never developed to the extent that gradually a philosophy had been
invented to justify it. In the East, it was never claimed that man was
born polygamous and could not at all adhere to monogamy.

It may be asked what alternative a man has when polygamy is legally
prohibited and, as the intellectuals say, man is polygamous by nature.

According to the thinking of these gentlemen the answer is quite clear.
Man should be legally monogamous and practically polygamous. He should
not have more than one legal wife, but he can cohabit with any number of
women he likes. Concubinage is the natural right of man. It is
unchivalrous to restrict him to one woman.

We believe that the time has come when the readers should have a clear
idea of the problem and should know what the question really is. It is
not the question whether polygamy is better or monogamy. There is no
doubt that monogamy is preferable, for monogamy means an exclusive
family life. In this system the body and the soul of each of the husband
and the wife exclusively belong to the other. It is obvious that the
spirit of marriage is the union of hearts which manifests itself better
in an exclusive marriage. Humanity does not have to choose between
monogamy and polygamy.

The only problem is that absolute monogamy is not practical in certain
social circumstances, especially when the number of women in need of
marriage is greater than the number of eligible men. Absolute monogamy
pervading every family is only a fiction. There are only two
alternatives: either to officially recognise polygamy or to encourage
unrestricted concubinage. In the case of the first alternative only a
small percentage of married men, in no case more than 10% will have more
than one wife and all women in need of a husband will be able to secure
a home and family life. In the case of the second alter-native every
woman having no legal husband will have sexual relations with several
men, and thus almost all married men will become practically
polygamous.

This is the correct picture of polygamy. But the partisans of the
European way of life are not prepared to present the true picture of the
problem. They do not want to tell the truth openly. In reality they
defend concubinage. They regard the legal wife as a burden and a
stumbling-block in their way. T() them even one wife is too much, let
alone two, three or four. They pretend to be the supporters of monogamy,
but, in fact, complete freedom from matrimonial restrictions is what
they would like to have.

**WILES OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY MAN**

The 20th century man has succeeded in befooling woman on many questions
related to family rights. He uses the high-sounding words of equality
and liberty to reduce his own commitments and to add to his
opportunities of enjoyment. But there are few questions in respect of
which he has been so successful as in disparaging polygamy.

Occasionally we come across writings that make us wonder whether their
authors are simpletons or rogues. One writer says: At present, in the
advanced countries relations between husband and wife are based on a
system of reciprocal rights and obligations, and for that reason it is
as difficult for a woman to recognise polygamy in any form, as for a man
to bear the existence of rivals in the field of his conjugal
relations.

We do not know whether that is their conception of the problem, or they
really do not know that polygamy has resulted from a social problem,
which puts a heavy responsibility on the shoulders of married men and
women and of which, so far, no solution other than polygamy has been
discovered. Shutting the eyes to the real problem and raising the
slogans 'long live monogamy' and 'down with polygamy' can serve no
purpose.

Do they not know that polyandry is neither a part of woman's rights nor
a part of man's rights. It has nothing to do with their reciprocal
rights.

It is ridiculous to say that it is as difficult for woman to agree to
polygamy as it is for a man to tolerate the existence of rivals in the
matter of conjugal relations. Apart from the fact that such a comparison
is wrong, it appears that these gentlemen do not know that the
present-day Western world, by the glitter of which they are so greatly
dazzled, actually requires the husband to respect the love-affairs of
his wife and tolerate the existence of rivals. It deprecates any
interference on the part of the husband as jealousy and fanaticism. We
wish that our young men had a deeper knowledge of what is going on in
the West.

As polygamy is the outcome of a social problem and is not man's
instinct, it is obvious that in a society where women are not in a
numerical majority, it should automatically disappear or at least its
incidence should be minimised. But it will not be proper to ban it even
in such circumstances, if such circumstances exist at all. Legal
prohibition of polygamy is neither sufficient nor something correct.
There are certain prerequisites to achieve this end. First of all,
social justice should be ensured and adequate opportunities of suitable
employment made available for every man, so that everyone eligible for
marriage should be in a position to have a family life. The second
condition is that every woman should be free to choose her husband and
should be under no compulsion by her guardians or anyone else to marry
any particular person of their choice. It is obvious that a woman who
has a chance to marry a bachelor will never like to marry a man who has
a wife. It is only their guardians who sell women for the sake of money
and give them in marriage to the moneyed people.

The third condition is that there should not exist too many temptations
that seduce even women having husbands not to mention women having no
husbands.

Should society be earnestly interested in reformation and in enforcing
true monogamy, it should endeavour for the fulfilment of the above three
conditions. Otherwise, a legal ban on polygamy will only lead to moral
depravation.

**CRISIS RESULTING FROM THE PRIVATION OF THE WOMEN HAVING NO
HUSBANDS**

If the women in need of marriage outnumber such men (bachelors), the
prohibition of polygamy is a treachery to humanity. It is not merely a
question of suppressing the rights of some women only. Had it been so,
it could have been tolerated to a certain extent. The crisis which
society faces as a result of legally enforced monogamy possess a bigger
danger than any other crisis, for the family organisation is more sacred
than any other organisation.

A woman who is deprived of her natural right is a living being prone to
all the reactions of a living being such as in the case of privation.
She is a human being who is susceptible to psychic disorders and
complexes. She is an Eve armed with the weapons for seducing men.

She is not wheat or barley, the surplus stock of which can be dumped
into the sea or stored for any future emergency. She is not a house or a
room which, if not acquired immediately, can be locked. She is a living
person. She is a human being. She is a woman. She has marvellous
potentialities. If she is frustrated she can ruin the society. She
cannot be an idle onlooker while others enjoy life. Her privation will
give rise to complexes and malice. If malice and instinct join hands
together, the consequences can only be catastrophic.

The women deprived of family life will do their utmost to seduce men
and to exploit their weakness in this respect. Even then the matter will
not end. The wives who will find their husbands to be unfaithful, will
think of taking revenge upon them and thus will themselves become
unfaithful. About the final result the less said the better.

This final result has been summarised in the well-known Kinsey Report
in one sentence: "The men and women of America have surpassed all other
nations in unfaithfulness."

It is to be noted that the matter does not end with the corruption and
perversion of men. The conflagration in the end also engulfs the women
having husbands and families.

**VARIOUS REACTIONS ABOUT THE EXCESS OF WOMEN**

The phenomenon of the comparative super-abundance of women has always
existed in human history, but the reactions to this phenomenon, which
create difficulties for the society, have not been the same in all
societies. The people who were more attached to the spirit of piety and
chastity and were guided by the teachings of the great heavenly
religions, solved the problem by adopting the system of polygamy. Other
people who were not so greatly attached to this spirit used the
phenomenon as a means of indulging in debauchery.

Neither was polygamy in the East introduced by Islam, nor its
prohibition in the West in any way related to the religion of Christ.
This custom existed in the East before the inception of Islam and was
sanctioned by the Eastern religions. Even in the Bible, it has not been
prohibited expressly.

A greater blow has been given to monogamy by the nations, which have
taken to debauchery, than by those which have adopted polygamy.

Dr. Muhammad Husayn Haikal, author of the book, 'Life of Muhammad'
after quoting several verses of the Holy Qur'an on the question of
polygamy, says: These verses favour adherence to monogamy. They say that
if you fear that you will not be able to do justice to more than one
wife, then have only one. Incidentally, they emphasise that absolute
justice is not possible. Anyhow in view of the fact that there may be
occasions when polygamy is unavoidable, they allow it conditionally. The
Holy Prophet himself contracted several marriages, when a large number
of Muslim women lost their husbands during the early battles of Islam.
Is it possible to say that following wars, epidemics and disturbances
which take a toll of thousands and sometimes millions of people, it is
still preferable to adhere to monogamy rather than to adopt polygamy as
an exceptional case and with the condition of doing justice to their
wife or wives? Can the people of the West claim that after the World War
the law of monogamy has been enforced in the same way in which it now
exists in name?

**DRAWBACKS AND DEFECTS OF POLYGAMY**

A happy married life depends on sincerity, tolerance, sacrifice and
unity. All these things are endangered in the case of polygamy. Apart
from the unenviable position of the wives and the children in a plural
marriage, the responsibilities of the husband himself are so heavy and
crushing that it is no fun to shoulder them -Most of the men, who are
happy and satisfied with polygamy, are those who practically evade their
legal and moral responsibilities. They turn all their attention to one
wife and ignore the other, whom they leave, in the words of the Holy
Qur'an, 'hanging', What is called polygamy by such people is in reality
a sort of monogamy coupled with high-handedness, tyranny and criminal
injustice. There is a proverb current among the common people which
says: 'One God, One Wife'.

That has been and is the belief of most of the people and, if we
measure the problem by the standard of individual happiness, it is
correct. The rule of monogamy, if not applicable to all men, is
certainly applicable to most of them.

If someone thinks that polygamy, with all the legal and moral
responsibilities it entails, is a bed of roses, he is sadly mistaken.
From the angle of personal comfort and happiness, monogamy is definitely
preferable.

**CORRECT APPRAISAL**

Anyhow, a correct appraisal of the system of polygamy, which emanates
from personal and social needs, cannot be made by comparing it with
monogamy. The right way of evaluating such a system is to give
consideration to the causes which give rise to it, to see what evil
consequences will follow, if those causes are overlooked, and at the
same time to give a thought to the defects and drawbacks of the system
itself. It is only after fully weighing all the pros and cons of a
system that we can arrive at the right conclusion. To illustrate the
point we give an example. If we look at the system of conscription only
from the angle of the interests and inclinations of a family, to which a
recruit belongs, there can be no doubt that the law of conscription is
not a good law. It would have been much better if there had been no such
law, and no darling of a family had been snatched from his family and,
occasionally, sent to the warfront.

But this is not a correct evaluation of the question. Along with the
separation of a son from his family, we should also take into
consideration the defence requirements of the country. If we do that, it
will appear perfectly reasonable and logical that an adequate number of
citizens should always be kept ready for the defence of the country and
their families should willingly put up with the inconveniences caused by
the compulsory military service.

Earlier we referred to some individual and collective needs which
sometimes justify polygamy. Now, to prepare the ground for an overall
judgement, let us discuss the defects and drawbacks of this system. We
admit that it has certain demerits, but we do not believe that all that
is said against it is valid. Anyway, we propose to discuss its defects
from various angles.

**FROM THE PSYCHOLOGICAL ANGLE**

The conjugal relations are not confined to such material and physical
matters as bodily contact and financial support. If they had been so
confined, it would have been easy to justify polygamy, for material and
physical matters are divisible between several people, each having a
share.

The basis of conjugal relations is emotional and psychological. They
are based on such things as love, emotions and feelings. Married life
means the union of hearts. Like all metaphysical things, love and
feelings are not divisible. They cannot be rationed among several people
nor can a definite quota thereof be allotted to any one. A heart cannot
be divided between two people. Love and worship are concomitant. They do
not admit a rival. Love cannot be measured and distributed like wheat
and barley. Furthermore, feelings cannot be controlled.

The heart dominates man, man does not dominate the heart. The spirit of
marriage, that is, its human aspect, which distinguishes the relations
between two human beings from the purely instinctive relations between
two animals, is neither divisible nor controllable. Hence, polygamy
should not be permitted.

To our belief the above statement is exaggerated. It is true that
emotions and feelings constitute the spirit of marriage. It is also true
that feelings are not controllable. But it is pure fancy, rather a
fallacy, to say that feelings are not divisible.

It is not a question of dividing and distributing feelings in the same
way as a material object is divided and distributed. It is a question of
the mental capacity of man, which is not too limited to accommodate
relations with two people. A father having ten sons loves all of them to
the extent of worship and makes sacrifices for them.

Anyhow, one thing is definite. Love cannot be as intense in the case of
several wives as it can be in the case of one. Intense love is not
consistent with plurality, but it is not consistent with reason too.

Russell in his book, 'Marriage and Morality'. says that many people
today regard love as a fair exchange of feelings. This argument alone,
irrespective of all other arguments, is enough to condemn polygamy.

If it is only a question of fair exchange of feelings. we wonder why
the exchange should he monopolistic. A father having several children
loves them all and they all reciprocally love him. Is not the exchange
of feelings between them fair? Incidentally even in the case of several
children, a father's love for each of them is always greater than the
love of each child for the father.

The most amazing part of the above statement is that it has been made
by a person who advises the husbands to respect their wives'
love-affairs with strangers and not to interfere in them. He gives the
same advice to the wives also. Does he believe that the exchange of
feelings between a husband and a wife will still be fair?

**FROM THE ANGLE OF BEHAVIOUR**

In the case of polygamy the relations between co-wives are proverbially
notorious for incongruity. A woman usually regards the co-wife as her
worst enemy. Plurality often induces wives to action against each other
and occasionally against the husband also. It creates malice and turns
the family atmosphere, expected to be an atmosphere of sincerity and
serenity, into a veritable battlefield. Enmity and rivalry existing
between the mothers passes on to their children and two or more blocs
are formed. The family atmosphere, instead of being the first school of
moral training for the children, turns into a school of dissensions and
inhuman behaviour.

There is no doubt that polygamy has all these evil effects. But one
point must not be overlooked. We have to see whether they are the
natural effects of plurality or the product of the unreasonable attitude
of the husband and the second wife. We believe that most of the evil
effects are not the direct result of plurality, but are the consequences
of its wrong implementation.

Suppose a husband and a wife live together and lead a normal life. In
the meantime the husband comes across another woman and takes a fancy to
her. After a secret understanding between the two, the second woman
raids the house and takes undue advantage of the husband, and challenges
the authority of the first. It can be easily imagined what the reaction
of the first wife would be. There is nothing more disturbing to a woman
than the impression that her husband despises her. To be unable to
retain the affection of her husband is the biggest failure of a wife.
When the husband takes to arrogance and licentiousness and the second
wife plays the role of a freebooter, it is useless to expect the first
wife to be patient.

But the things will be different and the internal conflict will be
greatly reduced if the first wife knows that her husband is justified in
having a second wife and that he is not fed up with her. The husband
also must not assume arrogance nor should he indulge in sensuality.
After having a second wife, he should more than ever be kind to his
first wife and should more than ever respect her feelings. The second
wife also should remember that the first wife has certain rights which
are to be respected. In short, all the parties concerned should remember
that they have taken a step to solve a social problem.

The law of polygamy is a progressive solution of a social problem and
is based on the broader interests of the society. Those who execute it,
should possess a standard of high-thinking and should be well-trained in
the Islamic ways.

Experience has shown that if the husband is neither licentious nor
arrogant and the wife is convinced that he needs a second wife, she
herself volunteers to arrange the second marriage of her husband. In
such cases the aforementioned troubles do not arise, as most of them
result from the misbehaviour of the husbands.

**FROM THE MORAL ANGLE**

It is said that polygamy means indulgence in sensuality. Morality
demands that the gratification of sexual desire is minimised, for the
nature of man is such that the more he indulges in sex, the more intense
his yearning for it becomes.

Montague in his book, 'Spirit of Laws', while dealing with the question
of polygamy, says: "The King of Morocco has, in his harem, women of all
races including white, yellow and black. Even if this man had twice as
many women as he has, he still would have craved for more. Sensuality is
like miserliness. The more it is practised, the more intense it becomes.
As the collection of more and more gold and silver intensifies greed and
avarice, indulgence in polygamy promotes vicious and unnatural ways of
love-making, for in the field of sensuality every act which exceeds the
limit encourages perversion. When disturbances broke out in Istanbul,
not a single woman was found in the harem of the ruler, because he
indulged in unnatural love-making (homosexuality).

This objection can be looked at from two angles. Firstly, it has been
claimed that sexual acts are repugnant to pure morality and that sexual
desire should be controlled to the utmost extent. Secondly, it has been
asserted that human nature is such that the more a man indulges in sex,
the more intense his yearning for it becomes.

As regards the first view, it may be said that unfortunately it
represents a wrong thinking. It has been inspired by Christian, Hindu,
Buddhist and Cynic ideas of morality based on renunciation. From the
Islamic point of view, it is not correct to say that the less the
gratification of sexual desire, the more moral it is. (Perhaps according
to this theory perfect morality means no gratification at all). It is
only excessive indulgence which is regarded by Islam as repugnant to
morality.

To ascertain whether polygamy means excessive indulgence let us see
whether by nature man is or is not monogamous. As stated earlier, now
nobody believes that man is purely monogamous or that polygamy is an act
of perversion. To the contrary many sociologists are of the view that by
nature man is polygamous and monogamy is as unnatural as celibacy.

Though we do not believe that man is polygamous by nature, we also do
not believe that he is purely monogamous and that polygamy is unnatural
and a sort of perversion like homosexuality.

Those who, like Montesquieu, regard polygamy tantamount to
licentiousness, have harems in their mind. They think that Islam, by
allowing plurality, wants to provide an excuse for the harems of the
Abbasid Caliphs and the Ottoman Sultans. But in fact Islam is totally
opposed to such a thing. The terms and conditions laid down by Islam in
respect of plurality are such that the chances of licentiousness are
absolutely eliminated.

As for the second point: that the more the natural desires are
satisfied, the more they grow and the more they are suppressed, the more
they are pacified, it is diametrically opposed to the current Freudian
theory.

According to the Freudists, instinctive desires are pacified if they
are satiated, hut if they are suppressed, they become violent. That is
why the Freudists advocate complete freedom and the violation of all
traditional restrictions and restraints in sexual matters. I wish that
Montesquieu had been alive today and had seen how his theory is being
ridiculed by the Freudists.

From the Islamic point of view both the theories are false. Human
nature has its own laws and limits which must be recognised. It becomes
passionate both as a result of privation as well as unrestricted
freedom.

Anyway, neither polygamy is immoral and disturbing to spiritual peace,
as Montesquieu and the like presume, nor is it against human nature, to
be content with one or more legal wives as the Freudists claim.

**FROM THE LEGAL ANGLE**

By virtue of a marriage contract both the husband and the wife belong
to each other, and each of them has a right to enjoy the other. As far
as the marital benefits are concerned, the marriage contract creates a
sort of proprietary right. In the case of polygamy it is the first wife
who has the first claim to the marital benefits, and as such any
transaction between the husband and another wife is ultra vires, for the
goods under transaction, as marital benefits may be called, have already
been sold to the first wife. Hence no subsequent transaction can be
valid without her consent. As such, if polygamy is to be allowed, its
validity must depend upon the consent and agreement of the first wife.
She should have the right to decide whether she can or cannot allow her
husband to have another wife.

This means that to have a second, third and fourth wife is just as if a
person had sold his property to a person and then resold it to a second,
third and fourth customer. The validity of such a transaction will
depend on the consent of the first, second and third buyers
respectively. If the vendor actually delivers the property to the
subsequent buyers without such a consent, he is liable to prosecution.

This objection is based on the presumption that the legal nature of
marriage is that of exchange of benefits, and that each of the husband
and the wife owns the marital benefits accruing from the other. Though
this presumption is not sound, for the present we do not want to dispute
it. Let us presume the position to be actually so. But this objection
can be valid only in case the husband takes another wife only for fun.
Obviously if it is admitted that the legal nature of marriage is that of
exchange of marital benefits, plurality of marriage is not justifiable
only so long as the wife can in every respect meet the lawful needs of
her husband. But if there exists any of the justifying causes mentioned
earlier, the objection becomes void. For instance, if the wife is barren
or has attained the age of menopause and the husband is still in need of
a child, or the wife is sick and not fit for cohabitation, the right of
the wife will be no bar to plurality of marriage.

This is the position in case polygamy is only a personal requirement of
the husband. But if it is a social requirement, for example, if women
outnumber men in a society or the society needs a larger population,
then the case is quite different. In such cases, plurality is a duty
which is to be performed by an adequate number of men. It is a duty to
be carried out to save the society from corruption and prostitution or
to increase the population of the community. When it is a question of
social duty, obviously the question of the consent and permission of the
wife does not arise. Suppose in a society women outnumber men or the
society needs a larger population, then a social duty devolves on all
married men and women which should be carried out by an adequate number
of them in the spirit of self-sacrifice. This is exactly like the case
of conscription. The defence of the country devolves a duty on all
families to send their dear ones to the front for the sake of the
society. In such cases there is no question of the consent of the
parties concerned.

They who maintain that justice demands that polygamy must depend upon
the consent of the existing wife, look at the question from a narrow
angle. They think that a husband always wants to have more than one wife
only for pleasure and variety. They forget that there can be other
individual and social needs also. Basically plurality of marriage should
not be acceptable even with the consent of the existing wife, if no
individual or social need is involved.

**FROM THE PHILOSOPHICAL ANGLE**

The law of polygamy is repugnant to the principle of equality between
man and woman as human beings. As man and woman both have equal rights,
either both of them should be allowed to practise polygamy or neither of
them. It is a pure and simple discrimination to allow man to have
several wives and not to allow woman to have several husbands. To allow
man to have up to four wives means that the value of a woman is only
one-fourth that of man. This position is derogatory to woman and is not
even in keeping with the Islamic view in respect of inheritance and
evidence. In respect of giving evidence, two women are regarded as equal
to one man.

This is the most flimsy objection. It seems that the critics have paid
no attention to the individual and the social causes of polygamy. They
think that it is only a question of passion. Hence man and woman should
be treated equally. We have already discussed the cases in which
polygamy is justified. We have also pointed out the circumstances in
which a duty in respect of a husbandless woman devolves on all married
men and women. Hence, it is not necessary to dwell on this question any
more.

It is enough to say that if the teachings of Islam in respect of
polygamy, inheritance and evidence had been due to any apathy to woman's
rights, and had Islam discriminated between man and woman as human
beings, it would have held a uniform view on all relevant questions. In
the case of inheritance it would not have allowed woman only a half of
the share of man in some cases and an equal share in others. Similarly,
in the case of evidence there would not have been different rules in
different cases. All this shows that Islam has some other philosophy. We
have already explained the question of inheritance in a preceding
chapter. We have also pointed out elsewhere that from the Islamic point
of view the question of equality between man and woman as human beings
is a part of basic human rights. Anyhow, while dealing with family
rights, Islam has taken into consideration certain other aspects also
which are more important than the question of mere equality.

**ROLE OF ISLAM IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF POLYGAMY**

Islam neither invented polygamy (for it had been in existence for
centuries before the inception of Islam), nor did it abolish it, for
there existed no other solution of certain social problems. Islam only
reformed this ancient custom.

**LIMITATIONS**

Before Islam, one could have an unlimited number of wives and could
form a harem. Islam prescribed a maximum limit. It did not allow anyone
to have more than four wives. Those who had more than four wives at the
time of embracing Islam were required to release the extra wives.

We come across the names of several such people in the early history of
Islam. A man named Ghaylan bin Aslamah had ten wives. Another man named
Nawfal bin Mu'awiyah had five. The Holy Prophet ordered them to part
with their extra wives.

The Shi'ah traditions report that during the days of Imam Sadiq (P) a
Zoroastrian embraced Islam. He had seven wives. The Imam was asked as to
what that man should do with his wives. The Imam said that he must part
with three.

**JUSTICE AND EQUAL TREATMENT**

Another reform introduced by Islam was the condition of giving equal
treatment to all the wives. Islam does not allow any discrimination
between the wives or between their children. The Holy Qur'an expressly
says: "If you [ear that you will not do justice (to them) then have one
only". (Surahan-Nisa,4:3)

The Pre-Islamic world observed equality neither between the wives nor
between their children. We have already quoted Christenson and others
who say that during the Sassanian period polygamy was customary in Iran.
One or more wives were called favourite wives and they enjoyed full
rights and others known as servant-wives had lesser legal rights. Only
the male children of the servant-wives were recognised to be the members
of the paternal family.

Islam abolished all such customs and usages. It does not allow any wife
or her children to be regarded as inferior to the other wife or children
of her husband.

Will Durant in his book, History of Culture, Vol. I, says:

"When a person accumulated wealth he feared that if it would be divided
among all his children, each one of them would receive only as small
portion of it. So he felt anxious to make a distinction between his real
and favourite wife and other mistresses to enable the children of the
real wife only to inherit from him."

This shows that in the ancient world discrimination between the wives
and between their children was common. Anyhow, surprisingly enough Will
Durant adds: "Till recently this continued to be the case in Asia.
Gradually the real wife took the position of the sole wife. Other wives
either disappeared or became clandestine mistresses."

Will Durant did not take notice of the fact, or he did not want to do
so, that 14 centuries ago Islam abolished discrimination between the
children. To have one real wife and several secret concubines is a
European and not an Asian custom. It has only lately infiltrated into
Asia.

Anyhow, the second reform which Islam introduced in the domain of
polygamy was the abolition of discrimination between the wives and
between their children. No form of favouritism with any particular wife
is permissible. Almost all jurists are unanimous on this point. Only a
few minor juristical schools have interpreted the rights of women in a
way that smacks of discrimination. But there is no denying the fact that
their view is in contradiction with the correct interpretation of the
Qur'anic passage. The Holy Prophet is reported by both the Shi'ah and
the Sunnis to have said: "He who has two wives but does not treat them
equally and shows leaning towards one of them, will be raised on the Day
of Resurrection in such a state that one side of his body will be
dragging along the ground. He will eventually go to Hell".

Justice is the greatest moral virtue. To prescribe the condition of
justice and equal treatment means that the husband is required to be in
possession of the highest moral qualities. As the feelings of man in
respect of all his wives usually are not the same, observation of
justice and abstinence from unequal treatment is one of his most onerous
duties.

We all know that the Holy Prophet, during the last ten years of his
life, that is, during the period of his stay in Madina, married several
women. This was a period of Islamic wars and at that time the number of
women, who had nobody to look after them, was quite large. Most of the
wives of the Prophet were widowed and aged. Several of them had children
by their former husbands.

The only maiden he married was Ayesha, who often proudly said that she
was the only woman whom no husband other than the Prophet, had ever
touched.
The Holy Prophet, always gave strict equal treatment to all his wives
and never discriminated between them. Urwah bin Zubayr was a nephew
(sister's son) of Ayesha. He inquired of his aunt as to how the Holy
Prophet treated his wives. Ayesha said that he treated them with justice
and complete equality.

He never gave preference to anyone of them over anyone else. Almost
daily he called on every wife and inquired after her health etc. He
passed the night with one wife, turn by turn. If by chance he wanted to
pass a night with another wife, he formally came to the wife whose turn
it was and took her permission. If the permission was given, he would
go, otherwise he would not. Ayesha said that she personally declined to
give permission as and when he asked for it.

Even during his last illness which led to his death and when he was too
weak to move, the Holy Prophet scrupulously adhered to the principle of
equality in his treatment with his wives. His bed was shifted from one
room to another daily. At last, one day he called all his wives and
asked them to permit him to stay in one room. With their permission he
stayed in the room of Ayesha.

At the time when he had two wives, Imam Ali (P) was so particular that
he performed even ablution before prayer (wuzu) in the house of the wife
whose turn was there.

Islam attaches so much importance to the principle of justice and
equality in treatment that it does not allow the husband and the second
wife to enter into an stipulation at the time of their marriage, by
which the second wife agrees to live on unequal terms with the first
wife. This means that it is an obligatory duty of the husband to treat
each wife on terms of strict equality, and that he cannot renounce this
responsibility by entering into a prior agreement with anyone of his
wives. All that the second wife can do is to forego some of her rights
for practical purposes. But no such condition can be stipulated, nor is
it possible that she should not have equal rights. Similarly, the first
wife also can voluntarily forego some of her rights for practical
purposes, but she cannot formally renounce them.

Once Imam Baqir (P) was asked whether by mutual consent it could be
stipulated that the husband would visit one of his wives only once a
week or once a month, or that the maintenance allowance of one wife
would not be equal to that of another wife. The Imam said that such
stipulations were not valid even with the consent of any wife. By virtue
of marriage, every wife was entitled to full marital rights. All that
she could do was to forego some or all of her rights after marriage,
either to please her husband or for some other reason.

With all these strict moral conditions polygamy becomes a duty instead
of being a means of pursuit of pleasure. Pursuit of pleasure and
licentiousness are possible only in an atmosphere of complete freedom to
pursue one's desires. But where there is a question of discipline,
justice and duty, there can be no room for lewdness.

Those who indulge in licentiousness under the pretext of polygamy
misuse an Islamic law and the society has every right to call them to
account and punish them.

**APPREHENSION OF NOT DOING JUSTICE**

To be fair, it must be admitted that the number of those, who observe
in letter and spirit all the conditions laid down by Islam in respect of
polygamy, is very small. According to the Islamic law, if a man
apprehends that the use of water may be harmful to him he should not
perform ablution for prayers, and if he apprehends that fasting may be
harmful to him he should not keep fast. You come across many people who
inquire of you whether they should or should not perform ablution, or
whether they should or should not keep fast, for they apprehend that
performing ablution or keeping fast might be harmful to them. Such
inquiries are in order. Such people should not perform ablution and
should not keep fast.

But the Holy Qur'an specifically says that if you fear that you will
not treat your wives equally, you must have only one wife. Still you do
not come across a single person who may say that he apprehends that he
might not be able to treat two wives equally, and may inquire whether in
his circumstances he should or should not have a second wife. It is
evident that some people knowing well that they will not be able to do
justice, still have several wives. They do so under the cloak of Islamic
law. These are the people who bring a bad name to Islam by their
unworthy action.

**HAREMS**

Another reason why Islam is criticised for polygamy is the system of
harems adopted by the former caliphs and sultans. Some Christian writers
and missionaries have described polygamy in Islam as equivalent to the
system of harems with all its shameful and cruel aspects.

Unfortunately some of our own writers who, like a parrot repeat the
ideas expressed by the Europeans, unnecessarily associate polygamy with
harems. They are not endowed with enough independence of thinking to be
able to distinguish between the two.

**OTHER CONDITIONS**

Besides the condition of justice and equality of treatment, there are
also other conditions which a husband has to fulfil. We all know that a
wife has a number of financial and other rights which the husband has to
discharge. A husband has the right of having more than one wife,
provided his financial condition allows him to do so. Financial
soundness is a pre-requisite to monogamy also. Anyhow, we skip over
further discussion of this question.

Physical and sexual potentialities are another pre-requisite.

It is reported in Al-Kafi and Al-Wasail that Imam Sadiq (P) has said
that in case somebody collects several women, while he is not fit to
satisfy them all, he will bear full responsibility if any of them takes
to sin.

The historical accounts of the harems narrate many stories of young
women, who, forced by the pressure of their sexual urges, had recourse
to sin and occasionally became the cause of crimes and murders.

By now our readers should have become aware of the causes of polygamy
and why Islam has not abolished this system. They should also have
become aware of the conditions and limits prescribed by Islam in this
respect. Islam has not disparaged women by allowing this system, but has
rendered a great service to them. If polygamy is not allowed even where
women of marriageable age outnumber men, women may become worthless toys
in the hands of men. They may be treated worse than slave-girls, for man
recognises the child of a salve-girl as his own, but he makes no such
commitment in respect of his mistresses and concubines.

**MODERN MAN AND POLYGAMY**

Modern man is averse to polygamy, not because he wants to be content
with one wife, but because he wants to satisfy his sense of variety by
indulging in unlimited adultery, for which ample facilities are
available. Sin and not fidelity has taken the place of polygamy. That is
why modern man is opposed to plurality of wives which commits him to
many duties and responsibilities, financial and otherwise. In the past,
even for a licentious man, opportunities of sin were limited. That is
why he had to take recourse to polygamy and, in spite of evading many
duties, he still had to shoulder certain responsibilities in respect of
his wives and children. The modern man who has ample opportunities of
enjoyment does not see any necessity of making the least commitment.
Hence he is averse to polygamy.

The modern man employs women as secretaries, typists etc. for his
enjoyment, and credits the expenses to the account of the government,
his firm or any other organisation in which he may be working, without
having to pay a single penny from his own pocket.

The modern man changes his mistress after every few days without
undergoing any formalities of dower, maintenance and divorce. M. Tshombe
was vehemently opposed to polygamy, but he always had a young, beautiful
secretary at his side whom he changed every year. With such
possibilities there is evidently no need to countenance polygamy.

We read in the life account of Bertrand Russell, who was a severe
opponent of polygamy, that two women, besides his grandmother, played an
important role in his life. One was his wife, Alice, and the other was
his sweet-heart, Morrel. Morrel who was one of the most prominent women
of that period, was on friendly terms with a number of the writers of
the early 20th century. Evidently such a man could not support
polygamy.

Apparently it was Russell's extra marital love which put an end to his
relations with Alice. He himself writes that one afternoon, while he was
going on a bicycle to a summer resort in the suburbs, he suddenly felt
that he no longer loved Alice.

