Prologue
========

In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful

The requirements of our time make it essential to re-evaluate many
vital questions and not to be content with their former appraisal. The
system of conjugal rights and family responsibilities is one such
question.

For certain reasons, to which we will refer later, it has been presumed
that in this age the basic question in this field is that of woman's
liberty and the equality of her rights with those of man, all other
questions being the by-products of this main question.

However, according to our view, the most fundamental question, or at
least one of the most fundamental questions, in respect of family
rights, is whether the domestic system is independent of all other
social systems and has its own special criteria and logic, or it is just
one out of many social systems and the same criteria and philosophy
apply to it as are applied to all other social systems.

The basis of the doubt is that, on the one hand, in this system the
main parties concerned belong to two opposite sexes, and on the other,
it involves the propagation and procreation of the progeny. Nature has
made the physical characteristics as well as the reproductive organs of
the two parties dissimilar. Domestic society is semi-natural and
semi-contractual. It is a middle way between an instinctive society like
that of bees or termites, whose rights and duties are pre-determined by
nature, with no possibility of breaking any rules, and a contractual
society like a civic society of human beings, which has a natural or
instinctive aspect.

As we know, the ancient philosophers regarded family life as an
independent branch of practical wisdom, and believed in a separate
standard for this part of human life. Plato, in his book, The Republic,
Aristotle in his book, The Politics, and Abu Ali ibn Sina (Avicenna), in
his book, Al-Shifa have also dealt with this subject from this very
angle as well.

It is a controversial question whether the natural and innate rights of
man and woman are similar or dissimilar; in other words, whether the
rights, accorded by nature to human beings, are mono-sexual or
bi-sexual, and whether male or female sexuality in any way, affects, or
does not affect, human rights and obligations.

In the Western world, a movement for human rights emerged in the 17th
century, in the wake of scientific and philosophical movements. The
writers and thinkers of the 17th and the 18th centuries made commendable
efforts in giving currency to their ideas regarding the natural,
undeniable and inalienable human rights. Jean Jacques Rousseau, Voltaire
and Montesquieu, who belong to this category of writers and thinkers,
are great benefactors of human society, and it may be said that their
services are in no way inferior to those of the great inventors and
discoverers.

Their basic idea was that human beings have a series of natural and
inborn rights and freedoms which are absolutely inalienable and
untransferable and cannot be renounced by anyone under any pretext. All
people, including rulers and subjects, white and black, rich and poor,
are equal.

The result of this social and intellectual movement first manifested
itself in England, then in America and afterwards in France. Revolutions
were brought about; systems were changed and charters were signed.
Gradually, the movement spread into other countries.

In the 19th century, new economic, social and political ideas emerged
in the field of human rights. New developments led to the appearance of
socialism, the participation of workers in industrial profits, and the
transfer of government from the society of capitalists to defenders of
labour class.

Till the end of the 19th century, all talks and whatever practical
steps were taken in human rights sphere, were mostly confined to the
rights of the nations as regards the governments and the employees
versus the employers. In the 20th century, the question of women's
rights was raised and for the first time in ~948, the United Nations'
Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaimed the equality of rights
between man and woman in clear terms.

All social movements in the West since the 17th century had revolved
around liberty and equality. As the movement for women's rights was the
latest in the series, and the history of women's lot in Europe, from
this point of view, was extraordinarily bitter, the UN's Declaration of
Human Rights talked of nothing but liberty and equality.

The protagonists of this movement maintained that it was complementary
to the movement for human rights. They held that without ensuring
women's liberty and equality it was meaningless to talk of human liberty
and human rights. They further asserted that the main cause of all
domestic troubles was that woman was deprived of her liberty and
equality with man, and that all domestic problems would be solved once
this aspect was taken care of.

What, in this connection, was overlooked was what we have described as
'the fundamental question regarding the system of family rights', that
is, whether this system is, or is not, independent of other social
systems, and whether it has or has not, different criteria and logic.
Attention was concentrated only on the general principles of liberty and
equality, and the only point taken into consideration was that of
natural and inalienable human rights. It was argued that woman, as a
human being, was entitled to all the rights enjoyed by man.

In certain chapters of this book, we have adequately discussed the
question as to what are the sources from which natural rights are
derived. There, we have shown that the basis of all natural rights, is
nature itself. If man has special rights, which a horse, a sheep, a bird
and a fish does not have, that is due to his nature and the way he has
been created. If all human beings are equal in the matter of natural
rights and all must live a free life, that is because that order is a
part of their very making. The intellectuals, who support the idea of
liberty and equality being an inborn right, have no argument other than
this. Hence, in the matter of family rights also, we should be guided by
nature itself.

Now, let us see why due attention was not paid to the question which we
have described as fundamental. Has it been established in the light of
modern scientific knowledge that the difference between man and woman is
simply organic, and does not affect their basic physical and spiritual
beings or their rights and obligations, and that is why it has been
ignored in the modern social philosophy?

In fact, the case is quite contrary. In the light of scientific
research and biological and psychological discoveries, it has been
proved that significant differences exist between the two sexes. In this
book, we have discussed this question and have quoted the views of the
biologists and the physiologists in this respect. It is surprising that
in spite of all that, this fundamental question was ignored. Perhaps
apathy on this vital question is due to the hasty development of the
women's liberation movement. That is why, while this movement has
redressed certain grievances of women, in certain other respects it has
caused calamity to them as well as to the human society as a whole. We
shall see, later in this book, that the Western woman, till the end of
the 19th century, was denied the most elementary human rights. It was
only in the beginning of the 20th century that the people of the West
thought of making amends for the past. As this movement came in the wake
of other movements

for equality and liberty, they expected every miracle from these two
words. They forgot that equality and liberty related to the relations
between human beings, as human beings only. No doubt, woman, as a human
being, is born free like any other human being and in that capacity she
has equal rights. But woman is a human being with certain peculiarities,
as man is a human being with certain other peculiarities. The traits of
their characters are different and their mentality is distinct. This
difference is not the result of any geographical, historical or social
factors, but lies in the very making of them. Nature has purposely made
them different and any action taken against the intention of nature
would produce a disastrous result. As we have taken inspiration from
nature, with regard to the liberty and equality of human beings, in the
same way we should seek guidance from nature itself to decide whether
the rights of man and woman are of the same kind, or of two different
kinds, and whether domestic society is, or is not, at least a
semi-natural society. It is, at least, a point worth considering whether
the bisexuality of animals, including human beings, is accidental or a
part of their creative design i.e. whether the sex differences are only
superficial and organic or, as Alexis Carell has pointed out, every cell
of the human body is stamped with sex, whether man and woman have, or
have not, separate missions to perform and whether rights are monosexual
or bisexual. The same question may be asked about morals, education,
punishments, responsibilities and missions.

During the women's liberation movement attention was not paid to the
point that, besides equality and liberty, there existed other questions
also. Liberty and equality are no doubt essential, but they are not all
in all everything in entirety. Equality of rights is one thing, but the
similarity of rights quite another. The equality of man's and woman's
rights from the viewpoint of material and moral values is quite
different from the uniformity or similarity of their rights. During this
movement, intentionally or unintentionally, equality has been used in
the sense of similarity and thus quality has overshadowed quantity. It
was stressed that a woman is a human being, but it was forgotten that
she is a woman too.

In fact, this indifference was not the outcome of mere haste; there
were other factors also, which impelled the exploitation of woman in the
name of liberty.

One of them was the excessive greed of the industrialists, who wanted
to lure woman from her house to a factory, in order to exploit her
economic potentiality. For this purpose, they advocated woman's rights,
her economic independence and her liberty and equality of rights with
those of man. It was they who secured official recognition to these
demands. Will Durant, in chapter IX of his book, "The Pleasures of
Philosophy", after mentioning certain humiliating theories about woman
advanced by Aristotle, Neitzsche, Schopenhauer and some Jewish
scriptures and referring to the fact that during the French Revolution,
though there was some talk about woman's liberty, there was practically
no change, says that till the end of the 19th century woman hardly had
any right to respect, to which man could he legally bound. Then he
discusses the cases which led to the change in the situation in the 20th
century. He says that the liberty of woman is a by-product of the
industrial revolution.
He adds that female workers were cheaper and the employers preferred
them to strong-headed and costly male workers. A century ago, it was
hardly possible for men to get a job, but there were advertisements
asking them to send their women-folk and children to the factories. The
first step towards the emancipation of women was taken in 1882, when a
law was enacted according to which the women of Great Britain acquired
an unprecedented privilege of keeping with themselves whatever money
they earned.(Dr. Ali Shayagan, in his commentary on the Iranian Civil
Code, writes that the independence, in respect of property, which a
woman enjoys now and which has been recognised by the Shi'ah law from
the very beginning, did not exist in ancient Greece, Rome, Germany and
till recently in most of the other countries. She, like a minor and a
lunatic, was interdicted from the disposition of her property. In
England, where previously her personality was completely merged with
that of her husband, two laws were enacted, one in 1870 and the other in
1882, which removed inhibitions regarding the ownership of property by a
married woman.) This law, described to be in keeping with high moral
values of Christianity, was passed by the mill-owners and the House of
Commons, to lure the women of England to the factories. Since that year,
an irresistible desire to earn money has forced them to labour in stores
and factories, and has relieved them of labour in household chores. (The
Pleasures of Philosophy, pages 155 - 159).

With the development of machines and the ever-increasing growth of
production it became necessary for the capitalists that, in order to
impose their surplus products on the consumers, they should employ all
audio-visual, intellectual, emotional, artistic and sexual means. To
convert the consumers into consumption factors and to make them as
powerless tools in consumption market they utilised the services of
women, but not as simple workers participating in the process of
production along with men. They, on the other hand, exploited their
beauty, charm and sexual attraction and persuaded them to stake their
honour and self-respect to be able to pervert the consumers and force
their own will on them. Obviously all these things have been done in the
name of freedom for women and their equality with men.

Politics also did not lag behind in utilising this factor. You
regularly read such reports in the newspapers and magazines. Woman is
exploited and her services are used to fulfil the objects of men under
the cloak of liberty and equality.

Obviously the youth of the 20th century could not miss this valuable
opportunity. In order to allure her, without shouldering conventional
responsibilities, and to prey upon her freely, he, more than anyone
else, shed crocodile tears for women's helplessness and the undue
discrimination against her. To be able to make a greater contribution to
this 'sacred cause', he went to the extent of delaying his own marriage
till the age of 40 or even remaining single for ever.
No doubt, the present century has rectified many grievances of woman,
but it has also brought many misfortunes to her. Why? Is she doomed for
ever and has she no way out of this vicious circle? Is it not possible
for her to get rid of all her old and new misfortunes at one and the
same time? Are women condemned to one of these two sufferings and must
be compelled to choose one of these two ways?

In fact, it is not at all necessary that she should continue to suffer.
She suffered in the past, mostly because it was forgotten that she was a
human being. She is suffering now because her womanhood, her inborn
requirements, her natural rights and demands and her special
capabilities have been ignored, intentionally or otherwise.

What is more surprising is that whenever there is a talk of natural and
inborn differences between man and woman, some groups have tendency to
regard such differences as a mark of imperfection of woman and the
perfection of man. Many such presumptions lead them to believe that men
have certain privileges, whereas women are deprived of them. They do not
seem to know that there is no question of perfection and imperfection.
It was not the intention of the Creator to make one of them perfect and
privileged and the other defective and deprived.

These kind of people, basing their arguments on their such amazing
logical and wise presumptions, assert that, as nature has been unkind to
woman, we should not add insult to injury and, as such, it is more human
to ignore her womanhood! But, in fact, it is the disregard of woman's
natural position which mostly leads to her being deprived of her rights.
If men form a front against women they say: "As both of us are equal,
our work, responsibilities, rewards and retributions must be similar.
You must share with us in our hard and heavy jobs, take wages according
to the amount of the work you perform and must not expect any
consideration, respect or protection. Bear your own expenses and share
the maintenance of the children with us and make your own arrangements
for defending yourselves against all perils. You should spend on us as
much as we spend on you".

If such a situation arises, women may be the losers, because by nature
they have a less productive capacity, while their consumption of wealth
is more than men's. Their menstrual cycles, hardships of pregnancies,
pains of childbirth and the nursing of children place them in a position
in which they require men's protection. They are in need of more rights
and cannot afford to have less commitments. This position is not
peculiar to human beings. It applies to all animals living in pairs. In
the case of all such animals the male instinctively protects its female
partner.

Due attention to the natural position of man and woman and to their
equality and common rights as human beings place woman in such a
comfortable position that neither is her person injured nor her
personality affected.

To have some idea of the results of ignoring the natural position of
man and woman, let us see what those, who have gone the whole hog on
this path, say and write.

Some time ago an interesting article appeared in the American magazine
'Coronet'. It is worth reading. It tells the story of a woman who, in
the name of equality between man and woman, lost the concessions which
she enjoyed previously. Previously, women were not required to lift
weights of more than 25 lbs., whereas no such limit existed in the case
of men. She says that now the working conditions in the General Motors
Factory, in the State of Ohio, where nearly 2500 woman workers toil,
have undergone a change. Now she finds herself maintaining a very
powerful steam engine or cleaning a 250 lb. metal oven, placed there a
few moments earlier by a strongly built male worker. She feels
completely exhausted and knocked out. She further says that every minute
she has to hook a 25 to 50 inch handle, weighing 35 lbs. Her hands are
always swollen and aching.

This article later narrates the anxiety and anguish of another woman
whose husband is a seaman in the Navy. Recently, the Admiral decided to
detail a number of women to work along with men aboard the ships. She
writes that one ship, with a crew of 40 women and 480 men, was sent on
duty. When the ship returned after her first voyage the worst fears of
the wives of the seamen were confirmed. Soon it was known that not only
were there many romances aboard the ship, but most of the women had had
sexual relations with more than one individual.

The article says that in the State of Florida the widows are very
worried since the liberation of women, because a judge of this State has
declared the law, visualising a subsidy of up to 500 dollars to widows
to be unconstitutional on the ground that it was discriminative against
men.

The article adds that the widows of Florida are the first to suffer.
Others too will, in their turn, have a taste of liberation. For many the
question is whether the women have lost more than they have gained. But
it is no use crying over the spilt milk. The show has begun and the
spectators have occupied their chairs. This year the 27th amendment to
the constitution is scheduled to be passed and according to it, all
privileges arising out of sex will be declared illegal. Thus, the fears
expressed by Professor Ruscobound, of the Law College, Harvard, that
Women's liberation is the origin of the regrettable consequences of the
legal position of woman in America, will come true.

G. Irvin, a senator of North Carolina, after studying the American
society, where men and women have equal rights, proposes that all family
laws should be amended and men should no more be held responsible for
maintaining the family.

According to this magazine, one Mrs. Macdaniel says that,on account of
lifting heavy weights some female workers of her factory suffered from
internal haemorrhage. These women want to return to their previous
position. They want to be treated as women and not as mere workers. For
the supporters of equality it may be a simple matter. They sit in their
luxurious apartments and talk of equality, but they have never been to
the factories, where most of the wage-earning women of this country have
to work. Mrs. Macdaniel says that she does not want this equality,
because she cannot do manly jobs. Men are physically stronger than
women. She would prefer to give up the job rather than compete with men.
The privileges which the working women of Ohio have lost, are far
greater than the benefits they have gained under the protection of the
workers' law. The women have lost their personality. It is not known
what they have gained after emancipation. The position of a few women
might have improved, but not of all.

This was the gist of that article. It is clear from its contents that
these women are so fed up with the discomforts which have been imposed
upon them in the name of liberty and equality that they have become
allergic to these two words. They forget that the words are not to be
blamed. Man and woman are two stars with their distinct orbits within
which they should move. "It is not given to the sun to overtake the
moon, nor can the night outpace the day.. Each in its orbit floats"
(Surah Yasin, 36:40). Their happiness, as well as the happiness of the
whole human society, depends on the condition that they move in their
respective orbits. Liberty and equality can be useful only if both the
sexes follow their normal and natural courses.
When we say that the question of women's rights at home and in the
society should be re-evaluated and should not remain limited to previous
evaluations, we mean that we should be guided by nature and should take
into consideration all the bitter and sweet experiences of the past,
especially of the present century. Only then will the movement for
women's rights be reasonable in the real sense.

It is admitted by every friend and foe that the Holy Qur'an revived the
rights of women. Even the adversaries admit, at least, that the Holy
Qur'an at the time of its revelation took a long step towards improving
the condition of women and restoring their human rights. The Qur'an
revived the rights of woman as a human being and man's partner in
humanity and human rights, but did not overlook her womanhood or man's
manhood. In other words, the Qur'an did not overlook woman's nature.
That is why complete harmony exists between the dictates of nature and
the dictates of the Qur'an. The woman in the Qur'an is the same as the
woman in nature. These two great divine books, one created and the other
compiled, fully conform to each other. The main aim of our book is to
highlight and explain this harmony.

