Islam and Modern Life
=====================

**ISLAM AND MODERN LIFE - I**

The question of religion and modernity is one of those subjects which
do not concern the Muslims alone. Other religions also had to face this
question. Many liberal minded people in the world have renounced
religion, because they are under the impression that religion and modern
life are incompatible. They think that inertia, stagnation and rigidity
are the inherent properties of religiousness. In other words, they think
that inertia, monotony and the maintenance of status quo are the
characteristics of religion.

The late Mr. Nehru, a former Prime Minister of India, had secular ideas
and did not have faith in any religion. It appears from his statements
that what made him averse to religion was its rigidity and monotony.
Towards the end of his life Nehru felt a vacuum within himself and in
the world and believed that it could be filled only by a spiritual
force. But still, he was not inclined to accept any religion, because he
believed that a state of rigidity and monotony pervaded all religions.

An Indian journalist, named Karanjia, interviewed Nehru towards the end
of the latter's life and apparently this was the last interview during
which Nehru expressed his views on general world problems. While talking
about Gandhi, Karanjia said:

"Some liberal and progressive elements believe that Gandhiji, through
his emotional solutions and moral and spiritual ways, weakened and
dampened your original belief in scientific socialism".

In the course of his reply, Nehru said: "It is necessary and good to
take advantage of moral and spiritual ways. I have always agreed with
Gandhiji in this respect. I believe that it is more necessary to take
advantage of these means, for now, more than ever, we need moral and
spiritual answers to the questions resulting from the moral vacuum
caused by the modern culture, which is becoming popular."

Then Karanjia put questions about Marxism. Nehru admitted its
imperfection and, in his replies, pointed out some of its failures. He
again suggested a spiritual solution to the world's problems. At this
juncture, Karanjia said: "Mr. Nehru, does not your present concept of
moral and spiritual solutions make you different from yesterday's
Jawaharlal (Nehru himself during his youth)? What you have said gives an
idea that Mr. Nehru, towards the end of his life, has come out in search
of God".

Nehru said: "Yes, I have changed. My emphasis on moral and spiritual
values and the solutions is not unintentional". He added: "Now the
question is how to raise the morality and spiritualism to a higher
level. No doubt, for this purpose, religion is there, but unfortunately
it has taken the shape of a short-sighted and rigid ritualism and has
been reduced to dry formalities. Only its apparent form and external
shell have remained and its real spirit and concept have disappeared".

**ISLAM AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TIME**

Of all the religions Islam alone is more concerned with all the aspects
of human life. Its teachings are not confined to acts of worship and
prayer and to a set of moral counsels. As Islam has dealt with men's
relations with God, it has also given the broad lines of men's relations
with each other. It has, in various forms, dealt with individual rights
and obligations, too. That is why the question whether its teachings are
applicable or not to the ever-changing circumstances is more valid in
the case of Islam than in that of any other religion.

Incidentally, many non-Muslim intellectuals and writers have studied
the social and civil laws of Islam and have commended them as a body of
progressive laws. They have paid rich tributes to Islam, as a living and
everlasting religion, and have recognised the applicability of its laws
to all times and circumstances.

The well-known liberal minded English writer, Bernard Shaw has said: "I
have always held the religion of Muhammad (P) in high estimation,
because of its wonderful vitality. It is the only religion which appears
to me to possess that assimilating capability to the changing phase of
existence, which can make itself appeal to every age. I have prophesied
about the faith of Muhammad that it would be acceptable to the Europe of
tomorrow, and the signs of this are becoming apparent even now. The
medieval ecclesiastics, either through ignorance or bigotry, painted
Muhammadanism in the darkest colours. They were, in fact, trained both
to hate the man, Muhammad, and his religion. To them Muhammad was
anti-Christ. I have studied him, the wonderful man, and, in my opinion,
far from being anti-Christ, he must be called the Saviour of Humanity. I
believe that if a man like him were to assume the leadership of the
modern world, he would succeed in solving its problems in a way that
would bring it the much needed peace and happiness".

Dr. Shibli Shama'il is an Arab materialist of Lebanon. He, for the
first time, translated Darwin's 'Origin of Species' into Arabic, along
with the German scientist Boucher's commentary on it, giving it the name
of 'A weapon against religious beliefs".

Though he is a materialist, he does not feel shy of admiring Islam and
its great founder. He appreciates Islam as a living religion, applicable
to all times.

This man, in the second volume of his book "Philosophy of Evolution",
which he has published in Arabic, has written an article under the
caption "The Qur'an and Civilisation". He has written this article to
refute a non-Muslim who had travelled in the Muslim countries and had
expressed the opinion that Islam was responsible for the decline of the
Muslims. Shibli Shama'il has tried to prove that actually the cause of
the decline of the Muslims is their deviation from the social teachings
of Islam. Those Europeans who attack Islam, either do not know it or
criticise it with the bad intention of making the people of the East
sceptical about their laws and their system with a view to keeping them
under the western tutelage.
During our time the question, whether Islam is compatible with the
present age, has become a burning question. We meet a cross-section of
people, especially those belonging to the educated class and we find
that this question is asked more often than other questions.

**OBJECTIONS**

Sometimes these people give a philosophical turn to their query and say
that everything in this world is subject to change. Nothing is static
and stationary, human society being no exception. Then, how can a body
of laws remain unchanged through the ages?

If we look at this question from a purely philosophical point of view,
the answer is simple. It is the material things of the world which are
ever changing; which grow and decline, and which are subject to
evolution and decay. As for the universal laws, they do not change. For
example, all living things have evolved and continue to evolve according
to certain laws which have been set forth by the scientists. The living
things themselves are, no doubt, ever changing, but the laws of their
evolution and development are not subject to any change. And we are at
present talking about the laws. In this respect it makes no difference
whether the laws are natural or have been framed and compiled, for it is
possible that the laws which have been framed might have nature as their
source and be in conformity with the evolutionary process of the
individuals as well as the human society as a whole.

Anyhow, the queries in respect of the compatibility and incompatibility
of Islam with the requirements of the time do not have a general and
philosophical aspect alone.

The question, which is more often asked, is that when the laws are
framed to meet human requirements which are not constant, how can social
laws be constant and unalterable?

It is a good question. Incidentally, it is a miraculous characteristic
of Islam that it provides constant laws to meet all constant
requirements of the individuals and the society, and flexible laws for
the temporary and changing requirements. This is its characteristic of
which all judicious and knowledgeable Muslims are proud of. We propose
to explain it further to an extent appropriate to the present
occasion.

**IS THE SOCIAL CHANGE COMPATIBLE WITH TIME?**

Before going into this question we should like to bring forward two
points:

The first point is that most of the people who talk of progress,
development and change in a situation suppose that any social change,
especially if its source is in the West, is the consequence of progress
and development. This is one of the most erroneous ideas entertained by
the present generation.

These people are under the impression that as the means of life change
from day to day, and the imperfect ones are replaced by the perfect ones
and as science and industry are constantly advancing, all changes in
human life are a sort of progress and advancement and should be welcomed
as such. Not only that, they think that such changes are inevitable and
have to come with the passage of time.

In fact, all changes are not the direct result of the advancement of
science and industry, nor are they inevitable. While science is
progressing, the selfish and animal nature of man is also not idle.
Knowledge and wisdom carry man towards perfection and the selfish and
animal human nature pushes him towards corruption and perversion. The
animal nature of man always tries to utilise knowledge as a means of
attaining its base desires. With the passage of time, as progress and
development takes place, corruption and perversion also grow. We have to
march forward with the advancement of time, but at the same time we must
fight corruption also. The reformer and the reactionary both fight
against time, with the difference that the reformer fights against the
perversion of time, and the reactionary fights against its progress. If
we regard time and its changes as the criterion of all good and evil,
then what is the criterion to judge time itself? If everything should
conform to time, then what should time conform to? If man should follow
time and its changes with folded hands, then what will happen to the
constructive and creative role of the human will? Man is riding the
vehicle of time, which is in motion. He must not be negligent of guiding
and controlling his vehicle. Otherwise, he will be like a person mounted
on horseback, who leaves himself to the will of the horse.

**ADJUSTMENT OR ABROGATION?**

The second point worth mentioning here is that some people have solved
the difficult problem of 'Islam and the requirements of time' in a very
simple and easy way. They say that Islam is an everlasting religion, and
it can be adjusted to every age and every time. But when asked how this
adjustment takes place and what its formula is, they at once say that
when the circumstances change, the existing laws are repealed and
replaced by other laws. They argue that the temporal laws of religion
must be flexible and in harmony with the progress of knowledge and
science and the expansion of culture and civilisation. According to
them, such flexibility and adjustability to the requirements of time
conform to the spirit of Islam and are not against its teachings.

They hold that, as the requirements of time are always changing, every
age demands a new set of laws. They further hold that the civil and
social laws of Islam are in conformity with the simple life of the
pre-Islamic Arabs, and are mostly based on their customs and usages. As
they are not compatible with the present age, they should be replaced by
modern laws.
Such people should be asked: If adjustability means capability of being
repealed, which law does not have this type of flexibility? Is there any
law which is not compatible with time in this sense?

This interpretation of flexibility and applicability to all times is
exactly like saying that books and libraries are the best means of
enjoying life, because whenever one wants enjoyment, one can sell them
and spend the money so obtained, on the gratification of one's
desires.
An Iranian writer says that the teachings of Islam are divided into
three parts. The first part consists of basic doctrines, such as Divine
Unity, Prophethood, Resurrection etc. The second part is related to the
acts of worship such as prayer, fasting, ablution, ritual cleaning,
pilgrimage etc. The third part consists of the laws concerning the life
of the people.
According to him only the first two parts are an integral part of
religion, and something to be preserved for ever. As far as the third
part is concerned, it is not an integral part of religion, for religion
is not concerned with the daily way of life of the people. The Holy
Prophet himself did not prescribe these laws as a part of religion, for
they were not related to his mission as Messenger. It was only a chance
that, as the Head of the State, he had to give some laws also.
Otherwise, religion has nothing to do with the worldly life of the
people.

It is hard to believe that a person living in a Muslim country should
be so ignorant of the precepts of Islam.

Has not the Qur'an described the aim of the Prophets and the Apostles?
Does not the Qur'an expressly say: "We have sent Our Messengers with
clear proof and We have sent down with them the Book and the Balance, so
that people may rise with justice" (Surah al-Hadid, 57 : 25). The Qur'an
describes social justice as the main aim of all the Prophets.
If you like, you may not act on the teachings of the Qur'an, but why do
you commit a bigger sin by bringing a calumny against Islam and the
Qur'an? Most of our misfortunes are due to the fact that our morals and
laws have lost their only source of strength, viz. religion.

It is only during the past half a century that we have come to hear the
cry that Islam is good, provided it remains confined to the places of
worship, and has nothing to do with the society. This cry has burst
forth from across the frontiers of the Muslim countries, and has been
propagated throughout the Muslim world.

To make the purpose of this cry clearer, it may be said that the idea
behind it is that Islam should stay as a force to withstand the spread
of communism, but when it clashes with the interests of the West, it
must go. From the viewpoint of the West, the devotional rites of Islam
must continue so that the Muslims, whenever need be, could be stirred up
against the atheistic and godless system of communism, but the social
rules of Islam which provide a philosophy of life to the Muslims must
go, for these rules give the Muslims a sense of independence and
separate identity, and prevent their being swallowed up by the greedy
West.

Unfortunately, the exponents of the thesis that Islam is not concerned
with the daily practical life, have ignored certain basic facts.

Firstly, Islam, 1,400 years ago, depreciated the principle of, "We
believe in certain things (some of the teachings of Islam) and reject
the others", and proclaimed that the rules of Islam are irreversible.

Secondly, we believe that the time has come, when the Muslims should
not be misled by such deceptive slogans. The critical sense of the
people has now, more or less, been awakened, and gradually they are
beginning to differentiate between the manifestations of progress and
advancement, which are the outcome of the blooming of the scientific and
intellectual forces, and the manifestations of corruption and
perversion, though their source be in the West.

The people of the Muslim world have now, more than ever, become
conscious of the value of the teachings of Islam, and have realised that
they can lead an independent life only by following them. They are not
going to give them up, at any cost.

The vigilant Muslims know that the propaganda against Islamic laws is
nothing but an imperialistic fraud.

Thirdly, the exponents of this thesis should know that Islam, when
powerful, withstands any other system, whether it is atheistic or not.
Islam wants to dominate the society as a philosophy of life, and does
not want to be confined to the 'masjids' and other places of worship.
The Islam which will be restricted to the places of worship, will vacate
the field, not only for the Western ideas, but it will vacate it for the
anti-Western ideas and doctrines as well.

The penalty which the West is paying, in certain Muslim countries, is
the result of its not realising this fact.

**ISLAM AND MODERN LIFE - II**

Man is not the only living being which leads a social life. Many
animals, especially insects, are gregarious. They follow sensible but
fixed rules of co-operation, division of labour, production and
distribution, and giving and receiving orders.

The bees, and certain kinds of ants and termites enjoy such superb
systems, that it will take man, who considers himself to be the prince
of creation, years, even centuries, to reach that level.
Their civilisation, contrary to the human civilisation, has not passed
through such periods as the forest age, the stone age and the atomic
age. They, from the very beginning, have had the same civilisation and
the same system as they have today. It is man who started his life from
a scratch: Vide Surah al-Nisa, 4 : 28 "Man was created powerless" and is
marching forward towards infinity.

For the animals, the requirements of life are always the same. For
them, modernity and new fashions have no meaning. The ancient world and
the modern world do not exist for them. So far as they are concerned
science does not make new discoveries everyday. The latest products of
light and heavy industries do not come to their market; why? Because
they live by instinct, and not by reason.

But the social life of human beings is always subject to change. Every
century, the world is changed. There lies the secret of man's being the
prince of creation. Human being is the mature and worthy child of
nature. He has reached a stage, where he does not require the direct
guidance of that mysterious force which is called instinct.

Nature recognises that man is mature, and that is why it has left him
free. What an animal accomplishes by its instinct and by following
inviolable natural laws, human beings should accomplish by one's
intellect and knowledge, and by following the viable enacted laws.

Man, being the master of his own destiny, can always deviate from the
path of progress, and there lies the secret of his slips, setbacks,
lapses and failures.

Just as the way to progress and advancement is open to him, the way to
corruption, perversion and failure is also not closed.

Human beings have reached such a stage that, in the words of the
Qur'an, they can shoulder that trust which the heavens, the earth and
the mountains could not carry. In other words, they can lead a free life
and can accept legal, professional and other responsibilities. That is
the reason why they are not immune to mistakes, selfishness, ignorance
and injustice.

Where the Qur'an refers to this wonderful human capacity, it also
immediately describes man as 'unjust' and 'ignorant'. These two human
capacities - the capacity of evolution and the capacity of deviation,
are inseparable. Man is not like an animal which, in its social life,
goes neither forward nor backward. It turns neither to the right nor to
the left. On the other hand, man, in his life, sometimes goes forward
and sometimes backward. In human life if there is motion and speed,
there is halt and pause also. If there is progress and evolution, there
is corruption and perversion, too. If there is justice and virtue, there
is injustice and aggression also. If there are manifestations of
knowledge and wisdom, there are manifestations of ignorance and base
desires, too.

It is possible that the changes which take place and the new phenomena
which appear, may be of the latter category.

**THE RIGID AND THE MISINFORMED**

It is one of the characteristics of man that he sometimes overacts and
sometimes underacts. If he adopts the middle course, he endeavours to
differentiate between the changes of the right type and that of the
wrong type. He endeavours to push time forward with the help of his
knowledge and creative power, and to identify himself with the
manifestations of progress and advancement. He also tries to arrest
perversion, and not to associate himself with it.
But unfortunately, man does not always adopt this course. He is liable
to be afflicted by two dangerous diseases, the disease of rigidity and
the disease of ignorance. The first disease results in stagnation and
abstention from progress, and the second in perversion and ruin.

The rigid is averse to everything new and cannot reconcile himself with
anything, except the old. On the other hand, the misinformed regards
everything new to be modern and progressive and considers it to be the
requirement of time. To the rigid, every new development means
corruption and perversion, whereas to the misinformed, all new
developments indiscriminately mean the expansion of culture and
knowledge.

The rigid does not distinguish between husk and kernel and between the
means and the end. In his opinion the duty of religion is to preserve
all that is obsolete and antiquated. He thinks that the Qur'an has come
down to arrest the motion of time and to nail down the world conditions
as they were.

According to this view, old and outdated customs, such as to begin
reading, from the last part of the Qur'an, writing with a reed-pen,
using a cardboard inkstand, washing in the tank of the Turkish bath,
eating with the hands, burning an oil lamp, and remaining illiterate,
are religious rites which must be preserved. In contrast, the
misinformed keeps his eyes fixed on the Western world to be able to
imitate every new fashion and every new custom. He calls this modernity
and the compulsion of time.

Both the rigid and the misinformed suppose that all old customs and
usages are a part of religious rites, with the difference that the rigid
wants to preserve them, whereas the misinformed may conclude that
religion is tantamount to stagnation and inertia.

During the past few centuries, the question of contradiction between
religion and science has been much debated among the people of the West.
The idea of contradiction arose from two developments. Firstly, the
Church had accepted some ancient, philosophical and scientific notions
as religious beliefs, but the progress of science has proved their
falsity. Secondly, science has changed the form and the conditions of
life.

The rigid, who are apparently religious, want to make the external form
of the material life a part of religion, just as they have unnecessarily
given religious colour to some philosophical questions.

The uninformed and the misinformed people are also under the impression
that religion has prescribed a particular form of material life, and as
science has decreed a change in this form, religion should be
abolished.

The rigidity of one group, and the ignorance of the other, have brought
into existence the fictitious idea of contradiction between science and
religion.

**A PARABLE OF THE QUR'AN**

Islam is a progressive religion and wants its followers to be
progressive. The Qur'an has employed a parable to persuade the Muslims
to keep marching forward, under the light of Islam. It says that the
followers of Prophet Muhammad (P) are like a seed which is sown in the
soil. First, it shoots out in the form of a tender seed leaf, then it
grows stronger and stronger till it stands on its own stalk. It grows so
rapidly that it causes great surprise to the farmers.

It is an analogy of the society which the Qur'an aims at. What the
Qur'an desires is growth. The Qur'an wants to lay the foundation of a
society, which should always be growing, developing and expanding.

Will Durant says that no religion has called upon its followers to gain
strength as Islam has done. The history of early Islam shows how
powerful a force Islam is to rebuild a society and to push it forward.

Islam is opposed to both rigidity and ignorance, and regards both of
them as dangerous. The intellectual sterility of the rigid and their
clinging to the old customs having no connection with Islam, have
provided a pretext to the misinformed to consider Islam to be really
opposed to modernity. On the other hand, the following and patronising
of the latest fashions and modes of the West by the misinformed, their
belief that the prosperity of the people of the East depends on their
complete westernization, both physically and spiritually, their
acceptance of the habits, manners and traditions of the West, and the
blind adaptation of their own civil and social laws to those of the
Western nations, have provided a pretext to the rigid to look at
everything new with suspicion and to regard it as a threat to their
religion, to their independence and to the social personality of their
community.

In the meantime, Islam has to pay the penalty for the mistake of both
the parties.

The rigidity of the rigid has left the field open to the misinformed to
play havoc, and the ignorance of the misinformed has made the rigid more
stubborn in their beliefs.

It is surprising that these so called cultured, but really ignorant
people, think that time is infallible. The fact is that all changes are
brought about by man, and man is not infallible at all. Then how can it
be presumed that the changes of time must necessarily be free from
error.

Just as man has scientific, moral, aesthetic and religious
inclinations, and constantly takes new measures for the benefit of
humanity, he has certain negative tendencies also. He is selfish, power-
hungry and pleasure-seeking. He loves money and exploitation. Just as he
is capable of making new discoveries and finding better ways and means
of doing things, he is liable to commit mistakes also. But the misguided
and misinformed do not understand these things. They simply go on
harping on the same tune and repeating that the modern world is like
this, and like that.

What is more surprising is that they compare the principles of life to
such things as a shoe, a cap and a dress. As these things are sought
after when they are new, and thrown away when they get old and worn out,
the same, according to them, should be the case with universal truths.
To them, good and bad has no sense other than that of new and old.
Feudalism is bad only because it has become old and has gone out of
fashion. Otherwise, it was quite good when it was first introduced into
the world.

Similarly, exploitation of women is bad only because it is disliked by
the modern world; otherwise, till recently, these same people had not
given her a share of inheritance. They had not recognised her right of
ownership, and had not respected her will or views.

According to such people in the present age, being the space age, just
as it is no longer possible to ride a donkey and leave aside the
aircraft, light an oil lamp and not to use electricity, use a
hand-spinning mills, and to write with hand and leave aside gigantic
printing machines, it is not possible not to attend dance parties,
swimming-costume parties and barbecue dinners, not to take part in
merry-making, not to play poker and not to wear mini-skirts, for all
these things are the phenomena of the present century. If they do not
indulge in such things, they fear that they will go back to the days of
donkey-riding.

They assert that this is the atomic age, the age of science, the age of
the artificial moons and the age of ballistic missiles. That is very
good! We also thank God that we are living in this age, and wish that we
may be able to enjoy the benefits of science and industry to the utmost.
But have all the springs, except that of science gone dry in this age?
Are all the phenomena of this century an outcome of the modern
scientific progress? Does science claim that it has brought nature under
its complete control?

Science makes no such claim. The tragedy of our century is that a group
of scientists, with good intentions, applies itself to making new
discoveries, but another group of selfish and power- hungry opportunists
and money-worshippers misuses the fruit of the scientists' labour to
achieve its own questionable ends. Science complains constantly that it
is misused by stubborn human nature and this is the misfortune of our
age.

Science moves forward in the field of physics and discovers the laws of
light and reflection, and an opportunist group uses them for the
preparation of blue films of a hostile and destructive nature. Chemistry
makes progress and discovers the properties of various substances and
their combinations. Then certain individuals exploit this discovery for
the preparation of heroin, which is a curse to humanity. Science found
its way into the inside of the atom and brought a wonderful source of
energy under its control, but before it could be used for the benefit of
mankind, the power-hungry people hastened to make the atom bomb, and to
drop it on innocent people.

When a reception was arranged in honour of Einstein, the great
scientist of the 20th Century, he himself mounted the rostrum and said:
"Do you honour the man who has been instrumental in the making of the
atom bomb?"

Einstein himself did not exercise his knowledge for its making. It was
others, who harnessed his discoveries for this purpose.

The use of heroin, the atom bomb and the blue films cannot be justified
on the ground that they are among the phenomena of the present
century.

If the latest type of bombers are used for throwing the most perfect
bombs on the people of another country, and the most highly educated
people are employed to perform this job, can all this modernity reduce
the inherent barbarity of the act?

**ISLAM AND MODERN LIFE -III**

The main argument of those, who say that in the matter of family rights
we should follow the Western system, is that times have changed, and the
requirements of the 20th century demand that we should do so. We propose
to make our views on this point clear, because without doing so, the
discussion of any other point will remain incomplete, though, owing to
the limitation of space, it is not possible to discuss the question from
all its philosophical, legal, social and moral angles. For the present
purpose, it is enough to make two points clear:

The first point is that the harmony in and conformity to the changes of
time is not such a simple question as some misinformed people think. The
changes, brought about by time, are sometimes progressive and sometimes
retrogressive. We should march forward along with the progressive
changes, and should fight the retrogressive tendencies. To distinguish
between these two kinds of changes and to determine their nature, we
should find out the source of the new developments, and which way they
are directed to. We should see what human tendencies have brought them
into existence, and which classes of society are behind them. We should
see whether they have been motivated by high human tendencies or by low
animal propensities, and whether they have come into existence as a
result of selfless investigations of scholars and intellectuals, or have
been motivated by the base desires of self-seekers and the corrupt
elements of society.

**THE FLEXIBILITY OF ISLAMIC LAWS**

The second point, to be made clear, is that the Muslim thinkers believe
that Islam has certain potentialities which have made it applicable to
all times. According to these thinkers, Islamic teachings are in harmony
with the progress of time, the expansion of culture and the resulting
changes. Let us see what is the nature of the potentialities which Islam
has. In other words, let us see what devices have been put into the
structure of this religion, and whether they have given it the
characteristic of being in harmony with all the changing situations,
without there being any need of dropping any of its teachings and
without any conflict taking place between its teachings and any
situation arising out of the expansion of knowledge and civilisation.

Although this question has a technical aspect, in order to remove the
misunderstanding of those who doubt that Islam has any such
characteristic, we briefly deal with it here.

For further discussion of the subject, the readers may refer to
Tanbihul Ummab by the late Ayatullah Naini, or to the Marjaiyyat Wa
Imamat by the great contemporary scholar, Allamah Tabatabai. Both the
books are, however in Persian.

There are many points, which form the secret of Islam being in harmony
with the expansion of knowledge and civilisation, and the applicability
of its firm and stable laws to the varying circumstances of life. We
mention here only a few of them.

**EMPHASIS ON SPIRIT AND INDIFFERENCE TO FORM**

Islam has not dealt only with the external form of life, which depends
upon the degree of the development of human knowledge. Islamic teachings
are concerned also with the spirit and the goals of life, and determine
the best way to reach these goals. Science has neither changed the
spirit and the goals of life, nor has it suggested any better, shorter
and safer route to reach them. It has only provided better means and
facilities to traverse the way to those goals.

Islam, by keeping only goals within its domain and leaving the form and
means to the domain of science and technology, has avoided any clash
with culture and civilisation. Not only that, but by encouraging the
factors helping the expansion of civilisation, namely, knowledge,
labour, piety, will, courage and perseverance, it has undertaken the
role of the main factor working for the cause of the expansion of
civilisation.

Islam has set up traffic signposts all along the route of human
progress. They, on the one hand, indicate the route and the destination,
and, on the other, warn against pitfalls and dangerous spots. All
Islamic laws are posts, either of the first kind or of the second.

The means of life in every age depend on the degree of the sum total of
human knowledge. As human knowledge expands, more perfect means of life
come into existence, and automatically take the place of the imperfect
ones.

The external and material forms of these means have no sanctity in
Islam, and the Muslims are not bound to preserve them forever.

Islam has not said that such and such tools are to be used for the
purpose of tailoring, weaving, cultivation, transport, war or any other
jobs. Hence, there can be no question of any conflict between science
and Islam, in case any tools or implements become obsolete. Islam has
not prescribed any particular design of shoes or dress, nor has it
suggested any particular style of construction for buildings. Similarly,
it does not insist on any particular methods of production and
distribution.

This is one of those aspects of Islam, which have facilitated its
applicability to all the developments of time.

**STABLE LAWS FOR STABLE REQUIREMENTS AND VARYING LAWS FOR VARYING
REQUIREMENTS**

Another characteristic of Islam, which is of great importance, is that
it has envisaged stable laws for the stable human requirements and
varying laws for the varying requirements. A part of the human
requirements, both individual and collective, is of a permanent nature.
They do not undergo any change with the change of time. The principles
of the systems regulating human instincts and social relations always
remain uniform.

We are aware of the theories of the "Relativity of Morals" and the
"Relativity of Justice" which have their supporters, and would express
our views with regard to them, later.

Another part of the human requirement is of a varying nature and this
demands varying laws. Islam has visualised such requirements, and has
linked them with certain principles which have subordinate laws for
every changed situation.

To elucidate this point, I give a few examples:

Islam has laid down a social principle which has been stated in the
Qur'an thus: Provide force against them (the enemies) to the utmost
possible extent (Surah Anfal, 8 : 60). At the same time, a number of
traditions of the Holy Prophet handed down to us, are mentioned in the
books of Islamic law under the heading 'Horsemanship and Archery'. The
Prophet directed that the Muslims should learn the arts of horsemanship
and archery and teach them to their children. These arts were a part of
military science in the ancient days. It is quite obvious that the basic
order is 'to provide force'. Bow and arrow, sword and lance and mule and
horse are not important. What is important is to be militarily powerful
against the enemy. To acquire skill in horsemanship and archery is only
a form of acquiring military strength, or a way of implementing the
basic order. To provide strength is a standing law which has sprung from
a permanent need.

However the necessity of acquiring skill in horsemanship and archery is
a temporary requirement, which varies with the change of time. With the
changed circumstances, skill in firearms etc. has taken the place of
skill in archery.

Another example is the social principle concerning the exchange of
wealth, mentioned in the Qur'an. Islam has recognised the principle of
individual ownership. However, the ownership as recognised by it is
different from that found in the capitalist world. A characteristic of
the individual ownership in Islam is the principle of exchange.

In this connection, Islam has laid down certain rules. One of them has
been enunciated by the Holy Qur'an in these words. And do not consume
each other's wealth in vain. (Surah al-Baqarah, 2 : 188). In other
words, in the case of business transactions, money must not pass from
one hand to another, except in exchange for some lawful return which has
a recognised value. Islam does not admit that ownership is equivalent to
absolute authority.

It is specified in the Islamic law that the sale and purchase of
certain things is forbidden. Such things include blood and human
excreta. The reason is that these things do not have such a value that
they should be considered to be a part of human wealth. The underlying
principle is the same as contained in the above quoted verse. The
invalidity of the sale and the purchase of blood and human excreta is
only an instance of the application of that principle. Even where no
exchange is involved, money or property belonging to someone else cannot
be appropriated and disposed of gratuitously.

The law forbidding the appropriation of another's property gratuitously
is a firm principle which is applicable to all time, and has emerged
from a permanent social need. But the rule that blood and excreta are
not to be regarded as wealth and are not saleable is related to time and
the degree of civilisation. This rule is subject to modification with
the change of conditions, the progress of science and industry and the
possibility of the correct and useful utilisation of these items.

Another example: Imam Ali (peace be on him) never dyed his hair, though
it had become grey during the last years of his life. One day a man said
to him: "Didn't the Prophet order grey hair to be covered with dye?"
'Yes, he did", Ali replied. "Then why don't you dye your hair?" the man
asked. Ali said "At the time the Prophet gave that instruction the
number of the Muslims was small, and there were many aged people who
used to take part in the battles. The Prophet ordered them to dye their
hair to conceal their real age, for if the enemy could see that he was
faced with only a bunch of old men, his morale might have been raised.
With the spread of Islam to the whole world, that situation has changed.
Now every body is free to dye, or not to dye, his hair".

In the opinion of Imam Ali, the Prophet's instruction was not a basic
and permanent law. It was only a way of implementing that law, which
says that we should not do anything which might raise the morale of the
enemy.

Islam attaches importance to the external appearance., as well as to
the inner spirit. But it wants the husk only for the sake of the kernel,
and the garb only for the sake of the body.

**THE QUESTION OF THE CHANGE OF SCRIPT**

Recently in Iran, there has been a controversy about the change of
script. This question can be considered from two angles from the point
of view of the Islamic principles, and in two forms. The first is
whether Islam favours any particular alphabet and discriminates against
others. Does it regard the present alphabet, known as Arabic, as its own
and others such as Latin as alien? Islam which is a universal religion
considers all the alphabets of the world as equal.

The second form of the question is how far the change of script will
lead to the cultural merger of a Muslim nation with the other peoples,
and what effects will it produce on the culture of this nation? After
all, during the past 14 centuries, the Islamic and scientific literature
produced by Iran has been recorded in the present script. With the
change of script, will not all connections with this literature be
severed? Another question is: "Who are the people who propose this
change, and who will be the people who are going to implement it?" All
these questions are relevant.

**DEPENDENCE ON OTHERS IS FORBIDDEN NOT THE EUROPEAN HAT**

People like me are often faced with such questions, asked
contemptuously and sarcastically. "What does Islamic law say about
eating food while standing?' "What about eating food with a spoon and a
fork?" "Is the wearing of the European hat forbidden?" "Is the use of a
foreign language forbidden?"

Answering such questions, we say: Islam has not given any particular
instructions in this respect. Islam has not directed its followers to
eat food with the hand or with a spoon. It has directed them only to
observe cleanliness. Islam has not prescribed any particular design of
shoes, cap or dress. From the Islamic point of view, the English,
Japanese and Persian (languages) all have just the same status.

However, Islam has said something else also. It has said that to lose
one's identity is forbidden. To be over-awed needlessly by others is
forbidden. Mimicry is forbidden. To be merged with others is forbidden.
To be charmed by others, as a hare is charmed by a snake, is forbidden.
To consider an alien dead donkey to be a mule is forbidden. To import
their perversion and immorality, in the name of a phenomenon of the 20th
century, is forbidden. To believe that the Muslims should be westernised
internally and externally, physically and spiritually, is forbidden. To
go to a Western country for a few days and on returning, to start
pronouncing our own words in their way is forbidden.

**IMPORTANT AND MORE IMPORTANT**

Another aspect of Islam which makes it compatible with the requirements
of the time is the conformity of its teachings to reason. Islam has
proclaimed that its laws are based on considerations of higher interest.
At the same time, Islam itself has given out the degree of importance of
these interests. This facilitates the work of the experts of the Islamic
law in those fields where various interests appear to be in contrast
with each other.

In such cases, Islam has allowed the experts of Islamic law to weigh
the relative importance of the various interests, and keeping in view
the guidance which Islam itself has provided, to determine the more
important interests. In Islamic jurisprudence, this rule is called the
question as 'important and more important'. There are many instances
where this rule of high and higher interests has been applied. Anyhow,
for lack of space we skip over them.

**THE LAWS WHICH HAVE A RIGHT OF VETO**

Another aspect of Islam which has given this religion the
characteristic of mobility and applicability to varying circumstances,
and has kept it as a living and everlasting religion, is that within it
there exists a body of laws whose object is to control and modify other
laws. They are called by the jurists, 'the governing rules'.

The rule of "No harm" and "No loss", that a law will not apply to those
cases in which it may cause hardship or harm the interests of an
innocent person, pervades the entire legal system. The object of such
rules is to control and modify other laws. In fact Islam has given a
veto power to these rules which change other rules.

**POWERS OF THE RULER**

In addition, there is a further series of checks and balances which has
given this religion the characteristic of finality. Ayatullah Na'ini and
Allama Tabatabai have, in this respect, mostly relied on the powers
delegated by Islam to the righteous Islamic Government.

**THE PRINCIPLE OF IJTIHAD**

The Pakistani poet and philosopher, Iqbal, says that Ijtihad (the
deducing of laws from their original sources) is the motivating force of
Islam. He is right in saying so. But what is more important is that
Islam has a special quality of being amenable to Ijtihad. No other
religion possesses this quality in the same manner. The internal
structure of Islam has been so designed that, with the aid of Ijtihad,
it can always cope with the ever-changing pattern of the requirements of
life.

Abu Ali Sina (Avicenna) in his book, Al-Shifa, has based the need of
Ijtihad on this very principle of ever-changing requirements. He says
that conditions of life change constantly. New problems frequently crop
up, but the fundamentals of Islam are constant and unalterable. Hence,
in these circumstances, there should be some people who, with their full
knowledge of all the points of law and precepts, may be able to answer
all the questions which may arise from time to time, and thus meet the
needs of the people.

The constitution of Iran provides that a body consisting of not less
than five Mujtahids (eminent scholars of theology, capable of practising
Ijtihad) should keep a watch on the laws enacted by the State from time
to time.

The idea is that such people, as are neither rigid and opposed to the
modern developments, nor uninformed, blindly following others, should
keep a watch on the legislative activity of the country.

It is worth mentioning that Ijtihad in the real sense means
specialisations and requires a deep insight into the fundamentals of
Islam and a thorough knowledge of the principles of Islamic
jurisprudence, which naturally cannot be claimed by everyone who might
have passed some time in an Islamic academy.

No doubt, it is a lifetime job to specialise in the principles and
precepts of Islam, and it requires Divine help besides a taste, a talent
and a special aptitude.

Apart from specialisation and Ijtihad, some people may acquire
knowledge to the extent that their views may be regarded as
authoritative. Such people must be pious and God-fearing to the utmost
extent possible. The history of Islam mentions those people who, despite
their vast knowledge and high morals, were cautious and fearful when
they expressed their opinions, on points of law.

