Dower and Maintenance
=====================

**DOWER AND MAINTENANCE - I**

It is one of the most ancient traditions of the human family relations
that at the time of marriage the man pays a dower (mahr) to the woman or
to her father. In addition to that, he undertakes to bear the expenses
of his wife and children during the entire period of his life.

What is the basis of this tradition? Why and how did it begin? Why
should the husband be responsible for the maintenance of his wife? What
is the spirit of dower? Are dower and maintenance still relevant, even
if man and woman enjoy all human and natural rights, and the relations
between them are based on justice and equity; or are they only the
surviving remnants of the days when man owned woman? Does justice and
the equality of rights, especially in the 20th century, demand that
these outdated traditions should be abolished, a marriage should take
place without a dower, woman should be responsible to bear her own
expenses, and the children should be the joint responsibility of husband
and wife?

We propose to answer these questions, and begin with the question of
dower. Let us see how this tradition came into being, what its
philosophy is and how the sociologists explain its origin.

**A BRIEF HISTORY OF DOWER**

It is said that during pre-historic times man lived a barbaric life,
which had the tribal form. For unknown reasons marriage was prohibited
between a male and a female of the same blood. Hence the young men of a
tribe, who wanted to marry, were compelled to choose their wives from
some other tribe. They often visited other tribes for this purpose. At
that time man was not aware of his role in begetting children. He
thought that the children belonged exclusively to their mother. Though
he often found that the children closely resembled him, he did not know
the cause of that resemblance. Naturally the children also thought that
they belonged to their mother and not to their father. At that time
ancestry was traced through the mothers. Men were considered to be
barren and sterile. After marriage they stayed with their wife's tribe
as a mere adjunct of it, because the wife required her husband's
company. This period is known as the period of matriarchy.

It was not long before man discovered his role in procreation and came
to believe that the children in reality belonged to him. From then
onwards, he dominated over woman and assumed the role of the head of the
family. Thus, the so called period of patriarchy began.

During this period also a marriage between the people having the same
blood was prohibited. Man had to choose his wife from some other tribe,
and bring her to his own tribe. As there was constant warfare among the
tribes, the only way to get a wife was to kidnap a young girl from some
other tribe.

Gradually peace took the place of warfare and the different tribes were
able to achieve peaceful coexistence. During this period the custom of
kidnapping the girls was abolished. In order to get the girl of his
choice the man went to her tribe, became a hired worker of her father
and worked for him for some time. In consideration of the services
rendered by him the girl's father gave her hand to him and he took her
to his own tribe.

When money became common, man discovered that instead of serving the
bride's father for years, it was better to present a suitable gift to
him and take the girl immediately. That was the origin of the dower
(mahr).

According to this account, in the early days man lived as an adjunct of
woman and served her. During this period woman ruled over man. In the
next stage, when power passed into man's hands, he kidnapped women from
some other tribe. During the third stage, in order to win a woman, man
went to woman's father and served him for years. During the fourth stage
man presented a sum of money to the woman's father. And that is how the
custom of dower originated.

It is said that since the time man abolished the system of matriarchy
and laid the foundation of patriarchy, he gave woman the status of a
slave, or at the most, of an employee or a servant of his. He looked
upon her as an economic tool, which, by the way, could satisfy his lust
also. He did not give her social or economic independence. The fruits of
woman's labour belonged either to her father or to her husband. She did
not have the right to choose her husband, nor could she carry out any
economic activity for her own sake. The money which man paid as dower
and the expenses which he bore as maintenance (nafaqah) were in
consideration of the economic gains which he derived from her during the
period of conjugal relations.

**DOWER IN THE ISLAMIC SYSTEM OF RIGHTS**

There is a fifth stage also about which the sociologists and other
commentators have observed silence. During this stage man gives a
present to woman herself. Neither of her parents has any claim to it.
Woman receives the present, but she preserves her social and economic
independence. She chooses her husband of her own free will, not with the
sanction of her father or brother. Furthermore, neither has her father
nor her husband any right to enslave or exploit her. The proceeds of her
work and labour belong exclusively to her. In financial matters she does
not require anybody's supervision or patronage.
The husband has only one right. He can enjoy sex with his wife. As long
as the conjugal relations are intact, he is under obligation to meet all
the legitimate requirements of his wife within his own financial
limits.

This is the stage which is recognised by Islam and on which Islam has
laid the foundation of matrimonial relations. Many passages of the
Qur'an emphasise that the dower exclusively belongs to woman. Besides,
the husband has to maintain her and meet her expenses. At the same time,
whatever woman earns belongs to her and not to anybody else, not even to
her father or husband.

It is here that the question of dower and maintenance becomes a little
puzzling. As long as the dower was paid to the father of the girl and
she went to the husband'5 house just like a slave and the husband could
economically exploit her, the question was easy to understand. The dower
was then paid as a price of the girl and she had to be maintained like
any other slave. But, if nothing is to be paid to the father of the
girl, the husband is not allowed to exploit his wife; woman has complete
economic independence, and as far as her rights are concerned, she does
not require the supervision, control or patronage of anybody. Then what
is the sense of a dower and maintenance allowance being paid?

**A GLANCE AT HISTORY**

To be able to grasp the philosophy of the dower and maintenance in the
fifth stage, we should examine, a little critically, the theory of the
four periods mentioned above. The fact is that all that is said about
these periods is nothing more than a hypothesis based on presumptions
and speculations. it neither constitutes a historical fact nor a
scientific truth. We have no definite knowledge about the life of
pre-historic man. All that is said about the matriarchal period, the
sale of girls by their fathers and the economic exploitation of wives by
their husbands, is not very credible. There are two things which strike
one's mind about these presumptions and speculations. One is that the
primitive man has been represented to be extraordinarily barbarous,
violent and devoid of human sentiments. The second thing is that the
wonderful planning of nature, to reach its universal goals has been
ignored.

Such an interpretation of human nature can possibly be made by the
people of the West and not by those of the East except by those of the
East who are fond of following the West. For certain reasons, the
European is not familiar with human sentiments. He cannot admit that
they play a basic role in history. If he has an economic bent of mind,
his attention remains confined to the problem of bread and butter. He
looks at history as a machine, which does not move unless fed with fuel.
If his trend is sexual, he regards the entire humanity and human
history, with all their cultural, artistic, moral and religious
manifestations, as modified forms of sex-play. If his views are
political, then, according to him, the entire human history consists of
a series of battles, bloodsheds and acts of cruelty.

The European was put to so much torture in the name of religion, during
the Middle Ages, when people were often burnt alive, that he has become
allergic to the name of God, religion and everything that religion
stands for. That is why, in spite of all the evidence of the fact that
nature has a goal and the system of the world is not working
haphazardly, he would not dare to admit the existence of the "First
Cause".

We do not ask the Western interpreters of history to admit the
existence of the prophets, who have appeared throughout human history to
proclaim the message of justice and humanity, and to fight corruption,
which they successfully did. We only want them not to ignore the
conscious role of nature at least.

No doubt in the history of man-woman relations there have been many
cases of extreme cruelty, some of them the most atrocious ones, which
have been narrated by the Qur'an also, but it cannot be said that the
entire history has been replete with instances of cruelty and
violence.

**THE REAL PHILOSOPHY OF DOWER**

According to our belief, the dower has come into being as the result of
skilful arrangements, put into the very design of creation, to balance
the relations between man and woman. The dower has come into being,
because, by nature, the respective roles of man and woman are different
from each other. According to the gnostics the law of love and
attraction prevails everywhere in the Universe. As everything is
designed to perform a definite function, its role is different from that
of all other things.

While discussing the disparities between man and woman, we have already
pointed out that their feelings and sentiments, with regard to each
other, are not the same. The law of creation has ordained that woman
should have the qualities of beauty, pride and indifference, whereas man
should have those of courting and pursuit. That is how the physical
weakness of woman, as compared to man, has been counterbalanced, and for
this very reason it has always been man who has sought woman's hand and
proposed to her. As we have already seen, according to the sociologists,
during the periods of both matriarchy and patriarchy, it has been man
who has sought after woman.

The scientists say that man is more lustful than woman. Certain Islamic
traditions say that man is not more lustful. Actually the case is the
reverse, but woman has a better sense of self-restraint. Practically,
both the views come to the same thing. Anyway, it is certain that man
has less self-control. This feature has enabled woman not to run after
man, nor to submit to him easily. Man's instinct compels him to approach
woman, and he takes steps to gain her favour. One of these steps is to
present her with a gift.

Members of the male sex have always vied with each other to win a
female. They have even fought each other to achieve this end. But the
members of the female sex have never shown the same keenness to win a
male. This is so, because the roles of the male and the female are not
the same. The male always pursues a female whereas the female shows a
sort of indifference to him.

The dower is closely related to woman's modesty and chastity. She knows
by instinct that her self-respect demands that she should not submit
herself freely.

That is how woman, in spite of her physical weakness, has been able to
bring men to their knees, to compel them to vie with each other, and to
make Romeos run after Juliets. When she agrees to marry a man, she
receives a present from him as a sign of friendship, cordiality and
goodwill.

It is said that among some barbaric tribes, when a girl had more than
one suitor, she used to persuade them to fight a duel. Whoever won the
duel or killed his rival was considered fit to secure the hand of the
girl.

There was a newspaper report that a girl in Tehran persuaded two boys
to fight a duel in her presence. From the point of view of those who
think that power means only brute force and maintain that the history of
man-woman relations contains nothing but cases of cruelty and
exploitation, it is unbelievable that the fair and weaker sex should be
able to set on two members of the stronger sex to attack each other. But
for those who have some knowledge of the wonderful and mysterious power
which nature has granted to woman there is nothing strange in this.

Woman has had much influence over man. Her influence over man has been
greater than man's influence over her. Man is indebted to woman and to
her chastity and charming modesty for his many achievements of art and
feats of bravery. The credit for the building of many a personality and
the developing of many a genius goes to her. Woman has built man and man
has built the society. If woman loses her qualities of chastity, modesty
and restraint, and tries to play the role of man, first she may be
debased, then man may lose his manhood, and in the end the society may
be ruined.

That faculty of woman, has enabled her to maintain her personality
throughout history; to compel man to come to her door-step as a suitor;
to lead man to rivalry and even to fight for her sake; to maintain her
modesty and chastity as her hallmark; to keep her body hidden from the
gaze of man; to inspire man to love to perform feats of bravery, as a
sacred asset; to excel in intellectual and creative deeds; to sing
amorous songs and to submit to the weaker sex in humility. Hence this
tendency has impelled bridegroom to offer his bride a present at the
time of marriage as the dower.

The dower is a part of the natural law, which has been promulgated by
nature itself.

**THE DOWER IN THE QUR'AN**

The form of the dower described above in connection with the fifth
stage is not an invention of the Qur'an. All that the Qur'an did was to
restore it to its natural and pristine form. The Qur'an in its
incomparably elegant style says: "Give to the women a free gift of their
marriage portions". (Surah an-Nisa, 4 : 4) This means that the dower
belongs to women exclusively and it is a gift to be paid directly to
them. It has nothing to do with their fathers or brothers.

In this short sentence the Holy Qur'an has referred to three basic
points:

Firstly it has used for marriage portion or the dower the word,
saduqatehinna meaning truthfulness and sincerity and not the word mehr.
Thus, the dower is a symbol of the cordiality of the man paying it. This
point has been expressly mentioned by a number of the commentators of
the Holy Qur'an, such as Zamakhshari, the author of the well-known
commentary, the Kashshaf Similarly, the famous philologist, Raghib
Isfahani says in his lexicon of the Qur'an that the dower has been
called saduqah because it is a symbol of the sincerity of faith.
Secondly, it is clear from the above verse of the Qur'an that the dower
is to be paid directly to the woman, and her parents have no claim to
it. It is not a compensation for the efforts made by them to bring up
their daughter. Thirdly, it is clear that the dower is nothing except a
present and a gift.

**THE QUALITY OF FEELINGS AMONG ANIMALS**

The law of sexuality is not confined to human beings. It prevails in
the animal kingdom also. Though both the sexes are in need of each
other, the male feels a greater need for the female, and takes the
initiative in gaining her favour. That is why the male does not misuse
his superior strength, and assumes a meek attitude towards the female.

**GIFTS IN ILLICIT RELATIONS**

Even when a man and a woman want to enjoy sex unlawfully and indulge in
free love, it is man who presents gifts to woman. When they have coffee,
tea or food together it is man who regards it his duty to pay the bill.
Woman considers it insulting to her to spend money for the sake of man.
Some may contend that a boy requires financial potentialities to indulge
in debauchery, whereas for a girl it is a means of receiving gifts.
These customs, which are common to both lawful and unlawful relations,
may also emanate from the dissimilarity of the feelings of man and woman
in relation to each other.

**A EUROPEAN IS MORE NATURAL IN LOVE-MAKING THAN IN MARRIAGE**
In the West where family rights have been perverted in the name of
equality of human rights, and an attempt is being made to allot man and
woman similar functions in domestic life, man still performs his natural
role, as far as free love is concerned. In free love he still offers
presents to woman and bears her expenses, whereas in the case of a
European marriage, not only does the dower not exist, but woman also has
to shoulder a heavy responsibility in connection with domestic expenses.
This means that European love-making is more natural than European
marriage.

The dower is an example, which indicates that man and woman have been
created with dissimilar genius, and the law of creation has entitled
them to dissimilar natural and innate rights.

**DOWER AND MAINTENANCE - II**

In the preceding chapter we have described the philosophy and origin of
dower. It was pointed out that the law of creation has fixed the
relationship between the two sexes and has allotted them separate roles
in life. It was also pointed out that the custom of dower has originated
from the gentle and affectionate feelings of man, and not from his sense
of domination and harshness. The role played by woman in this connection
has proceeded from her peculiar sense of self-restraint, and not from
any weakness or helplessness on her part. The payment of dower is a
device prescribed by the law of nature, to enhance the value of woman.
It gives a personality to her. Its moral value is far higher than its
material value.

**PRE-ISLAMIC CUSTOMS ABOLISHED BY ISLAM**

The Holy Qur'an abolished many pre- Islamic Arab customs connected with
dower and restored it to its natural and deserving pristine form.

During the pre-Islamic period the parents thought that dower belonged
to them exclusively as a recompense for the pains they took in rearing
and bringing up the girl.

It is mentioned in the "Kashshaf" (a celebrated commentary on the
Qur'an) etc. that when a girl was born and somebody wanted to
congratulate her father, he did so by saying:

'May this musk-bag be beneficial to you'. What he meant was:

'May you give her in marriage and receive her dower'.

During the pre-Islamic period, the fathers and, in their absence, the
brothers, as natural guardians of the girl, gave her in marriage
according to their own will and not according to that of the girl
herself. At the same time they regarded her dower as belonging to
themselves. They sometimes exchanged their daughters. A man would give
his daughter or sister in marriage to another, in consideration of the
latter giving his daughter or sister in marriage to the former. In this
form of marriage, which was called Shighar marriage, neither of the
wives would get a dower. Islam abolished this custom. The Holy Prophet
has said: 'There is no Shighar (exchange of daughters or sisters) in
Islam".

According to the Islamic traditions not only a father has no claim to
any part of the dower of his daughter, but it is also not permissible to
include, in the marriage agreement, a condition that apart from dower
anything additional would be paid to him. In other words, a father is
not allowed to derive any financial gain out of the marriage of his
daughter.

Islam also abolished the custom according to which a man worked for his
prospective father-in-law when money had not yet become a medium of
exchange. This custom did not come into existence simply because the
fathers wanted to benefit through their daughters. There were other
reasons also, which were characteristic of the age and were not
necessarily unfair. Anyhow, there is no doubt about the existence of
such a custom in the ancient world.

The story of Moses and Shu'aib, narrated by the Qur'an, indicates the
existence of such a custom. When Moses, while escaping from Egypt,
reached the well of Madyan he took pity on the daughters of Shu'aib, who
were standing in a corner with their sheep and nobody was paying any
attention to them. Moses drew water for them. The girls, on returning
home, told the story to their father who sent one of them back to Moses
and invited him to his house. Having been introduced to each other,
Shu'aib said to Moses one day: "I would like to give one of my daughters
to you in marriage on the condition that you work for me for eight
years. If you like, you may work for two years more in all 10 years".
Moses accepted the offer and became Shu'aib's son-in-law. Such a custom
was current at that time The reason was two-fold. First, money did not
exist then and the only service which a bridegroom could render to his
wife or to his father-in-law was to work for them. The other reason was
the existence of the custom of dowry. The sociologists believe that the
custom of giving dowry by the father is one of the oldest traditions. To
be able to provide a dowry to his daughter, the father either employed
the bridegroom or took money from him. Practically what he took from his
son-in-law was for the benefit of his daughter.

Anyhow, Islam has done away with this custom, and now the father of the
woman has no claim to the dower, even if he wants it for spending it on
his daughter. Only the woman herself has full rights to spend it as she
likes.

During the pre-Islamic period there existed other customs also, which
practically deprived the woman of her dower. One of them was the custom
of inheriting conjugal rights. If a man died, his son or brother
inherited his conjugal rights, in respect of his wife, in the same way
as he inherited his property. The son or the brother of the deceased had
a right, either to give the widow in marriage to another man and take
her dower, or to declare her his own wife against dower already paid to
her by the deceased.

The Holy Qur'an did away with this custom also. It says:

'0 you who believe! It is not lawful for you to inherit women forcibly"
(Surahan-Nisa,4 : 19)

In another verse, the holy Qur'an has totally banned a marriage with
one's father's wife (stepmother) even if she be willing. It says: "Marry
not those women whom your father married" (Surahan-Nisa,4 : 22).

The Holy Qur'an did away with every custom which deprived woman of her
dower. One of such customs was that when a man lost interest in his
wife, he harassed her with a view to making her agree to a divorce on
the condition that she would return, wholely or partly, the dower which
she had received. The Holy Qur'an says: "Nor should you put constraint
on them (women) so that you take away part of what you have given '~
(Surahan-Nisa,4 : 19).

Another obnoxious custom was that a man would marry a woman and even
pay her heavy dower, but after losing interest in her he would tarnish
her image, accuse her of adultery and demand the dower back. This custom
was also done away with by the Holy Qur'an.

**ISLAM HAS ITS OWN SYSTEM OF DOWER**

It is one of the indisputable principles of Islam that a man has no
claim to the money or property of his wife, nor is he entitled to force
her to do anything for him. The earnings of a working woman can in no
way be appropriated by her husband without her consent. In this respect
there is no difference between man and woman. Contrary to the custom
prevailing in Christian Europe up to the beginning of the 20th century,
woman, from the Islamic point of view, is not under the control of her
husband in financial matters. She has full independence to deal with
them herself. Though Islam has given complete economic independence to
woman, and has allowed the husband no right in regard to her property,
it has retained the system of dower. This shows that, from the Islamic
point of view, dower is not paid to woman because the husband
subsequently utilises her physical energy or exploits her economically.
Islam has its own system of dower, which should not be confused with any
other system. The objections, which are raised against other systems,
are not valid in this case.

As stated in the preceding chapter, the Holy Qur'an describes the dower
as a 'free gift'. According to the Qur'an, it is obligatory. The Qur'an
has minutely taken into consideration all the characteristics of human
nature and, to ensure that neither man nor woman forgets the respective
role entrusted to him or her by nature, stresses the necessity of fixing
a dower.

Woman's role is to respond to man's love. It is good if she loves a man
but her love should be a reaction to the initiative taken by him. If she
falls in love with a man who already does not want her, she would
invariably be faced with failure and this will strike a blow to her
personality. But if her love is in response to man's love, there is no
question of her failure or a blow to her personality.

Is it true that woman is not faithful, that she is not consistent in
love, and cannot be relied upon? It is true as well as false. It is true
if the initiative comes from woman. If she is first to fall in love,
such a love is not reliable. She will soon lose interest. But it is
false if woman's love is in response to man's sincere love. In such a
case it is unlikely to fade, unless man himself loses interest in her.
Then, of course, it will wither. That is woman's natural love.

It is because of the cases of the first kind of love that woman is
notorious for her infidelity, and it is because of the second kind of
love that she is extolled for her faithfulness. If society wants
firmness and stability of the conjugal bond, it has no alternative but
to follow the Qur'an, which has prescribed distinct rules for man and
woman. The law of dower is in conformity with nature, because it is a
symbol that shows that love is initiated by man, and woman only responds
to it. Man offers a gift as a symbol of his love and respect for woman.
Hence, it is not appropriate to repeal this law which forms a section of
the basic law formulated by nature itself.

As we have observed, the Holy Qur'an abolished many pre-Islamic customs
and usages in connection with dower, though the people of that time were
very much attached to them. What the Qur'an has prescribed is different
from the custom prevalent in those days. Hence, it cannot be said that
the Qur'an attaches no importance to the existence, or non-existence, of
the dower. It could have abolished the dower totally, but it did not
deem it fit to do so.

**CRITICISMS:**

Now that we know the views of Islam on dower, let us take up the
objections raised by those who criticise this Islamic law.

A critic says: "As one has to spend money for getting a garden, a
house, a horse or a mule, similarly money has to be spent to purchase a
woman. And as the price of a house, a garden or a horse depends upon its
size, beauty and usefulness, similarly the price of a woman varies
according to her beauty or ugliness and her wealth or poverty. That is
the philosophy of dower. There can be no conjugality without spending
money and paying the price of the purchase".

Had it been a Western custom, could it have been possible to fabricate
such a malicious slander against it? If one person gives money to
another person, does that mean that he wants to purchase him? Should the
custom of offering a present or giving a gift be abolished? The Qur'an
expressly says that dower is nothing but a free gift. Furthermore, Islam
has organised its economic laws in such a way that they do not allow
economic exploitation of a woman by a man.

You may say that many husbands in the East actually exploit their wives
economically. We admit that, but it has nothing to do with dower. These
husbands do not say that they paid a dower to them. Actually there are
other reasons why, in many cases, men dominate over women. Why should
the natural law be wrecked instead of reforming the men concerned? The
underlying idea of all such arguments is that the people of the East
should forget their own philosophy of life and their human standards, so
that they may easily be devoured by aliens.

The same critic adds: "If complete economic equality between man and
woman is established, there is no reason why man should be held
responsible for maintaining his wife and providing her with food,
clothing and dower. Such precautions and double assurances have never
been considered necessary in the case of man".

If we minutely analyse this argument, it simply means that during the
period when woman had no right of holding property, and had no economic
independence, the dower and maintenance were justified to a certain
extent, but in the cases where woman has been given economic
independence, as Islam has already given her, there is no justification
for providing her maintenance and dower.

The critic appears to be under the false impression that dower is paid
simply to compensate woman for her being deprived of her economic
rights. The fact is otherwise. If reference to the Qur'an is made, the
real philosophy of the dower can easily be ascertained.

Another critic writes: "As man and woman have been created equal, the
payment of any price or wages by one to the other does not stand to
reason. Just as man needs woman, woman needs man. In this respect both
of them are on an equal footing. Hence it would be unfair to enjoin upon
either of them to bear the expenses of the other. But as man had the
right of divorce and woman had no guarantee of the continuity of a joint
life with him, she was given a right to demand a sort of security from
him".

He adds: "In case man does not have an absolute right of divorce, no
justification is left for the continuation of the custom of dower.

It is clear from what we have said that these arguments are baseless. A
dower is neither a price nor wages. No doubt man and woman need each
other, but their position is not the same. Nature has placed them into
two different positions.

It is still more baseless to describe dower as a financial security
against the right of divorce. On top of that, to claim that this is the
reason why Islam has prescribed it, is the height of absurdity. We would
like to ask such people why, in the first instance, did Islam give the
right of divorce to man. Had this right not been given, there would have
been no need of any security? Furthermore, this statement means that
when the Holy Prophet fixed the dower of his own wives, he provided them
with a security against himself. Similarly, when he fixed the dower of
Lady Fatimah at the time of her marriage with Imam Ali, he did so
because he wanted to provide the former with a security against the
latter.

If, for the sake of argument, we admit that dower is a form of
security, then the question arises as to why the Holy Prophet counselled
the women to consent formally to surrender their dower to their husbands
as a gesture of goodwill. Why did he describe such an act as meritorious
and rewarding? Why did he advise that, as far as possible, the amount of
dower should not be large? Does not all this show that the Prophet
considered dower to be a gift and regarded its voluntary surrender as a
means of strengthening and consolidating love between a husband and a
wife?

If Islam looked upon dower as a security, why did the Qur'an say: "Give
the women their dower as a free gift'; and why did it not say: "Give the
women their dower as a security?"

Furthermore, it appears that the critic is under the impression that,
in the early days of Islam, dower had the same form as it has today. At
present, the common practice is that the husband, at the time of
marriage, undertakes to pay a certain amount, but usually the wife does
not demand its actual payment, except in the cases where a dispute
develops between the two. This type of dower may assume the form of a
security. But, during the early Islamic period, the usual practice was
to make a prompt payment of the amount promised. In these circumstances,
it cannot be said that dower is a form of security.

History shows that the Holy Prophet was never willing to give any woman
in marriage without fixing her dower. In this connection the following
story has been mentioned in the books of both the Shiah and the Sunnis,
with slight variations:
A woman came to the Prophet and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Accept me
to be your wife". The Holy Prophet kept quiet and said nothing. The
woman sat down.

One of the companions of the Prophet rose and said:

"O Messenger of Allah! If you are not inclined, I am prepared to marry
her". The Holy Prophet asked: "What dower will you give9" "I have
nothing". "That won't do. Go to your house. Maybe you will find
something to give this woman as dower".

The man went to his house. Soon he came back and said:

"I could find nothing in my house". The Prophet said: "Go again and
search. Even an iron ring will do".
The man went again. He came back and said that he could not find even
an iron ring. He said that he was willing to give the clothes he was
wearing to the woman.

One of the companions of the Prophet, who knew the man well, said that
he was aware that the man had no other clothes. So he asked the Prophet
to assign only that of his clothes as dower to the woman.
The Prophet said: "If half of his clothes is assigned as dower, who
will wear it? Whichever of these two will wear it' the other will go
unclothed. That's not possible".

The suitor was sitting in his place. The woman was also waiting for the
final decision. In the meantime, the Prophet and his other companions
were busy talking about some other subject. When a long time had
elapsed, the man rose to go away. The Holy Prophet called him saying:
"Come here". He came. The Prophet asked him: "Do you remember the
Qur'an?" "Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah! I remember such and such Surah".
"Can you recite it from memory?" "Yes, I can". "Very good. That's right.
I give this woman in marriage to you and her dower is that you teach the
Qur'an to her".

The man grasped the hand of the woman and both of them took their
leave.

There are some other points also connected with the question of dower,
but we leave them for the present.

**DOWER AND MAINTENANCE - III**

We have mentioned the Islamic point of view regarding dower and its
philosophy. Now let us take up the question of maintenance.

It should be kept in mind that like dower, maintenance also has a
peculiar form in the Islamic law, and it should not be confused with the
practice in the non-Muslim world.

Had Islam allowed man to engage woman to work for him and to
appropriate her earnings, the reason why a husband has to maintain his
wife would have been evident, for it is clear that if a man exploits
another man (or an animal) economically he has to bear his (or its)
expenses of life. If a coachman does not give fodder and barley to his
horse, it will not carry a load for him.

But Islam has not allowed man to exploit woman. On the other hand,
woman has a right to own property and to earn money, and a husband has
no right to lay his hands on what belongs to his wife. At the same time,
it is incumbent on him to meet the expenses of the family. He has to
maintain his wife and children and to bear the expenses in connection
with servants, the household etc. For what reason?

Unfortunately, people with a Westernised mentality are not prepared in
the least to think over such things. They often repeat the same adverse
remarks, in the context of Islamic law, which the Europeans justifiably
make against their own legal system.

It is perfectly right to say that the maintenance of a wife in the
West, up to the beginning of the 19th century, was a sign of the slavery
of woman, because there the woman was bound to run the household of her
husband gratis, without having any right of owning anything. Obviously
in this case whatever food, clothing etc. was given to her was not
different from the daily ration of a prisoner or the portion of fodder
given to a beast of burden.

However, the case of Islam is quite different. It is a unique system in
the world which absolves woman from administering the domestic life of
man, gives her complete economic independence, and at the same time
exempts her from making any contribution to the family budget. Here we
have a different philosophy, which of course, requires our special
consideration.

