Preface
=======

Pope Benedict XVI, the leader of world’s Catholics in his lecture on
Tuesday, 12[^1] September 2006 in Ratisbona University, Regensburg,
Germany, discussed about relation of rationalism, faith and Jihad, and
accused Islam to violence and incompatibility with knowledge and wisdom.
In his speech, he cited a quotation from talks between Christian
Byzantine emperors, Manuel II with an Iranian Muslim religious scholar
saying: “Let me know what new Muhammad has introduced? Has he brought
anything save bad and inhuman ideas? For instance, he ordered the faith
which he preaches to be spread by force of sword”.[^2]

Narrating the said historical quotation, Pope has attributed two
unfounded accusations to Islam: first, the accusation of violence and
progress of Islam by force and sword; second, incompatibility of the
sacred religion of Islam with knowledge and rationalism.

Although these are not new accusations against Islam, and those who are
not able to encounter logically with this strong religion and culture
have tried to prevent conversion of truth-seekers to Islam through such
accusations, but it is very awful when a religious authority as the
highest rank of world’s Catholics, who should naturally have sufficient
familiarity with other religions in the world, utters such accusations.
So, it was deemed necessary to give an appropriate reply to these unfair
accusations. Here we reply to the first accusation, and Insha’Allah, we
will prove his second accusation to be unfounded with authentic
reasoning and documentation later.

Hereunder you will find a part of commentary discussions by the
honorable Marja’ Hazrat Grand Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi during the
blessed month of Ramadan, and published in the book, “The Loftiest
Servants”.

The said discussions are reviewed and complementary notes are added, you
can find it here in six chapters.

Moreover, for completion of this work, the statement by his holiness in
reply to the unfounded speech by the Pope, and the notice for declaring
readiness by His holiness to debate with Pope about the claim will be
available in chapter six.

We hope this sacred religion which is full of clemency, compassion and
rationalism to accept this little action from us and make it a reserve
for us in the Day of Resurrection.

Wassalam Alaykum Va Rahmatullah Va Barakatuh

Abolghassem Olyan Nejadi  
 15.10.2006

[^1]: It is noteworthy that the said lecture was delivered one day after
the suspicious event of 11th September, and a few days after the
wonderful victory of Hezbollah in Lebanon, and the awful defeat of the
usurper Israel.

[^2]: Newsletter of Qom Seminary Professors Association, issue 927, page
29.


