Chapter 1: Explanation and Description of Question
==================================================

Is Islam Religion of Violence or Clemency?
------------------------------------------

When obstinate adversaries of Islam found this divine religion a big
hindrance for their interests, and more proper to say, their avarice,
they decided to fight and encounter with it. They used any means and
method for achieving their objectives. The struggle started from the
early days of appearance of Islam, and it is and will be continuing.
Rather, at our time it is one of the main programs of the West, headed
by U.S.[^1]

One of their generally applied unmanly tools is the accusation of
violence. They say: “Islam is the religion of violence and war. Islam is
not compatible with the man’s gentle spirit. Islam disregards human
rights.”

Then, they spread and implant these unfair accusations against Islam
throughout the world.

Regretfully, we shall confess that the deeds of some unreal Muslims
support their poisonous propagations, for instance, we can refer to
Taliban group who were the symbol and indication of violence, barbarism,
oppression and injustice and at the meantime, alien to Islam, and as an
Islamic population ruled Afghanistan for a short period.

This small rude and ungodly population committed strange crimes during
their short period of governance under the name of Islam. Our enemies
provided films and reports from their deeds and crimes and broadcasted
them in the world as an image from Islam. The films included heinous
crimes such as beheading humans like sheep. However, fortunately the
majority of Muslims in the world expressed their hatred and disgust to
these unreal Muslims, and called their actions and deeds fabrications by
their weak and unable mind.

Al-Qaida sect was even worse and ruder than them. They, who only know
the name of Islam, but nothing of its instructions and rulings,
committed such crimes in Iraq which were unprecedented in the history.

Fortunately, the absolute majority of Muslims condemned them and called
them alien to Islam.

Considering these issues, it is necessary to discuss seriously and
carefully if Islam is really the religion of violence or the religion of
mercy, clemency and amicable relations?

In order to answer this question, we shall refer to the Holy Qur’an and
the luminous verses of this virgin and unaltered book and the utterances
of our infallible religious leaders. Then, we can find some samples of
the social and practical attitudes of these great men, and compare them
with the behaviors of those claiming for civilisation in the Western
world to let the sun of truth to reveal from the back of dark clouds.

[^1]: Although, apparently, some pretend belief in some Islamic rules,
and even in the blessed month of Ramadan, they provide Iftar
(fast-breaking food) for the Islamic authorities, but today the nature
of these demagogic actions is known to all, and all Muslims know that
they have conspired powerfully for destruction of Islam, which is a
healing to human’s present and future pains and problems.


