Chapter 4: Islamic Clemency and Mercy in the Practices of Religious Leaders
===========================================================================

The practical manner, social behavior and associations of religious
authorities and Islamic leaders and Imams are full of mercy, clemency
and benevolence with their followers and with adversaries. Here are two
examples:

Prophet’s (S) Clemency after Conquest of Mecca
----------------------------------------------

The attitude of Prophet Muhammad (S) after the conquest of Mecca is a
sample of this practical manner. We narrate in brief his attitude and
then compare it with that of Western civilisation with their enemies
after World War II.

Prophet Muhammad (S) was annoyed in Mecca thirteen years before his
Hijra (immigration) to Medina because Mecca reminded him of the numerous
pains, tragedies, a baseness, troubles and afflictions as his most
obstinate enemies were in Mecca. However, when the Islam conquered
Mecca, and Prophet (S) overcame those obstinate and stubborn enemies who
caused all those calamities and problems, he pardoned all and extended
Islamic mercy and absolution to all addressing them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذهبوا انتم الطلقاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are free to go wherever you will!”

Even when he was informed that one of the Islam soldiers with a flag of
Islam in his hand is chanting for revenge, he was provoked, and took the
flag from the soldier, and chanted for peace and amity instead of
revenge:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الیوم یوم الرحمه
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Today is the day of clemency and benevolence!”

On the other hand, when the allies’ soldiers entered capital of Germany
(Berlin), they massacred the inhabitants, and committed numerous crimes.
For instance, they threw up an infant and fired him before falling into
the ground.

Now, a generation from the same heartless felons commits a new crime
every day. A pen is ashamed to write these crimes and sometimes man
could not tolerate to see or hear them.

Are we the people of violence or these uncivilised wrongly claiming for
civilisation?

‘Ali (as) and Recommendations for his Slayer
--------------------------------------------

Another sample is the attitude of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) with his killer,
Abdur-Rahman Ibn Muljam Moradi.

Following the religious instructions, he was so kind and merciful that
even his enemy who attempted to kill him was not deprived and excluded
from his mercy. Recommendations by the kind Imam for his killer start
from arresting him and continue till Imam’s death:

“My children! My slayer is just Ibn Muljam. Beware! Do not let the
self-seekers and opportunists to unsheathe their swords and kill the
innocent people with the excuse of cooperation with ‘Ali’s slayer for
their own personal interests!

My dears! Give my slayer the same food you prepare for me!

My darlings! If I survive, I know what to do with him. If I die, you are
authorised to retaliate, but as he struck me once with sword, you shall
not exceed more than one!

O Children of Prophet! Do not mutilate him after death!”

These are ‘Ali’s (as) recommendations about his slayer when he was
dying. Do you know any authority of any country throughout the world and
during history to express such recommendations in favour of his slayer?

Is Islam whose Prophet’s successor is so kind and merciful, the religion
of violence?


