Appendixes
==========

1) Statements of His holiness Grand Ayatollah Makarim Shirazi criticising Pope’s utterances regarding Islam
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Recently, cartoonists in Denmark insulted Islam and Islam Prophet (S)
and faced with worldwide protest by Muslims. Now, Pope, leader of
Catholics, deluded world, and questioned Islamic Jihad and accused
Muslims with violence and faced with severe and widespread protest by
Muslims.

Of course, such movements were expected after the heroic victory of
Hezbollah in Lebanon over Israel (thanks to the ruling of Islamic
Jihad), but why was a great Christian leader deceived by tyrant and
cruel politicians and this was proof that he is unaware of Islamic
rulings. Is it acceptable for the great leader of Catholics to be so
uninformed of a great religion like Islam with more one billion and four
hundred million followers?

Condemning this big insult to Islam and Muslims resulting in more
insecurity in world, we remind that Qur’an explicitly says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ جَنَحُوا لِلسَّلْمِ فَاجْنَحْ لَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And if they incline to peace, do thou incline to it.**"*
***(8:61)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَاتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ الَّذِينَ يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ وَلَا
تَعْتَدُوا ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ الْمُعْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And fight in the way of God with those who fight with you, but
aggress not: God loves not the aggressors.**"* ***(2:190)***

Does Pope expect Palestinians to keep silent while Zionists dispossess
them of their country, Palestine, and expatriate them? Or Hezbollah to
keep silent while Zionists transgress Lebanon and ruin everything and
massacre all including infant, old and young?

O Pope! Instead of assaulting Muslims in the world, you have better to
admonish your cruel and bloodthirsty politicians that the time of
colonisation has expired and you shall respect the independency of
Islamic countries and Muslims to be respected.

Following the ideas of imperialist politicians, you committed a big sin.
Try to compensate it as soon as possible, and be sure that your
illogical assault to Islam and Muslims has no effect save more
solidarity among them.

16.09.2006

Peace be upon the one who follows guidance.

2) Invitation from Pope to a scientific and logical debate
----------------------------------------------------------

On 20.09.2006, His holiness Grand Ayatollah Makarem Shirazi invited Pope
to a scientific and logical debate and added: The debate could be in a
live broadcast at any time and place with no restriction. I am sure that
at the end of debate, people in the world will judge that Islam is a
herald of peace, amity and truce, and Jihad is a defensive shield
against the enemies, but not for imposition of belief and idea.

In his Kharej Fiqh lesson in the seminary on the occasion of end of
course before the blessed month of Ramadan, His holiness expressed: Many
Christians are living with Muslims from centuries ago, and it is never
heard that one is obliged to convert to Islam.

Then, he added: Pope’s hard-bitten utterances are the clear instance of
spreading violence throughout the world. Unfortunately, it endangered
the peaceful coexistence between Muslims and Christians, while at
present, we need invitation to peace, security and truce more than ever.

His holiness called all esteemed seminary students and preachers to
explain for people the pacific attitudes of Islam according to the
Qur’anic verses and Islamic narrations.

### Text of His holiness’s letter to Pope

Your Excellency Pope Benedict XVI

With greeting,

Considering your utterances in Germany rebuking and reproaching Islam
and the ruling of Islamic Jihad (Holy War), hurting the feelings of all
Muslims, I, as one of the Muslims’ religious authorities, having many
followers all around the world, and the writer of more than 130 books in
various Islamic sciences, including more than 40 books about commentary
of Holy Qur’an, invite you to participate in a scientific and logical
debate in a live broadcast with me to discuss about two issues:

1) Does Islam advocate violence or it invites to peace, amity and
kindness?

2) Did Islam spread throughout the world through the force of sword or
the extreme logic, reasoning and attraction of Islamic culture?

I will be glad to declare that I leave the time and location to you, and
do not have any condition for it. I hope you would declare your
agreement with this.

Wishing your ever success,

Nasser Makarim Shirazi

25.09.2006  
 Islamic Seminary of Qom  
 Islamic Republic of Iran

The invitation letter was sent to Vatican embassy in Tehran in Persian
and English, but we have not received any reply yet.

3) The remonstrant letter by representative of Iranian Assyrians to Pope
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The utterances of Pope Benedict XVI was so illogical and weak that even
his impartial and fair coreligionists could not keep silent, and many of
them stood against it. For instance, we refer hereunder to the
reasonable and logical letter of MP of Iranian Assyrians in the Islamic
Consultative Parliament:

In the name of God

His Eminence Pope Benedict XVI

It was very astounding for the Assyrian Christian society that you
criticised harshly all beliefs of Islam and Muslims with a different and
of course hostile conception. We know that you are in the same position
that Pope John Paul II as the symbol of peace and dialogue among
religions, not only did he not mention anything unreasonable against
Islam and Muslims, but he also forgave the Turkish Muslim who shot him.

Jesting Jihad and calling Islam violent is a questionable judgment which
you utter carelessly in this critical time. Didn’t your predecessor
remind the Christians in an impressive statement that they shall learn
religious zeal and support as well as sincerity and servitude from
Muslims?

It is very surprising for the Christians in the world that why you
revive the divisive utterances of the Christian Byzantine emperor,
Manuel II Palaeologus in the recent centuries and renew the old wounds
of Crusade Wars dressed by present civilised world?

If you renew the old wounds, Muslims too will naturally talk about the
crimes committed by Crusade fighters of Catholic Church during the
Middle Ages against other Christians, Jews and Muslims.

We, Assyrians, as a Christian society converting to Christianity at the
time of its appearance in the east, have been living many centuries in
the Islamic territories and especially in our home country, Iran. We
have never been transgressed or offended by Muslims for our religious
beliefs. Rather, we have been laudably honoured and respected by our
countrymen.

We, Assyrians, had most cultural and scientific transactions and deals
with Muslims at the beginning of Islam, and have rendered valuable
services to Islamic caliphs and Muslims. Now, it is the time of dialogue
and our deals at the beginning of appearance of Islam could be a live
notation for our dialogue. Regretfully, your attitude is far from the
dynamic civilisation

We are living with our Christian beliefs and ideas, and our eastern
religion is still alive with remembrance of Eastern Church in our
country, Iran. Our language and script is also alive in the territory
where Islam is ruling for centuries. We have never heard nor seen the
violence you are talking about, and we believe that it is not true. We
too like other believers and particularly Muslims expect your excellence
to apologise the dynamic one billion society. This is the same
instruction of our Savior, Jesus Christ, who says: Share with your
neighbor in happiness and grief.

We too like these one billion believers are grieved by this hostile
judgment.

With regards,

Jonathan Betkellia

Representative of Iran's Assyrian and Chaldean Christians in the Majlis
and Director of the Asian branch of the World Union of Assyrians

19.09.2006

4) Is it a mistake or something else?
-------------------------------------

A conference for studying and reviewing the causes and consequences of
Pope’s utterances was held in the presence of tens of eminent professors
and scholars from seminary and university from 18 to 22 on Monday,
9.10.2006 in the office of Political and International Studies of
Foreign Ministry, a part of which will be quoted hereunder:

Mostafa Boroujerdi, the latest ambassador of Iran in Vatican referred to
parts of biography of Pope Benedict XVI and his scientific and political
background, and expressed: Benedict XVI was the head of Congregation for
the Doctrine of the Faith, which can select the next Pope. However, as
he was the head of Congregation, he selected himself as new Pope after
demise of Pope John Paul II.

Referring to his concern about appearance and spread of Islam in Europe,
especially Italy, he remarked: During the recent 40 years, number of
Muslims in Europe has doubled, and this causes concern for the
political, security and religious departments of European rulers.

According to Boroujerdi, Christianity has failed to fulfill the
expectations of church despite of all facilities it has applied for
mission. This has increased Pope’s concern.

Indicating spread of Islam in Italy, he expressed: The area of Italy is
half of Iran, and its population is 57 million. 437 Catholic radio
channels are evangelizing in this country. However, as confessed by
church authorities, the people are referring less to church. On the
other hand, according to the studies, the Muslim population of this
country may reach 50 million within the next 10 years. This has
concerned the new Pope.

Expressing that west introduces Al-Qaida as the symbol of Islam to
create hatred in Europeans against Islam, the latest ambassador of
Iranian Vatican said: Another point concerning the Pope and church is
that despite of growth in Islamism; Catholic Church is suffering from
increase in Christians’ irreligiousness.

In this congress, stating that Pope’s insult against Islam is not start
of Crusade War and rather it is its continuation, the scholar, Mr.
Khosroshahi, the previous ambassador of Iran in Vatican stipulated: In
the project of encounter with Islam, Pope is assigned with the cultural
and religious part of the project, as we see that Mr. Bush too has
exactly confirmed his utterances.

Referring to the biography of new Pope, he said: He was a member of the
Nazi Youth organization when he was young, and then, he joined church
and became a priest.

He added: It is a vulgar idea if we say that Pope’s utterances have
resulted from his lack of knowledge about Islam. Be sure that a Pope
knows more than others about the positive points of Islam.

Khosroshahi stressed: Pope has the record of relation with Fascism in
Italy and Nazism in Germany. His correspondence with Hitler and
Mussolini is a published document.

Stating that precedent Pope had a close cooperation with imperialism of
U.S., he expressed: It was published in the Left dailies in Italy at the
lifetime of John Paul Pope II that when he is going to comment about the
critical global issues, first he studies CIA reports.

Then, Mohaghegh Damad, the great professor, head of Islam Encyclopedia
stated: I beseechingly propose to select a practical strategy for
replying Pope.

Stating that Pope has introduced Islam as an irrational religion, he
said: For replying this question, Pope shall be reminded to study the
contents of 1400 years of Islamic literature.

Many of western thinkers have confessed that Islam is the religion of
rationalism. The great Islamic thinkers have been a model for the
western civilisation, and the western civilisation is indebted to
Islamic rationalism. This is a good reply to Pope’s claim.

According to Mohaghegh Damad, regardless of physical spread of Islam
during the last two centuries, concerning Christianity, conversion of
great and famous western thinkers and philosophers have dealt a
deathblow to western civilisation. For better understanding, can you
imagine what happened to Muslims and Islamic society if, for instance, a
great philosopher like Allamah Tabataba’i (as) converted to
Christianity?

According to the heads of Islam Encyclopedia, like Walter and Corbin who
were rationalists were astonished by Islam, and Corbin says: I love the
rational Iranian Islam, and dies as a Muslim.

Referring to the narrations and verses concerned with Jihad, he said:
The Islamic scholars shall study these verses and narrations to clarify
the issue of Jihad for the Islamic society. [^1]

[^1]: Keyhan daily.


