Translator's Word
=================

This is my humble translation for the book of Abdul-Sâhib Al-'âmeli. Of
course, and because of the high flexibility of Arabic and it's numerous
words and divisions, my translation won't exactly be in the same line of
the book, but I tried my best to give the overall meaning as much as and
as clearer as possible.

This book is considered a valuable item in any Shiite library, and I
would like to notice out that there is another book and considered older
than this one which was written by a scholar and a holy faithful man
called "Al-Sayed Al-Jazâ'iri" but I really did not get to know this book
very well, but in this translation of the book of Abdul-Sâhib you will
find some reference for the book of Al-Sayed Al-Jazâiri.

I faced many troubles analysing and trying to understand the complex
philosophical terms in order to proceed with my translation but I
couldn't be lucky all the time, so whenever I couldn't continue
translating I've put a notice of that between square brackets [..].

Maybe it is important to show some of the characteristics of the creed
of Shiite in order to understand some parts of the book, of course if
you are an Arabic learner and could read, then reading this book by its
Arabic contents would be far more beneficial to you to understand what
is going on.

For Shiite people, they believe that every prophet or a messenger from
God, since the time of Adam until the last messenger which is Muhammad,
every one of them got a viceroy or a saint that would take care of
things after the death of the prophet or the messenger himself. For
example, there is Asaph the son of Berechiah who was a viceroy for king
Solomon, and there is Joshua the viceroy of Moses and lot others, and so
do the prophet Muhammad got a viceroy, which is his cousin and the
husband of his daughter, 'Ali ben Abi Tâlib, and after 'Ali ben Abi
Tâlib comes his children and his descendants.

For sunnite muslims, they do not believe in such thing, but believe
that the prophet ordered things to be organized in a committee after his
death, and such thing is denied by Shiite believers. It is important to
note out that Shiite and Sunnite are creeds and not bound to some
borders and to some countries as some others think.

Lot of people think that a Shiite would mean Iranian person which is
something not true at all, but people got this impression because
supposedly that the modern islamic government in Iran is a Shiite
government, although it has different aspects than other sub-Shiite
creeds, and the speech about this will take long time and maybe it needs
a book for its own sake. Here are some of the abbreviations and
notifications first that I used in my translation:

PUH: Peace Upon Him (Her)
PUT: Peace Upon Them

--------------------

from (name1) from (name2) ...etc: This is called the chain of the
speech or saying and points out the names of people that carried the
tidings or news.


