About Some Conditions of the Father of Human Beings "adam" (puh) and the Beginning of This Creation
===================================================================================================

Said God in his Holy Book: And when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo!
I am about to place a viceroy in the earth, they said: Wilt thou place
therein one who will do harm therein and will shed blood, while we, we
hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee ? He said: Surely I know that which ye
know not.

Since "Viceroy" by language and tradition points out to what takes the
place of what was before in time, then there must have been another
Responsible agent before him (Adam), and that is pointed out by the
opposition of the Angels, and this opposition is not done except by them
for they bear the knowledge of the ex-mischiefers because they said
"Wilt thou place therein one who will do harm therein and will shed
blood, while we, we hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee?"

and it was pointed out by news, tidings and traces that the existence
of pre-Adam creatures did take place and they are the Djinns and others
and earth was full of them. And also pointed out of the existence of
lions, beasts and all of the other animals, and also the existence of
rulers and vicegerents for God, command by His commandment and prohibit
by His prohibition, so they were ordering for Goodness and prohibiting
the Mischiefts, but the Djinn got wicked and rebelled, and they refused
the commandments of God and changed lot of His orders and laws.

From 'Ali ben Ibrâhim from Albâqir (PUH) from the Prince of Believers,
'Ali ben Abi Tâlib (PUH) that he said: When God wanted to create a
creation by His hand and that was after Djinn and Nesnas spent seven
thousands years on earth, He removed the layers of heavens and Said to
the Angels: Look to the inhabitants of earth from my creation of Djinn
and Nesnas, and when they saw what was done by them (Djinn and Nesnas)
of mischiefs and evils,

that grew hard upon them (Angels), and said: our Lord you are the
Almighty, and this is Your weak worthless creation, live by Your grace
and refuse to take your orders and You don't take a revenge of them? And
when He heard that from the Angels He said "Lo! I am about to place a
viceroy in the earth" and he will be a ruler on earth. The Angels said:
Are You going to place someone that will make mischiefs and evils as the
Djinn did? May you make the viceroy one of us,

and we don't refuse Your commandments and "we hymn Thy praise and
sanctify Thee", so the God said: I know what you know not, I want to
make a creation by my Hand and make out of his descendants prophets and
faithful slaves of mine and guiders. I will make them rulers on my
creations in my earth and purify my earth from the Nesnas and move the
rebellious Djinns those who refused my commandments away from my
creation and make them live in the air and shattered across the lands
and make a veil between Djinns and my creation.

Angels then said: Our Lord You command and prohibit, praise to You, no
other god than You, and You have the knowledge of everything. Then they
got farthest (Angels) from the Holy Throne a distant of five hundreds
years of travelling. Until the Imam ('Ali ben Abi Tâlib PUH) said in a
long speech:

then God held the clay of Adam (PUH) and worked on it the four natures
of air, mucus, bitterness, and blood. And connected with the air the
love of women, length of hope and caution. And connected with the mucus
the love of food, drinks, goodness, gentleness and easiness. And
connected with bitterness the anger, stupidity, evil, pride, and haste.
And connected with the blood the love of women, pleasure, and doing
sins.

And the summary of some of the tidings is that God created Angels from
light, and created Djinn from fire, and created Adam from clay, then He
ran the light, the fire, the air and water, so with light he saw and
understood and by fire he ate and drank, and if it wasn't the fire in
the stomache (the heat of the stomache) food won't be cooked (digested),
and if it wasn't the air in the body of people to flame the fire, fire
wouldn't be existed, and if it wasn't the water existence to cool it
down and extinguish it, the stomache would have been burnt and the body
would be burnt in return.

And it has been said that it was meant by the black wind of
stomache -or soul- that it might be the stomache's movements with
breathing that leads to the foundation of cells with the heat of the
core (?)

And the most probable that Adam (PUH) was created from all types of
clays and if he was created with one type only people wouldn't know each
other and all would be with one shape, but instead he was created from
the easiness of the earth and its sadness, bitterness, sweetness, and
saltness, and from all its shapes and colors, from its whiteness,
redness, yellowness, blackness and (blondeness)..etc and that's why you
see human beings differ in their colors and types.

From the Prince of Muslim (PUH) that God sent Gabriel and ordered him
to bring from the skin of earth (Arabic: Adeem) four clays: white, red,
yellowish and black and that would be from its (earth) easiness and
sadness. Then He ordered him (Gabriel) to bring four types of waters:
sweet, saline, bitter, and stinking. Then He ordered him (Gabriel) to
pour all the waters in the clay so He made the sweet in his throat, the
saline in his eyes, the bitter in his ears and the stinking in his
nose.

And in "Tawheed Al-Mofadhal ben Omar" (??) from Al-Sâdiq (PUH): The
sweet water was placed in the throat to make him (Adam or the human)
able to eat and taste the food, and the saline water was placed in the
eyes to protect the flesh of the eyes since the flesh will remain when
salt or saline water is placed on it. And for the bitter water in the
ears it is to protect the brain from the attacks of insects and
organisms since they die when they reach the bitter water in the ear.

Maybe they can get pass over the bitter water and reach the brain for
their power and the small quantity of bitter water in the ears and that
might be because of the weak body for it might be a sick man, old man,
or a child. And they brought many cases, tidings and witnesses for the
truthfulness of such analysis and some of those cases were during the
time of Plato and other perfect doctors that found an animal (organism)
that grew up in the brain and didn't find any other way than the ears to
let it reach there.

**(Subjects from different sources with agreement in contents)**

Adam was named as Adam because he was created from the skin of the
earth (Arabic: Adeem) and from Al-Sadooq: that the fourth ground (or
earth) was called Adeem and from it Adam was created and that's why he
was called Adam, and the mother of human beings Eve (Arabic: Hawâ') was
called like this because she was made from the living (Arabic: living =
Hay) and that is Adam (PUH). And from Al-Sâdiq (PUH): that God created
Adam from clay and created Eve from Adam, and so the work of men is on
land (earth, ground) and the work of women is in men. It was told that
when Adam was created and God placed the soul in his body He made him
stand between His hands then Adam sneezed and praised the God by saying:
Praise be to the God.

then God said: O Adam, you praised me, and I swear by my Highness, if
it was but to make two slaves at the end of time, I wouldn't have
created you. Then Adam said: O Lord, by their endearment and their
values to You, what are their names? So God said: O Adam, look to the
Throne. So Adam took a look and found two lines made of light. The first
line was: No God but Allah, Muhammad the prophet of mercy and 'Ali is
the key of paradise. The second line was: I decided to bear mercy for
these who be victorious to them and follow their path, and torture these
who oppose them.

The trustworthy 'Ali ben Ibrâhim had told from Abi Jafar Al-Bâqir (PUH)
in telling the meaning of God's saying "And verily We made a covenant of
old with Adam, but he forgot, and We found no constancy in him"
(Taha:115) he said: God made a covenant with him in Muhammad and the
Imam's after him (PUT), but he left that out and he never thought they
were (Muhammad and the Imam's PUT) in such high place and value, and the
"Them of Constancy" (meaning: Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad)
are called like that because God made a covenant with them in Muhammad
and the viceroys after him and in Al-Qâ'im (PUT) and gathered their
constancies in admitting their (Muhammad and his viceroys PUT) rights
and virtues. And from Abi 'Abdullah Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: the
sons of Adam (PUH) gathered in a house and had an argument about who's
better, Adam or the close Angels.

Some of them said that our father Adam is better and others said the
close Angels are, and few others said the carriers of the Throne. While
they were like that, "Gift of God" Seth (Also: Sheth PUH) entered and
they told him the story, so he got back to his father Adam (PUH) and
told him the story of the fighting men and they asked him (asked Seth)
but he didn't have an answer for this, then said Adam: O son, I've stood
between the hands of God may praise be to him, then I looked into a line
on the door of the Throne that was written on it: By the name of Allah,
the Beneficent, the Merciful. Muhammad and the descendants of Muhammad
are the best of what Allah started.

From Al-'Ayyashi from Amr ben Abi Miqdâm from his father that he said:
I asked Aba Jafar Al-Bâqir (PUH) from what thing did God made Eve (PUH)?
he said (Al-Bâqir PUH): and what thing do they say about this creation?
I said: they say from one of Adam's (PUH) ribs, then he said (PUH): they
lied.

Is God unable to create her except out of Adam's rib? Then I said: O
may I be a ransom to you son of the prophet of God, of what thing did
God create her? He said (PUH): my father told me from his fathers that
the prophet of God (PUH) said: God, may praise be to Him, held a clay
and mixed it with his right hand, and both of His hands are right, so He
created out of it Adam and part of it was left untouched so He created
Eve out of it (Al-Sayed Ne'mato-Allah Al-Jaza'eri said: this Hadith or
speech is trustworthy and believed in among our comrades and partners.

Meaning what had been told by Al-'Ayyashi..etc) and this speech has
what supports it and there is no doubt among us about its contents and
anything oppose it would oppose the rules and laws of what God made what
we are in now, and so the claim of creating Eve out of his (Adam) rib is
something strange and weird instead of creating her out of the remaining
of his (Adam) clay as it was told by them (meaning them the Holy family
of Muhammad PUT) many times.

About the story of creating Eve out of the rib, and that is the little
left rib, is carried by explaining according to the pictorial match for
these who believe it and there are other taken paths and God only
knows.And it is probable that God created Adam and Eve without a mother
and father and created Jesus (PUH) without a father to let know that He
is able to create anything anyhow, and His laws in nature used to be
creating any creation out of a father and a mother except these
mentioned before.

And it is told that the Angels (PUT) when they felt about their mistake
and got sorrowful for their arguing with God about the creation of Adam
(PUH) and saying "Wilt thou place therein one who will do harm therein
and will shed blood" and they knew that they made a mistake and
regretted and got to the Throne praising and asking for pardon for what
they did, and this was a reason to put up a house in the fourth heaven
at the edge of the Throne and was called Ad-Dhirâh,

then after that He put up a house in the earth's sky and Called it
Al-Bayt Al-Ma'moor (The Great House) at the edge of Ad-Dhirâh, and Put
up on earth Al-Bayt Al-'Ateeq (The Old House, or Holy House) at the edge
of Al-Bayt Al-Ma'moor. Then after He ordered his slave Adam (PUH) to go
around it and so he did, so He had mercy upon him and that spread out
among his sons until the doomsday. And it was told that Adam (PUH)
visited the Holy House for a thousand times on his feet, for seven
hundreds Hijjas (pilgrimages) and three hundreds 'Omras ('Omrah = A
visit not in the pilgrimage time)


