Useful Caution
==============

About what was been told in the Holy phrases of the saying of the
damned which is "Now, because Thou hast sent me astray, verily I shall
lurk in ambush for them on Thy Right Path...etc", it is apparent that
the damned thought God made him astray and this is something can't be
accepted by the right-thinking minds and it is against and opposes the
justice and the holiness that are well-known of God may praise be to
Him, and above all these mistaken words about Him He shall be. And so
the damned appointed to God that He made him astray, and this is what is
mentioned in the creed of Jabarism [Another coined term by me] of
Al-Ashâ'irah (?) [seems a branch of this creed], and it is one of the
corrupted believes without any doubt about that, because its contents is
not accepted by me, nor others would accept it for themselves.

Is it possible for someone to accept for himself being mentioned that
he obliged a slave of him to do mischiefs and sins and then punish him
for doing this?

No and no, and this is the case here of what had been appointed to God,
The most exalted. May God make shame be with them, as He made it with
their master and director and teacher the damned Iblis may damnations be
upon him. All of the matter was because of his wrong chosen path, and
God exiled him and avoided him from His mercy and banned him from His
paradise, because he rebelled and refused His command to prostrate to
Adam (PUH) with the rest of Angels, and them (PUT) didn't stop for one
moment but prostrated directly as they are commanded to do and they did
not think about a reason for this and didn't get a pride against it, but
instead they did obey the command of their Lord and don't think about
anything else except His command, and never argue about it.

When God examined Iblis by prostrating for Adam (PUH), he got so high
with his pride and honour for what he was created of and got rebelled,
and God knew his intention and his perversity, and all of his long
worshipping and praising was only for the sake of life and for what he
wishes and deems, and so he got wicked by his soul and obeyed it and so
it owned him and captivated him away from his Creator. And when God
wanted to put him under the test and wanted him to refuse what his soul
is ordering him to do, he disbelieved in His grace and got ready for
war, and so he is a foe for the Great God, The One of Grace, and then
his greatest foe is this to whom he was ordered to prostrate before him
and that is Adam (PUH) so he sat his hate for him (Adam) and for his
descendants until the time of doomsday.

**(The inhabitation of Adam in paradise)**

The Prince of Believers (PUH) said in Al-Nahj: Then God made Adam
inhabit a place of much grace and made it a safe place for him, and
warned him of Iblis and his hostility, and so his foe envied him (Adam)
for his place of inhabitation and his company of the faithful, so then
he (Adam) paid for what was so sure with his doubt, and for the power
with his weakness,

and exchanged hilarity with fear, and pride with regret, then God
Relented toward him and Gave him the words of His mercy and Promised him
that he would be back to his paradise, and Got him down to the place of
troubles and breeding. What is apparent from this speech of the Prince
of Believers (PUH) and from lot of tales and Holy phrases about the
subject of Adam's paradise that God made him inhabt, that it is the
paradise that God promised for His faithful after life for their deeds,
or even as a gift for these of faith in His prophets and Holy Books, and
so his saying (PUH) about the place of inhabitation and the company of
the faithful, do appoint out to the paradise after life and not the
gardens of this life, and it is apparent for these who got a cautious
hearts and a well mind, and then meditate in his saying (PUH) about
getting back to his (Adam) paradise and getting him down to the place of
troubles and breeding.

And there is no need to explain and interpret more than that and saying
the opposition of what had been said in the speech, and the more
opposition that might be made against it, then it is an ignorance and
perversity that are not needed.

It is told from some tales and speeches that the inhbaitation of Adam
and Eve (PUT) in paradise lasted for seven hours as measured in this
life's days, and so their out was in the same day that they got in and
if they did obey the commandments of their Lord, they would have been
lasted for more time and never got out of it.

**(How was it correct to prostrate before Adam by angels and he's just
a creation)**

Prostration, is not allowed and not correct except for God may praise
be to Him, because it is a worshipping and it won't be except for God,
otherwise it would be a disbelieve or paganism and such thing is
impossible to be done by the Angels that are protected against doing any
sins. The real matter is that this prostration is done by a commandment
from God and so it is a prostration for God as it was mentioned by them
(PUT) ["them" meaning the prophet and his Household PUT] about this
matter. From Al-Sâdiq (PUH): whoever prostrated by a command from God,
then it is a prostration for God and obeying his order, and if it wasn't
the commandment by His Highness he wouldn't prostrate. And this is what
had been told also by Al-Imam 'Ali ben Muhammad Al-Hâdi (PUH) when he
said: prostration before Adam by Angels was not for Adam but for obeying
God and endearment for Adam.

After all, prostration before Adam was but as an endearment for him and
in real it was worshipping for God because it was done by His command.
Al-Mohaddeth Al-Qommi in "Safeenat Al-Bihâr" in Al-Moqâm[apparently
seems it is a book name done by a person called Al-Mohaddeth Al-Qommi]
did say: you should know that Muslims all agreed that prostrating was
not for the purpose of worshipping, but as an endearment for Adam (PUH)
and in deep it was a worshipping for God since it was by His command and
this is chosen by most of the interpreters,

and God's sayings "then fall down before him prostrate"(Sad: 72) and
about Joseph (PUH) "they fell down before him prostrate" (Yusuf: 100)
both have the same interpretation, and the prostration was for God only
and for obeying His commandment and was for the endearment of Adam and
Joseph (PUT), like prostrating for God for the occurence of grace or the
disappearing of a grace. It is told from Prince of Believers (PUH) that
he said that the first spot on earth that God was worshipped on is that
on Kufa[a city in Iraq that had been made a capital during the rule of
'Ali ben Abi Tâlib PUH] and that was when God ordered Angels to
prostrate before Adam (PUH) and so they did that on the surface of
Kufa.

**(Some tales related to our research)**

From Musa ben Jafar (PUH), that a jew came and asked the Prince of
Believers (PUH) about a miracle for the prophet (PUH) like the miracles
of other prophets, and that God made Angels prostrate before Adam so
would that be also for Muhammad (PUH)? so 'Ali (PUH) answered: that was
indeed, but God made the Angels prostrate for Adam not for obeying nor
worshipping Adam instead of God, but it was as a confession from them
for the virtues of Adam (PUH),

and for Muhammad (PUH) he was given what is better than this and
higher, and that is because God assigned blessings upon him in His
Highness and ordered the Angels to say the blessings upon him, and also
the believers worship and pray by saying the blessings upon him Don't
you say in your prayer and other prayers: Oh God bless Muhammad and the
Household of Muhammad? and this is in a place much higher and greater
than prostrating before Adam (PUH),

and in the speech of God to the damned Iblis: Art thou too proud or art
thou of the high exalted? (Sad: 75), and in a speech for the prophet of
God (PUH) that these "high exalted" are the prophet himself (PUH),
Muhammad ben 'Abdullah (PUH) and 'Ali, Fâtima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain
(PUT), then said the prophet (PUH): we were in the awning of the Throne,
sanctifying God and Angels with us, before creating Adam by two
thousands years, and when God created Adam He commanded the Angels to
prostrate before him but Did not command us, and so all the Angels
prostrated except Iblis, so then God said to him: Art thou too proud or
art thou of the high exalted? Meaning of the these five that their names
are written on the awning of the Throne.

From 'Ali ben Al-Husain (PUH): Adam did look to the apex of the Throne
and saw the lights of our ghosts, so then God said to him: O Adam, these
ghosts are the best of my creation. Then He told him their names and
Told him: By them I take and by them I give and by them I punish and by
them I reward, O Adam ask me by them, and when you are in trouble make
them your intercessors to me, because I decided not to refuse any
requests (prayers) made by them. That's why after that after he and Eve
got into the trouble of the sin, he prayed and asked God by their names
so then God made a repentace upon him.

From an interpretation from Al-Imam Al-'Askari (PUH) in a long speech
and this is part of it: When God put Al-Husain ben 'Ali (PUH) and these
who were with him under the test by the army that wanted to kill him, he
(Al-Husain PUH) saw their large numbers and saw his folks and knew that
they want not but him, and whenever they would kill him they wouldn't
ask for another, and so he released them (his folks) from their swear of
fealty and commanded them to quit and depart him and said to them: let
me with these.

God helps me as He used to be with our ancestors, and his folks did
depart him except few of them. His closer relatives and household
refused to leave and told him: we will not leave you until we die for
thee O Abâ 'Abdullah [another name for Al-Husain PUH] and when he saw
their assertiveness and that they would not leave him until they die for
him, he said to them: if you decided for yourselves what I decided for
myself then know that God gives the high places for his slaves by their
patience for the troubles they face and that you will have that from
God's gifts to you, and know that this life is just a dream and the
after life is the real awakening.

Shall not I tell you our beginnings? They answered: for sure O son of
the prophet, then he said: When God created Adam, He told him the names
of everything, and when He showed them to the Angels they said "We have
no knowledge saving that which Thou hast taught us" (Al-Baqarah: 32) and
He made the lights of Muhammad, 'Ali, Fâtima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain and
they are the five ghosts, at the back of Adam, and their lights were
shining in the horizons of heavens,

veils, paradises, the Chair (?) and the Throne, and God then commanded
the Angels to prostrate before Adam as an endearment for he was but a
container for these ghosts that their lights shined in the horizons, so
the Angels did prostrate except Iblis who denied to be humble for our
lights we the Household, after the Angels did humbling and obeyed the
command of God and for this their level got higher and got the honour,
and Iblis was damned and exiled out and shame got upon him and so he is
a foe for Him and His faithful slaves until the doomsday.

It was mentioned in some tales of Al-Sâdiqiyah [here, maybe it meant
tales that was told by Al-Sâdiq PUH] and also from 'Ali ben Ibrâhim
about the saying of God: Till the Day of appointed time (Al-Hijr: 38),
what is meant here is the time when he (Iblis) gets slaughtered by the
hands of the prophet of God (PUH) on the Rock that is in Jerusalem.

Al-Sayed Al-Jazâ'eri said that he (Iblis) was appointed til the day of
the appearance of Al-Mahdee (PUH) and it is the minor doomsday, and
there are lot of tidings about this matter, and we have explained what
is related to this subject in the introduction of this book that you
read now, and the return of the prophets and messengers and in special
our prophet Muhammad The Chosen (PUH) and the purified Imams (PUT) after
the appearance of the "Awaited Absent" may our souls be in ransom to him
to take revenge of their foes, is something that must be and it is one
of the believes for Shiites, or lets say most of the Muslims in
general,

and it is called the minor doomsday, but only after the long journey
with troubles and when most of the created would turn away from the path
and life would be full of wrong and injustice, it is then when we shall
see the release is close and it is the time. May God paces up the
re-appearance of Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad and May He make
us one of their supporters and companions, and martyrs between their
hands by the rights of the prophet and his purified Household (PUT)


