The Reason For Getting Adam Down From Paradise To Earth
=======================================================

From Mos'adah ben Sadaqah from Al-Sâdiq (PUH) from the prophet (PUH)
that Moses the son of Amram [Arabic: Musa ben Imrân] (PUH) asked his
Lord to let him see Adam (PUH) and so He answered him and made him see
Adam, and then Moses did say: O Father! you are the one that God created
with His own hands and made you live in His paradise and prohibited you
from one tree so you couldn't be patient enough til you fell on earth
because of it, and couldn't you control yourself away from it and so
Iblis seduced you and you followed him and so you are the one that got
us out of paradise because of your sin.

Then did say Adam (PUH): O son take it easy on your father for the
matter of this tree. O son my foe approached by trick and plot, so he
swore to me by God that his opinion is a good advice and he said to me:
O Adam I am sad for you, so I said to him: and how is that? he said: I
enjoyed being with you and you will be out of what you are in now to
what you hate, I asked him: and what to do? he said to me: here is what
to do,

do you want me to guide you to the tree of eternity and an endless
reign so you can eat from it with your wife and then you shall both be
in paradise with me for eternity, and he swore to me by God and he was a
liar that he has the truthful advice, and O Moses I never thought that
someone would swear by God and he is a liar, so I trusted his oath and
this is my excuse, so tell me son, do you find out from what had been
revealed to you from God that my sin was noted before I get created,
then Moses said to him: before a long time. Then said the prophet
(Muhammad PUH): and so did Adam overcame Moses in the argument.

From Al-Sâdiq (PUH) also: when Adam was put out of paradise, Gabriel
(PUH) came down to him and said: O Adam, didn't God create you with His
hands and Breathed into you of His Spirit and made the Angels prostrate
before you, and Got you Eve as a wife and Made you inhabit paradise and
Prohibited you directly from eating from that tree but you made the sin?
Then Adam (PUH) said: Iblis did swear to me by God, and I never thought
that someone from God's creation would swear by Him falsely!

And what is understood from the previous conversation between Moses and
Adam (PUT) that the sin was something meant to be and predestinated long
ago before Adam's creation and from the world of atom [It is believed
that everything exists in this life including people existed before
becoming alive or born in a world or a dimension where they were just
atoms], at the time of creating the spirits before his (Adam) existence
by two thousands years, and it is a case which was a battle field for
several opinions and many people got doomed for their
mis-interpretations and not understanding the truth in it, and it is a
case of God's judgement and what He Has predestined for His creation
before his existence.

And the solution for this case for us in general is: God founded in
this human the power that could aid him in doing what God appointed to
him and Made him able to do, and Left him the selection and Gave him the
mind and brain with which he can differentiate between what's wrong and
whats true, and what would make God satisfied or dissatisfied. After the
knowledge and looking into the path of these faithful to God and their
viceroys and every allowed path that leads to it (?),

that God knows whatever he chooses or does from wether it be a sin or
obeying for His commandments, for He knows the ends of workings and
deeds that are done by His slaves and no incidents would happen without
His knowledgement before his (the human) existence, by his well or bad
chose, and He His Highness the one that knows the the guilt of Adam
whatever would be acted by him and whatever he would choose, as it is
the case with all His creations and slaves,

so from Him may praise be to Him the powers and destinies in doings and
not-doings, and the selection is made for these of responsibilities by
mind, heart and reality, and He is the one who Knows the ends and what
these of responsibilities might choose for themselves, if it was good it
is good, and if it an evil it is an evil, and there is no forcing for
the slave, but it is something in between, because the force and power
is from His Highness, and the full choice for these of responsibilities,
and God knows what might the slave choose for himself.

**(What is the tree that was prohibited for Adam PUH)**

Tales and speeches had differed about of what type is it and what is
it. Some said it is wheat and some said it is vine and grape while
others said it is camphor and still others said it is the fig. It is
said also that it is the tree of good and evil and it was said it is the
tree of eternity that the Angels used to eat from, and more had been
said. From M'ânee Al-Akhbâr [seems a book name] in its basing to
Al-Harawee said: I said to Al-Ridhâ (PUH): O son of prophet of God, tell
me about the tree that Adam and Eve ate from, what was it?

because many people differ in its nature, some say it is wheat, some
say it is grape and some say it is tree of the envy, then he said (PUH):
all of that is right, then I said: then what is the meaning of all these
different opinions? then he said (PUH): O Abâ As-Silt [=Al-Harawee], the
tree of paradise carries types, so it was wheat carrying grapes and it
is not like the trees of our life, and when God honoured him and
Reminded him of the prostrating of Angels before him and Letting him
into the paradise, he (Adam) said to himself: did God created a human
better than me? and God knew what was between him and himself and so
Called him and told him:

O Adam, left up your head and look to the leg of the Throne, so then
Adam left up his head and looked into the leg of the Throne and found
there it was written on it: No other God but Allah, Muhammad is the
prophet of Allah, 'Ali ben Abi Tâlib is the Appointed from God and his
wife Fâtima is the mistress of all women, and Al-Hasan and Al-Husain are
the masters of paradise's young people, so said Adam: O Lord, who are
they? then said His Highness: they are from your descendants, and they
are better than you and than the rest of my creation, and for them only
I did create you, and Created paradise and hell, and heavens with earth,
so be aware not to envy them and wish for their place and so demon would
take control over you, so then he got something in hisself about them
and then did the demon control over him until he ate from the tree that
he was prohibited from, and took control over Eve for her thoughts of
envy about Fâtima (PUH) until she ate from the tree like Adam did, and
so God put them out from His side down to earth.

And in contents of the tale as it is with other tales, the word "wish
for their place" points out that the meaning is "glee" and not "envy" in
its real meaning, because glee like wishing for their place, and envy is
wishing for their obsolescence, because envying is a sin and points out
to a lame character and the glee is totally against that,

and it is impossible for the father of human beings and prophets and
messenger, and the one whom Angels did prostrate before by God's
commandment and whom God Had created with His Hands and Inhabited in
paradise then had been chosen by God and Made him a prophet, it is
impossible for him to be an envious one, and from this point we believe
that the prohibition from eating from that tree was a prohibition for
the purity and not for a taboo, and it was mentioned before something
about the protection of prophets against doing sins and there is more to
do about that to come to you by God's well, and the meaning of the tree
of envy is that eating from it was because of envy, and if it was the
envy it would not have been eaten.

And it is mentioned that if it wasn't Adam's (PUH) guilt, no faithful
would have done any guilt ever, and if it wasn't that God relented
toward Adam, there would not have been any repentance for any guilty
ever, and from Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he was asked that how come the
inheritance of man is as much as twice of that of females so he said
(PUH): that is because the number of fruits that Adam and Eve ate were
eighteen, twelve were eaten by Adam and six were eaten by Eve and so the
inheritance is made up as mentioned before.

It had been told that when Adam was down from paradise a black mole
appeared in his face from the top of it til its feet and so long was his
sadness and crying for this, then came Gabriel (PUH) and said to him:
why crying Adam? so he (Adam) said: for this mole that occured in me, so
then he (Gabriel) told him: get up and pray, it is time for the first
prayer, so Adam did that and the mole shrinked to his chest, then he
(Gabriel) came again at the time of the second prayer and said to him:
get up Adam and pray this is the time for the second prayer and so he
did and the mole shrinked to his navel, and then came again at the time
of the third prayer and said to him:

get up Adam and pray this is the time for the third prayer and so he
did and the mole shrinked to his knee, then he came at the time of the
fourth prayer and said to him: get up Adam and pray this is the time for
the fourth prayer and so he did and the mole shrinked to his legs, then
he came at the time of the fifth prayer and Adam did the same and the
mole was out of him and he thanked God for this a lot, then Gabriel did
say to him: O Adam, your sons in this prayer are like you in this mole,
and who would pray from your sons each day and night five prayers he
would be out of his sins as you got out of this mole.

And also in a speech that when Adam (PUH) got down on earth he got a
beard as black as coal, so he held it with his hand and said: O Lord,
what is this? and He answered him: this is the beard, I made it as an
ornamet for you and your male descendants until the doomsday. And it was
mentioned before that the inhabitation of Adam and Eve in paradise was
for seven hours until they got out of it, and that God breathed in Adam
with His Spirit after the sunset of Friday and then Created Eve after
him,

then Commanded the Angels to prostrate before him and Made him inhabit
His paradise since then, and the Imam (PUH) swore [not mentioned which
Imam is it] that they did not stay more than these hours on that day
until they did what was prohibited then God got them out after sunset
and didn't stay in it (Paradise) and they were moved to the yards of
paradise until it was the morning and their loins appeared then their
Lord said to them: Did not I prohibited you from that tree, so Adam got
ashamed and shy of his Lord and said: O our Lord, we did wrong to
ourselves and made a confession of our sins, O may You forgive us, then
did God say: get down from My heavens to earth for no sinners would be
in My paradise nor My heavens.


