The Place of Falling of Adam and Eve When They Got Down From Paradise
=====================================================================

What is famous from the Household (PUT) that Adam (PUH) fell down on
Al-Safâ and Eve on Al-Marwah [Al-Safâ and Al-Marwah are two hills in
Mecca and people go in between them seven times in pilgrimage season],
and what is famous for the most of Muslims is that Adam (PUH) fell down
on a mount called Sarandeeb [Notice: Sarandeeb is the old Arabic name
for Ceylon, Sri Lanka now] and it is called Nud also, and Eve did fall
in Jeddah, and some people suggested that this is the truth and their
fall on Al-Safâ and Al-Marwah was after they got into Mecca.

From Hayât Al-Hayawân for Al-Domayri [hayât al-hayawân means the life
of animals and seems it is a book's name] he said: Ka'b Al-Ahbâr did say
[Ka'b Al-Ahbâr was a nickname for the chief priest of jews]: God
revealed the snake in Asbahân [maybe he means Asfahân in Iran?] and
Iblis in Jeddah and Eve in 'Arafah [a mount around Mecca] and Adam in
Sarandeeb and it is in the higher region of China in the sea of India
[this description is somehow close to modern day Sri Lanka], and it is a
high place where seamen can see it from a distance of days and it bears
the footprint of Adam (PUH) in stones, and this mount is seen each night
as a lightning without clouds, and it rains in everyday to wash the foot
steps of Adam (PUH), and it is told that Rubies are found in this mount
and also Diamonds with Aloeswood (Agar wood, Oud, Ood).

In tales, that when Adam (PUH) came to Mecca from India by a
commandment from God, every step he would take there would be a
prosperity of land in its place, and everything in between was just a
desert, all along the way until he reached Mecca, and when he reached
Mecca he went around the Holy place.

It had been told also that when God got Adam down, He got down with him
one hundred and twenty rods and branches that got every seed for every
type of grains, and that he died on Friday, in the sixth of April in the
same hour that he was created in, and he was nine hundred and thirty
years old, and it had been said also that he died after he got forty
thousands of his sons, grandsons and grand grandsons.

And from Abi Jafar Al-Bâqir (PUH) that he said: God the Exalted one
Inspired to Adam: O Adam, I would collect all goodness for you in four
words, one for Me, one for you, one between Me and you, and one between
you and people. The one for Me is that you worship Me and no one else,
and the one for you is that I will reward you for your deeds as much as
you need, and the one between Me and you is that you have to pray and
praise Me and I will answer you, and the one between you and people is
that you have to love for people what you love for yourself.

Some tidings mentioned that God revealed a book written in Syriac made
of tweny one pages, and it is the first book ever to be revealed on
human beings, and in it there was one thousand thousand [a million]
tongues, no people with one of these tongues would understand the other
without education, and Adam has the knowledge in every tongue and can
speak it better than its native speakers, and contained also the clues
of God and His worshippings, judgements, rules and laws..etc

from Ibn 'Abbâs that he said: When God created Adam, and Breathed in
him from His Spirit, he sneezed and God inspired him to thank Him so he
said: Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, so his Lord said to him:
mercy of your Lord be upon you. And when God made Angels prostrate
before him, he got exclaimed and said: O Lord, You created a creation
that is beloved to You more than me?

but God didn't answer him, then he asked again, and God didn't answer,
then he asked for the third time but god didn't answer him, then God did
say: Yes, and for them only I did create you, then he said: O Lord let
me see them, then God ordered the Angels of the veils to left off the
veils, and when they did and Adam looked, he found out five ghosts in
front of the Throne, then he said: O Lord who are they? then God did
say: O Adam, this is my prophet Muhammad, and this is 'Ali the Prince of
Believers,

the cousin of my prophet and his viceroy, and this is Fâtima the
daughter of my prophet, and these two are Al-Hasan and Al-Husain the
sons of 'Ali and sons of my prophet, then He said: and they are your
descendants, so Adam got happy for this. And when he did the sin he
said: O Lord I ask You by Muhammad and 'Ali and Al-Hasan and Al-Husain
to relent toward me, and so God relented toward him by them, and this is
what is meant by God's saying "Then Adam received from his Lord words
(of revelation),

and He relented toward him" (Al-Baqarah: 37). When Adam got down on
earth, he made a ring and carved on it: Muhammad is the prophet of God
and 'Ali is the Prince of Believers. It is mentioned also that Adam was
called "Abi Muhammad" [meaning: father of Muhammad, it is a common
Arabic way also to call men by the names of their elder males children
as: Aba Nasir, meaning father of Nasir and so on. Aba could be Abu and
Abi and this is subject to change according to the grammar of the Arabic
language]

The mention of Muhammad, 'Ali, Fâtima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain (PUT) is
repeated, and viewing them by Adam (PUH) is repeated also, once upon the
leg of the Throne, once on the door of the Throne and once in front of
the Throne and so on. They are mentioned once by the Holy name of God,
the Exalted, one time and another without It, and all of this would not
be a reason for confusion and it would be fine to consider all of that
is correct to show their virtues and how they are different from the
others and so people would not have to argue about it with God, and so
everyone would die and live with its knowledgement and Allah is no
oppressor of (His) bondmen.

**(Crying of Adam PUH for paradise)**

It was told that Adam (PUH) cried for paradise until it was like great
rivers on his cheeks because of tears, and he stood at the door of Kaba
and his clothes were of the skins of cows and camels and said: O Lord
help me with my mistake and Make repentace upon me and Let me back into
the place that I were in. Then said God, the Exalted one: I helped you,
and Made repentace upon you and I will let you back in the place that I
got you out from. It is doubtless that what we understand and everyone
with the right mind would understand as well that the paradise that Adam
is asking his Lord to be back into is the paradise of eternity,

and it was the place that he were in and got out from, and the clue to
that is the tidings about him viewing the place (level) of Muhammad,
'Ali, Fâtima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain (PUT) and that he saw their names
written on the corners of the Throne and it was told that the Throne is
the roof of paradise as mentioned in Hadith, and it is behind heavens
and its roof is the Throne. Add to that, the words of revelation that
Adam received from his Lord and Relented toward him were of Muhammad and
his Household (PUT) and His Holy saying "fulfilled them"(Al-Baqarah:
124) meaning until Al-Qâ'im Al-Mahdi from the Household of Muhammad
(PUH), they are the twelve Imams adding the nine descendants of
Al-Husain (PUT).

Also mentioned that the words that Adam received from his Lord are His
Holy saying "Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves..etc"(Al-A'raf: 23) and
also mentioned they are the prayer of the prophet (PUH): O praise be to
You my Lord and Thanks..etc [This is a line from a prayer that seems
famous but I didn't get to know], and other things had been mentioned
also but the probability that all of that is true is not impossible, but
the most common base is what was mentioned by the purified masters that
the words that was received were their names (PUT). As supported by
Al-Mofadhal ben 'Omar he said:

Abu 'Abdullah Al-Sâdiq (PUH) said: God, the Exalted, may praise be to
Him, created the souls before the bodies by two thousands, and Made the
higher of them and the most honourable are these of Muhammad, 'Ali,
Fâtima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain, and the rest of the Imams after them
(PUT), and Showed them to the heavens and earth with mounts and their
lights covered them all, then God did say to the heavens and earth with
the mounts: these are my judges and rulers over my creations, for them
and for these who follow their path I made My paradise, and for these
who oppose them I made My hell, and whoever claims their position from
Me and their greatness I would torture him like I did not Do to anyone
else, and whoever agreed to be loyal to them and never claimed their
position I shall Let him be with them in paradise, and being loyal to
them is a fidelity to be taken by My creation..etc.

It is a long speech where he mentioned their virtues and the goodness
that would be to these who would be loyal to them and the damnations on
whoever take them as a foe and took over their rights and helped others
over them and whoever does this, God Prepared for him the shame and
torture.

Also in it there is a warning for these who wishes for their places,
and that when Adam and Eve (PUT) got down to earth, Gabriel (PUH) came
to them and guided them to ask their Lord by the right of the names that
they saw on the leg of the Throne to Relent toward them, so then they
said: O Lord we ask You by the right of the closest to You, Muhammd and
'Ali and Fâtima and Al-Hasan and Al-Husain and the Imams after them to
Relent toward us and Have mercy upon us, so then God relented toward
them. All the prophets after that kept this fidelity then and advised
their viceroys and the loyals of their nations so they denied to claim
it for themselves and never forgot about it, and whoever's soul might
get sick and get wicked by his demons to put himself in such place,
damnations he will get from God and torture, and for this God, the
Exalted, did say "Lo! We offered the trust unto the heavens and the
earth and the hills, but they shrank from bearing it and were afraid of
it. And man assumed it. Lo! he hath proved a tyrant and a
fool"(Al-Ahzab: 72).

And it is never thought of Adam (PUH) being one of these who wished for
their place and so he would be one of these who took their rights, but
No and Never. But what is meant by the previous Holy phrase in "man
assumed it" is assuming this trust (fidelity) without any right for
doing this, as it is mentioned by some famous wisemen with little
difference between each tale (explanation), "Those who do wrong will
come to know by what a (great) reverse they will be
overturned!"(Al-Shu'arâ': 227) [This paragraph was shortened by the
overall meaning translation]

It is told by the holy prophet (PUH) that when Adam (PUH) did the sin,
a call came from the Throne towards him saying: O Adam, leave My
vicinity, because no one stays in and refuses My commandment, then Adam
did cry and the Angels cried with him, then God sent him Gabriel to get
him down to earth with blackened face, then when Angels did see that
cried loudly and lamented and said: O Lord, a creation You did Create
and Breathed in it by Your Spirit and Made Your Angels prostrate before
him,

so You did Change his whiteness to blackness with one sin? Then a call
came toward him from heavens: O Adam, fast for your Lord this day, and
it was the thirteenth day of the month, and one third of the blackness
was removed from Adam (PUH), then he was called again in the fourteenth
day to fast for Lord and so two thirds of the blackness went out, and
then called again in the fifteenth day to fast and so he did and all of
the blackness went out, and for this these days were called "Al-Ayam
Al-Beedh" (The White Days) in which Adam retained his whiteness, then a
called from heavens called him: O Adam, these three days I made for you
and your descendants and whoever fasted these three days from each month
he would be as if he had fasted all of his life.

From the explanation of Al-Imam Al-'Askiri (PUH) in his explanation of
God's saying "but come not nigh this tree..etc"(Al-Baqarah: 35), that it
is the tree of wisdom of Muhammad and his Household that God made it for
them only and it was for them only in special and no one would eat from
it except them, and they were eating from it after they fed the wretch,
the orphan and the prisoner and the revelation of the chapter of Al-Dahr
[Also called Al-Insân. Al-Dahr means The Life and Al-Insân means The
Man]

about them with the agreement of all interpreters, and so they did not
feel any hunger, thirst, nor tiredness after they ate from it. It is a
tree that was not like any tree in paradise and carried many
charactersitics and has lot of different types of wheat, grape, fig and
the rest of fruits, and this is why many interpreters did interpret the
type of this tree in many ways, so some of them said it is the wheat and
others said it is the grape and so on, so God did say: come not nigh
this tree, meaning you will be seeking the place and level of Muhammad
and his Household and their virtues, and this is something that God made
so special for them only, and it is the tree that whoever eats from by
the will of God, he would be inspired with the knowledge and wisdom of
those of old and those of later time without any need to learn. This
speech and its contents is not a weird because of what was mentioned
about the rights of the Household (PUT) before.

And then if you meditate fairly and neglected the partisanship and the
love of the self, and looked with the eye of your heart to what was
mentioned for 'Ali and the Household of 'Ali by the special and the
normal people, and asked these of thoughts and fair of your wisemen
about the place and level of 'Ali and the Household of 'Ali and their
knowledge and what God made them special with from virtues and true
characteristics, you would win the great luck and the happiness of the
two lifes [meaning this life and the after-life] and you would know that
they are the top of all creatures and they are the path to the God, and
their knowledge is not taken by someone else but was given by God, the
Exalted, and by the prophet (PUH) in a special position that no one else
would be able to count and limit (the knowledge). Look to all what the
wisemen of Islam agreed on about the rightness of what was mentioned
that the holy prophet (PUH) taught 'Ali one thousand doors of knowledge,
from each each door there is one thousand doors are opened to him.
Meditate about this and what does it mean and what is wanted by it, and
do not take it easy and lose.

Their knowledge is not compared by their age, but it is all equal to
whatever age they are, and whoever took a look into their lives and
history would know that fact clearly. Their hearts never stop praising
God, and they know the most about what people need in their lives, rules
and laws, and the disciplines of all the heavenly religions of rules and
laws, worshippings and policies as revealed in its truthful state.

Nothing is hidden from them about what people and artists did make of
industries, careers, tiniest inventions and the weirdest sciences to the
fullest and they know more than its inventors in these inventions and
nothing of what mankind did make would be out of their knowledge by the
care of God, the Exalted, and His inspiration, because they are the
rulers by God over His creations by whatever means this word would be
understood, and whoever would deny this would be of incomplete faith,
and there are clues and prooves that cut out the road for the opponent
and narrow his way, and they have the knowledge of troubles and what
happened or what will happen until the doomsday, add to that the
knowledge of the Islamic laws as it was revealed on their grandfather
the Chosen [meaning the prophet] (PUH),

and 'Ali is the one who tells about himself the holiness and he's the
most truthful sayer after God, the Exalted and His chosen prophet (PUH)
when he said: in here (and pointing to his holy chest) a great
knowledge, if only I can find someone to bear it. He said also (after he
swore by God): I've become to know a secret that if I told you about you
would be diffused as the robes of buckets in the far distant wells. And
he's the sayer also: I know what are in heavens and earth and I know
what is in paradise and hell, and i know what was and what will be..etc.
He said also: ask me before you lose me, and a lot more of the same
sayings and what was been told about his rights by the holy prophets
(PUH) is not countable and one of the most famous speeches for him
(PUH):

if I wasn't just afraid that you would say in 'Ali like what the
christians said about Jesus the son of Mary, I would say something that
would make you take the sand from beneath his feet. And from him (PUH)
speaking to 'Ali: O 'Ali, no one loves you but a believer, and no one
hates you but a hypocrite, and so the love of 'Ali is faith and his hate
is hypocrisy. Could anyone count his virtues and miracles?, here is Nahj
Al-Balâghah in front of you, meditate through it and it will guide you
through, and how many times they did the books and detailed his virtues
and miracles and Ahmad ben Hanbal [an Islamic wiseman or scholar that
created a creed in Islam known by his name] did show a lot of these
[Nahj Al-Balâghah: a famous book that collects lot of 'Ali ben Abi
Tâlib's speeches, it is a great source for anyone that would like to see
the magic of Arabic tongue, for 'Ali ben Abi Tâlib was and still one of
the greatest personnes that bore the great knowledges of the Arabic
language].

Al-Shâfi'i [another scholar that created another creed] did make poems
about him ('Ali PUH), add to that me also [the author of this book], and
also Ibno Abi Al-Hadeed Abdul-Hameed, and Abdul-Bâqi Al-Omari and
others. The wiseman Al-Hilli issued a book that he called "Kitab
Al-Alfayn" (Book of the two thousands) that contained two thousands
clues by logic and by chained speeches for that 'Ali being an Imam and
protected against the wrong doings and the same for his eleven
descendants one by one until the last of them Al-Mahdi the awaited
absent, may our souls be a ransom to him. It is not a speech to show
their virtues and their levels, however, but it was necessary to show
this in this position.


