Having a Tent For Them in the Place of the Holy House
=====================================================

From Abi Jafar Al-Bâqir (PUH) from his fathers (PUT): God sent to
Gabriel (PUH) that I had mercy upon Adam and Eve so get them a tent from
the tents of paradise and make it stand in the place of the House and
its base that was lifted before by the Angels, and so did Gabriel, and
made a stand for it in the place of the House then he got them down from
Al-Safâ and Al-Marwah and gathered them together in the tent.

The pillar of the tent was made of ruby and its light enlightened the
mounts of Mecca, and the light reached the borders of Al-Haram, and it
is the position of Al-Haram nowadays [meaning borders of Mecca maybe?],
and so God made it sacred for the tent and the pillar that are from
paradise. Then the tent was stretched and the end of the tent's ropes
were the mosque and it is Al-Masjid Al-Harâm (the Holy "Sacred" Mosque).
Then God revelaed seventy thousands angels to guard the tent against
demons and cheer Adam and Eve, and so they were going around the tent
and guard it.

It is probable that God after that sent to Gabriel (PUH) to get down to
Adam and Eve and make them depart the place of the House and build it
with stones and raise up its basis and complete it for the rest of the
Angels and the creation of Adam's descendants. So he got down to them
and made them out of the tent and moved them away from the House and the
tent as well. Then Gabriel raised the basis of the House by a stone from
Al-Safâ, and a stone from Al-Marwah,

and a stone from the mount of Sinai, and a stone from the mount of
Al-Salâm [Al-Salâm means The Peace] and it is at the hind of the House
at the back of Kaba, and made these stones the corners of the Holy
House, and so he completed it by stones from the mount of Abi-Qubays as
he was commanded by God, and made for it two doors, to the east and to
the west. When he was done with its building, Angels started to go
around it and when Adam and Eve saw that, they also started going around
it seven by seven and it is the law that went on in his (Adam)
descendants until the doomsday.

And in Ilal Al-Sharâye' (Reasons of Laws) from Bakeer ben A'yon he
said: Abu 'Abdullah Al-Sâdiq (PUH) said to me: do you know what it was
the black stone in the Holy corner of Kaba? then he said: I said no, he
said (PUH) then: it was one of the greatest Angels that God, the
Exalted, did Have and when God took the covenant from the Angels, he was
the first to admit it and so God made him the guardian for all of His
creation and Gave him the covenant to keep and Decided to Make all the
creations to renew their covenants with him each year,

then God made him in company with Adam in paradise to remind him of the
covenant and renew it each year, so when Adam did the sin and got out of
paradise, God made him forget the covenant that He took over him and his
descendants, for Muhammad and his viceroy and his descendants the
protected against wrong doings, and Made him buffled and lost, but when
He relented toward Adam He made this Angel in the picture of a white
pearl and Sent it down from paradise to Adam when he was in the lands of
India.

When Adam saw this, he got pleased though he didn't know what it was
except it is some treasure, then God made him speak and said: O Adam,
did you know me? then Adam said: no! then he answered: O yes, the demon
overcame you and made you forget to praise your Lord, then he changed to
his true shape as it was in paradise with Adam (PUH) and said to Adam:
where is the covenant? And when Adam remembered that jumped to him and
cried and kissed him and renewed his covenant, then God changed him to a
clear white pearl and Adam (PUH) carried him over his shoulders for his
honour, and when he gets tired, Gabriel (PUH) would take it over, until
they got to Mecca.

It was there in Mecca that Adam kept it and renew his covenant every
day and night and when God wanted to build the Kaba and sent Gabriel for
this purpose and started in building, made this stone and it is the
white pearl in the corner that it is in nowadays, and he (Gabriel)
sactified God and praised Him, and that's why the law goes for praising
and sanctifying everytime being in front of the corner that carries the
Holy stone, and so it is until this very day.

One of the religious duties to do when visiting the Holy House is to
come to the Black Stone and kiss it if it was possible, or raise up the
hand towards it and say: O Lord my fidelity I've done, and my covenant
I've made to Testify me with the deed. [this is a line from a prayer
said on pilgrimage time] This is the way of Muslims and all who came
before them from the various religions and laws that admit the honour of
the Holy House and the honoured Stone, and it is widely believed by
these of the right wisdom and knowledge that an angel can be shaped in
any shape even a stone, so it not a weird thing that it is indeed an
angel in the shape of a stone [meaning the Black Stone], then how you
Muslim raise your hand towards it, and though you speak to your Lord,
but you are pointing toward the Holy stone, and it is not like any stone
that appear to the public.

Some unbelievers make it as a fictitious tale to mock at it and mock at
what the Muslims do and the people of the past time religions did, so we
take refuse to God the Almighty from these who mock at what God had
ordered to be honoured by His prophets and Ordered His creations to
glorify and honour it."He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no
guide"(Al-Ra'd: 33)

**(Of what was the dog created)**

It is mentioned from the prophet (PUH) when he was asked about the dog,
of what he was created, he said (PUH): God created it from the saliva of
Iblis, and the questioner asked: and how was that O prophet of God, he
then said (PUH): when God got Adam and Eve down to earth, He got them
down like shaking chicks, and when their foe Iblis the damned saw them
he ran to the lions ,and they were on earth before Adam, and then said
to them: there are two birds got down from the sky like them no one saw
before, come and eat them.

Then the lions ran with Iblis, and they were in a far place away from
them (Adam and Eve) and Iblis went out shouting and seducing them and
tell them of how close they are, and because of his haste and his many
words coming out of his mouth, some saliva came out and from that saliva
did God create two dogs, one male and the other a female, and they stood
before Adam and Eve protecting them from the lions and they didn't allow
the lions to approach and since that day the dog is an enemy for the
lion and the lion is an enemy for the dog.

It is mentioned also that when God got Adam (PUH) down to earth,
Ordered him to till the land and Gave him plants from paradise, so He
gave him palms, grape, olive and pomegranate and so on, and so he(Adam)
planted them to be for him and for his children and descendants after
him and he ate from the fruits, and the grape were the most aromatic and
prettier than musk and sweeter than honey, and the palm of Mary the
daughter of Amram (PUH) is the Al-'Ajwah [type of palms, it might be
translated as "pressed dates"],

and it is one of paradise's palms and was revealed in Kanun [what is
meant here it might be revealed in the month of Kanun as it is named by
people of Iraq and Syria and the surroundings where the Assyrian names
still in use for solar months], and also revealed with Adam (PUH)
Al-'Ateeq [another type of palms] and from it did the palm get diverse,
and it was mentioned before that Adam (PUH) got down with him some rods
and branches that carried every seed for every grain, and mentioned also
many things more than we had said about what did he face but all left
out to mention only the most important things for who got the heart of
caution and an ear to listen, and they mentioned also that he was
seventy arms in length and Eve was thirty five arms in length, and he
lived for nine hundreds and thirty years and was burried in a cave in
the mount of Abi-Qubays and his face to the Kaba, and Eve lived after
him by one year then got sick for fifteen days and died then burried
beside him, and when they died there did exist forty thousands from
their descendants.

Whoever scans through the life of Adam and Eve (PUT) since they were
created by God until the last day of their lives, he would surely know
that they were and still beloved by God and faithful ones and He only
knows their secrets and what are they in real and they are the parents
of human beings and the prophets and messengers, and everyone is out of
them and their son, though some might be better than them and all on
earth and on earth they live and die and on its surface will be grouped,
and He, praise be to Him, know all that and whatever might happened by
them and what will be from their descendants even before their creation,
since the enterance of Adam and Eve into paradise and their exit and
whatever happened to them before their enterance and after their exit,
for a secret that no one knows but Him and a wisdom of His own and it is
all in His hands and no one would share Him in this or in any other
matter or any command, and so no power and no strength but by Him.

Meditate, understand and notice the company of Gabriel (PUH) for them
and his contact with Adam (PUH) without any delay and telling him(Adam)
about anything from God and about everything he met and happened with
him, and the consignment of God for him toward Adam in paradise and
after getting out of it and getting him down on earth and amusing
him(Adam) and carrying the Black Stone (the white pearl) with him from
India to Mecca and revealing the tent for him from paradise by
commandment of God and revealing the Angels to his side to amuse him by
commandment of God and teaching him the hermitage of pilgrimage, so how
we would say something that is not proper about him(Adam), and that he
did something wrong against God, the Exalted, and that he refused the
commandment of God by doing such sin, No and Never, and even though God
called it a sin, then it is like that and it is better to leave it for
Him to judge, and we showed something in the introduction of this book
about the infallibility of the prophets.

And Adam (PUH) did say to Moses the son of Amram (PUH) when God
gathered them together: Take it easy on your father O son..etc, and
mentioned that Moses asked God to gather them together, so then Adam
(PUH) did not let his heart forget about God even for a twinkling of an
eye, and God, the Exalted, blamed him and he knew that he had done
something wrong and regretted about it and been sorry for what he had
done by eating from the tree, and he cried and been sad for so long for
the anger of God, his beloved, his Creator and his Master and Lord, and
Who founded him from nothing and from sand to existence,

completed with thought and sense, and he knew that God did not Want him
to eat from the tree that is well known with its type and he did ate
from it by the seduction of Iblis the damned and it is against the will
of the Master, the High, the Exalted and Almighty, and so the sin of
Adam and his deed with the tree that was prohibited and to Whom
prohibited him was great, and not a taboo, but what he had done was
something disliked, and this is the truth that we believe in and no
doubt we have about it for what we had explained. [the previous
paragraph was a highly philosophical in its terms and might contain
uncorrect translations].


