Introduction
============

The main characteristic of the contemporary history of the Islamic
civilization is full-fledge confrontation and conflict between the
Islamic culture and the Western culture. 1

However, regrettably, in the field of research the confrontation
between the two great civilizations " Islamic and Western " is totally
different. On the one hand, due to the longstanding dictatorial
governments, keeping the masses away from the religious culture and
confining the religious thought to the individual rites and rituals, a
static, disappointing atmosphere, devoid of any innovation, permeates
the Islamic World.

On the other hand, due to the renaissance and experiencing life in the
ambiance of modernism, an atmosphere of creativity, modernization,
social activities, and inclination towards discovery and domination of
the unknown realms (sciences, territories, cultures and civilizations of
other nations) permeate the Western world.

Hence, cultural interaction and exchange, which is possible only within
the framework of a bilateral dialogue, has given its way to a unilateral
monologue, that is, the all-out arrival of Western concepts and terms in
the Islamic countries. This challenge is the main reason for the
emergence of social-religious reformist movements of the Muslim
intellectuals in the contemporary Islamic societies.

Having felt the threat of metamorphosis and destruction of cultural
identity and originality of the Islamic societies, Muslim social
reformers founded the movement for the revival of Islamic thought. The
movement aimed to revise the religious teachings and expurgate them from
superstitions and intellectual residues and ultimately reinterpret the
religious teachings according to the requirements of time and space in
order to lay the foundations of cultural activities in the Muslim
societies to spread and consolidate fundamentals of Islamic culture
among the masses. 2

"The rise of the European civilization and its domination of the
Eastern territories, paralleled with the deterioration and decline of
Islamic civilization in the nineteenth century, caused various reactions
by the Muslim scholars. These reactions, stemming from national,
religious emotions and human needs, compelled the scholars and believers
to endeavor for finding a solution to restore their identity and
reconstruct their civilization. Therefore the nuclei of reformist
movements were formed one after another in the Islamic world… These
movements can be designated as the Islamic Renaissance or Islamic
Revivalism." 3


**Main Challenges of the Islamic Civilization**

The most fundamental questions and challenges of the Muslim thinkers in
the contemporary world are as follows:

**1- The Threat of Alienation of the Society from Islamic-Indigenous
Identity**

The arrival of the concepts and terms of the alien culture in the
Islamic societies and their acceptance by the scholars, who were
disappointed at the dictatorial rulers - who had distanced themselves
from the religious-indigenous culture " was spreading so quickly and
irrationally that the danger of the destruction of cultural identity
became quite palpable.

On the other hand the approach of the Western culture to such human
values as freedom, justice, citizenship rights and the definitions of
these concepts was basically different from that of the Eastern Muslim
man. Therefore the masses in the Muslim societies were alien to these
concepts, which were interpreted through a Western outlook.

In every society, the scholars are the representatives and delineators
of the course of movement of the society towards the future and they are
the ones who intellectually feed the society. Therefore if they distance
themselves from the society, a gap will appear between them and the
masses. If this happens, the cultural foundations of the society will be
weakened and such a culture will lose its power of progress and fruition
and therefore cannot meet the needs of the society.

Under the circumstances, the identity and originality of the society
are gradually eroded and a society without an identity cannot take any
action to reform its body. The Muslim scholars had realized that without
a scientific study of the basic concepts and principles of their own
Islamic culture, and without revival and theoretical elaboration of such
concepts as Islamic brotherhood, Islamic ummah, freedom and justice in
Islamic viewpoint, etc.

vis-à-vis the alien concepts and terms of the Western culture, Muslims
will not find their answers within their own indigenous culture and the
end result will be stagnation of growth, dynamism and development of
Islamic thought. Inevitably such a man will resort to the alien culture
and ultimately as a result of conflict between indigenous cultural
attractions and those of the alien culture, his mentality will be more
and more split.


**2- Expansion of the Sphere of Power of Dictatorial**

**Governments in Islamic Societies**

The ruling system as well as the theoreticians of the ruling powers in
the Islamic countries had well realized that the alien concepts did not
enjoy an historical and cultural background in the Islamic countries. As
a result they lacked any theoretical backing and firmness of
interpretation. Therefore in a crafty measure they changed their nature
and through combination of these concepts with their own legitimizing
issues transformed them into new instruments for the legitimization of
their own authoritarian rules.

They expanded the sphere of their dictatorship and hid their violent
face under the veneer of deceiving masks. Such concepts as progressive
dictatorial rule, guided democracy, superior civilization and such
strategies as extremist nationalism (chauvinism) pan Arabism, pan
Iranism, etc. are among the most prevailing ones during this stage of
political history of the Islamic world.

"Self-centeredness of authoritarian rulers in the world of Islam stems
from this fact. For instance, self-centeredness in development justifies
the political order through referring to economic disorderliness;
nationalist self-centeredness on its part justifies relies on the role
of the leader by referring to the need to resist foreign factors and
military self-centeredness which previously used to rely on the
justification of conquest, now emphasizes on the necessity of
preservation of order through resort to the force." 4

Imam Khomeini states: "In our time, the words and logics have been
misplaced, open political atmosphere is in fact the very suppression and
all-out censors. The "great civilization" is in fact savageries worse
than that of the medieval ages. The reconciliation government kills the
people with tanks, cannons and machineguns. Independence is military,
economic and cultural dependence." 5


**Solutions**

Under the critical circumstances, Muslim scholars have laid the
foundation of a reformist movement based on the indigenous-religious
elements of their society, which is designated as the movement for the
revival of religious thought.

The outstanding solutions forwarded by the Muslim intellectuals in our
contemporary world may be classified as follows:

**1- Return to Indigenous-Religious Culture**

Commenting on the issue, Nouruallah Qeisary states: "The ideas of Seyed
Jamal uddin Assadabadi, attention to religious thoughts, purification of
Islam from superstitions, emphasis on the unity of Muslims in the light
of the Islamic decrees and principles, and encouragement of the Muslim
ulema to take political stances became a headway for an inclination
which entered Islam into the realm of politics and finally the
leadership of the political religious activities of the Muslims since
1960s by Imam Khomeini and his book, Wilayat Faqih, a new theory of
Islamic government,

turned the political Islamic tendency into the dominant tendency,
uniting all the Muslim fighters under a single banner to lead the
historical developments until the collapse of the Pahlavi regime and
establishment of the Islamic Republic of Iran." 6

**2- Struggle Against Longstanding Dictatorial Rules in Islamic
Societies**

The dictatorial systems had become one of the main obsessions of the
Muslims thinkers. They considered the ruling dictatorial systems as one
of the greatest problems of the Eastern societies. However the reason
for the establishment of dictatorial rules in their opinion was not
confined to the authoritarian tendencies of the rulers.

They maintained that submission to dictatorship, as a component of the
Eastern culture, had prepared the grounds for the continuation of
authoritarianism and dictatorship in these territories. Therefore, the
Muslim thinkers maintained that in order to eliminate dictatorship, and
prevent new dictatorial rules, the spirit of submission to dictatorship
should be eliminated. In a message to the world Muslims, Imam Khomeini
writes: "O, Muslims of the world, since you have been inflicted with
gradual demise under the domination of rulers, you should overcome the
fear of death and rely on the zealous, martyrdom-seeking youth who are
ready to defeat the frontlines of infidelity and inequity.

Do not think of preserving the status quo, rather think of getting rid
of captivity and redemption from slavery, for honor and dignity are
achieved in the light of struggle and the first step of struggle is
determination." 7

**3- Consolidation the Cultural Elements of Society with Theoretical
Backing**

Many Muslim thinkers have tried to expand and develop the theoretical
foundations of religious beliefs through revision, analysis, and
purification of people’s religious beliefs in order to increase the
intellectual, convictional capabilities of the Islamic society. In fact,
in order to transform the metamorphosed indigenous-religious culture of
the Muslims, they tried to give a human-centered definition of this
culture based on the clear source of revelation.

This culture enjoys richer theoretical and rational foundations
compared to the materialistic Western thought, particularly with regard
to sociopolitical thoughts of Islam and its ideas about man’s dignity,
individual rights, and his social status.

Islam is compatible with man’s primordial nature and its principles aim
to preserve his honor and dignity. Man’s status in Islamic thought is so
sublime that he is considered the "representative of God" on earth.

It should be borne in mind that a calculated, diabolic plot is being
hatched by the arrogant camp, targeting the entire Islamic world. The
main objective of this plot is to project the Islamic culture and
civilization as an ineffective body and incapable of responding to man’s
contemporary needs.

It also tries to make the Muslims believe that the main reason for the
backwardness of the Islamic world is Islamic culture and thought. The
arrogant camp did not confine its activities to this objective, rather
through poisonous propaganda it tried to make the Muslims believe that
the only solution for the salvation of the Islamic societies from
backwardness and achievement of progress and social-material welfare was
bidding farewell with the Islamic thought and turning back to
indigenous-religious culture and in turn acceptance of the Western
culture.

Without any doubt the inroad of Western concepts and terms as well as
the presence of their agents in various social levels of the Islamic
societies as well as application of colonial, exploitative thought,
based on Western utilitarianism, underline the sensitivity of the
prevailing situation and the crucial responsibility the Muslim thinkers
shoulder in confronting the crises and directing the society towards
acceptance, establishment and continuation of Islamic cultural values.

Realizing the existing problem, the founder of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Imam Khomeini, called on the Muslim ummah to come out of the
cocoon of isolation vis-à-vis the cultural invasion of the aliens, and
encouraged them to dynamically revive the religious culture, for he
maintained that the religious cultural values are the most effective
weapons of the Muslims in this campaign:

"Islam is the religion of movement. The holy Quran is movement.
Movement from nature to the unseen, from materialism to spiritualism,
movement in the way of justice, and movement in the way of the
establishment of justice; unfortunately, those who wanted to plunder the
East and captivated the Muslim nations, made such a propaganda that even
the Easterners themselves,

those who were ignorant of Islam and monotheistic books, believed them.
The monotheistic schools were all schools of movement, but they
propagated to the contrary and claimed that religion is the opium of the
masses, that is, religion has come to destroy the people… This is
exactly contrary to the fact." 8

**4- Uniting Various Islamic Social Strata (Islamic Ummah)**

The redefinition of the concept of Islamic ummah and attempts to
reinterpret it in accordance with the prevailing conditions and
requirements of today’s Islamic society will provide the Islamic ummah
with a suitable strategy to confront the intellectual and identity
crises the Muslims face and will also help them systematize and define
the fundamentals of the religious thought.

The incessant struggles and endeavors of the Muslims and Muslim
thinkers in contemporary era to revive the sublime Islamic thought among
the Muslims has to a great extent prevented the spread, invasion or
progress of Western materialistic thought in the Islamic societies,
preparing the grounds for the spread of self-confidence among the
Muslims and their confidence on the unlimited capabilities of the
Islamic culture.

The Muslim thinkers had to offer an alternative intellectual-cultural
model. Particularly in the realm of sociopolitical thought they had to
offer a government model compatible with the religious-indigenous
cultural conditions of the Islamic society. However, the contemporary
Muslim thinkers enjoyed an advantage compared to other social thinkers
of the non-Muslim Third World countries, that is, the experience of the
Islamic civilization in the formation of religious government in the
early years of the advent of Islam by Prophet Muhammad (PBUH).

Through most perfect and humane laws, the Prophet (PBUH) could prepare
the grounds for the glory and grandeur of the Muslims and spread of the
divine religion of Islam across the world in the shortest possible
time.

Therefore, Muslim thinkers enjoyed all necessary instruments for the
presentation of a suitable government model, based on the Islamic
principles and even had the experience of the establishment of the most
perfect model of religious government in their store. What materialized
in the form of the greatest and most principled popular movement of the
history in the late twentieth century and astonished the entire world
was the emergence and continuation of the religious revolution of the
Iranian people whose final victory led to the establishment of a
religious government in Iran.

By relying on the sublime religious values on one hand, and using the
disappointing atmosphere prevailing in Iran " which stemmed from the
intermittent failures of the internationalist movements such as
nationalism, Marxism, liberalism, reformism, etc. " on the other, the
father of the Islamic Revolution, Imam Khomeini, chanted the slogan of
struggle against the tyrannical, dependent regime and succeeded to
depict a clear picture of the holy Prophet (PBUH) of Islam, the
infallible Imams and the society founded by the Prophet (PBUH)

[Jamiat un Nabi] for the Iranian nation in order to encourage them to
rise against all manifestations of oppression, inequity and dependency."
9


**Chapter 1 : Islamic Culture-World of Islam**

**Unlimited Capabilities**

Establishment of Religious Government, Demonstration of the
Capabilities of World of Islam One of the main characteristics of Islam,
which also constitutes its main body, is being a social religion. The
social principles of Islam are so comprehensive that their scopes go
beyond mere recommendations on the nature of people’s relations with
each other. In fact in order to implement these principles, the
existence of a system with executive power is indispensable. The decrees
on Imamate, following (obedience) consultation, commandment of good and
prohibition of evil, and holy war, which are called governmental
decrees, belong to this category.

Islam is the most perfect divine religion and the holy Quran is the
only divine book that has not been falsified. Moreover the Islamic laws,
legislated by the divine lawgiver, are based on man’s primordial nature
and project Islam as the most human-oriented culture. Therefore, Islamic
political thought which stems from the sublime Islamic culture,

prepares the grounds for the establishment of the most sublime and
perfect structure of a religious government - a government based on
divine laws headed by the most merited and qualified member of the
Islamic ummah. Such government offers a path for material and spiritual
felicity and perfection of man through revival and spread of sublime
Islamic values in the society.

Throughout the history of the Islamic civilization " since the advent
of Islam till date " Muslim thinkers, through proper understanding of
the unlimited capabilities of Islam for the formation of an Islamic
government and its role in guiding human beings, particularly the
Muslims, as well as the restoration of the grandeur of the world of
Islam have always been preoccupied with the establishment of a religious
government.

"The concept of perfect man in the Islamic civilization and its
materialization in the person of Prophet Muhammad (PBHU) (in the Sunni
jurisprudence) and in the person of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) and the
infallible Imams (PBHT) (in the Shii jurisprudence) " "Ye have indeed in
the Apostle of God a beautiful pattern (of conduct) for any of whose
hope is in God and the Final Day ..." 10

"and the social characteristics of Islam as well as its diverse
principles and decrees about the method of formation and establishment
of a religious government all in all are considered as valuable
cultural-religious data for the Muslim thinkers in their endeavor for
social reforms. Hence, in their endeavor to offer an alternative
government model, Muslim thinkers enjoyed all the required means on the
basis of human-based, sublime divine teachings; and even had the most
perfect model of divine government is at their disposal." 11

In fact the prevailing issues and problems of every society takes new
shapes depending on the conditions of time and space and hence require
befitting reply. The concept of individual inference or individual
reasoning (ijtihad) in Islamic jurisprudence provides the qualified,
pious Muslim jurisprudents to offer suitable answers to these questions
on the basis of unambiguous principles of this discipline " the Book,
the sunnah, consensus, and reason. This is one of the secrets of the
durability of Islam in the course of time. In this regard Imam Khomeini
states:

"I do not think that there is any method better than that of the
previous ulema for a thorough study of Islamic sciences. The
millennium-old history of research and investigation of the veracious
ulema of Islam bears testimony to our claim regarding the fruition of
the sacred sapling of Islam." 12

Without any doubt the founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Imam
Khomeini, was the most distinguished disciple of the rich Islamic
culture, had the highest command of the Islamic teachings and was the
greatest social reformer in the world of Islam. Relying on his deep
knowledge and proper social insight, he could realize the challenges of
the Islamic society and founded the popular, Islamic struggles through
revival of religious thought and their spread among the Islamic ummah by
relying on the power of the Muslim masses.

Finally through his insightful leadership of the struggles, he founded
the first religious government in the contemporary world " a world that
has distanced itself from spiritual values.

In sum, the establishment of the divine religion in the Arabian
peninsula, the legislation of the most human-based social decrees which
are based on human primordial nature, the experience of the
establishment of religious government, spread of Islam across the
universe, the splendor and glory of Muslims in the light of this
government, the definition of new sublime concepts as a model for the
religious leaders of the Islamic society (perfect man) and finally the
creation of the discipline of individual inference by reliance on
genuine Islamic sources, all underline the unlimited capability of Islam
in establishing the most complete form of government (Islamic
government).

Such a government sprouts from the clear spring of revelation and its
leadership is vested with the most righteous person who has the highest
command of religious teachings. One can claim that it is only under such
a government and the leadership of such an Imam that human societies can
move towards felicity and material and spiritual perfection and will
find the way of redemption and salvation in this world and in the
hereafter.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 It should be borne in mind that it became possible due to the rapid
growth of communication technology after the Industrial Revolution and
their increasing ability to have access to remote areas.
2 Saebi, Mohammad Javad, Fundamentals of Revival of Religious Thought
(Qom: Seminary Propagation Office Publishers, 2001), p. 12.
3 Ibid.
4 Naqibzadeh, Ahmad, "Possibility of a Universal Political Sociology,"
Islamic Government (Quarterly), Vol. 3, No. 3, Autumn 1998.
5 Sahifeh-e Nour, Vol. 2, P. 266.
6 Qeisry, Nourullah, "Intellectual Current and Intellectuals in Iran,"
(Mo’aseseh Andisheh va Farhand Dini, 2000), P. 44.
7 Sahifeh-e Nour, Vol. 20, P. 232.
8 Ibid., Vol. 8, P. 291.
9 Haj Aqajani, Mohammad Javad, Imam’s Governmental Approach to Violence
and Terrorism (not published), P. 58.
10 (The Holy Quran, 33: 21).
11 Haj Aqajani, Op. Cit. P. 66.
12 Sahifeh-e Nour, Vol. 21, P. 88.


