Preface
=======

The present book entitled “The Divine Wisdom of the Holy Prophet
Muhammad (S), Debates of Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) with scholars and
representatives of other religions”, translated from *Ihtajaj
al-Tabarsi* by Fizza Hyderi, edited and annotated by Abu Yahya
al-Hosseini is being published by the Islamic Research Foundation of the
Holy Shrine of Imam Reza (as), Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran.

This work includes debates of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) with
scholars and representatives of the Judaism, Christianity, atheism,
dualism and polytheism in three chapters and the Chapter One is divided
into five parts. The glossary of key terms is also provided for the
readers of this book.

Publication of the present work can be considered as the dire need of
the time because ceaseless false, baseless and vicious propaganda is
being carried out against the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) by the Zionist
controlled Western mass media to create Islamophobia in the world. But
the debates of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) with scholars and
representatives of other religions prove that the dynamic universal
message of Islam was preached through peace and brotherhood.

As the Almighty Allah's Final, Last and Greatest Messenger, entrusted
with the universal message of Islam, the Prophet Muhammad (S) preached
Islam by dialogue, reasoning and rational approach.

These were the factors that led to the rapid spread of the message of
*Tawhid* (monotheism) and virtue in his lifetime in the Arabian
Peninsula and beyond. In accordance with the commandments of God
revealed through the *ayahs* of the Holy Qur'an, the Final and Last
Testament from Almighty Allah, he invited the Arab polytheists, Jews and
Christians, as well as the Zoroastrians to contemplate on the
rationality of Islam and acknowledge it as the final and universal creed
of mankind.

The Holy Prophet’s politeness had a great impact on all those who came
into contact with him. He used to say I have been raised to complete the
best morals. His courteous behavior and his modesty, in addition to his
already famous reputation as *Sadeq* (Truthful) and *Amin* (Trustworthy)
had an electrifying impact on the people of Makkah and Medina, in
moulding their life as per the directives of the Holy Qur'an.

Despite persecution by the oligarch rich pagans in Makkah that saw its
vested interests in exploiting fellow human beings in danger, the
message of Islam spread, through the patience, endurance, and rational
teachings of Holy Prophet Muhammad (S), who invited people to ponder. In
the face of divine logic and reasoning, the pressures, tortures and even
killing of early Muslims by the pagan Arabs were useless. Even the three
year economic and social boycott imposed by the pagan Arabs on the Holy
Prophet (S) and the new Muslim community was useless, thanks to the
devotion and loyalty of the Holy Prophet's uncle and guardian, Abu Taleb
(as), who took his nephew and all Muslims under his care and protection
in the gorge outside Makkah, known till this day as She'b Abi Taleb.

Soon God ordered the Holy Prophet (S) to migrate to Medina, and this
heralded the start of a new phase in the history of Islam. Earlier
several groups of people from this city, which was then called Yathreb
had visited Makkah, and on being impressed by the rational teachings of
the Holy Prophet (S) had given their allegiance to him. They now
welcomed him and through dialogue with other Arabs, as well as with the
Jews and Christians, the message of Islam began to spread.

Many of the pagans, the Jews, and the Christians, embraced the truth of
Islam. Of those who did not, and were neither hostile, the Holy Prophet
(S) made pacts of neutrality with them and gave them time to contemplate
and decide. Many embraced Islam and become Muslims, while the evil ones
that plotted against him after sealing the agreement, he permitted them
to leave Madinah by the command of God.

This is how the Holy Prophet (S) won the hearts and minds. It was his
routine during the season migrations of nomadic tribes to Makkah, to
speak with the chieftains and others about the message that God had
entrusted to his for the guidance of humanity. His equal treatment of
all and his convincing discourse that all Prophets [pbut] have been sent
by God in lands, but with the same universal message of monotheism and
virtue, made lasting impression on the minds of all those who came into
contact with him, and thus many embraced the truth of Islam.

Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) was indeed the most courteous person ever. He
was polite with the followers of other religions, and held dialogues
with them to convince them of the truth of Islam. He did not force
anybody to become Muslim, because such a conversion is useless, since
real faith is from heart and with conviction. This is how Islam spread,
through dialogue and discussion, and not through force, violence and the
sword.

He said, if even a single person is guided towards the truth of Islam,
this entails greater rewards than having red-hair camels. As the mercy
to the entire creation, he never forced the Christians and Jews living
under the protection of the Islamic state to change their faith, until
they were convinced of the truth from the depths of their hearts. He
allowed them to practice their religious rituals.

As part of his policy of peace, Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) sent letters
to the rulers of the then powerful empires inviting them to study Islam
and come under its shade. All letters of the Holy Prophet (S) started
with the phrase *Bismillah-hir-Rahman-nir-Rahim*, which means ‘In the
Name of God, the All-Compassionate, the All-Merciful’. He used to say
that reciting this dynamic phrase before embarking on any task would
bring success.

The content of the Holy Prophet’s letters also indicates that the Holy
Prophet (S) called for dialogue at the international level. In other
words, enjoining good and forbidding evil was among the main messages of
the Holy Prophet’s epistles. The Holy Prophet’s letters showed their
positive effects within a short period. In this way, through dialogue
and reasoning the message of Islam spread.

The Islamic Research Foundation of the Holy Shrine of Imam Reza (as)
hopes that the present book titled “The Divine Wisdom of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S), Debates of Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) with scholars
and representatives of other religions” will pave the way for better
understanding of the great divine personality of Holy Prophet Muhammad
(S) and the dynamic universal message of Islam.

**The Islamic Research Foundation**  
*Astan Quds Razavi* [the Holy Shrine of Imam Reza (as)]  
 Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran


