Chapter 3: Prophet’s (S) debate with Jews
=========================================

**Imam Hassan Askari (as) said: ‘**When Prophet (S) was living in Mecca,
God’s order was such that while offering his prayers, he should face
*Bayt–ul–Muqaddas* [the holy al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem] and when
possible, keep *Kaaba* [the Holy *Kaaba*] in between the
*Bayt–ul–Muqaddas* and Mecca and when this was not possible, keep
*Bayt–ul–Muqaddas* as *Qibla* [direction to which Muslims turn for their
prayers] and this routine continued for 13 years.

When Prophet (S) migrated to Medina, he would still face
*Bayt–ul–Muqaddas,* while praying [a direction] that deviated from
*Kaaba*, and this continued for about 16 or 17 months.

After seeing this, extremist and mischievous Jews[^1] said that how
strange it is that Muhammad (S) faces our *Qibla* while praying and he
has adopted our ways and style in his prayers.

When the Prophet (S) found out about what the Jews had been saying, he
was hurt and severely grieved; it bothered him to pray while facing
their *Qibla* and he wished to make *Kaaba* his *Qibla*. As soon as he
wished this, Jibreel came to him.

**The Prophet (S) said to Jibreel:** “If God changed *Qibla* from
*Bayt–ul–Muqaddas* to *Kaaba*, I would be very pleased because it hurts
me to hear what the Jews are saying about praying while facing their
*Qibla*.”

**Jibreel [a] replied:** ‘Oh Prophet of God! Ask God for changing the
*Qibla* and I am sure that God will not reject your wish and request.’
Upon hearing this, the Prophet (S) prayed to God. As soon as he prayed,
Jibreel went to Heavens and returned immediately. **He said:** ‘Oh
Muhammad (S)! Recite this:

***Indeed We see the turning of your face to heaven, so We shall surely
turn you to a qibla which you shall like; turn then your face towards
the Sacred Mosque, and wherever you are, turn your face towards it, and
those who have been given the Book most surely know that it is the truth
from their Lord; and Allah is not at all heedless of what they do.***

***And even if you bring to those who have been given the Book every
sign they would not follow your qibla, nor can you be a follower of
their qibla, neither are they the followers of each other's qibla, and
if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you,
then you shall most surely be among the unjust.*** **[2:144-145**][^2]

**Upon hearing this, the Jews said:** ‘Why did Muslims stop facing their
previous *Qibla* [*Bayt–ul–Muqaddas*] and turned to *Kaaba*?’

God gave a perfect answer to this question and the Prophet (S) said:

***The fools among the people will say: What has turned them from their
qibla which they had? Say: The East and the West belong only to Allah;
He guides whom He likes to the right path.*** **[2:142].**

And He is all-aware of the interests of His servants, and it is He who
will send His obedient servants to gardens of bliss.”[^3]

**Imam Hassan Askari (as) said:** ‘Then, some Jews came to the Prophet
(S) and started talking: ‘O Muhammad! You prayed while facing the
*Qibla* you call *Bayt–ul–Muqaddas* for 14 years and now you suddenly
left it so can we ask you a question: Were you following *haq*
[righteous way, truth] before and now you have left it and started
following *batil* [erroneous way, wrong, against *haq*] or were you
following *batil* before for a period of time and now you have come to
follow *haq*?’

**The Prophet (S) said:** “I was on *haq* before and I am on *haq* now
as well because God’s clear command is that the east and the west are
His and He guides whoever He wishes to the right path.

Oh servants of God! When Allah felt that your interest and welfare lies
in praying while facing the east, He ordered you to make east your
*Qibla* and when He saw that your interest and welfare lies in making
the west as your *Qibla*, He ordered you to face the west. Hence, do not
interfere in divine plans for His servants and His will for your
interest”

**The Prophet (S) then continued:** “Now you tell me, you stopped
working on Saturdays and then you worked on all the days. Then again you
stopped working on Saturdays and then you again worked on all the days.
Now tell me, did you come towards *batil* from *haq* or from *batil*
towards *haq* or from *batil* towards *batil* or from *haq* towards
*haq*? Explain in any way you wish. Then our answer will be the same as
yours.”

**The Jews said:** ‘Yes, our ‘*tark al-amal*’ [leaving daily work for
earning] on Saturdays was *haq* and our working afterwards was also
*haq*.’

**The Prophet (S) said:** “So, this is exactly our situation. It was
*haq* at that time when *Bayt–ul–Muqaddas* was made the *Qibla*. Then,
the decision to make *Kaaba* the new *Qibla* at that time was also
*haq*.”

**The Jews said:** ‘Has *bada*[^4] (change) occurred in Lord when He
ordered you to turn your face from *Bayt–ul–Muqaddas* towards *Kaaba*
while praying?’

**The Prophet (S) said:** “This change in the *Qibla* cannot lead to
*bada* in God. The truth is that He is aware of all the consequences. He
is omnipotent over the advantages and benefits [of His orders]. He
cannot make mistakes nor can anyone change His decisions. God is higher
over all these things.”

**Then the Prophet said to them:** “Oh Jews! Tell me, does not God give
a person a disease and then cure him? And He cures him and does He not
give him an incurable disease? Is this *bada* for God? And is it not so
that God gives life and takes it away? Does this lead to *bada* for
God?”

**The Jews replied:** ‘No.’

**The Prophet (S) said:** “Then just like this, God’s Prophet Muhammad
(S) prayed facing the *Kaaba* while before, he used to pray facing
*Bayt-ul-Muqaddas*. So, no *bada* occurred by His first order [so that
there would be the necessity to give a new order] but that what happened
was the need of time and the need of time changes in every era.”

**He (S) continued:** “Does not God bring winter after summer and summer
after winter and does this change in seasons manifest *bada* in God’s
decision?”

**The Jews said:** ‘No.’

**The Prophet (S) said:** “Then similarly, no *bada* occurred with the
change of *Qibla*.”

**He (S) then said:** “Has not God ordered us to wear thick and warm
clothes in winter to protect ourselves from cold and in summer, to
protect our bodies from the heat of summer? Then, wasn’t the order given
in summer against the order given in winter? So is this contradiction
tantamount to *bada*?”

**The Jews replied**: ‘No.’

**The Prophet (S) said:** “Similarly, God gives you an order and it is
in your interests. Then, at another time, He gives you a different order
while keeping in view your interests. And then, when you will obey Him
in both the situations, you will deserve His reward.”

**Then he (S) said:** “Oh servants of God! Think this way as if you are
sick and the Lord of the world is your physician. So, the interest and
welfare of the patients lies in acting upon the advice of physician. And
not in considering the patients’ desires and fulfilling their wants.
Thus, submit to Allah’s orders so that you will be among those who are
successful.”

**Reference:** ***al-Ihtajaj*****, vol. 1, p. 81-86 [written by
al-Allama Abu Mansur Ahmed Ibn Ali al-Tabarsi. d. 599 A.H.]**

[^1]: Three tribes of Jews lived in strong forts in Medina at that time:
Banu Qurayza, Banu Nudhayr and Banu Qaynqa’. They were bitter enemies of
Prophet Muhammad (S) and Muslims. They broke their pledge with Prophet
(S) and started a campaign of propaganda and insult against Prophet (S)
and Muslims. They conspired to kill Prophet (S) and Muslims and waged
war against Muslims either directly or indirectly by supporting other
tribes. Ultimately, all these three tribes were banished from Medina.
For more details see the book, The Message, by Ayatullah Ja’far Subhani
available at: http://www.al-islam.org/message/

[^2]: For exegesis of these ayahs, please see Tafsir al-Mizan available
online at: http://www.shiasource.com/al-mizan/ See under verse 2:144

[^3]: Related verses of Holy Qur’an: And thus We have made you a medium
(just) nation that you may be the bearers of witness to the people and
(that) the Messenger may be a bearer of witness to you; and We did not
make that which you would have to be the qibla but that We might
distinguish him who follows the Messenger from him who turns back upon
his heels, and this was surely hard except for those whom Allah has
guided aright; and Allah was not going to make your faith to be
fruitless; most surely Allah is Affectionate, Merciful to the people
[2-143]. And from whatsoever place you come forth, turn your face
towards the Sacred Mosque; and surely it is the very truth from your
Lord, and Allah is not at all heedless of what you do. And from
whatsoever place you come forth, turn your face towards the Sacred
Mosque; and wherever you are turn your faces towards it, so that people
shall have no accusation against you, except such of them as are unjust;
so do not fear them, and fear Me, that I may complete My favor on you
and that you may walk on the right course [2:149-150].

[^4]: Please see glossary for more details.


