Glossary of key terms
=====================

***bada*** *[revealing after concealing]* Bada is an Islamic concept
regarding Allah’s will. Based on some specific circumstances, Allah
(SwT) reveals His will opposite to what was expected. Muslims were
accused by the Jews that they believe that Allah (SwT) is ignorant of
the ultimate outcome (God forbid) of His orders. This accusation can be
defended by the fact that Allah is the Ultimate Wise and creatures or
people are ignorant of Allah’s will and not that the Allah (SwT) is
ignorant.

***fanaa*** [destruction, annihilation] Fanaa is the term used for
"dissolution" or "annihilation". The term refers to the end of this
world. Everything which is created is dependent upon the Creator for its
survival and will undergo destruction before the Day of Judgment. Fanaa
is thus an inherent characteristic of all created things which would get
destructed except Allah (SwT).

***haadith*** [contingent, that which comes into being] Haadith is an
object which didn’t exist once and then came into the existence. Thus
every object in the universe is attributed to this quality because it
came into existence. Every haadith needs external factor for coming into
being, time and space. As Allah (SwT) being totally independent and
beyond time and space cannot be attributed to be haadith. Any god other
than Allah (SwT) is in fact not god and is haadith.

***hikmatal balighatal jamiah*** [Ultimate and Complete Wisdom] This
term refers to a high level of wisdom which is ultimate and
comprehensive. It is greater than the knowledge itself which is just to
collect random information. The word Hikmat is derived from Hakamah
which is a tool to stop the horse from indulgence. A person having such
wisdom is always careful in his thoughts, speech, ideas, acts etc. The
words and the speeches of Prophets (as) and Imams (as) are the
manifestation of the Ultimate and Comprehensive Wisdom blessed to them
by Allah (SwT).

***hudooth*** [the process of coming into being or existence] This term
is used to refer to the existence of all the things in the world. The
entire creation is described with this term. Only Allah (SwT) is the
exception who is eternally preexistent. Every existent needs a creator
which is Allah (SwT) to come into existence and so all the things are
His creatures. Thus every existent has a beginning, a Creator, all its
characteristics are acquired [and so haadith] and it has time of fanaa.

***hulool*** [incarnation, permeation, penetration] The word indicates
the transformation from one thing to other and to settle down in that
particular object. God cannot incarnate into an object as that would
mean His specific presence a particular space and time, which is
impossible for God. Few people believe in the concept of the soul being
transferred in some of the bodies. Few deviated sects believe in the
penetration of Allah’s soul in some gnostic scholar and few others like
Hindus believe in incarnation where the soul transfers from one body to
other in two different times.

***inqadha*** [expiry, to be finished] This term refers to the nature of
the creation that it has a date of expiry. The creation will not exist
beyond that date. The whole creation is attributed to this
characteristic.

***qadeem*** [eternally pre-existent] This is one of the attributes of
Allah (SwT) referring to the concept of always present from infinity.
Allah (SwT) was, He is and He will always be. This term is used to
indicate that He is not created; rather He is pre-existent. Unlike Him,
His creatures are attributed to be haadith, the created ones. Thus all
the gods beside Allah are not qadeem and were created.

***zawaal*** [gradual destruction, weakening towards death, to perish
etc] Everything in the world moves towards weakening, destruction and
the death. The nature of the creation is formed in such a way that it
has a time of expiry. This expiry time is zawaal. None of the creatures
can be considered as a God because they are born or created for a
limited time and undergo zawaal and thus these objects cannot be
considered as gods. An example is the fact that every material object,
living or non-living undergoes zawaal according to God’s plan for it.


