 INTRODUCTION
=============

**IT IS ALMOST A TRUISM** to say that a person’s beliefs play a central
role in making up his personality. We are what we believe, and we become
what we come to believe. It is our beliefs that determine how we look at
ourselves, how we look at life, at the world around us and our own role
and destiny in life. Our beliefs determine our ideals and actions and
mould the conduct of our lives.

This is another way of saying that our understanding of what we are is
the mainspring of our thought and feeling, conduct and behaviour. Our
understanding concerning our own nature, our origin, our situation in
the world of being, our relationship with other human beings, the
purpose of our life, and the future destiny that awaits us-all these
matters together determine the kind of person we are today and what we
may become tomorrow.

This is as true of society as it is true of individuals. That is, the
character of a society derives from its current beliefs. A society’s
culture, its ideals and norms, its social, educational, economic and
political institutions-all are derived in some way or another from the
beliefs prevailing in society and those that are held by various groups
that play a dominant role in it.

Beliefs are ordinarily absorbed by human beings in the course of
acculturation, that is, “the process by which the culture of a
particular society is instilled in a human being from infancy onward.”
Yet beliefs are too important to be left to acculturation. In view of
the critical role they play in the making of an individual and his
destiny, they are immensely more important than other cultural modes
like language, social customs, diet, dress, lifestyle and technology.

One of the greatest of human needs is the need to believe, and this
poses a tremendous challenge to individuals and society. The challenge
is truly stupendous because our need to believe pertains to matters of
great consequence, answering which is apparently beyond the capacity of
any individual or institution. How can I know where I have come from,
why I have come into this world and what is the purpose of my life, how
do I relate to this vast universe into which I have been brought, how
can I know what is expected of me, how should I order my relationships
with other human beings, how should I live so as to fulfil the real
purpose of my life, what laws and regulations should I follow in order
to achieve that purpose?

According to Islamic teachings, every individual does normally have the
complete capacity to find true answers to these questions. Indeed,
according to Islam, it is his duty to find the right answers. This
capacity is represented by the faculty of reason or intellect, which is
innate in every human being.

This faculty enables human beings to distinguish between true and false,
just and unjust, right and wrong, straight and crooked, wholesome and
unhealthy. Of course, the intellect by itself does not have the means
and equipment to discover the truth concerning all the significant
questions. However, by following its own criteria it can arrive at
reliable sources of knowledge whose mainspring lies beyond the reach of
reason as such. This source of knowledge is revelation.

According to Islamic teachings, the Source of Being, which has brought
into existence the human being and the world, has provided not only for
his physical and natural needs during life on this planet, but also the
necessary nourishment for his mind and spirit. In fact, as man’s
intellectual and spiritual needs far exceed his physical requirements,
the Source of Being has made appropriate and commensurate arrangements
for the satisfaction of these needs as well. These arrangements consist
of the messengers, prophets and sages who have been inspired by God to
guide human beings throughout the course of history. And whenever the
teachings, writings and scriptures brought by these prophets and sages
have become corrupted and distorted in the course of time by priests,
scribes, poets, and theologians, or entirely forsaken and abandoned by
human communities, the Source of Being has dispatched further messengers
and guides to restore guidance and the purity of divine teachings and to
update them to bring them on a par with the needs of society.

From an Islamic point of view, religion is the pursuit of truth. In this
sense, it is not intrinsically different from science which is the quest
of the human mind to discover facts pertaining to the physical world. In
fact, if we take the pursuit of truth in an absolute sense, science can
be considered a part of religion, a component of the human quest for the
truth. The respect for truth and the urge to discover is common to
religion and science. The distinction between religion and science lies
in the kind of knowledge they seek and the methods they use for
obtaining that knowledge. Whereas science confines itself to discovering
the laws governing the perceptible world-the part of the universe that
is open to perception, experiment and empirical methods- religion
directs its pursuit to the entire world of being and to domains that
transcend empirical experience.

Hence, from the viewpoint of Islam, there can be no intrinsic conflict
between science and religion, nor is there any contradiction between
reason and revelation. Revelation is a source of knowledge for religious
inquiry, whereas the empirical methods employed by science are a source
of scientific knowledge. The use of reason as the basic instrument of
inquiry is common to religion and science. Superstition, humbug,
falsehood, falsification, forgery, distortion and perversion of truth
and mental dishonesty are as much of an anathema to religion as they are
to science.

When we understand religion as the pursuit of truth, there can neither
be any conflict between it and science, nor can there be any conflict
between those engaged in the religious pursuit, because their goal and
objective is one. This is not to deny the unfortunate conflicts that
have often arisen in the course of history between the savants of
science and the self-styled patrons of religious traditions on the
other.

Neither this is to deny the bloody conflicts that have at times plagued
the relations between followers of different religious traditions.

During the last four centuries or so, modern science developed in an
environment marked by the growing domination of secular and humanistic
schools of thought in Europe. The historical conflict between scientific
outlook and the religious worldview in the West has been mainly a
conflict limited to Christendom and a product of the doctrines and
dogmas of the

Church. These dogmas, which developed in the course of history as a
result of the intellectual activities of Christian theologians, were
based on certain interpretations of the scriptures. Hence it can be said
that the Western conflict between religion and science was in fact not a
conflict between reason and revelation as such, but one between reason
and science on the one hand and a certain type of religious tradition on
the other.

Apart from the conflict between science and religious traditions, we
have the divergent and conflicting doctrines of the various religious
traditions. Indeed even within the major religious traditions of the
world such as Islam, Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism and Judaism, we
are confronted with different outlooks, doctrines, laws, and precepts.
According to the Islamic view of the history of religions, the
differences between the religious traditions derive not from authentic
revelation but mainly from the theological, hermeneutic, legislative and
interpretive activity of various generations of mankind through the
course of centuries and belonging to different regions.

To a large extent, these differences of doctrine and religious law are a
product of misunderstanding concerning the very meaning and purpose of
religion as the pursuit of truth. Religiosity and piety have been
understood to mean not loyalty and commitment to the truth, but as
faithfulness to the religious tradition in which one has been born and
which one was made to imbibe through the process of acculturation.

All the existing religious traditions of the world, including
unfortunately even the Islamic world for the most part, base their
following on imitation of ancestors and thoughtless adoption of current
ideas, beliefs and norms through acculturation.

Children are expected to adopt the creed of their parents and ancestors,
and adherence to any given religious tradition derives from imitation
rather than individual research and quest. Imitation, acculturation and
loyalty to the creed and beliefs of one’s elders and ancestors rather
than intellectual effort make the basis for the continuity of religious
traditions. Such a view of religion is a travesty of the real meaning
and spirit of religion as the highest and noblest of human pursuits for
the truth.

According to Islam, imitation cannot be the basis of faith. Even if
someone adopts the right beliefs by following and imitating others, it
will not be acceptable and such a person cannot be said to possess a
valid faith. Faith is something which is attained after a valid search
for the truth. It may be said to be the religious equivalent of
scientific knowledge and certainty, which can only be achieved through a
valid process of scientific inquiry, training and research. Science is
not a medley of unproved hypotheses, and a hypothesis does not become
part of scientific knowledge unless it is proved by valid scientific
methods. A scientific theory, even if it should be true and correspond
to factual reality, cannot be accepted by the scientific community
unless it can be established by valid empirical demonstration. Religious
faith too is not blind faith; it is a knowledge that permeates deeply
the heart of the faithful person as a result of valid intellectual
effort, reasoning and spiritual endeavor.

The Qur’an is unique among the world’s scriptures in that it not only
lays down the doctrines and laws of the Islamic religion but also offers
a critique of the religious traditions that existed in the Arabia of
those days, namely Arab polytheism, Judaism and Christianity. The
rejection of imitation and acculturation as a foundation for belief has
a basis in the Qur’an itself. The Qur’an flatly rejects the rationale
advanced by the polytheists for following the creed and practices of
their ancestors:

When they are told, 'Follow what Allah has sent down,' they say, 'We
will rather follow what we have found our fathers following.' What, even
if their fathers neither applied any reason nor were guided?! The
parable of the faithless is that of someone who shouts after that which
does not hear [anything] except a call and cry: deaf, dumb, and blind,
they do not apply reason. (2:170-1)

According to the Qur’an, the most conspicuous characteristic of those
who are devoid of real faith is that they do not apply rational criteria
to their beliefs. As such they are considered creatures of a lower order
than animals, because the animals simply follow their innate God-given
instincts, whereas the faithless fail to use their God-given intellects
and therefore degenerate to a level below that of animals:

Do you suppose that most of them listen or apply reason? They are just
like cattle; rather they are further astray from the way. (25:44) Indeed
the worst of beasts in Allah's sight are the deaf and the dumb who do
not apply reason. Indeed We have sent it down as an Arabic Qur'¡n so
that you may apply reason. (12:2) According to the Qur’an, beliefs and
religious rites should be derived from reason and revelation.
Superstitious customs practiced in the name of religion are an affront
to religion as the pursuit of the truth and conformity to the precepts
of the Creator, received through genuine revelation, not through the
muddy channels of theology:

Allah has not prescribed any such thing as Ba¦¢rah, S¡’ibah, Wa¥¢lah, or
H¡m; but those who are faithless fabricate lies against Allah, and most
of them do not apply reason. And when they are told, ‘Come to what Allah
has sent down and [come] to the Apostle,’ they say, ‘Sufficient for us
is what we have found our fathers following.’ What, even if their
fathers did not know anything and were not guided?! (5:103-4) According
to the Qur’anic teaching, everything that exists in the world is a sign
of God. The universe is a text, a Book that, albeit between the lines,
speaks of the presence of its Source, Its compassion and care and Its
perfect design and lofty purposes. The revealed Scripture is a
commentary on this Book of Existence, and both of them are addressed to
the intelligent, contemplative and thoughtful readers, “who apply their
reason” and to whom the Qur’an often refers as “the Godwary,” or as
“those possessing intellects”:

Have they not travelled over the land so that they may have hearts by
which they may apply reason, or ears by which they may hear? Indeed it
is not the eyes that turn blind, but the hearts turn blind-those that
are in the breasts! (22:46).

It is He who sends down water from the sky: from it you get your drink
and from it are [sustained] the plants wherein you pasture your herds.
With it He makes the crops grow for you and olives, date palms, vines,
and fruits

of all kinds. There is indeed a sign in that for a people who reflect.
He disposed the night and the day for you, and the sun, the moon and the
stars are disposed by His command. There are indeed signs in that for a
people who apply reason. And whatever He has created for you in the
earth of diverse hues-there is indeed a sign in that for a people who
take admonition. (16:10-13) In the earth are neighbouring terrains [of
diverse kinds] and vineyards, farms, and date palms growing from the
same root and from diverse roots, [all] irrigated by the same water, and
We give some of them an advantage over others in flavour. There are
indeed signs in that for a people who apply reason. (13:4)

He brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from
the living, and revives the earth after its death. Likewise you [too]
shall be raised [from the dead]. Of His signs is that He created you
from dust, then, behold, you are humans scattering [all over]! And of
His signs is that He created for you mates from your own selves that you
may take comfort in them, and He ordained affection and mercy between
you. There are indeed signs in that for a people who reflect. Among His
signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the difference
of your languages and colours. There are indeed signs in that for those
who know. And of His signs is your sleep by night and day, and your
pursuit of His grace. There are indeed signs in that for a people who
listen. And of His signs is that He shows you the lightning, arousing
fear and hope, and He sends down water from the sky, and with it revives
the earth after its death. There are indeed signs in that for a people
who apply reason. (30:19-24)

It is He who made for you hearing, eyesight, and hearts. Little do you
thank. It is He who created you on the earth, and you will be mustered
toward Him. And it is He who gives life and brings death and due to Him
are the alternations of day and night. Do you not apply reason?
(23:78-80)

It is He who created you from dust, then from a drop of [seminal] fluid,
then from a clinging mass, then He brings you forth as infants, then [He
nourishes you] so that you may come of age, then that you may become
aged-though there are some of you who die earlier-and that you may
complete a specified term, and so that you may apply reason. (40:67)

And in the alternation of night and day and what Allah sends down from
the sky of [His] provision with which He revives the earth after its
death, and in the changing of the winds there are signs for a people who
apply reason. (45:5)

“Those who reflect,” “those who listen,” “those who apply reason,”
“those who take admonition,” those who keep their minds and ears
open-these phrases describe the essential qualities of the genuinely
religious human beings from the viewpoint of the Qur’an. Opinionated
ness and dogmatic attachment to the beliefs of one’s denomination and
theological tradition, and loyalty to one’s clan, tribe and ethnic ties
do not make the foundation of religion but form the biggest hurdles in
the way of genuine religious pursuit. The Qur’an condemns the Arab
idolaters for their thoughtless loyalty to the polytheistic traditions
of their forbears. The faithless are doomed on account of their refusal
to use their rational

faculties, for defying the God- sent guide and denying the Qur’anic
revelation:

For those who defy their Lord is the punishment of hell, and it is an
evil destination.

When they are thrown in it, they hear it blaring, as it seethes, almost
exploding with rage. Whenever a group is thrown in it, its keepers will
ask them, ‘Did there not come to you any warner?’ They will say, ‘Yes, a
warner did come to us, but we impugned [him] and said, ‘Allah did not
send down anything; you are only in great error.’ And they will say,
‘Had we listened or applied reason, we would not have been among inmates
of the Blaze.’ (67:6-10)

Elsewhere it rebukes the Jews for their ethnic and racial pretensions as
well for their extravagant theological claims of having a special
relationship with God, a claim which is shared by some Christians, thus
warning Muslims by implication against entertaining similar claims:

The Jews and the Christians say, ‘We are Allah’s children and His
beloved ones.’ Say, ‘Then why does He punish you for your sins?’ Rather
you are humans from among His creatures. He forgives whomever He wishes,
and punishes whomever He wishes, and to Allah belongs the kingdom of the
heavens and the earth, and whatever is between them, and toward Him is
the return. (5:18)

Muslim scholars have developed the discipline of ‘ilm al-kalam
(literally, the science of dialectics) to deal with topics pertaining to
belief and doctrine, which are often lumped together under the head of
“theology.” The tradition of theological discourse pertaining to matters
of belief begins in the Qur’an itself. In fact, the greater part of the
Qur’an deals with theological discussions pertaining to the nature and
attributes of Divinity, the perfection of the system of creation, the
role of justice in scheme of existence, the necessity of Divine guidance
through prophets and scriptures, and the necessity of judgement and
retribution and the pertinent details that go under the head of
eschatology.

This tradition is followed up in the traditions of the Prophet (s) and
the Imams (a). Among Shi‘ah compilers of hadith, Kulayni (d. 328 or
329/939 or 940) devotes the first volumes of his al-Kafi, known as Usul
al-Kafi, to issues of doctrine ranging from tawhid, prophethood and
Imamate, to details pertaining to faith and unfaith. Shaykh Saduq
(306-381/918-991), another prolific compiler of the traditions and a
theologian, has a compilation, Kitab al-Tawhid, exclusively devoted to
the traditions of the Prophet and the Imams surrounding the topic of
tawhid. Muhammad b. Hasan al- Saffar (d. 290/903) had earlier compiled
the Basa’ir al-Darajat, a collection of traditions dealing solely with
the topic of Imamate.

Aside from the Qur’an and hadith, theological discourse in the
Shi‘i-Imami tradition has a long history. Shi‘ah writers, right from the
era of the Imams until the present day, have written hundreds of works
on topics dealing with theological issues. Details of their theological
works and polemical tracts dealing with debates and controversies can be
sought from the Dhari‘ah, an elaborate catalogue of Shi‘ah works. After
the era of the Imams and their disciples, the most eminent theologians
of the early

centuries were Ibn Qubbah al-Razi (fl. 3rd/9th century, Shaykh Saduq,
Shaykh Mufid (336-413/948-1022), Sayyid Murtada (355-436/966-1044) and
Shaykh Tusi (385- 460/955-1067), and their works have had a profound
influence on Shi‘ah thought of later centuries.

A major portion of Shi‘i theological writings deals with the topic of
Imamate, as this has been the most crucial issue in the Shi‘i-Sunni
debate. Two of the major works on Imamate were compiled in the Indian
subcontinent, namely the Ahqaq al-Haqq by Qazi Sayyid Nur Allah
Shushtari (d. 1019/1610) and the ‘Abaqat al-Anwar by Mir Hamid Husain
Lakhnawi (1246-1306/1830-1888). Two other major works on Imamate, namely
al-Ghadir in Arabic by ‘Allamah Amini (1320-1390/1902-1970) and
Imamshensi in Persian by ‘Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husain Husaini
Tehrani, both of recent origin, are by Iranian scholars. Another
contemporary work of significance is ‘Adl-e Ilahi, a monograph on the
subject of Divine justice by Martyr Murtaza Mutahhari. He has also
written a short work An Introduction of ‘Ilm al- Kalam, which gives an
excellent outline of the development of this discipline and the various
schools of ‘ilm al-kalam in the Islamic world, and describes the salient
features of Shi‘i theological thought.

Apart from monographs on Imamate and other theological subjects, and
besides the polemical tracts, Shi‘ah scholars have written comprehensive
works with a didactic purpose dealing with almost all the basic
doctrines of the Islamic creed. The most famous of the early works of
this category are the ‘Aqa’id of Shaykh Saduq and Shaykh Mufid’s Tashih
al-I‘tiqad. A later influential work of this kind is the Tajrid
al-I‘tiqad of Khwajah Nasiruddin Tusi (597-672/1201-1274) on which
‘Allamah Hilli (648-726/1250-1325), another eminent theologian, wrote a
famous commentary.

Three important contemporary works of this category are worthy of
mention. The first is the encyclopedic trilogy in Persian, consisting of
Allah-shenasi (Theology, in 3 volumes), Imam-shenasi (Imamology, in 18
volumes) and Ma‘ad-shenasi (Eschatology, in 10 volumes), by ‘Allamah
Sayyid Muhammad Husain Husaini Tehrani (1345-1416/1926-1995). This work
has been translated into Arabic.

The second is a four-volume work Mabani-ye Aqa’id-e Islami by Sayyid
Mujtaba Musavi Lari, which has been translated into English by Prof.
Hamid Algar and has been published under the title Lessons on Islamic
Doctrine.

The third noteworthy work, shortest of the three, is the present one by
Ayatullah Misbah Yazdi, an eminent philosopher and prolific writer on a
variety Islamic subjects. Despite its comparative brevity, it covers an
immense range of topics from tawhid to ma‘ad. Meant as an introductory
textbook on Islamic doctrines for students, its format of short
systematically arranged lessons, each dealing with a specific issue,
makes it an ideal text for classroom purposes.

The book is entirely contemporary, both in its outlook and treatment of
the subject. Shi‘ah theological thought has always been known for its
characteristic philosophical flavour and approach, and this quality is
quite evident in the entire volumes of the present work.

It has been standard practice for works of this category to take almost
no doctrinal notice of other religions and to show limited attention to
the standpoints of other Islamic sects. They are written basically with
the motive to explain and substantiate Islamic beliefs and display a
healthy restraint in abstaining from distracting the student’s attention
by posing controversial and polemic issues. However, on the whole they
remain largely indifferent to the intellectual climate and environment
of their times.

But, all the three contemporary works mentioned above show varying
degrees of awareness of the presence of other currents of thought in the
contemporary world and offer an appropriate intellectual response. Among
them, the present one is especially outstanding, as it reveals a keen
awareness of the secular and materialistic philosophies and modes of
thought that pose a broad danger to religion as a quest for truth beyond
the limited concerns of modern science and a common hazard to all
religious traditions of the world.

The Farsi original has received a warm welcome in Islamic seminaries and
by teachers of courses in Islamic doctrine. It is hoped that the present
translation of this outstanding work will as well be well received by
teachers and students of Islamic studies and the general reader.

**Sayyid ‛Alī Qulī Qarā'ī Qum**

**al-Musharrifah**

**April 25th, 2005 CE**


