LESSON SEVEN: PROOFS OF NECESSARY EXISTENT
==========================================

Introduction
------------

In the previous lessons we have indicated that the philosophers and the
scholars of theology (mutakallimīn) have established several arguments
for the proof of God. In this lesson we have brought one of their many
arguments, because of the fact that it is elementary, simple and
requires less of an introduction in order to establish an existence as
necessary (wājib). However the validity of this argument is only for
proving necessary existent (wājib al-wujūd), i.e. an existent which does
not need, require or depend upon any other existent for coming into
being and in order to proof its positive attributes (knowledge,
omnipotence, and being above time and space) requires additional
arguments.

Text of the proof
-----------------

Existence through intellectual perception is either necessary existence
or possible existence. Intellectually, no existent lies outside these
two assumptions and every existent cannot be known as a possible
existent because a possible existent always needs a cause (‘illah). If
all the causes were possible existents, each one of them in turn
requiring a cause, no existent would ever come into being, in other
words an infinite series (tasalsul) of causes is impossible (muhāl).
Therefore an infinite series (back wards) of causes is compelled to
terminate in an existent (mawjūd), which is not a caused thing (ma’lūl)
of any other existent, i.e. the necessary existent.

This argument is the simplest argument in philosophy for proving the
existence of God. This argument has been constructed with a few
intellectual syllogisms and does not need any form of sense perception
or experimental sciences as premises. However it has used philosophical
concepts and terminologies, hence it requires an explanation about these
premises and terminologies mentioned in the argument.

Possibility and necessity
-------------------------

All propositions have two fundamental concepts (subject and predicate)
regardless of them being simple or complex, for example in the following
axiom, ‘The sun shines’, which establishes shining for the sun, ‘sun’ is
the subject and ‘shining’ is the predicate. The establishment of a
predicate for the subject has no more than three states:

it is either impossible, such as ‘the number three is greater than the
number four,’ or it is necessary, such as, ‘the number two is half of
four’ or it is neither impossible nor necessary, for instance, ‘the sun
is above our head’.

In logical terminology the first proposition has the state of
impossibility (imtinā’), the second proposition is given the attribute
of necessity (wujūb), and the third state is considered as possible
(imkān) However in philosophy only existence is discussed and those
things, which are being incapable of being or of occurring and
impossible (mumtani’) will never have an existence (al-wujūd
al-khāriji). For this reason philosophy regards existence

from an intellectual perception as being either necessary existence or
possible existence.

Necessary existence is known as an existent, which exists in-itself and
does not depend upon another existent. Naturally such an existent will
have no beginning and no end, because the non-existence of something in
a particular time is an indication that its existence is not from
itself. In order for it to come into existence it needs another
existent, which, is the cause or the condition for its realisation. The
absence of this condition or cause would be the reason of annihilation.

Possible existence (mum’kin al-wujūd) is known as an existent, which
does not exist in-itself and depends on another existent in order for it
to be realised.

This division, which has taken place through intellectual perception,
essentially disregards the existence of the impossible (mumtani’
al-wujūd), but it does not have any indication whether the existent is
either a possible existent or necessary existent.

In other words the genuineness of this perception can be conceptualised
in three essential forms:

1. Every existent is a necessary existent.

2. Every existent is a possible existent.

3. Some existents are necessary existents and some are possible
existents.

On the basis of the first and third assumptions, the existence of a
necessary existent is established, therefore the assumption that should
be reviewed is whether all existents are possible existents or not?

However by disproving this assumption (that all existents are possible
existents), the existence of the necessary existent is definitely and
confidently proven. The establishment of unity and other attributes must
be proven with other arguments.

Therefore in order to disprove the second assumption additional
arguments must be utilised one of which, is that it is impossible for
all of the existents to be possible existents.

As this argument is not self-evident, it will be explained as follows:

Every possible existent needs a cause and it is impossible to have an
endless chain of causes. Thus the endless chain of causes is compelled
to terminate at an existent, which is not in need of a cause, i.e. the
necessary existent. This argument has introduced other philosophical
concepts, which require a brief explanation of it and things related to
it.

### a. Cause and effect

###

If an existent requires another existent and depends upon that other
existent for its being, then in philosophical terminology the caused
existent is known as the effect and the other existent is known as the
cause. However it is possible that a cause can also be an effect, and be
a dependable existent, not absolutely free from need. If a cause is
absolutely free from need and does not depend upon any other existent
then it will be the Absolute cause.

By now we have become familiar with the definition of the terms cause
and effect.

We will now provide an explanation of the premise mentioned (every
possible existent needs a cause).

Possible existence does not exist in-itself and has no alternative other
than to depend upon another existent. Thus every predicate, which is
recognised for the subject is established either by itself (bi-l-dhāt)
or by means of other than itself (bi-l-ghayr). For example every thing
either shines in and of itself or requires something else for its
illumination, or every body is oily in itself or needs oil for becoming
oily. It is impossible for something in itself to not be illuminating or
oily and not receive light or oil from something else, and at the same
time be oily and illuminating!

Hence the establishment of existence for a subject is either through its
essence or by means of other than itself, and when it is not through its
essence then it has to be by means of other than itself. Therefore every
possible existent, which is not realised through its essence, is bound
to be realised by means of other than itself, which implies that it is
an effect. This provides us with the fundamental principle of the
intellect, that every possible existent needs a cause.

However, some have conceived that the principle of causation means that
all existents need a cause and therefore God needs a primary cause. They
have overlooked the fact that the subject of the principle of causation
is existence in the possible sense and its effect and not in the
absolute sense. Not all existents require a cause, only those which are
dependable and in need.

### b. The impossibility of an endless chain of causes

###

The last premise used for this argument is that the chain of causes
should terminate at an existent, which is not an effect. In technical
terms an endless chain of causes is impossible. It is thus established
that the necessary existent is the initial cause, which is
self-subsistent depending on no other existent.

Philosophy has come up with many arguments in order to disprove infinite
series (tasalsul); nevertheless with the minimum of reflection infinite
series would almost seem to be self-evident. That is to say, considering
the existence of an effect requires a cause and is conditional upon that
cause. Furthermore if this state of being caused (ma’lūliyyah) and this
conditionality is universal, then no existents would be realised
anywhere. This is because the assumption of a few existents that are
dependent without the existence of an existent is against the intellect.

Let us assume that a group of runners are waiting to begin a race. They
have all decided that they will not commence running until the others
have. If this decision prevails among all of them, then none of them
would begin to run.

In the same manner if the existence of every existent is conditional
upon the realisation of another existent, never would an existent come
into being. The realisation of an external existent indicates that there
is an existent, which is needless and unconditional.

### c. Affirmation of the argument

###

At this moment, with the understanding of the premises mentioned, we
would like to re-affirm our argument:

Every thing that can be considered as an existent has no more than two
states:

1. The existent for which existence is necessary and exists by means of
its own essence. In technical terms this is known as the necessary
existent.

2. The existent for which existence is not necessary and depends upon
another existent in order to be realised. In technical terms this is
termed as the possible existent.

It is self-evident that if the realisation of a thing is impossible,
then it will never come into being; hence every existent is either a
possible existent or a necessary existent.

By focusing upon the concept of possible existence it becomes clear that
the every referent of this concept is an effect and requires a cause.
Furthermore if an existent does not exist by means of its essence then
it becomes necessary that it came into existence through another
existent, because every attribute that is not existent by means of its
own essence has to exist by means of other than itself.

The principle of causation affirms that every existent that is dependent
and possible requires a cause. But not every existent requires a cause;
otherwise one would conclude that there must then be a cause for God.

From another angle it must be seen that if all existents were possible
existents, an existent would never then be realised. This is like
assuming that a group of people had conditioned their actions upon each
other, which implies no activity. However the external activity of
existents establishes the existence of the necessary existent.

Questions:
----------

1- Give the philosophical and logical definition of possibility and
necessity.

2- Define necessary existence and possible existence.

3- Define cause and effect.

4- Why does every possible existent need a cause?

5- Explain the principle of causation.

6- Is God subject to the principle of causation? Why?

7- Explain the impossibility of infinite series.

8- Does the belief in a non-created God contradict the principle of
causation?

9- Elaborate more on the impossibility of the infinite series? And
explain the aim of this argument!

10- How is the logical form of the argument of impossibility of the
infinite series?


