LESSON EIGHT: ATTRIBUTES OF GOD
===============================

Introduction
------------

In the previous lessons we have discussed arguments for proving the
necessary existent. By subordinating other arguments we will now prove
the negative and positive attributes of this existence. This is so we
can recognise the Creator distinctively from His creation. It is not
sufficient to merely know Him as the necessary existent, because some
may conceive of energy or matter as being the referent -of a concept-
(misdāq) for this necessary existent.

The following discourse is from two standpoints:

By establishing the negative attributes so that the necessary existent
is glorified from anthropomorphic temperaments and not compared to His
creation.

By establishing the positive attributes so that the Creator will be
recognised as being worthy of worship, and for laying the ground to
prove other principles such as prophethood, resurrection and their
branches.

From the previous arguments we have realised that the necessary existent
does not require any cause and that He is the cause for the possible
existent.

We have thus already established two attributes of the necessary
existent:

Not being dependent on any other existent.

The necessary existent is the first cause of the possible existent.

By application of these two results we would like to further illustrate
and establish the negative and positive attributes of the necessary
existent through arguments, which are familiar and related to the
previous arguments.

The eternal nature of God
-------------------------

If an existent is an effect of, dependent or in need of another
existent, this needy existent will come after the cause. If the cause is
annihilated or not actualised then there will be no effect (existence).
In other words, for an existent to be non-existing in an interval of
time, indicates that it is a dependent and possible existent. As the
necessary existent exists by means of its essence and does not require
any existent for its being, it will always exist and is therefore unlike
the possible existent.

By means of the above argument one can prove two more attributes of the
necessary existent:

God was without beginning, meaning that He never had an antecedent of
non- existence.

God is without end, meaning that He will never be non-existent.

Occasionally these two attributes are brought together under the epithet
of (eternity) sempiternity (sarmadi). Therefore every existent that has
a past of non-existence or has the possibility to become extinct will
never be a necessary existent. This very fact will prove the assumption
of material (māddah) as being the necessary existent as wrong.

### a. Negative attributes

###

Another essentiality of the necessary existent is to be separate and
invisible, because every composite thing is a synthesis or in need of
parts to

be complete. The necessary existent is glorified and independent from
needs.

The necessary existent is not made up of parts. This is because a thing,
which has the potential to be divided, intellectually then has the
possibility of being annihilated. It has already been established that
the necessary existent cannot be annihilated. As the distribution of
parts in potency (bi-l-quwwah) and in actuality (bi-l-fi’l) is peculiar
to corporeality, the necessary existent will be established as being
non-corporeal and immaterial. This will therefore imply that the
necessary existent cannot be seen with the corporeal eye and cannot be
sensed through the corporeal senses.

By disassociating bodily existence from the necessary existent, several
other possibilities are also nullified. Necessary existence is thus not
limited to or subjected to time (zamān) and space (makān). This
nullification is because space is imagined for a thing, which has a
body, and on the other hand every temporal object has the potentiality
of being divided at intervals. As temporality is not attributed to the
necessary existent, transition, growth and movement can also be
invalidated because there is no movement without time and space.

Based on the above, those who believe that God sits on a throne,
descends from heaven to earth and can be seen by the naked eye are thus
regarding Him as being subjected to space, growth and movement. This
indicates that they have failed to fully grasp true recognition of Him.

Generally speaking every concept that indicates an imperfection, need or
limitation is negated from the Almighty and is classified as His
negative attribute.

### b. The cause that bestows existence

###

The second result to emerge from the above argument is that the
necessary existent is the reason or cause for the possible existent. We
now intend to specify the different types of cause and the specialties
of the cause that bestows existence.

Cause in the regular sense means that every existent is dependent on
another existent, and includes the conditions and circumstances as-well.
God not having a cause means that He is not dependent on any existence,
nor requires a condition for Him to come into being. God is the cause of
creation and has the attribute of bestowing existence.

This is known as a special type of efficient cause (‘illiyyah
fā’iliyyah). Before explaining this cause it is necessary for the reader
to become acquainted with the different types of causes, which are
mentioned in detail in the books of philosophy.

In order to cultivate a seed, we know that their must be factors such as
the seed, soil, water, a conducive environment and an active factor (man
or nature) that can plant the seed and nurture it. All of these referred
agents are regarded as different reasons and causes that help the plant
to grow.

These various causes can be classified into distinctive categories, for
instance the cause, which is constantly needed for the existence of an
effect is known as the real cause (al-’illah al-haqīqiyyah).

The subsistence of the existence of an effect is not dependent upon the
subsistence of that cause (like the farmer for the plant), this type of
cause is known as the preparatory cause (‘illah mu’iddah).

The causes, which have a possible alternative, are known as the
substitute causes (‘illah inhisāriyyah).

However there is another type of cause, which is quite distinct from the
above example and can be discovered through our soul and its functions.
When an individual imagines something or intends to carry out an act, he
will have a configuration in his mind called an ‘image’ (sūrah
dhihniyyah), which is actualised by the means of ‘will’, which is
dependent upon the existence of the soul. As it is dependant it will be
known as an effect, but this effect is an effect, which is not
independent from the cause at all and cannot have any existence by
itself.

The activity of the soul with regards to the ‘will’ and ‘idea’ is
conditional upon the limited elements, which manifest from the possible
existent. When this activity is compared to the activity of the
necessary existent, we realise that the latter is exalted and sublime
and that there is nothing comparable to Him and all effects are totally
dependant upon Him.

### c. Peculiarities of the cause that bestows existence

###

Taking into consideration what has just been mentioned we can classify a
few of the unique features of the cause that bestows existence:

a. The ‘cause that bestows existence’ must be complete in the perfection
that exists in the effects to its absolute sense. This is so that the
cause can provide the existent with its required need as opposed to
those material or preparing causes, which only create an environment. It
is not necessary for these causes to have the relative perfection of the
effects; for example it is not required for the soil to have the
perfections of the plant or the parents to have the perfections of the
child.

Hence the God that bestows creation must be absolutely perfect in
essence.

b. The ‘cause that bestows existence’, brings its effect from
non-existence to existence, it creates, by the intermediacy of which, it
(the cause that bestows existence) is not deprived from and does not
lose anything from its existence.

c. The ‘cause that bestows existence’ is the real cause upon which the
effect is completely dependent for its subsistence as opposed to the
preparatory cause, upon which the subsistence of effect is not
dependent.

On this basis we can refute the claims made by some of the Sunni
theologians who state that the universe does not require God for its
subsistence, as-well as those western philosophers who claim that the
(natural) world is like a clock that has been wound up and left to
operate free from God.

On the contrary the universe is dependant on God in its entirety, and if
He were to withhold His grace for one moment, the whole of creation
would be as nothing.

Questions:
----------

1- Why should one be familiar with the attributes of God?

2- How can you establish that God possesses sempiternity?

3- How could one prove that the essence of God is absolute and not
comprised of parts, whether actively or potentially?

4- How can you prove that God is not a corporeal being?

5- Why is God not visible?

6- Why is God not subject to time and space?

7- Can we assign mobility and immobility to God? Why?

8- Explain the different types of cause.

9- Explain the peculiarities of the cause that bestows existence.


