LESSON TEN: ATTRIBUTES OF ACTION
================================

Introduction
------------

We are now aware that the attributes of action are concepts, which are
abstracted by the intellect that makes a special comparison between the
divine sacred essence of God and His creatures and considers the
relationship that exists between the two. In this context, the Creator
and the created engender a bilateral relationship from which the very
concept of creating is itself abstracted. If this bilateral relationship
is not considered then this concept will not be realised.

Consideration of the relationship that exists between God and His
creation does not have any boundaries or limits, however it can be
classified into two general groups:

1. The direct relationship that exists between God and His creation
(such as direct creation, initiation and origination).

2. Relationships that are consequent upon immediate relationships (such
as the relationship that is due to the sustenance provided by God for
His creatures).

Before abstracting an attribute of action for God it is sometimes
necessary to first abstract several forms of relationship. It is also
possible that a relationship is further based upon several bilateral
relationships between God and His creatures. An example is forgiveness,
which is based upon the lordship of divine legislation, where the
rulings issue from God and transgressions issue from the servants.

The substance of matter for the realisation of the attributes of action
is through the comparison between God the Supreme and His creatures.

As already indicated, it is possible that the actualisation of an
attribute of action is with the consideration of its origin, which will
allow it (attributes of actions) to return to the attributes of essence.
For instance if the Creator is defined as someone who has the power to
create, then it returns to the attribute of Power, the attribute of
hearing and seeing is interpreted as the knowledge of audible and
visible, and will return to the All-Knowing (‘alīm).

It is possible that some of the concepts of the attributes of essence
are regarded as relational or actively related. In this case they are
known as attributes of action. The concept of knowledge for instance has
been used several times in the Noble Qur’an as an attribute of action.

It must be noted however that when an attribute of action for God is
abstracted from the relationship that exists between God and a material
existent, it is conditional upon time and space. However this condition
is limited to the material side, the other side being free from and
exalted far beyond such limitations. For example, to provide sustenance
for a need, which is confined to time and space, is a characteristic
attributed to the need and not to the Sustainer.

The Holy Divine essence is beyond any frame of time or space. This point
requires special attention and is the key for many difficult issues and
problems, which arise between the scholars of polemics, when trying to
understand the attributes of essence and action.

a. Creatorship (khāliqiyyah)
----------------------------

Having established necessary existence as the first cause for the
appearance of possible existents, the concept of creatorship can be
abstracted and applied to the necessary existent, and the concept of
creation applied to the possible existents. The concept of creator,
which is abstracted on the basis of the existential relationship, is
equivalent to the cause that bestows existence. All of the possible
existents, which are in need of this cause, are thus regarded as the
creation.

The word ‘creation’ can at times be used in a limited way, such as when
it defines material existence as compared to the concept of ‘primordial
innovation’ (ibdā’) where the existents, which are prior to matter are
also considered. To bring into existence can be divided into primordial
innovation and creation.

The ability of God to create can never be compared to human activity,
which requires movement and the utilisation of equipment, which pertains
to action. The achievement of this action is known as the result of this
action.

It is not the case that ‘creating’ is one thing and ‘being created’ is
something else, because God transcends motion and the peculiarities of
bodily existence. If God’s ‘creating’ has a real referent of a concept
(misdāq ‘ayni) in addition to His essence, it would have been counted as
possible existence and the created thing from among His creation and the
discussion of creation would have been repeated (in relation to it).

Rather attributes of action are concepts abstracted by a special
comparison between God and His creation and consistence of it due to the
intellect.

b. Lordship (rubūbiyyah)
------------------------

The relationship that exists between God and His creation is not only
because of the creation being the effect of God, but the creation from
all its existential aspects needs God the Supreme. The creation is
entirely dependent upon God, and He can intervene and manage affairs in
whichever way He wishes.

When this relationship is considered in a general form, the concept of
Lordship is abstracted. The management of affairs is the necessary
factor here, from which several other referents for this concept can be
derived: maintenance and protection, giving life and causing death,
providing guidance and sustenance, etc.

Stations of Lordship can be divided into two general groups:

i.Metaphysical lordship, which includes the managing of affairs of all
the existents and provision for their needs - thus engendering the
universe.

ii.Legislative lordship, which is peculiar to those existents, which
have intelligence and free-will. It includes issues such as the
deputising of the prophets (a), sending heavenly books, prescribing
responsibilities and discipline and the making of rules.

The absolute lordship of God means that all creatures depend upon God.
The dependency that exists between creatures also returns to dependence
upon God.

He is the one who manages His affairs through His creatures, and guides
the intelligent existents (through intellect and other perception) and
assigns responsibilities, rules and regulations for them.

Lordship is similar to Creatorship in its being a relational concept,
however with the difference that sometimes the relationship between the
creatures is also considered, as mentioned in earlier while discussing
sustenance.

c. Divinity (ulūhiyyah)
-----------------------

With regards to the concept of the Divine (illah) and divinity
(ulūhiyyah), several discourses have been discussed, which are recorded
in the books of commentaries of the Qur’an. The meaning preferred by us
for the divine is: the One who is worshipped (ma’būd), or the One worthy
of being worshipped. This is in the same manner as which, ‘a book’ means
a thing written and a thing, which has an eminence of being written.

According to the mentioned meaning, the attribute of Divinity must be
abstracted through the relation of responsibility, obligation and
worship. Although those who are misguided have recognised a false deity
for themselves, the only one who deserves worship is the one who has
created them and that is the Lord of the universe. Apart from
recognising God as the Necessary Existent, the Creator, the Omnipotent
and the Originator, every individual must know that He is worthy of
being worshipped. Hence this very aspect is acknowledged in the
testimony of Islam, ‘There is no God (divine) but Allah’ (La ilāha illa
Allah).

Questions:
----------

1. Explain the relationship between the attributes of essence and the
attributes of action, and how they return to each other.

2. From which aspect are the attributes of action conditioned to time
and space?

3. Give an explanation for the concept of Creatorship.

4. Can we imagine that creatures possess an additional separated form of
existence from the action of creating by God?

5. Define Lordship?

6. Explain the general stations of Lordship.

7. Explain the necessary connection between Divinity and Lordship.

8. What is the meaning of Divinity? And why should it be combined with
Creatorship and Lordship?


