LESSON ELEVEN: ADDITIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF ACTION
==============================================

Introduction
------------

The issue of Divine Will is a matter, which has been frequently debated.
Various views have been discussed and disputed over, such as whether it
is to be considered as an attribute of essence or action, whether it is
pre-existent (qadīm) or temporal (hādith) and is it singular or
multiple, etc.

These elements and peripheries of the will and especially of the Divine
Will are discussed in philosophy. This topic is quite extensive and
cannot here be discussed in detail, but we will provide a concise
definition of the concept of ‘Will’, followed by a brief discussion on
the peripheries of Divine Will.

Will
----

The expression ‘Will’ in common use (‘urf) is employed in at least two
senses: one is wishing or desiring, and the other is deciding to perform
an action. The first meaning is more extensive compared to the second
meaning because the first meaning includes desiring one’s own actions,
the actions of others and desiring things in the external world. The
second meaning however includes only one’s own actions.

Will in the first sense is equivalent to loving (mawaddah) to whatever
degree. In the case of man it is from the accidental and psychical
quality (kayf nafsāni) and can be abstracted in an unlimited sense (as a
general concept) through the assistance of the intellect. This general
concept can be applied to the substantial existents (mawjūdāt
jawhariyyah) and even for God, the Supreme, as was discussed previously
with regards to knowledge. From this standpoint we can consider love
(hubb), which can be applied for God’s loving in relation to His own
essence (or in other words God loving His own essence) as an attribute
of essence. Hence the Divine Will means love of ontological perfections,
which on the initial level is directed towards the infinite perfection
and on the subordinate level is directed towards the perfections of
existents, which overflow from the perfections and goodness of the
Divine essence.

However the second meaning of Will, which requires the making of
decision in order to perform an action, is an attribute of action as it
is relate to a temporal decree which has a spatial qualification.
Furthermore the Noble Qur’an has also utilised this meaning on several
occasions, such as:

“All His command, when He wills something, is to say to it ‘Be’, and it
is” (Yāsīn:82).

It is important to remember that by relating an attribute of action to
God, it does not mean that a change has occurred in the Divine essence
or that an accidental quality has happened to evolve for God. On the
other hand it can be considered as a relational attribute of action
applied to God, which is abstracted by comparing the actions of
creatures to the divine essence.

Concerning Will, the relationship, which is taken into consideration, is
that the created things have been created from the aspect of having
goodness, perfections and benefit (maslahah). Their existence is in a
special

time and space and is associated with Divine knowledge and love. He
created them out of His own desire and not because He is forced into
doing so. Observation of this relation becomes the reason for the
abstraction of a relational concept called Will, which in relation with
a limited and restricted thing becomes limited and restricted. Hence
this relative concept (mafhūm idāfi) is given the attribute of
temporality and multiplicity.

a. Wisdom
---------

It becomes clear by the explanation given with regards to Divine Will,
that Divine Will is not to be associated with creating things absurdly;
rather it is to be fundamentally associated with the aspect of goodness
and perfection of a thing.

Nevertheless due to the fact that the collision of matter, results in
its own destruction and deterioration, the determination of Divine love
for the perfection is that their overall production (creation) is in
such a fashion that they receive as much goodness and perfection as
possible. By pondering upon this type of relationship, we come to grasp
the concept of benefit, which does not exist independently from the
existent of creations, and therefore will not cause their production,
far from being an effective agent for the Divine Will (irādah).

We can conclude that as the Divine actions find their source in the
knowledge, power, and love towards perfection and goodness, which are
the attributes of essence, they will always be realised as being
beneficial. This type of Will (which desires to deliver the ultimate
perfection and goodness) is known as the wise Will (irādah hakīmah).
Another attribute of action can here be abstracted, by the name of Wise
(hakīm), which also like other attributes of action returns to the
attributes of essence.

One should remember that just because the benefit fulfills a task it
does not mean that that benefit is the ultimate cause (‘illah ghāi’yyah)
for God the Supreme. Rather it is counted as a type of branch or
adherent for the purpose. The fundamental final cause for the
accomplishment of a job is love towards the essential infinite
perfection, which is also subordinately related to the perfections of
the creation. Hence it is from here that it has been said: that the
final cause for Divine actions is that very active cause (‘illah
fā’iliyyah) and God the Supreme does not have any other extra purpose
other than essence. However this subject does not contradict the
understanding that the perfection, goodness and benefit of existents are
counted as a secondary goal. For this very reason the divine actions in
the Noble Qur’an are considered as the causation of affairs, which
returns them all towards perfection and goodness for creation.

b. Speech
---------

One of the concepts associated with God the Supreme, is the concept of
speech. Discussions with regards to the speech of the Divine existed in
the past among the scholars of philosophy and theology and it has even
been said that this was the very reason why they named theology as the
knowledge of speech (ilm al-kalām). The companions of this knowledge
used to debate about whether Divine speech is an attribute of essence as
the Asharites (ashā’irah) believed or whether it is related to the
attributes of

action as believed by the Mutazilites (mu’tazilah). One of the strongest
conflicts between these two schools of thought, was whether the Qur’an,
which is the speech of God is created or uncreated. This sometimes led
to the two groups damming each other upon this issue.

By focusing on the definition given for the attributes of essence and
for the attributes of action it becomes clear that speaking is an
attribute of action. In order to abstract this concept, one has to
consider a person who is addressed (mukhātab) and who understands the
purpose of the speaker through the means of listening to the sound,
reading a text, or by understanding a concept in one’s mind. In reality
this concept is abstracted from the relationship that exists between God
and the addressed, whereby God intends to unveil the truth to the
addressed, who realises the truth. To the contrary, if speaking is taken
as the ability or power for speech, then it will become an attribute of
essence. These types of occurrence have been mentioned earlier with
regards to other attributes of action.

However the Qur’an in the sense of letters, words or concepts present in
one’s mind is indeed created.

If someone regards the knowledge of God as the reality of the Qur’an, it
will then become the attribute of essence. However this type of
interpretation is far from common parlance and must be disregarded.

c. Truth
--------

If God’s speech is referred with the structure of, or as a command
(amr), prohibition or assertion, it charts out the practical
responsibilities of servanthood, where it cannot be attributed as being
true or false. However if it (speech) is in the form of a prophecy, then
it will be attributed as the truth, because the Noble Qur’an has
mentioned:

“And who is more truthful in speech than Allah?” (al-Nisā’:87).

Hence no-one would have any reason for not accepting it.

This attribute is considered as a foundation for different types of
arguments (known as traditional and devotional), which are employed for
proving topics relating to the worldview and ideology.

On the other hand, intellectual arguments for proving this attribute can
be established, God’s speech is from the station of lordship, and the
management of the universe and man is based upon knowledge and wisdom.
In other words it means that guidance for the creation and means for the
realisation of the truth for the addressed is provided.

Questions:
----------

1. From which angle is Divine Will considered as an attribute of action
and from what perspective is it known as an attribute of essence?

2. For abstracting the concept of Divine Will as an attribute of action,
what relationship must be considered?

3. How can Will be associated with temporality and multiplicity?

4. Explain Divine Wisdom (hikmah).

5. How can one arrive at the concept of the benefit (maslahah)?

6. In which sense can benefit, perfection and goodness be considered as
the purpose of creation?

7. Explain God’s speech (kalām).

8. What is the argument for the Divine Truth?


