LESSON TWELVE: ANALYSING THE REASONS FOR DEVIATION
==================================================

Introduction
------------

As indicated in the first lesson, the worldviews can be divided into two
groups; the divine worldview and the materialistic worldview. The major
difference between the two is that the divine worldview accepts a wise
creator as the fundamental principle, whereas this is rejected by the
materialistic worldview.

In the previous lessons we have provided appropriate discourses for
proving God’s existence, established the most important positive and
negative attributes and given discussions pertaining to the attributes
of essence and action.

In order to acknowledge belief with the fundamental principle we will
give a brief criticism of the materialistic worldview by establishing
the divine worldview, which will unveil the former as being baseless and
impotent.

In order to realise this, we will be initiating the following discussion
by providing the reasons for the departure from the divine view towards
heresy, followed by an explanation of the weak elements in the
materialistic worldview.

Reasons of deviation
--------------------

Heresy, atheism, and materialism have a long past in human history.
However there have always been traces in human societies of there being
a belief in a creator.

Nevertheless the ubiquity of being irreligious started in Europe during
the eighteenth century and gradually expanded to other regions of the
world.

Although the advent of this irreligiousness was a response towards the
system of the church and aimed at opposing Christianity, its waves
nevertheless swept the other religions away with it. This anti-religious
inclination, along with industry, art and Western technology was
exported to other parts of the world. Furthermore in the more recent
centuries this transformation and diffusion was with sociological and
economical; Marxist thought, which was applied in many countries, the
outcome of which was the fall of humanity.

The reasons and factors that necessitated the appearance and development
of this distorted thought are numerous, an investigation into which
would require a separate book. However they can be generalised into
three groups:

### a. Psychological reasons for deviation

###

Qualities such as irresponsibility, carelessness and desire towards
pleasure seeking are all tendencies, which may delude an individual
towards atheism.

For such an individual, from one side it means the pain of research and
investigation is necessary, this is especially so when those issues,
which provide no bodily or material pleasure, are concerned. So for
those who are

lazy such an effort becomes a big obstacle in their way. From another
angle man’s inclination towards animalistic freedom, carelessness,
freedom from limitations and discipline will only act to distance him
further from the divine worldview.

Acceptance of a divine worldview based upon belief in a wise creator,
establishes a series of beliefs, which obligates responsibility upon man
in all voluntary actions.

This responsibility requires sacrifice and discipline in many areas; the
acceptance of discipline with carelessness is in itself contradictory.
Hence the tendency towards the love of animalistic freedom, even though
the individual may be unaware of it, becomes the very reason by which
the roots of responsibility are cut, which leads more fundamentally to
the denial in the existence of God.

There are other elements, that also incline man away from his
religiosity, and these become more apparent once the other tendencies
have been exposed.

### b. Sociological reasons for deviation

###

When a deformity appears within a society, partially due to the
custodians of the religion, then this occurrence can be classified as a
sociological reason. The deformation of a society could force men to
blame the caretakers of religion, resulting in the society becoming
dissatisfied with the religion and doctrine itself. The reason behind
this is that most men are intellectually weak, and are unable to
analyse, interpret and realise the true reasons behind the corrupt
events. They think that these confusions and chaos are because of the
involvement of religious authorities and as a result of religion, they
thereby form the assumption that religious beliefs are the reason for
this deformity and distortion. They subsequently become dissatisfied
with the religion and doctrine itself.

Obvious illustrations of the mentioned elements can be seen in the
social order of Europe during the Renaissance. The inappropriate
response of the church in the field of religion, politics, and law
(civil rights) was one of the major reasons by which the people became
tired and disinterested in Christianity, and more generally in religion
as a whole.

Focusing upon this element of deviation indicates that it is necessary
for all of the religious authorities and institutions to understand the
sensibility of time and importance of responsibility, as their mistakes
will result in the misfortune and deviation of the society.

### c. Intellectual factors for deviation

###

Intellectual deviations can occur through the doubts and confusions that
appear in one’s mind, or through things that one hears. As a man’s
intellectual and rational capability may be weak, he may not be able to
respond to these doubts, and thus he becomes influenced by them. This
obstacle then becomes a hurdle in his way to achieving tranquillity and
certainty.

However there are other factors, which can be divided into different
branches such as:

doubts based upon sense perception, doubts emerging from legends and
myths, doubts evolving from false explanations, doubts based upon weak
arguments, doubts related to unexpected incidents and events, that are
claimed as being against the wisdom (hikmah) and justice (‘adl) of God,
doubts arising from scientific hypotheses which oppose religious belief,
doubts associated with the practical laws, especially in the field of
politics, jurisprudence and law (huqūq).

Occasionally two or more factors can together become the reason for
confusion, doubt, disagreement and atheism. Distinctive psychological
disorder can also sometimes create the grounds for doubts and confusion.

Campaign against the elements of deviation
------------------------------------------

With the understanding of the different reasons and elements of
deviation, it becomes clear that campaigning and dealing with each one
requires special conditions with a unique procedure. For example,
psychological and ethical deviations must be cured by means of the
correct training and also by focusing upon the disadvantages delivered
through it, as was mentioned in lesson two and three, where the need for
investigating religion was discussed. Likewise, in order to protect
oneself from the effects of social disorder (sociological deviation) one
must differentiate between a religion and its caretakers. However at
least an individual is unaware of the influences of psychological and
sociological deviations but for the intellectual influences one has to
choose a special method. Such a method for instance could be by
discerning between the differences of distorted beliefs and true
beliefs, and by never proving the religious beliefs through illogical or
weak arguments.

Questions:
----------

1- What is the benefit of analysing and criticising the materialistic
worldview?

2- What is the reason for the expansion of atheism in the recent
centuries?

3- Explain the reasons behind psychological deviation.

4- Explain in detail the sociological reasons for deviation?

5- Explain the intellectual reasons and its branches for deviation?

6- How would legends and myths negatively affect faith?

7- How can one combat the elements of deviation?


