LESSON THIRTEEN: RESOLVING SEVERAL SPURIOUS DOUBTS
==================================================

Believing in an intangible existence
------------------------------------

One of the simplest doubts in the field of theology (knowing God) is how
can one believe in the existence of an existent, which is not
perceivable?

This doubt is held by the simpleton who finds it hard to grasp the
concept of there being an intangible reality. However one will also find
reflective thinkers who base their thinking upon the principle of sense
perception, and also deny the possibility of an intangible existence,
hence they are also influenced by this doubt.

The answer to this spurious argument is that the perceptions of the
senses are due to an outcome of coherence between bodily parts and
bodies or substances etc, which is attained by virtue of corporeality.
Each one of our senses perceives a particular material form, which is
proportional for that sense with defined conditions. In the same way,
one cannot expect the eyes to have the sense of sound, or the ears to
have the sense of sight and ability to see colours, hence one must not
expect our senses to perceive each and every existent.

On the basis of the following reasons we will establish that we cannot
perceive all existents through our outward senses:

Firstly, among the material existents, there are things, which are not
competent of being perceived through our senses such as: electrical
waves or ultra-violet rays.

Secondly, we perceive many realities through other than the means of our
outward senses and we confidently believe in their existence. For
example, the states of love and fear, or of conscious intentions are
psychological stations just as the spirit is not perceivable by the
(bodily) senses. Essentially perception itself is immaterial and
imperceptible (through the senses).

Therefore just because a thing cannot be perceived through bodily
senses, does not invalidate its existence and should not be the reason
for such a thing being improbable and remote to the mind.

### a. The role of fear and ignorance in belief in God

###

Another spurious doubt asserted by the sociologist is that belief in God
is an outcome of fear, especially of the dangers of natural disasters
such as earthquakes, lightening etc. They believe that man in order to
calm his mind has imagined an imaginary existence and named it God and
started to worship it. Due to this reason, belief in God becomes
subsequently weaker as the causes of, and safety precautions against
such disasters are known.

Many Marxist’s in their books grandiloquently regard this as an
accomplishment of the science of sociology and use this as a means for
deceiving many immature people.

In order to answer their allegations we would say:

Firstly, the bases of this argument are suppositions made by some
sociologists and they do not have any logical ground for validity.

Secondly, in the present century itself there were and indeed are many
great thinkers aware of the causes behind these phenomena, and who at
the same time have a firm belief in God. Belief in God is thus not an
outcome of fear or ignorance.

Thirdly, if the fear of some natural phenomenon, or being ignorant of
the causes becomes the motive to focus upon God, then it does not mean
that God is an outcome of the fear or ignorance of man. Many
psychological instincts such as pleasure seeking or lustfulness become
the impetus for philosophical, scientific, and technical investigations
but do not negatively affect their authenticity.

Fourthly, if people recognise God as the originator of that phenomenon,
whose causes are unknown and if with the discovery of their natural
causes their faith becomes weak, then surely it is their view and faith,
which is weak. This does not provide us with a valid reason to
disbelieve in God, because the reality is that the Divine causation with
regards to the occurrences in the universe is from the source of the
efficacy of natural causes. These causes are not parallel to the Divine
causation but rather the Divine causation is transcendental to every
material or immaterial cause.

Furthermore the recognition and unrecognition of natural causes will
have no efficacy in establishing or not establishing the existence of
God.

### b. Is the principle of causation, one universal concept?

###

Yet another spurious argument put forward by some of the Western
thinkers is that if the causal nexus (asl al -‘illiyyah) is universal,
then God must also have a cause. To accept a God without cause is thus a
defect in the principle of causation. If we do not accept this rule to
be universal then we would not be able to prove necessary existence
through this principle, because it is possible that someone could state
that the origin of matter or energy was by itself, and through its
mutation things originated.

This argument, as indicated earlier in lesson seven is due to the
improper interpretation of the principle of causation. It has been
recognised as ‘every existence needs a cause’ but the reality of the
matter is that ‘every possible existence or every existent that is
dependent or needy requires a cause,’ and this rule is universal,
essential, and unexceptional.

However, accepting the origin of matter or energy without a cause, and
its mutation as the basis for the origination of the world has several
controversies, and will be discussed in future lessons.

### c. Achievements of sociology

###

Some believe that the belief in the Creator of man and universe does not
correspond to the accomplishments of modern sociology. For example, it
has been proven in chemistry that a certain amount of matter and energy
is always subsisting. On this basis, it is not possible for any
manifestation to come into existence from nothing and no existent can be
completely destroyed. Those who believe in God believe that God has
brought creation from non-existence into existence.

They claim that this same argument has been proven in biology. A living
creature has evolved from non-living matter and gradually mutated and

reached perfection when it attained the position of man. Those who
believe in God believe that God created human beings separately.

We will now aim to answer these controversies:

Firstly, the principle of the continual subsistence of energy and matter
is a scientific rule and can only be regarded and applied to those
concrete perceptible things. On this basis, philosophical issues such as
whether matter and energy are eternal and pre- eternal are not resolved.

Secondly, the subsistence of energy and matter does not imply that one
is needless of the Creator, but with the ageing of the universe the more
need it has for a creator, because every effect requires a cause.
Possibility and dependency are the essence of a possible existent (an
effect), rather than it being accidental or temporal.

In other words, matter and energy form as a material cause (‘illah
māddiyyah) for the appearance of the universe, and as opposed to being
an active cause, is itself in need of an active cause.

Thirdly, the subsistence of certain matter and energy does not obligate
the coming into being of a new creation, its growth and reduction.
Entities like spirit, life, sense and will etc, are not from matter and
energy until their growth and reduction would contradict with the rule.

Fourthly, the presumption of evolution - despite it being scientifically
unauthentic and disproved by several great thinkers - does not
contradict the belief in God. At its highest level it proves the
supportive causation between the living existents. It does not neglect
the relationship between them and the necessary existent. It is probably
because of this reason that several supporters of this thought believe
in God.

Questions:
----------

1. Explain the controversies for denying intangible reality and sense
perception.

2. How can one criticise the opinion of sociologists who assert, that
belief in God is out of fear and ignorance?

3. Does belief in God contradict the principle of causation? Why?

4. Is the rule of the subsistence of matter and energy incompatible with
belief in a creator? Why?

5. Does the presumption of evolution nullify belief in God? Why?


