LESSON FOURTEEN: THE MATERIALISTIC WORLD VIEW AND ITS CRITICISM
===============================================================

The principles of the materialist worldview
-------------------------------------------

In order to define the materialist worldview the following principles
can be applied:

1. Existence is equivalent to matter and materiality. An existent is
either matter, having three dimensions (length, width, and thickness) or
volume, or it is counted as having the properties of matter. Naturally
matter has the capability of being quantitative and divisible. Hence on
this very principle the existence of God as being immaterial and
supernatural is denied.

2. Matter has no beginning or end, resulting in it being uncreated and
without any need for cause. According to our philosophical terminology
it is the necessary existence.

3. The universe cannot be considered as having a final cause and
purpose, because the active agent (fā’il) does not seem to have any
intelligence and will for being identified as having a purpose.

4. Phenomena in the universe (not matter itself) come into existence as
an effect of the shifting of material particles, which influence each
other.

From this standpoint one can recognise the former things as a type of
condition and as a preparatory cause (‘illah i’dādiyyah) for the
subsequent phenomenon or at-most it can be considered as natural
activity among materials. For example, a tree can be known as a natural
agent for the fruit that it bears, or the phenomena of chemistry and
physics can be considered as the agent. However, none of the phenomena
require a divine agent that bestows existence.

5. The fifth principle can also be added to the above and is related to
theology. However from a certain aspect it precedes the other principles
and is the only authentic cognition. It is the principle, which comes
forth from sense experience. As the experience of the senses only
confirms matter and materials, it will thus not accept any other
existence.

Nevertheless we have mentioned in the previous lesson the defects of
this principle and it is not required from us to criticise this
principle over again, therefore we will analyse the remaining principles
of materialist worldview:

### a. Investigating the first principle

###

This principle is the most fundamental principle in the materialist
worldview, however its proclamations are nothing but absurd. It has
failed to establish any argument for denying metaphysics, particularly
on the basis of materialist epistemology, which is founded upon the
principles of sense and experience. It is clear that no sense
experience, which itself is matter, would be able to articulate in the
domain of metaphysics and either deny or establish anything. The utmost
thing stated in the logic of empiricism is, that existence beyond the
physical realm cannot be established on its basis. It should therefore
at least accept the possibility of the existence of this realm. We have
indicated earlier that it is possible for man to perceive various
immaterial phenomena, which do not have the peculiarities of matter,
such as spirit through the immediate knowledge (‘ilm hudūri).
Furthermore

several intellectual arguments have been established for proving the
existence of the immaterial realm in the books of philosophy. The best
attestations for the existence of the immaterial spirit are the true
dreams, several practices of the yogis, and also the miracles of the
prophets (a) and saints.

In any case the arguments mentioned in lesson seven and eight are
sufficient enough for proving the existence and non-corporeality of God
the Supreme.

### b. Investigating the second principle

###

The second principle emphasises upon matter having no beginning or end
and thus being uncreated.

Firstly, matter having no beginning or end cannot be scientifically or
experimentally established. This is because the experimental dimensions
are limited and no experiment can prove the infinity of the universe
from the point of view of time and space.

Secondly, the assumption that matter has no end does not necessitate it
having no creator. The assumption of a spatial movement requires the
supposition of everlasting force from the moving agent, rather than not
needing an impetus for the moving agent.

In addition, matter uncreated implies that it is a necessary existent
and we have already established in lesson eight that it is impossible
for matter to be a necessary existent.

### c. Investigating the third principle

###

This principle denies that the universe is purposeful. This will
naturally result in the denial of the existence of the Creator and
consequently once the existence of God the Wise is proven this principle
will be nullified. In addition to this, one might question as to how it
is possible for an intelligent individual, after witnessing the
astonishing order and harmonisation of the universe and the benefits
that emanate forth from it, could fail to realise that the universe is
purposeful.

### d. Investigating the fourth principle

###

This principle of the materialist worldview recognises causation as
being limited to the material realm and material phenomenon. This view
has been severely criticised, the most important points are as follows:

1. According to this rule a new (immaterial) existent could never come
into existence.

However we witness the commencement of subsequent existents, especially
in the realm of the human being and animals. The most significant of
them are life, intelligence, intellectuality, emotions and will etc.

The materialists assert that these phenomena are also nothing more than
the special characteristics and properties of matter.

In order to answer their claim one must say that, firstly the
peculiaritythat cannot be separated from the matter and from those
things belonging to matter is it that it accepts division and it has a
magnitude. These peculiarities are not present in the phenomena
mentioned.

2. Secondly, the phenomena, which are said to be the special properties
of matter, also exist in lifeless matter. In other words matter was
lacking these special characteristics and subsequently they appeared.
Therefore the appearance of these existents, which are known as special
properties, require an originator who has initiated this into the
matter. This originator itself is the cause that bestows existence or is
the creating cause.

3.Another serious criticism for their claim is based on their principle,
that all phenomena in the universe must be pre-determined (jabr),
because by effecting and becoming effected in matter there is no place
for choice and free-will (ikhtiyār).

Opposing free-will in addition to it being against self-evidence
(badāhah) and commonsense, necessitates it denying any type of
responsibility and value for spirituality and ethics. By denying
responsibility and any ethical value system, the results for human life
are surely clear.

4.Finally with the understanding, that matter cannot be the necessary
existence, as already established, one must consider that it (matter)
has a cause, which cannot be classified as a preparatory or natural
cause. This is because this type of relationship and correlation can
only be imagined between the materials with each other. However not all
types of matter can have this type of relationship with its cause. Thus
the cause that brought matter into existence is the cause beyond the
physical realm, and is the creating cause.

Questions:
----------

1- Explain the principles of the materialist worldview.

2- Define matter and material (corporeal).

3- Criticise the first principle of the materialist worldview.

4- Criticise the second principle.

5- Criticise the third principle.

6- Explain the problems of the fourth principle.


