LESSON FIFTEEN: DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM AND ITS CRITICISM
=========================================================

Mechanical materialism and dialectical materialism
--------------------------------------------------

Materialism comes in different forms, and each one has a distinctive
explanation for the beginning of the universe and its phenomena. In the
beginning of the modern age, materialism by utilising the concepts of
Newton on physics, interpreted the appearance of phenomena on the basis
of mechanical movement. They considered every movement as an effect of a
particular moving force, which entered from outside upon the momentary
body.

They assumed that the universe was like a large machine from within
which there was a moving force. This force would then transfer itself
from one section to another causing the ‘large machine’ to move.

This theory was named as mechanical materialism. This belief however
contained many weaknesses and was subsequently criticised by their
adversaries. An example of such a criticism was:

If every movement is an effect of an external moving force, then there
must be an external force for that prime matter (māddah al-awwaliyyah).
This therefore necessitates the acceptance of a force beyond the
physical realm (metaphysical), which has become the source for the
initial movement in the realm of matter.

Another such criticism was that only conventional and transitional
movements could be interpreted as mechanical forces. The phenomena in
the universe could not all be limited to spatial changes, and this
further necessitates the acceptance of other causes and agents for the
appearance of several such phenomena.

The incapacity of mechanical materialism to answer these criticisms
caused the materialists to search for other reasons to explain the
metamorphosis of the universe.

They sought to at least prove that some movement was based on dynamics
and that matter was in some way self-erupting.

Some of the founders of dialectical materialism (Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engles) by using the philosophical concepts of Hegel regarded the cause
for movement to be the internal contradictory factor of the phenomena.
In addition to accepting that matter is eternal and uncreated, and in
the acceptance of the universal movement and the efficacy of the
phenomena upon each other, they explain their assumption based upon
three subjective principles:

1. Principle of internal contradictions.

2. Principle of sublimation or conversion of quantity (kammi) to quality
(kayfi).

3. Principle of negating the negation or the dialectic of nature.

It is here that we will give a brief explanation of these principles
followed by a criticism:

a. The principle of contradiction
---------------------------------

Dialectical materialism recognises every phenomenon to be composed of
two incompatible elements: thesis and anti-thesis. They cause the
transmutation of the phenomenon in such a way that the anti-thesis
dominates, synthesising a new phenomenon.

For example an egg, which contains within itself an embryo, eventually
develops by consuming the food provided and turns into a chicken,
through the processes know as synthesis. Positive and negative
electricity are a good example of contradiction within the phenomena of
physics. Also addition and subtraction is known as antilogy in
elementary mathematics, and integral and non-integral are known as
antilogies in higher mathematics.

These consequences are also present in the sociological history of man.
For example, in Capitalism the working class is the anti-thesis for the
capitalist class. If they gradually take over, then this synthesis will
result in a socialist and communist society.

### Criticism of the principle of contradiction

###

It cannot be denied that by arranging two material existents next to
each other, it can result in such a way that one affects the other by
weakening or even destroying it. For example we know of the effects that
water has on fire. However this outcome is not universal and cannot be
recognised as a principle. There are several instances contrary to this
rule.

The presence of this type of contradiction between the phenomena is not
considered impossible under the understanding of classical logic,
philosophy and metaphysics.

Rather it is the combination of two opposites in one subject, which is
considered impossible. They have brought absurd examples for the
combination of two opposites, such as the combination of addition and
subtraction or integral and non-integral etc, aswell as the false
prediction for the establishment of a dictatorship of proletarianism in
capitalist countries.

If every phenomenon was composed of two opposites, then there must be
another combination for every thesis and anti-thesis. Each one is a
phenomenon and according to the principle mentioned they must have a
combination of two opposites. This would mean that every limited
phenomenon would have to contain infinite opposites.

However, the most basic criticism, that can be levied against this
assumption (internal contradiction being considered as the cause for
movement, supposedly compensating for the flaw in mechanical
materialism), is that there is no intellectual argument to support it.
In addition to this there is no denial in accepting the existence of a
mechanical movement due to external force acting upon it. Unless of
course, it can be accepted that the movement of a football is an effect
of its internal contradictions and not an effect of the contact of the
foot of a football player!

b. The principle of the quantum leap
------------------------------------

By focusing upon the transformations in the universe, we realise that
not all these transformations are gradual or step-by-step. In several
instances a subsequent phenomenon may appear, but is dissimilar to the
former phenomenon, and therefore cannot be counted as a result or
outcome of a

former movement and transmission. The materialists have interpreted
another principle for this process known as the quantum leap or
conversion of quantity to quality. They explain that the conversion of
quantity occurs when it reaches a special point and causes the
appearance of quality. For example, when water increases in temperature
to a degree whereby it changes into a vapoury state, and when metal
changes its form and state from a solid to a liquid when it is heated to
a certain level. Also an example can be that when conflicts in a society
reach a certain level, they can cause a revolution.

### Criticisms of the principle of the quantum leap

###

Firstly, a quantity could never be converted into a quality. At most, it
is possible that the appearance of a phenomenon could be conditional
upon the existence of a specific quantity. For example, it is not the
temperature level of water, which changes it into vapour, (which is
another quality), but this change is conditional upon the existence of a
certain temperature.

Secondly, it is not necessary that this quantity is acquired as an
effect of the gradual increase in the temperature of antecedent
quantities. However it is possible that it is acquired as an effect of
the decrease of antecedent quantities. For example vapour changing into
water, is conditional upon the decrease in temperature.

Thirdly, the qualitative transformation (quality related) is not always
sudden and impulsive, rather in many cases it occurs gradually, as the
melting of glass and wax is gradual.

On these bases the only thing that can be accepted is that the necessity
of a particular quantity is needed for the actualisation of some natural
phenomena. However this cannot be considered, as the conversion of
quantity to quality and one cannot accept the gradual increase of
quantity as a necessity for the transformation of a phenomenon.
Furthermore one cannot accept this condition as universal for the
qualitative changes (of phenomena). Hence sublimation cannot be
recognised as a universal rule.

c. The principle of negating the negation
-----------------------------------------

The meaning of negating the negation, sometimes also known as the
principle of exploring nature or the perfection of contradiction, is
that during the course of change in dialectics, a thesis is always
negated by an anti-thesis, and an anti-thesis is negated through
synthesis in turn. A plant negates the seed and is negated by subsequent
seeds, and an embryo negates an egg and is negated through a chicken.
The new phenomena however, are always more perfect than the former ones,
and the dialectical course is always vertical and towards perfection.
This is the most significant element in the principle of negating the
negation, which highlights the developing aspect with a tendency towards
perfection.

Criticisms of the principle of negating the negation There is no doubt
that in every transformation and transition there is the disintegration
of previous states and circumstances, before the appearance of a new
state and environment. If this is considered as the principle of
negating the negation then this principle is nothing but solely a change
or transformation. However the explanation -they give for this
principle, with which they

justify the direction of movement being towards perfection, and upon
which they claim that all movements are towards perfection, as well as
each transformation of the universe is evolutional, meaning, that every
new phenomenon is necessarily more perfect than the previous one- is not
acceptable. Is uranium, which turns into lead through the effect of
radiation more perfect? Is the plant, which dries producing no seed or
fruit more perfect? Therefore the only conclusion that can be accepted
is that some natural phenomenon can, as a result of movement and
transformation, reach perfection. Perfection cannot be considered as a
universal rule for all of the phenomena in the universe.

It would be appropriate here to remind the reader that the assumption
upon which these principles were universally established, only define
the rules which have already been proven in the natural sciences, such
as how the phenomena come into appearance.

However the existence of universal rules does not mean that we are
without need of an originator or the cause, which bestows existence. We
have already established in our previous lessons that matter and
materiality are possible existents and they require a necessary
existence.

Questions:
----------

1. What is the difference between mechanical and dialectical
materialism?

2. Explain the principle of contradiction and its criticism?

3. Explain the principle of the quantum leap?

4. Explain the principle of negating the negation?

5. Does the universality of the assumption of the principle of negating
the negation, establish the needlessness of the cause that bestows
existence?


