LESSON SIXTEEN: ONENESS OF GOD
==============================

Introduction
------------

In previous lessons the essentiality of the existence of God the Creator
of the universe was established. In later lessons we investigated the
materialist worldview and provided an explanation of their various
criticisms. To assume the universe was free from a creator became
apparently absurd and the interpretations given were unacceptable.

It is now an appropriate time to expand upon the issues relating to the
oneness of God and unveil the flaws in polytheistic thought.

With reference to the appearance and alteration of polytheistic beliefs,
there have been distinctive opinions between the sociologists. However
none of these arguments can be considered as clear or authentic.

It may be possible to state that the initial reason for the inclination
towards polytheism was the appearance of numerous heavenly and earthly
phenomena, which, lead to the view that a particular god manages each
phenomenon. Some related goodness to the god of good and evil to the god
of evil. This resulted in the belief of there being two sources for the
world.

From another angle by focusing upon the effect of the light (nūr) of the
sun, moon and stars, upon the earthly phenomena, they discerned that the
celestial objects have a type of lordship (rubūbiyyah) compared to the
earth.

In addition to the above, man’s tendency towards having a tangible God
became the reason for creating different idols, signs and symbols for
worshiping their presumed gods. These idols and symbols then gradually
became the fundamental aspect of belief among the less intelligent.
Every nation, perhaps every tribe on the basis of ambiguity and doubt
established customs and rituals for idol worship as an answer for the
intrinsic tendency of god worshiping. Furthermore, in order to sanctify
their animalistic and egoistic tendencies, they moulded these tendencies
into religious rituals. Such rituals like dancing festivals,
wine-drinking fiestas, Epicureanism, etc still exist among the idol
worshipper.

However more significant than the mentioned reasons, were the egotistic
interests and arrogance of tyrants and authoritarians, which caused them
to abuse the beliefs of simpletons in order to expand their power and
rule. Furthermore they considered a type of lordship for themselves and
also regarded satanic worship as part of their rituals. Such examples
can be seen in the past empires of China, India, Iran and Egypt.

Nevertheless polytheistic religions came under the influence of
different factors and discernment among humans. Thus a barrier was
formed preventing people from understanding the true perfection, which
was supposed to be applied by the divine and monotheistic religions. The
Noble Qur’an portrays such struggles encountered by the prophets (a) of
God and the polytheists.

On these bases, the foundation of polytheistic belief is to believe in
the lordship of an existent other than God the Supreme, for the
appearance of some of the universe’s phenomena. Furthermore many
polytheists had faith in the oneness of the Creator, and in reality they
accepted the oneness of creatorship. However on a lower realm they
recognised other second level

gods who administrated the world independently, and they called God the
Creator, the God of gods or Lord of the lords (rabb al-arbāb).

These gods, who administrate according to some, were known as angels,
and were called by the polytheist Arabs, the daughters of God. Some
recognised them as fairies and genies or some regarded them as the
spirits of stars or humans from the past, or as a type of invisible
existent.

In lesson ten indications were made that creatorship and true lordship
are inseparable from each other, belief in the creatorship of God and
the acceptance of the lordship of others is not compatible. By
explaining the contradiction in this belief, it is possible to nullify
the argument of those who held such a view.

In order to establish the oneness of God, the Supreme, many arguments
have been demonstrated in the different books of theology and
philosophy. Here we are going to demonstrate an argument, which
encompasses the oneness of lordship and rejects the polytheistic
beliefs.

Proofs for the Oneness of God
-----------------------------

The assumption that the universe has two or more gods can solely be
imagined through a few possibilities:

Firstly it can be considered that every phenomenon of the universe is
created and is an effect of all the assumed gods. The second assumption
could be that each particular group of phenomena is an effect (or
created by a particular god) of one of the assumed gods. Finally the
third assumption is that all of the phenomena are created by one of
these assumed gods and the other gods are recognised as the managers of
the universe.

However it is impossible to assume that every phenomenon has several
gods. If two or more gods created an existent, it would imply that each
of the assumed gods would create an existent. This would result in many
existents, whereas in reality there is only one.

If it is to be assumed that a particular god creates each particular
phenomenon, this will imply that each phenomenon exists because of its
particular god. Furthermore they must not require or depend upon any
other existent unless the (dependency) need returns to their particular
god. This type of requirement or need must be upon the existent, which
is created by that very creator who has created that particular group.

In other words, the assumption of having more than one god necessitates
the order in the universe to be multifarious and deteriorating. In
reality there is only one order and all phenomena are related and
effectual upon each other and at the same time need each other.

Furthermore the present phenomenon is linked with the former phenomenon
and every coexisting phenomenon creates grounds for future phenomena.
Hence a universe, which is linked and related to each other (interwoven
with each other) is governed under a sole order and it (this universe)
cannot be an effect of several causes that bestow existence.

Moreover, if the assumption is made that the creator of the creation is
one, and other gods are the administrators and governors of the
universe, this is also incorrect, because every effect with all its
being is established on the cause that bestows existence (‘illah mufīda
lil-wujūd). No independent existent has the means to interfere unless
the results and outcomes of effects

of a cause are all under the authority of the existence-bestowing agent
and take place with the will of the Divine. In this case none of them
would be considered as lord because the true meaning of ‘lord’ means the
one who can freely and independently intervene in the creation. However
there is no intervention, but in the dissipation of the lordship given
by the Creator and with the power He has bestowed. This form of
executing does not contradict with the oneness of lordship because the
oneness of creatorship, does not contradict ‘the creating’ with the
Divine decree of the Creator. In the Noble Qur’an and traditions we find
a similar type of creation or origination based on Allah’s support and
godly power. As it has been mentioned with regards to Prophet Jesus (a)
that:“ and when you would createA from clay the form of a bird, with My
leave, and you would breathe into it and it would become a bird, with My
leave” (al-Māi’da:110).

And also in another verse we find:

“And those who direct the affairs [of creatures]” (al-Nāzi’āt:5).

It can be concluded that the illusion of having several gods, stems from
the comparison made between God and material causes, where many causes
are not unusual. However it can never be accepted that several causes
can bestow existence for an effect, or that several lords and
independent administrators can be assumed for administrating the
universe.

Based on this argument for nullifying this illusion, one must focus upon
the meaning and the peculiarities of this cause that bestows existence
until it is known that the profusion of this cause is impossible.
Furthermore one must contemplate upon the coherence of the creation
until reaching the realisation that several gods could not possibly
create this type of order, or numerous lords administer this type of
universe.

Likewise it became clear for some of the qualified and saintly
individuals of God, that by accepting Divine authority (wilāyah
al-takwīniyyah) in a setting where there is no independent lordship or
creatorship over them, the oneness of God would not be negated. The
legislative authority (wilāyah al-tashrī’iyyah) of the Prophet (s) and
Imams (a) is not inconsistent with the Divine legislative lordship
(rubūbiyyah al- tashrī’iyyah), because it comes with the Divine degree.

Questions:
----------

1- Explain the causes for the development of polytheism.

2- What is the basis of polytheism?

3- Why can one not assume that a phenomenon has several gods?

4- What difference is caused if one considers that the creation created
by one god has several lords to administer it?

5- Why can one not regard every group of creation to be created by its
particular god?

6- How would you criticise the assumption that the entire universe is
created by one God, and at the same time claim that there are many lords
and executers?

7- From where does the illusion of several gods come from, and how can
it be nullified?

8- Why does it make no difference to the oneness of lordship and
creatorship, if one believes in the Divine authority for the saints?


