TRANSLATOR’S NOTE
=================

This is a revolutionary work in the field Islamic Theology and also in
the domain of seminary teaching. Theological Instruction is not only a
traditional text on theology but it approaches the modern and post
modern issues in a traditional style and replies the doubts raised by
that domain on traditional bases. I am glad that we were taught this
text while we were doing theology and for certain, this text has helped
me in the field of propagation. This also portrays the uniqueness of
this work because the text of hawza is usually difficult to be utilised
in the field of propagation.

The Translation
---------------

The translation was begun in the year 2002 when Hujjatulislam Hayder
Shirazi approached me and asks for this gracious work as he was teaching
theology to the hawza students in London. He recognized the importance
of this work and asserted that there is definitely a need in the west
for this book for the students of the hawza and also for others. I
translated lesson by lesson and emailed him from Qum eventually the task
was accomplished in a year. However Mr Shirazi also translated eight to
ten lessons which we are thankful to him. Those lessons have been re-
translated in this final translation in order the uniformity remains in
the work.

The translation focuses upon providing accurate translation of
Ayatulla’s work, rather than just transferring the meaning. However, a
relatively academic English style has been utilised in order to
facilitate the student of theology in the field of theology and others
in general reading. An effort has been made to focus upon creating a
uniformity between this translation and Philosophical Instruction of
Ayatulullah Misbah Yazdi translated by Professor Legenhausan and Dr
’Azim Sarvdalīr. I have tried to use the same terminology used by these
two translators and also adapted the title of this translation and the
style from Philosophical Instruction.

I am honoured, encouraged and quite grateful to Aga Qulī Qarā’ī for
writing a very rich introduction to this work. I am obligated to thank
my wife for her motivation provided and Hujjatulislām Muhsin ‘Ahmedī,
Hujjatulislām S. Sādiq Hāshimīyān, and Hujjatulislām Ahmed Hanif, who
encouraged and provided assistance whenever needed in translating this
work. I am also grateful to Dr. Rawand Osmaan for providing the work
with proper transliteration of terms and also for the uniformity of the
verses of the Qur’an from the translation of Aga Qulī Qarā’ī. However,
if any lapses and errors remain, I accept the responsibility and humbly
request the reader to provide their remarks and suggestion by
corresponding on the postal and e-mail addresses provided herein.
Finally this translation would not have seen the light of publication
without the effort of Hujjatulislām Muhammad Shumālī, whom I sincerely
thank.

The effort and work is very little for it to be a re-pay to the martyrs
and to the Hawzah ’Illmiyyah (Islamic Seminary), whom I owe the most. I
can only pray that this work be a piece of focus for the Imam of the
time and that he prays for me and also all of those who have made this
work possible.

**Mīrzā Muhammad ’Abbās Rida**

**26 June, 2006 CE**


