LESSON SEVENTEEN: THE MEANING OF THE ONENESS OF THE GOD
=======================================================

Introduction
------------

The word monotheism from the lexical point of view means ‘oneness or
unity ’, but in philosophy, scholastic theology, ethics (akhlāq), and
mysticism it has been applied with various different meanings. However
it gives the same basic meaning in all of these sciences, but when
viewed from different aspects it can be regarded differently, such as
‘the different forms of oneness’ or ‘the different levels oneness’. The
investigation of these offshoots cannot be comprised in these writings.

Therefore from this angle it is sufficient enough that we bring the most
significant and befitting arguments for our explanation:

The negation of plurality
-------------------------

The initial and distinguished meaning of monotheism is that very
believing in the unity of God and negation of plurality and multiplicity
outside its essence. This belief is in complete opposition to
polytheism, and the belief in two or more gods who are independent and
apart in their existence from each other.

The negation of composition
---------------------------

he second terminological meaning of monotheism is to believe in oneness,
and to believe that the essence is self-evident and not composed of
actual or potential parts.

This meaning is usually interpreted as the negative attributes (al-sifāt
al-salbiyyah) (mentioned in lesson ten), because our mind is more
familiar with compositional concepts as compared to the concept of
self-evidence.

### a. The negation of attributes as additional to the essence

###

The third meaning of monotheism is to believe in the unity of the
attributes of essence with the essence of God Himself, and the negation
of considering the attributes as being additional to the essence. This
is known as the unity of Divine attributes (tawhīd al-sifāti).
Furthermore this Divine unity of attributes in the traditional texts is
known as the negation of attributes, which is in opposition to those
Ashirites (ashā’irah) who have regarded the Divine attributes as
additional to the Divine essence, and believed in the Eight Ancients
(qudama al-thamāniyah).

The proof for the unity of Divine attributes is that, if all of the
Divine attributes have separate referents or affirmations then they can
be solely imagined through a few possibilities:

It would be either that the referents or affirmations would be assumed
to be within the Divine essence, which necessitates the Divine essence
being compound, and this we have already proved as being impossible.

Or that the referents are imagined to be outside the Divine essence, and
are regarded as possible existents. However if they were assumed as
being necessary existents then it would bring about plurality in the
essence and polytheism, which cannot be considered by any Muslim.
However if they are assumed as being possible existents then it means
that the Divine

essence, which is deficient of those attributes, has created them and
has then later been given them. For example the essence even after
lacking ‘life’ creates an existent by the name of life and through this
creation the essence comes to life, the same is the case for knowledge
and power.

It is impossible for the cause that bestows existence to be deficient of
the perfections of creation. More significantly the provision of its
creation and the cause that bestows existence retains life, knowledge
and power, and is also attributed with the different attributes of
perfection!

By the nullification of these assumptions it becomes clear that the
Divine attributes do not have distinctive referents and are not
separated from the Divine essence. On the other hand they are single
self-evident concepts abstracted from the Divine almighty essence.

### b. The unity of Divine actions

###

The fourth terminology used for monotheism, which in the parlance of
philosophy and scholastic theology is known as the unity of Divine
actions, is that God the Almighty is self- sufficient in His works, He
does not need anybody or anything and no existent can aid Him.

This subject is proven with the understanding of the peculiarities of
the cause that bestows existence, which is self-existing when compared
to its effects, because the effect of this particular cause with all its
existence is dependent upon this cause. This is known in philosophical
terminology as the manifestation of need and dependence (‘ayn al-rabt
wa-l-ta’alluq) to the cause and the effect does not have any
independence of its own.

In other words:

Everything that is actualised is because of Him and is obedient to the
realm of power, sovereignty, and true and original mastership. The power
and mastership of others is in line with Divine power and an offshoot of
it. The ownership of a slave’s (‘abd) possessions is perpendicular to
the ownership of his master. Hence how can it be possible that God the
Supreme requires aid from someone who with all its existence is
dependent upon Him.

### c. Independent effectuality

###

The fifth meaning of monotheism is independent effectuality. This means
that the Divine creation is not independent from God and the influences
that are made by them (the creation) are with the permission of God and
under the strength that has been provided by God the Supreme. The only
existent that can influence independently - without the aid of any other
creation - and in all time and space is the Divine essence of God. The
actions and influences of others are vertical to the influences and
actions of Him and are at the dispersal of God the Supreme.

On this base, the Noble Qur’an associates the actions in nature and in
the corporeal world (like the ownership of humans and jinn) to God. For
instance a tree giving fruit, or the falling of rain and emergence of a
plant from a seed are all related to God. The Qur’an continuously
emphasises that humans must focus upon and realise that these actions in
the natural and corporeal world are parallel with the actions God.

In order to bring our mind towards the realisation of this reality we
have brought the following relative example:

If a supervisor of a firm orders his workers to undertake a project, and
the project reaches success, the credit will go to the supervisor, even
though the instrumentality of the project was in the hands of the
workers. The supervisor is referred to as the intelligent and effective
agent, due to accomplishment of the project.

The original action is also comprised of consequent levels, and from
this aspect Divine Will establishes the existence of every agent. From
another view they are like mental forms, which are established by the
one who imagines. From this point of view the influences of every agent
and of the one who influences on a higher level is dependent upon the
Divine original will and permission of God:

“[This is] as Allah has wished! There is no power except by Allah!”
(al-Kahf:39).

### d. The two important results achieved

###

The result of the unity of Divine action is that nothing other than God
deserves worship, because as we have indicated before, a being does not
deserve to be worshipped by just being a creator or a lord. In other
words Divinity (ulūhiyyah) is the necessary condition of lordship and
creatorship.

From another angle, the result of monotheism in the latter meaning is
that the entirety of human reliance must be upon God, and in all of
works He must be trusted and solely from Him help must be requested.
Man’s fear and hope ought to be from Him, and when the sources for the
completion of needs are out of reach, one must not despair, because God
is capable of furnishing all needs from His distinctive and hidden
source.

Living under such monotheistic circumstances results in mankind enjoying
a special Divine authority (wilāyah) and having a unique and tranquil
soul:

“Look! The friends of Allah will indeed have no fear nor will they
grieve” (Yūnus:62). These two results have already been placed in the
verse that a Muslim recites at-least ten times a day:

“You [alone] do we worship, and You [alone] do we turn for help”
(al-Fātiha:62).

### e. The resolution of a doubt

###

It is possible that one may question, that if the necessity of perfect
monotheism is that humans seek help exclusively from God, they should
not then seek intercession from the saints of God.

The answer to this is that if by seeking intercession from the friends
of God in the meaning that they are independent and without the
permission of God, acts or fulfills the need of the seeker; this type of
intercession is not harmonious with monotheism.

However if it is the case that they are the means through which the
bounties and mercies of God can be reached, and then there is no
contradiction in it. On the other hand these intercessions are
considered as the illustrations of monotheism in worship, and obedience,
because it has been originated from His command.

Nevertheless, someone may question as to why has God regulated these
types of intercession? And as to why God has ordained humans to seek
intercession from His saints? The answer to these questions would be
that the command of God is with wisdom and the wisdom behind these
ordinances can be categorised in the following way:

For the recognition and understanding of the great station of
servanthood, motivation for others in the performance of worship and
obedience, which are the means of reaching this station.

In order to prevent those who become arrogant from their worship and
consider themselves as having a position and station in the realm of
perfection.

This trait had been found to be in those who have departed from the
Divine authority of the Prophet’s household (a) (ahlul-bayt).

Questions:
----------

1- Give the terminological and lexical meaning of monotheism.

2- What is the proof for the unity of divine attributes?

3- How can one establish the unity of divine actions?

4- Explain the meaning of monotheism through independent effectuality.

5- What are the two most significant results?

6- Is seeking intercession from the saints of God considered as
contradictory to monotheism? Why?

7- What is the wisdom behind God’s decree for seeking intercession?


