LESSON EIGHTEEN: FREEWILL AND DETERMINISM
=========================================

Introduction
------------

As indicated in the previous lesson, monotheism in independent
effectuality is of significance in the Islamic sciences, which
substantially play a great role in the composition of man. Due to this
very fact the Noble Qur’an has emphasised upon this subject several
times in different occasions. The Noble Qur’an, in order for the correct
realisation of this issue has created distinctive grounds and regarded
all phenomena to be dependent upon the Will, consent, and the Divine
decree and destination of God.

However true realisation of this subject requires intellectual capacity
and developed thinking, and from another side it requires correct
teaching and explanation. Those who fall short in their intellectuality
or those who did not utilise the teachings of the Infallibles, who were
the true interpreters of the Noble Qur’an, deviated and presumed that
monotheism in independent effectuality means that all causation is
specified to God. They illustrated the negation of all causation from
any intermediary cause, such as the existence of heat is parallel to the
existence of fire or the existence of becoming quenched is created
correspondently to drinking. In other words there is no effect of fire
upon heat or the drinking of water upon being quenched, and these
imaginations are totally against the clearly defined and undisputed
verses of the Noble Qur’an.

The unfortunate effect of this intellectual perversion is manifested
when the actions and capabilities of man are investigated. This means
that the result of this investigation is that all human actions are
entitled to God and human activity with regards to its action is
completely negated, and due to this, none can be considered as
responsible for their action.

In other words: one of the destructive conclusions of this distorted
thinking is fatalism and the negation of responsibility for man, which
means denying the most important characteristic of the human soul.
Furthermore this assumption also becomes absurd and vain for any
ethical, legal, and educational system and likewise for the Divine
Islamic legislative system. If man does not have any freewill or choice
for his actions then there will be no question of responsibility, reward
or chastisement for the actions performed. It also necessitates the
absurdity and purposelessness of the universe.

However, from the noble verses, the immaculate traditions and
intellectual arguments, one can understand the purposefulness of the
universe. The purposefulness of the universe is to create grounds where
humans by their activity, out of freewill, carry out their worship and
obligation towards God and reach high levels of perfection, proximity to
the Divine and acquire unique mercies from God.

Besides, if there were no such thing as human volition then there would
be no meaning of responsibility. There would also be no eternal
recompense or bounties for the actions provided. Furthermore the purpose
for creation would be defective resulting in the mechanism of creation
being as a puppet

show, where humans are the puppets acting without any determination, and
at the end of the day some are rewarded and some are punished for their
actions!

The substantial cause for the expansion of these inclinations was the
evil political desires of the tyrannical regimes, which nullified and
rectified their ill actions and behaviours and hampered resistance from
over throwing them.

From another angle, those who were aware of the weak elements of this
thought but had no vision of how to associate between absolute
monotheism and the negation of determinism and were also remote or did
not benefit from the teachings of the Prophet’s household (a),
acknowledged delegation. They regarded human activity to be completely
out of the realm of Divine activity. This itself become another branch
of distorted thought, which deprived them from achieving great results
from the Islamic sciences.

However those who had the capacity to recognise this knowledge, and were
aware of the rightful teachers and interpreters of the Qur’an, saved
themselves from this distortion. They regarded their free-activity as
being due to the power that God had granted them and accepted the
responsibility, which was derived from it. From another standpoint they
accepted the Divine independent effectuality on a higher level and
realised the outcomes of this great wisdom.

In the enlightening traditions of the household of the Prophet (a) under
the section of freewill, capability (istitā’ah), Divine decree and
destiny, we find the denial and negation of determinism and
predestination. Also there are many narrations, which have ordered
disqualified individuals to avoid delving too deeply into these issues,
to prevent deviation and misunderstanding.

The issue of Divine decree and destiny comes in different dimensions,
which requires an independent research and investigation that cannot be
compounded to this writing.

However by focusing upon the importance of this subject we will be
outwardly discussing this issue. Those who are interested in the precise
details of this subject, and its intellectual principles must refer to
the detailed discussions in philosophy.

The explanation of human volition
---------------------------------

The power to decide and choose is one of the most obvious factors for
man, because every man by presence is aware of these qualities, which
are undoubtedly identical to other psychological qualities. In addition
to this, even if he doubts, then the existence of the doubt itself is
understood by the (knowledge of) presence. Hence in this case it becomes
impossible for him to doubt with regards to these dispositions.

Likewise every individual who is the slightest bit observant can realise
whether he is willing to speak or not, or whether he wants to wave his
hand or not and if he wants to eat or does not want to eat etc.

The decision-making in order for carrying out an act is seldom dependent
upon the animalistic instincts such as hunger that intends food or
thirst that desires one to drink water. Occasionally this may be
prompted from the intellect and ambitions, such as an ill person taking
a bitter pill in order to

gain health or avoiding a certain type of tempting food to remain
healthy, or a student on the path of knowledge who for unveiling the
truths shuts himself away from the materialistic pleasures and faces
numerous difficulties, or a sincere soldier who even sacrifices his life
for reaching high levels of objectiveness in offering.

In reality the humanistic value is only known when a prohibition occurs
and an individual in order to reach moralistic excellence, eternal
spiritual perfections, and proximity towards the Divine acceptance,
shuns the animalistic and low desires.

Every action provided that, if it is determined with greater awareness
and freewill has more effect upon the ascent and the descent of a soul
depending on the realisation of the action.

It is unquestionably correct to say that the capacity of resisting the
low desires of the soul in every individual is not at the same level,
though more or less man benefits from this Divine gift of volition and
will. However through a sufficient amount of effort and extra practice,
one can improve the capacity for opposing the lowly desires through this
Divine bestowal.

Therefore there is no reason for being skeptical with regards to the
existence of human volition (freewill) and will, and one must not become
confused with distinctive arguments and doubts that are posited upon
this self-evident subject.

Nevertheless, as indicated earlier, human volition is considered as a
self-evident principle in the educational, ethical, and religious
systems. Hence if this were not the case then there would be no meaning
to recompense and chastisement.

The cause for the deviation from this self-evident truth and inclination
towards the concept of determinism (fatalism) is due to some spurious
doubts, which must be answered so that there is no place left for
confusions and suspicions. For this reason we will be attending briefly
to these spurious doubts below.

### a. The resolution of spurious doubts concerning determinism

###

The most substantial arguments of fatalism are as follows:

1. The will of man takes it form due to the stimulation of intrinsic and
internal tendencies. The existence of these tendencies is neither in
control of man nor the stimulation of it through external means. Thus
there is no room for human volition and determination.

The answer to this is that the agitation of internal tendencies creates
the grounds for the will and decision-making, but does not make the
decision to carry out the action. The only way that it will be
considered as a compulsion is when there is deprivational steadfastness.
The proof for this is that when we are in the process of
decision-making, we calculate the pros and cons of the decision or we
hesitate in making a decision.

2. On the basis of the various sciences, it has been proven that
tendencies are hereditary and also that the environmental and social
surroundings determine their configuration. The difference in the
mannerisms and behaviour of man is due to the very fact that there is
diversity in the human social and environmental surroundings.

This very reality more or less is also accepted in the religious
documents, thus on these bases one cannot accept that the actions of man
emanates from freewill.

The answer to this argument raised is that the acceptance of freewill
and will does not mean the denial of these aspects of tendencies, but it
means that humans even after being effected by these environmental,
social, and hereditary conditions can still resist and decide at the
time of the arousal of inclinations. It is certain that the requirement
of the struggle against these tendencies requires much pain and
hardship, due to the fact that these are more effective towards
achieving perfection, and the rewards after passing these troubles are
always bigger. Also these psychological complexes and difficulties may
affect the level of punishment, diminishing it.

3 Another one of the spurious doubts of the determinist is that God the
Supreme has knowledge of the entire phenomena and actions of man before
they act upon it, and that the knowledge of God is impeccable. Therefore
all of the actions have to take place according to the eternal knowledge
of God, and departure from them is impossible. On this basis there is no
room for freewill and choice for man. The answer to this doubt would be
that the knowledge of God is implicated with every action that takes
place and the attribute of man being free in his decision-making or
having the freewill is also known by God. Hence if determinism is
established then it will be against divine knowledge. For example, God
the Supreme is aware of an action that an individual is going to take in
a certain situation, not only that but God is also aware of the
relationship of this action with the will and freewill of that agent
(individual). Therefore the knowledge of God does not contradict the
freewill and will of man. Another doubt of the fatalist is with regards
to the divine decree and destination, which according to them is not
compatible with human freewill, and hence we will be discussing this
subject in the following lesson.

Questions:
----------

1. Explain the cause for the inclination towards fatalism.

2. What are the distorted effects of this thought?

3. Explain briefly the freewill and will of man.

4. Do the internal tendencies contradict with freewill? Why?

5. What are the differences between those who are influenced by the
difficult circumstances and complicated psychological conditions, and
those who are not?

6. Do the genetically, social and environmental surroundings effect
freewill? Why?

7. Does the knowledge of God contradict the thought of freewill? Why?


