LESSON NINETEEN: DIVINE DECREE AND DESTINY
==========================================

The concepts of destiny and decree
----------------------------------

The term destiny (qadar) means dimension and pre-determination (taqdīr)
means measurement, and measuring and building something to determine a
size. The term decree (qadā’) is used in the meaning of bringing to an
end, finishing, and judgement (which, figuratively, is a kind of
finishing of finishing). Occasionally decree and destiny are used as
synonyms in the sense of destiny (masīr).

By destiny it is implied that God has decided the limits and dimensions,
time and space, quantity and quality of the phenomena, which are
established through the influence of gradual causes and agents. Likewise
decree is known as the final and inevitable termination of a phenomenon
after creating their grounds and conditions.

According to these definitions the classification of divine destiny is
prior to the classification of divine decree and they are comprised of
hierarchical degrees, which include conditions that are immediate,
intermediary, and remote and by the innovation of some means and
conditions they are transformed. For example the gradual development of
a foetus from a sperm to an embryo goes through different stages, which
includes distinctive time and space, and finally its deliverance, which
is considered from the realm of its destiny. However the classification
of instant decree is related to the generation of all factors and
conditions and at the same time it is inevitable as the Noble Qur’an has
referred:

“And when He decides on a matter, He just says to it, ‘Be!’ and it
is”(al-Baqarah :117).

As has already been indicated, occasionally decree and destiny are used
as synonyms, and due to this it is divided into certain and uncertain,
and from this aspect we find in our traditions and supplications that
the decree can be averted through giving charity, supplication and
strengthening the blood-kinship.

Objective determination and epistemic-determination
---------------------------------------------------

Occasionally the divine pre-determination (taqdīr) and decree are known
as the knowledge of God, with regards to the conditions and grounds for
the birth and actualisation of a phenomenon. This is named as
epistemic-decree, and destiny (qada’ wa qadar ‘ilmi). Similarly the
objective decree and destiny (qada’ wa qadar ‘ayni) are known to be
related to the gradual evolution of a phenomenon and its realisation in
the realm of the external world (its materialisation).

On the accounts of the traditions and the noble verses of the Qur’an,
all knowledge with regards to the past and present realisation and
future actualisation of the phenomenon in the external world is
epitomised upon ‘the safe tablet’ (lawh mahfūz). Those by the permission
of the Divine have access to the ‘tablet’ and are aware of the past and
future of things. Furthermore there are other tablets of lesser degree
in which the incomplete and conditional futuristic knowledge is present.

Those who are aware of this have limited information, which is
susceptible to substitution. Apparently the following noble verse
asserts upon these two forms of destinies sarnevest}:

“Allah effaces and confirms whatever He wishes and with Him is the
Mother of the Book” (al-Ra’d:39).

Alteration in the conditional destinies is known as change (badā) in an
earlier ruling in the religious text.

At any instance believing in the epistemic-decree and destiny will not
influx any enigmas other than that of Divine eternal knowledge (‘ilm
azali). In our previous lessons we have refuted those fatalistic
arguments with relation to Divine knowledge.

However believing in the objective decree and destiny, and particularly
believing in determined destiny will influx several doubts and enigmas,
which must be resolved.

Nevertheless a brief answer was provided in the discussions on
independent effectuality.

The relation of destiny and decree to human volition
----------------------------------------------------

We know that the requirement for believing in the Divine objective
decree and destiny is that all phenomena from beginning to end, and even
the conditions of actualisation are subservient to the wise design of
God the Supreme. Furthermore the reaching of this phenomenon to its
final stage is also in consonance with the Divine will.

In other words the existence of every phenomenon is related to Divine
will, without which no existent can come into being. Likewise the
beginning of everything is based upon the Divine decree, without which
no existent would take the limited forms or reach its (end) final stage.
The explanation of these relationships and constituents in reality is
the gradual teachings of the oneness of God. This in the meaning of it
being independent in effectuality, which is of the foremost level and
plays an important role in the being and becoming of man, as indicated
in our previous lessons.

However the proving of the origination of a phenomenon by the
authorisation of God and even by the will of God is perhaps easier than
the final stages of a phenomenon entangled with the Divine decree, which
requires more complex proofs. Besides, it is difficult to combine the
belief in Divine decree with human volition (free-will) in the building
of one’s own future. For this reason the school of the theological
scholars (ash’arites) who acknowledge the Divine decree, have inclined
towards determinist thought, and those who could not maintain this
thought, have completely denied it and accepted absolute human volition.
Moreover, they have interpreted all of those verses and the traditions
opposing their thought, which can be seen in their detailed books
relating to this topic.

The genuine doubt mentioned, is that if human acts in reality are based
upon the will of man, then how can one establish the relationship
between it and Divine decree?

And if it is grounded upon Divine decree, then how can it be known to be
the choice of man or be complied with human volition?

Hence on this basis, for the refutation of doubt and for the combination
of human volition and Divine will, one must demonstrate the different

proofs for proving that an effect can have several causes in a way that
the different voluntary actions (f ‘al) of man are related to human
volition and also to Divine decree.

### a. Different types of influences from distinctive causes

###

The effect of several causes in the appearance of a phenomenon can be
imagined in the following ways:

1. Certain cause next to each other or together make an influence such
as the mixing of water, grain and temperature etc. that influences the
seed to sprout and grow into a plant.

2. Each and every one of the causes influence a phenomenon periodically
during the stretch of its (a phenomenon’s) life such as the flight of an
aircraft is dependent or influenced periodically by several machines.

3. The effect, which results from certain causes due to the sequential
inducement, such as the effect of the intention of man to write upon the
hand and the effect of the hand upon the pen.

4. The effect, resulting from certain vertical causes in such a fashion
that each and every one of them depends on other causes (existence).
This is contrary to the assumption above were the pen was not dependent
upon the hand and the hand was not contingent upon the intention.

In all of these forms certain causes were required for the formation of
an effect, hence the effect of Divine will and human will upon the
voluntary action of man pertains to these realities.

However, the combination of two separate causes upon an effect (or for
the origination of an effect) is not possible, taking into consideration
that the causes are those which bestow existence (‘illah muwjidah), or
if there is a combination of two causes, the combination of which, is
impossible.

### b. Resolution of a doubt

###

With the explanation which has been provided, it has become clear that
relating the voluntary actions of man to God the Supreme is not
contradictory, however Divine will and human will are considered as
being parallel to each other.

In other words, the contingency of the action and the agent is on one
level, however their existence is compared to God the Supreme on a
higher level, in such a way that the existence of man and the existence
of the matter is dependent upon Him.

The influence of human-will as being a part of a complete cause in the
accomplishment of a work does not contradict the thought that all parts
of the complete cause are acknowledged to God. It is God who has the
power in his hand by which He gives the existence to man, the universe
and to all affairs, there is nothing that can be considered as being
independent from Him. The voluntary actions of man are also dependent
and not beyond the radius of the Divine will. Therefore these two wills
are not horizontal to each other and it is not impossible for them to
co-exist.

Human will in its very existence is dependent upon Divine will and the
Divine will is necessary for the realisation (actualisation) of any
action:

“But you do not wish unless it is wished by Allah, the Lord of all the
worlds” (al-Takwīr:29).

### c. The influence of belief upon destiny and decree

###

To believe in Divine destiny and decree other than it being a reason for
the perfection of man in the dimension of the intellect, also has a
tremendous effect upon the actions of man. Some of these actions have
already been discussed, however we will mention a few more below:

One, who believes in the return of all occurrences to the wise will of
God, which is related to the Divine decree and destiny, will never be
afraid or confused with regards to these occurrences. Furthermore such a
person will not despair at fear and suffering, but will see such
incidents as the Divine plan of God, and will gladly receive them and
master the great art of patience, trust, consent, and submission.
Moreover the joys and the status of the world, which leads towards
arrogance and intoxication, will not carry him away. These are those
very effects, which the Noble Qur’an has mentioned:

“No affliction visits the earth or yourselves but it is in a Book before
We bring it about -that is indeed easy for Allah- so that you may not
grieve for what escapes you, nor exult for what comes your way, and
Allah does not like any swaggering braggart” (al-Hadīd:22- 23).

In every instance one must remember that the false understanding of the
issue of destiny and decree or independent effectuality will result in
the acceptance of oppression, irresponsibility and indolence. However
one must know that the felicity and success and also the eternal
misfortune of man are the outcomes of his actions. As the Noble Qur’an
has mentioned:

“Whatever [good] it earns is to its benefit, and whatever [evil] it
incurs is to its harm” (al-Baqarah:286).

“And that nothing belongs to man except what he strives for”
(al-Najm:39).

Questions:
----------

1. Give the lexical meaning of decree and destiny.

2. What is meant by Divine decree?

3. Why is Divine decree and destiny separated into certain and
uncertain?

4. What is appearance (badā)?

5. Explain objective and epistemic decree and destiny?

6. What is the ‘guarded tablet’ and what is its relationship to the
certain and uncertain destiny?

7. Explain the difficulties of combining human volition with Divine
decree and destiny. Briefly explain the deviation of the school of the
Asharite theologians.

8. What are the different types of influences upon an effect?

9. How can the doubt of the fatalist be refuted with regards to divine
destiny and decree?

10. What is the influence of belief upon Divine decree and destiny?


