LESSON TWENTY: DIVINE JUSTICE
=============================

Introduction
------------

In the previous lessons we have dealt with the contradictions of the two
schools of thought, the Asharites and Mutazilites with reference to the
issues of theology, Divine will, determinism and human volition, and
also upon Divine decree and destiny.

However these two schools frequently held the two extremist positions,
and have either exaggerated or underestimated these realities.

Another one of the most fundamental differences between these two groups
is the issue of Divine justice and the Shi’ite understanding of this
issue is in agreement with that of Mutazilites. They have been known as
the ‘adliyyah vis-a-vis ashā’irah. This topic is of great importance in
the field of theology, and is known to be the crux of the matter in
theological issues and is even acknowledged as one of the principles of
belief for the schools of Mutazilite and Shi’ite.

One must focus on the point, that the Asharites do not deny Divine
justice and do not consider God as being unjust or tyrannical (God
forbid), due to clear and apparent verses that establish Divine justice
and deny any form of oppression from the Holy Divine realm. However the
discussion centres around this issue, that the sole intellect without
any explanation from Divine law (the Book and the traditions) can
standardise Divine actions. Upon this basis it can demand the
forbearance and accomplishment of Divine actions. For example:

Is it necessary for God the Supreme to take a believer to heaven and a
polytheist to hell, or are these decisions based on revelation and
cannot be applied by the sole-intellect?

The point of dispute is that very issue, which has been named as good
and evil from the point of the intellect (husn wa qubh ‘aqli). The
Asharites have denied this and instead came up with the idea that
whatever God carries out in the transcendental realm (takwīn), it is
considered as good, and on the corporal realm, whatever God orders it is
considered as good, but not because it is good by itself.

However the belief of the Mutazilites and the Shi’ites, is that action
without any subsistence from the corporal and transcendental world, can
be distinguish by God as good and evil (husn wa qubh), and the intellect
has the capacity to understand good and evil to a certain extent. This
understanding results in the belief that the Holy Divine realm is remote
from evil actions. However this is not in the sense that God is
commanded or ordered, but means that the emanation of evil from God the
Supreme is incompatible, and the emergence of any evil from God is
impossible.

It is self-evidential that the investigation has provided the answers
for the doubts raised by the Asharites with regards to the good and
evil, from the intellectual point of view. However the current work does
not have the capacity to display them. Likewise it is possible that the
Mutazilites have some inadequate patterns in their belief with respect
to the good and evil, which shall be investigated in its place. However
the overall belief of good and evil from the intellectual point of view,
is acknowledged by the Shi’ites

and has been confirmed in the Book and the traditions, and emphasised by
the Infallible Imams (a).

From here on we will be explaining the perimeters of the concept of
justice and then demonstrate intellectual arguments in order to prove
this attribute as an attribute of action for God the Supreme. Finally we
will resolve some of the most important issues dealing with this topic.

The concept of justice
----------------------

The lexical meaning of justice is:

to equalise, uniformity and is commonly known as the consideration of
the rights of others. Hence the definition would be ‘granting rights to
one who deserves.’ Therefore, initially one must conceive an existence,
which enjoys right, and then the consideration of its right will be
known as justice, and the violation of it will be regarded as tyranny.
However, occasionally the concept of justice can be extended and
regarded in the meaning of ‘the performance of work befittingly or as to
place all things in its proper place.’ According to the latter
definition, justice is tantamount to wisdom and just work is wise work.
Nevertheless the determination of the ‘right of the deserved-one’ and
what a ‘proper place’ is, involves a vast domain of words, which is
usually discussed in the philosophy of ethics and in the philosophy of
rights. Naturally this work does not allow us to cover all these
peripheries.

However, every mindful person understands that if a person snatches a
piece of bread from an orphan’s hand without any reason or kills an
innocent person for no reason, they have persecuted and oppressed, and
therefore committed an evil act. Furthermore in contrast to this, if the
snatched bread is taken from the tyrant and given back to the orphan, or
the killer is punished, the action carried out would be considered to be
wise and just. This is true even for someone who does not believe in the
existence of God.

The secret behind this discernment and the force that determines the
good and evil, and similar issues must be investigated within the
different branches of philosophy.

It may be concluded that justice can be conceived from two concepts,
which are considered as general and particular:

Consideration for the rights of others, the wise performance of work and
heeding to the rights of others is an extension to this.

Therefore, the factor that is not necessary for justice is uniformity or
equalisation. For example, a just teacher is not the one who encourages
or reprimands students equally, whether they are hard working or lazy. A
true teacher is the one who nourishes the one who deserve the
nourishment. Another example could be with regards to a righteous judge
who distributes the property in a feud according to the one who is
entitled to that property, but not equally.

Likewise the requirement of Divine justice and wisdom is not that the
Creator creates His creation uniformly or equally, for example He does
not create humans with horns, wings, wool etc. However the necessity of
Divine justice and wisdom is that the Creator creates the existence in
such a way that it receives the utmost good and perfection and also in a
way that it

fulfills the ultimate goal. Furthermore the essence of Divine justice
and wisdom is that all human beings are responsible according to their
capacity and are judged and rewarded with consideration of their
free-will.

### a. The proofs for Divine justice

###

As indicated earlier Divine justice is considered to be a branch of
Divine wisdom.

From another point of view it is considered wisdom itself and the proof
for it is also that of the Divine wisdom, which has already been
established in lesson eleven.

However, we will here provide a more detailed explanation.

We know that God the Supreme possesses the ultimate level of power and
volition, and can perform any work, which is possible without being
under the influence of any existent. However, He will not perform
everything, which is possible for Him to perform, but will act only upon
that which He has desired and willed.

We also know that God’s Will cannot be absurd or uncalculated, but He
desires only that which His impeccable attributes necessitate of Him. He
will not create any existent without what is demanded from His
ontological attributes. God the Supreme is absolute (pure) perfection
and His Will is quintessentially related towards the perfection and
benevolence of the creation. If the necessity of existence is the
origination of evil and the imperfections in the universe, then it is
considered to be one of the consequences of quintessentiality.

However this consequential evil and imperfection is predominated by
perfection and good, because it is coherent with the abundant good and
perfection (or because abundant good and perfection is quintessential).
The abundant good will overwhelms the evil, because God the Supreme is
absolute perfection.

Hence the requirement for the Divine attributes of perfection is that
the universe is created in such a way, that it overall receives the
utmost perfection and good, and from here the attribute of wisdom for
God the Supreme is proven.

On this very basis, Divine Will is related to man’s creation when the
right conditions are possible and are the source of abundant good. One
of the fundamental privileges of man is volition and freewill, which
without doubt is an ontological attribute. An existent that possesses
this quality is considered to be more perfect compared to one who is
deprived of it. However the requirement for being independent is the
movement towards eternal perfection through good actions, which can also
descend in the direction of eternal loss and misery through bad conduct.
The aim of Divine Will is the perfection of man, and this is not
possible without free-will. However this provides the possibility of
deterioration due to the effect of sensual desires (hawa al- nafs),
which take form because of the influences of Satan. Subsequently this
deterioration is also associated with Divine Will.

Selection with awareness requires the understanding of good and evil.
Hence God the Supreme has ordained for man, that which is beneficial and
prohibited for him that which will lead him towards deterioration and
decline. Furthermore the requirement for Divine wisdom is that

responsibility must be harmonious with the capability of the performer,
because responsibility, which is impossible to perform, is absurd.

Therefore, the initial element of justice (in this particular sense)
means ‘justice in the ordinance of responsibilities.’ This is proven by
the reason, that if God the Supreme ordains a responsibility beyond the
capacity of his servants then the performance of it would be not
possible.

However ‘justice in judgement’ for the servants will be proven by
focusing upon the factor of reward or chastisement provided for the
action performed according to their (deserving) creditability.

Finally ‘justice in granting rewards and chastisement’ will be
established by focusing upon the final purpose of creation. Man has been
created in order to reach perfection or imperfection, if God rewards
regardless of their work then He has not carried out His purpose.

Thus the reason for the justice of God the Supreme in the true meaning
and in all aspects, is that the essential attributes of Him cause
actions that are wise and just.

None of the unjust, absurd, or fatuous attributes are present (exist) in
Him.

### b. The resolution of certain doubts

###

1. How can the diversity that exists in the creation, particularly in
human beings be harmonious with Divine justice and wisdom?

The answer given is that the diversity in creation is existentially
advantageous and necessary for the order of creation. It is
consequential to the principle of ‘cause and effect.’ The assumption
that creation is alike is an immature idea and if we look further we
will understand that this type of idea is equal to the idea of not
creating.

For example if all human beings were only men or women, there would be
no birth or reproduction, resulting in the end of the human race. If all
creatures were human beings then there would be nothing to consume or
sustain our needs. If animals and plants were all of a single colour, we
would lose the benefits and spectacular beauties that we find in
creation. Appearances of different phenomena in distinctive forms are
the results of conditions and these conditions are because of the
movement of matter.

No-one has the right to make an objection regarding them, before his/her
birth in order that He should have given it another form, or different
place, or time, implying that there could be space for questioning the
Divine justice.

2. If divine wisdom is the cause of life for the human being, why does
God destroy them?

The answer to this question is that initially the life and death of
existents in this world are the outcome of the relationships of cause
and effect, the principle of creation (takwīn) and also a necessary
element of the order of creation. Secondly, if the living creatures do
not die then the grounds for newer creation will not be there and the
future generation will be deprived of God’s bounties. Thirdly, if it is
assumed that all human beings were to remain alive, the earth would
rapidly become a small place to live upon, and the inhabitants due to
despair and hunger would wish for death.

Fourthly, the true purpose for the creation of man is that he attains
eternal felicity. If they do not transfer from this world through the
medium of death they will not reach this final goal.

3. How can the existence of suffering and natural disasters (such as
earthquakes, storms, etc) and other sociological hardships (such as war,
oppression, etc) be harmonious with Divine justice?

The answer to this doubt is that natural disasters are the requirement
of action and reactions of matter. As good overwhelms evil, Divine
wisdom will not be contradicted. The eruption of sociological hardships
and corruption in the world is due to the fact that humans are free in
their action. Having a free will is the requirement of Divine wisdom and
the welfare for the society is more than that of corruption. If it were
not the case then there would not exist a single man on the face of the
planet. Secondly, the existence of all suffering and difficulty leads
man to explore and search for the hidden natural sources and results in
the appearance of sciences and different discoveries. Furthermore
dealing with these difficulties will improve man’s potential for
advancement towards perfection. Nevertheless if suffering is
acknowledged in the proper sense then there will be a greater reward in
the eternal world, and compensation will be given appropriately.

4. If eternal chastisement is intended for limited sins committed in
this world, then how is it compatible with Divine justice?

The reply for this question is, that between the good deeds and bad
deeds there is a relation of ‘causation,’ which has been disclosed to
people through Divine revelation.

Likewise some of the persecutions in this world have extended
circumstances such as to blind oneself or others, which can take place
in an instant but the result of this remains till the end of one’s life.
Similarly, great sins also have eternal effects and if a person does not
arrange the means of atonement in this world (through seeking
forgiveness) then the evil will remain with him forever. As with the
case of blindness, which will remain permanently due to an instant
abuse, it does not contradict Divine justice, in the same way eternal
punishment for a great sin does not contradict Divine justice, because
it is an action performed with full awareness.

Questions:
----------

1. Explain the fundamental difference between the issues of Divine
justice.

2. Explain the concept of justice.

3. Is it the necessity of justice for everything to be the same? Why?

4. Explain the necessity of Divine wisdom and justice.

5. What is the purpose of creation?

6. How can the diversity in creation correspond with Divine justice and
wisdom?

7. Give the reasons for justice.

8. Why does God the Supreme cause His creatures to die?

9. How are natural disasters and social corruptions harmonious with
Divine justice?

10. Why do limited sins become the reason for unlimited (eternal)
punishment?


