LESSON TWENTY-ONE: THE ISSUES CONCERNING PROPHETHOOD
====================================================

Introduction
------------

We know that the most fundamental issues to be solved by every
intellectual individual in order for him to live an intelligent life
are:

1. Where did the existence of man and the universe originate? Who
manages this creation?

2. What is the end and where lie’s the purpose of man?

3. By focusing upon the required needs for the realisation of a true
path of felicity, what are the means to accomplish such perfection and
with whom does it lie?

The proper answer for these questions would be the three principles:

oneness of God, resurrection, (ma’ād), and prophethood (nubuwwah). These
are considered as the fundamental beliefs in all the monotheistic
religions.

In the beginning of this book we have provided investigations concerning
the issues of theology and arrived upon the result that all creation is
created by One being, and all are under the decree of His wisdom and
none can in any dimension be ever independent from Him.

This subject has been proven by intellectual arguments and we have
explained that these types of issue can only be resolved by the
intellect. The arguments and proofs from religious texts can only be
accepted when one has proven the existence of God and their
authenticity. The establishment of the sayings of the Prophet (s) and
Imams (a) is dependent upon the establishment of prophethood and
leadership, which necessitates the traditions being reliable and
authentic. Hence intellectual reasoning must first prove the principle
of prophethood, and then later the legitimacy of the Noble Qur’an can be
used and applied for proving specific issues. The details and the
specifics of resurrection must be proven from revelation; nevertheless
intellectual reasoning can also be used to prove this principle.

Therefore for the explanation of the issues of prophethood and
resurrection one must first establish the principle of prophethood and
resurrection through the intellect.

Once the reliability of the Noble Qur’an and the legitimacy of the
Prophet of Islam (s) are confirmed then the specifics of these two
sections can be proven in the peripheries of the Book and traditions.

By focusing upon the pattern of learning, it is preferable and likeable
that we distinguish between these two issues. We will initially discuss
the issues concerning prophethood and then explain the topic of
resurrection.

1. The purpose of discussing this section
-----------------------------------------

The initial purpose of this discussion is to prove for this subject,
that for the realisation of the realities of being, and a true path for
living life, there are means other than that of sense perception and
intellect, which are accurate (or cannot make any mistake). These are
known as revelation, and are types of Divine teaching, which are
specified for the special servants of God. The majority of people are
unaware of this reality because they do not

see an example of it within themselves. However through the effects and
signs they can arrive upon and confirm the proclamations of the Divine
prophets and messengers (a). Accordingly, once the confirmation of the
revelation upon a person is established then others are obliged to
accept and act upon it with out any confrontation. None will be excused
except those who have a message especially for them as a group or an
individual in a particular time.

Therefore, the fundamental elements of this section are as follows: the
necessity of prophethood and the requirement of revelation being immune
from any form of domination or personal initiation, until the crux of
the matter reaches the people. In other words the necessity of the
infallibility of the prophets and the above requirement is needed in
order to prove the prophethood of the Prophet of Islam (s).

After the issues concerning prophethood and revelation through the
intellect are established, other issues arise such as the number of
prophets, Books, Divine laws and the determination of the last Book, its
Prophet and his successors. However the establishment of all these
topics with intellectual reasoning is not possible, therefore the
religious text must be given as a proof for these topics.

### a. The method of investigation in theology

###

By focusing upon what has been said, the essential difference between
philosophy and theology becomes clear. Philosophy discusses only those
issues that are established by intellectual reasoning and theology
includes those topics that are only proved through devotion and
narration (or religious texts).

In other words:

The relationship between philosophy and theology is of generality and
peculiarity in some respect. This means that philosophy and theology
share common issues, which are established by the intellect, and
uncommon (specific) issues.

However for philosophy the basis of establishment is the intellect. In
theology it is narration and devotion for the uncommon issues. In other
words the method of investigation in theology is through the combination
of the intellect and that of devotion.

It is to be concluded that there are two basic differences between
philosophy and theology:

The first one is that even after sharing common topics (such as the
issues of knowing God), they have specific issues that are not discussed
outside the specific radius of their own.

Secondly, the method of investigation in all of the philosophical issues
is the method of intellectual reasoning, which is opposite to that of
theology. In some of the issues of theology, which are in common with
that of philosophy, intellectual reasoning is used, but in certain
issues narrations are utilised (such as the discussions concerning
Imamah). In some issues both (intellectual reasoning and narration) are
used (such as in the topic of resurrection).

It is necessary to indicate that specific issues in theology, which are
established through narration and devotion, are not on one level.
However a

group of them can be considered so with regards to reliability and the
authenticity of the actions and traditions of the Noble Prophet (s),
which are directly established by the means of the noble verses of the
Qur’an. Then other issues such as the determination of the successor of
the Prophet of Islam and the reliability of the words of the infallible
imams are established upon the basis of the exegesis of the Noble
Prophet (s).

It is self-evident that the results received from the narration
establishments will only be accepted when the chain of transmission of
narration is certain.

Questions
---------

1. Why are theological issues, which deal with the understanding of God,
determined through intellectual reasoning?

2. What are the fundamental issues of prophethood?

3. Is it possible to establish prophethood and resurrection through
narration and devotion? Why?

4. Which issues amongst the theological issues can be established
through narration?

5. What is the reason for discussing prophethood prior to resurrection?

6. What are the differences between philosophy and theology?

7. Explain the distribution of the issues of theology.


