LESSON TWENTY-TWO: THE NEED FOR REVELATION AND PROPHETHOOD
==========================================================

The necessity for the nomination of prophets
--------------------------------------------

This topic is the most fundamental topic of this section and can be
established by arguments comprising of three premises:

1. The purpose of creation is that by carrying out voluntary actions one
should move in the direction of ultimate perfection, which is only
possible through the execution of free-will and human volition. In other
words man has been created in order to earn and receive mercies from God
through his worship and devotion and striving towards perfection. The
Divine Will essentially constitutes felicity and perfection for human
beings and this is not possible without voluntary action. Therefore
mankind’s life is regulated upon two directions -where one leads towards
suffering and chastisement, and the other to eternal felicity- these two
options are subsequently related (not directly) to the Divine will
(irādah) in order to create the conditions of volition.

This premise became clear under the discussion of Divine justice:

2. In addition to physical and psychological abilities and essential
conditions, the ability to make a conscious decision requires the
realisation of the differences between a true and false path. To
intentionally choose a path towards perfection also requires one to
decide between right and wrong. Thus Divine wisdom necessitates that
mankind is provided with the appropriate tool in order to distinguish
between right and wrong to reach perfection. If this is not the case the
likeness can be compared to a host who invites a guest without giving
him the address of his house! It is self-evidential that this type of
action is unwise and a reflection of defect and imperfection.

3. The usual and common understandings of people, which are established
because of the intellect and sense perception, are insufficient in
determining a path of perfection and true felicity in all dimensions
(worldly, spiritual, celestial, and social). If there is no way to
compensate for this limitation, then the ultimate aim of man cannot be
realised.

By focusing upon these three premises we conclude that the requirement
of Divine wisdom is the classification of another path for man aside
from that of intellect and sense perception. The bestowal of such a path
is for the realisation of perfection in all dimensions. It is the path
of revelation, and through the revelation, which has been delivered to
mankind by the prophets; humanity can benefit and become aware of the
true path of perfection.

The third of these premises could be seen to create doubt; therefore we
will provide further explanation in order to illustrate the limitations
of man’s knowledge in determining the true path towards perfection. This
will consequently prove man’s need for revelation.

### a. The limitations of human sciences

###

In order for the realisation of the true path of felicity and perfection
in all dimensions of life, it is necessary that the beginning and end of
man, the

connection he has with existence, his relationships with kin, aswell as
the influences that any other form of relationship have upon him, must
all be understood. It is also necessary to recognise and assess whether
the effect is positive or negative. Following that the responsibilities
that millions of men have with the determination of their physiological
and psychological conditions in a particular time, space and social
circumstances must be known. However the establishment of these complex
guidelines - with the understanding and formulating of all the
dimensions and needs of man in order that there be no contradiction
among them - cannot be particularised to one or several men, or even to
numerous specialised groups within the field of humanities.

The trend of the alteration of rights and rules in the course of history
manifests, that even after many experts throughout time have managed to
constitute a sound and perfect system for rights encompassing all
domains, the lawmakers of the world realise the limitations of their
laws and continuously amend such rules and rights in order to perfect
them.

It must not be forgotten that these laws and rules have utilised
religious texts and Divine doctrines in their law making. It must not be
overlooked that the attempts of the lawmakers and jurists are only to
contribute towards the security for the social and worldly states, and
they pay no heed towards the importance of the assurance for the
Hereafter.

However, if attention had been paid to this important aspect (of the
next world), then certainty within this field would never have been
reached. It is possible that the issues dealing with the world and
matter to a certain extent may be solved by experimental sciences,
however the issues dealing with the Divine or next world could never be
resolved with such sciences.

If we take a closer look at contemporary man made rules, we can see that
compared to the knowledge held by man further back in history,
contemporary man has somewhat developed in his sense of living a proper
life. However if this is with the assumption that contemporary man with
the utilisation of thousands of years of experience was able to arrive
upon a perfect and sound system of rights, and with the assumption that
they encompass the realm of eternal and Divine felicity, the question
remains as to how could the ignorance of so many men throughout the
course of history be harmonious with Divine wisdom and the purpose of
creation?

We can conclude that the purpose of creating man from start to finish
can only be established if there exists the possibility to transcend
sense (perception) and mind (intellect) in order to realise the
realities of life and cognition of individual and group
responsibilities. This very path, which transcends the intellect and
sense perception, is no other than the way of revelation.

Through this argument it has also become clear, that the initial man
would have to be a Prophet of God, so that he could guide man to the
true and correct way of living, and establish the purpose of creation
through the means of revelation.

The benefits of the nomination of prophets
------------------------------------------

The prophets of God in addition to the establishment of the true path of
perfection for man (through Divine revelation) have also greatly
influenced man regarding their perfection.

The most important ways they have had such an influence are mentioned
below:

1. There are many subjects that can be understood by the intellect,
however this requires much past experience. Man due to the effects of
false publicity or due to the influences of matter or animalistic
tendencies tends to overlook or even forget the remarkableness of the
intellect. This matter was brought to man’s attention by the prophets,
who continually reminded man in order that he did not forget. It is
because of this that the prophets (a) were named as reminders
(mudhakkir) and warners (nadhīr) and that the Qur’an has been referred
to as theremembrance(dhikr),andreminder(tadhkirah).

Imam Ali (a) mentioned with regards to the wisdom of the nomination of a
Prophet (a) that:

“God the Supreme has sent prophets continuously in order that men remain
faithful to their intrinsic nature, and are reminded of the forgotten
bounties provided by God.

This reminder is a propagation and declaration of the truth in order
that the proof is completed upon them.” 2.One of the most important and
necessary elements of the development and perfection of man is the
presence of a prototype (behavioural paradigm); this has already been
proven in the field of psychology. The prophets of God are the best
trained and most perfect among men, and in addition to enlightening and
educating people they also train and purify people. We are aware that
purification and education have concurrently been mentioned throughout
the Noble Qur’an and that sometimes purification should be regarded
prior to education.

3.Another great benefit of having the presence of prophets was that of
political and sociological leadership. It is self-evident that an
infallible leader is a great bounty from God for a society, and due to
this a society will be protected from sociological corruption and
deterioration and be able to move forward towards the perfection
recognised by the leader.

Questions
---------

1. What is the purpose of the creation of man?

2. Is Divine will related to the chastisement of man in the same way
that it is related to his felicity?

3. What are the elements required for human voluntary action and
conscious choice?

4. Why is the intellect incapable of realising and understanding all
subjects?

5. Provide the argument for the necessity of the nomination of prophets.

6. If man is capable of realising worldly and sociological happiness,
why then is Divine revelation essential?

7. Is there an intellectual proof for the necessity of the first man
being a Prophet?

How?

8. What are the benefits of having the presence of a prophet?


