LESSON TWEWNTY-FIVE: THE REASONS FOR THE INFALLIBILITY OF PROPHETS
==================================================================

Introduction
------------

The belief in the immunity of the prophets (a) against sin, whether
intentional or unintentional is one of the important and categorical
beliefs in Shi’ism. The great Imams (a) have verified this fact to their
followers and used different discourses to deal with the relevant
challenges raised by its opponents. One of the most popular arguments in
this relation is that of Imam Rida (a), and has been recorded in the
books of tradition and history.

However, to deny the forgetfulness of the prophet with reference to the
lawful and everyday aspects of their lives has been more or less a
matter of debate, and the sayings from the Prophet’s Household are not
free from discrepancy. Nevertheless, research on such sayings needs
further explanation, although such a belief is by no means fundamental.

Moreover, there are other reasons for the infallibility of the prophets,
which can be divided into two groups: Intellectual and traditional
(Qur’anic).Although traditional reasons are more trustworthy, two
intellectual and some traditional reasons for the infallibility of the
prophets will be discussed in this chapter.

Intellectual reasons for the infallibility of prophets (a)
----------------------------------------------------------

The first intellectual reason for the necessity of the prophets’
immunity against committing sin, is that the main objective for their
mission is to guide man towards the truth and teach him how to perform
the duties God has assigned to him. Moreover, the prophets are in fact
the representatives of God among men and must guide them towards the
right path (al-sirāt al-mustaqīm). However, if such representatives and
missionaries do not obey the Divine instructions themselves and their
behaviour contradicts their mission, people will find the contrast
between their words and behaviour contradictory and, therefore, the
objective of their mission will not be thoroughly fulfilled. Thus, God’s
wisdom and kindness necessitates that the prophets be pure and innocent,
and for them to refrain from committing any undeserving action even if
unintentional or due to forgetfulness. The people will thus never accept
unwillingness or forgetfulness as an excuse for the prophets to commit a
sin.

The second intellectual reason for such infallibility is that, rather
than advertising the content of revelation and their mission to the
people, the prophets are responsible for educating and purifying and
helping the most talented of people reach the highest level of man’s
perfection. In other words, rather than teaching (ta’līm) and showing
the people the right way, the prophets are responsible for educating
(tarbiyah) and leading them. Such an education is valuable and solely
applies to the most talented and outstanding members of the society. To
educate such people needs the most deserving educators who are
themselves at the topmost level of man’s perfection and have the most
perfect form of faculty (malakah) - the faculty of Infallibility
(malakat al-‘ismah).

In addition, the educator’s behaviour in educating others is generally
more important than his words; therefore, if a person has deficiencies
in his behaviour, his words will not affect the people in a desirable
way. Hence, God’s objective for sending prophets as the educators of
people will not be thoroughly fulfilled unless they are immune against
any kind of deviations in their words and behaviour.

Traditional reasons for the infallibility of prophets (a)
---------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an has described a group of people as being, “purified for
the sake of God” (mukhlas), (the word mukhlas is different from mukhlis.
The former refers to a person who has been purified by God, and the
latter is a person who is pure in performing his worship).Satan does not
intend to mislead this group of people, who are exempted from his oath
to mislead the children of Adam (a):

“He (Iblīs) said, ‘By Your might, I will surely pervert them, except
Your exclusive servants among them” (Sād:82-83). There is no doubt that
Satan’s refusal to mislead them is due to their immunity against being
misled or corrupted; otherwise his enmity would include them and he
would do whatever was in his power to seduce them.

Thus, the term used to describe being purified for the sake of God is
synonymous with being infallible (ma’sūm). Although there is no evidence
for the allocation of infallibility being given to the prophets (as), it
is certainly one of their qualities. The Holy Qur’an refers to some of
the prophets as being purified for the sake of God (mukhlasīn). For
instance:

“And remember Our servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, men of strength and
insight. Indeed We purified them with the exclusiveness of the
remembrance of the abode [of the Hereafter]” (Sād:45-46) And also:

“And mention in the Book Moses. Indeed he was exclusively dedicated [to
Allah], and an apostle and a prophet” (Maryam:51).

The Holy Qur’an also asserts that the reason behind the immunity of
Prophet Joseph (as), who was severely tempted with the committal of sin,
was that he was a purified person. “So it was, that We might turn away
from him all evil and indecency. He was indeed one of Our dedicated
servants” (Yūsuf:24).

2. The Holy Qur’an claims that unconditional obedience to the prophets
(as) is obligatory.

“We did not send any apostle but to be obeyed by Allah’s leave”
(al-Nisā’:64).

However, unconditional obedience to the prophets is acceptable provided
that it is in line with the obedience of God and has no contradiction in
obeying Him. Otherwise, the commands from God with relation to
unconditional obedience to Him and unconditional obedience to those who
are subject to sin and deviation would be in opposition.

3. The Holy Qur’an has allocated Divine responsibilities to those who
are not involved in ‘cruelty’. In response to Prophet Abraham (a), who
asked for the position of ‘Imam’ for his children, the Holy Qur’an
asserts:

“My pledge does not extend to the unjust” (al-Baqarah:124).We know that
the committal of sin is oppression towards oneself (nafs), and that the
Qur’an terms a guilty person as an oppressor, therefore the prophets who

hold the position of the Divine responsibilities of prophecy and
prophetic mission must be free from any kind of sin or cruelty.

Numerous Qur’anic verses and traditions can be employed to discuss the
infallibility of the prophets; however we will conclude the discussion
at this point.

The philosophy behind the infallibility of prophets (a)
-------------------------------------------------------

At the end of this lesson, it is worth discussing the mystery behind the
infallibility of the prophets. The mystery of their infallibility in
receiving revelation is that their understanding of revelation is
basically free from any mistakes, and one who has the merit of receiving
it will find revelation a scientific reality, which he thoroughly
comprehends. He will also recognise the relationship between the
revelation and its issuer-whether or not there is an Angel in between,
in this relation the Holy Qur’an states:

“The heart did not deny what it saw”. (al-Najm:11) Furthermore, it is
impossible for the receiver of revelation to hesitate as to whether or
not he has received it, over who has sent the revelation to him, or as
to what its content is. Therefore, if in some man-made stories there are
cases where a Prophet is doubtful about his prophecy, fails in
understanding the content of the revelation or does not recognise its
issuer, they should not be given ant credence. Such cases are like
saying that one is doubtful over one’s existence, presence, or
conscience.

To discuss the mystery behind the infallibility of the prophets in
performing their Divine responsibilities, such as proclaiming God’s
message needs an introduction, which comes below:

Man performs his favourite actions through a feeling of desire, which
forms within him towards a subject; the desire is then activated by
various factors. Moreover, by having access to various sciences and a
variety of senses, he recognises the way to his objective and practices
whatever he thinks will help him reach it. At the same time, when there
are contradictory and intervening desires, he attempts to recognise and
choose the best and most deserving one. Nevertheless, due to man’s lack
of knowledge, he may commit a mistake in his evaluation and/or
recognition, or due to ignorance and/or his association with an inferior
desire, he might miscalculate the better choice. In such a case there
may be no further opportunity to re-think and recognise the best choice.

Therefore, the better a person is at recognising the truth, the higher
and more everlasting the attention he pays to his choices will be; and
the higher the intention for harnessing his innate desires and
excitements, the more remarkable the success he experiences in choosing
the best will be. This will in turn secure him from deviation and
wrong -doing.

This is the way the talented people, by acquiring the necessary
knowledge and insight and by utilising their proper education, goes
through the different stages of perfection, so that they can touch the
borders of infallibility. When they reach such an exalted position, then
such people do not even think of committing sin or wrong doing; this is
in the same way that a wise person would never think of taking a
poisonous or fatal drug or consumes unclean or rotten substances.

If we assume that a person’s ability for recognising the truth and the
purity of his soul is at the highest level, as described in the Holy
Qur’an like the pure, clean and flammable olive oil, which is ready to
blaze even without a spark.

“Whose oil almost lights up, though fire should not touch it” (al-Nūr:

35).

And if we further assume that such a person due to the same
characteristics receives Divine education, confirmed by the Holy Spirit,
he will (surely) go through the stages of perfection at the utmost speed
and fulfil the long distance towards perfection in a short duration of
time. To such a person the disgracefulness of sin is as recognisable as
the dangers of poisonous and rotten substances are to an ordinary man.
Just as ordinary people are not forced to avoid drinking and eating
poison, an infallible person is also not forced to avoid sin.

Questions
---------

1. Verify the infallibility of the prophets through intellectual and
traditional evidence.

2. Which verses of the Holy Qur’an determine the infallibility of the
prophets?

3. What is the mystery behind the immunity of the prophets against
mistakes in understanding revelation?

4. How is the prophets’ infallibility against sin in agreement with
their freedom?


