LESSON TWEWNTY-SIX: RESPONSE TO CERTAIN DOUBTS
==============================================

Introduction
------------

Some doubts have been put forward with relation to the infallibility of
the prophets; the following introduces those doubts and presents their
relevant responses:

### Why does an infallible person deserve reward?

###

If Almighty God has immunised the prophets (a) against committing sins
and if the performance of their duties is guaranteed, they would
therefore have no freedom in their choice, and as a result they would
not deserve any reward for performing their duties properly or for
avoiding sins. In other words, any other person who was provided by God
with infallibility would behave similarly.

The response to the above doubt has been given in my previous
discussions; however to summarise; having infallibility does not mean
being obliged to perform duties or avoid sins. Just because the prophets
know that God has provided them with infallibility and that He is their
protector, does not mean that they have no choice over the optional
aspects of their lives. As discussed in previous lessons, although God’s
will dominates the occurrence of all events, it does not intervene or
repel man’s will, but rather parallels it. However, when God’s attention
towards man accommodates a specific achievement, connecting it to God
(saying that ‘God did it’), it is nothing more than man’s double concern
about Him.

Nevertheless, God’s attention towards the innocent, like providing
particular people with specific means, conditions, and facilities, makes
their responsibilities heavier.

Therefore, as they might receive more reward for their obedience, they
may also receive more punishment for their disobedience. Thus, their
reward and punishment will balance although the innocent person, by his
proper choice, will not be entitled to punishment. The same analogy can
be used for all others who enjoy a particular merit, for example,
scholars and members of the Prophet’s family (refer to al-Ahzāb:30-33)
regarding the Prophet’s wives. Those who have higher or more essential
responsibilities will similarly receive higher reward for their good
deeds, just as they will receive more severe punishments for their sins
(provided that they commit sins).

This is why those in charge of higher spiritual positions face a greater
danger of decline and are more afraid of becoming deviated.

### Why did the infallible Prophets and Imams (a) confess to committing sins?

###

According to the prayers from the prophets and other innocent people,
they consider themselves guilty and ask God to forgive them for their
sins. In such circumstances and with these confessions how can they be
considered as infallible?

The answer is that the innocent were at the highest level of perfection
and were in a close relationship with God; therefore, they considered
their

duties much more beyond those of other (ordinary) people. For them,
paying attention to anything except God was considered to be a great
sin; this is why they apologised, and asked for God’s forgiveness.
However, as I previously mentioned, infallibility in the prophets does
not only mean immunity against anything, which can be called sin; rather
it is also against opposing the essential duties and committing what is
religiously forbidden.

### How is Satan’s influence on the prophets (a) in agreement with their infallibility?

###

One of the arguments, with relation to the prophets’ infallibility,
asserts that the prophets are completely pure and that Satan cannot
affect them. However, the Holy Qur’an itself mentions some instances in
which Satan has affected the prophets, for example, one of Qur’anic
verses claims:

“O Children of Adam! Do not let Satan tempt you, like he expelled your
parents from Paradise” (al-A’rāf:27).

In this verse, Adam and Eve’s deception and expulsion from Paradise have
been attributed to Satan. Moreover the Qur’an asserts, in another verse
when quoting Job (a):

“And remember Our servant Job [in the Qur’an]. When he called out to his
Lord,’The devil has visited on me hardship and torment’” (Sād:41).

Similarly, in the following verse a kind of satanic inspiration to all
prophets has been approved:

“We did not send before you any apostle or prophet but that when he
recited [the scripture] satan interjected [something] in his recitation”
(al-Hajj:52) The response is that in none of these verses, does the
penetration attributed to Satan cause the prophets (a) to oppose their
essential duties. However the first quoted verse -i.e. al-A’rāf:27-
points to the satanic temptation (concerning Adam and Eve) for eating
from the forbidden tree, which was not lawful. In fact God had just
reminded Adam and Eve not to eat from that tree; otherwise, they would
be expelled from that garden and cast down to the Earth. Nevertheless,
the satanic temptation caused them to oppose that ‘guiding prohibition’.
Moreover, the previous world (in which Adam and Eve lived) was not a
world of responsibilities, because there were no religions sent by God.
In addition, the second quoted verse -i.e. Sād:42- points to the
sufferings and problems made by Satan with relation to the Prophet Job
(a), and does not indicate any opposition on behalf of that great man
towards God’s orders and prohibitions.

Furthermore, the third quoted verse -i.e. al-Hajj:52- refers to the
disturbances Satan made for all the prophets, and the problems he made
in the way of the fulfilment of their duties with relation to guiding
people. However, Almighty God will eventually destroy Satan’s tricks and
strengthen His True religion.

Attributing forgetfulness and rebelliousness to Adam (a)
--------------------------------------------------------

In chapter ‘TāHa’ verses 112 and 115 of the Holy Qur’an, rebellion and
forgetfulness have both been attributed to the Prophet Adam (a). How are
these characteristics in agreement with infallibility?

The answer to this question can be understood from our previous
discussions, which explain that ‘rebellion’ and ‘forgetfulness’ have not
been in relation to Adam’s essential responsibilities.

### Attributing lies to some of the prophets (a)

###

In the holy Qur’an, some prophets have been introduced as telling lies,
for example Abraham (a) is quoted as saying the following, whilst he was
not sick: “and he said, ‘Indeed I am sick!’” (al-Ssāffāt:89)

Abraham (a) was also quoted as saying the following, when he himself had
destroyed the idols: “He said,’Rather it was this biggest of them who
did it!” (al-Anbiyā’:63). Also in Chapter Yūsuf it states: “Then a
herald shouted: ‘O [men of the] caravan! You are indeed thieves!’”
(Yūsuf:70), while Joseph’s brothers had not stolen anything.

The response to this is, that such sentences, according to some
narrations (riwāyāt) are saying one thing and meaning something else
(Touriyah), and have been expressed for the sake of something more
important. It can be concluded from some verses that they were preceded
by an inspiration from God. For instance, in Joseph’s (a) story, the
Holy Qur’an states: “Thus did We plan for the sake of Yusuf”.

Therefore, such lies are not in contrast with infallibility.

### Moses’ (a) murdering of a Qobti

###

In the story of Moses (a), we are told that he killed a Qobti person,
who was quarrelling with a member of the Banī-Israel, and then he fled
from Egypt. When Moses was ordered to invite Pharaoh and his followers
towards God, he (Moses) said:

“Also they have a charge against me, and I fear they will kill me”
(al-Shu’arā’:14) When Pharaoh reminded him of the murder he had
committed, Moses said:

“He said, ‘I Did that when I was astray’” (al-Shu’arā’:20) How can this
story agree with the immunity of the prophets (a) from error even before
their mission?

The answer is that first of all the murder of that Qobti person was not
on purpose; Moses struck him once and he was killed. Secondly, the
sentence “And they have a charge against me” is in fact from the point
of view from Pharaoh and his followers, meaning that Moses thought that
they would call him guilty; he was therefore afraid of being executed
because of that murder. Thirdly, the sentence “I was astray” is either
to pretend to be in agreement with Pharaoh and his followers, meaning
‘assuming that I was misled at that time, God has guided me and sent me
to you with absolute miracles’, or to go astray (zalāl) might mean that
he (Moses) was unaware of the result of that strike. However it by no
means indicates any opposition from Moses against his essential Heavenly
duties.

### Prohibiting the Prophet (s) from casting doubt on his mission

###

In many verses God prohibits the Prophet (s) from being in doubt:

“So if you are in doubt about what We have sent down to you, ask those
who read the Book [revealed] before you. The truth has certainly come to
you from your Lord, so do not be among the skeptics” (Yūnus:94) Other
examples can be found in al-Baqarah:142, āl-‘Imrān:60, Hūd:17 and al

Sajdah:23. al-An’ām:114, How is it possible to say that understanding
revelation is free from doubts and hesitations?

The answer is that these verses do not indicate the Prophet’s (s)
hesitation at all, rather they are claiming that the Prophet’s mission,
the Holy Qur’an and the legitimacy of its content leave no space for
doubt and hesitation. Such an addressing is in fact the same as “making
a hint towards someone indirectly”.

### The Prophet (s) is described in the Qur’an as committing some sins

###

In the Holy Qur’an, the Prophet (s) has been said to have committed some
sins, which have been forgiven by God. The Holy Qur’an states that:

“That Allah may forgive you what is past of your sin and what is to
come” (al- Fath:1) The response is that the word sin (dhanb) in the
above verse refers to the accusations the dualists made against the
Prophet (s) in response to his insulting their idols.

Forgiving them means repelling the possible resulting effects of such
accusations. The reason for this interpretation is that the conquest of
Mecca has been considered to be the cause of forgiving them:

“Indeed We have inaugurated for you a clear victory, that Allah may
forgive you what is past of your sin and what is to come” (al-Fath:1)
Clearly, if they were the type of usual sins, then their forgiveness,
because of conquering Mecca, could not be justified.

### Reports concerning the marriage of the Prophet (s) with the divorced wife of Zayd

###

The Holy Qur’an, in the story of the Prophet’s marriage with the
divorced wife of Zayd (his adopted son), asserts that:

“And you feared the people though Allah is worthier that you should fear
Him” (al-Ahzāb:37).

How is this in agreement with his infallibility?

The answer is that the Prophet (s) was afraid that the people would
think of him as someone who acts according to his personal desires and
of being labelled as an apostate. What he did was on the basis of God’s
commandment, with relation to violating one of the wrong customs of the
ignorant era before Islam. In this verse, God the Almighty tells His
Prophet (s) that this violation is more important (than what people
would think about him), and that being afraid of opposing God’s will and
the practical struggle against that wrong custom, was more deserving.
Therefore, the above verse is by no means blaming the Prophet (s).

The rapprochement of the Prophet (s) in the Holy Qur’an The Holy Qur’an
in some cases has reproached the Prophet (s). For instance, with
relation to permitting those who did not want to participate in war, the
Holy Qur’an claims: “May Allah excuse you! Why did you grant them leave”
(al-Tawbah:43) With reference to the Prophet (s) prohibiting himself
from doing some lawful things for the satisfaction of some of his wives,
the Holy Qur’an asserts: “O Prophet! Why do you prohibit [yourself] what
Allah has made lawful for you, seeking to please your wives?”
(al-Tahrīm:1).

How are such reproaches in agreement with his infallibility?

The answer is, that such sentences are in fact “praises in the form of
reproaches,” indicating the Prophet’s (s) kindness and sympathy, which
never disappointed even the hypocrites and never disclosed their
secrets. He considered his wives’ satisfaction prior to his own wishes,
so he swore to forbid himself from some thing lawful. The verse
therefore, by no means refers to changing God’s order or making a lawful
thing unlawful for the people.

Such verses are in fact from one angle, similar to those in which the
Prophet’s attempts and sympathy in guiding the unbelievers have been
reported, such as: “You might kill yourself [out of distress] that they
will not have faith”(al-Shu’arā’: 3).

Or they are like the verses which indicate the huge amount of suffering
he tolerated for worshipping God: “Ta Ha. We did not send down to you
the Qur’an that you should be miserable” (Tāha:1-2).

Such verses are therefore by no means in contradiction with the
Prophet’s (s) infallibility.

Questions
---------

1- What makes the freedom of an infallible person prior to the freedom
of others? And why does an action due to infallibility deserve reward?

2- Why did the prophets (a) and Imams (a) call themselves guilty and
entreated God to forgive them?

3- How is Satan’s affect on the prophets in agreement with their
infallibility?

4- How are ‘rebellion’ and ‘forgetfulness’, which are attributed to Adam
(a) in the Holy Qur’an in agreement with his infallibility?

5- If all the prophets are infallible, why did Abraham and Joseph tell
lies?

6- Explain the doubt concerning Moses’ (a) infallibility and provide a
response to it.

7- If understanding revelation is free from mistakes, why does Almighty
God frequently prohibit the Prophet (s) from casting doubt on his
mission?

8- How is the attribution of sin to the Prophet of Islam (s) in chapter
‘Fath’ in line with his infallibility?

9- Explain the doubt about Zayd’s story, and provide its response.

10- What is the doubt concerning God’s blaming the Prophet (s)? And what
is its response?


