LESSON TWENTY-EIGHT: RESPONSES TO CERTAIN DOUBTS
================================================

Responses to certain doubts
---------------------------

With respect to ‘Miracles’, some doubts have been raised. The following
presents the doubts and their relevant explanations:

Do miracles contradict causality?
---------------------------------

Every physical phenomenon has a specific cause, which can be recognised
through experimentation. However, if due to the deficiencies of
laboratory equipment the cause of a phenomenon is not recognised, it
cannot be considered as evidence for rejecting causality. Therefore,
extraordinary acts can be justified, by saying that their causes have
not yet been recognised and that the only extraordinary thing about them
is that while being unknown to ordinary people, their causes have been
discovered by their performers. Thus, denying experimentally
recognisable causes is contradictory to the principle of causality and
is unacceptable.

The response to this doubt is that the principle of causality is nothing
more than the proof, that any dependent or resulting phenomenon has a
cause; however, the realisation of that cause through scientific
experiments is by no means a requisite for such a principle and there is
no reason why it should be so. The reason is that the scope of
scientific experimentation is limited to natural phenomena, and it is
impossible to prove the existence or non-existence of metaphysical
phenomena or their effects through laboratory tests.

Moreover, it is incorrect to interpret miracles in terms of being aware
of the unknown causes, because if this awareness is gained through the
usual factors, there would be no difference between an extraordinary
phenomenon and other usual phenomena, and it could not be considered
extraordinary. However, if such awareness is reached unusually, the act
will be extraordinary, and should it be in accordance with God’s
specific permission and the evidence of true prophecy, it would be
considered as a miracle (scientific miracle). In this way Jesus’s (a)
knowledge about people’s food and property is known as one of his
miracles (Āl-‘Imrān:

49). Miracles are not only limited to the scientific; there are other
types as well, which cannot be denied. Finally, the question remains as
to what the difference is between miracles and other types of
extraordinary acts with reference to the principle of causality?

Do extraordinary acts indicate changes in Divine customs?
---------------------------------------------------------

Divine custom has dictated that every phenomenon follows a specific
cause and according to the verses of the Holy Qur’an, there will be no
change in this way (refer to al-Isrā’:77, al-Ahzāb:62, Fātir:43,
Fateh:23). Therefore, extraordinary acts, which are the proof for such
changes in these customs, are rejected by these verses.

This doubt is like the previous one; the difference is that in the
former, the intellect was used for reasoning and in the latter the
verses of the Holy Qur’an. The response is that it is not reasonable to
limit unchangeable

Divine customs to merely include usual causes for all phenomena. It is
like saying that there is an unchangeable Divine law and that fire is
the only cause for heat! Such claims can be challenged by saying that
different causes for various phenomena, and the replacement of the usual
causes by unusual ones, have always existed in the world and should
consequently be described as a Divine custom. Therefore, restricting the
causes of events to usual ones is considered a change in Divine customs
and those verses of the Holy Qur’an are (in fact) denying it.

Thus, interpreting the verses, which deny changes in Divine customs in a
way that they show the replacement of usual causes by unusual ones, is
impossible and it is unreasonable to describe that interpretation as a
Divine custom. Moreover, the great number of verses, which indicate the
occurrence of miracles and extraordinary acts, can be strong reasons for
falsifying such an interpretation. The correct interpretation for such
verses should be searched for in the books of commentary; however, I
will briefly explain that such Holy verses deny the independence of the
events from their causes, rather than the plurality of causes or the
replacement of a usual cause by an unusual one. It is nonetheless;
probably right to claim that the majority of such verses are related to
the effect of unusual causes.

Why did the Prophet of Islam (s) refuse to present miracles to the public?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is stated in the Holy Qur’an that people frequently asked the Prophet
(s) to present to them some miracles, but he refused (refer to
al-An’ām:37,109, Yūnus:20, al- Ra’d:7, al-Anbiyā’:5). If providing
miracles is a way of proving prophecy, why did the Prophet (s) not use
this means?

The response is that such verses are related to the requests after the
Prophet (s) had proved his prophecy in three ways: clues to his honesty,
predictions made by the previous prophets, and miracles. Such requests
were rooted in obstinacy and enmity and were due to reasons other than
finding the truth (refer to al-An’ām:35,124, Tāha:33, al-Ssaffāt:14,
al-Qamar:2, al-Shu’arā’:3-4,197, al-Isrā’:59, al-Rūm:58).

Therefore, God’s Wisdom didn’t necessitate responding to them.

To provide further explanation, it should be stated that the reason for
presenting miracles, which have been exceptional to the rules governing
the universe, have sometimes provided responses to the people’s requests
(e.g. Sāleh’s (a) camel), and were at other times incidental (e.g.
Jesus’ (a) miracles), were to introduce God’s prophets and provide the
people with the means for such an introduction. However, miracles were
not employed to force the people to accept the prophets’ invitations,
neither were they used for people to compulsory submit to them.
Furthermore, miracles were not a means to entertain the people by
violating the rules of causality for usual events. Such an objective
does not necessitate responding to all the requests.

In some cases responding to certain requests would be unwise and
contradict the ultimate aim of the miracle. For example, there were
requests, which would restrict the people’s choices and enforce them to
accept the prophets’ invitations, or cases where the requests were due
to enmity and obstinacy. Moreover, if all the requests received a
positive response,

triteness would occur and people would see miracles as entertainment,
and they would gather around the Prophet (s) for their personal benefit.

In addition, testing people for their faith and providing them with the
freedom in decision making would be impossible and they would accept the
obedience of the Prophets aversely or forcefully. In both cases such an
acceptance would be against both wisdom and the real aims of the
miracle. However, in other cases where Divine wisdom necessitated, the
Prophet (s) would accept such requests. There are many miracles, which
have been attributed to the Prophet of Islam (s); and most have been
verified through successive traditions, however his ultimate miracle is
the eternal miracle of the Holy Qur’an. More explanation will be
provided about the Holy Qur’an in its due place.

Can miracles be accepted as intellectual or convincing evidence?
----------------------------------------------------------------

Since miracles are performed according to God’s specific permission,
they can indicate a particular relationship between Almighty God and the
performer of the miracle, who has been provided with such permission. In
other words, God has fulfilled His own Will through the performer of the
miracle. However, the intellectual requisite for such a relationship is
not the existence of another relationship - the type of sending and
receiving of revelation-between Almighty God and the performer of the
miracle. Therefore, miracles cannot be considered as intellectual
evidence for the honesty of the prophets in their claims. However, they
can in the best condition, be considered as speculative or convincing
evidence.

The response is, that extraordinary acts - even Divine ones - are not by
themselves the evidence for a relationship to revelation and, due to the
same reason, the generosity of God’s saints cannot be considered as the
proof for their prophecy.

However, the subject of our discussion is a person who has claimed to be
the Prophet of God, by using miracles as the proof for his honesty. If
such a person had falsely claimed to be a Prophet, and thereby committed
one of the greatest and most disgraceful sins causing the most evil
corruption of this world and the Hereafter, - he would never deserve
such a relationship with Almighty God, and Divine wisdom would never
provide him with the miracles to deceive His servants.

In conclusion, our intellect clearly realises that having a specific
relationship with Almighty God and being equipped with the ability to
perform miracles, is only deserved by those who do not betray their Lord
and do not mislead His servants to eternal misfortune.

Therefore, miracles can be considered intellectual evidence for the true
claim of prophecy.

Questions
---------

1. What is the content of the principle of causality?

2. Why does the acceptance of causality not contradict the acceptance of
miracles?

3. Why is it incorrect to interpret miracles in terms of the awareness
of unknown causes?

4. Is the acceptance of miracles in contrast to the unchangeable divine
customs?

Why?

5. Did the prophets (a) provide miracles incidentally or in response to
the people’s requests?

6. Why didn’t the Prophet of Islam (s) respond positively to all the
requests to present miracles?

7. Explain how miracles are not merely the speculative or convincing
evidence for the true claim of prophecy, but how they are considered as
the intellectual proof for such a claim.


