LESSON TWENTY-NINE: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROPHET
==================================================

The plurality of the prophets
-----------------------------

So far, three fundamental issues related to prophecy and the recognition
of leaders have been discussed. Moreover, it was realised that due to
the deficiencies of human wisdom in acquiring the information necessary
for the welfare of this world and the hereafter, it is necessary for
Divine wisdom to select a Prophet or prophets to teach them the
necessary facts. These prophets will in turn, present those facts to
others in the most perfect and intact form. Furthermore, it is necessary
(for Divine wisdom) to introduce the prophets to the public so that no
excuse remains (for the unbelievers).

The most general way to accomplish this is the presentation of miracles.

I used intellectual evidence to prove the above point; however, such
pieces of evidence do not deal with the necessity of the plurality of
the prophets, their Books or Divine religions. Therefore, if for
instance the conditions of man’s life were so, that one Prophet could
cater for all of humanity’s needs up until the end of time, and every
individual or group of people throughout history could find his/their
responsibilities, by referring to what the same Prophet had proposed, no
contradiction would then evolve with the requisites of those pieces of
(intellectual) evidence.

However, first we know that every human being, including the prophets,
have a limited life and Divine wisdom has not found it necessary to keep
the first Prophet alive for all time.

Secondly, the conditions of people’s lives in different places and at
different times are not the same; such differences and specifically the
gradual complications of social relationships can influence the quality
as well as the quantity of social rules and regulations. Furthermore, in
some cases new regulations should be issued and if such regulations are
advertised by a Prophet who had been appointed thousands of years ago,
it would make no sense; similarly, the protection of those regulations
and handling of them with specific cases would be very difficult.

Thirdly, in ancient times, it was not possible to advertise the
invitations of the prophets and for the entire world to be informed of
their message would be impossible.

Fourthly, with the process of time, and due to various factors, the
instructions given by a Prophet to the people of his time would face
alterations (to familiarise with such alterations refer to:

Al-Huda ila Dīn al- Mustafa, by ‘Allamah Shaykh Muhammad Javād Balāghī)
and incorrect interpretations, so that after some time the original
religion would change into a deviated one. The same thing has happened
to the monotheistic religion presented by Jesus (a), which later changed
into the concept of the trinity.

The above discussion makes the reason for the plurality of prophets and
the differences in some devotional and social instructions of the Divine
religions clear (refer to al-Māi’da:48, al-Hajj:67). This is in line
with the fact that all Divine religions are not only the same in their
principles of

belief and ethical foundations, but they have also been in agreement
with reference to their personal and social instructions (refer to
al-Baqarah:131-137,285, Āl-‘Imrān:19-20). For example, Prayers (salāt)
have existed in all religions, although the way to perform them and the
direction towards which they were performed (qiblah) have been
different. There has also been poor-rate (zakāt) in all religions;
however, its amount and the cases for which it would be necessary have
not been the same.

Therefore, it is a necessity to believe in all of the prophets and to
admit their prophecy without any discrimination, aswell as accepting
their messages and information provided by them, and recognising them as
being unique individuals (refer to al- Shūra:13, al-Nisā’:136,152,
Āl-‘Imrān:84-85). Moreover, it is not permissible to deny any of the
prophets (a) or any of their instructions, because denying one Prophet
is tantamount to the denial of all the instructions issued by God (refer
to al-Nisā’:150, al-Baqara:85). However, the practical duties of every
Prophet’s nation at any time are to obey the instructions provided by
the same Prophet and at the same time.

It is worth mentioning that although human intellect due to the
aforementioned points realises the rational behind the plurality of the
prophets and the differences between Divine religions, it cannot
discover the exact formula for the number of prophets and Divine
religions, and cannot decide when and where a new Prophet would be
appointed and a new religion introduced. It is however, understood from
the above points that while the conditions of man’s life are so, that
the Prophet’s invitation can reach all the people of the world and his
message can be protected and secured for future generations, as long as
the social regulations do not need fundamental changes, no new Prophet
would be necessary.

### The number of prophets

###

As I discussed above, our intellect cannot decide about the number of
prophets and Divine Books; such points can only be proved through
traditions. Even in the case of the Holy Qur’an, although it emphasises
that Almighty God has sent a Prophet for every nation (refer to
Fātir:24, al-Nahl:36), it does not clarify the number of the nations or
their prophets.

However, more than twenty prophets have been mentioned in the Holy
Qur’an and the stories of some others have been narrated without
referring to their names (refer to al- Baqarah:246, 256). On the other
hand, in some traditions from the Prophet’s family members (a), it has
been stated (refer to Risālat I’tiqādāt al-Sadūq, Bihār al-Anwār,
vol.11, p. 28,30,32,41) that Almighty God has appointed one hundred and
twenty four thousand prophets (a), and that the chain of prophets began
with Adam (a) and ended with Muhammad (s) the son of Abdullah.

God’s prophets (a) have had various characteristics:

They have been guides (nabi), which is the main responsibility for this
Divine position, ‘warners’ (nadhīr or mundhir), and ‘providers of glad
tidings’ (bashīr or mubashshir) (refer to al- Baqarah:213,
al-Nisā’:165). They have also been known as the best (salihīn) and the
most pious (mukhlasīn) people some of whom have held the position of
‘Messengers of God’ (rasūl) aswell. In some sayings, the number of
Divine messengers is said to be three hundred and thirteen (refer to
Bihār al-Anwār Vol.11, p, 32).

Therefore, in this part, I will explain the definition of prophet and
messenger aswell as the differences between them.

### Prophets and God’s Messengers

###

The word ‘Messenger’ (Rasūl) means the one who brings a message, and the
word Prophet (Nabi), if derived from the root (Naba’) means important
news, and if derived from (Nabu) means holding an outstanding position.

Some have thought that the word ‘Prophet’ includes the meaning of the
word ‘Messenger’; therefore, they claim that a Prophet is a person who
receives revelation from Almighty God, whether or not he has the
responsibility of advertising it to other people, whereas a ‘Messenger’
is a person who holds the responsibility of advertising God’s message to
the public.

However, it is not right, because in some verses of the Holy Qur’an, the
word ‘Prophet’ is used after the word ‘Messenger’ (refer to
Maryam:51,54). Whereas, according to the above interpretations, the more
general word ‘Messenger’ should have preceded the specific one
‘Prophet’. Furthermore, there is no reason for allocating the
responsibility of advertising revelation to messengers.

In some traditions, it has been stated that the requisite for the
position of Prophet, is that the person should visit the Angel of
revelation only in his dreams and when he is awake he would just hear
the Angel’s voice; while, the Messenger visits the Angel in his
wakefulness (refer to Usūl al-Kāfi, vol 1, p.176).

However, this can not be due to the interpretation of the word, as the
acceptable point is that the word ‘Prophet’ with reference to those to
whom it refers -rather than the way it is interpreted - is a more
general term than the word ‘Messenger’. In other words, all prophets
have held the position of prophecy; nevertheless, the position of a
Messenger of God applies to only a group of them. As mentioned before,
the number of God’s messengers is three hundred and thirteen. Their
position has certainly been higher than that of prophets; however, there
has been some degree of hierarchy with reference to the ‘position’ and
‘excellence’ amongst the messengers’ aswell (refer to al-Baqarah:253,
al-Isrā’:55). Some of them, for example, had the honour of holding the
position of Imamah (refer to al-Baqarah:124, al-Anbiyā’:73,
al-Sajdah:24).

### The prominent prophets

###

The Holy Qur’an introduces some of God’s prophets as ‘Those messengers
with a strong will’ (ūlu al-‘azm) (refer to al-Ahqāf:35); however, their
particularities have not been clarified. Moreover, according to the
sayings of the Prophet’s family members (a), there have been five
prominent prophets:

Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad (refer to Bihār al-Anwār vol.
11, p. 33-4, Ma’ālim al-Nubuwwah, p.113). They not only had a
distinctive level of patience and tolerance, which has been referred to
in the Qur’an, but each of them had a specific religion and a particular
Book, and their contemporary or succeeding prophets obeyed their
religions until

another prominent Prophet was appointed, and a new Book and a new
religion were introduced.

It was also clarified that the co-existence of two prophets at the same
time has been possible as Lot (a) was contemporary to Abraham and Aaron
was appointed at the same time when Moses (a) was appointed a Prophet.
Also John (a) lived with Jesus (a) simultaneously.

Some Points
-----------

At the end of this lesson, some points are briefly discussed:

A) God’s prophets have confirmed each other and each one predicted his
successor (refer to Āl-‘Imrān:81). Therefore, if a person claimed to be
a Prophet and denied his preceding or succeeding prophets, he would be a
liar.

B)God’s prophets did not request any payment or reward for performing
their duties (refer to al-An’ām:90, Yāsīn:21, al-Tūr:40, al-Qalam:46,
Yūnus:72, Hūd:29,51, al-Furqān:57, al-Shūra:109,127,145,164,180); only
the Prophet of Islam (s) has recommended his nation to be friends with
the knowledgeable people (refer to al-Shūra:23) and has considered it as
the reward for his endeavour. In this way, he urged his nation to obey
the (instructions given by the Islamic) scholars. The benefits of such
obedience will in fact return to the nation themselves (refer to
Saba’:47).

C) Some prophets have had other exalted positions such as ‘Judge’ and
‘Governor’ (David and Solomon). In addition, verse al-Nisā’:64 have
necessitated the unconditional obedience of every Prophet. Therefore, it
can be inferred that all the prophets (a) have had the same Divine
positions.

D) The Jinn, who have the freedom of decision-making and are responsible
for their deeds, and in normal conditions are invisible, were aware of
the invitations made by some of God’s prophets. The pious Jinn believed
in them, Moses (a) and Muhammad (s) each having some followers from
among them.

However, there also existed a group of Jinn who obeyed Satan and
disbelieved in God’s prophets (refer to al-Jinn:1-14).

Questions
---------

1. Discuss the reasons for the plurality of the prophets (a).

2. What is the Prophet’s duty with respect to the invitations and
instructions made by all other prophets?

3. When is it not necessary for a new Prophet to be appointed?

4. Discuss the plurality of the prophets and messengers.

5. What is the difference between a Prophet and a messenger? What is
their relationship with respect to the meaning and application of these
terms?

6. With reference to their Divine positions, what are the priorities of
the prophets (a) to each other?

7. Who are the prominent prophets? What are their characteristics?

8. Is it possible to have more than one Prophet at the same time? If
yes, can you provide some examples?

9. What other characteristics of God’s prophets (a) do you know?

10. How did the Jinn react regarding the acceptance or rejection of the
prophets’ invitations?


