LESSON THIRTY: PROPHETS AND PEOPLE
==================================

Introduction
------------

When referring to the prophets (a) and their illustrious lives, the Holy
Qur’an discloses the reactions of the people against them. On one side
we are informed about the stance the people took towards the prophets
and the reasons for their opposition. On the other side the methods
employed by the prophets to guide and educate the people are explained
and the way in which they struggled against the roots of disbelief,
polytheism, and deviation. The Holy Qur’an upholds Divine regulations
for governing societies, particularly with reference to the mutual
relationships between people and prophets. Such discussions include the
most instructive and insightful issues.

These points are not in direct relation with ideological or discoursal
points. This is due to the fact that they shed light on prophecy and its
related aspects, and destroy a number of relevant doubts, and due to
their importance in teaching and educating people and functioning as
examples for the people to learn from, they are considered to be vital.
Therefore, in this lesson, I will discuss some of the most important
points of this nature.

The people’s reaction against the prophets (a)
----------------------------------------------

When God’s prophets (a) began to invite people to worship the unique God
(refer to al-Nahl:36, al-Anbiyā’:25], Fussilat:14, al-Ahqāf:21), obey
His orders, stay away from idols and false gods, avoid Satan and other
misleaders, and refuse committing oppression, corruption and wrong
doing, they generally faced opposition from the people (refer to
Ibrāhīm:9, al-Mu’minūn:44). Such opposers were the rulers of societies,
the rich who were drowning in their own worldly pleasures (refer to
Saba’:34) and proud of their wealth, social positions, or knowledge
(refer to Ghāfir:83, al-Qasas:78, al-Zumar:49). They held great
influence and managed to mislead many away from the true path of life
(refer to al-Ahzāb:67, Saba’:31-33).

Nevertheless, little by little, a group of people who were mainly among
the deprived accepted the prophets’ invitation (refer to Hūd:40).

However it has rarely occurred that a society has been formed on the
principles of correct beliefs, norms of justice and with obedience to
God and His prophets. For instance, this happened at the time of
Solomon. Nevertheless, some of the Divine teachings gradually affected
the culture of some societies and were later transferred to others.

In some cases, the prophets’ teachings and instructions were introduced
as the innovations of the leaders of the unbelievers. Many of today’s
law systems in the world have taken the rules and regulations from
Divine religions; however, without referring to their sources they
introduce such regulations as original.

Reasons and motivations behind the opposition of the prophets (a)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In addition to the desire for corruption and worldly pleasure (refer to
al-Māi’dah:70), there were other reasons and motivations behind the

opposition against the prophets (a). More generally traits such as
selfishness, pride and self-praise appeared amongst the rich, noble and
more knowledgeable of societies (refer to Ghāfir:56, al-A’rāf:76).

Another reason was the bias that such people held concerning the wrong
customs and beliefs of their ancestors, which were erroneously respected
by various societies (refer to al-Baqarah:170, al-Māi’dah:104,
al-A’rāf:28, Yūnus:78, al-Anbiyā’:53, al- Shu’arā’:74, Luqmān:21,
al-Zukhruf:22-23). The protection of economical benefits and social
positions were strong motivations for the rich people, the rulers, and
the scientists (refer to Hūd:84-86, al-Qasas:76-79, al-Tawbah:34); and
the ignorance and lack of knowledge among the public were the main
reasons behind their deception from the unbelieving leaders and their
obedience towards the societal authorities. It was in turn, the cause
for their feeling of satisfaction with their false beliefs and their
refusal of the religion, which had already been accepted by a few people
who mainly held no important social positions and had been rejected by
the authorities and the majority of the societies. However, the pressure
imposed by the rulers and the oppressors on the deprived should not be
ignored (refer to Ibrāhīm:21, Fātir:47, Hūd:27, al-Shu’arā’:111).

Behaviour towards the prophets (a)
----------------------------------

The opponents of the prophets (a) employed various methods to prevent
the progress of their invitation:

### Contempt

###

A group of people would try to suppress the status of the prophets by
despising, mocking, and insulting them (refer to al-Hijr:11, Yāsīn:30,
al-Zukhruf:7, al- Mutaffifīn:29-32) so that the public would pay no
attention to them.

### Slander and unjust accusations

###

Then they would spread slander and lies, and attribute unjust
accusations to the prophets, such as claiming they were mad etc (refer
to al-A’rāf:66, al-Baqarah:13, al-Mu’minūn:25). When the prophets
performed miracles, they slandered them by calling them magicians and
tricksters (refer to al-Dhāriyāt:39,52-53, al-Anbiyā’:3, al- Qamar:2);
they also described the Divine messages as being myths and imaginary
tales (refer to al-An’ām:25, al-Anfāl:31, al-Nahl:24, al-Mu’minūn:83,
al-Furqān:5, al-Naml:68, al-Ahqāf:17, al-Qalam:15, al-Mutaffifīn:14).

### Dispute and chicanery

###

The leaders of the unbelievers would prohibit people from listening to
the prophets when they warned them of the results of disbelief and
rebellion against God, and the benefits and rewards of following the
true way, even though they used reason and wisdom in their speeches.
Such infidels would then employ weak and ridiculous arguments, covered
in beautiful words in an attempt to deceive the public and prevent them
from obeying the prophets (refer to Nūh:7, Fussilat:26, al-
An’ām:112,121, Ghāfir:5,35, al-A’rāf:70-71, al-Kahf:56). In so doing,
they frequently mentioned their ancestors’ way of life (refer to
al-Baqarah:170, al- Māi’dah:104, al

A’rāf:28, al-Anbiyā’:53, Yūnus:78, Luqmān:21) and always proudly
referred to their wealth and worldly progress. They also referred to the
worldly weaknesses and backwardness of the prophets’ followers, as an
indicator of their false beliefs and behaviour (refer to Yūnus:88,
Saba’:35, al-Qalam:14, Maryam:77, al- Muddaththir:12, al-Muzzammil:11,
al-Ahqāf:11). In some cases they argued as to why God had not chosen his
messengers from amongst the angels, and as to why had the prophets not
been accompanied by angels. They also argued as to why had God not
provided the prophets with enough economical and financial support
(refer to al- An’ām:7-9, al-Isrā’:90-95, al-Furqān:4-8). On some
occasions, they went to the extent that they said:

“We will believe (in God) provided that the revelation is exposed to us,
or we see God and listen to His words directly” (refer to al-
Baqarah:118, al-An’ām:124, al-Nisā’:153).

### Threats and allurement

###

Another method of opposition that is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an is
that the various nations would threaten the prophets and their followers
with torture, and drive them out of their town or country by trying to
stone them to death or by other means of execution (refer to Ibrāhīm:13,
Maryam:46, Hūd:91, Yāsīn:18, Ghāfir:26). The infidels to the contrary,
allured the people by spending vast quantities of money, in order to
make them disobey the prophets (refer to al- Anfāl:36).

### Violence and murder

###

Finally, when the unbelievers faced the patience, tolerance, firmness,
and coolness of the prophets, (refer to Ibrāhīm:12) and realized the
seriousness and dedication of the prophets’ true followers, they lost
hope with their propaganda and other discouraging tricks and instead
made threats through violent means, which subsequently resulted in the
murder of many of the prophets (refer to al-Baqarah:61,87,91,
al-Māi’dah: 70, Āl-‘Imrān:21,112,181, al- Nisā’:155). This left the
society deprived of the greatest heavenly gifts and the most deserving
social leaders.

### Some heavenly approached in ruling societies

###

The main reason behind the mission of the prophets was to enlighten the
people concerning matters pertaining to this world and the Hereafter,
and through revelation to provide them with all the necessary proof of
His existence (refer to al-Nisā’:65, Tāha:134). However Almighty God due
to His endless mercy and most perfect wisdom provided the people with a
specific psychological background from which to accept the prophets’
invitation, at the time of their mission. Such a background also
assisted the development of the prophets’ movement. Moreover, since the
greatest reason for one’s infidelity and refusal of God, is the feeling
of being free from want (refer to al-‘Alaq:6) and ignorance concerning
the dominant and multi-sided needs of mankind, the most perfect Lord
prepared the situation so that the people were aware of their needs and
put their ignorance, pride, and selfishness aside. In so doing, the
Almighty God allowed the people to face certain problems and
preoccupations in order to make them discover their deficiencies and
turn towards Him (refer to al- An’ām:42, al-A’rāf:95).

However, those whose hearts were as hard as stone, as mentioned in the
Qur’an, were not affected by such problems due to their luxurious lives
and amassed wealth, and subsequently they did not accept the message
bought to them by the prophets (refer to al-An’ām:43, al-Mu’minūn:76)
thus continuing their ignorant and false way of life.

Such people were unaffected by the prophets’ warnings and advice and
accounted for any change in life of hardship into ease as the requisites
of life itself, and their ancestors had also experienced such
occurrences (refer to al-A’rāf:95). In this way, they continued their
oppression, accumulation of wealth, and developing of power.

They ignored the fact that increased wealth and other social merits
might in fact be a Divine trap and cause their misfortune in this world
and the Hereafter (refer to al- A’rāf:182-183, Āl-‘Imrān:178,
al-Tawbah:55,85, al-Mu’minūn:54-56).

Nevertheless, when the prophets reached the stage whereby they had
numerous followers, they were able to establish an independent society,
defend themselves and fight against the enemies of God under the mission
of Holy war (Jihād), (refer to Āl-‘Imrāan:146, al-Tawbah:14). If the
situation arose whereby it was impossible to fight against the
unbelievers, the people obeyed the prophets and left their society.

When all hope had faded of the unbelievers repenting, the punishment of
God plagued their societies in various ways (refer to al-‘Ankabūt:40).
This indeed is the ever- lasting approach of God in governing human
society (refer to Fātir:43, Ghāfir:85, Isrā’:77).

Questions
---------

1. What was the reaction of the people against the movement of prophets?

2. Explain the reasons and motivations behind the opposition against the
prophets.

3. What antagonistic methods did the opponents of the prophets employ
against them?

4. Describe the divine approaches with respect to the prophets’ mission
and people’s reaction against them.


