LESSON THIRY-ONE: THE PROPHET OF ISLAM
======================================

Introduction
------------

God had sent mankind numerous prophets in different eras and different
places. They have played an important role in guiding and training
people, by which they have left illuminating effects upon human society.
Every one of them, on the basis of true beliefs and exalted values,
trained special groups and also indirectly influenced those outside
these groups. Some of them were even successful in establishing a
monotheistic and just society and became their leaders.

Among them were Noah (a), Abraham (a), Moses (a), and Jesus (a), who all
conveyed Divine scriptures. These scriptures included a system of rules
for the individual and society, as well as ethical responsibilities and
laws in accordance with the requirements and conditions of time and
space. However, these scriptures either deteriorated completely or they
were literally and conceptually altered. Ultimately the Divine religions
and laws became distorted.

Likewise the Torah of Moses has been outrageously altered and nothing
remains of the Gospel (evangel) of Jesus, except the collective hand
written testaments by the associates of Christ, now known as the Holy
Bible.

Any individual with an open mind who looks into the testaments would
surely realise that none of them are the books that were revealed to
Moses or Jesus.

Moreover the Torah apart from characterising God as a man has also
regarded Him as regretting many of His actions. God is described as
wrestling with one of his servants (Jacob) and could not defeat him,
eventually imploring him to spare Him in order that the people would not
see their God in such a predicament! Other than these deviant tales, the
Torah also relates inconsiderate actions to the Divine prophets, such as
the fornication of David (a) with a chaste woman and as for Lot (a) it
says that he drank alcohol and fornicated with his daughter (far be this
act). Besides these accusations the illustrations of the demise of the
Prophet Moses - who brought the Torah itself - is mentioned within it.
These points are sufficient enough to understand that the Torah we have
now is not from Moses.

Nevertheless the state of the Bible is direr than that of the Torah, as
the Christians themselves agree that nothing of what was revealed to
Jesus remains, rather they have the synopsis of it, which are from the
companions of Jesus. Apart from legitimising alcohol, the Bible regards
it as a miracle of Christ!

It is thus clear and obvious that such distorted texts could in no way
be suitable for guiding mankind. However, to understand how and why
these deteriorations and alterations took place, one must look into the
detailed accounts mentioned, which cannot be discussed here.

In the sixth century after the birth of Christ, when the entire world
was filled with the darkness of ignorance and oppression and the torches
of guidance were dimmed, God sent the best of the prophets to the worse
of societies, in order to perpetuate the light of Revelation for
mankind. The Revelation was protected from any alteration and was to
remain with man. It

contained true knowledge, laws and order for the society, as well as
Divine Wisdom. Such information was to lead man towards the felicity of
this world and the next.

Imam Ali (a) in one of his sermons (Nahj al- Balagha, sermon 87)
describes the state of the world at the advent of Islam:

“Allah sent the Prophet (s) when the mission of other prophets had
stopped and the people were in slumber for along time. Evil was raising
its head; all matters were in disruption and in the flames of war, while
the world was devoid of brightness, and full of open deceitfulness. Its
leaves had turned yellow and there was absence of hope about its fruit,
while the water had gone underground. The minarets of guidance had
disappeared and signs of destruction had appeared. It was stern to its
people and frowned in the face of its seeker. Its fruit was vice and its
food was a carcass. Its inner dress was fear and its outer cover was the
sword.” From the time of the Prophet of Islam (s) the most important
subject for human beings has been the investigation of the reality of
the prophecy of the Prophet of Islam and the truth of the immaculateness
of the religion of Islam. The establishment of the authenticity of Islam
and the Prophet will consequently prove the reality of the Qur’an as
being the only Divine book present in its pure and unaltered form that
has remained in hands of man. This will also establish the recognition
of the true belief, value system and practical responsibilities in Islam
as being perpetual and as being the only solution for resolving the
problems of ideology and worldview.

The establishment of the prophethood of the Prophet of Islam (s)
----------------------------------------------------------------

In lesson twenty-seven we mentioned that the proof of prohethood is
established in three ways; firstly by studying the way of life of the
apostle through dependable sources, secondly through the prophecies of
the previous prophets and thirdly through the performance of miracles.

In the case of the Prophet of Islam, all three ways were accomplished,
as the people of Mecca had closely observed the life of the Prophet of
Islam for forty years and certified that he was perfect in every way.
They knew him for his unsurpassable character and righteousness and due
to this they called him the trustworthy (al-Amīn).

The probability of such a character being dishonest and fabricating a
false proclamation is not conceivable.

From another angle the previous prophets have informed of the nomination
of such a prophet and certain individuals from the People of the Book
(ahl al-kitāb) were anticipating his arrival. Even the Arabs from the
Ignorant era proclaimed that someone from the lineage of Ishmael (a)
would be nominated as a prophet and would correct the unitary religions
of the previous prophets.

On the basis of the clear signs and traditions some of the Jewish and
Christian scholars accepted Islam and believed in the apostleship of the
Prophet of Islam but others due to the lowly and satanic desires
rejected him as prophet. The Noble Qur’an in this regard has
mentioned:*“Is it not a sign for them that the learned Children of
Israel recognize it?”* (al-Shu’arā’:197).

Understanding about the Prophet of Islam through the scholars of Banī
Israel, on the basis of the prophecies of their prophets, provides clear
evidence for his apostleship.

This was an absolute and definitive proof for the People of the Book to
accept the prophethood of the Prophet of Islam. They had clearly
recognised the signs with their own eyes and could analyse the truth of
the prophecy of the Prophet of Islam through their own intellects.

Despite the distorted Bible and Torah, and the attempts to eradicate any
indication or prophecy regarding the Prophet of Islam, traces of
evidence can still be found, confirming the matter for those who seek
the truth. There are many Jewish and Christian scholars who while
looking for the truth, were guided through these remaining proofs and
accepted the pure religion of Islam.[1]

The Prophet of Islam further performed many miracles that have been
recorded in the books of history and the traditions and narrations
relating them have reached the level of certainty (mutawātir).[2]

Questions
---------

1- Describe the conditions of the books of the previous prophets?

2- Indicate a few points that illustrate the alteration of the Torah.

3- Describe the in-authenticity of the Bible?

4- Explain the importance of the prophethood of the Prophet of Islam.

5- What are the ways of establishing the prophethood of the Prophet of
Islam?


