LESSON THIRY-TWO: THE MIRCULOUS NATURE OF THE QUR’AN
====================================================

The Qur'an as a Miracle
-----------------------

The Noble Qur’an is the only Divine Book that openly and confidently
claims that none can bring a book of the same calibre. It asserts that
if all mankind and jinn work together to produce a book like it, they
will certainly fail. Furthermore not only would they fail in producing a
book like it, but they would not even have the ability to produce the
like of a single verse.

The challenge in the Qur’an to produce something similar to it, and the
inability of the people to do so, is considered as one of the proofs for
the prophethood of the Prophet of Islam (s) and also the Divine nature
of this Holy Book.

Therefore there should be no doubt over whether this Book is a miracle;
the Messenger himself introduces it as an eternal miracle and
everlasting proof of his prophecy.

From the initial outset of his mission the Prophet faced numerous
problems from those near and far from him, who tried their best to
destroy the message of Islam. In their failed attempts they ultimately
decided to kill the Prophet. Their plot however was divinely exposed,
and the Prophet and his companions migrated to the city of Medina.

After his migration, the Prophet spent his life engaged in battles
against the disbelievers. Indeed from that time until today the
hypocrites and enemies of Islam are trying to erase the message of
Islam.

The contemporary world regards Islam as the greatest threat and are
doing what they can financially, technologically and politically to
combat the spread of Islam.

However these great nations with all their resources have failed to
compose a verse of the like contained within the Holy Qur’an. Had they
been able to, they could have utilised their paramount technology of
propaganda and broadcasting to the world and been successful in their
mission. This method would also have been the most simple, effective and
inexpensive. On this basis every intellectual who is in search of the
truth can, by focusing upon the above-mentioned points reach the
certainty that the Qur’an is an exceptional and inimitable Book. As
no-one has managed to produce even the like of the smallest verse; the
Qur’an unquestionably has the substantiality of being a miracle. From
this angle it can be determined as the best argument for claiming the
truth of the Prophet’s message, and the authenticity of the pure
religion of Islam.

This Book is the greatest of all bounties for human society, as it has
been revealed with its eternal miraculous nature. The realisation of
this proof does not require any intellectual activity or specialisation
in knowledge, as it is understandable and acceptable by all individuals.

The miraculous aspects of the Qur’an
------------------------------------

By now we have an overall understanding of the Noble Qur’an; that it is
the speech of God and is miraculous in its nature. We will now expand on
some of its miraculous aspects.

### a. Its eloquence and rhetoric

###

The foremost miracle of the Qur’an is its eloquence and rhetoric
(expressiveness).

God the Supreme has utilised the best method, most beautiful words, and
rhythmical composition for explaining his objective on every level. The
selection of these words and their exquisite combination, which is
harmonious with the exalted and deep meanings, is only viable to someone
who has extended knowledge of all the particularities of the words and
their precise meanings and relationships with their opposites. In
addition they must have the ability to understand all the dimensions of
the word, and with the consideration of the indispensability of time and
space select the best words and style for expressing themselves. This
art of knowledge is not possible unless it comes through Divine
intuition and revelation.

The rhythmical beauty and the angelic nature are evident for all
individuals, and the artistic eloquence and rhetoric for those with
knowledge of the Arabic language is clear. However to discern that the
Qur’an is a miracle regarding its eloquence and rhetoric, requires a
philologist - an expert who is specialised in the distinctive arts of
speech and is therefore able to compare the Qur’an with different
eloquent and rhetorical speeches in order to realise its proficiency.
Such was the work of those proficient Arabic poets, who were highly
skilled in this art at the time of the descent of the Qur’an.

Divine wisdom and generosity requires that the miracle of every Prophet
should be according to the art and science of that period, in order that
the sublimity of the miracle is understood. The tenth Imam (a) was asked
by Ibn Sikkiyah, “Why has God the Supreme bestowed Prophet Moses (a)
with the miracle of transforming a staff into a snake, and Prophet Jesus
(a) with the miracle of curing the sick, and the Prophet of Islam (s)
with the miracle of the Noble Qur’an?” The Imam (a) replied:

“The art in the era of Prophet Moses (a) was sorcery, therefore God
bestowed him with a miracle that resembled sorcery and magic. At the
time of Prophet Jesus (a) the artistry was medicinal and hence he was
provided by the miracle of curing the sick, in order that its miraculous
aspect was known. However during the time of the Prophet of Islam (s),
the art was oratorical and centred around poetry, hence the Qur’an was
revealed in the best and most beautiful style so that its miraculous
nature would be recognised.” Bari, one of the greatest philologists, as
was Walid ibn Mughayrah, ’Utbat ibn Rabī’ah and Tafyl ibn Omar, has all
born witness upon the eloquence and rhetoric found in the Qur’an. After
almost a century had passed, Ibn Abi al-’Awjā’, Ibn al- Muqaffa’,
Abu-Shaker al-Dysani, and ’Abdul Mālik al-Basri decided to take up the
challenge of the Qur’an. They worked for a year and a half, but failed
to accomplish anything remotely resembling such eloquent beauty. Whilst
they were engaged in a meeting discussing their work, in the Masjid
al-Harām, Imam Sadiq (a) walked by and recited the following verse:“Say,
‘Should all humans and jinn rally to bring the like of this Qur’an, they
will not bring the like of it, even if they assisted one
another”(al-Isrā’:88)

### b. The illiteracy of its Messenger

###

The Noble Qur’an is a Book, which within its small voluminous capacity
encompasses the many different sciences, aswell as rules pertaining to
society and individuals. The investigation of each particular issue
requires a group of experts in order to arrive at an understanding of
its meaning and unveiling of its realities.

However a complete and perfect understanding of it is only possible
through someone who has Divine knowledge and is appointed by God.

This great Book includes the finest and greatest of all sciences, the
most significant and excellent prescription of morals, the ultimate
equitable and determined cannons on rights and judgement, the wisest
practices for worship and sociological rules, the best and most
beneficial counsels and lessons, precise historical educational points,
and the most constructive ways of teaching and training. In short, the
Qur’an simply contains all of the principles that are required by man to
attain felicity in this world and the next.

To bring forth such knowledge and reality in such an arrangement is far
beyond the possibility of a common man. Nevertheless, it is astonishing
that this great Book has been revealed through an individual who was
unlettered (never taught), and who had never placed a pen upon paper and
was brought-up in an atmosphere, which was far removed from civilization
and culture. It is also surprising that during the period of his forty
years (before being nominated as a Prophet) no-one ever heard his speech
in any way resembling the revelation, which he brought. During the
period of his apostleship his speech differed aswell to the revelation
he proclaimed. The revelation had a strange harmony and eloquence
compared to his speech, and this was noticeable by all men.

The Noble Qur’an mentions:“You did not use to recite any scripture
before it, nor did you write it with your right hand, for then the
impugners would have been skeptical”(al-‘Ankabūt:48) In another place it
mentions:

“Say, ‘Had Allah [so] wished, I would not have recited it to you, nor
would He have made it known to you, for I have dwelled among you for a
lifetime before it. Do you not apply reason?’ ” (Yūnus:16). And:“And if
you are in doubt concerning what We have sent down to Our servant, then
bring a sūrah like it” (al-Baqarah:23) This verse indicates the
miraculous aspect of the Qur’an, as there seems a significant
possibility that the pronoun of ‘like-it’ (mithl) returns to ‘Our
servant’ (’abdinā).

One might form the conclusion that this Book is the work created by the
collaboration of various groups of experts, but it could never be
assumed that such a work would be uttered from the lips of an unlettered
man.

Therefore, the coming of this book with all the proficiency mentioned
from an individual who received no formal education is in itself
self-evidently miraculous.

### c. Its harmony and lack of contradiction

###

The Noble Qur’an is a Book that has been revealed over the duration of
the twenty- three years of apostleship of the Holy Prophet. This was a
tumultuous period, yet these inconceivable circumstances and
transformations had no effect upon the method and miraculous nature of
the Qur’an. The harmony and proportionality of the Qur’an from the point
of

view of its form and meaning is also another aspect of its miraculous
nature and has been indicated in the very Qur’an itself:

“Do they not contemplate the Qur’an? Had it been from [someone] other
than Allah, they would have surely found much discrepancy in it”
(al-Nisā’:82) In explanation of the above, it can be said that every
human being goes through two different types of transformation. The
first is that gradually his knowledge increases which reflects in his
speech, and naturally this gives rise to distinction and contradiction
in his thought and understanding (which can clearly be defined in his
life span).

The second type of transformation is due to the different incidents that
take place during one’s life. They become the very reason for the
initiation of psychological, emotional and sentimental conditions, which
lead to hope, sadness, happiness, peacefulness, and absurdity. It is
these factors, which bring about changes in his thought, understanding
and speech. When these conditions mature they create contradictions, and
in reality the difference of speech is due to the transformations in
psychological conditions.

If it is assumed for a moment that the Noble Qur’an is the creation of
the Holy Prophet (s), who has been regarded to have gone through
transformations with the consideration of the different outward and
inward conditions of his life, then these transformations, which the
Prophet (s) has been through, must be reflected in the Book he has
brought. However no such evidence can be found in the Qur’an.

Hence we will conclude that the harmony and lack of contradiction in the
contents of the Qur’an represents its miraculous nature. It also
indicates that this honourable Book is the source of the eternal
knowledge of God the Supreme.

Questions
---------

1. Explain how the Qur’an proclaims itself to be a miracle.

2. Provide an overall proof for the miraculous nature of the Qur’an.

3. Is it possible to imagine that someone who could have produced a Book
like the Qur’an is unknown?

4. Explain the miraculous nature of the eloquent and rhetoric aspects of
the Qur’an.

5. Explain the importance of the relationship between the Qur’an and its
unlettered Messenger.

6. How does the lack of contradiction in the Qur’an reinforce it being a
miracle?


