LESSON THIRTY-FOUR: ISLAM IS UNIVERSAL AND ETERNAL
==================================================

Introduction
------------

So far it has been clearly understood that the belief in all prophets
and acceptance of their message is a necessity and the rejection of a
Prophet or of a message from a Prophet is paramount to rejecting the
Divine legislative lordship.

On this basis, once the prophecy of the Prophet of Islam (s) has been
proven, it is necessary to believe in him and in the revelation he
brought, and to accept the messages and rules delivered by him, from God
the Supreme.

However the belief in all prophets (a) and their books does not imply
that one has to comply with all their sacred laws. Although we may
believe in the previous prophets and their messages, this does not
obligate the implementation of all their laws.

It is the responsibility of every nation to follow and apply the laws
ordained to them by the Prophet of their time. Hence the application of
the sacred law of Islam for all of men would only be established when
the prophecy of the Prophet of Islam (s) was not particularised to the
Arabs. In addition to this, it is necessary the no Prophet appears after
the Prophet of Islam (s) who could bring abrogating laws. In other words
Islam has to be universal and eternal.

It is here necessary to discuss as to whether the Prophet of Islam (s)
was particularly assigned to the Arabs and for a limited time, or
whether he is indeed a universal Prophet for all time.

It is quite clear that this issue cannot be investigated by pure
intellect (‘aql), however one has to consider the techniques used for
the establishment of history and narration sciences (al-‘ulūm
al-naqliyyah), meaning that one must refer to documents, facts and
evidence. Moreover one who has arrived with certainty upon the
legitimacy of the Noble Qur’an and the infallibility of the Prophet of
Islam (s) will without doubt find the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah of the
Prophet (s) the most reliable source.

1. The universality of Islam
----------------------------

The universality of the religion of Islam is the most essential element
of this Divine religion. Even those who do not believe in Islam are
aware that the faith is perpetual and not limited to any geographical
location or race.

In addition to this we have numerous historical documents and proofs,
that the Noble Prophet (s) had dispatched several letters to Persian,
Byzantine, Roman, Egyptian, and Abyssinian rulers as well as to several
other tribal leaders, in order to invite them towards the Divine
religion. However if Islam was not universal and there were no universal
invitations dispatched by the Prophet of Islam (s), then there would
have been an excuse for other nations to reject Islam.

On this basis one cannot believe in the legitimacy of Islam without
associating it with the application of its Divine sacred law. Therefore
nobody is exempted from this belief.

### a. Qura’nic proofs for the universality of Islam

###

As indicated earlier, the best proof and the most reliable argument for
the establishment of such issues is through the Noble Qur’an, its
righteousness and creditability has been proven in the previous lessons.
Furthermore if someone reflects upon the verses of this Divine Book of
God, he would certainly realise that the invitation to embrace Islam is
universal and not specialised towards a specific race or language.

Throughout the Qur’an mankind has been addressed as: O people, or as: O
children of Adam (refer to al-Baqarah:21, al-Nisā’:1,174, Fātir:15), and
has referred to the guidance of all human beings (nās and ‘ālamīn). The
Qur’an also indicates the universality of the Prophet of Islam (saws)
for all men and invites all who are aware of him to follow his way. From
another standpoint, the followers of other religions are regarded and
addressed as the People of the Book, and the prophecy of the Prophet of
Islam is also proven to them. Moreover the purpose of the dissension of
the Noble Qur’an upon the Prophet is considered as the victory and
mastery of Islam upon other religions (refer to al-Saff: 9, al-Fath:28,
al-Tawbah:33).

By focusing upon these verses there should be no ground left to harbour
spurious doubts concerning the universality of Islam.

The Eternity of Islam
---------------------

The mentioned verses through the utilisation of common phrases establish
the universality of Islam. Similarly through being unconditional
regarding time it denies the limitation of Islam to a certain period,
and in particular remarks:" “It is He who has sent His Apostle with the
guidance and the religion of truth that He may make it prevail over all
religions” (al-Saff:9. see also al-Fath:28 and al- Tawbah:33).

In the following Qura’nic verse, one can establish the authenticity and
reliability of the Qur’an:

“Indeed it is an august Book: falsehood cannot approach it, from before
it nor from behind it, a [gradually] sent down [revelation] from One
all-wise, all- laudable” (Fussilat: 41-42).

Furthermore it proves the seal of prophecy upon the Prophet of Islam
(which will be discussed independently in our future lessons), and
nullifies any possibility of the abrogation of Islam through any other
Prophet or sacred law. We find several traditions in agreement with this
subject:

“Things made lawful by Mohammed are lawful until the Day of Judgement,
and things prohibited by Mohammed are prohibited until the Day of
Judgment.” (Al-KāfīVol.1 p. 57) In addition to this, the eternity of
Islam is similar to the universality of Islam.

Theologically both are considered axioms of faith teaching, and
therefore we do not need an extra argument apart from the arguments
which prove the authenticity of Islam.

The resolution of certain doubts
--------------------------------

The enemies of Islam in order to create hurdles for the spread of this
Divine religion have come up with the idea that Islam is particular to
the Arabs, and that it is not universal, however such claims fail to
have the slightest effect upon this universal and Divine religion.

They are under the pretext that the responsibility of the Noble Prophet
of Islam was towards only his kin, clan and for those who live in Mecca
and its neighborhood.

Furthermore verse 69 of chapter 5, al-Māi’dah, in the Holy Qur’an, after
characterising the Jews, Christians and the people of the Sabbath,
regards righteous acts as the criterion for felicity and not the
acceptance of Islam. In addition to this, the practical laws (fiqh) of
Islam recognise the People of the Book as compared to the idol
worshippers (polytheists). The People of the Book whilst paying an
exemption tax come under the protection of the Islamic state and may
practice unhindered, their sacred laws; therefore this in itself is a
sign of officially acknowledging their religion.

In response it must be stated that those verses, which mention the kin
and clan of the Noble Prophet, or which mention the people of Mecca and
its surrounds, are the verses, which were revealed at the advent of
Islam. At that time the call towards the truth initiated with the family
of the Prophet and then extended to the people of Mecca and around
Mecca, eventually encompassed the entire world. Moreover these verses
cannot be regarded as the determining factor for nullifying the
universality of Islam. This is because the formulation and tone of these
verses -proving the universality of Islam- are in a way that must remain
unconditional, and if there would be exemptions from these verses, it
would contradict the commonsensical methods of conversation used by
rational human beings.

However the mentioned verse (al-Māi’dah:69) explains that the sole
acceptance of any religion is not sufficient for attaining felicity, and
that the engendering factor for reaching eternal bliss is the
application of religious responsibility, which is the implementation of
righteous acts. Moreover God the Supreme assigns these righteous acts,
and as we have already proven the universality of Islam then the
responsibility of all men after the advent of Islam would be the
application of those responsibilities, which are prescribed by this
universal faith.

The recognition and preference given by Islam to the People of the Book
compared to other polytheistic religions does not mean that Islam has
excused them from accepting Islam. However in reality the leniency
provided is for the sake of the partial truth, which they believe in and
this leniency is only temporary according to Shi’ite theology. By the
time Imam Mahdi (a) appears (May Allah hasten his return) the final
decree with regards to the People of the Book will have been declared
and they will be treated just like the polytheists. This is concluded
from verses such as:

“It is He who sent His Apostle with the guidance and the religion of
truth that He may make it prevail over all religions” (al-Tawbah:33, see
also al-Fath:28 and al-Saff:9).

Questions
---------

1- Why should all men apply the sacred laws of Islam?

2- What are the Qura’nic proofs for the universality and eternity of
Islam?

3- Provide other reasons for the universality and eternity of Islam.

4- Explain those verses, which indicate that the Noble Prophet was
universally appointed, and not sent exclusively for the guidance of his
kin, clan, inhabitants of Mecca and its neighbourhood.

5- Explain verse 69 of chapter 5, al-Māi’dah!

6- Explain the reason behind the leniency towards the People of the
Book, but also how this does not excuse them from accepting the
universal faith.


