LESSON ONE: CONCEPT OF RELIGION
===============================

The purpose of this book is to explain the beliefs of Islam, known in
Islamic terminology as ‘The Principles of Religion’ (Usūl al-Dīn).
Before delving into this subject it is necessary to briefly define the
word ‘religion’. A definition in the art of Logic marks the beginning of
conceptualisation.

The Arabic word for religion is, ‘dīn’ and carries a lexical meaning of
obedience, reward and subjugation.

In technical terminology, religion means to have a belief in the
‘Creator’ of man and universe. The prescribed actions that accompany
such a belief also fall within this definition. Those who believe in a
creator, even if their beliefs are mingled with perversions and
superstitions are regarded as being ‘religious’. Those who consider the
universe to be merely accidental, resulting from an effect of a material
or natural cause are called ‘materialists’.

On this basis contemporary religions can be divided into true or false
religions. A true religion can be termed as a tradition, which holds
correct beliefs, which are consonant with the reality, and from which
emanates behaviour, which is expounded and intensified with the sense of
being right and secure.

The principles of religion and its branches
-------------------------------------------

By understanding the technical definition given to the word ‘religion’,
it becomes clear that religion can be divided into two major components:

1. The fundamental belief or beliefs, which are held to be the
foundation.

2. The practical rules, which are related to, and emerge from the
fundamental beliefs.

The section, which relates to the religious belief, is termed as its
‘principle’ (usūl), and the section relating to the practical rules are
known as its ‘branches’ (furū’).

Islamic scholars use these terms to identify these two categories.

### a. Worldview and Ideology

###

Worldview can be defined as being a series of universal and harmonious
beliefs concerning man and the universe.

Ideology can generally be taken to mean a series of universal and
harmonious views regarding human behaviour.

By consideration of the above, the term ‘worldview’ can be applied to
the ‘principles of belief’, and ‘ideology’ can be used in connection
with the branches or universal practical rules. It must be noted though,
that neither worldview nor ideology includes the particular aspects of
the principles or the branches. Also ideology can occasionally overlap
with worldview and include some of the latter’s meanings.

### b. Divine and Materialistic Worldviews

###

Throughout differing human societies, miscellaneous worldviews have
existed and exist. They can be divided into the ‘divine’ and the
‘materialistic’. A divine worldview is based upon the metaphysical
reality, whereas a materialistic worldview is not.

In the past, adherents to the materialistic worldview were known as
atheists (dahrī), naturalists (tabi’ī) and occasionally as dualists
(zindīq) or heretics (mulhid).

Contemporary materialism appears in various shapes and forms, the most
famous being ‘dialectical materialism’, which can be witnessed within
Marxist philosophy.

Through the course of this discussion it has become apparent that the
terms worldview and ideology can also be applied in a non-religious
context.

### c. Revealed religions and their principles

###

There have always been differing opinions amongst the sociologists,
anthropologists and religious historians with regards to the appearance
of religion. However from evidence found within Islam, the appearance of
religion is considered to be associated with the appearance of man. The
first man on earth was Adam (a), the Prophet of God, who came to
proclaim monotheism. The polytheism and distortion of the truth that we
see around us is the result of man following his own desires and not
adhering to the true guidance.

The monotheistic religions, also known as the ‘Revealed Religions’, have
three common fundamental principles:

1. Belief in One God.

2. Belief in eternal life in the hereafter, and the recompense of reward
or punishment for actions performed in this life.

3. Belief in the prophets of God sent to guide man towards perfection
and towards attaining felicity in this world and in the hereafter.

These three fundamental principles provide the answers to the following
questions, which could be asked by any intelligent person:

*Who is the creator?*

*What is the ultimate end?*

*From where does one seek guidance in living a righteous life?*

Such guidance has been secured through revelation (wahi), and is known
as that religious ideology which has manifested itself from within the
divine worldview.

The principles of religious belief are comprised of corollaries,
implications and details, differences of which lead to the appearance of
differing religions, sects and schools. Thus the difference in belief
over prophethood, can be seen in the principle of trinity (as with the
Christian belief), and the differences in belief over ‘Imamate’
(socio-political leadership), has led to differences of belief over the
principle of succession (which has divided Muslims into Sunnite and
Shiite).

The main point to consider is that monotheism (tawhīd); prophethood
(nubuwwah) and resurrection (ma’ād) are the fundamental principles for
all of the revealed religions.

Corollaries however can also be considered to be part of a fundamental
principle. For example, belief in the existence and unity of God is a
fundamental principle. Some Shiite scholars believe that justice (‘adl)
should be considered as a separate principle, but in reality it is
actually part of the first principle mentioned. Another example is that
of Imamate, which

some scholars consider as a principle in its own right, whereas in fact
it is just a continuation of the principle of prophethood.

On this basis the term ‘Principles of Religion’ can be categorized into
general and particular forms. The general use of the form, ‘principle of
religion’ is vis-à-vis ‘branches’ and the particular uses of the term
are for particular sects and beliefs.

The general form also includes the other revealed religions, which share
the three common principles (tawhīd, nubuwwah, ma’ād).

Questions:
----------

1. Explain the concept of religion from the lexical and terminological
point of view.

2. Define the terms worldview and ideology, and explain the differences
between them.

3. Briefly explain the two different kinds of worldview.

4. State the general and particular aspects of ‘The principles of
religion’.

5. What is the commonality between the revealed religions?


