LESSON THIRY-SEVEN: THE NEED FOR AN IMAM
========================================

Introduction
------------

Many of those who fail to contemplate or profoundly reflect upon the
issues pertaining to belief, understand that the only difference in view
between a Shi’ite and Sunnite on the issue of Imāmah, is that the
Shi’ite believe in the appointment of Ali ibn Abu Talib (a) as successor
to the Prophet (s) in issues dealing with the Islamic state and society.

However the Sunnites deny this appointment and believe the decision of
appointment was to be left up to the people. They thus selected the
first successor who in turn nominated the second, and the latter then
appointed a six-man counsel to establish the third successor. The people
then again elected the fourth Caliph themselves.

Hence it can be seen that no specific procedure was followed for the
nomination of successor. After the demise of the fourth Caliph, this
coveted position was gained by whoever was in possession of the
strongest military force.

The Shi’ites and Sunnites hold the same idea with regards to the
selection of an Imam, the Sunnites also believe in the idea of
nomination, as the first Caliph nominated the second. But the difference
is that they disregarded the Prophet’s order concerning the appointment
of Ali (a), yet accepted the first Caliph’s nomination of his successor.

They fail to contemplate the questions, which arise as to who gave the
first Caliph the right to appoint his successor? And why would the
Prophet overlook the appointment of a successor and guardian to his
community, whilst we know that whenever he left Medina for Holy war, he
would always leave someone in charge, as he was aware of the trouble and
conspiracies that could arise.

We need to examine as to whether the issue of Imāmah needs to be by
Divine appointment, whether it carries any religious status or whether
it is just a form of monarchy, which has developed due to sociological
factors.

The Shi’ites believe that in the case of Imāmah, the Prophet of Islam
does not have an independent say, and the nomination of an Imam is
directly from God through His Prophet. In reality there is wisdom behind
the termination of the chain of prophethood with the nomination of an
Infallible Imam, and there is a relationship between these two issues.
It is because of the presence of an Imam -after the demise of the
Prophet - that an Islamic nation is secured and safeguarded.

Therefore from here it becomes clear as to why Imāmah is considered as a
‘principle of belief,’ and not just as a branch of practical law (hukm
fiqhi). Moreover for the Shi’ites the three conditions of Knowledge,
Infallibility and Divine nomination are regarded as the essential
elements for an Imam.

The necessity of the existence of an Imam
-----------------------------------------

As previously discussed in lesson twenty-two, the accomplishment of the
purpose of creation is based upon the guidance provided by God through
revelation. The requirement of Divine wisdom was the nomination of

different prophets in order to enlighten man with the way of felicity
for this world and the Hereafter. In addition to this the prophets
trained man to reach the ultimate level of perfection, as well as
administering the society if the sociological conditions permitted.

Similarly, in lesson thirty-four and thirty-five we have explained that
the religion of Islam is universal, eternal and cannot be abrogated.
Besides, the Prophet of Islam is considered as the last Prophet and this
is harmonious with Divine wisdom, as the system of Islamic Law
(sharī’ah) fulfils all the needs of man and society for all time.

God, the Supreme, establishes this guaranty in regards to the noble,
Quran. The Quran has been referred as being protected from any type of
alteration and distortions.

However, all of ahkam (the rules) and regulations cannot be understood
by the appearance of the ayahs (verses) such as the number of rak’ahs
and the manner of performance of a salah or the obligations and
recommendation that it includes cannot be rationalized from the outward
of the Quran. The Quran is in a position of epitomizing the hukm and it
is the responsibility of the prophet to explain the hukm on the bases of
the knowledge provided by God, which is other than the Quranic
revelations. Hence by this approach the authenticity of the Sunna as a
fundamental source for the cognition of Islam is established.

Nevertheless the difficult conditions during the life of the prophet -
such as the confined years in the valley of Abi Talib or ten years of
wars with the enemies of Islam - did not allow him for the explanation
of all of rules for all men. That which remains with the companions even
have lots of differences for instance the manner of performing the wudhu
(minor ablution), which was an act carried out by the prophet every day
and several times is also subjected with differences. When this act of
performing wudhu which does not seem to have any reason for its
alteration have been altered by the conspirators then for sure major
alteration must have taken place in the ahkam (rules) that belongs to
law and order in order to benefit desires of different groups.

By focusing upon these points it becomes clear that the religion of
Islam will be known as a perfect religion - which attends to the all
needs of man - if it provides the society with the essential benefits
which are not consign and endangered after the demise of the prophet.
However this is only possible with the nomination of an individual who
deserve the position of being a successor to the prophet. This successor
must possess the divine knowledge and have the ability to manifest the
reality of deen in different dimensions and he must be unsinning
(ma’sum) in order not to be under the influence of his nafs and shaitan
so that there be no alteration in the deen. Furthermore he must play the
role of the prophet in training individuals to arrive upon perfection
and at the same time he should establish a government if the
sociological conditions provides the grounds for it. Then by applying
the sociological ahkam of Islam in the society he should expand the
realm of ’adl (justice) in the world.

Hence the termination of the chain of nabuwah is only harmonious with
the Divine hikmah when it is concurrent with the nomination of an Imam
al

ma’sum who have all the particularities that the prophet of Islam had
except the nabuwah and risalah.

In this manner (three things are established), the necessity for an
existence of an Imam and the requirement of the divine knowledge and
sinlessness (’ismah). In addition to this the nomination of an Imam
through God, the Supreme is also established as it He who knows to whom
He should give this status to. In actuality it is God who has the right
of wilayah (authority) over His creation and hence He can decide whom to
give this position on a lower level.

It is necessary that we mention that the ahl Sunna jammah does not have
these conditions and particularities for any of the khilafah and they do
not even claim that God and the prophet nominate the caliphs or they
(caliphs) possess any divine knowledge. On the other hand the ahl Sunna
jammah have recorded numerous precarious incidents in which their
caliphs have made mistakes in answering to the religious questions such
as they themselves quote their first khalifah saying:

“Certainly I have not defeated my shaitan.” Then from their second
caliph they have reported that he called the allegiance to the first
caliph as an absurd and uncalculated act and several times he has
declared that:

“If it was not for Ali, Omar would have been destroyed.” It is clearer
in the case of the khulafah al bany ummayah and abbasy and it does not
require that we indicate more, whosoever has a little information about
the Islamic history they can understand in this regard.

Shi’ites are the exclusive ones who belief that the twelve Imams enjoy
those three conditions of Imamat and by focusing upon the mentioned
reasons the need and necessity of Imamat has been established. Hence
there seem to be no need for any other elucidative arguments for this
issue, however in the future lessons we have brought useful proofs from
the kitab and the Sunna.

Questions
=========

1. Mention the Shi’ite opinion regarding Imāmah, and explain the
differences between the Sunnite and Shi’ite views?

2. Why does the Shi’ites consider Imāmah as one of the basic principles
of Islamic belief?

3. Why is the existence of an Imam necessary?

4. What can man conclude from these arguments?


