LESSON THIRTY-EIGHT: THE APPOINTMENT OF AN IMAM
===============================================

The appointment of an Imam
--------------------------

In the previous lesson we have explained that the termination of the
chain of prophecy without the nomination of an Imam is against Divine
wisdom. In order for the religion of Islam to be perfect, universal and
eternal it requires a successor - who possesses all the qualities and
realities of the Prophet, (except the station of prophethood and
messengership) - after his demise (the Prophet).

This can be extracted from the noble verses of the Qur’an and from the
many traditions, which are applied and utilised by both Sunnites and
Shi’ites:

“Today I have perfected your religion for you, and I have completed My
blessings upon you, and I have approved Islam as your religion”.
(al-Māi’dah:

3) The understanding with regards to the above verse is common between
the Sunnites and Shi’ites. This verse was revealed at the period when
the Prophet was returning from his last pilgrimage (hajj - known as hajj
al-wadā’). This happened to be just a few months before the demise of
the Prophet. After indicating the hopelessness of the infidels (kuffār)
in damaging Islam, it emphasizes on the fact that ‘today your religion
has been perfected and all the bounties upon you have been completed’.
In addition, by focusing upon many traditions with regards to the reason
of this verse, it becomes very clear that the perfection and completion
of bounties together with the hopelessness of the infidels in hurting
Islam is due to the very nomination of the successor of the Prophet
through God the Supreme and the Prophet. The infidels were waiting for
the death of the Prophet, with the understanding that he was not leaving
behind any son and thus assuming that Islam would be left without a
custodian, causing it to weaken and deteriorate. However through the
appointment of the successor the religion became perfect and God
completed His favour upon the Muslims and hence, the assumption of the
infidels was shattered.

When the Prophet of Islam returned from the last pilgrimage, he
assembled all of the pilgrims at a place called Ghadīr Khumm, where he
proceeded to deliver a detailed sermon. In his sermon he asks the
people:

“Do I have an authority (wilāyah) over you from God?” The response from
the people was positive, he raised the hand of Ali (a) and said:

“Whosoever I am the master of, then Ali is his master.” In this fashion
the Prophet declared that the Divine authority belonged to Ali (a).
Consequently each and every individual paid their allegiance to Imam Ali
and the second caliph ‘Umar paid allegiance in a congratulating manner:

“Congratulations, congratulations oh Ali you are the master of mine and
of all the believers.” It was on this very day, that this noble verse,
“This day I have perfected for you your religion and completed my Favour
upon you”, was revealed. Then the people present at Ghadīr shouted, ‘God
is great’ (Allahu Akhbar) and said:

“The prophethood has been completed and the religion of Allah is
perfected and Ali is the authority after you.” In some traditions of the
famous Sunnite authorities - such as Humweyni - it has been mentioned
that Abu Bakr and ‘Umar told Jaber to ask the Prophet (s) as to whether
this authority applied only to Ali (a). The Prophet (s) replied that the
authority was indeed only for Ali (a) and his successors until the Day
of Judgement. When questioned as to whom the successors of the Prophet
were, he (the Prophet) answered:

“Ali is my brother, minister, inheritor, successor, and the caliph of
this nation and he is the master for all the believers after me, and
then al Hassan and my son al Husayn, and then nine from the descendents
of my son al Husayn, one after the other. The Qur’an is with them and
they are with the Qur’an, there is no separation between them and they
will be no separation till they meet me at the Pond.” On the bases of
the traditions relating to this issue of nomination, we understand that
the Prophet had been ordered to announce the Imāmah of Ali. However, the
Prophet feared that the people might suspect that such a nomination was
made on a personal whim, and that it would not be accepted. On the other
hand he was waiting for an opportunity to present this idea, until the
verse it-self arrived:

“O Apostle! Communicate that which has been sent down to you from your
Lord, and if you do not, you will not have communicated His message, and
Allah shall protect you from the people.” (al-Māi’dah:67) This
revelation, which seems to be the most important of all and its
concealment would nullify the entire message, revealed that the Prophet
would be protected after its deliverance. After the arrival of this
verse the Noble Prophet understood that he should hasten with this
responsibility and deliver this message as soon as the opportunity
arose, and hence the afore mentioned event took place at Ghadīr Khum.

The aim of this event was to officially announce the successor of the
Prophet and gain public allegiance. However through the course of time
the succession of Ali had been mentioned on various occasions:

At the beginning of the advent of Islam, when the Prophet was ordered to
proclaim his message publicly, he was first told to warn those nearest
to him. He invited his family members to a meeting and said that the
first to accept his message would be his successor. All Muslims agree
that Ali was the first to accept Islam.

Likewise, when the following verse was revealed, the obedience to those
with authority (ūlī-l-amr) had been made absolutely obligatory and the
obedience of those with the authority is regarded to be at the same
level as obedience to the Prophet (s):

“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those vested
with authority among you.” (al-Nisā’:59) Jaber ibn Abdullah al-Ansari
asked the Prophet about those with authority, who replied:

“The First of them is Ali ibn Abi Talib, then al Hssan, then al Husayn
ibn Ali, then Ali ibn al Husayn, then Mohammed ibn Ali, known as Baqir
in the Torah -You will see him O Jaber, so give my Salams to him - then
Jafer al Sadiq ibn Mohammed, then Musa ibn Jafer, then Ali ibn Musa,
then Mohammed ibn Ali, then Ali ibn Mohammed, then Hassan ibn Ali, and
then

the one whose title is Hujjat Allah (Evidence of God) upon this earth….”
The prophesy of the Prophet came true, Jaber was alive till the period
of Imam al Baqir (a) and he delivered the Prophet’s salutations to the
fifth successor.

In another tradition Abu Basir narrates with reference to the verse of
authority, from Imam al Sadiq (a), that this verse was revealed in the
honour of Ali ibn Abi Talib, Hasan and Husayn (a). Abu Basir asked the
Imam how to answer people who argued as to why Ali (a) and the Prophet’s
household were not mentioned in the Qur’an by name. Imam Sadiq (a) told
him to:

“Tell them that, the verses revealed with reference to the prayers, did
not mention any names for the three and four rak’ah prayers, this was
indeed relayed to the people by the Prophet”. Likewise the Prophet
explained the verses of alms (zakāh) and pilgrimage (hajj), and
therefore he must also interpret the verse of authority. The Prophet
declared, “Of whomever I am the master, Ali is his master after me”. He
also advised the people to follow the Book of God and his Household and
asked God not to separate them until they meet at the Pond. This is
again mentioned in the famous Hadith Al-Thaqalayn, where the Prophet
told the Muslims how he was leaving behind him two weighty things; the
Book and his Household, who would never separate until they met him at
the Pond. He is also reported to have said:

“Do not teach them as they are wiser than you all and they will never
lead you astray”. In another famous tradition he mentioned that:

My Household is like Noah’s ark, whoever boards it has saved themselves,
and whoever does not has gone astray.” There are numerous traditions,
which support the aforementioned claims, but we do not have the space to
mention them here.

Questions
---------

1. Which verse refers to the appointment of Imāmah?

2. Explain the event, which took place for the nomination of Ali (a).

3. Why did the Prophet delay in announcing the appointment of Ali (a)
and how did he finally deliver the message?

4. Which traditions provide proof for Imāmah?

5. Provide some traditions that prove the Imāmah of the Prophet’s
Household.


