LESSON THIRTY-NINE: THE KNOWLEDGE AND THE INFFALIBILITY OF THE IMAM
===================================================================

Introduction
------------

In lesson thirty-six we have discussed the differences between the
Shi’ite and Sunnite schools of thought with regards to the subject of
Imāmah. This difference seems to have three specific issues, the Imam
for the Shi’ites, must be nominated by God the Supreme, be infallible
and possess Divine knowledge. In lesson thirty-seven these three issues
were intellectually proven and in lesson thirty-eight we have provided
traditional proofs for the divine nomination of the Imams. However, now
we will explain the infallibility of, and the Divine knowledge held by
the Imams.

The infallibility of the Imam
-----------------------------

Having established Imāmah as being a Divine institution, and the
appointment for this position of Ali (a) and his progeny by God the
Supreme, their infallible nature can be established by the following
verse:

“He said, ‘My pledge does not extend to the unjust.” (al-Baqarah:124)
The Divine nomination applies to those who are free from corruption and
sin.

Furthermore the verse known as the verse of ‘those in authority’,
charts-out the absolute obedience due to them and regards the level of
obedience to them as being on the same level as obedience to the Prophet
(s) and God the Supreme. Therefore the command of obedience towards
those in authority must indicate their infallibility.

In the same manner, the infallibility of the Prophet’s Household can be
proven through the verse known as the verse of ‘purification’ (āyat
al-tathīr):

“Indeed Allah desires to repel all impurity from you, O people of the
Household, and purify you with a thorough purification.” (al-Ahzāb:33)
It is necessary to mention that we have more than seventy traditions
from the Sunnite school, confirming that this particular verse was
revealed in honor of the ‘five immaculate ones’ (al-khamsa ashāb
al-kisā’). Sheikh Saduq narrates from Imam Ali that the Prophet of God
said:

“O Ali! This verse has been revealed for you, Hassan, Hussain, and the
Imams who will come from your progeny.” I asked him:

“How many Imams will be there after you?” He said:

“You! O Ali and after you Hassan, and after him Hussain, and after him
his son Ali, then his son Mohammed, then Ja’far, then Musa, then Ali,
then Mohammed, then Ali, then Hassan, then his son the proof of God”.

After this he added:

“This is how their names have been written upon the Divine Throne and I
asked God the Supreme whose are these names? He said “O Mohammed they
are the Imams after you and they have been purified from sin and their
enemies have been cursed by Me.” Likewise in the tradition of the two
weighty things (thaqalayn), the Prophet had regarded his Household as
carrying the same weight as that of the Holy Qur’an, and has emphasized
on

the fact that they will never separate. This in itself is a proof for
the infallibility of the Prophet’s Household.

The Knowledge of the Imam
-------------------------

It is without doubt that the Household of the Prophet were more
acquainted with the knowledge of the Prophet than other men were. The
Prophet himself has said:

“Do not teach them as they are more knowledgeable than you.” Imam Ali
was with the Prophet’s from the very young age and was brought up in his
house and he remained with the Prophet until the last minute of his (the
Prophet’s) life, thus culminating and absorbing knowledge directly from
him. Hence the Prophet said:

“ I am the city of knowledge and Ali is the gate,” and Imam Ali is
quoted as saying “ The Prophet of God taught me a thousand doors of
knowledge, each one opening a thousand other doors (for every door he
taught) and I learnt everything…” However the knowledge of the Imams was
not limited to that taught by the Prophet.

They were also bestowed with Divine knowledge and taught the secret
sciences in an intuitive manner. These particular methods of instruction
have been mentioned in the Qur’an as with the cases of Khizr (a), Dhul
Qarnayn, Mary (a) and the mother of the Prophet Moses (a). It has been
defined as revelation but different to the kind of revelation received
by the prophets. The infallible ones, even from a very young age were
bestowed with knowledge of these sciences and were needless of any form
of education from others, and were qualified to be Imams, even in their
childhood.

This issue can be understood from many traditions of the Imams, and
whilst focusing upon their infallibility the authenticity of those
traditions can be established. However before mentioning any examples,
we would first like to refer to a verse in the Noble Qur’an, which
regards the importance of an individual or individuals who have
‘knowledge of the book’:“Say, ‘Allah suffices as a witness between me
and you, and he who possesses the knowledge of the Book”. (al-Ra’d:43)
There is no doubt in the understanding of the greatness of the station
of those who have the knowledge of the book, as it is a clear and
certain fact that their testimony is parallel to that of God the
Supreme. It has been referred to in another Qur’anic verse, and it is
stated that Imam Ali is to be counted after the Prophet:“Is he who
stands on a manifest proof from his Lord, and whom a witness of his own
[family] follows?”(Hūd:17). The word “from him” indicates that this
witness is actually one of the Prophet’s relatives and a member of his
household. There are dozens of narrations from both the Sunnite and
Shi’ite sources stating that this witness is Ali bin Abi Tālib. Some of
these narrations are as follows:Ibn Al-Maghazeli Al-Shafi’i narrated
from Abdullah ibn ‘Ata, that: I was sitting with Abi Ja’afar (Imam
Baqir) when Abdullah ibn Salam passed by us (Abdullah was one of the
people of the book who converted to Islam during the time of the
Prophet), I said:m Is this man the son of he who was described as
possessing the knowledge of the book?

He said: No, it is your friend Ali bin Abi Taleb, about whom many
Qur’anic verses were revealed, such as: “and he who possesses the
knowledge of the book”(al-Ra’d:43.)“Is he who stands on a manifest proof
from his Lord, and whom a witness of his own [family] follows?”(Hūd:
17). “Your guardian is only Allah, His Apostle, and the faithful”
(al-Māi’dah :55) There are also many narrations from both schools of
thought (Shi’ite and Sunnite), which state that the use of the word
“Shāhid” in the Qur’anic chapter Hūd, verse 17, actually refers to Imam
Ali (as). When we reflect upon the word used “from him”, we realise that
it can only refer to him.

We can understand the importance of possessing the knowledge of the Book
when we read the story of Solomon and the summoning of the throne of
Bilquis. The Qur’an has mentioned: “The one who had knowledge of the
Book said, ‘I will bring it to you in the twinkling of an eye”
(al-Naml:40) From this Qur’anic verse one is able to recognise that if
this miraculous effect can be achieved through possessing partial
knowledge of the Book, then how great is the power of those whom possess
complete knowledge. Imam Sadiq (a) has referred to this fact in another
narration:

“I, Abu Basir, Yahya Al- Bazzaz and Dawud ibn Kathir were in the
reception room -‘majlis’, of Abu Abdullah (a), when he came out to us in
a state of anger. He took his place and said: “How strange it is that
some groups claim that we know the unseen.

No-one knows the unseen but Allah; to whom belong Might and Majesty. I
had intended to bear my female slave, but she fled from me and I did not
know in which room of the house she was.” Sadir said: “But when he stood
up from the ‘majlis’ and went into his private quarters, I, Abu Basir
and Maysar went in and said to him: ‘May we be made your ransom, we
heard you say this and that about the matter of your female slave, and
we know that you have a very broad and extensive knowledge, but we do
not attribute knowledge of the unseen to you.’” He said: ‘Have you found
in what you have read of the Book of Allah, to Whom belong Might and
Majesty: Said he who possessed knowledge from the Book: “I will bring it
to thee, before ever thy glance returns to thee (al-Naml:40)?’” He said:
“I said: ‘May I be made your ransom, I have read it.’ He said: ‘Did you
understand who the man was? Did you know how much of the knowledge of
the Book he possessed?’” He said: “I said: ‘Tell me about it.’ He said:
‘It was the amount of a drop from the deep blue sea of knowledge, but
what portion of the knowledge of the Book was that?’” He said: “I said:
‘May I be your ransom, how little that IS!’ then he said: ‘O Sadir, how
much is it! (unless it be that) Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty,
compares it to the knowledge which I shall tell you about, O Sadir, have
you also found in what you have read of the Book of Allah, to Whom
belong Might and Majesty:

Say: “Allah suffices as a witness between me and you, and whosoever
possesses knowledge of the Book” (Ra’d:43)? He said: “I said: ‘Yes, I
have read it, may I be your ransom.’ He said: ‘Is he who possesses
knowledge of the Book, (but only) some of it?’ I said: ‘No, rather he
who possesses knowledge of the Book, all of it.’” He said: “Then he
pointed with his hand to his chest and said: ‘The knowledge of the Book,
by Allah, all of it, is in our possession; the knowledge of the Book, by
Allah, all of it, is in our

possession.’” (p.252- 254 vol. 1 al-Kāfi al-Usūl - Part 2, the book of
divine proof III) Now we will present some narrations with regards to
the knowledge of the Prophet’s Household: In a along narration Imam Rida
(as) said: “Verily, when Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty,
selects a slave for the affairs of His slaves, He expands his breast for
it; He entrusts to his heart the fountains of wisdom, and profoundly
inspires him with knowledge. So after this, he does not stammer in
answers, and he does not deviate from the truth in them. Thus he is
infallible, supported by Allah; he is accommodated to the right path,
his steps being firmly guided; he will be safe from errors, slips and
stumbling. Allah distinguishes him by this, because he is His Proof over
His slaves, and His witness over His creatures - ‘that is the bounty of
Allah, He gives wisdom to whom He will, and Allah is of bounty
abounding’ (al-Hadīd:21, Jum’ah:4) “’ So, do they have the power to do
the like of this, so that they can choose him? Or can the one that they
choose have this attribution so that they may prefer him?” (p.103-104,
vol. 1 al-Usūl - Part 2, book of divine proof II).

Also from Al-Hassan ibn Yahya Al-Mad’ini from Abi Abdullah (s), who
said: I asked the Imam: Tell me how would an Imam be able to answer any
question? He replied: Inspiration, revelation or perhaps both.” (Bihār
al-Anwār vol.26 p.58) And in another narration, Imam Sadiq (a) said:” An
Imam who does not know what will happen to him and how his life will
pass, is not a person who can be the proof of Allah over His creation.”
(al-Kāfi, p.261 vol. 1 al- Usūl - Part 2, book of divine proof III) ” It
has also been mentioned in many narrations, that Imam Sadiq has said:
“Verily when the Imam wishes to know (something), he knows it.” And in
other narrations Imam Sadiq was asked about the Qur’anic revelation:
‘Even so, We have revealed to thee a spirit of Our bidding’. He said it
is one of the created things of Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty,
it is greater than Jibrai’īel and Mīkā’īl. It was with the Messenger of
Allah (s); it informed him and directed his steps, and it is with the
Imams after him.” (al-Kāfi, p.307, vol. 1 al-Usūl - Part 2, book of
divine proof IV).

Questions
---------

1. Mention the Qur’anic verses by which one can prove the infallibility
of the Imam.

2. Mention the narrations, which prove the infallibility of the Imam.

3. What are the special channels from which the Imam can receive
knowledge?

4. Who are the people who possessed a similar type of knowledge in the
past?

5. Which Qur’anic verse proves the Imam’s knowledge? How would you argue
using it?

6. Clarify the importance of the knowledge of the book?

7. Mention an example of the narrations referring to the Imams’
knowledge.


