LESSON FORTY-ONE: THE IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING DAY OF JUDGEMENT
==================================================================

Introduction
------------

In the beginning of this book we have already discussed the importance
of investigation into religion and have charted out the fundamentals of
belief (tawhīd, nubuwwah, and ma’ād).

We have also explained that in order for a person’s life to be truly
human, it must correctly resolve these issues. Theology, Prophethood and
Imāmah have all so far been discussed. Now the important issue of
Resurrection will be covered under the title of ‘Understanding the Day
of Judgement’.

Firstly, we will discuss the importance and the effects of this
fundamental belief upon the actions of individuals and upon human
society. We will explain the correct understanding of Resurrection
(ma’ād), which is dependent upon accepting the spirit as being
immaterial and eternal in the same manner as ontology necessitates
acceptance of the Oneness of Being. In the like manner knowing the
nature of the human being is also incomplete without the belief of the
spirit being eternal. Finally the issues of Resurrection will be
appropriately investigated in this section of the book.

The significance of believing in the Resurrection
-------------------------------------------------

The incentive for activity in man’s life is to fulfil his needs and
necessities, accomplish different desires, and eventually arrive at pure
felicity (sa’ādah) and ultimate perfection (kamāl). The limited work
that he does is based upon that goal he is trying to achieve in life.
Therefore knowing the ultimate goal has a major influence in giving
direction to human activity and preferences. In reality it is the true
factor that gives direction and vision to man to realize his own reality
towards perfection and felicity. Those who believe that they are only a
composite of matter and accept that life is limited to only the material
plane, do not give importance to the acquisition of fruits of perfection
and felicity in this life, and they consequently direct their life in a
way, which will reap benefit in this world alone. However those who
believe that their reality is more than just a material phenomenon and
believe that death is not the end of life but rather a means of
transformation for arriving at eternal felicity and perfection due their
action, direct their lives in an entirely different direction. Their aim
is to acquire the most out of this life, through their actions for their
eternal life.

As well, they do not despair with the difficulties of this life, and
they are thus not hindered from carrying out their responsibilities
towards achieving felicity and perfection.

The effects of these two differing perspectives on life are not limited
to only a few individuals, but to the whole society and the behaviour of
humans with respect to each other. Believing in life after death has a
major effect upon fulfilling the rights of the other. A society with
this outlook is less likely to foster oppression and needs to exert less
effort to execute justice. Furthermore if this belief becomes universal
and extends to different societies, the enigmas of the world would
eventually be solved.

While focusing upon these points the importance of investigating the
principle of Resurrection will be clearly understood. Even the effect of
the belief in the Unity of God, by itself, is not sufficient for
attaining a prosperous life. It is for this reason that the Divine
religions especially Islam, have centred upon this fundamental
principle.

All the different prophets of God have struggled to imprint the accurate
reflection of this principle on to the hearts of the people.

Belief in the Hereafter will only give benefit and direction to mans
life, if there is a causational (’illiyyah) relationship between the
actions of man and the felicities of the Hereafter. Furthermore the
rewards and punishments of the Hereafter must be recognized as the
result of the good and bad actions of this world. Consequently, if it
were believed that such bounties could be achieved in this very world,
then belief in the next and eternal life would not set out for us a path
in this life. If this belief were maintained, it would result in one
aiming for the bounties of this life in this world and the bounties of
the next life in the next world!

Hence, it is thus imperative that while establishing the principle of
Resurrection, we prove the causational relationship between this life
and the next and that the actions of this life have a direct influence
on the next life.

The importance given by the Qur’an to the issue of Resurrection
---------------------------------------------------------------

More than one fourth of Qur’anic verses mention the life of the
Hereafter. They can be divided into groups as follows:

1. The first group emphasises the necessity of faith in the Hereafter.

2. The second group of verses are associated with the denial of faith
and the Hereafter.

3. The third group classify the eternal bounties.

4. The fourth group refer to the everlasting chastisements.

Likewise in several verses, the relationship between the good and bad
actions and their results as well as the necessity of Resurrection
through different methods have been emphasised upon and explained. The
doubts concerning the Hereafter are explained and answered and it is
shown that denial of the Hereafter is the very reason for the corruption
and deterioration of societies and civilisations.

When focusing on the Qur’anic verses it becomes clear that most of the
debates and discussions of the prophets with the people were over the
issue of Resurrection.

Moreover, their struggle for establishing the principle of Resurrection
was greater than that for the establishment of the reality of the Unity
of the Creator, because of the fact that the majority of people
exhibited reluctance in accepting this principle. The reasons for this
reluctance can be epitomised in two factors:

Firstly, denial of the Unseen and the unknown, and secondly denial of
the Resurrection itself. This results in mankind inclining towards
irresponsibility, perversion and immorality. As it has earlier been
indicated, believing in Resurrection and giving account of the actions
performed in this life is the absolute factor for the recognition of
responsibilities,

acceptance of behavioural limitations and protection against corruption
and oppression. By denying this principle, the way for lust, desire, and
egotism will be open.

The Noble Qur’an while indicating this factor mentions:

“Does man suppose that We shall not put together his bones? Yes indeed,
We are able to proportion [even] his fingertips! Rather man desires to
go on living viciously.” (al- Qiyāmah:3-5) This very characteristic of
denial and refusal of Resurrection in the real sense can be found in the
sayings and writings of those who interpret the Qur’anic terminology of
Resurrection and the Hereafter, to be a phenomenon of this material
world. The reason for this interpretation is to institutionalise a
classless society and to construct a society that is heaven on earth,
and to make the Hereafter and its concepts appear to be imaginary.

The Noble Qur’an has termed such individuals as evil human beings
(shayātīn al- ins), and enemies of the prophets, who by their deceptive
talks destroy the faith of the people, resulting in their irresponsible
behaviour towards the Divine rules.

“That is how for every prophet We appointed as enemy the devils from
among humans and jinn, who inspire each other with flashy words,
deceptively. Had your Lord wished they would not have done it. So leave
them with what they fabricate so that toward it may incline the hearts
of those who do not believe in the Hereafter, and so that they may be
pleased with it and commit what they commit” (al-An’ām:112- 113).

Conclusion
----------

In order to achieve and arrive at the eternal felicity and perfection,
man must contemplate upon the following:

1. Does the life of man terminate with his death or is there a life
after death?

2. Does the transformation of man from this life to the other life
resemble travelling from one city to another in this life, whereby one
can obtain the goods required in the city travelled to? Or does the
other life depend on the groundwork set forth in this life?

Unless these issues are solved, the chance for organising and directing
ones life towards a goal will not arrive, because if one does not know
his destination one will never recognise the path for arriving at it.

While concluding we would like to make the point, that no matter how
weak the possibility of the other life may be, it is sufficient enough
for an intellectual and sensible individual to investigate the issue of
Resurrection.

Questions
---------

1. Explain the differences between the actions of man and his direction
of life with the understanding of believing and not believing in
Resurrection.

2. What important role does belief in the eternal life play in man’s
life?

3. Explain the importance given by the Noble Qur’an to the issue of
Resurrection.

4. Explain the reasons for the denial of Resurrection.

5. Give the example used in the Noble Qur’an for those who deceive
people over the concepts and realities of Resurrection.

6. What is the need for investigating the issue of Resurrection?


