LESSON FORTY-FOUR: PROVING RESSURRECTION
========================================

Introduction
------------

It was indicated in the beginning of this book that belief in
Resurrection for every individual on the Day of Judgment is the most
fundamental belief of the Divine religions. The prophets (a) and saints
have emphasized upon this fundamental principle, endeavouring at lengths
to establish it. The Qur’an regards this belief as being as important as
belief in Divine Unity. In various Qur’anic verses the words ‘Allah’ and
‘Day of Judgement’ have been used together.

In the beginning the importance of investigating the issue of
resurrection was discussed. We have already explained how a true
understanding of resurrection is dependent upon the acknowledgement of
the spirit, which is the criterion for the reality of man. This reality
is eternal in such a way that when he is raised on the Day of Judgment
one would say that it is the same individual who had died and is raised
back to life.

We then established the proofs for this kind of spirit from the Qur’an,
and presented an intellectual view so that the grounds for understanding
the eternity of life for man are understood. Now we have reached the
point where it is time to establish the most important fundamental
principle of belief, which will be proved in the similar manner utilized
for proving the spirit. First we will discuss the intellectual reasons
for resurrection and then we will convey the Qur’anic explanation in
regard to it.

Proving Resurrection through Wisdom
-----------------------------------

In the section on theology we have explained that the creation of man is
not meaningless or without aim. God is essentially perfect and good, and
His creation receives such goodness. We then recognised that God has the
quality of Wisdom and we understood that the purpose of this was to
recognize the purpose of creation, which was that creation would reach
its own ultimate perfection. Although the material world acts as an
impediment and the goodness and perfection of the material existents
conflict with each other, the requirement of Divine wisdom is that the
achievement of perfection and goodness must surpass such imperfections.
In other words:

The circle of nature has been created in such a way so as to promote
life. The action and the reaction have been organized in such a manner
that the earth encourages the growth of the plant, animal, and human
(who are the most perfect of all) kingdoms. If this was not the case and
the material world was created in such a way that it did not promote
life, it would have been against such Wisdom.

Now we will intensify our argument. We know that man has an eternal
spirit and the ability to acquire eternal perfection, but if it was
assumed that man was here only to achieve material perfections which are
limited only to the material world, then this is not then in resonance
with Divine Wisdom. This is especially so, when we consider how the
material world is full of pain and where in order to achieve limited
pleasure one has to endure much suffering. Furthermore the suffering and
pain that one goes through is not

usually worth the limited pleasure that one achieves. Due to this very
limited calculation, many people became hedonistic, or certain
individuals committed suicide despite the love that they had for life
and eternity.

If life consisted only of going through social, financial, and physical
difficulties with the result of momentary pleasure followed by the
aftermath of exhaustion, which requires rest in order to regain strength
for yet again the same repetition, a vicious circle is formed, which is
unacceptable to the intellect. An example of this pattern would be like
a driver who fills up the petrol tank of his car, only in order to
arrive at another petrol station, this then continues until the car
breaks down or another obstacle brings an end to it.

It is apparent from a logical analysis that such a life is absurd, also
to reinforce the argument, is the fact that man has within him the
intrinsic love to be eternal, which has been placed within him by the
Creator. He has also been endowed with the energy to accomplish this
eternal goal, which encourages and motivates him towards its
accomplishment. If we suppose that this human being during his ultimate
development towards his Creator is going to fail whatever the case, then
there is no wisdom in motivating and encouraging him towards a doomed
destination. Therefore the placement of such a tendency within man is
not at all compatible with the Divine wisdom of God.

The result that can be discerned from these two premises - of Divine
wisdom and the possibility of eternal life for man - is that there must
exist another life for man, which must be different from this life where
he experiences trouble and limited pleasure.

Furthermore the intrinsic tendency for the love of eternal life can also
be considered as another premise, which can be combined with the
principle of Divine wisdom and utilised as an argument for proving
resurrection.

Hence, it becomes clear that eternal life must be very different when
compared to this life, which is comprised of pain and sorrow. If this is
not the case and even if this very life is eternal, it would not be
harmonious with the Divine wisdom of God.

Proving Resurrection through Justice
------------------------------------

In this world man is free to choose between the good and the bad. From
one side one will find people who have served their life worshiping God
and serving human beings and from another side one will see tyrants and
oppressors who for achieving their desires, oppress people and commit
crime. The purpose for the creation of man, whilst providing him with
all the necessary mechanisms and productive grounds for developing, is
that he independently chooses truth over falsehood. By doing so, he
arrives at the fruit of his action for which he has wrought much pain.
In reality man’s life is solely for arriving at the reality of his
nature, which he does through the means of different tests. Even until
the last moment of his life he is accountable for even the smallest of
his responsibilities.

However we see in this world that the tyrants, oppressors and corrupt do
not arrive at the fruit of their action and on the other hand they
possess a higher share of the bounties (luxuries) of this world. For
example: a criminal who commits several murders and numerous acts of
crime may only be

prosecuted once and executed. This is against the Justice of God. The
reason for this is that the requirement of justice is that there should
be a different punishment for every crime committed, whether that crime
is minor or major. Therefore, as this world is filled with tests and
responsibilities, there must be another world where the result of these
tests and responsibilities is received, so that the Justice of God is
manifested. Therefore it becomes clear that that the next world is not a
place of choice or responsibility. We will discuss this in future
lessons.

Questions
---------

1. Explain the relationship between Divine Wisdom and creation.

2. Explain the proving of Resurrection through wisdom with two premises.

3. What other points can be understood from the premises used for the
proof of the principle Resurrection?

4. What is the purpose of creation?

5. Explain the argument for Justice.

6. What key points can be derived from the argument for Justice?


