LESSON FORTY-FIVE: RESSURECTION IN THE QUR’AN
=============================================

Introduction
------------

The noble verses of the Qur’an in regard to the argumentation with the
infidels in order to establish Resurrection can be divided into five
different groups:

1. The verses that emphasise that there is no evidence for the denial of
the existence of Resurrection. These verses nullify the arguments of the
infidels.

2. The verses that indicate the resembling phenomena of Resurrection in
order to distinguish it as a principle.

3. The verses that eliminate the confusions of the infidels in regard to
Resurrection, establishing its possibility.

4. The verses that prove Resurrection through the authentic traditions
and consider it as a Divine inevitable covenant that will take place.

5. The verse, which indicates the intellectual arguments for the
necessity of Resurrection.

The first three groups are in reality indicating the possibility of
Resurrection and the last two points to the occurrence and necessitation
of it.

Denial of Resurrection is baseless
----------------------------------

One of the Qur’anic ways of rejecting the false beliefs of the infidels
is by citing their assumptions in order to highlight them as being
baseless, illogical and absurd. It is mentioned in the Qur’an:

“Say, ‘Produce your evidence, should you be truthful’”(al- Baqarah:111,
al-Naml:64) In a similar manner the Qur’an says that those who have
false belief have no intellectual basis, but rather only a hypothetical
belief.

“They say, ‘There is nothing but the life of this world: we live and we
die, and nothing but time destroys us’ But they do not have any
knowledge of that, and they only make conjectures.” (al-Jāthiyah: 24)
Likewise in other verses this type of emphasis has been made, denying
Resurrection is absurd but it is possible that it can be based upon
hypothetical arguments due to low desires of the soul. This in the
course of time might manifest itself as a belief and one could persist
in believing it.

“They swear by Allah with solemn oaths that Allah will not resurrect
those who die.

Yes indeed, it is a promise binding upon Him, but most people do not
know” (Al- Nahl:38) The Noble Qur’an mentions the allegations of those
who disregard the Resurrection and indicates certain weak arguments,
which are based on doubt and perplexity.

“It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six days -and His
Throne was [then] upon the waters- that He may test you [to see] which
of you is best in conduct.

Yet if you say, ‘You will indeed be raised up after death,’ the
faithless will surely say, ‘This is nothing but plain magic’” (Hūd:7)
Due to this very reason the Qur’an reminds the disbelievers of
resembling phenomena, in

order that they do not distance themselves from the reality of
Resurrection. On the other hand it also answers the arguments raised to
eliminate any doubt. The Qur’an does not stop here, but also brings the
intellectual arguments to prove this covenant of God and its necessity
in the following lessons.

Phenomena resembling Resurrection
---------------------------------

### a. Plant life

###

The coming back to life of a human being after death is similar to the
sprouting of plants from the earth after a dry winter. Contemplation on
this phenomenon, which occurs in front of all human beings, is
sufficient enough to believe in the possibility of life after death. In
reality this phenomenon is no different from that of life after death
but due to man’s forgetfulness and in his being accustomed to or immune
to this phenomenon, man has neglected to remember its uniqueness.

The Noble Qur’an in order to lift this veil repeatedly reminds man of
this phenomenon and compares it with the coming back to life of humans.
The Qur’an mentions in one of its noble verses: “So observe the effects
of Allah’s mercy: how He revives the earth after its death! Indeed He is
the reviver of the dead, and He has power over all things” (al-Rūm:50)

b. The sleep of the people of cave
----------------------------------

After mentioning the mysterious story of the people of the cave, which
has many lessons, the Qur’an says:

“So it was that We let them come upon them, that they might know that
Allah’s promise is true, and that there is no doubt in the Hour.” (al-
Kahf:21) It is without doubt that the fact of this incident whereby a
few men awaken after three hundred or so of sleep can have a significant
import on dealing with the spurious arguments with regards to
Resurrection. Nevertheless, every sleep of a man resembles death and
every awakening is a coming back to life. However in our regular sleep
the physiological mechanism continues to function and the return of the
spirit when we wake-up does not astonish us. But for someone who slept
for three hundred years without utilizing any (form of) food according
to the biological make-up must die and deteriorate without allowing the
spirit to return.

Therefore, the incident of the people of the cave is incredible and
influences man to focus upon the metaphysical realm and realise that the
return of the spirit to the body is not only dependent upon the outward
and natural conditions but rather it’s a metaphysical reality. Hence the
life after death may be irrelevant for the outward natural system of
life and death in this world but it is not impossible, as it is a Divine
covenant that will take place.

### c. The coming back to life of certain animals

###

The Noble Qur’an indicates the coming back to life of certain animals,
such as that of four birds in the hands of the Prophet Abraham (a), and
the donkey of a Prophet, whose story will follow. However the verse
mentioned in the Qur’an is: “And when Abraham said, ‘My Lord! Show me
how You revived the dead,’ He said, ‘Do you not believe?’ He said, ‘Yes
indeed, but

in order that my heart may be at rest.’ He said, ‘Take four of the
birds. Then cut them into pieces, and place a part of them on every
mountain then call them; they will come to you hastening. And know that
Allah is all-mighty and all-wise.’” (al-Baqarah:260)

### d. The coming back to life of certain humans

###

The most important issue of all is the coming back to life of human
beings in this world. The Qur’an refers to the story of one of the
prophets of the Israelites who was known as Uzair. The noble verse that
narrates his story is as follows: “Or him who came upon a township as it
lay fallen on its trellises. He said, ‘How will Allah revive this after
its death?!’ So Allah made him die for a hundred years, then He
resurrected him. He said, ‘How long have you remained?’ Said he, ‘I have
remained a day or part of a day.’ He said, ‘Rather you have remained a
hundred years. Now look at your food and drink which have not rotted!
Then look at your ass!

[This was done] that We may make you a sign for mankind. And look at the
bones, how We arrange them and then clothe them with flesh!’ When it
became evident to him, he said, ‘I know that Allah has power over all
things.’” (al-Baqarah:259)

Likewise, another incident is mentioned by the Qur’an whereby a man -
who was killed during the time of the Prophet Moses (a) - comes back to
life due to the striking of his dead body with the part of a sacrificed
cow.

“We said, ‘Strike him with a piece of it:’ thus does Allah revive the
dead, and He shows you His signs so that you may apply reason.”
(al-Baqarah:73)

Furthermore, the Qur’an informs us of the miracles of Prophet Jesus (as)
whereby humans were brought back to life, “And I heal the blind and the
leper and I revive the dead by Allah’s leave” (Āl-‘Imrān:49)

Questions
---------

1. How does the Noble Qur’an answer those who deny the Resurrection?

2. What resemblance does plant life have with the raising-up of humans?

3. What lesson can be taken from the story of the people of the cave in
regard to Resurrection?

4. What relationship does the story of the four birds that were brought
back to life by the Prophet Abraham (a) have with Resurrection?

5. Who was brought back to life in the narrations of the Holy Qur’an?


