LESSON FORTY-SIX: THE QUR’ANIC RESPONSE RESSURRECTION TO THE DOUBTHS CONCERNING
===============================================================================

The argumentation that the Qur’an establishes for those who deny
Resurrection can be outlined in the following manner.

The argument for the return from non-existence
----------------------------------------------

As indicated earlier, the Qur’an has answered those who deny
Resurrection in the following way:

“The say, ‘When we have been lost in the dust, shall we indeed be
created anew?’ Rather they disbelieve in the encounter with their Lord.
Say, ‘You will be taken away by the angel of death, who has been charged
with you. Then you will be brought back to your Lord.’”
(al-Sajdah:10-11) From this verse we can learn that the reasoning of the
infidels is of the argument, which is know in philosophy as ‘the
impossibility of the return from non-existence (muhāl). They believe
that the human being with its material body which has died and
deteriorated returns back to life with its same material body. This is
considered as impossible because the return of something that has been
destroyed and become non- existent returns to existence from
non-existence, and this is essentially impossible.

The Qur’an’s reply to this argument is that the reality of every
individual is dependent upon his spirit and Resurrection means the
return of the spirit.

The argument for the material body having the ability of new life
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The previous argument was with respect to the essential possibility of
Resurrection; this argument is in regard to its external existence. The
return of the spirit to the body is not intellectually impossible, but
does this material body to which the spirit is returning have the
ability to come to life again? As we know that coming into existence
requires certain conditions. Furthermore these conditions must be
created gradually, as the foetus, which is in the womb of a woman,
requires the proper conditions for its nourishment and growth, so that
it becomes a human being. How can a body that has decomposed have the
ability to regain life?

The answer to this question is that the appeared order of this universe
is not the only possible order or sequence, and the cause and conditions
that are found in this, based on experience are not limited causes. The
evidence for this is that there are exceptional phenomena in this
universe, such as the coming to life of certain animals and human
beings, which have taken place. Hence this could be the answer taken
from the Noble Qur’an for the above argument.

The argument with respect to the strength of a creator
------------------------------------------------------

Another of the spurious arguments raised is the establishment of a
phenomenon apart from being essentially and outwardly possible, the
strength of a creator is also necessary and from where does God obtain
such strength so as to raise the dead?

Those who have no knowledge of the infinite strength of God raise this
argument. The answer to this is that Divine strength is limitless and
God can actualize everything that has the ‘possibility of existence’, as
God has created this universe with all its greatness and wonderment.

“Do they not see that Allah, who created the heavens and the earth and
[who] was not exhausted by their creation, is able to revive the dead?
Yes, indeed he has power over all things.” (al-Ahqāf:33) Moreover the
bringing of a creation back to life is not more difficult than that of a
new creation, which requires more power and strength as compared to the
case of returning to life:

“They say, ‘What, when we have become bones and dust, shall we really be
raised in anew creation? Say, ‘Should you be stones or iron, or a
creature more fantastic to your minds!’ they will say, ‘Who will bring
us back?’ Say, ‘He who originated you the first time.’ They will nod
their heads at you and say, ‘When will that be?’ Say, ‘Maybe it is
near!’”(al-Isrā’:49-51) And in another of its noble verses:

“It is He who originates the creation, and then He will bring it
back -and that is more simple for Him” (al-Rūm:27) The argument with
respect to the knowledge of a creator If God wanted to return all the
spirits to their respective bodies and give them the reward and
punishment for the actions committed, then ‘He’ must have knowledge of
the countless bodies. How is it possible for the body after it has
decomposed to be recognised and brought back together? How is it
possible to record all the different actions of all human being for
millions and millions of years?

This doubt is also raised by some of those who do not have enough
awareness of God’s infinite knowledge. The answer to this doubt is that
Divine Knowledge does not have any limits or bounds and it encompasses
all things, and God never forgets anything. The Noble Qur’an quotes
Pharaoh addressing the Prophet Moses (as):

“He said, ‘Who is your Lord, Moses?’ He said, ‘Our Lord is He who gave
everything its creation and then guided it.’ He said, ‘What about the
former generations?’ He said, ‘Their knowledge is with my Lord in a
Book. My Lord neither makes any error nor forgets” (Tāha:49-52) In
another of its noble verses the Qur’an, says: “Say, ‘he will revive them
who produced them the first time, and He has knowledge of all creation”
(Yāsīn:79)

Questions
---------

1. Explain the spurious argument for the ‘impossibility of return from
non- existence’!

2. Give the explanation in regard to the ability of the material body to
regain new life!

3. What is the answer given in regard to the doubt of the strength of
the creator?

4. How can the doubt concerning the limitless knowledge of God be
answered?


