LESSON FORTY-EIGHT: CHARACTERSTICS OF THE NEXT LIFE
===================================================

Introduction
------------

One cannot speak about those things that one has not experienced, or
sensed, whether inwardly or without intuitional knowledge.

Taking into consideration the above point, one should realise that it is
not possible to comprehend all the realities of the next life. Therefore
one must comply with the intellect and with the information we receive
from revelation in order to understand the realm of the next world and
restrain from inaccurate interpretations.

Regrettably, some have compared this world directly to this life and
imagine it is somehow within the realm of this universe. They further
believe that through development and research man will reach it and
enjoy a blissful and luxurious life.

However if one was to hold this belief, that the next life is within
this universe where does that leave the principle of Resurrection, which
has been established in the Qur’an? How can the reward and punishment be
allotted for past actions?

In addition to this there are some who completely deny the essential
existence of the next world, and regard heaven as a moral honour
(al-qīmah al-akhlāqi), therefore those who want to serve society are
seduced towards fame and so on. They claim that the difference between
this world and the Hereafter is nothing but like the distinction between
economic profit and moral values. This type of belief must be questioned
aswell; that if heaven is only mere moralistic benefit why has the
Qur’an placed so much emphasis on the return to life of mankind and
established the principle of Resurrection? If this were the case then
the prophets (as) could have given the same explanation and saved
themselves from the allegations of insanity!

Following such absurd arguments, one is then faced with the differences
of opinion between the philosophers and the theologians in their
discussions regarding matters such as the spiritual and bodily
resurrection (ma’ād jismāni wa rūhi). A further example debated over is
as to whether matter has the capability of being completely annihilated
or not, and as to whether the body in the next life is similar to the
material body.

This type of intellectual and philosophical discussion aims to arrive at
the reality, however it will result in the realisation of the limitation
of one’s thought. One should not presume that these discussions would
lead towards a complete and essential understanding of the life of the
next world. It should be highlighted that mankind has not yet arrived at
a complete understanding of some of the realities of this world.

Have the scientists figured out the reality of matter and energy? Can
they predict the future? Have they realised what the outcome would be to
the world if electrons ceased to move? Are such things possible in this
present life or not?

Furthermore, do the philosophers manage, with certainty, to solve all
intellectual issues regarding this life? Do the issues pertaining to
form, genus, and the relation of the spirit and the body require further
research?

Under these above-mentioned restricted circumstances, how can one
resolve the issues of the next life considering we have absolutely no
experience at all?

Man’s imperfect knowledge does not imply that he should fail to at least
try and understand the reality of existence. It is beyond question that
with the bestowal of the intellect, man has the ability to recognise
numerous realities, and through the help of the senses one can discover
many secrets from the natural realm. Man must endeavour to carry out
research and increase his knowledge and perception through philosophical
and practical exertion. Simultaneously he must also have constant
awareness of his limitations and guard himself against false
interpretations, bearing in mind that:

“You have not been given of the knowledge except a littlefew”
(al-Isrā:85) It is sufficient for a believer to know that his destiny is
from God, even when he cannot precisely foresee the details or
understand the accuracy of certain phenomenon due to the deficiency of
his knowledge in that realm.

We will now view the extent to which the intellect can perceive the
qualities of the next life and how this life differs from the world we
are now in.

Characteristics of the next life from an intellectual viewpoint
---------------------------------------------------------------

Considering the already mentioned arguments for Resurrection, one can
deduce that the most important characteristics of the next life are
that:

1. The next life must be eternal, as this attribute is placed in the
intrinsic nature of man and Divine Wisdom necessitates it.

2. The order of the next world is synthesized in a special manner. This
includes the Divine mercy and bounties bestowed by God for those who
have reached the ultimate in their existence and are free from sin and
imperfection. Such individuals are blessed with absolute felicities
unlike those found in this life (dunyā), as it is impossible for such
manifestations to be apparent in this life due to the limitation of this
world.

3. Two parts characterize the third special feature of the next life.
This is in order to divide the tyrants and oppressors from the righteous
and upright. The distinction reached by the individual results from
their actions carried out in this life. These two divisions are Heaven
and Hell.

4. The fourth attribute is derived from the argument for justice,
whereby the next life must be so comprehensive that millions of
individuals acquire their reward or punishment according to every
specific action that they have performed. For example if an individual
killed many people then the possibility for his punishment must exist in
the next life. In contrast if a person saves many lives then that world
must have the potential to reward.

5. Many features an be derived from the argument for justice, including
the presumption that the next life must be based on recompense (jazā) as
opposed to responsibility and duty (taklīf).

The explanation for understanding the above point is that this world is
composed of opposite forces, or actions and reactions where man’s desire
arrives at a point at which he has to decide between two alternatives.
This is the very factor, which makes him responsible or places him in
the realm of action (taklīf), and these situations will last until the
end of his life. Subsequent to this, Divine Wisdom and Justice are
expedient of precisely rewarding or punishing the specific individual
for fulfilling the responsibility or carrying out the duty or action. At
this time if it is assumed that the Hereafter necessitates
responsibility or duty then it is necessary for God to leave the
individual free to determine their path. Thereupon there has to be
another world for rewarding or punishing them depending upon their
actions performed. In reality the world assumed to be the next life is
another entirely different world, which is the final abode free from the
test of obligation, (meaning that it must not contradict our desires).

Hence, this world is the place of action and duty where man has to
choose and endure tests, as compared to the next life where he will
receive the fruits of his deeds, in an everlasting realm. Imam Ali (a)
in sermon 42 mentions:

“Surely today is the day for action and tomorrow is the day of accounts
not action.” Therefore it is from here that the major distinctive factor
between this world and the next is understood.

Questions
---------

1- Why is it impossible to have complete comprehension of the next life?

2- Criticise two examples of the incorrect understandings of the next
life.

3- How can the characteristics of the next world be known?

4- Explain the characteristics of the next world from the intellectual
viewpoint.


