LESSON FIFTY-ONE: A COMPARISON BETWEEN THIS WORLD AND THE HEREAFTER
===================================================================

Introduction
------------

It is possible to employ our knowledge acquired through wisdom and
tradition and compare and evaluate this world and the Hereafter in
different ways. Fortunately, such a comparison has been made in the Holy
Qur’an, and it is possible to use Qur’anic assumptions for a true
evaluation of life in this world and in the Hereafter and explore the
priority of life in the Hereafter.

The finiteness of this World and infiniteness of the Hereafter
--------------------------------------------------------------

The first remarkable difference between this world and the Hereafter is
the finite life of this world and the endless life in the world
following it. Anyone’s life in this world will sooner or later come to
its end. Even though a person may live in this world for hundreds or
thousands of years, his life will eventually come to its end at the time
of nature’s final evolution and when the first trumpet is blown, as
explained in the previous lessons. On the other hand, about eighty
verses of the Holy Qur’an express the eternity of life in the Hereafter
(refer to verses cited in previous lesson re:

the eternity of Paradise and Hell), and it is obvious that any finite
life, no matter how long it is, will not be comparable to an infinite
life.

Therefore, the Hereafter due to its infinity has great priority over
this world; this has been a matter of concern in a number of verses.
Words like infinite - ‘Abqaa’ (al- Kahf: 46, Maryam:76, Tāha:73,131,
al-Qasas:60, Ghāfir:39, al-A’la: 17), and finite - qalīl (Āl-‘Imrān:197,
al-Nisā’:77, al-Tawbah:38, al-Nahl:117), have been employed to explain
the Hereafter and this world respectively. In some other verses, such
concepts have been expressed by making a simulation between worldly life
and a plant, which is green for a few days, then changes to yellow, and
later fades and dies (Yūnus:24, Kahf:45-46, Hadīd:2). Finally, in one
verse, it is stated that, “what is with Allah shall last” (al-Nahl:96).

Isolation of Blessing from Punishment
-------------------------------------

Another fundamental difference between the worldly life and the
Hereafter is that this world’s pleasure and life is mixed with suffering
and hardship. It is unlikely that a group of people will always live in
happiness and tranquility while another group live in sadness and
anxiety. Rather, all people are involved, more or less, in happiness,
pleasure and peace together with suffering, sadness and anxiety.
However, the Hereafter comprises of two separate sections (Paradise and
Hell). In one section, there is no sign of punishment, suffering, panic
or sadness; while in the other, there is nothing but fire, pain, regret
and sadness. All the joys and sufferings are obviously of this world’s
nature.

Similar comparisons have also been made in the Holy Qur’an, and the
priority of the blessings of the other world, and living close to God
has been emphasised over this world’s blessings (Āl-‘Imrān 15,
al-Nisā’:77, al

An’ām:32, al-A’rāf:32, Yūsuf:109, al-Nahl:30, al-Kahf 46). Similarly, it
has been maintained in the Holy Qur’an that punishment in the Hereafter
is much harder than suffering and hardship in this world (al-Ra’d:34,
Tāha:127, al-Sajjdah:21, al-Zumar:36, al-Qalam:33).

The nobility of the Hereafter
-----------------------------

Another vital difference between this world and the Hereafter is that
life in this world is an introduction to the other world and is a means
for reaching eternal prosperity; life in the other world is the main
objective. Even though, the life of man with all its material and
spiritual blessing is merely a means to test man and cannot be
considered as the aim of this life. The real value of what man attains
in this life can only truly be seen in the Hereafter (al-Qasas:77).

Therefore, one who ignores the other world and focuses on the bounties
of this world and selects the worldly pleasures as his ultimate
objective has not recognised the real value of this world. He has,
nevertheless, considered some imaginary value for it and has mistakenly
chosen the means instead of the goal. This will be nothing more than
‘entertainment’ and ‘deception’; and this is why the Holy Qur’an refers
to worldly life as ‘play’ and ‘entertainment’ and a means of ‘deception’
(Āl-‘Imrān:185, al-‘Ankabūt:64, Muhammad:36, al-Hadīd:20); whereas, the
Hereafter is claimed to be the true life (al-‘Ankabūt:64, al-Fajr:24).
However it is the intention behind and way by which the blessings of
this life are used that will be judged, as the true believer can take
advantage of worldly blessings in order to aim towards eternal bliss.

Due to the privileges of the Hereafter and the blessings bestowed upon
man by choosing a life close to God over worldly desires, it would
certainly seem unwise to choose the path of this life over that of the
next (al-A’lā:16, al-Fajr:24). Choosing the wrong path would result only
in regret and remorse. However, the disgracefulness of such a selection
is more vivid when we realise that choosing this world over the
Hereafter is not only the cause of one’s deprivation from eternal
prosperity but it is also a vital factor affecting his/her adversity.
Note:

If man could select the finite pleasures of this world over the eternal
prosperity of the Hereafter without facing any evil outcome, such a
decision due to the priority of the Hereafter would still be idiotic.

However, no one can avoid his faith in the Hereafter; therefore, the one
who spends his life in favor of worldly desires and ignores or totally
rejects the Hereafter, will not only be deprived from Paradise but also
will be tied up in Hell’s torture forever and meet a double loss
(Hūd:22, al-Kahf:104-105, al-Naml:4-5).

This is why the Holy Qur’an, on one hand, refers to the blessings of the
Hereafter and warns against being deceived by worldly desires
(al-Baqarah:102,200, al- Tawbah:38, al-Rūm:33, Fātir:5,
al-Zukhruf:34-35) and, on the other, counts the losses of falling in
love with this world and forgetting or rejecting the Hereafter or
casting doubt on it. Such points as the Holy Qur’an emphasises will
cause one’s adversity and eternal misfortune (al-Isrā’:10,
al-Baqarah:86, al-An’ām:130, Yūnus:7-8, Hūd:15-16, Ibrāhīm:3,
al-Nahl:22, Luqmān:4). Therefore, it is unlikely that one who

chooses this world over the other will only be deprived from the other
world’s rewards; rather in addition to that, such a person will be
sentenced to eternal punishment.

The secret behind the above point is that the lover of this world has
wasted the talents provided for him by God and has destroyed or changed
them for a fruitless tree for example, which could have given the fruit
of eternal prosperity. Such a person has not thanked (worshiped) the
real provider of such gifts and has wasted His blessings in a way, which
has failed to cause His satisfaction. Thus, when he finds the evil
results of his choice, he would wish to be mere dust (al-Naba’:40).

Questions
---------

1- Discuss the differences between this world and the Hereafter.

2- Explain the reason why this world is at loss.

3- Describe the failings of falling in love with the material world.

4- Why will disbelief in the Hereafter cause eternal punishment?


