LESSON FIFTY-THREE: THE TYPE OF RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THIS WORLD AND THE HERE AFTER
==================================================================================

Introduction
------------

We understand (from previous discussions) that there is a direct
relationship between belief in God and good deeds on one side, and
living close to God and His blessings in the Hereafter on the other, or
between disbelief and sins on one side and living far from God and being
deprived from eternal blessings on the other. Moreover, we found that
there is a counter-relationship between belief in God and good deeds on
one side and punishment in the Hereafter on the other, or between
disbelief and sins on one side and eternal blessings on the other. There
is no doubt about the origin of such relationships, and rejection of
them amounts to the rejection of the Qur’an. However, there are some
points about this vital issue, which need explanation. For example, are
such relationships true and noble or are they dependent on situations
and conventions? What kind of relationship is there between belief in
God and good deeds, or between disbelief and sin? Is there any
cause/effect relationship between good and evil deeds?

In this lesson, the first point will be explained and it will be
clarified that such relationships are not false or conventional.

True or conventional relationships
----------------------------------

As already mentioned, the relationship between worldly deeds, and
blessings or punishment in the Hereafter is not similar to material or
common relationships, and cannot be explained in terms of physical,
chemical, or other similar relations. The assumption that, on the basis
of the rules of the conversion of matter and energy, the consumed energy
in performing actions would be converted into blessings or punishment in
the Hereafter, would be wrong. Firstly the consumed energy of one’s
speech and behavior would be insufficient, and could not even provide
enough energy to be converted into an apple, let alone the infinite
number of paradise’s blessings.

Secondly, the conversion of energy and matter follows specific rules and
does not have anything to do with the goodness or badness of deeds, or
the intention of their performer. There is no rule of nature for
distinguishing between sincere or hypocritical acts so that the energy
consumed for one changes to blessing and for the other changes to
punishment. Thirdly, the energy, which was once used for some kind of
worship, may be used for the committing of a sin on another occasion.

However, rejecting such a relationship does not equate complete
rejection of true relations because the scope of true relations includes
unknown and non-experimental relationships. Moreover, in the same way
empirical sciences cannot approve cause/effect relations between the
events of this world and those of the other, they cannot reject all
types of such relations between them either. Therefore, it seems
reasonable to assume that good or evil acts will have true effects on
one’s soul and due to that some individuals are able to do extraordinary
acts in this world. The same effects

will also cause blessings or punishment in the Hereafter. Such points
can be proved on the basis of philosophical principles, which are beyond
the scope of this book.

Qur’anic Evidence
-----------------

Although in some verses there are references to reward and punishment
(The term reward has been mentioned 90 times in the Qur’an and the term
punishment 100 times), Qur’anic expressions justify false and
conventional relations, other verses indicate that the relationship
between one’s deeds in this world and results in the Hereafter is beyond
such relations. Therefore, it might be reasonable to say that the former
group of verses is to make understanding such concepts easier for the
majority of people to whom they are more familiar.

In some traditions, there is evidence indicating that man’s free deeds
have different spiritual representations revealed in the world between
this world and the Hereafter and on Resurrection.

The following represents some verses in which the existence of a true
relationship between one’s deeds and their outcome in the Hereafter is
emphasized.

“Any good that you send ahead for your souls, you shall find it with
Allah” (al- Baqara: 110)

“The day when every soul will find present whatever good it has done;
and as to whatever evil it has done it will wish there were a far
distance between it and itself” (Āl-‘Imrān: 30)

“The day when a person will observe what his hands have sent ahead”
(al-Naba’:40)

“So whoever does an atom’s weight of good will see it, and whoever does
an atom’s weight of evil will see it” (al-Zalzalah:7-8)

“Shall you be requited except with what you used to do?” (al-Naml:90)

“Indeed those who consume the property of orphans wrongfully, only
ingest fire into their bellies, and soon they will enter the Blaze”
(al-Nisā’: 10)

It is obvious that by merely meeting with what one has done in this
world, it is not the reward or punishment for his or her deeds in the
Hereafter. On the contrary, what is met is the spiritual representation
of them revealed in the form of blessings or punishment and accordingly
the person will either be in pleasure or in torture. As it is understood
from the last verse explained above, the underlying representation of
eating (consuming) an orphan’s wealth is eating fire; when in the
Hereafter the facts are revealed, one finds that by eating illegal food
one has in fact been eating fire and accordingly the person will feel
the irritation of his inside. He will then be questioned: “Is this fire
different from the illegal wealth you ate (consumed)?”

Questions
---------

1. What is the problem with assuming that the representation of deeds in
the Hereafter follows the rule of converting matter and energy?

2. How is it possible to explain the true relationship between one’s
deeds and their results in the Hereafter?

3. What verses indicate the representation of deeds? Why have terms like
‘reward’ and ‘punishment’ have been used?

4. Is it possible to describe the representation of deeds (in the
Hereafter) as ‘being represented by their worldly characteristics’? Why?


