LESSON FIFTY-FIVE: THE INTER-RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FAITH AND DEEDS
=================================================================

Introduction
------------

We have realised so far that the main factors leading to eternal
prosperity or adversity are faith and disbelief, and that secure faith
guarantees eternal prosperity, but the committal of sins will result in
limited punishment. On the other hand, constant disbelief will bring
about eternal adversity and will cause good deeds to become obliterated.

Moreover, it was pointed out that faith and disbelief can be weakened or
intensified and it is possible that the accumulation of sins will result
in the destruction of faith; on the contrary, the performance of good
deeds may weaken the root of disbelief and pave the way for the
development of faith.

This clarifies the importance of the question about the relationship
between faith and deeds. This lesson attempts to answer such a question.

The relationship between faith and disbelief
--------------------------------------------

Our previous discussions clarified the point that faith is a spiritual
state, originating from knowledge and an attitude that necessitates the
believer to behave in accordance with the requisites of what he believes
in.

Therefore, one who is aware of a truth and decides not to behave
according to its requisites does not have any belief in it. Such a
person, even in the case of doubting as whether to behave according to
the requisites of that truth or not, will still be categorised as a
disbeliever. The Holy Qur’an maintains:

“The Bedouins say, ‘We have faith’. Say, ‘You do not have faith yet;
rather say, ‘we have embraced Islam,’ for faith has not yet entered into
your hearts” (al- Hujurāt:14) Moreover, true faith is comprised of
different stages; however, the accomplishment of each stage does not
necessitate the performance of all its requisites. It is probable that,
in a weak believer, excitement due to lust or anger may causes
rebellion; however, it might not necessarily cause him to rebel
permanently and struggle against his faith and all its requisites.
Nevertheless, the stronger and more complete the faith, the more
effective it will be in committing deeds accordingly.

To sum up, having faith naturally necessitates behaving in accordance
with its requisites; however, the extent of that depends on the weakness
or intensity of one’s faith and finally this is the will and decision of
the individual, which determines the performance, or abandonment of the
deed.

The relationship between deeds and faith
----------------------------------------

Any arbitrary act is either deserving and in line with one’s faith or
undeserving and contradictory to it; the former strengthens the faith
and makes one’s heart brighter while the latter weakens the faith and
darkens the heart. Therefore, any good deed committed by a believer will
not only originate from his faith but will also strengthen and stabilise
it, paving the way for other good deeds. The effect of good deeds on the
perfection of one’s faith can be understood from the following verse:

“To Him ascends the good word, and He elevates righteous conduct”
(Fātir:10)

Provided that the subject pronoun refers to (al-‘amal al-sālih)
(righteous conduct) and the object pronoun refers to al-kalām al-tayyib
(good word).

In the same way, in a number of verses, the Holy Qur’an maintains that
the promotion of belief, enlightenment, and guidance in good-doers is
the consequence of their good deeds (Refer to: Āl-‘Imrān:172,
al-Anfāl:2, al-Tawbah:124, al-Kahf:13, Maryam:76, al-Ahzāb:22,
Muhammad:17).

However, if opposing motives appear against the requisites of faith and
if they lead to undeserving acts and one’s level of faith is not high
enough to prevent them, faith will begin to weaken and this in turn will
pave the way for the repetition of sin. The continuation of this process
will lead to greater sins and their repetition, and this will eventually
threaten the essence of faith and (May I ask for God’s shelter) convert
into disbelief or hypocrisy.

The Holy Qur’an in relation to those who ended up as hypocrites’ claims:

“So He caused hypocrisy to ensue in their hearts until the day they will
encounter Him, because of their going back on what they had promised
Allah and because of the lies they used to tell” (al-Tawbah:77) The Holy
Qur’an states elsewhere:

“Then the fate of those who committed misdeeds was that they denied the
signs of Allah and they used to deride them” (al-Rūm:10) Similarly, in
many verses, the Holy Qur’an discusses the increase of disbelief,
darkness, and hard-heartedness in the sinners (See: al- Baqarah:10,
Āl-‘Imrān:90, al-Nisā:137, al-Maidah:68, al-Tawbah:37, al-Isrā’: 60,82,
al-Saff: 5,9,24).

Conclusion
----------

Concerning the interrelationship between faith and deeds and their role
in man’s prosperity, it seems reasonable to compare prosperous life with
a tree (See: Ibrahim: 24-27) whose roots resemble faith in the unique
God, His prophets, messages, and Resurrection; the trunk resembles the
decision made for behavior in accordance with the requisites of faith
originating directly from it; the branches and leaves resemble the
deserving deeds which originate from the root (faith), and finally, its
fruit will be the eternal prosperity. Had it had no root, there would be
no trunk, branches, or leaves nor would it bear any fruit.

However, there is no guarantee that the roots will always result in
suitable branches and desirable fruits; rather it is often possible that
due to unsuitable conditions of the environment and various diseases, a
number of branches fail to grow, and any fruit that is born may instead
cause the death of the tree.

Moreover, it is possible that due to specific grafts on the branches,
trunk or even the roots of the tree, either its appearance or the whole
plant may change into another tree. This event resembles the change from
faith into apostasy.

To conclude, faith with relation to the topics discussed above will be
the main factor affecting man’s prosperity; however, the complete effect
of such a factor depends on the absorption of necessary nutrition, by
the performance of deserving acts, and the destruction of diseases and
harmful elements, by the avoidance of sins.

Finally, the abandonment of obligatory deeds and the committal of
forbidden acts weaken the root of faith and will occasionally result in
its death just as grafting (believing in) wrong ideas causes change in
the nature of faith.

Questions
---------

1. Explain the effect of faith on good deeds.

2. Describe the effect of good or bad deeds on the weakness or intensity
of faith.

3. Explain the inter-relationship between faith and deeds and their
correspondence with man’s prosperity.

LESSON FIFTY-SIX: SOME IMPORTANT POINTS
---------------------------------------

Introduction
------------

Some of those who know little about Islamic culture evaluate man’s acts
on the basis of superficial standards and pay no attention to the
importance of one’s motivation or intention. In other words, they ignore
‘the doer’ in favour of ‘the action’. Such people may also think of a
deserving act in relation to the extent to which it affects other
peoples’ happiness. The advocates of such an idea will, nevertheless,
deviate in their analysis of Islamic beliefs and thoughts or may
misunderstand them. For instance, in realising the role of faith and its
relation to good deeds, and on the other hand, the destructive role of
disbelief and dualism they will face deviation. Similarly, they
misunderstand the priority of some small short term acts over larger
long term ones, and will, for example, suppose that the great inventors
who brought tranquility to others or the liberals who struggled for
their nation’s freedom should possess an exalted position in the
Hereafter even though they have no belief in God or Resurrection. In
some cases, they claim that the necessary faith for true prosperity is
belief in humanitarian values and labours’ final victory in this world.
For them, the concept of God equals a cultural value and an ethical
ideal.

Although our discussions in previous lessons can distinguish weak and
deviated points in the above thoughts, it seems reasonable, due to their
spread, and at the same time, dangerous for the future generations, to
explain them more.

However, detailed and comprehensive discussions need more time and
space; therefore, what I present below is the most fundamental points
with reference to their ideological aspect. I will, nevertheless, try to
present my arguments so that the style of this book is not violated.

Man’s true perfection
---------------------

If we compare an apple-tree with a fruitless one, we will find the
apple-tree more worthy; this is not merely because man uses the fruit of
a fruitful tree, rather the fact that such a tree is a more complete
organism and is more effective, causes it to be naturally more valuable.
However, if the same apple-tree faces disease and changes its way
towards complete development, it will lose its value and may even become
the origin of pollution and harm for others.

The same case applies to man in comparison with other animals. If man
reaches his deserving perfection and presents the characteristics
relevant to his creation, he will be more valuable than other animals.
However, if he meets deviation, he will become inferior and more harmful
than the animals. That is why the Holy Qur’an refers to some people as
‘worse than all living things’ (Refer to al-Anfāl:22) and ‘more astray
than four- legged animals’ (Refer to al-A’rāf:179).

Moreover, if somebody observes the apple-tree up to when it blossoms, he
may think it is at the highest stage in its development. Similarly,
those who observe man’s middle stages of perfection will not be able to
realise his true and final perfection.

Only those who are familiar with man’s final perfection will be able to
understand his true values.

In addition, man’s true perfection is not the same as material or
natural perfection because as I discussed earlier, the humanitarian
aspect of man depends on his heavenly soul. Similarly his evolution is
infact the evolution of his soul, which is performed through his own
free deeds, happening either in his inside (heart) or outside and by
means of different parts of his body. Such a kind of perfection cannot
be recognised by means of experiments neither can it be measured through
quantitative scales. Thus, it will not naturally be understood through
laboratory tools.

Therefore, one who has not reached such perfection and has not realised
it through his innate knowledge and ability, should try to understand it
by means of intellectual theorem, revelation or Divine book.

Furthermore, revelation, Qur’anic teachings and traditions from the
Prophet’s family members, ascertain that man’s final perfection is a
stage in his life called ‘living close to God’ which is together with
eternal blessings and Divine paradise presented to him in the Hereafter.
The general way to this type of perfection is that worship of God and
piety should dominate all aspects of one’s individual and social life.

From an intellectual point of view, more complicated theorems can be
employed in this discussion, which necessitates a detailed philosophical
introduction. However, in this section, I have attempted to provide a
simplified explanation of the topic.

Intellectual clarification
--------------------------

Man naturally desires infinite perfection whose manifestations are
knowledge and power; approaching such perfection results in endless
pleasure and eternal prosperity.

However, infinite perfection is attainable when it is linked with the
origin of infinite knowledge, power and absolute perfection - God; this
link is called ‘closeness to God’ (See ‘Knowing oneself for empowering
one’s soul’, by the same author).

Therefore, man’s true perfection, which is the aim of his creation, is
achieved by means of his relationship and closeness to God. Thus, one
who has not reached the first or the lowest level of faith is similar to
a tree, which is not fully developed and has not born its first fruit.
Such a tree will lose its capability for bearing fruit and will become
worse than a fruitless tree if it faces disease.

Finally, the importance of faith’s role in man’s perfection and
prosperity is because of his soul’s main characteristic - the
intentional and free relationship with God - without which he will be
deprived of deserving perfection and its traces; in other words, his
humanitarian dimension will not be fulfilled. However, if man makes the
wrong choice, he spoils such vital talents and damages his dignity;
this, therefore, necessitates him to be punished forever. In this
relation, the Holy Qur’an maintains:“Indeed the worst of beasts in
Allah’s sight are those who are faithless; so they will not have faith”
(al-anfāl:55) To summarise, both faith and disbelief determine man’s
main way either towards perfection and prosperity or towards decline and
adversity; the more powerful any one of them is in one’s life the more
influential and determining it will be.

The role of motivation and intention
------------------------------------

The above principle clarifies that the true value of man’s arbitrary
deeds depends on their role in his approaching true perfection (i.e.,
closeness to God). Although the deeds, which promote one’s evolution in
one way or another or even through some mediators undergo virtue and
excellence, their effect on the doer’s eternal prosperity depends on the
extent to which they affect his soul’s evolution.

Moreover, one’s own intention mediates his deeds and soul. Intention
originates from one’s tendency, eagerness, and love towards the end or
result of something. It, at the same time, causes movement within one’s
soul towards its aim and is manifested as intention. Therefore, the
value of an arbitrary act depends on the motivation and intention of its
doer, and one’s good deeds without good intention will have no effect on
the promotion of his soul neither will they affect his eternal
prosperity. That is why deeds performed on the basis of material and
worldly motivations will not affect eternal prosperity. Even causing the
greatest benefit to society will be of no benefit to the performer, had
they been done in a hypocritical way (Refer to al-Baqarah:245,
al-Nisā’:38,142, al-Anfāl:47, al-Mā’ūn:6). Such deeds may even cause
spiritual loss and decline. This is the reason why the Holy Qur’an has
conditioned the effect of good deeds on eternal prosperity on faith and
the intention of gaining closeness to God (Refer to al-Nisā’:124,
al-Nahl:97, al-Isrā’:19, TāHa:112, al-Anbiyā:94, Ghāfir:40, al-An’ām:52,
al-Kahf:28, al-Rūm:38, al-Baqarah: 207,265, al-Layl: 20).

In conclusion, firstly good deeds are not limited to working for the
benefit of others.

Secondly, working for other people’s benefit like other individual acts
of worship will be effective on one’s perfection and eternal prosperity
provided that it originated from Divine motivation.

Questions
---------

1. What does one’s true value depend on?

2. How is man’s final perfection recognised?

3. Prove that man’s final perfection is achievable only if his life
relates to God and being close to Him.

4. Prove that the effect of good deeds on man’s eternal prosperity
depends on his Divine motivation.
