LESSON FIFTY-SEVEN: THE MISCARRIAGE BY EVIL ACTS (Habt) AND REMITTANCE OF SINS AFTER GOOD DEEDS (Takfīr)
========================================================================================================

Introduction
------------

One point in relation to the interaction between faith and good deeds on
one side and eternal prosperity on the other, or between disbelief and
rebellion on one side and eternal adversity on the other, is (to know)
whether the relationship between any moment of faith or disbelief (in
one’s life) and its result in the Hereafter, or any good or evil deed
and its reward or punishment, is certain, fixed and unchangeable or
whether it can be changed in one way or another. Is it, for instance,
possible to recompense for a sin by performing a good act or vice-versa?
Or will those who spend part of their lives in apostasy and rebellion
and another part in faith and obedience be involved in punishment for
some time and reward for the other? Or will the algebraic sum of the two
parts determine one’s good or bad luck in the eternal world? Or is there
something else involved?

The above point is known as “Habt and Takfīr” (‘Habt’ and ‘takfīr’ are
two Qur’anic terms; the former means good deeds becoming inefficient or
miscarried and the latter means remitting sins), which has been a topic
of discussion and dialogue amongst the Ash’arite and Mu’tazilite
scholars since ancient times. However, in this lesson I will briefly
explain the issue from the Shi’ite point of view.

The relationship between faith and disbelief
--------------------------------------------

In previous lessons, I pointed out that where there is no faith in the
principles of belief, no good deed can end in eternal prosperity; in
other words, disbelief will remove the effect of deserving deeds.
However, I add in this section that man’s faith at the end of his life
removes the evil effects of his previous disbelief just as a bright
light removes the effect of previous darkness. Similarly, disbelief at
the end of one’s life destroys the effect of his previous faith; it
spoils his record (of good deeds) and annihilates his fate just like a
fire destroys wood.

As another example, faith resembles a bright light, which makes one’s
heart and soul bright and clear and puts an end to their darkness. On
the other hand, disbelief resembles switching the same light off,
removing the brightness and causing darkness. Therefore, as long as
man’s soul belongs to the material world and varying or changing
universe, it will be subject to brightness and darkness or increase and
decrease of light and darkness until he passes away and the opportunity
of choosing between faith and disbelief terminates. Then he may wish to
have the opportunity to go back to the world and remove the darkness (of
his soul) but this will not materialize (See lesson 49). There is no
doubt about this kind of interaction between faith and disbelief in the
Holy Qur’an; there are many pieces of evidence in this relation such
as:“And whoever has faith in Allah and acts righteously, He shall
absolve him of his misdeeds” (al-Taghābun:9) Or the following Qur’anic
verse maintains:

“And whoever of you turns away from his religion and dies
faithless -they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and
the Hereafter. They shall be inmates of the Fire and they shall remain
in it [forever].” (al-Baqarah:217).

The relationship between good and evil deeds
--------------------------------------------

The relationship between good and evil deeds is very similar to the
relationship between faith and disbelief; however, it is not general, so
that one’s record will always include deserving acts and the previous
evil deeds will be destroyed (as Mu’tazilite scholars believe), or the
algebraic sum of past deeds including their quality and quantity will
always be reflected in one’s record (as some others speculate).
Nevertheless, with reference to deeds we should consider separation; in
other words, some deeds, if performed in a deserving way and (if they)
please God, will destroy the effect of past evil deeds, for instance
repentance will forgive one’s sins if performed properly (Refer to
al-Nisā:110, Āl-‘Imrān:135, al-An’ām:54, al- Shūra:25, al-Zumar: 57).

This is exactly like a ray of light, which illuminates a dark space.
However, not all good deeds remove the effect of sin; therefore, it is
possible for a believer to be punished for some time as a result of his
sins and then enter eternal Paradise. It seems that man’s soul has
different dimensions to which different groups of deeds - good or evil -
are related. For example, a good deed related to dimension (A) will not
remove the effect of an evil deed related to dimension (B) unless the
good deed is so bright that it can penetrate other dimensions of the
soul. On the other hand, an evil deed may be so unpleasant that it can
defect other dimensions of the soul. That is why it is been claimed in
the noble traditions that God-pleasing prayers wash the sins away and
forgive them. The Holy Qur’an also maintains:

“Maintain the prayer at the two ends of the day, and during the early
hours of the night. Indeed good deeds efface bad deeds.” (Hūd:114)
Moreover, some sins including being undutiful to parents, and the
consumption of alcohol will prevent the acceptance of worship for some
time, and reproaching others for what one has done to them will remove
its good effect. As the Holy Qur’an claims:

“Do not render your charities void by reproaches and affronts” (al-
Baqarah:264) However, to determine the type and extent of the
interaction between good and evil deeds, one should refer to Revelation
and the traditions of the Imams, as it is impossible to draw a general
rule for all of them.

At the end of this lesson it seems reasonable to claim that good and
evil deeds may often affect one’s joy, sadness, or success in some work
and failure in others in this world. For example, being kind to others,
particularly parents and relatives, lengthens one’s life and destroys
harm and misfortunes. Or being irrespective towards the great people
particularly one’s teachers and professors will remove success; however,
this type of interaction does not postpone real reward or punishment as
the true origin of rewards and punishment is in the Hereafter.

Questions
---------

1. Explain what ‘Habt and Takfeer’ mean.

2. What are the manifestations of the relationship between faith and
disbelief? Which of them is right?

3. What are the manifestations of the relationship between good and evil
deeds?

Which of them is right?

4. Can the worldly effects of good and evil deeds replace their reward
and punishment in the Hereafter or not?


