LESSON FIFTY-EIGHT: PRIVILEDGES OF THE BELIEVERS
================================================

Introduction
------------

In the section on ‘Theology’ (See lesson 11), we realised that God’s
Will consists basically of righteousness and perfection and there is no
place therein for deficiency.

Therefore, with respect to man, God’s primary Will naturally tends to
belong to his perfection, eternal prosperity and enjoyment of eternal
blessings. However, the sinners’ punishment and bad luck, which are due
to their own wrong choices, are included in God’s wise Will aswell.
Nevertheless, had it not been the requisite of the peoples’ wrong
choices, in meeting their punishment and adversity, God’s infinite mercy
would necessitate no creature to meet punishment.[5]

It is the same overwhelming Divine mercy, which characterizes man’s
creation with freedom and the right of choice; however, the requisite of
being able to choose between faith and disbelief is to meet its good or
bad outcome. The difference, nevertheless, is that meeting a joyful end
belongs to God’s primary Will, while meeting a painful end belongs to
His subordinate Will. The same difference necessitates that in both
creation and canonization, righteousness is preferred. In other words,
man is created so as his personality becomes more deeply affected by
good deeds, whilst canonically he has been ordered to perform easy deeds
so that other than for gaining prosperity and relief from eternal
punishment he would not need to perform hard and intolerable deeds
(Refer to al-Baqarah:158, al-Hajj: 78).

Moreover, at the time of assigning reward or punishment to people,
reward is preferred and God’s mercy will precede His anger. This
precedence or preference of God’s mercy is manifested in different ways;
some of which are discussed below.

Increase in reward
------------------

With respect to the results of good deeds, the first privilege for those
who seek prosperity is that their reward does not merely equal the
amount they deserve; rather it exceeds their deeds. This has been cited
in the Holy Qur’an in different verses such as:

“Whoever brings virtue shall receive [a reward] better than it”
(al-Naml:89).

Moreover, the following verse states:“Whoever performs a good deed, We
shall enhance for him its goodness” (al-Shūra:23).

And the following verse maintains:“Those who are virtuous shall receive
the best reward and an enhancement” (Yūnus:26).

The Holy Qur’an also claims:

“Indeed Allah does not wrong [anyone] [even to the extent of] an atom’s
weight, and if it be a good deed He doubles it [s reward], and gives
from Himself a great reward” (al-Nisā:40).

And:“Whoever brings virtue shall receive ten times its like; but whoever
brings vice shall not be requited except with its like, and they will
not be wronged” (al- An’ām:160).

Forgiveness of minor sins
-------------------------

Another privilege is that if those who believe in God avoid committing
major sins, God, the kindest, will forgive their minor sins and destroy
their effect.

This has been claimed in the following verse:

“If you avoid the major sins that you are forbidden, We will absolve you
of your misdeeds, and admit you to a noble abode” (al-Nisā:31).

Clearly, the forgiveness of minor sins for such believers does not
require their repentance, as repentance forgives major sins as well.

Receiving benefits from the deeds of others
-------------------------------------------

Another merit for believers is that Almighty God accepts the requests
for forgiveness for believers of His angels and selected slaves (Refer
to Ghāir: 7, Āl-‘Imrān:152, al- Nisā’:64, Ibrāhīm:41), and accepts the
prayers and requests of other believers in their favor. Almighty God
also accepts to allocate the reward of a good deed done by a person to
the person of the doer’s choice.

Such points have been discussed in a number of verses and traditions;
however, since they are directly related to ‘Intercession’ and should be
discussed in more detail, in the present section, the above points seem
sufficient.

Questions
---------

1. What is the secret behind the precedence of God’s mercy?

2. Discuss the manifestations of such precedence in creation and
canonisation.

3. Explain its usage in man’s reward and punishment.


