LESSON FIFTY-NINE: INTERSSESION
===============================

Introduction
------------

One of the privileges devoted by God to the believers, is that if a
believer protects his faith until death, and does not commit any sins
which lead to the removal of prosperity, bad luck, and eventually doubt
and denial (of God), thus dying a believer in God, he will not meet with
eternal punishment. His minor sins will be forgiven as a result of him
avoiding major sins, and major sins will be forgiven via a complete and
acceptable repentance. However, if one does not succeed in performing
such repentance, his involvement in worldly troubles and disasters may
lighten his load of sin and the life between this world and the
Hereafter together with the first stages of Resurrection will remove his
impurities. Nevertheless, if there are still some impurities in the
believer, he will be saved from Hell through intercession - the greatest
Divine blessing represented particularly by the Prophet (s), and his
noble family members (a) (The Prophet (s) maintains that:

“I have saved my intercession for those among my nation who commit major
sins.” (Bihār al-Anwār:Vol. 40:378) According to a number of traditions,
a praised position (Maqām Mahmūd) (Refer to al-Isrā’:79), promised to
the Prophet in the Holy Qur’an, is the position of intercessor.
Moreover, the noble verse below refers to God’s forgiveness presented to
deserving people through the Prophet’s intercession: “Soon your Lord
will give you [that with which] you will be pleased” (al-Duhā:5)

Therefore, the guilty believer’s greatest and last hope is intercession;
however, they should always keep themselves alert, and fear committing a
sin which may bring them bad luck and disbelief at the time of death.
They should also be concerned over their interest in worldly affairs and
that (may I seek God’s shelter) they may die whilst feeling hatred
towards God because they assumed that it was He who caused separation
between them and their beloved.

The concept of intercession
---------------------------

he term ‘shafā’ah’ the Arabic word for ‘Intercession’ is derived from
the word ‘Shaf’’ meaning ‘associate’. In Arabic conversations, the term
is used when an honorable person asks a noble individual to ignore the
guilt of a criminal or to increase the reward of a servant. The term
intercession has, presumably been used in such conditions because the
guilty person does not deserve forgiveness without such help, as indeed
the servant does not deserve reward; however, the association of an
intercessor’s request makes them deserving.

In usual situations, the reason why one accepts the request of an
intercessor is to avoid him becoming annoyed; this might, in turn, cause
one to be deprived from the pleasures of the intercessor’s companionship
or services, or it might even cause harm from the side of intercessor.
The dualists, who associate human characteristics such as the need for
companionship with a spouse, maids, friends, and colleagues, or fear
from one’s partners and mates, present their requests to their imaginary
gods to attract God’s attention or to protect them from His anger. They
also

worshipped Angels and Jinn or bowed down before idols and statues and
said:

These are our intercessors with God. (Yūnus:18, see also: al-Rūm:13,
al-An’ām:94, al-Zumar:44) Or they said: “We only worship them so that
they may bring us near to Allah” (al- Zumar:3). The Holy Qur’an in
rejecting such ignorant ideas maintains: “It shall not have any guardian
besides Allah, nor any intercessor” (al-An’ām:70, see also: al- An’ām
:51, al-Sajdah:4, al-Zumar:4) Nevertheless, rejecting such intercessors
or intercession does not mean the total rejection of intercession, as
there are verses in the Holy Qur’an, which prove that ‘God permits
intercession’. There are also some verses, which state the conditions
for the intercessors aswell as the subjects of intercession. The Holy
Qur’an maintains that acceptance of the intercessors’ request is not due
to fright or need, rather it is a gate God Himself has opened for those
who have the least merit for receiving His eternal mercy; He has
nevertheless, identified some conditions and limitations for such
intercession. Therefore, the difference between belief in true
intercession and in the false one is the same as the difference between
management and political authority by God’s permission, and management
and political authority independent from Him is discussed in the section
on monotheism (See lesson 16).

The word intercession is sometimes used in a more general term including
the representation of any pleasurable effect in an individual’s life
initiated by a third party. This applies to parents who may function as
intercessors for their children or vice versa, and in the same way to
teachers for their students, or even to a muizzin (one who calls people
for prayers) for those who have remembered prayers and gone to the
mosque after hearing his voice. In fact, the same good effects of the
above cases represent as intercession and help in the Resurrection.

Another point is that ‘asking for forgiveness’ by others for the sinners
in this world is a kind of intercession. Even praying for others and
asking God for the fulfillment of their needs is a type of intercession
with God because they are all mediations between God and His servants in
allowing them to receive a benefit or preventing them from receiving
harm.

Conditions of Intercession
--------------------------

As pointed out above, the main condition for the performance of or being
the subject of intercession is God’s permission. The Holy Qur’an
maintains:

“Who is it that may intercede with Him except with His permission” (al-
Baqarah:255). In addition, the Holy Qur’an claims: “There is no
intercessor except by His leave” (Yūnus:3).

Also:

“Intercession will not avail that day except from Him whom the
All-beneficient allows and approves of his word” (TāHa:109). The Holy
Qur’an also claims:

“Intercession is of no avail with Him except for those whom He permits”
(Saba’:23)

The above verses generally prove God’s permission as a prerequisite for
intercession; however, they do not have anything to do with the
characteristics of its subjects. Other verses, nevertheless, provide
more clarified conditions for both sides (the intercessors and the
subjects of intercession). For example:

“Those whom they invoke besides Him have no power of intercession except
those who are witness to the truth and who know [for whom to intercede]”
(al-Zukhruf:86) The phrase ‘someone who testifies to the truth’ might
refer to the (Angel) witnesses who are aware of the servants’ deeds and
intentions through God’s teachings and can witness the quality and value
of their deeds. Moreover, as it is understood from the proportion
between religious statements and their subjects, the intercessors should
be knowledgeable so as that they can recognise whether one deserves
intercession or not.

Certainly amongst those who possess both characteristics are our
innocent Imams.

Moreover, it is understood from some verses that the subjects of
intercession should have acquired God’s satisfaction. As stated in the
Qur’an as follows: “and they do not intercede except for someone He
approves of” (al-Anbiyā’:28)

Also:

“How many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession is of no
avail in any way except after Allah grants permission to whomever He
wishes and approves of” (al-Najm:26) Clearly, God’s satisfaction towards
one who is the subject for intercession does not mean that all his deeds
are acceptable, as in that case there would be no need for intercession;
it rather means that the person himself should be satisfactory with
respect to his faith and religion. The above point has been commented on
in the same way in the traditions.

Moreover, in several verses the characteristics of those who are not
included for intercession have been discussed. For example, Qur’an
al-Shu’arā:100 quotes the dualists as saying:

We have no intercessor. In Qur’an al-Muddaththir:40-48, it maintains
that when the sinners are asked as to why they entered Hell, they refer
to their abandonment of prayer (Imam Sadiq (a) in the last minutes of
his precious life stated:

“Our intercession does not reach those who do not respect prayers.”
Bihar- Al-Anwar, Vol.4:3), postponement of giving help to the oppressed,
and the denial of Resurrection as the main reasons. The Holy Qur’an then
claims:

They will find no benefit out of the intercessors’ intercession. These
verses clarify the point that the dualists and those who deny
Resurrection, fail in worshipping God, refuse helping His needy servants
and do not believe in the true principles, and will never be included
amongst those worthy of intercession. Moreover, considering the fact
that the Prophet’s ‘asking for forgiveness’ is a kind of intercession in
this world, and that it will not be accepted (by God) for those who do
not request it (Refer to al- Munafiqūn:5-6), it can be realised that
those who deny intercession will not be included for it aswell. Such an
idea has also been discussed in the traditions. (The Prophet (s):

“God will not include in my intercession those who do not believe in it”
Bihar-Al-Anwar. Vol. 8 p.58 tradition 84).

To summarize, the main intercessor in addition to having permission by
God to do so, should be free from sin and capable of evaluating the
extent of obedience or rebellion in others. The true followers of such
people can possess some lower levels of intercession under their
dominance; such followers are included amongst the martyrs and pious
people (Those who believe in God and His prophets will be near their
Lord with the martyrs and the pious).

Furthermore, one deserves to be the subject of intercession if he in
addition to being permitted by God, has true belief in God, His
prophets, Resurrection, and whatever God has sent to His prophets.

Questions
---------

1. Explain what is meant by intercession and in what ways it is used.

2. Discuss the difference between true intercession and false
intercession.

3. What are the conditions for an intercessor?

4. What are the conditions for a person who is subject to intercession?


