LESSON SIXTY: RESPONSES TO CERTAIN SPURIOUS DOUBTS
==================================================

Various questions and doubts have arisen concerning the subject of
intercession; in this lesson, I will provide the answers to the most
important doubts raised.

Doubt 1:
--------

The first doubt is that several verses in the Holy Qur’an maintain that
on Resurrection no intercession will be accepted for anyone. For
example, it is claimed in al-Baqarah that:

“Beware of the day when no soul shall compensate for another, neither
any intercession shall be accepted from it, nor any ransom shall be
received from it, nor will they be helped” (al-Baqarah:48)

### Response 1:

###

The point aimed at here is the rejection of independent and non-
regulated intercession in which some people believe. Moreover, such
verses are general and can be dealt with by the verses in which the
acceptance of regulated and God-permitted intercession has been
discussed as I explained in the previous lesson.

Doubt 2:
--------

The requisite for the rightfulness of intercession is that Almighty God
should become affected by intercessors; in other words, their
intercession causes forgiveness - an action performed by God.

### Response 2:

###

The admittance of intercession does not mean ‘to become affected by’
just as accepting repentance and granting a prayer also do not have such
an incorrect requisite. In all these cases the deeds of the servants
make readiness in them to accept Divine blessings; in other words, “it
is the readiness of the person which counts not the performance of the
one who forgives”.

Doubt 3:
--------

The requisite for intercession is that the intercessors are in fact more
merciful than God, as the assumption is that without their intercession
the sinners would be engaged in punishment or their punishment would
continue.

### Response 3:

###

The intercessors’ sympathy or kindness is a manifestation of God’s
endless mercy. In other words, intercession is a means or way Almighty
God has considered for forgiving His sinful servants. This indeed
manifests His highest levels of mercifulness towards His selected and
deserving servants. Similarly, prayer and repentance are other ways He
has recognized for the fulfilling of needs aswell as the forgiving of
sins.

Doubt 4:
--------

If God’s decree for punishing the sinful is the requisite for justice,
the acceptance of intercession will be against justice. On the other
hand, if being secured from punishment, which is a requisite for
intercession, is just, sentencing one to punishment before the
establishment of intercession would be unjust.

### Response 4:

###

All of God’s sentences, either in punishment before intercession or in
releasing from punishment after, is in line with justice and wisdom.
However, the point that both of them are wise and just does not mean the
togetherness of two contradictory points, as their subjects are
different. This means that being sentenced to punishment, irrespective
of the conditions, which cause intercession and its being accepted in
relation to a sinner, is the outcome of committing sins, just as
receiving security from punishment follows its own conditions. Change in
a decree due to change in its conditions has been frequently used in
canonical and creational laws and regulations. Moreover, the fact that
an abolished decree, was considered just at the time of its issue, does
not contradict with the decree that replaces it. Similarly, the wisdom
behind both the approval of disasters -pre-prayers and almsgiving- and
their removal -after prayers and almsgiving- is undeniable. In the same
way, the decree towards forgiving sins issued after intercession does
not contradict the decree towards punishment pre-intercession.

Doubt 5:
--------

Almighty God has mentioned that the followers of Satan will certainly be
punished in Hell:

“Indeed as for My servants you do not have any authority over them,
except the perverse who follow you, and indeed hell is the tryst of them
all” (al-Hijr:43)

Therefore, punishing the sinful in the Hereafter is in fact a Divine
decree and as we know, such traditions cannot be abrogated or replaced.

“You will never find any change in Allah’s precedent, and you will never
find any revision in Allah’s precedent” (Fātir:43)

How is it possible for such a decree to change as a result of
intercession?

### Response 5:

###

Accepting intercession for those sinners who possess the necessary
qualifications is one of the unchangeable Divine decrees. In other
words, Divine decrees are affected by real norms and standards, and
should the conditions for occurrence or non-occurrence of a decree
exist, it would be unchangeable. However, the words, which express such
decrees, do not often include all the relevant limitations and
conditions, as it is possible to find verses which on the surface relate
to certain decrees, but in reality they represent a specific case. Such
verses are interpreted in relation to the most probable case they refer
to. Therefore, any decree is unchangeable in terms of its real
conditions and limitations (rather than conditions and limitations used
in the phrases). One such decree is intercession for those specific
sinners who possess the necessary qualifications and follow special
regulations; such an intercession is fixed and unchanged.

Doubt 6:
--------

The promise of intercession will cause boldness and impudence in people,
leading them to commit sins and become astray.

### Response 6:

###

The response to this doubt, which is also applicable to the acceptance
of repentance and compensating sins, is that; being subject to
intercession and forgiveness is limited to certain conditions, the
fulfillment of which cannot be guaranteed by the sinner. For example,
one condition for intercession is that the sinner must protect his faith
until the last minute of his life, and we know that no-one can guarantee
to fulfill such a condition. Moreover, if one who has committed a sin
does not hope to be forgiven, he will become hopeless and disappointed;
this will in turn weaken the motivation for the abandonment of sins and
will cause the continuation of his wrong and deviated way. This is why
it has been the approach of the teachers of religion to instill into the
people the balance between hope and fear - neither holding so much hope
in God’s mercy as to make them become complacent, nor to hold so much
fear of His punishment as to make them loss hope in His Mercy - both of
which, as we know, are among the major sins.

Doubt 7:
--------

The effect of intercession on one’s security from punishment means that
someone else (intercessor’s) has an effect on one’s prosperity and
release from adversity, yet the verse:

‘There is nothing for man except what he attempts to get,’ clearly
implies that it is only one’s own labor which brings reward.

Response 7:
-----------

One’s attempt in reaching an aim is often direct and continues to the
end; however, on some occasions such attempts are indirect and are
therefore performed following the preparation of their means and
preliminaries. A person who is subject to intercession attempts to
approach the preliminaries of prosperity, because becoming a believer
and behaving in a way whereby one deserves intercession, are considered
as attempts at reaching prosperity, even though it is incomplete and
deficient. This is the reason why such a person will be involved in the
pains and difficulties of the life between this world and the Hereafter
aswell as the first stages of Resurrection. Nevertheless, this same
person himself has planted the roots of prosperity - faith - in his
heart and has watered it with his deserving deeds so that it will not
dry out until the end of his worldly life. Therefore, one’s eventual
prosperity depends on his efforts and hard work; however, the
intercessors will contribute in growing the fruits of this tree (of
prosperity), exactly as we witness the fruit of guiding people in this
worldly life, as such guidance cannot replace each individual’s efforts
and hard work.

Questions
---------

1- How can one believe in intercession while there are some verses
denying it?

2- Is the effect of others on God not a requisite for intercession?

3- Are the intercessors more merciful that God?

4- Explain the relationship between intercession and Divine justice.

5- Does intercession cause change in Divine decree?

6- Does the promise of intercession cause impudence in the sinners?

7- Explain how intercession does not contradict with the claim that
people’s prosperity depends on their own attempts and hard work.


