LESSON FOUR: THE WAY OF RESOLVING FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES
====================================================

Introduction
------------

When man enters the domain of resolving the fundamental issues of the
worldview and the way of realisation of understanding the principles of
a true religion, he will initially encounter the following question:

How can these issues be resolved? And how can one discover the
fundamentals of epistemology and the means to achieve it?

Intensive and professional research of this understanding in philosophy
is known as ‘epistemology’, where the different understandings of man
are discussed and their values acknowledged.

To embark on a discussion of all the different types of understanding
would sidetrack us away from the aim of this book. We have thus
summarised the required subjects, which are presented as follows:

The different types of epistemology
-----------------------------------

Man’s understanding can be divided into four parts:

1. Experimental understanding:

The understanding we perceive through our bodily senses is known as
experimental understanding. Intellect however plays an active role in
refining and analysing these sense perceptions.

The experimental sciences such as physics, chemistry and biology are
founded upon experimental understanding.

2. Intellectual understanding:

Intellectual understanding is formed through the abstraction of
concepts. The process is greatly assisted by the intellect; however
syllogisms may sometimes be used as a premise. The domain of
intellectual understanding is logic, philosophy and mathematics.

3. Devotional understanding or religious understanding:

This understanding is based on information that has been previously
gained through a reliable source and has been accepted because of coming
from a trustworthy person or authority. This type of understanding can
sometimes be stronger than those beliefs, which have evolved from sense
perception and experimental knowledge.

4. Mystical or intuitive understanding:

This type of understanding is contrary to all of the above-mentioned
understandings.

The essence of reality is known without any assistance from mental
concepts, intercession or any procedure whatsoever.

However as intuitive or mystical understanding is based on the
interpretation of a witness, who is capable of making mistakes, there is
thus the possibility of this understanding also being wrong.

### a. Different types of worldview

###

By considering the above divisions of epistemology, worldview can also
be divided as follows:

1. Scientific worldview:

Based on the results of experimental knowledge, man develops a universal
vision, which can be known as the scientific worldview.

2. Philosophical worldview:

This worldview is based on the vision that is acquired from intellectual
arguments.

3. Religious worldview:

Man on account of his faith and trust in religious leaders comes to the
realisation of a vision, which can be classified as a religious
worldview.

4. Gnostic Worldview:

The Worldview achieved through purification, which results in
Illumination (kashf) and Witnessing (shuhūd).

We will now look at whether the above four procedures will solve the
fundamental issues of the worldview and provide wise solutions. We will
then deduce which view is the most superior.

### b. Criticism and research

###

Experimental understanding is limited to the realm of matter. The
scientific and experimental sciences have yet to prove or falsify the
issues relating to the principles of the worldview. For instance, one
cannot prove or disprove the existence of God with the help of a
laboratory experiment. Furthermore the realm of experimental
understanding is limited to understanding and answering the issues
concerning the metaphysical realities.

Hence it becomes clear that one cannot understand the principles of the
worldview resolve the issues relating to it or even be concerned with
the enigmas relating to it on the basis of the experimental/scientific
understanding.

The understanding that emanates from devotion and religion requires as
already mentioned, the establishment of a reliable source. Firstly the
existence of the Originator must be proven, followed by the proof of
prophethood, so as the message will be recognised and secure. The
principle of the existence of the Originator and of prophethood cannot
be proven through the message.

For instance, one cannot argue that because the Qur’an has mentioned
that God exists therefore He is proven.

Verily after proving the existence of God, identifying the Prophet, and
the truthfulness of the Qur’an, one can accept the auxiliary beliefs and
practices based upon the trustworthy channel (Prophet) and reliable
source (God).

Hence the issues concerned cannot utilise the medium of devotion to
answer the fundamental questions of principles (existence of God,
prophethood etc.) relating the worldviews.

However the means of gnosis and illumination requires a field of
discussion.

1. A worldview is an understanding that is achieved by virtue of mental
conception; nonetheless there is no place for mental conception in the
realm of witnessing.

2. The interpretation of witnessing and its expression in words requires
a skilful and intellectual mind, which has a background of extensive
research into philosophy.

Those who lack such intelligence and the skilful means to accurately
convey the meanings use concepts and words those are similar.
Nevertheless, they lead to major distortions and perversions.

3. Most of the time the reality, which has been witnessed, is under the
influence of the imagination and the explanation that a mind gives, even
for the witnessing one, is inaccurate.

4. Acquiring the reality, which is known as the worldview (as
interpreted by the intellect) is bound to spiritual journey. Accepting
the path of spiritual journey (sayr wa sulūk), which is itself from the
practical understanding, requires the basis of speculation and issues of
worldview.

Prior to starting upon the path of spiritual journey, one has to resolve
the fundamental issues of the worldviews. The fulfilment of these issues
will instigate gnostic understanding. Essentially true mysticism
(‘irfān) is only realised for an individual who is on the path of
servitude and who strives sincerely for the truth. This process is
subservient to the previous understanding of God and the path of
servitude and submission.

### c. Results to be achieved

###

The only way to resolve the fundamental issues of the worldview is
intellectually, i.e. through the use of the intellect. For this reason
the true worldview should be known as the philosophical worldview.

However knowing the way to resolve problems through a philosophical
worldview is not sufficient, but to achieve a correct worldview it is
also not necessary to resolve all of the philosophical issues. But it is
enough to resolve some of the simple philosophical issues which are
virtually self evident for proving the existence of God (basis issue of
the worldview). It must not be overlooked, that to be specialised in
religious issues in order to have the ability to answer questions and
doubts requires a deep study of philosophy.

Furthermore, it must be realised that just because the other types of
epistemology are limited compared to the intellectual understanding, it
does not mean that they are irrelevant; rather information from them can
be also employed in resolving issues.

The majority of intellectual arguments use a combination of intuitive
knowledge, experimental understanding and sense perception as premises.

Therefore after concluding a correct worldview and ideology one can
arrive at a mystical vision (mukāshafah) through spiritual wayfaring
without any intermediary mental concepts. However these mystical
intuitions can be proven by intellectual arguments.

Questions:
----------

1- Explain the different types of epistemology and their limitations.

2- How many types of worldviews can be assumed?

3- How can one solve the fundamental issues of the worldview?

4- Give a critical analysis of the scientific worldview?

5- How can one utilise experimental understanding to explain the issues
of the worldview?

6- In what way is devotional or religious understanding fruitful?

7- What is the gnostical or mystical worldview? Explain whether the
essential problems relating to the worldview can be solved on the basis
of witnessing? Why?


