LESSON FIVE: KNOWING GOD
========================

Introduction
------------

The foundation of religion is the belief in the Supreme Creator of the
universe. This point constitutes the divisive element, which separates
the divine worldview from the materialistic worldview. The primary
factor to be established in the search for reality is whether or not God
exists. We have to arrive at a positive or negative conclusion through
the utilisation of the intellect.

If the conclusion is positive then we proceed to review the secondary
issues (such as unity, justice and other divine qualities). If on the
other hand the result proves to be negative, then we accept the
materialistic worldview and there is no further need to investigate into
religion.

### Cognition through knowledge by presence and knowledge by acquisition

###

There are two ways of knowing God; one way through acquired knowledge
and the other way through knowledge by presence. The meaning of
knowledge by presence means that an individual knows God through a type
of inward witnessing, without any intermediary or mental concepts. It is
self evident that if someone has conscious witnessing with regards to
God - the way that the great gnostics have claimed - then he does not
require any intellectual proof or reasoning. However for the average
individual this type of knowledge and vision is only possible through
self-building and spiritual wayfaring. Although a weak version of it is
present in the average man it is not combined with awareness and is not
considered sufficient enough to acquire a worldview.

The meaning of knowledge by acquisition is that an individual with the
help of universal concepts -such as the Creator, All Knowing,
Omnipotent, etc -realises intellectually the existence of God.

However this understanding is limited and inadequate because it adheres
upon the intellectual capacity of that individual and subsequently he
associates the additional acquired knowledge to this base in order to
establish a harmonious system of belief (worldview).

Acquired knowledge is established upon intellectual proofs and
philosophical reasoning. Once acquired man can enter the realm of
understanding and realising knowledge by presence.

### Cognition through intrinsic nature

###

In most of the discourses of the saints, gnostics and philosophers we
find that knowing God is a natural instinct of man, and something that
is inherent to him through his intrinsic nature. In order to understand
these definitions one has to define the meaning of intrinsic nature.

In Arabic the word ‘fitrah’ is used to imply a ‘type of creation’. Such
things, which are related to this intrinsic nature, are called ‘fitri’,
and are those things whose creation depends on something already
existent.

We consider those things, which are fitri to have three distinctive
features:

1. Different creatures all have a similar intrinsic nature within their
species, although there may be variations with regards to it being
strong or weak.

2. Things related to the intrinsic nature in the course of history have
been determined as being permanent and perpetual. “The origination of
Allah according to which he originated mankind (there is no altering
Allah’s creation)”. (al-Rūm:30)

3. The intrinsic nature is self-sufficient from education and training,
however it can be intensified and guided through the assistance of
discipline.

This intrinsic nature of man can be divided into two parts:

a. Cognition related to the intrinsic nature endowed to man and not
acquired through learning.

b. Those tendencies and impulses, which are related to the intrinsic
nature and are essential elements in the creation of every individual.

On this basis, if awareness of God is established within every human
being and is not a thing that man needs to acquire through research,
then it can be called, ‘Knowing God through intrinsic nature’.

If all humans have the tendency towards worshipping God, then it would
be known as, ‘Worshipping God through intrinsic nature.’ In lesson two
we have indicated that most of the experts in the fields of anthropology
and psychology have regarded the tendencies towards religion as
psychological and have labelled it as a ‘sense of religiosity’ or as
‘religious sentiment’. We must emphasise that ‘knowing God’ is based on
man’s intrinsic nature. However the intrinsic nature of knowing and
worshipping God is not with full awareness in a manner that it will
suffice ordinary men from intellectual reasoning.

One should not forget that the element of knowledge by presence exists
in every individual to a lower degree and is perfected through
intellectual reasoning.

In conclusion, cognition of God based upon intrinsic nature means that
man’s heart is aware of God, and his spirit has the potentiality of
knowing God with full awareness.

Questions
---------

1. Name the most fundamental issue of a worldview? Why it is considered
the most fundamental?

2. Explain the meaning of knowledge by presence and knowledge by
acquisition?

3. Is it possible to acquire knowledge by presence through intellectual
reasoning and philosophical proof? Why?

4. What is the role of acquired knowledge for an individual, who wants
to arrive to knowledge by presence?

5. What is the meaning of intrinsic nature - fitrah?

6. Explain the specialties of those things, which are related to the
intrinsic nature of man.

7. Explain the different types of things considered as ‘fitri?

8. Which particular aspect of intrinsic nature is in relationship to
God?

9. Define cognition through intrinsic nature. Is the intrinsic nature of
man sufficient in itself for the average man to know God, without
resorting to intellectual reasoning? Why?


