LESSON SIX: THE SIMPLE WAY OF KNOWING GOD
=========================================

The ways of knowing God
-----------------------

There are numerous mediums through which man can know God, many of which
are mentioned in the different books of philosophy, theology and in the
discourses of saints. These mediums or ways have used distinctive forms
of reasoning and proofs:

for example some have utilised (corporeal) senses and experimental
sciences, on the other hand some have applied only intellectual
arguments as a premise for knowing God. Certain schools attempt to prove
God directly and certain schools to only prove His existence, which does
not depend on any existent (necessary existent). In order to understand
His complexity (attributes), the establishment of other arguments is
required.

The proofs and reasoning of knowledge about God can be compared for
example to the multiplicity of ways by which one can cross a river: some
are like simple wooden bridges which are drawn over the river, by which
a light-weight traveller can easily cross and reach his destination.
Other bridges may be built of stone, which results in them being strong
but also longer, the way thus becomes lengthier. Finally, some bridges
such as intricate iron bridges, which contain tunnels for trains,
provide a more complex way of travelling.

An individual with a simple mind can recognise God through a very simple
way and fulfil his responsibilities of servitude. If one has encountered
many criticisms, which caused him to doubt, then he should prefer the
stone bridge. The man who is entangled with extreme doubts and questions
must choose the complex path; it is essential for him, even though his
path may be lengthened.

We now aim to outline the three different levels by which man can know
God. Firstly by defining the simple way, then the intermediary way and
finally the more complex way, this way resolves several fundamental
issues of philosophy and is for those minds, which are full of doubts
and that have become deviated from the reality and goal.

a. Specialties of the simple way
--------------------------------

The simple way of knowing about God is bestowed with different merits
and peculiarities, the most important of them are mentioned as follows:

1. The initial way is the most simple of all and does not require any
intricate or proficient premises. It is easily understood by all degrees
of mind.

2. This path directly accepts God as the Wise Creator. In this way it is
unlike philosophy or theology (kalām) where the proof for the existence
of God is first accomplished and then followed by the proof for the
establishment of His attributes through intellectual reasoning.

3. This way is based upon and emphasises upon the intrinsic nature of
man. Through reflection man will come to witness the beauty of God in
the creation as well as in other manifestations.

4. The saints for guiding the masses utilise this path, which is based
upon the intrinsic nature of man. However when discussing or debating
with atheists, materialistic philosophers or sharp-minded individuals,
the leaders would choose a different method by which to debate.

b. Familiar signs.
------------------

By reflecting upon the signs (āyāt) around us, man can arrive at an
understanding of his Creator. In Qur’anic terminology such reflection is
termed as ‘contemplation upon the signs of the Lord’. Hence everything
that is in the heavens and the earth and within man himself reflects God
and channels the heart to feel the presence of God’s guidance in the
universe.

This very book that you have in your hand is a sign from the author. Is
it not true that by reading it you are becoming aware that the writer is
intelligent and has a purpose?

Have you ever thought that this work is the result of a chain of
reactions without any intent? Is it not an absurd idea that an
encyclopaedia of a hundred volumes could have come into existence as an
effect of an explosion which came to occur in a metal mine, the
fragments of which took the form of letters and through accidental
encounters with pieces of paper made writing appear and then the papers
also accidentally became arranged and bound into volumes?

To accept blind accidents as a means of explaining the vast universe as
a phenomenon, with all the hidden and uncovered secrets and wisdoms
behind it is a thousand times more absurd than the above-mentioned idea!

Every determined order is the sign of a determiner who is orderly and
has a determination. This type of order can be perceived all over the
universe. These orders bring together a universal orderliness, which has
been brought about by a wise creator who perpetually manages it.

Shrubs of rose stem out from mud and clay in a beautiful garden, with
distinctive colours and a variety of fragrances, an apple tree
originates from a small seed and every year gives a good amount of
apples which are fair in taste, colour, and fragrance.

Furthermore the song of the nightingale, the chicken hatching out of an
egg, by beating the ground with the beak, and the newborn calf suckling
its mothers for milk, at the same time the breasts are ready with the
supply of milk for the baby etc. These are all signs from Him.

Is it not surprising that the honeybees, cows, and goats provide man
with honey and milk especially for his use and in unlimited quantity?
Ungrateful man however does not recognise these familiar bounties and
encounters them with confrontation and dissidence.

In his very body man can see the outstanding effects of wise
supervision:

the shape of the body with balanced functional division, the external
vital structure with harmonious internal organs composed of millions of
cells, which are all from a mother cell, each cell containing a specific
portion of special material to function properly, such as breathing
oxygen through the lungs, which is then transported by the red blood
cells, and the liver which produces sugar necessary for the human body,
and the replacement of destroyed cells with new cells, and the
protection of the human body by the white blood cells against viruses
and microbes, and the various hormones

which are produced by different glands- organising the physiological
tasks of human body, all the abovementioned are signs reflecting
Almighty God.

This physiological system is mysterious, and even though dozens of
centuries have passed, man still has further ground to discover. If one
investigates the smallest details of the living cell, he would
undoubtedly question as to who was the administrator and originator
behind it all.

It is the Wise Creator who holds the utmost perfection and orderliness,
who manages such affairs:

“That is Allah! Then where do you stray?” (al-An’ām:95) It is apparent,
that as knowledge expands and grows resulting in more discoveries of
natural laws and their relationships, it will result in the unveiling of
the secret wisdom behind the creation. However contemplating on these
simple, visible, and clear signs is sufficient enough for pure and
uncontaminated hearts.

Questions:
----------

1- Explain the different ways of knowing God and what their
peculiarities are?

2- Define the simple way of knowing about God and its peculiarities.

3- Explain the determined signs of creation.

4- Give the logical proof for ‘order’.


