Zal and Rudabeh
===============

Anon it came about that Zal desired to see the kingdom. And he set
forth, and there followed after him a goodly train, and when they had
journeyed a while they marched with pomp into Cabul. Now Mihrab, who was
descended from Zohak the Serpent, reigned in Cabul, yet he was worthy,
prudent, and wise. When he heard that the son of Saum, to whom he paid
tribute, drew nigh unto the city, he went out to meet him, and his
nobles went with him, and slaves bearing costly gifts. And Zal, hearing
that Mihrab was at hand, prepared a feast in his tents, and Mihrab and
his train feasted with him until the night was far spent. Now, after the
King was gone, Zal praised his beauty. Then a noble rose up and said
unto him-

"O Zal, thou knowest not beauty since thou hast not beheld the daughter
of this man. For she is like unto the slender cypress, her face is
brighter than the sun, her mouth is a pomegranate flower."

When Zal heard these words he was filled with longing, and sleep would
not visit his eyelids for thinking of her beauty.

Now, when the day dawned, he opened the doors of his court, and the
nobles stood about him, each man according to his rank. And presently
there came from Cabul Mihrab the King to tender morning greeting to the
stranger without his gates. And Zal desired that Mihrab should crave a
boon at his hands. Then spake Mihrab unto him saying-

"O ruler mighty and great, I have but one desire, and to bring it to
pass is easy. For I crave thee that thou dwell as guest beneath my roof,
and let my heart rejoice in thy presence."

Then Zal said unto him, "O King, ask not this boon at my hands, I pray
thee, for it can in nowise be accomplished. The Shah and Saum would be
angered should they learn that I had eaten under the roof of Zohak. I
beg of thee ask aught but this."

When Mihrab heard these words he was sorrowful, and bent low before Zal,
and departed from out the tents. And the eye of Zal looked after him,
and yet again he spake his praises. Then he bethought him of the King's
daughter, and how that she was fair, and he was sunk in brooding and
desire, and the days passed unheeded over his head.

Now it came to pass that on a certain morning Mihrab stepped forth from
his palace to the house of the women to visit Sindokht his wife, and her
daughter Rudabeh. Truly the house was like to a garden for colour and
perfume, and over all shone those moons of beauty. Now when Mihrab had
greeted Rudabeh he marvelled at her loveliness, and called down the
blessings of Heaven upon her head. Then Sindokht opened her lips and
questioned Mihrab concerning the stranger whose tents were without their
gates. And she said-

"I pray thee tell unto me what manner of man is this white-haired son of
Saum, and is he worthy the nest or the throne? "

Then Mihrab said unto her, "O my fair cypress, the son of Saum is a hero
among men. His heart is like unto a lion's, his strength is as an
elephant's, to his friends he is a gracious Nile, unto his enemies a
wasting crocodile. And in him are even blemishes turned to beauties, his
white locks but enhance his glory."

When Rudabeh had listened to these words her heart burned with love for
Zal, so that she could neither eat nor rest, and was like unto one that
hath changed her shape. And after a while, because that she could bear
the burden thereof no longer, she told her secret to the slaves that
loved and served her. And she charged them tell no man, and entreated of
them that they would aid her to allay the troubles of her heart. And
when the slaves had listened to her story, they were filled with fear,
and with one accord entreated her that she would dismiss from her heart
one branded among men, and whom his own father had cast out. But Rudabeh
would not listen to their voice. And when they beheld that she was firm
in her spirit, and that their words were vain, they cast about how they
might serve her. And one among them who was wise above the rest opened
her lips and spake-

"O moon-faced beauty, slender cypress, it shall be done at thy desire.
Thy slaves will neither rest nor slumber until the royal youth shall
have become the footstool to thy feet."

Then Rudabeh was glad and said-

"An the issue be happy, there shall be planted for thee a noble tree,
and it shall bear riches and jewels, and wisdom shall cull its fruits."

Then the slaves pondered in their hearts how they should compass their
end, for they knew that only by craft could it be brought about.
Straightway they clothed themselves in costly raiment, and went forth
blithely into the garden of flowers that was spread beside the river's
bank without the city. And they gathered roses, and decked their hair
with blossoms, and threw them into the stream for sooth-telling; and as
they gathered they came unto the spot over against which were pitched
the tents of Zal. Now Zal beheld them from his tent, and he questioned
them concerning these rose-gatherers. And one uprose and said unto him-

"They are slaves sent forth by the moon of Cabul into the garden of
flowers."

Now when Zal heard this his heart leaped for joy, and he set forth unto
the river's bank with only one page to bear him company. And seeing a
water-bird fly upwards, he took his bow and shot it through the heart,
and it fell among the rose-gatherers. Then Zal bade the boy cross the
water and bring him the bird. And when he had landed, the moon-faced
women pressed about him and questioned him, saying-

"O youth, tell us the name of him who aimeth thus surely, for verily he
is a king among men."

Then the boy answering said, "What! know ye not the son of Saum the
hero? The world hath not his equal for strength and beauty."

But the girls reproved him, and said, "Not so, boast not thus vainly,
for the house of Mihrab holdeth a sun that o'ershines all besides."

And the page smiled, and the smile yet lingered on his lips when he came
back to Zal. And Zal said-

"Why smilest thou, boy? What have they spoken unto thee that thou
openest thy lips and showest thy ivory teeth? "

Then the boy told unto him the speech of the women. And Zal said-

"Go over yet again and bid them tarry, that they may bear back jewels
with their roses."

And he chose forth from among his treasures trinkets of pearl and gold,
and sent them to the slaves. Then the one who had sworn to serve Rudabeh
above the rest craved that she might look upon the face of the hero, for
she said-

"A secret that is known to three is one no longer."

And Zal granted her desire, and she told him of Rudabeh and of her
beauty, and his passion burned the more. And he spake-

"Show unto me, I pray thee, the path by which I may behold this fair
one, for my heart is filled with longing."

Then the slave said, "Suffer that we go back to the house of the women,
and we will fill the ears of Rudabeh with praises of the son of Saum,
and will entangle her in the meshes of our net, and the lion shall
rejoice in his chase of the lamb."

Then Zal bade her go forth, and the women returned to the house
rejoicing and saying-

"The lion entereth the snare spread forth to entrap him, and the wishes
of Rudabeh and Zal will be accomplished."

But when they were come to the gates the porter chid them that they were
gone without while the stranger sojourned in Cabul, and they were
troubled and sore afraid for their secret. But they stilled his wrath
and came unto where Rudabeh awaited them. And they told her of Zal, the
son of Saum, and of his beauty and his prowess. And Rudabeh smiled and
said-

"Wherefore have ye thus changed your note? For a while back ye spake
with scorn of this bird-reared youth, on whose head hang the locks of a
sage, but now are ye loud in his praises."

Then Rudabeh began privily to deck her house that it might be worthy a
guest. With brocades of Roum and carpets of Ind did she hang it, and she
perfumed it with musk and ambergris, and flowers did she cause to bloom
about the rooms. And when the sun was sunk, and the doors of the house
were locked and the keys withdrawn, a slave went forth unto Zal, the son
of Saum. And she spake unto him in a low voice-

"Come now, for all is ready."

And Zal followed after her. And when they were come to the house of the
women Zal beheld the daughter of the King standing upon the roof, and
her beauty was like unto a cypress on which the full moon shineth. And
when she beheld him, she spake and said-

"I bid thee welcome, O young man, son of a hero, and may the blessing of
Heaven rest upon thee."

And Zal answered her benison, and prayed that he might enter into nearer
converse, for he was on the ground and she was on the roof. Then the
Peri-faced loosened her tresses, and they were long, so that they fell
from the battlements unto the ground. And she said unto Zal-

"Here hast thou a cord without flaw. Mount, O Pehliva, and seize my
black locks, for it is fitting that I should be a snare unto thee."

But Zal cried, "Not so, O fair one, it would beseem me ill to do thee
hurt."

And he covered her hair with kisses. Then he called for a cord and made
a running knot, and threw it upwards and fastened it to the battlements.
And with a bound he swung himself upon the roof. Then Rudabeh took his
hand and they stepped down together into the golden chambers, and the
slaves stood round about them. And they gazed upon each other and knew
that they excelled in beauty, and the hours slipped by in sweet talk,
while love was fanned in their hearts. Then Zal cried-

"O fair cypress, musk-perfumed, when Minuchihr shall learn of this he
will be angered and Saum also will chide. And they will say I have
forgotten my God, and will lift their hands against me. But I swear unto
thee that this life is to me vile if it be not spent in thy presence.
And I call upon Heaven to hear me that none other but thee will I call
my bride."

And Rudabeh said, "I too will swear unto thee this oath."

So the hours sped, and there arose from out the tents of the King the
sound of drums that announce the coming of the day. Then cried Zal and
Rudabeh of one accord-

"O glory of the world, tarry yet a while, neither arrive so quickly."

But the sun gave no ear to their reproaches, and the hour to part was
come. Then Zal swung himself from the battlements unto the ground, and
quitted the house of his beloved.

Now when the earth was flooded with light, and the nobles and chiefs had
tendered unto Zal their morning greetings as was their wont, he called
about him his Mubids, and laid before them how that he was filled with
love for a daughter of the Serpent. And the Mubids when they heard it
were troubled, and their lips were closed, and the words were chained
upon their tongues. For there was none of them that listed to mingle
poison in the honey of this love. Whereupon Zal reproved them, and said
that he would bestow on them rich gifts if they would open their mouths.
Then they spake and said unto him that the honour of a king could not
suffer by a woman, and though Mihrab be indeed of Zohak's race, he was
noble and valiant. And they urged him to write unto his father and crave
Saum to wait upon the Shah.

Then Zal called unto him a scribe and bade him write down the words that
he spake. And he told unto Saum his love and his fears. And he recalled
unto him how that he had cast him out, and how that he had lived in a
nest, and a bird had reared him, and the sun had poured down upon his
head, and raw flesh had been his nourishment the while his father had
sat within a goodly house clothed in silk. And he recalled the promise
given to him by Saum. Neither did he seek to justify that which was come
about. Then he gave the letter to a messenger, and bade him ride until
he should be come into the presence of Saum.

When Saum had heard the words of his son his spirit was troubled, and he
cried-

"Woe unto me, for now is clear what hath so long been hidden. One whom a
wild bird hath reared looketh for the fulfilment of wild desires, and
seeks union with an accursed race."

And he pondered long what he should answer. For he said, "If I say,
Abandon this desire, sow no discord, return to reason, I break my oath
and God will punish me. Yet if I say, Thy desire is just, satisfy the
passions of thy heart, what offspring can come to pass from the union of
a Deev and the nursling of a bird?"

And the heart of Saum was heavy with care. So he called unto him his
Mubids that they should search the stars, for he said-

"If I mingle fire and water I do ill, and ill will come of it."

Then all that day the Wise Men searched the secrets of Fate, and they
cast the horoscope of Zal and Rudabeh, and at even they returned to the
King rejoicing. And they found him torn with anguish. Then they said-

"Hail unto thee, O Saum, for we have followed the movement of the stars
and counted their course, and we have read the message of the skies. And
it is written, 'A clear spring shall issue into the day, a son shall be
born to Zal, a hero full of power and glory, and there shall not be his
like in Iran.' "

Now when Saum had drunk in these words, his soul was uplifted, and he
poured gifts upon the Mubids. Then he called to him the messenger of
Zal, and he gave him pieces of silver, and bade him return unto his
master and say-

"I hold thy passion folly, O my son, but because of the oath that I have
sworn to thee it shall be done at thy desire. I will hie me unto Iran
and lay thy suit before the Shah."

Then Saum called together his army and set forth for Iran, and the sound
of trumpets and cymbals went before him.

Now when the messenger was come back to Zal, he rejoiced and praised
God, and gave gold and silver to the poor, and gifts unto his servants.
But when night was come he could not close his eyes in slumber, nor
could he rest during the day. Neither did he drink wine nor demand the
singers, for his soul was filled with longing after his love. And
presently there came out to him a slave, and he gave unto her Saum's
letter that she might bear it to Rudabeh. And Rudabeh rejoiced also, and
chose from among her treasures a costly crown and a ring of worth, and
bade the woman bear them unto Zal. Now as she quitted the chamber she
met Sindokht. And the Queen questioned her and said-

"Whence comest thou? Reply to all my questions, neither seek thou to
deceive me, for already a long time do I suspect thy passing to and
fro."

And the woman trembled as she heard these words, and fell down and
kissed the feet of the Queen, and said-

"Have pity on thine handmaiden, who is poor and gaineth her bread as she
can. I go into the houses of the rich and sell to them robes and jewels.
And Rudabeh hath this day bought of me a tiara and a bracelet of gold."

Then said Sindokht, "Show unto me the money thou hast received for the
same, that my anger be appeased."

And the woman answered and said, "Demand not that I show unto thee that
which I have not, for Rudabeh will pay me to-morrow."

Now Sindokht knew that these words were feigned, and she searched the
sleeve of the woman, and lo! she found therein the tiara that Rudabeh
had broidered with her hands. Then she was angered, and commanded that
the slave should be bound in chains. And she desired that her daughter
be brought into her presence. And when she was come, Sindokht opened her
mouth and spake, saying-

"O moon of noble race, to whom hath been taught naught but that which is
good, how hast thou gone astray upon the paths of evil? O my daughter,
confide unto thy mother thy secrets. From whom cometh this woman? For
what man are destined thy gifts?"

When she had heard, Rudabeh was abashed, but after a while she told all
unto Sindokht. Now when the Queen had heard she was confounded, for she
feared the wrath of the Shah, and that he would raze Cabul to the dust
for this mischance. And she went into her rooms and wept in her sorrow.
Then presently Mihrab the King came in to Sindokht, and he was of joyful
mind, for Zal had received him graciously. But when he beheld her tears
he questioned of her grief. Then she told him how that his daughter was
filled with love for Zal, the son of Saum. And when Mihrab had heard her
to an end, his heart also was troubled, for he knew that Cabul could not
stand before the Shah.

Minuchihr, too, when he had heard these things, was troubled, for he
beheld in them the device of Ahriman, and feared lest this union should
bring evil upon Iran. And he bade Nauder call Saum before him. Now when
Saum heard the desire of the Shah, he spake and said-

"I obey, and the sight of the King will be a banquet. unto my soul."

Then Saum went into the presence of Minuchihr, and he kissed the ground,
and called down blessings upon the head of the Shah. But Minuchihr
raised him and seated him beside him on the throne, and straightway
began to question him concerning the war, and the Deevs of Mazinderan.
Then Saum told him all the story of his battles. And Minuchihr listened
with joy though the tale was long, and when Saum had ended he praised
his prowess. And he lifted his crown unto heaven and rejoiced that his
enemies were thus confounded. Then be bade a banquet be spread, and all
night long the heroes feasted and shortened the hours with wine. But
when the first rays of morn had shed their light, the curtains of the
Shah's house were opened, that he might hold audience and grant the
petitions of his people. And Saum the Pehliva came the first to stand
before the King, for he desired to speak to him of Zal. But the Shah of
the world would not suffer him to open his lips, but said unto him-

"Go hence, O Saum, and take with thee thine army, for I command thee to
go yet again to battle. Set forth unto Cabul and burn the house of
Mihrab the King, and utterly destroy his race and all who serve him, nor
suffer that any of the seed of Zohak escape destruction, for I will that
the earth be delivered of this serpent brood."

When Saum heard these words he knew that the Shah was angered, and that
speech would avail him naught. So he kissed the throne and touched the
earth with his forehead, and said, "Lord, I am thy servant, and I obey
thy desires." And he departed, and the earth trembled under the stamping
of footmen and of hoofs, and the air of the city was darkened with his
spears.

Now the news of Saum's intent reached even unto Cabul, and the land was
sunk in woe, and weeping filled the house of the King. But Zal was
wroth, and he went forth to meet his father. And when he was come to the
spot where he had encamped his army, he craved an audience. And Saum
granted it, and Zal reminded him yet again of his oath, and desired that
he would spare the land of Cabul, nor visit his judgments upon the
innocent. When Saum had listened, his heart was moved, and he said-

"O my son, thou speakest that which is right. To thee have I been unjust
from the day of thy birth. But stay thy wrath, for surely I will find a
remedy, and thy wishes shall yet be accomplished. For thou shalt bear a
letter unto the Shah, and when he shall have looked on thy face, he will
be moved with compassion and cease to trouble thee."

Then Zal kissed the ground before his father and craved the blessings of
God upon his head. And Saum dictated a letter to the Shah, and he spoke
therein of all he had done for Minuchihr, and how he had killed the
dragon that had laid waste the land, how he had ever subdued the foes of
Iran, and how the frontiers were enlarged by his hands. Yet now was he
waxing old, and could no longer do doughty deeds. But a brave son was
his, worthy and true, who would follow in his footsteps. Only his heart
was devoured of love, and perchance he would die if his longing were
unsatisfied. And therewith he commended to the wisdom of the Shah the
affairs of Zal.

When the letter was ended Zal set forth with it unto the court, and the
flower of his army went with him.

But the fear of Minuchihr was great in Cabul, and Mihrab pondered how he
should quench the wrath of the King of kings. And he spake to Sindokht
and said-

"For that the King is angered against me because of thee and thy
daughter, and because I cannot stand before him, I will lead Rudabeh
unto his court and kill her before his eyes. Perchance his anger may be
thus allayed."

Sindokht listened to his words in silence, and when he had ended she
cast about her for a plan, for she was quick of wit. And when she had
found one she came again into the presence of Mihrab, and she craved of
him that he should give her the key of his treasury. For she said-

"This is not the hour to be strait-handed; suffer that I take what
seemeth good unto me and go before Saum, it may be that I move him to
spare the land."

And Mihrab agreed to her demand because of the fear that devoured him.
Then Sindokht went out to the house of Saum, and she took with her three
hundred thousand pieces of gold, and sixty horses caparisoned in silver,
bearing sixty slaves that held cups filled to the brim with musk and
camphor, and rubies, and turquoise, and precious stones of every kind.
And there followed two hundred dromedaries and four tall Indian
elephants laden with carpets and brocades of Roum, and the train reached
for two miles beyond the King's gates. Now when Sindokht was come to
Seistan she bade the guardians of the door say unto Saum that an envoy
was come from Cabul bearing a message. And Saum granted an audience, and
Sindokht was brought into his presence. Then she kissed the ground at
his feet and called upon Heaven to shower down blessings on his head.
And when she had done so, she caused her gifts to be laid before Saum,
and when Saum beheld these treasures, he marvelled and thought within
himself, "How cometh it that a woman is sent as envoy from a land that
boasteth such riches? If I accept them the Shah will be angered, and if
I refuse perchance Zal will reproach me that I rob him of his heritage."
So he lifted his head and said-

"Let these treasures be given unto the treasurer of my son."

When Sindokht beheld that her gifts were accepted, she rejoiced and
raised her voice in speech. And she questioned Saum, saying-

"Tell me, I pray thee, what wrong have the people of Cabul done unto
thee that thou wouldst destroy them?"

Then answered Saum the hero, "Reply unto my questions and lie not. Art
thou the slave or the wife of Mihrab, and is it thy daughter whom Zal
hath seen? If indeed it be so, tell me, I pray, of her beauty, that I
may know if she be worthy of my son."

Then Sindokht said, "O Pehliva, swear to me first a great oath that thou
wilt spare my life and the lives of those dear unto me. And when I am
assured of thy protection I will recount all that thou desirest."

Then Saum took the hand of Sindokht, and he sware unto her a great oath,
and gave her his word and his promise. And when she had heard it she was
no longer afraid, and she told him all her secrets. And she said-

"I am of the race of Zohak, and wife unto the valiant Mihrab, and mother
of Rudabeh, who hath found favour in the eyes of thy son. And I am come
to learn of thy desire, and who are thine enemies in Cabul. Destroy the
wicked, and those who merit chastisement, but spare, I pray thee, the
innocent, or thy deeds will change day into night."

Then spake Saum, "My oath is sacred, and if it cost my life, thou and
thine and Cabul may rest assured that I will not harm them. And I desire
that Zal should find a wife in Rudabeh, though she be of an alien race."

And he told her how that he had written to the Shah a letter of
supplication such as only one in grief could pen, and how Zal was absent
with the message, and he craved her to tell him of Rudabeh.

But Sindokht replied, "If the Pehliva of the world will make the hearts
of his slaves rejoice, he will visit us and look with his own eyes upon
our moon."

And Saum smiled and said, "Rest content and deliver thine heart of
cares, for all shall end according unto thy desires."

When Sindokht heard this she bade him farewell and made all haste to
return. And Saum loaded her with gifts and bade her depart in peace. And
Sindokht's face shone brightly, like unto the moon when she hath been
eclipsed, and hope once more reigned in her breast.

Now listen to what happened to Zal while these things were passing in
Seistan. When he was come to the court of Minuchihr he hastened into his
presence, and kissed the ground at his feet, and lay prostrate before
him in the dust. And when the Shah saw this he was moved, and bade his
servants raise Zal, and pour musk before him. Then Zal drew nigh unto
the throne and gave to the King the letter written by Saum the son of
Neriman. And when Minuchihr had read it he was grieved, and said-

"This letter, written by Saum thy father in his sorrow, hath awakened an
old pain within me. But for the sake of my faithful servant I will do
unto thee that which is thy desire. Yet I ask that thou abide with me a
little while that I may seek counsel about thee."

Then the cooks brought forth a table of gold, and Zal was seated beside
the Shah and all the nobles according to their rank, and they ate flesh
and drank wine together. Then when the mantle of night was fallen over
the earth Zal sprang upon his steed and scoured the land in the unrest
of his spirit, for his heart was full of thoughts and his mouth of
words. But when morning was come he presented himself before the Shah in
audience. And his speech and mien found favour in the eyes of the Shah,
and he called unto him his Wise Men and bade them question the stars of
this matter. Three days and three nights did the Mubids search the
heavens without ceasing, and on the fourth they came before the Shah and
spake. And they said unto him-

"Hail to thee, hero of the golden girdle, for we bring unto thee glad
tidings. The son of Saum and the daughter of Mihrab shall be a glorious
pair, and from their union shall spring a son like to a war-elephant,
and he shall subdue all men by his sword and raise the glory of Iran
even unto the skies. And he shall uproot the wicked from the earth so
that there shall be no room for them. Segsars and Mazinderan shall feel
the weight of his mace, and he shall bring much woe upon Turan, but Iran
shall be loaded with prosperity at his hands. And he will give back
sleep to the unhappy, and close the doors of discord, and bar the paths
of wrong-doing. The kingdom will rejoice while he lives; Roum, Ind, and
Iran will grave his name upon their seals."

When the Shah had heard this he charged the Mubids that they keep secret
that which they had revealed unto him. And he called for Zal that he
might question him and test his wisdom. And the Wise Men and the Mubids
were seated in a circle, and they put these questions to the son of
Saum.

And the first opened his mouth and said-

"Twelve trees, well grown and green, Fair and lofty, have I seen; Each
has sprung with vigorous sprout, Sending thirty branches out; Wax no
more, nor wane, they can In the kingdom of Iran."

And Zal pondered a while and then answered and said-

'Twelve moons in the year, and each I praise As a new-made king on a new
throne's blaze: Each comes to an end in thirty days."

Then the second Mubid questioned him and said-

"Thou whose head is high in air, Rede me now of coursers twain; Both are
noble, swift to speed; Black as storms in the night one steed, The other
crystal, white and fair, They race for ever and haste in vain, Towards a
goal they never gain."

And Zal thought again yet a while and answered-

"Two shining horses, one black, one white. That run for ever in rapid
flight; The one is the day, the other the night, That count the throbs
of the heavens height, Like the hunted prey from the following chase
They flee, yet neither wins the race."

Then the third Mubid questioned him and said-

"Thirty knights before the king Pass along. Regard the thing Closely;
one is gone. Again Look- the thirty are in train."

And Zal answered and spake-

"Thirty knights of whom the train Is full, then fails, then fills again,
Know, each moon is reckoned thus, So willed by God who governs us, And
thy word is true of the faint moon's wane, Now failing in darkness, now
shining plain."

Then the fourth Mubid questioned him and said-

"See a green garden full of springs; A strong man with a sickle keen
Enters, and reaps both dry and green; No word thine utmost anguish
wrings."

And Zal bethought him and replied-

"Thy word was of a garden green, A reaper with a sickle keen, Who cuts
alike the fresh and the dry Nor heedeth prayer nor any cry: Time is the
reaper, we the grass; Pity nor fear his spirit has, But old and young he
reaps alike. No rank can stay his sickle's strike, No love, but he will
leave it lorn, For to this end all men are born. Birth opes to all the
gate of Life, Death shuts it down on love and strife, And Fate, that
counts the breath of man, Measures to each a reckoned span."

Then the fifth Mubid questioned him and said-

"Look how two lofty cypresses Spring up, like reeds, from stormy seas,
There builds a bird his dwelling-place; Upon the one all night he stays,
But swift, with the dawn, across he flies; The abandoned tree dries up
and dies, While that whereon he sets his feet Breathes odours out,
surpassing sweet. The one is dead for ever and aye, The other lives and
blooms alway."

Then Zal yet again bethought him before he said-

"Hear of the sea-born cypresses, Where builds a bird, and rests, and
flees. From the Ram to the Scales the earth o'erpowers, Shadows obscure
of the night that lowers, But when the Scales' sign it must quit,
Darkness and gloom o'ermaster it; The sides of heaven thy fable shows
Whence grief to man or blessing flows, The sun like a bird flies to and
fro, Weal with him bringing, but leaving woe."

Then the sixth Mubid questioned him, and it was the last question that
he asked, and he deemed it the hardest of all to answer. And all men
hung upon his words and listened to the answer of Zal. And the Mubid
said-

"Builded on a rock I found A town. Men left the gate and chose A thicket
on the level ground. Soon their soaring mansions rose Lifting roofs that
reach the moon, Some men slaves, some kings, became, Of their earlier
city soon The memory died in all. Its name None breathed. But hark! an
earthquake; down, Lost in the chasm lies the land- Now long they for
their rock-built town, Enduring things they understand. Seek in thy soul
the truth of this; This before kings proclaim, I was, If rightly thou
the riddle rede, Black earth to musk thou hast changed indeed."

And Zal pondered this riddle but a little while, and then opened his
mouth and said-

"The eternal, final world is shown By image of a rock-built town; The
thicket is our passing life, A place of pleasure and of pain, A world of
dreams and eager strife, A time for labour, and loss, and gain; This
counts thy heart-beats, at its will Prolongs their pulse or makes it
still. But winds and earthquake rouse: a cry Goes up of bitterness and
woe, Now we must leave our homes below And climb the rocky fastness
high. Another reaps our fruit of pain, That yet to another leaves his
gain; So was it aye, must so remain. Well for us if our name endure,
Though we shall pass, beloved and pure, For all the evil man hath done,
Stalks, when he dies, in the sight of the sun; When dust is strown on
breast and head, Then desolation reigns with dread."

When Zal had spoken thus the Shah was glad, and an the assembly were
amazed, and lauded the son of Saum. And the King bade a great banquet be
prepared, and they drank wine until the world was darkened, and the
heads of the drinkers were troubled. Then when morn was come Zal prayed
that the Shah would dismiss him. But Minuchihr said-

"Not so, abide with me yet another day," and he bade the drums be beaten
to call together his heroes, for he desired to test Zal also in feats of
strength. And the Shah sat upon the roof of his house and looked down
upon the games, and he beheld Zal, the son of Saum, do mighty deeds of
prowess. With his arrow did he shoot farther and straighter than the
rest, and with his spear he pierced all shields, and in wrestling he
overcame the strongest who had never known defeat. When the nobles
beheld these doughty deeds they shouted and clapped their hands, and
Minuchihr loaded Zal with gifts. Then he prepared a reply unto the
letter of Saum. And he wrote-

"O my Pehliva, hero of great renown, I have listened to thy desires, and
I have beheld the youth who is worthy to be thy son. And he hath found
favour in my sight, and I send him back to thee satisfied. May his
enemies be impotent to harm him."

Then when the Shah had given him leave to go, Zal set forth, and he bare
his head high in the joy of his heart. And when he came before his
father and gave to him the letter of the Shah, Saum was young again for
happiness. Then the drums sounded the signal to depart, and the tents
were prepared, and a messenger, mounted on a fleet dromedary, was sent
unto Mihrab to tell him that Saum and Zal were setting forth for Cabul.
And when Mihrab heard the tidings his fears were stilled, and he
commanded that his army be clad in festal array. And silken standards of
bright colour decked the city, and the sounds of trumpets, harps, and
cymbals filled the air. And Sindokht told the glad tidings to Rudabeh,
and they made ready the house like unto a paradise. Carpets broidered
with gold and precious stones did they lay down upon its floors, and set
forth thrones of ivory and rich carving. And the ground they watered
with rose-water and wine.

Then when the guests were come near unto Cabul, Mihrab went forth to
meet them, and he placed upon the head of Zal a crown of diamonds, and
they came into the city in triumph. And all the people did homage before
them, and Sindokht met them at the doors of the King's house, and poured
out musk and precious stones before them. Then Saum, when he had replied
to their homage, smiled, and turned to Sindokht and said-

"How much longer dost thou think to hide Rudabeh from our eyes?"

And Sindokht said, "What wilt thou give me to see the sun?"

Then Saum replied, "All that thou wilt, even unto my slaves and my
throne, will I give to thee."

Then Sindokht led him within the curtains, and when Saum beheld Rudabeh
he was struck dumb with wonder, for her beauty exceeded dreams, and he
knew not how he could find words to praise her. Then he asked of Mihrab
that he would give unto him her hand, and they concluded an alliance
according to custom and the law. And the lovers were seated upon a
throne, and Mihrab read out the list of the gifts, and it was so long
the ear did not suffice to hear them. Then they repaired unto the
banquet, and they feasted seven days without ceasing. And when a month
had passed Saum went back to Seistan, and Zal and Rudabeh followed after
him. And speedily did he set forth again to battle, and left the kingdom
in the hands of his son, and Zal administered it with wisdom and
judgment. And Rudabeh sat beside him on the throne, and he placed a
crown of gold upon her head.


