Supplement 3
============

What would become of history, had we not a dependence on the veracity
of the historian according to the experience which we have had of
mankind? How could politics be a science, if laws and forms of
government had not a uniform influence upon society? Where would be the
foundation of morals, if par- ticular characters had no certain or
determinate power to produce particular sentiments,

and if these sentiments had no constant operation on actions? And with
what pretence could we employ our criticism upon any poet or polite
author, if we could not pronounce the conduct and sentiments of his
actors either natural or unnatural to such characters, and in such
circumstances? It seems almost impossible, therefore, to engage either
in science or action of any kind without acknowledging the doctrine of
necessity, and this inference from motive to voluntary actions, from
characters to conduct.

And indeed, when we consider how aptly natural and moral evidence link
together, and form only one chain of argument, we shall make no scruple
to allow that they are of the same nature, and derived from the same
principles.

A prisoner who has neither money nor interest, discovers the
impossibility of his escape, as well when he considers the obstinacy of
the gaoler, as the walls and bars with which he is surrounded; and, in
all attempts for his freedom, chooses rather to work upon the stone and
iron of the one, than upon the inflexible nature of the other.

The same prisoner, when conducted to the scaffold, foresees his death
as certainly from the constancy and fidelity of his guards, as from the
operation of the axe or wheel.

His mind runs along a certain train of ideas: the refusal of the
soldiers to consent to his escape; the action of the executioner; the
separation of the head and body; bleeding, convulsive motions, and
death.

Here is a connected chain of natural causes and voluntary actions; but
the mind feels no differ- ence between them in passing from one link to
another: Nor is it less certain of the future event than if it were con-
nected with the objects present to the memory or senses, by a train of
causes, cemented together by what we are pleased to call a physical
necessity.

The same experienced union has the same effect on the mind, whether the
united objects be motives, volition, and actions; or figure and motion.
We may change the name of things; but their nature and their operation
on the understanding never change.

Were a man, whom I know to be honest and opulent, and with whom I live
in intimate friendship, to come into my house, where I am surrounded
with my servants, I rest assured that he is not to stab me before he
leaves it in order to rob me of my silver standish; and I no more
suspect this event than the falling of the house itself, which is new,
and solidly built and founded.

--But he may have been seized with a sudden and unknown frenzy.

--So may a sudden earthquake arise, and shake and tumble my house about
my ears.

I shall therefore change the suppositions.

I shall say that I know with certainty that he is not to put his hand
into the fire and hold it there till it be consumed: and this event, I
think I can foretell with the same assurance, as that, if he throw
himself out at the window, and meet with no obstruction, he will not
remain a moment suspended in the air.

No suspicion of an unknown frenzy can give the least possibility to the
former event, which is so con- trary to all the known principles of
human nature. A man who at noon leaves his purse full of gold on the
pavement at Charing-Cross, may as well expect that it will fly away like
a feather, as that he will find it untouched an hour after.

Above one half of human reasonings contain inferences of a similar
nature, attended with more or less degrees of cer- tainty proportioned
to our experience of the usual conduct of mankind in such particular
situations.

I have frequently considered, what could possibly be the reason why all
mankind, though they have ever, without hesitation, acknowledged the
doctrine of necessity in their whole practice and reasoning, have yet
discovered such a reluctance to acknowledge it in words, and have rather
shown a propensity, in all ages, to profess the contrary opinion.

The matter, I think, may be accounted for after the following manner.

If we examine the operations of body, and the production of effects
from their causes, we shall find that all our faculties can never carry
us farther in our knowledge of this relation than barely to observe that
particular objects are constantly conjoined together, and that the mind
is carried, by a customary transition, from the appearance of one to the
belief of the other.

But though this conclusion concerning human ignorance be the result of
the strictest scrutiny of this subject, men still entertain a strong
propensity to believe that they penetrate farther into the powers of
nature, and perceive something like a necessary connexion between the
cause and the effect.

When again they turn their reflections towards the opera- tions of
their own minds, and feel no such connexion of the motive and the
action; they are thence apt to suppose, that there is a difference
between the effects which result from material force, and those which
arise from thought and intelligence.

But being once convinced that we know nothing farther of causation of
any kind than merely the constant conjunction of objects, and the
consequent inference of the mind from one to another, and finding that
these two circumstances are universally allowed to have place in
voluntary actions; we may be more easily led to own the same necessity
common to all causes.

And though this reasoning may contradict the systems of many
philosophers, in ascribing necessity to the determinations of the will,
we shall find, upon reflection, that they dissent from it in words only,
not in their real sentiment.

Necessity, according to the sense in which it is here taken, has never
yet been rejected, nor can ever, I think, be rejected by any
philosopher. It may only, perhaps, be pretended that the mind can per-
ceive, in the operations of matter, some farther connexion between the
cause and effect; and connexion that has not place in voluntary actions
of intelligent beings.

Now whether it be so or not, can only appear upon examination; and it
is incumbent on these philosophers to make good their assertion, by
defining or describing that necessity, and pointing it out to us in the
operations of material causes.

It would seem, indeed, that men begin at the wrong end of this question
concerning liberty and necessity, when they enter upon it by examining
the faculties of the soul, the influence of the understanding, and the
operations of the will.

Let them first discuss a more simple question, namely, the operations
of body and of brute unintelligent matter; and try whether they can
there form any idea of causation and necessity, except that of a
constant conjunc- tion of objects, and subsequent inference of the mind
from one to another. If these circumstances form, in reality, the whole
of that necessity, which we conceive in matter, and if these
circumstances be also universally acknowledged to take place in the
operations of the mind, the dispute is at an end; at least, must be
owned to be thenceforth merely verbal.

But as long as we will rashly suppose, that we have some farther idea
of necessity and causation in the opera- tions of external objects; at
the same time, that we can find nothing farther in the voluntary actions
of the mind; there is no possibility of bringing the question to any
determinate issue, while we proceed upon so erroneous a supposition.

The only method of undeceiving us is to mount up higher; to examine the
narrow extent of science when applied to material causes; and to
convince ourselves that all we know of them is the constant conjunction
and inference above mentioned.


We may, perhaps, find that it is with dif- ficulty we are induced to
fix such narrow limits to human understanding: but we can afterwards
find no difficulty when we come to apply this doctrine to the actions of
the will.

For as it is evident that these have a regular con- junction with
motives and circumstances and characters, and as we always draw
inferences from one to the other, we must be obliged to acknowledge in
words that necessity, which we have already avowed, in every
deliberation of our lives, and in every step of our conduct and
behaviour.

[^1] But to proceed in this reconciling project with regard to the
question of liberty and necessity; the most contentious question of
metaphysics, the most contentious science; it will not require many
words to prove, that all mankind have ever agreed in the doctrine of
liberty as well as in that of necessity, and that the whole dispute, in
this respect also, has been hitherto merely verbal.

For what is meant by liberty, when applied to voluntary actions? We
cannot surely mean that actions have so little connexion with motives,
inclinations, and circumstances, that one does not follow with a certain
degree of uniformity from the other, and that one affords no inference
by which we can conclude the existence of the other.

For these are plain and acknowl- edged matters of fact. By liberty,
then, we can only mean a power of acting or not acting, according to the
determin- ations of the will; this is, if we choose to remain at rest,
we may; if we choose to move, we also may. Now this hypothetical liberty
is universally allowed to belong to every one who is not a prisoner and
in chains. Here, then, is no subject of dispute.

Whatever definition we may give of liberty, we should be careful to
observe two requisite circumstances; First, that it be consistent with
plain matter of fact; secondly, that it be consistent with itself.

If we observe these circum- stances, and render our definition
intelligible, I am per- suaded that all mankind will be found of one
opinion with regard to it.

It is universally allowed that nothing exists without a cause of its
existence, and that chance, when strictly ex- amined, is a mere negative
word, and means not any real power which has anywhere a being in nature.
But it is pretended that some causes are necessary, some not neces-
sary. Here then is the advantage of definitions.

Let any one define a cause, without comprehending, as a part of the
definition, a necessary connexion with its effect; and let him show
distinctly the origin of the idea, expressed by the definition; and I
shall readily give up the whole con- troversy. But if the foregoing
explication of the matter be received, this must be absolutely
impracticable.

Had not objects a regular conjunction with each other, we should never
have entertained any notion of cause and effect; and this regular
conjunction produces that inference of the understanding, which is the
only connexion, that we can have any comprehension of.

Whoever attempts a defi- nition of cause, exclusive of these
circumstances, will be obliged either to employ unintelligible terms or
such as are synonymous to the term which he endeavours to define. [^2]
And if the definition above mentioned be admitted; liberty, when opposed
to necessity, not to constraint, is the same thing with chance; which is
universally allowed to have no existence.


**PART II
**

THERE is no method of reasoning more common, and yet none more
blameable, than, in philosophical disputes, to endeavour the refutation
of any hypothesis, by a pre- tence of its dangerous consequences to
religion and mor- ality. When any opinion leads to absurdities, it is
cer- tainly false; but it is not certain that an opinion is false,
because it is of dangerous consequence.

Such topics, there- fore, ought entirely to be forborne; as serving
nothing to the discovery of truth, but only to make the person of an
antagonist odious.

This I observe in general, without pre- tending to draw any advantage
from it.

I frankly submit to an examination of this kind, and shall venture to
affirm that the doctrines, both of necessity and of liberty, as above
explained, are not only consistent with morality, but are absolutely
essential to its support.

Necessity may be defined two ways, conformably to the two definitions
of cause, of which it makes an essential part.

It consists either in the constant conjunction of like objects, or in
the inference of the understanding from one object to another.

Now necessity, in both these senses, (which, indeed, are at bottom the
same) has universally, though tacitly, in the schools, in the pulpit,
and in common life, been allowed to belong to the will of man; and no
one has ever pretended to deny that we can draw inferences concerning
human actions, and that those inferences are founded on the experienced
union of like actions, with like motives, inclinations, and
circumstances.

The only par- ticular in which any one can differ, is, that either,
perhaps, he will refuse to give the name of necessity to this property
of human actions: but as long as the meaning is understood, I hope the
word can do no harm: or that he will maintain it possible to discover
something farther in the operations of matter.

But this, it must be acknowledged, can be of no consequence to morality
or religion, whatever it may be to natural philosophy or metaphysics. We
may here be mistaken in asserting that there is no idea of any other
necessity or connexion in the actions of body: But surely we ascribe
nothing to the actions of the mind, but what everyone does, and must
readily allow of.

We change no circumstance in the received orthodox system with regard
to the will, but only in that with regard to material objects and
causes. Nothing, therefore, can be more innocent, at least, than this
doctrine.

All laws being founded on rewards and punishments, it is supposed as a
fundamental principle, that these motives have a regular and uniform
influence on the mind, and both produce the good and prevent the evil
actions.

We may give to this influence what name we please; but, as it is
usually conjoined with the action, it must be esteemed a cause, and be
looked upon as an instance of that necessity, which we would here
establish.

The only proper object of hatred or vengeance is a person or creature,
endowed with thought and conscious- ness; and when any criminal or
injurious actions excite that passion, it is only by their relation to
the person, or connexion with him.

Actions are, by their very nature, temporary and perishing; and where
they proceed not from some cause in the character and disposition of the
person who performed them, they can neither redound to his honour, if
good; nor infamy, if evil.

The actions themselves may be blameable; they may be contrary to all
the rules of morality and religion: but the person is not answerable for
them; and as they proceeded from nothing in him that is durable and
constant, and leave nothing of that nature behind them, it is impossible
he can, upon their account, become the object of punishment or
vengeance.

According to the principle, therefore, which denies necessity, and
consequently causes, a man is as pure and untainted, after having
committed the most horrid crime, as at the first moment of his birth,
nor is his character anywise concerned in his actions, since they are
not derived from it, and the wickedness of the one can never be used as
a proof of the depravity of the other.

Men are not blamed for such actions as they perform ignorantly and
casually, whatever may be the consequences. Why? but because the
principles of these actions are only momentary, and terminate in them
alone.

Men are less blamed for such actions as they perform hastily and unpre-
meditatedly than for such as proceed from deliberation. For what reason?
but because a hasty temper, though a constant cause or principle in the
mind, operates only by intervals, and infects not the whole character.

Again, repentance wipes off every crime, if attended with a reformation
of life and manners.

How is this to be accounted for? but by asserting that actions render a
person criminal merely as they are proofs of criminal principles in the
mind; and when, by an alteration of these principles, they cease to be
just proofs, they likewise cease to be criminal. But, except upon the
doctrine of necessity, they never were just proofs, and consequently
never were criminal.

It will be equally easy to prove, and from the same arguments, that
liberty, according to that definition above mentioned, in which all men
agree, is also essential to morality, and that no human actions, where
it is wanting, are susceptible of any moral qualities, or can be the
objects either of approbation or dislike.

For as actions are objects of our moral sentiment, so far only as they
are indications of the internal character, passions, and affections; it
is impossible that they can give rise either to praise or blame, where
they proceed not from these principles, but are derived altogether from
external violence.

I pretend not to have obviated or removed all objections to this
theory, with regard to necessity and liberty. I can foresee other
objections, derived from topics which have not here been treated of.

It may be said, for instance, that, if voluntary actions be subjected
to the same laws of necessity with the operations of matter, there is a
continued chain of necessary causes, pre-ordained and pre-determined,
reaching from the original cause of all to every single volition of
every human creature. No contingency any- where in the universe; no
indifference; no liberty.

While we act, we are, at the same time, acted upon.

The ulti- mate Author of all our volitions is the Creator of the world,
who first bestowed motion on this immense machine, and placed all beings
in that particular position, whence every subsequent event, by an
inevitable necessity, must result.

Human actions, therefore, either can have no moral turpitude at all, as
proceeding from so good a cause; or if they have any turpitude, they
must involve our Creator in the same guilt, while he is acknowledged to
be their ultimate cause and author.

For as a man, who fired a mine, is answerable for all the consequences
whether the train he employed be long or short; so wherever a continued
chain of necessary causes is fixed, that Being, either finite or
infinite, who produces the first, is likewise the author of all the
rest, and must both bear the blame and acquire the praise which belong
to them.

Our clear and unalterable ideas of morality establish this rule, upon
unquestionable reasons, when we examine the consequences of any human
action; and these reasons must still have greater force when applied to
the volitions and intentions of a Being infinitely wise and powerful.
Ignorance or impotence may be pleaded for so limited a creature as man;
but those imperfections have no place in our Creator. He foresaw, he
ordained, he intended all those actions of men, which we so rashly
pronounce criminal.

And we must there- fore conclude, either that they are not criminal, or
that the Deity, not man, is accountable for them. But as either of these
positions is absurd and impious, it follows, that the doctrine from
which they are deduced cannot possibly be true, as being liable to all
the same objections.

An absurd consequence, if necessary, proves the original doctrine to be
absurd; in the same manner as criminal actions render crimi- nal the
original cause, if the connexion between them be necessary and
inevitable.

This objection consists of two parts, which we shall examine
separately; First, that, if human actions can be traced up, by a
necessary chain, to the Deity, they can never be criminal; on account of
the infinite perfection of that Being from whom they are derived, and
who can intend nothing but what is altogether good and laudable.

Or, Secondly, if they be criminal, we must retract the attribute of
perfection, which we ascribe to the Deity, and must acknowledge him to
be the ultimate author of guilt and moral turpitude in all his
creatures. The answer to the first objection seems obvious and con-
vincing.

There are many philosophers who, after an exact scrutiny of all the
phenomena of nature, conclude, that the WHOLE, considered as one system,
is, in every period of its existence, ordered with perfect benevolence;
and that the utmost possible happiness will, in the end, result to all
created beings, without any mixture of positive or absolute ill or
misery.

Every physical ill, say they, makes an essen- tial part of this
benevolent system, and could not possibly be removed, even by the Deity
himself, considered as a wise agent, without giving entrance to greater
ill, or ex- cluding greater good, which will result from it. From this
theory, some philosophers, and the ancient Stoics among the rest,
derived a topic of consolation under all afflictions, while they taught
their pupils that those ills under which they laboured were, in reality,
goods to the universe; and that to an enlarged view, which could
comprehend the whole system of nature, every event became an object of
joy and exultation.

But though this topic be specious and sublime, it was soon found in
practice weak and inef- fectual.

You would surely more irritate than appease a man lying under the
racking pains of the gout by preaching up to him the rectitude of those
general laws, which pro- duced the malignant humours in his body, and
led them through the proper canals, to the sinews and nerves, where they
now excite such acute torments.

These enlarged views may, for a moment, please the imagination of a
speculative man, who is placed in ease and security; but neither can
they dwell with constancy on his mind, even though undisturbed by the
emotions of pain or passion; much less can they maintain their ground
when attacked by such powerful antagonists.

The affections take a nar- rower and more natural survey of their
object; and by an economy, more suitable to the infirmity of human
minds, regard alone the beings around us, and are actuated by such
events as appear good or ill to the private system. The case is the same
with moral as with physical ill.

It cannot reasonably be supposed, that those remote consid- erations,
which are found of so little efficacy with regard to one, will have a
more powerful influence with regard to the other.

The mind of man is so formed by nature that, upon the appearance of
certain characters, dispositions, and actions, it immediately feels the
sentiment of appro- bation or blame; nor are there any emotions more
essential to its frame and constitution.

The characters which engage our approbation are chiefly such as
contribute to the peace and security of human society; as the characters
which excite blame are chiefly such as tend to public detriment and
disturbance: whence it may reasonably be presumed, that the moral
sentiments arise, either mediately or im- mediately, from a reflection
of these opposite interests.

What though philosophical meditations establish a different opinion or
conjecture; that everything is right with regard to the WHOLE, and that
the qualities, which disturb society, are, in the main, as beneficial,
and are as suitable to the primary intention of nature as those which
more directly promote its happiness and welfare?

Are such remote and uncertain speculations able to counterbalance the
senti- ments which arise from the natural and immediate view of the
objects? A man who is robbed of a considerable sum; does he find his
vexation for the loss anywise diminished by these sublime reflections?
Why then should his moral resentment against the crime be supposed
incompatible with them?

Or why should not the acknowledgment of a real distinction between vice
and virtue be reconcileable to all speculative systems of philosophy, as
well as that of a real distinction between personal beauty and
deformity? Both these distinctions are founded in the natural senti-
ments of the human mind: And these sentiments are not to be controuled
or altered by any philosophical theory or speculation whatsoever.

The second objection admits not of so easy and satis- factory an
answer; nor is it possible to explain distinctly, how the Deity can be
the mediate cause of all the actions of men, without being the author of
sin and moral turpitude.

These are mysteries, which mere natural and unassisted reason is very
unfit to handle; and whatever system she embraces, she must find herself
involved in inextricable difficulties, and even contradictions, at every
step which she takes with regard to such subjects. To reconcile the in-
difference and contingency of human actions with prescience; or to
defend absolute decrees, and yet free the Deity from being the author of
sin, has been found hitherto to exceed all the power of philosophy.

Happy, if she be thence sensible of her temerity, when she pries into
these sublime mysteries; and leaving a scene so full of obscurities and
perplexities, return, with suitable modesty, to her true and proper
province, the examination of common life; where she will find
difficulties enough to employ her enquiries, without launching into so
boundless an ocean of doubt, uncertainty, and contradiction! [^1] The
prevalence of the doctrine of liberty may be accounted for, from another
cause, viz.

a false sensation of seeming experience which we have, or may have, of
liberty or indifference, in many of our actions.

The necessity of any action, whether of matter or of mind, is not,
properly speaking, a quality in the agent, but in any thinking or
intelligent being, who may con- sider the action; and it consists
chiefly in the determination of his thoughts to infer the existence of
that action from some preceding objects; as liberty, when opposed to
necessity, is nothing but the want of that determination, and a certain
looseness or indifference, which we feel, in passing, or not passing,
from the idea of one object to that of any succeeding one.

Now we may observe, that, though, in reflecting on human actions, we
seldom feel such a looseness, or indifference, but are commonly able to
infer them with considerable certainty from their motives, and from the
dispositions of the agent; yet it frequently happens, that, in
performing the actions themselves, we are sensible of something like it:
And as all resembling objects are readily taken for each other, this has
been employed as a demonstrative and even intuitive proof of human
liberty.

We feel, that our actions are subject to our will, on most occasions;
and imagine we feel, that the will itself is subject to nothing,
because, when by a denial of it we are provoked to try, we feel, that it
moves easily every way, and produces an image of itself (or a Velleity,
as it is called in the schools) even on that side, on which it did not
settle.

This image, or faint motion, we persuade ourselves, could, at that
time, have been compleated into the thing itself; because, should that
be denied, we find, upon a second trial, that, at present, it can.

We consider not, that the fantastical desire of shewing liberty, is
here the motive of our actions. And it seems certain, that, however we
may imagine we feel a liberty within ourselves, a spec- tator can
commonly infer our actions from our motives and character; and even
where he cannot, he concludes in general, that he might, were he
perfectly acquainted with every circumstance of our situation and
temper, and the most secret springs of our complexion and disposition.
Now this is the very essence of necessity, according to the foregoing
doctrine.

[^2] Thus, if a cause be defined, that which produces any thing, it is
easy to observe, that producing is synonymous to causing. In like
manner, if a cause be defined, that by which any thing exists, this is
liable to the same objection. For what is meant by these words, by
which? Had it been said, that a cause is that after which any thing
constantly exists; we should have understood the terms.

For this is, indeed, all we know of the mat- ter.

And this constantly forms the very essence of necessity, nor have we
any other idea of it.


