Section X : of Miracles Part I
==============================

THERE is, in Dr.Tillotson's writings, an argument against the real
presence, which is as concise, and elegant, and strong as any argument
can possibly be supposed against a doctrine, so little worthy of a
serious refutation.

It is acknowledged on all hands, says that learned prelate, that the
authority, either of the scripture or of tradition, is founded merely in
the testimony of the Apostles, who were eye-witnesses to those miracles
of our Saviour, by which he proved his divine mission.

Our evi- dence, then, for, the truth of the Christian religion is less
than the evidence for the truth of our senses; because, even in the
first authors of our religion, it was no greater; and it is evident it
must diminish in passing from them to their disciples; nor can any one
rest such confidence in their testimony, as in the immediate object of
his senses.

But a weaker evidence can never destroy a stronger; and therefore, were
the doctrine of the real presence ever so clearly re- vealed in
scripture, it were directly contrary to the rules of just reasoning to
give our assent to it.

It contradicts sense, though both the scripture and tradition, on which
it is supposed to be built, carry not such evidence with them as sense;
when they are considered merely as external evidences, and are not
brought home to every one's breast, by the immediate operation of the
Holy Spirit. Nothing is so convenient as a decisive argument of this
kind, which must at least silence the most arrogant big- otry and
superstition, and free us from their impertinent solicitations.

I flatter myself, that I have discovered an argument of a like nature,
which, if just, will, with the wise and learned, be an everlasting check
to all kinds of super- stitious delusion, and consequently, will be
useful as long as the world endures. For so long, I presume, will the
accounts of miracles and prodigies be found in all history, sacred and
profane.

Though experience be our only guide in reasoning con- cerning matters
of fact; it must be acknowledged, that this guide is not altogether
infallible, but in some cases is apt to lead us into errors.

One, who in our climate, should expect better weather in any week of
June than in one of December, would reason justly, and conformably to
experience; but it is certain, that he may happen, in the event, to find
himself mistaken. However, we may observe, that, in such a case, he
would have no cause to complain of experience; because it commonly
informs us beforehand of the uncertainty, by that contrariety of events,
which we may learn from a diligent observation.

All effects follow not with like certainty from their supposed
causes.

Some events are found, in all countries and all ages, to have been con-
stantly conjoined together: Others are found to have been more variable,
and sometimes to disappoint our expecta- tions; so that, in our
reasonings concerning matter of fact, there are all imaginable degrees
of assurance, from the highest certainty to the lowest species of moral
evidence.

A wise man, therefore, proportions his belief to the evidence. In such
conclusions as are founded on an infal- lible experience, he expects the
event with the last degree of assurance, and regards his past experience
as a full proof of the future existence of that event.

In other cases, he proceeds with more caution: he weighs the opposite
experiments: he considers which side is sup- ported by the greater
number of experiments: to that side he inclines, with doubt and
hesitation; and when at last he fixes his judgement, the evidence
exceeds not what we properly call probability.

All probability, then, supposes an opposition of experiments and
observations, where the one side is found to overbalance the other, and
to produce a degree of evidence, proportioned to the superiority.

A hundred instances or experiments on one side, and fifty on another,
afford a doubtful expectation of any event; though a hundred uniform
experiments, with only one that is con- tradictory, reasonably beget a
pretty strong degree of as- surance. In all cases, we must balance the
opposite experi- ments, where they are opposite, and deduct the smaller
number from the greater, in order to know the exact force of the
superior evidence.

To apply these principles to a particular instance; we may observe,
that there is no species of reasoning more common, more useful, and even
necessary to human life, than that which is derived from the testimony
of men, and the reports of eye-witnesses and spectators. This species of
reasoning, perhaps, one may deny to be founded on the relation of cause
and effect. I shall not dispute about a word.

It will be sufficient to observe that our assurance in any argument of
this kind is derived from no other principle than our observation of the
veracity of human testimony, and of the usual conformity of facts to the
reports of witnesses.

It being a general maxim, that no objects have any dis- coverable
connexion together, and that all the inferences, which we can draw from
one to another, are founded merely on our experience of their constant
and regular conjunction; it is evident, that we ought not to make an
exception to this maxim in favour of human testimony, whose connexion
with any event seems, in itself, as little necessary as any other.

Were not the memory tenacious to a certain degree; had not men commonly
an inclination to truth and a prin- ciple of probity; were they not
sensible to shame, when detected in a falsehood: were not these, I say,
discovered by experience to be qualities, inherent in human nature, we
should never repose the least confidence in human testi- mony.

A man delirious, or noted for falsehood and villainy, has no manner of
authority with us. And as the evidence, derived from witnesses and human
testimony, is founded on past experience, so it varies with the
experience, and is regarded either as a proof or a probability,
according as the conjunction between any par- ticular kind of report and
any kind of object has been found to be constant or variable.

There are a number of circum- stances to be taken into consideration in
all judgements of this kind; and the ultimate standard, by which we
determine all disputes, that may arise concerning them, is always
derived from experience and observation.

Where this experience is not entirely uniform on any side, it is
attended with an unavoidable contrariety in our judgements, and with the
same opposition and mutual destruction of argument as in every other
kind of evidence. We frequently hesitate con- cerning the reports of
others.

We balance the opposite circumstances, which cause any doubt or
uncertainty; and when we discover a superiority on any side, we incline
to it; but still with a diminution of assurance, in proportion to the
force of its antagonist.

This contrariety of evidence, in the present case, may be derived from
several different causes; from the opposition of contrary testimony;
from the character or number of the witnesses; from the manner of their
delivering their testi- mony; or from the union of all these
circumstances. We entertain a suspicion concerning any matter of fact,
when the witnesses contradict each other; when they are but few, or of a
doubtful character; when they have an interest in what they affirm; when
they deliver their testimony with hesitation, or on the contrary, with
too violent asseverations.

There are many other particulars of the same kind, which may diminish
or destroy the force of any argument, derived from human testimony.
Suppose, for instance, that the fact, which the testimony endeavours to
establish, partakes of the extraordinary and the marvellous; in that
case, the evidence, resulting from the testimony, admits of a
diminution, greater or less, in proportion as the fact is more or less
unusual.

The reason why we place any credit in witnesses and historians, is not
derived from any connexion, which we perceive a priori, between
testimony and reality, but because we are accustomed to find a
conformity between them.

But when the fact attested is such a one as has seldom fallen under our
observation, here is a contest of two opposite experi- ences; of which
the one destroys the other, as far as its force goes, and the superior
can only operate on the mind by the force, which remains.

The very same principle of experience, which gives us a certain degree
of assurance in the testimony of witnesses, gives us also, in this case,
another degree of assurance against the fact, which they endeavour to
establish; from which contradiction there necessarily arises a
counterpoize, and mutual destruction of belief and authority.

I should not believe such a story were it told me by Cato, was a
proverbial saying in Rome, even during the lifetime of that
philosophical patriot.

[^1] The incredibility of a fact, it was allowed, might invalidate so
great an authority.

The Indian prince, who refused to believe the first re- lations
concerning the effects of frost, reasoned justly; and it naturally
required very strong testimony to engage his assent to facts, that arose
from a state of nature, with which he was unacquainted, and which bore
so little analogy to those events, of which he had had constant and
uniform experience.

Though they were not contrary to his experience, they were not
conformable to it.

[^2] But in order to encrease the probability against the testimony of
witnesses, let us suppose, that the fact, which they affirm, instead of
being only marvellous, is really miraculous; and suppose also, that the
testimony considered apart and in itself, amounts to an entire proof; in
that case, there is proof against proof, of which the strongest must
prevail, but still with a diminution of its force, in pro- portion to
that of its antagonist.

A miracle is a violation of the laws of nature; and as a firm and
unalterable experience has established these laws, the proof against a
miracle, from the very nature of the fact, is as entire as any argument
from experience can possibly be imagined.

Why is it more than probable, that all men must die; that lead cannot,
of itself, remain suspended in the air; that fire consumes wood, and is
extinguished by water; unless it be, that these events are found
agreeable to the laws of nature, and there is required a violation of
these laws, or in other words, a miracle to prevent them? Nothing is
esteemed a miracle, if it ever happen in the common course of nature. It
is no miracle that a man, seemingly in good health, should die on a
sudden: because such a kind of death, though more unusual than any
other, has yet been frequently observed to happen.

But it is a miracle, that a dead man should come to life; because that
has never been observed in any age or country. There must, therefore, be
a uniform experience against every miraculous event, otherwise the event
would not merit that appellation. And as a uniform experience amounts to
a proof, there is here a direct and full proof, from the nature of the
fact, against the existence of any miracle; nor can such a proof be
destroyed, or the miracle rendered credible, but by an opposite proof,
which is superior.

[^3] The plain consequence is (and it is a general maxim worthy of our
attention), 'that no testimony is sufficient to establish a miracle,
unless the testimony be of such a kind, that its falsehood would be more
miraculous, than the fact, which it endeavors to establish; and even in
that case there is a mutual destruction of arguments, and the superior
only gives us an assurance suitable to that degree of force, which
remains, after deducting the inferior.

' When anyone tells me, that he saw a dead man restored to life, I
immediately consider with myself, whether it be more probable, that this
person should either deceive or be deceived, or that the fact, which he
relates, should really have happened. I weigh the one miracle against
the other; and according to the superiority, which I discover, I pro-
nounce my decision, and always reject the greater miracle.

If the falsehood of his testimony would be more miraculous, than the
event which he relates; then, and not till then, can he pretend to
command my belief or opinion.

PART II IN the foregoing reasoning we have supposed, that the
testimony, upon which a miracle is founded, may possibly amount to an
entire proof, and that the falsehood of that testimony would be a real
prodigy: but it is easy to shew, that we have been a great deal too
liberal in our concession, and that there never was a miraculous event
established on so full an evidence.

For first, there is not to be found, in all history, any miracle
attested by a sufficient number of men, of such unquestioned good-sense,
education, and learning, as to secure us against all delusion in
themselves; of such un- doubted integrity, as to place them beyond all
suspicion of any design to deceive others; of such credit and reputation
in the eyes of mankind, as to have a great deal to lose in case of their
being detected in any falsehood; and at the same time, attesting facts
performed in such a public manner and in so celebrated a part of the
world, as to render the detection unavoidable: all which circumstances
are re- quisite to give us a full assurance in the testimony of men.

Secondly.

We may observe in human nature a principle which, if strictly examined,
will be found to diminish extremely the assurance, which we might, from
human testimony, have in any kind of prodigy.

The maxim, by which we commonly conduct ourselves in our reasonings,
is, that the objects, of which we have no experience, re- sembles those,
of which we have; that what we have found to be most usual is always
most probable; and that where there is an opposition of arguments, we
ought to give the preference to such as are founded on the greatest
number of past observations.

But though, in proceeding by this rule, we readily reject any fact
which is unusual and incredible in an ordinary degree; yet in advancing
farther, the mind observes not always the same rule; but when anything
is affirmed utterly absurd and miraculous, it rather the more readily
admits of such a fact, upon account of that very circumstance, which
ought to destroy all its authority.

The passion of surprise and wonder, arising from miracles, being an
agreeable emotion, gives a sensible tendency towards the belief of those
events, from which it is derived.

And this goes so far, that even those who cannot enjoy this pleasure
immediately, nor can believe those miraculous events, of which they are
informed, yet love to partake of the satisfac- tion at second-hand or by
rebound, and place a pride and delight in exciting the admiration of
others.

With what greediness are the miraculous accounts of travellers
received, their descriptions of sea and land mon- sters, their relations
of wonderful adventures, strange men, and uncouth manners? But if the
spirit of religion join itself to the love of wonder, there is an end of
common sense; and human testimony, in these circumstances, loses all
pretensions to authority.

A religionist may be an en- thusiast, and imagine he sees what has no
reality: he may know his narrative to be false, and yet persevere in it,
with the best intentions in the world, for the sake of promoting so holy
a cause: or even where this delusion has not place, vanity, excited by
so strong a temptation,

operates on him more powerfully than on the rest of mankind in any
other circumstances; and self-interest with equal force. His auditors
may not have, and commonly have not, suf- ficient judgement to canvass
his evidence: what judgement they have, they renounce by principle, in
these sublime and mysterious subjects: or if they were ever so willing
to employ it, passion and a heated imagination disturb the regularity of
its operations.

their credulity increases his impudence: and his impudence overpowers
their credulity.

Eloquence, when at its highest pitch, leaves little room for reason or
reflection; but addressing itself entirely to the fancy or the
affections, captivates the willing hearers, and subdues their
understanding. Happily, this pitch it seldom attains.

But what a Tully or a Demosthenes could scarcely effect over a Roman or
Athenian audience, every Capuchin, every itinerant or stationary teacher
can perform over the generality of mankind, and in a higher degree, by
touching such gross and vulgar passions.

The many instances of forged miracles, and prophecies, and supernatural
events, which, in all ages, have either been detected by contrary
evidence, or which detect themselves by their absurdity, prove
sufficiently the strong propensity of mankind to the extraordinary and
the marvellous, and ought reasonably to beget a suspicion against all
relations of this kind.


