Section Xi : of a Particular Providence and of a Future State
=============================================================

I WAS lately engaged in conversation with a friend who loves sceptical
paradoxes; where, though he ad- vanced many principles, of which I can
by no means approve, yet as they seem to be curious, and to bear some
relation to the chain of reasoning carried on throughout this enquiry, I
shall here copy them from my memory as accurately as I can, in order to
submit them to the judge- ment of the reader.

Our conversation began with my admiring the singular good fortune of
philosophy, which, as it requires entire liberty above all other
privileges, and chiefly flourishes from the free opposition of
sentiments and argumentation, received its first birth in an age and
country of freedom and toleration, and was never cramped, even in its
most extrav- agant principles, by any creeds, concessions, or penal
statutes.

For, except the banishment of Protagoras, and the death of Socrates,
which last event proceeded partly from other motives, there are scarcely
any instances to be met with, in ancient history, of this bigoted
jealousy, with which the present age is so much infested.
Epicurus lived at Athens to an advanced age, in peace and tranquillity:
Epicureans[^1] were even admitted to receive the sacerdotal character,
and to officiate at the altar, in the most sacred rites of the
established religion: and the public encourage- ment[^2] of pensions and
salaries was afforded equally, by the wisest of all the Roman
emperors[^3], to the professors of every sect of philosophy.

How requisite such kind of treat- ment was to philosophy, in her early
youth, will easily be conceived, if we reflect, that, even at present,
when she may be supposed more hardy and robust, she bears with much
difficulty the inclemency of the seasons, and those harsh winds of
calumny and persecution, which blow upon her.

You admire, says my friend, as the singular good fortune of philosophy,
what seems to result from the natural course of things, and to be
unavoidable in every age and nation.

This pertinacious bigotry, of which you complain, as so fatal to
philosophy, is really her offspring, who, after allying with
superstition, separates himself entirely from the interest of his
parent, and becomes her most inveterate enemy and persecutor.

Speculative dogmas of religion, the present occasions of such furious
dispute, could not possibly be con- ceived or admitted in the early ages
of the world; when mankind, being wholly illiterate, formed an idea of
religion more suitable to their weak apprehension, and composed their
sacred tenets of such tales chiefly as were the objects of traditional
belief, more than of argument or disputation.

After the first alarm, therefore, was over, which arose from the new
paradoxes and principles of the philosophers; these teachers seem ever
after, during the ages of antiquity, to have lived in great harmony with
the established supersti- tion, and to have made a fair partition of
mankind between them; the former claiming all the learned and wise, the
latter possessing all the vulgar and illiterate.

It seems then, say I, that you leave politics entirely out of the
question, and never suppose, that a wise magistrate can justly be
jealous of certain tenets of philosophy, such as those of Epicurus,
which, denying a divine existence, and conse- quently a providence and a
future state, seem to loosen, in a great measure the ties of morality,
and may be supposed, for that reason, pernicious to the peace of civil
society.

I know, replied he, that in fact these persecutions never, in any age,
proceeded from calm reason, or from experience of the pernicious
consequences of philosophy; but arose entirely from passion and
prejudice.

But what if I should advance farther, and assert, that if Epicurus had
been ac- cused before the people, by any of the sycophants or inform-
ers of those days, he could easily have defended his cause, and proved
his principles of philosophy to be as salutary as those of his
adversaries, who endeavoured, with such zeal, to expose him to the
public hatred and jealousy? I wish, said I, you would try your eloquence
upon so extraordinary a topic, and make a speech for Epicurus, which
might satisfy, not the mob of Athens, if you will allow that ancient and
polite city to have contained any mob, but the more philosophical part
of his audience, such as might be supposed capable of comprehending his
arguments.

The matter would not be difficult, upon such conditions, replied he:
and if you please, I shall suppose myself Epi- curus for a moment, and
make you stand for the Athenian people, and shall deliver you such an
harangue as will fill all the urn with white beans, and leave not a
black one to gratify the malice of my adversaries. Very well: pray
proceed upon these suppositions.

I come hither, O ye Athenians, to justify in your assembly what I
maintain in my school, and I find myself impeached by furious
antagonists, instead of reasoning with calm and dispassionate
enquirers.

Your deliberations, which of right should be directed to questions of
public good, and the interest of the commonwealth, are diverted to the
disquisi- tions of speculative philosophy; and these magnificent, but
perhaps fruitless enquiries, take place of your more familiar but more
useful occupations.

But so far as in me lies, I will prevent this abuse. We shall not here
dispute con- cerning the origin and government of worlds. We shall only
enquire how far such questions concern the public interest.

And if I can persuade you, that they are entirely indifferent to the
peace of society and security of government, I hope that you will
presently send us back to our schools, there to examine, at leisure, the
question the most sublime, but, at the same time, the most speculative
of all philosophy.

The religious philosophers, not satisfied with the tradition of your
forefathers, and doctrine of your priests (in which I willingly
acquiesce), indulge a rash curiosity, in trying how far they can
establish religion upon the principles of reason; and they thereby
excite, instead of satisfying, the doubts, which naturally arise from a
diligent and scrutinous enquiry. They paint, in the most magnificent
colours, the order, beauty, and wise arrangement of the universe; and
then ask, if such a glorious display of intelligence could proceed from
the fortuitous concourse of atoms, or if chance could produce what the
greatest genius can never sufficiently admire.

I shall not examine the justness of this argument.

I shall allow it to be as solid as my antagonists and accusers can
desire. It is sufficient, if I can prove, from this very reasoning, that
the question is entirely speculative, and that, when, in my
philosophical disquisitions, I deny a providence and a future state, I
undermine not the founda- tions of society, but advance principles,
which they them- selves, upon their own topics, if they argue
consistently, must allow to be solid and satisfactory.

You then, who are my accusers, have acknowledged, that the chief or
sole argument for a divine existence (which I never questioned) is
derived from the order of nature; where there appear such marks of
intelligence and design, that you think it extravagant to assign for its
cause, either chance, or the blind and unguided force of matter. You
allow, that this is an argument drawn from effects to causes.

\>From the order of the work, you infer, that there must have been
project and forethought in the workman. If you can- not make out this
point, you allow, that your conclusion fails; and you pretend not to
establish the conclusion in a greater latitude than the phenomena of
nature will justify. These are your concessions.

I desire you to mark the con- sequences. When we infer any particular
cause from an effect, we must proportion the one to the other, and can
never be allowed to ascribe to the cause any qualities, but what are
exactly sufficient to produce the effect.

A body of ten ounces raised in any scale may serve as a proof, that the
counterbalancing weight exceeds ten ounces; but can never afford a
reason that it exceeds a hundred. If the cause, assigned for any effect,
be not sufficient to produce it, we must either reject that cause, or
add to it such qualities as will give it a just proportion to the
effect.

But if we ascribe to it farther qualities, or affirm it capable of
producing other effects, we can only indulge the licence of conjecture,
and arbitrarily suppose the existence of qualities and energies, without
reason or authority.

The same rule holds, whether the cause assigned be brute unconscious
matter, or a rational intelligent being. If the cause be known only by
the effect, we never ought to ascribe to it any qualities, beyond what
are precisely requisite to produce the effect: nor can we, by any rules
of just reason- ing, return back from the cause, and infer other effects
from it, beyond those by which alone it is known to us.

No one, merely from the sight of one of Zeuxis's pictures, could know,
that he was also a statuary or architect, and was an artist no less
skilful in stone and marble than in colours.

The talents and taste, displayed in the particular work before us;
these we may safely conclude the workman to be pos- sessed of. The cause
must be proportioned to the effect; and if we exactly and precisely
proportion it, we shall never find in it any qualities, that point
farther, or afford an inference concerning any other design or
performance.

Such qualities must be somewhat beyond what is merely requisite for
producing the effect, which we examine. Allowing, therefore, the gods to
be the authors of the existence or order of the universe; it follows,
that they possess that precise degree of power, intelligence, and
benevolence, which appears in their workmanship; but nothing farther can
ever be proved, except we call in the assistance of exaggeration and
flattery to supply the defects of argument and reasoning.

So far as the traces of any attributes, at present, appear, so far may
we conclude these attributes to exist.

The supposition of farther attributes is mere hypothesis; much more the
supposition, that, in distant regions of space or periods of time, there
has been, or will be, a more magnificent display of these attributes,
and a scheme of administration more suitable to such imaginary virtues.
We can never be allowed to mount up from the universe, the effect, to
Jupiter, the cause; and then descend downwards, to infer any new effect
from that cause; as if the present effects alone were not entirely
worthy of the glorious attributes, which we ascribe to that deity.

The knowledge of the cause being derived solely from the effect, they
must be exactly adjusted to each other; and the one can never refer to
anything farther, or be the foundation of any new inference and
conclusion.

You find certain phenomena in nature. You seek a cause or author. You
imagine that you have found him.

You afterwards become so enamoured of this offspring of your brain,
that you imagine it impossible, but he must produce something greater
and more perfect than the present scene of things, which is so full of
ill and disorder.

You forget, that this superlative intelligence and benevo- lence are
entirely imaginary, or, at least, without any foun- dation in reason;
and that you have no ground to ascribe to him any qualities, but what
you see he has actually exerted and displayed in his productions. Let
your gods, therefore, O philosophers, be suited to the present appear-
ances of nature: and presume not to alter these appearances by arbitrary
suppositions, in order to suit them to the at- tributes, which you so
fondly ascribe to your deities.

When priests and poets, supported by your authority, O Athenians, talk
of a golden or silver age, which preceded the present state of vice and
misery, I hear them with at- tention and with reverence. But when
philosophers, who pretend to neglect authority, and to cultivate reason,
hold the same discourse, I pay them not, I own, the same ob- sequious
submission and pious deference.

I ask; who carried them into the celestial regions, who admitted them
into the councils of the gods, who opened to them the book of fate, that
they thus rashly affirm, that their deities have executed, or will
execute, any purpose beyond what has actually appeared? If they tell me,
that they have mounted on the steps or by the gradual ascent of reason,
and by drawing inferences from effects to causes, I still insist, that
they have aided the ascent of reason by the wings of imagination;
otherwise they could not thus change their manner of inference, and
argue from causes to effects; presuming, that a more perfect production
than the present world would be more suitable to such perfect beings as
the gods, and forgetting that they have no reason to ascribe to these
celestial beings any perfection or any attribute, but what can be found
in the present world.

Hence all the fruitless industry to account for the ill appearances of
nature, and save the honour of the gods; while we must acknowledge the
reality of that evil and disorder, with which the world so much
abounds.

The obstinate and intractable qualities of matter, we are told, or the
observance of general laws, or some such reason, is the sole cause,
which controlled the power and benevo- lence of Jupiter, and obliged him
to create mankind and every sensible creature so imperfect and so
unhappy. These attributes then, are, it seems, beforehand, taken for
granted, in their greatest latitude.

And upon that supposition, I own that such conjectures may, perhaps, be
admitted as plausible solutions of the ill phenomena.

But still I ask; Why take these attributes for granted, or why ascribe
to the cause any qualities but what actually appear in the effect? Why
torture your brain to justify the course of nature upon suppositions,
which, for aught you know, may be entirely imaginary, and of which there
are to be found no traces in the course of nature? The religious
hypothesis, therefore, must be considered only as a particular method of
accounting for the visible phenomena of the universe: but no just
reasoner will ever presume to infer from it any single fact, and alter
or add to the phenomena, in any single particular.

If you think, that the appearances of things prove such causes, it is
al- lowable for you to draw an inference concerning the exist- ence of
these causes.

In such complicated and sublime subjects, every one should be indulged
in the liberty of conjecture and argument. But here you ought to rest.

If you come backward, and arguing from your inferred causes, conclude,
that any other fact has existed, or will exist, in the course of nature,
which may serve as a fuller display of particular attributes; I must
admonish you, that you have departed from the method of reasoning,
attached to the present subject, and have certainly added something to
the attributes of the cause, beyond what appears in the effect;
otherwise you could never, with tolerable sense or propriety, add
anything to the effect, in order to render it more worthy of the
cause.

Where, then, is the odiousness of that doctrine, which I teach in my
school, or rather, which I examine in my gardens? Or what do you find in
this whole question, wherein the security of good morals, or the peace
and order of society, is in the least concerned? I deny a providence,
you say, and supreme governor of the world, who guides the course of
events, and punishes the vicious with infamy and disappointment, and
rewards the virtuous with honour and success, in all their under-
takings.

But surely, I deny not the course itself of events, which lies open to
every one's inquiry and examination.

I acknowledge, that, in the present order of things, virtue is attended
with more peace of mind than vice, and meets with a more favourable
reception from the world.

I am sensible, that, according to the past experience of mankind,
friendship is the chief joy of human life, and moderation the only
source of tranquillity and happiness. I never balance between the
virtuous and the vicious course of life; but am sensible, that, to a
well-disposed mind, every ad- vantage is on the side of the former.

And what can you say more, allowing all your suppositions and
reasonings? You tell me, indeed, that this disposition of things
proceeds from intelligence and design. But whatever it proceeds from,
the disposition itself, on which depends our happiness or misery, and
consequently our conduct and deportment in life is still the same.


