Supplement 4
============

This is our natural way of thinking, even with regard to the most
common and most credible events.

For instance: There is no kind of report which rises so easily, and
spreads so quickly, especially in country places and provincial towns,
as those concerning marriages; inso- much that two young persons of
equal condition never see each other twice, but the whole neighbourhood
immediately join them together.

The pleasure of telling a piece of news so interesting, of propagating
it, and of being the first reporters of it, spreads the intelligence.
And this is so well known, that no man of sense gives attention to these
reports, till he find them confirmed by some greater evidence. Do not
the same passions, and others still stronger, incline the generality of
mankind to believe and report, with the greatest vehemence and
assurance, all religious miracles? Thirdly.

It forms a strong presumption against all super- natural and miraculous
relations, that they are observed chiefly to abound among ignorant and
barbarous nations; or if a civilized people has ever given admission to
any of them, that people will be found to have received them from
ignorant and barbarous ancestors, who transmitted them with that
inviolable sanction and authority, which always attend received
opinions.

When we peruse the first histories of all nations, we are apt to
imagine our- selves transported into some new world; where the whole
frame of nature is disjointed, and every element performs its operations
in a different manner, from what it does at present.

Battles, revolutions, pestilence, famine and death, are never the
effect of those natural causes, which we experience. Prodigies, omens,
oracles, judgements, quite obscure the few natural events, that are
intermingled with them.

But as the former grow thinner every page, in proportion as we advance
nearer the enlightened ages, we soon learn, that there is nothing
mysterious or supernatural in the case, but that all proceeds from the
usual propensity of mankind towards the marvellous, and that, though
this inclination may at intervals receive a check from sense and
learning, it can never be thoroughly extirpated from human nature.

It is strange, a judicious reader is apt to say, upon the perusal of
these wonderful historians, that such prodigious events never happen in
our days.

But it is nothing strange, I hope, that men should lie in all ages.

You must surely have seen instances enough of that frailty. You have
your- self heard many such marvellous relations started, which, being
treated with scorn by all the wise and judicious, have at last been
abandoned even by the vulgar.

Be as- sured, that those renowned lies, which have spread and
flourished to such a monstrous height, arose from like beginnings; but
being sown in a more proper soil, shot up at last into prodigies almost
equal to those which they relate.

It was a wise policy in that false prophet, Alexander, who though now
forgotten, was once so famous, to lay the first scene of his impostures
in Paphlagonia, where, as Lucian tells us, the people were extremely
ignorant and stupid, and ready to swallow even the grossest delusion.
People at a distance, who are weak enough to think the matter at all
worth enquiry, have no opportunity of receiving better in- formation.
The stories come magnified to them by a hundred circumstances.

Fools are industrious in propagating the imposture; while the wise and
learned are contented, in general, to deride its absurdity, without
informing themselves of the particular facts, by which it may be
distinctly refuted.

And thus the impostor above mentioned was enabled to proceed, from his
ignorant Paphlagonians, to the enlisting of votaries, even among the
Grecian philosophers, and men of the most eminent rank and distinction
in Rome; nay, could engage the attention of that sage emperor Marcus
Aurelius; so far as to make him trust the success of a military
expedition to his delusive prophecies.

The advantages are so great, of starting an imposture among an ignorant
people, that, even though the delusion should be too gross to impose on
the generality of them (which, though seldom, is sometimes the case) it
has a much better chance for succeeding in remote countries, than if the
first scene had been laid in a city renowned for arts and knowledge.

The most ignorant and barbarous of these barbarians carry the report
abroad. None of their country- men have a large correspondence, or
sufficient credit and authority to contradict and beat down the
delusion. Men's inclination to the marvellous has full opportunity to
display itself.

And thus a story, which is universally exploded in the place where it
was first started, shall pass for certain at a thousand miles distance.
But had Alexander fixed his residence at Athens, the philosophers of
that renowned mart of learning had immediately spread, throughout the
whole Roman empire, their sense of the matter; which, being supported by
so great authority, and displayed by all the force of reason and
eloquence, had entirely opened the eyes of mankind.

It is true; Lucian, passing by chance through Paphlagonia, had an
opportunity of performing this good office.

But, though much to be wished, it does not always happen, that every
Alexander meets with a Lucian, ready to expose and detect his
impostures. I may add as a fourth reason, which diminishes the authority
of prodigies, that there is no testimony for any, even those which have
not been expressly detected, that is not opposed by an infinite number
of witnesses; so that not only the miracle destroys the credit of
testimony, but the testimony destroys itself.

To make this the better understood, let us consider, that, in matters
of religion, whatever is different is contrary; and that it is
impossible the religions of ancient Rome, of Turkey, of Siam, and of
China should, all of them, be established on any solid foundation.

Every miracle, therefore, pretended to have been wrought in any of
these religions (and all of them abound in miracles), as its direct
scope is to establish the particular system to which it is attributed;
so has it the same force, though more indirectly, to overthrow every
other system. In destroying a rival system, it likewise destroys the
credit of those miracles, on which that system was established; so that
all the prodigies of different re- ligions are to be regarded as
contrary facts, and the evi- dences of these prodigies, whether weak or
strong, as opposite to each other.

According to this method of rea- soning, when we believe any miracle of
Mahomet or his successors, we have for our warrant the testimony of a
few barbarous Arabians: and on the other hand, we are to regard the
authority of Titus Livius, Plutarch, Tacitus, and, in short, of all the
authors and witnesses, Grecian, Chinese, and Roman Catholic, who have
related any mira- cle in their particular religion; I say, we are to
regard their testimony in the same light as if they had mentioned that
Mahometan miracle, and had in express terms con- tradicted it, with the
same certainty as they have for the miracle they relate.

This argument may appear over sub- tile and refined; but is not in
reality different from the reasoning of a judge, who supposes, that the
credit of two witnesses, maintaining a crime against any one, is
destroyed by the testimony of two others, who affirm him to have been
two hundred leagues distant, at the same in- stant when the crime is
said to have been committed.

One of the best attested miracles in all profane history, is that which
Tacitus reports of Vespasian, who cured a blind man in Alexandria, by
means of his spittle, and a lame man by the mere touch of his foot; in
obedience to a vision of the god Serapis, who had enjoined them to have
recourse to the Emperor, for these miraculous cures.

The story may be seen in that fine historian[^4]; where every
circumstance seems to add weight to the testimony, and might be
displayed at large with all the force of argument and eloquence, if any
one were now concerned to enforce the evidence of that exploded and
idolatrous superstition. The gravity, solidity, age, and probity of so
great an emperor, who, through the whole course of his life, con- versed
in a familiar manner with his friends and courtiers, and never affected
those extraordinary airs of divinity assumed by Alexander and
Demetrius.

The historian, a contemporary writer, noted for candour and veracity,
and withal, the greatest and most penetrating genius, perhaps, of all
antiquity; and so free from any tendency to credulity, that he even lies
under the contrary imputation, of atheism and profaneness: The persons,
from whose authority he related the miracle, of established character
for judgement and veracity, as we may well presume; eye-witnesses of the
fact, and confirming their testimony, after the Flavian family was
despoiled of the empire, and could no longer give any reward, as the
price of a lie. Utrumque, qui interfuere, nunc quoque memorant, postquam
nullum men- dacio pretium.

To which if we add the public nature of the facts, as related, it will
appear, that no evidence can well be supposed stronger for so gross and
so palpable a falsehood.

There is also a memorable story related by Cardinal de Retz, which may
well deserve our consideration.

When that intriguing politician fled into Spain, to avoid the
persecution of his enemies, he passed through Saragossa, the capital of
Arragon, where he was shewn, in the cathe- dral, a man, who had served
seven years as a doorkeeper, and was well known to every body in town,
that had ever paid his devotions at that church.

He had been seen, for so long a time, wanting a leg; but recovered that
limb by the rubbing of holy oil upon the stump; and the cardinal assures
us that he saw him with two legs.

This miracle was vouched by all the canons of the church; and the whole
company in town were appealed to for a con- firmation of the fact; whom
the cardinal found, by their zealous devotion, to be thorough believers
of the miracle.

Here the relater was also contemporary to the supposed prodigy, of an
incredulous and libertine character, as well as of great genius; the
miracle of so singular a nature as could scarcely admit of a
counterfeit, and the witnesses very numerous, and all of them, in a
manner, spectators of the fact, to which they gave their testimony.

And what adds mightily to the force of the evidence, and may double our
surprise on this occasion, is, that the cardinal himself, who relates
the story, seems not to give any credit to it, and consequently cannot
be suspected of any concurrence in the holy fraud. He considered justly,
that it was not requisite, in order to reject a fact of this nature, to
be able accurately to disprove the testimony, and to trace its
falsehood, through all the circumstances of knavery and credulity which
produced it.

He knew, that, as this was commonly altogether impossible at any small
distance of time and place; so was it extremely difficult, even where
one was immediately present, by reason of the bigotry, ignorance,
cunning, and roguery of a great part of man- kind.

He therefore concluded, like a just reasoner, that such an evidence
carried falsehood upon the very face of it, and that a miracle,
supported by any human testi- mony, was more properly a subject of
derision than of argument.

There surely never was a greater number of miracles ascribed to one
person, than those, which were lately said to have been wrought in
France upon the tomb of Abbe Paris, the famous Jansenist, with whose
sanctity the people were so long deluded.

The curing of the sick, giving hearing to the deaf, and sight to the
blind, were every where talked of as the usual effects of that holy
sepulchre. But what is more extraordinary; many of the miracles were
immediately proved upon the spot, before judges of un- questioned
integrity, attested by witnesses of credit and distinction, in a learned
age, and on the most eminent theatre that is now in the world.

Nor is this all: a relation of them was published and dispersed
everywhere; nor were the Jesuits, though a learned body supported by the
civil magistrate, and determined enemies to those opinions, in whose
favour the miracles were said to have been wrought, ever able distinctly
to refute or detect them.

[^5] Where shall we find such a number of circumstances, agreeing to the
corroboration of one fact? And what have we to oppose to such a cloud of
witnesses, but the absolute impossibility or miraculous nature of the
events, which they relate? And this surely, in the eyes of all
reasonable people, will alone be regarded as a sufficient refutation.

Is the consequence just, because some human testimony has the utmost
force and authority in some cases, when it relates the battle of
Philippi or Pharsalia for instance; that therefore all kinds of
testimony must, in all cases, have equal force and authority? Suppose
that the Caesarean and Pompeian factions had, each of them, claimed the
victory in these battles, and that the historians of each party had
uniformly ascribed the advantage to their own side; how could mankind,
at this distance, have been able to determine between them?

The contrariety is equally strong between the miracles related by
Herodotus or Plutarch, and those delivered by Mariana, Bede, or any
monkish historian.

The wise lend a very academic faith to every report which favours the
passion of the reporter; whether it magnifies his country, his family,
or himself, or in any other way strikes in with his natural inclinations
and pro- pensities.

But what greater temptation than to appear a missionary, a prophet, an
ambassador from heaven? Who would not encounter many dangers and
difficulties, in order to attain so sublime a character? Or if, by the
help of vanity and a heated imagination, a man has first made a convert
of himself, and entered seriously into the delusion; who ever scruples
to make use of pious frauds, in support of so holy and meritorious a
cause? The smallest spark may here kindle into the greatest flame;
because the materials are always prepared for it.

The avidum genus auricularum[^6], the gazing populace, re- ceive
greedily, without examination, whatever sooths super- stition, and
promotes wonder. How many stories of this nature have, in all ages, been
detected and exploded in their infancy? How many more have been
celebrated for a time, and have afterwards sunk into neglect and
oblivion? Where such reports, therefore, fly about,

the solution of the phenomenon is obvious; and we judge in conformity
to regular experience and observa- tion, when we account for it by the
known and natural principles of credulity and delusion. And shall we,
rather than have a recourse to so natural a solution, allow of a
miraculous violation of the most established laws of nature? I need not
mention the difficulty of detecting a falsehood in any private or even
public history, at the place, where it is said to happen; much more when
the scene is removed to ever so small a distance.

Even a court of judicature, with all the authority, accuracy, and
judgement, which they can employ, find themselves often at a loss to
distinguish between truth and falsehood in the most recent actions.

But the matter never comes to any issue, if trusted to the common
method of altercations and debate and flying rumours; especially when
men's passions have taken part on either side.

In the infancy of new religions, the wise and learned commonly esteem
the matter too inconsiderable to deserve their attention or regard. And
when afterwards they would willingly detect the cheat in order to
undeceive the deluded multitude, the season is now past, and the records
and witnesses, which might clear up the matter, have perished beyond
recovery.

No means of detection remain, but those which must be drawn from the
very testimony itself of the reporters: and these, though always
sufficient with the judicious and know- ing, are commonly too fine to
fall under the comprehension of the vulgar. Upon the whole, then, it
appears, that no testimony for any kind of miracle has ever amounted to
a probability, much less to a proof; and that, even supposing it
amounted to a proof, it would be opposed by another proof; derived from
the very nature of the fact, which it would endeavour to establish.

It is experience only, which gives authority to human testimony; and it
is the same experience, which assures us of the laws of nature. When,
therefore, these two kinds of experience are contrary, we have nothing
to do but subtract the one from the other, and embrace an opinion,
either on one side or the other, with that assurance which arises from
the remainder.

But according to the principle here explained, this subtraction, with
regard to all popular religions, amounts to an entire annihilation; and
therefore we may establish it as a maxim, that no human testimony can
have such force as to prove a miracle, and make it a just foundation for
any such system of religion.

I beg the limitations here made may be remarked, when I say, that a
miracle can never be proved, so as to be the foundation of a system of
religion. For I own, that other- wise, there may possibly be miracles,
or violations of the usual course of nature, of such a kind as to admit
of proof from human testimony; though, perhaps, it will be im- possible
to find any such in all the records of history.

Thus, suppose, all authors, in all languages, agree, that, from the
first of January, 1600, there was a total darkness over the whole earth
for eight days: suppose that the tradition of this extraordinary event
is still strong and lively among the people: that all travellers, who
return from foreign countries, bring us accounts of the same tradition,
without the least variation or contradiction: it is evident, that our
present philosophers, instead of doubting the fact, ought to receive it
as certain, and ought to search for the causes whence it might be
derived.

The decay, corruption, and dissolution of nature, is an event rendered
probable by so many analogies, that any phenomenon, which seems to have
a tendency towards that catastrophe, comes within the reach of human
testimony, if that testi- mony be very extensive and uniform.

But suppose, that all the historians who treat of England, should
agree, that, on the first of January, 1600, Queen Elizabeth died; that
both before and after her death she was seen by her physicians and the
whole court, as is usual with persons of her rank; that her successor
was acknowl- edged and proclaimed by the parliament; and that, after
being interred a month, she again appeared, resumed the throne, and
governed England for three years: I must confess that I should be
surprised at the concurrence of so many odd circumstances, but should
not have the least inclination to believe so miraculous an event.

I should not doubt of her pretended death, and of those other public
circumstances that followed it: I should only assert it to have been
pretended, and that it neither was, nor possibly could be real.

You would in vain object to me the difficulty, and almost impossibility
of deceiving the world in an affair of such consequence; the wisdom and
solid judgment of that renowned queen; with the little or no advantage
which she could reap from so poor an artifice: all this might astonish
me; but I would still reply, that the knavery and folly of men are such
common phenomena, that I should rather believe the most extraordinary
events to arise from their concurrence, than admit of so signal a
violation of the laws of nature.

But should this miracle be ascribed to any new system of religion; men,
in all ages, have been so much imposed on by ridiculous stories of that
kind, that this very circumstance would be a full proof of a cheat, and
sufficient, with all men of sense, not only to make them reject the
fact, but even reject it without farther examination.

Though the Being to whom the miracle is ascribed, be, in this case,
Almighty, it does not, upon that account, become a whit more probable;
since it is impossible for us to know the attributes or actions of such
a Being, otherwise than from the experience which we have of his
productions, in the usual course of nature.

This still reduces us to past observation, and obliges us to compare
the instances of the violation of truth in the testi- mony of men, with
those of the violation of the laws of nature by miracles, in order to
judge which of them is most likely and probable.

As the violations of truth are more common in the testimony concerning
religious mir- acles, than in that concerning any other matter of fact;
this must diminish very much the authority of the former testimony, and
make us form a general resolution, never to lend any attention to it,
with whatever specious pretence it may be covered.

Lord Bacon seems to have embraced the same principles of reasoning. 'We
ought,' says he, 'to make a collection or particular history of all
monsters and prodigious births or productions, and in a word of every
thing new, rare, and extraordinary in nature.

But this must be done with the most severe scrutiny, lest we depart
from truth. Above all, every relation must be considered as suspicious,
which depends in any degree upon religion, as the prodigies of Livy: and
no less so, everything that is to be found in the writers of natural
magic or alchimy, or such authors, who seem, all of them, to have an
unconquerable appetite for falsehood and fable.

[^7] I am the better pleased with the method of reasoning here
delivered, as I think it may serve to confound those dangerous friends
or disguised enemies to the Christian Religion, who have undertaken to
defend it by the principles of human reason. Our most holy religion is
founded on Faith, not on reason; and it is a sure method of exposing it
to put it to such a trial as it is, by no means, fitted to endure.

To make this more evident, let us examine those miracles, related in
scripture; and not to lose ourselves in too wide a field, let us confine
ourselves to such as we find in the Pentateuch, which we shall examine,
according to the principles of these pretended Christians, not as the
word or testimony of God himself, but as the production of a mere human
writer and historian.

Here then we are first to consider a book, presented to us by a
barbarous and ignorant people, written in an age when they were still
more bar- barous, and in all probability long after the facts which it
relates, corroborated by no concurring testimony, and resembling those
fabulous accounts, which every nation gives of its origin.

Upon reading this book, we find it full of prodigies and miracles.

It gives an account of a state of the world and of human nature
entirely different from the present: of our fall from that state: of the
age of man, extended to near a thousand years: of the destruction of the
world by a deluge: of the arbitrary choice of one people, as the
favourites of heaven; and that people the countrymen of the author: of
their deliverance from bond- age by prodigies the most astonishing
imaginable: I desire any one to lay his hand upon his heart, and after a
serious consideration declare, whether he thinks that the falsehood of
such a book, supported by such a testimony, would be more extraordinary
and miraculous than all the miracles it relates; which is, however,
necessary to make it be received, according to the measures of
probability above established.

What we have said of miracles may be applied, without any variation, to
prophecies; and indeed, all prophecies are real miracles, and as such
only, can be admitted as proofs of any revelation.

If it did not exceed the capacity of human nature to foretell future
events, it would be absurd to employ any prophecy as an argument for a
divine mission or authority from heaven.

So that, upon the whole, we may conclude, that the Christian Religion
not only was at first attended with miracles, but even at this day
cannot be believed by any reasonable person without one.

Mere reason is insufficient to convince us of its veracity: and whoever
is moved by Faith to assent to it, is conscious of a con- tinued miracle
in his own person, which subverts all the principles of his
understanding, and gives him a determina- tion to believe what is most
contrary to custom and ex- perience.

[^1] Plutarch, in vita Catonis.

[^2] No Indian, it is evident, could have experience that water did not
freeze in cold climates.

This is placing nature in a situation quite unknown to him; and it is
impossible for him to tell a priori what will result from it. It is
making a new experiment, the consequence of which is always uncer-
tain.

One may sometimes conjecture from analogy what will follow; but still
this is but conjecture. And it must be confessed, that, in the present
case of freezing, the event follows contrary to the rules of analogy,
and is such as a rational Indian would not look for.

The operations of cold upon water are not gradual, according to the
degrees of cold; but when- ever it comes to the freezing point, the
water passes in a moment, from the utmost liquidity to perfect
hardness.

Such an event, therefore, may be denominated extraordinary, and
requires a pretty strong testimony, to ren- der it credible to people in
a warm climate: But still it is not miraculous, nor contrary to uniform
experience of the course of nature in cases where all the circumstances
are the same.

The inhabitants of Sumatra have always seen water fluid in their own
climate, and the freezing of their rivers ought to be deemed a prodigy:
But they never saw water in Muscovy during the winter; and therefore
they cannot reasonably be positive what would there be the consequence.
[^3] Sometimes an event may not, in itself, seem to be contrary to the
laws of nature, and yet, if it were real, it might, by reason of some
circum- stances, be denominated a miracle; because, in fact, it is
contrary to these laws.

Thus if a person, claiming a divine authority, should command a sick
person to be well, a healthful man to fall down dead, the clouds to pour
rain, the winds to blow, in short, should order many natural events,
which immediately follow upon his command; these might justly be
esteemed miracles, because they are really, in this case, contrary to
the laws of nature.

For if any suspicion remain, that the event and command con- curred by
accident there is no miracle and no transgression of the laws of nature.
If this suspicion be removed, there is evidently a miracle, and a
transgression of these laws; because nothing can be more contrary to
nature than that the voice or command of a man should have such an
influence. A miracle may be accurately defined, a transgression of a law
of nature by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the interposition
of some invisible agent.

A miracle may either be discoverable by men or not. This alters not its
nature and essence.

The raising of a house or ship into the air is a visible miracle. The
raising of a feather, when the wind wants ever so little of a force
requisite for that purpose, is as real a miracle, though not so sensible
with regard to us.

[^4] Hist.

[^5] By Mons.

Montgeron, counsellor or judge of the Parliament of Paris.

[^6] Lucret.

[^7] Nov.


