Supplement 3
============

It is still open for me, as well as you, to regulate my behaviour, by
my experience of past events. And if you affirm, that, while a divine
providence is allowed and a supreme distributive justice in the
universe, I ought to expect some more particular reward of the good, and
punishment of the bad, beyond the ordinary course of events; I here find
the same fallacy, which I have before endeavoured to detect.

You persist in imagining, that, if we grant that divine existence, for
which you so earnestly contend, you may safely infer consequences from
it, and add something to the experienced order of nature, by arguing
from the attributes which you ascribe to your gods. You seem not to
remember, that all your reasonings on this subJect can only be drawn
from effects to causes; and that every argument, deducted from causes to
effects, must of necessity be a gross sophism; since it is impossible
for you to know anything of the cause, but what you have antecedently,
not inferred, but discovered to the full, in the effect.

But what must a philosopher think of those vain rea- soners, who
instead of regarding the present scene of things as the sole object of
their contemplation, so far reverse the whole course of nature, as to
render this life merely a passage to something farther; a porch, which
leads to a greater, and vastly different building; a prologue, which
serves only to introduce the piece, and give it more grace and
propriety? Whence, do you think, can such philoso- phers derive their
idea of the gods? From their own con- ceit and imagination surely.

For if they derived it from the present phenomena, it would never point
to anything farther, but must be exactly adjusted to them. That the
divinity may possibly be endowed with attributes, which we have never
seen exerted; may be governed by principles of action, which we cannot
discover to be satisfied: all this will freely be allowed.

But still this is mere possibility and hypothesis.

We never can have reason to infer any attributes, or any principles of
action in him, but so far as we know them to have been exerted and
satisfied. Are there any marks of a distributive justice in the world?
If you answer in the affirmative, I conclude, that, since justice here
exerts itself, it is satisfied.

If you reply in the negative, I conclude, that you have then no reason
to ascribe justice, in our sense of it, to the gods. If you hold a
medium between affirmation and negation, by saying, that the justice of
the gods, at present, exerts itself in part, but not in its full extent;
I answer, that you have no reason to give it any particular extent, but
only so far as you see it, at present, exert itself. Thus I bring the
dispute, O Athenians, to a short issue with my antagonists.

The course of nature lies open to my contemplation as well as to
theirs.

The experi- enced train of events is the great standard, by which we
all regulate our conduct. Nothing else can be appealed to in the field,
or in the senate.

Nothing else ought ever to be heard of in the school, or in the closet.
In vain would our limited understanding break through those boundaries,
which are too narrow for our fond imagination. While we argue from the
course of nature, and infer a particular intelligent cause, which first
bestowed, and still preserves order in the universe, we embrace a
principle, which is both uncertain and useless.

It is uncertain; be- cause the subject lies entirely beyond the reach
of human experience. It is useless; because our knowledge of this cause
being derived entirely from the course of nature, we can never,
according to the rules of just reasoning, return back from the cause
with any new inference, or making additions to the common and
experienced course of nature, establish any new principles of conduct
and be- haviour.

I observe (said I, finding he had finished his harangue) that you
neglect not the artifice of the demagogues of old; and as you were
pleased to make me stand for the people, you insinuate yourself into my
favour by embracing those principles, to which, you know, I have always
ex- pressed a particular attachment.

But allowing you to make experience (as indeed I think you ought) the
only standard of our judgement concerning this, and all other questions
of fact; I doubt not but, from the very same experience, to which you
appeal, it may be possible to refute this reasoning, which you have put
into the mouth of Epicurus.

If you saw, for instance, a half-finished building, surrounded with
heaps of brick and stone and mortar, and all the instruments of masonry;
could you not infer from the effect, that it was a work of design and
con- trivance? And could you not return again, from this in- ferred
cause, to infer new additions to the effect, and conclude, that the
building would soon be finished, and receive all the further
improvements, which art could be- stow upon it? If you saw upon the
sea-shore the print of one human foot, you would conclude, that a man
had passed that way, and that he had also left the traces of the other
foot, though effaced by the rolling of the sands or inundation of the
waters.

Why then do you refuse to admit the same method of reasoning with
regard to the order of nature? Consider the world and the present life
only as an imperfect building, from which you can infer a superior
intelligence; and arguing from that superior intelligence, which can
leave nothing imperfect; why may you not infer a more finished scheme or
plan, which will receive its completion in some distant point of space
or time? Are not these methods of reasoning exactly similar? And under
what pretence can you embrace the one, while you reject the other? The
infinite difference of the subjects, replied he, is a sufficient
foundation for this difference in my conclusions.

In works of human art and contrivance, it is allowable to advance from
the effect to the cause, and returning back from the cause, to form new
inferences concerning the effect, and examine the alterations, which it
has probably undergone, or may still undergo.

But what is the founda- tion of this method of reasoning? Plainly this;
that man is a being, whom we know by experience, whose motives and
designs we are acquainted with, and whose projects and inclinations have
a certain connexion and coherence, according to the laws which nature
has established for the government of such a creature.

When, therefore, we find, that any work has proceeded from the skill
and industry of man; as we are otherwise acquainted with the nature of
the animal, we can draw a hundred infer- ences concerning what may be
expected from him; and these inferences will all be founded in
experience and observation.

But did we know man only from the single work or production which we
examine, it were impossible for us to argue in this manner; because our
knowledge of all the qualities, which we ascribe to him, being in that
case derived from the production, it is impossible they could point to
anything farther, or be the foundation of any new inference.

The print of a foot in the sand can only prove, when considered alone,
that there was some figure adapted to it, by which it was produced: but
the print of a human foot proves likewise, from our other experience,
that there was probably another foot, which also left its impression,
though effaced by time or other accidents.

Here we mount from the effect to the cause; and descending again from
the cause, infer alterations in the effect; but this is not a
continuation of the same simple chain of reasoning.

We comprehend in this case a hundred other experiences and
observations, concerning the usual figure and members of that species of
animal, without which this method of argument must be considered as
fallacious and sophistical.

The case is not the same with our reasonings from the works of nature.
The Deity is known to us only by his productions, and is a single being
in the universe, not comprehended under any species or genus, from whose
experienced attributes or qualities, we can, by analogy, infer any
attribute or quality in him.

As the universe shews wisdom and goodness, we infer wisdom and good-
ness.

As it shews a particular degree of these perfections, we infer a
particular degree of them, precisely adapted to the effect which we
examine. But farther attributes or farther degrees of the same
attributes, we can never be authorised to infer or suppose, by any rules
of just rea- soning. Now, without some such licence of supposition, it
is impossible for us to argue from the cause, or infer any alteration in
the effect, beyond what has immediately fallen under our observation.

Greater good produced by this Being must still prove a greater degree
of goodness: a more impartial distribution of rewards and punishments
must proceed from a greater regard to justice and equity.

Every supposed addition to the works of nature makes an addition to the
attributes of the Author of nature; and consequently, being entirely
unsupported by any reason or argument, can never be admitted but as mere
conjecture and hypothesis. [^4] The great source of our mistake in this
subject, and of the unbounded licence of conjecture, which we indulge,
is, that we tacitly consider ourselves, as in the place of the Supreme
Being, and conclude, that he will, on every occasion, observe the same
conduct, which we ourselves, in his situation, would have embraced as
reasonable and eligible.

But, besides that the ordinary course of nature may convince us, that
almost everything is regulated by principles and maxims very different
from ours; besides this, I say, it must evidently appear contrary to all
rules of analogy to reason, from the intentions and projects of men, to
those of a Being so different, and so much su- perior.

In human nature, there is a certain experienced coherence of designs
and inclinations; so that when, from any fact, we have discovered one
intention of any man, it may often be reasonable, from experience, to
infer an- other, and draw a long chain of conclusions concerning his
past or future conduct.

But this method of reasoning can never have place with regard to a
Being, so remote and in- comprehensible, who bears much less analogy to
any other being in the universe than the sun to a waxen taper, and who
discovers himself only by some faint traces or outlines, beyond which we
have no authority to ascribe to him any attribute or perfection.

What we imagine to be a superior perfection, may really be a defect. Or
were it ever so much a perfection, the ascribing of it to the Supreme
Being, where it appears not to have been really exerted, to the full, in
his works, savours more of flattery and panegyric, than of just
reasoning and sound philosophy. All the philo- sophy, therefore, in the
world, and all the religion, which is nothing but a species of
philosophy, will never be able to carry us beyond the usual course of
experience, or give us measures of conduct and behaviour different from
those which are furnished by reflections on common life.

No new fact can ever be inferred from the religious hypothesis; no
event foreseen or foretold; no reward or punishment ex- pected or
dreaded, beyond what is already known by practice and observation.

So that my apology for Epicurus will still appear solid and
satisfactory; nor have the political inter- ests of society any
connexion with the philosophical dis- putes concerning metaphysics and
religion. There is still one circumstance, replied I, which you seem to
have overlooked.

Though I should allow your premises, I must deny your conclusion. You
conclude, that religious doctrines and reasonings can have no influence
on life, because they ought to have no influence; never con- sidering,
that men reason not in the same manner you do, but draw many
consequences from the belief of a divine Existence, and suppose that the
Deity will inflict punish- ments on vice, and bestow rewards on virtue,
beyond what appear in the ordinary course of nature. Whether this
reasoning of theirs be just or not, is no matter.

Its influence on their life and conduct must still be the same. And
those, who attempt to disabuse them of such prejudices, may, for aught I
know, be good reasoners, but I cannot allow them to be good citizens and
politicians; since they free men from one restraint upon their passions,
and make the infringement of the laws of society, in one respect, more
easy and secure.

After all, I may, perhaps, agree to your general conclusion in favour
of liberty, though upon different premises from those, on which you
endeavour to found it.

I think, that the state ought to tolerate every principle of
philosophy; nor is there an instance, that any government has suffered
in its political interests by such indulgence.

There is no enthusiasm among philosophers; their doctrines are not very
alluring to the people; and no restraint can be put upon their
reasonings, but what must be of dangerous con- sequence to the sciences,
and even to the state, by paving the way for persecution and oppression
in points, where the generality of mankind are more deeply interested
and concerned.

But there occurs to me (continued I) with regard to your main topic, a
difficulty, which I shall just propose to you without insisting on it;
lest it lead into reasonings of too nice and delicate a nature.

In a word, I much doubt whether it be possible for a cause to be known
only by its effect (as you have all along supposed) or to be of so
singular and particular a nature as to have no parallel and no
similarity with any other cause or object, that has ever fallen under
our observation. It is only when two species of objects are found to be
constantly conjoined, that we can infer the one from the other; and were
an effect presented, which was entirely singular, and could not be
comprehended under any known species, I do not see, that we could form
any conjecture or inference at all concerning its cause.

If experience and observation and analogy be, indeed, the only guides
which we can reasonably follow in inferences of this nature; both the
effect and cause must bear a similarity and resemblance to other effects
and causes, which we know, and which we have found, in many instances,
to be con- joined with each other.

I leave it to your own reflection to pursue the consequences of this
principle.

I shall just observe, that, as the antagonists of Epicurus always sup-
pose the universe, an effect quite singular and unparalleled, to be the
proof of a Deity, a cause no less singular and un- paralleled; your
reasonings, upon that supposition, seem, at least, to merit our
attention. There is, I own, some dif- ficulty, how we can ever return
from the cause to the effect, and, reasoning from our ideas of the
former, infer any alteration on the latter, or any, addition to it.

[^1] Luciani, [3 greek words].
[^2] Luciani, [greek word].
[^3] Luciani and Dio.

[^4] In general, it may, I think, Be established as a maxim, that where
any cause is known only by its particular effects, it must be impossible
to infer any new effects from that cause; since the qualities, which are
requisite to produce these new effects along with the former, must
either be different, or superior, or of more extensive operation, than
those which simply pro- duced the effect, whence alone the cause is
supposed to be known to us.

We can never, therefore, have any reason to suppose the existence of
these qualities. To say, that the new effects proceed only from a
continuation of the same energy, which is already known from the first
effects, will not remove the difficulty.

For even granting this to be the case (which can seldom be supposed),
the very continuation and exertion of a like energy (for it is
impossible it can be absolutely the same), I say, this exertion of a
like energy, in a different period of space and time, is a very
arbitrary supposition, and what there cannot possibly be any traces of
it in the effects, from which all our knowledge of the cause is
originally derived.

Let the inferred cause be exactly proportioned (as it should be) to the
known effect; and it is impossible that it can possess any qualities,
from which new or different effects can be inferred.


