Section Xii of the Acadimical Or Sceptical Philosophy
=====================================================

PART I THERE is not a greater number of philosophical reason- ings,
displayed upon any subject, than those, which prove the existence of a
Deity, and refute the falla- cies of Atheists; and yet the most
religious philosophers still dispute whether any man can be so blinded
as to be a speculative atheist.

How shall we reconcile these contra- dictions? The knights errant, who
wandered about to clear the world of dragons and giants, never
entertained the least doubt with regard to the existence of these
monsters.

The Sceptic is another enemy of religion, who naturally provokes the
indignation of all divines and graver philoso- phers; though it is
certain, that no man ever met with any such absurd creature, or
conversed with a man, who had no opinion or principle concerning any
subject, either of action or speculation.

This begets a very natural question; What is meant by a sceptic? And
how far it is possible to push these philosophical principles of doubt
and uncertainty? There is a species of scepticism, antecedent to all
study and philosophy, which is much inculcated by Des Cartes and others,
as a sovereign preservative against error and precipitate judgement.

It recommends an universal doubt, not only of all our former opinions
and principles, but also of our very faculties; of whose veracity, say
they, we must assure ourselves, by a chain of reasoning, deduced from
some original principle, which cannot possibly be fallacious or
deceitful. But neither is there any such original principle, which has a
prerogative above others, that are self-evident and convincing: or if
there were, could we advance a step beyond it, but by the use of those
very faculties, of which we are supposed to be already diffident.

The Cartesian doubt, therefore, were it ever possible to be attained by
any human creature (as it plainly is not) would be entirely in- curable;
and no reasoning could ever bring us to a state of assurance and
conviction upon any subject.

It must, however, be confessed, that this species of scep- ticism, when
more moderate, may be understood in a very reasonable sense, and is a
necessary preparative to the study of philosophy, by preserving a proper
impartiality in our judgements, and weaning our mind from all those
preju- dices, which we may have imbibed from education or rash
opinion.

To begin with clear and self-evident principles, to advance by timorous
and sure steps, to review frequently our conclusions, and examine
accurately all their conse- quences; though by these means we shall make
both a slow and a short progress in our systems; are the only methods,
by which we can ever hope to reach truth, and attain a proper stability
and certainty in our determinations.

There is another species of scepticism, consequent to science and
enquiry, when men are supposed to have dis- covered, either the absolute
fallaciousness of their mental faculties, or their unfitness to reach
any fixed determination in all those curious subjects of speculation,
about which they are commonly employed.

Even our very senses are brought into dispute, by a certain species of
philosophers; and the maxims of common life are subjected to the same
doubt as the most profound principles or conclusions of metaphysics and
theology.

As these paradoxical tenets (if they may be called tenets) are to be
met with in some philosophers, and the refutation of them in several,
they naturally excite our curiosity, and make us enquire into the
arguments, on which they may be founded.

I need not insist upon the more trite topics, employed by the sceptics
in all ages, against the evidence of sense; such as those which are
derived from the imperfection and fallaciousness of our organs, on
numberless occasions; the crooked appearance of an oar in water; the
various aspects of objects, according to their different distances; the
double images which arise from the pressing one eye; with many other
appearances of a like nature.

These sceptical topics, indeed, are only sufficient to prove, that the
senses alone are not implicitly to be depended on; but that we must
correct their evidence by reason, and by considerations, derived from
the nature of the medium, the distance of the object, and the
disposition of the organ, in order to render them, within their sphere,
the proper criteria of truth and falsehood.

There are other more profound arguments against the senses, which admit
not of so easy a solution. It seems evident, that men are carried, by a
natural instinct or prepossession, to repose faith in their senses; and
that, without any reasoning, or even almost before the use of reason, we
always suppose an external universe, which depends not on our
perception, but would exist, though we and every sensible creature were
absent or an- nihilated.

Even the animal creation are governed by a like opinion, and preserve
this belief of external objects, in all their thoughts, designs, and
actions. It seems also evident, that, when men follow this blind and
powerful instinct of nature, they always suppose the very images,
presented by the senses, to be the external objects, and never entertain
any suspicion, that the one are nothing but representations of the
other.

This very table, which we see white, and which we feel hard, is
believed to exist, independent of our perception, and to be something
external to our mind, which perceives it.

Our presence bestows not being on it: our absence does not annihilate
it.

It preserves its existence uniform and entire, independ- ent of the
situation of intelligent beings, who perceive or contemplate it. But
this universal and primary opinion of all men is soon destroyed by the
slightest philosophy, which teaches us, that nothing can ever be present
to the mind but an image or perception, and that the senses are only the
inlets, through which these images are conveyed, without being able to
produce any immediate intercourse between the mind and the object.

The table, which we see, seems to diminish, as we remove farther from
it: but the real table, which exists independent of us, suffers no
alteration: it was, there- fore, nothing but its image, which was
present to the mind.

These are the obvious dictates of reason; and no man, who reflects,
ever doubted, that the existences, which we consider, when we say, this
house and that tree, are nothing but perceptions in the mind, and
fleeting copies or represen- tations of other existences, which remain
uniform and inde- pendent.

So far, then, are we necessitated by reasoning to con- tradict or
depart from the primary instincts of nature, and to embrace a new system
with regard to the evidence of our senses. But here philosophy finds
herself extremely em- barrassed, when she would justify this new system,
and obviate the cavils and objections of the sceptics.

She can no longer plead the infallible and irresistible instinct of
nature: for that led us to a quite different system, which is
acknowledged fallible and even erroneous. And to justify this pretended
philosophical system, by a chain of clear and convincing argument, or
even any appearance of argu- ment, exceeds the power of all human
capacity.

By what argument can it be proved, that the perceptions of the mind
must be caused by external objects, entirely different from them, though
resembling them (if that be possible) and could not arise either from
the energy of the mind itself, or from the suggestion of some invisible
and unknown spirit, or from some other cause still more un- known to us?
It is acknowledged, that, in fact, many of these perceptions arise not
from anything external, as in dreams, madness, and other diseases.

And nothing can be more inexplicable than the manner, in which body
should so operate upon mind as ever to convey an image of itself to a
substance, supposed of so different, and even contrary a nature.

It is a question of fact, whether the perceptions of the senses be
produced by external objects, resembling them: how shall this question
be determined? By experience surely; as all other questions of a like
nature. But here experience is, and must be entirely silent.

The mind has never anything present to it but the perceptions, and
cannot possibly reach any experience of their connexion with ob- jects.
The supposition of such a connexion is, therefore, without any
foundation in reasoning. To have recourse to the veracity of the supreme
Being, in order to prove the veracity of our senses, is surely making a
very unexpected circuit. If his veracity were at all concerned in this
matter, our senses would be entirely infallible; because it is not
possible that he can ever deceive. Not to mention, that, if the external
world be once called in question, we shall be at a loss to find argu-
ments, by which we may prove the existence of that Being or any of his
attributes.

This is a topic, therefore, in which the profounder and more
philosophical sceptics will always triumph, when they endeavour to
introduce an universal doubt into all subjects of human knowledge and
enquiry.

Do you follow the in- stincts and propensities of nature, may they say,
in assenting to the veracity of sense? But these lead you to believe
that the very perception or sensible image is the external object.

Do you disclaim this principle, in order to embrace a more rational
opinion, that the perceptions are only representations of something
external? You here depart from your natural propensities and more
obvious senti- ments; and yet are not able to satisfy your reason, which
can never find any convincing argument from experience to prove, that
the perceptions are connected with any external objects.

There is another sceptical topic of a like nature, derived from the
most profound philosophy; which might merit our attention, were it
requisite to dive so deep, in order to discover arguments and
reasonings, which can so little serve to any serious purpose.

It is universally allowed by modern enquirers, that all the sensible
qualities of ob- jects, such as hard, soft, hot, cold, white, black, &c.
are merely secondary, and exist not in the objects themselves, but are
perceptions of the mind, without any external archetype or model, which
they represent. If this be al- lowed, with regard to secondary
qualities, it must also follow, with regard to the supposed primary
qualities of extension and solidity; nor can the latter be any more
entitled to that denomination than the former.

The idea of extension is entirely acquired from the senses of sight and
feeling; and if all the qualities, perceived by the senses, be in the
mind, not in the object, the same con- clusion must reach the idea of
extension, which is wholly dependent on the sensible ideas or the ideas
of secondary qualities.

Nothing can save us from this conclusion, but the asserting, that the
ideas of those primary qualities are attained by Abstraction, an
opinion, which, if we examine it accurately, we shall find to be
unintelligible, and even absurd.

An extension, that is neither tangible nor visible, cannot possibly be
conceived: and a tangible or visible extension, which is neither hard
nor soft, black nor white, is equally beyond the reach of human
conception.

Let any man try to conceive a triangle in general, which is neither
Isosceles nor Scalenum, nor has any particular length or proportion of
sides; and he will soon perceive the absurdity of all the scholastic
notions with regard to abstraction and general ideas.

[^1] Thus the first philosophical objection to the evidence of sense or
to the opinion of external existence consists in this, that such an
opinion, if rested on natural instinct, is contrary to reason, and if
referred to reason, is contrary to natural instinct, and at the same
time carries no rational evidence with it, to convince an impartial
enquirer.

The second objection goes farther, and represents this opinion as
contrary to reason: at least, if it be a principle of reason, that all
sensible qualities are in the mind, not in the object.

Bereave matter of all its intelligible qualities, both primary and
secondary, you in a manner annihilate it, and leave only a certain
unknown, inexplicable something, as the cause of our perceptions; a
notion so imperfect, that no sceptic will think it worth while to
contend against it. PART II IT may seem a very extravagant attempt of
the sceptics to destroy reason by argument and ratiocination; yet is
this the grand scope of all their enquiries and disputes.

They endeavour to find objections, both to our abstract reasonings, and
to those which regard matter of fact and existence. The chief objection
against all abstract reasonings is derived from the ideas of space and
time; ideas, which, in common life and to a careless view, are very
clear and intelligible, but when they pass through the scrutiny of the
profound sciences (and they are the chief object of these sciences)
afford principles, which seem full of absurdity and contradiction.

No priestly dogmas, invented on purpose to tame and subdue the
rebellious reason of mankind, ever shocked common sense more than the
doctrine of the infinitive divisibility of extension, with its
consequences; as they are pompously displayed by all geometricians and
metaphysicians, with a kind of triumph and exultation.

A real quantity, infinitely less than any finite quantity, con- taining
quantities infinitely less than itself, and so on in infinitum; this is
an edifice so bold and prodigious, that it is too weighty for any
pretended demonstration to support, because it shocks the clearest and
most natural principles of human reason.

[^2] But what renders the matter more extraordinary, is, that these
seemingly absurd opinions are supported by a chain of reasoning, the
clearest and most natural; nor is it possible for us to allow the
premises without admitting the consequences.

Nothing can be more convincing and satisfactory than all the
conclusions con- cerning the properties of circles and triangles; and
yet, when these are once received, how can we deny, that the angle of
contact between a circle and its tangent is infinitely less than any
rectilineal angle, that as you may increase the diameter of the circle
in infinitum, this angle of contact becomes still less, even in
infinitum, and that the angle of contact between other curves and their
tangents may be infinitely less than those between any circle and its
tangent, and so on, in infinitum? The demonstration of these prin-
ciples seems as unexceptionable as that which proves the three angles of
a triangle to be equal to two right ones, though the latter opinion be
natural and easy, and the former big with contradiction and absurdity.

Reason here seems to be thrown into a kind of amazement and sus- pence,
which, without the suggestions of any sceptic, gives her a diffidence of
herself, and of the ground on which she treads.

She sees a full light, which illuminates certain places; but that light
borders upon the most profound darkness. And between these she is so
dazzled and con- founded, that she scarcely can pronounce with certainty
and assurance concerning any one object. The absurdity of these bold
determinations of the ab- stract sciences seems to become, if possible,
still more palpable with regard to time than extension.

An infinite number of real parts of time, passing in succession, and
exhausted one after another, appears so evident a contra- diction, that
no man, one should think, whose judgement is not corrupted, instead of
being improved, by the sciences, would ever be able to admit of it. Yet
still reason must remain restless, and unquiet, even with regard to that
scepticism, to which she is driven by these seeming absurdities and
contradictions.

How any clear, distinct idea can contain circumstances, contradictory
to itself, or to any other clear, distinct idea, is absolutely
incomprehensible; and is, perhaps, as absurd as any propo- sition, which
can be formed. So that nothing can be more sceptical, or more full of
doubt and hesitation, than this scepticism itself, which arises from
some of the paradoxical conclusions of geometry or the science of
quantity.

[^3] The sceptical objections to moral evidence, or to the reasonings
concerning matter of fact, are either popular or philosophical. The
popular objections are derived from the natural weakness of human
understanding; the contra- dictory opinions, which have been entertained
in different ages and nations; the variations of our judgement in sick-
ness and health, youth and old age, prosperity and adver- sity; the
perpetual contradiction of each particular man's opinions and
sentiments; with many other topics of that kind. It is needless to
insist farther on this head.

These objections are but weak.

For as, in common life, we reason every moment concerning fact and
existence, and cannot possibly subsist, without continually employing
this species of argument, any popular objections, derived from thence,
must be insufficient to destroy that evidence.

The great subverter of Pyrrhonism or the excessive principles of
scepticism is action, and employment, and the occupations of common
life. These principles may flourish and triumph in the schools; where it
is, indeed, difficult, if not impossible, to refute them.

But as soon as they leave the shade, and by the presence of the real
objects, which actuate our passions and sentiments, are put in
opposition to the more powerful principles of our nature, they vanish
like smoke, and leave the most determined sceptic in the same condition
as other mortals. The sceptic, therefore, had better keep within his
proper sphere, and display those philosophical objections, which arise
from more profound researches.

Here he seems to have ample matter of triumph; while he justly insists,
that all our evidence for any matter of fact, which lies beyond the
testimony of sense or memory, is derived entirely from the relation of
cause and effect; that we have no other idea of this relation than that
of two objects, which have been frequently conjoined together; that we
have no argument to convince us, that objects, which have, in our
experience, been frequently conjoined, will likewise, in other
instances, be conjoined in the same manner; and that nothing leads us to
this inference but custom or a certain instinct of our nature; which it
is indeed difficult to resist, but which, like other instincts, may be
fallacious and deceitful.

While the sceptic insists upon these topics, he shows his force, or
rather, indeed, his own and our weakness; and seems, for the time at
least, to destroy all assurance and conviction.

These arguments might be displayed at greater length, if any durable
good or benefit to society could ever be expected to result from them.
For here is the chief and most confounding objection to excessive
scepticism, that no durable good can ever result from it; while it
remains in its full force and vigour.

We need only ask such a sceptic, What his meaning is? And what he
proposes by all these curious researches? He is immediately at a loss,
and knows not what to answer.

A Copernican or Ptolemaic, who supports each his different system of
astronomy, may hope to produce a conviction, which will remain constant
and durable, with his audience.

A Stoic or Epicurean displays principles, which may not be durable, but
which have an effect on conduct and be- haviour. But a Pyrrhonian cannot
expect, that his philos- ophy will have any constant influence on the
mind: or if it had, that its influence would be beneficial to society.

On the contrary, he must acknowledge, if he will acknowledge anything,
that all human life must perish, were his principles universally and
steadily to prevail.

All discourse, all action would immediately cease; and men remain in a
total lethargy, till the necessities of nature, unsatisfied, put an end
to their miserable existence.

It is true; so fatal an event is very little to be dreaded. Nature is
always too strong for principle.


