Section Iii : of the Association of Ideas
=========================================

IT IS evident that there is a principle of connexion be- tween the
different thoughts or ideas of the mind, and that in their appearance to
the memory or imagination, they introduce each other with a certain
degree of method and regularity. In our more serious thinking or
discourse this is so observable that any particular thought, which
breaks in upon the regular tract or chain of ideas, is immediately
remarked and rejected.

And even in our wildest and most wandering reveries, nay in our very
dreams, we shall find, if we reflect, that the imagination ran not
altogether at adventures, but that there was still a connexion upheld
among the different ideas, which suc- ceeded each other.

Were the loosest and freest conversa- tion to be transcribed, there
would immediately be observed something which connected it in all its
transitions. Or where this is wanting, the person who broke the thread
of discourse might still inform you, that there had secretly revolved in
his mind a succession of thought, which had gradually led him from the
subject of conversation.

Among different languages, even where we cannot suspect the least
connexion or communication, it is found, that the words, expressive of
ideas, the most compounded, do yet nearly correspond to each other: a
certain proof that the simple ideas, comprehended in the compound ones,
were bound together by some universal principle, which had an equal
influence on all mankind.

Though it be too obvious to escape observation, that different ideas
are connected together; I do not find that any philosopher has attempted
to enumerate or class all the principles of association; a subject,
however, that seems worthy of curiosity.

To me, there appear to be only three principles of connexion among
ideas, namely, Resemblance, Contiguity in time or place, and Cause or
Effect. That these principles serve to connect ideas will not, I
believe, be much doubted.

A picture naturally leads our thoughts to the original:[^1] the mention
of one apartment in a building naturally introduces an enquiry or
discourse concerning the others:[^2] and if we think of a wound, we can
scarcely forbear reflecting on the pain which follows it.

[^3] But that this enumeration is complete, and that there are no other
principles of association except these, may be difficult to prove to the
satisfaction of the reader, or even to a man's own satisfaction.

All we can do, in such cases, is to run over several instances, and
examine carefully the principle which binds the different thoughts to
each other, never stopping till we render the principle as general as
possible.

[^4] The more instances we examine, and the more care we employ, the
more assurance shall we acquire, that the enumeration, which we form
from the whole, is com- plete and entire.

[^1] Resemblance.

[^2] Contiguity.

[^3] Cause and effect.

[^4] For instance, Contrast or Contrariety is also a connexion among
Ideas: but it may perhaps, be considered as a mixture of Causation and
Resem- blance.

Where two objects are contrary, the one destroys the other; that is,
the cause of its annihilation, and the idea of the annihilation of an
object, implies the idea of its former existence.


