Section V : Sceptical Solution of These Doubts
==============================================

PART I THE passion for philosophy, like that for religion, seems liable
to this inconvenience, that, though it aims at the correction of our
manners, and extirpation of our vices, it may only serve, by imprudent
management, to foster a predominant inclination, and push the mind, with
more determined resolution, towards that side which already draws too
much, by the bias and propensity of the natural temper.

It is certain that, while we aspire to the magnanimous firmness of the
philosophic sage, and en- deavour to confine our pleasures altogether
within our own minds, we may, at last, render our philosophy like that
of Epictetus, and other Stoics, only a more refined system of
selfishness, and reason ourselves out of all virtue as well as social
enjoyment.

While we study with attention the vanity of human life, and turn all
our thoughts towards the empty and transitory nature of riches and
honours, we are, perhaps, all the while flattering our natural
indolence, which, hating the bustle of the world, and drudgery of
business, seeks a pretence of reason to give itself a full and
uncontrolled indulgence.

There is, however, one species of philosophy which seems little liable
to this in- convenience, and that because it strikes in with no dis-
orderly passion of the human mind, nor can mingle it- self with any
natural affection or propensity; and that is the Academic or Sceptical
philosophy. The academics al- ways talk of doubt and suspense of
judgment, of danger in hasty determinations, of confining to very narrow
bounds the enquiries of the understanding, and of renouncing all
speculations which lie not within the limits of common life and
practice.

Nothing, therefore, can be more contrary than such a philosophy to the
supine indolence of the mind, its rash arrogance, its lofty pretensions,
and its super- stitious credulity.

Every passion is mortified by it, except the love of truth; and that
passion never is, nor can be, carried to too high a degree. It is
surprising, therefore, that this philosophy, which, in almost every
instance, must be harmless and innocent, should be the subject of so
much groundless reproach and obloquy.

But, perhaps, the very circumstance which renders it so innocent is
what chiefly exposes it to the public hatred and resentment. By
flattering no irregular passion, it gains few partizans: By opposing so
many vices and follies, it raises to itself abundance of enemies, who
stigmatize it as libertine, pro- fane, and irreligious.

Nor need we fear that this philosophy, while it endeavours to limit our
enquiries to common life, should ever undermine the reasonings of common
life, and carry its doubts so far as to destroy all action, as well as
speculation.

Nature will always maintain her rights, and prevail in the end over any
abstract reasoning whatsoever. Though we should conclude, for instance,
as in the foregoing section, that, in all reasonings from experience,
there is a step taken by the mind which is not supported by any argument
or process of the understanding; there is no danger that these rea-
sonings, on which almost all knowledge depends, will ever be affected by
such a discovery.

If the mind be not en- gaged by argument to make this step, it must be
induced by some other principle of equal weight and authority; and that
principle will preserve its influence as long as human nature remains
the same.

What that principle is may well be worth the pains of enquiry. Suppose
a person, though endowed with the strongest faculties of reason and
reflection, to be brought on a sudden into this world; he would, indeed,
immediately observe a continual succession of objects, and one event
following another; but he would not be able to discover anything
farther.

He would not, at first, by any reasoning, be able to reach the idea of
cause and effect; since the particular powers, by which all natural
operations are performed, never appear to the senses; nor is it
reasonable to conclude, merely because one event, in one instance,
precedes another, that therefore the one is the cause, the other the
effect.

Their conjunction may be arbitrary and casual.

There may be no reason to infer the existence of one from the
appearance of the other. And in a word, such a person, without more
experience, could never employ his conjecture or reasoning concerning
any matter of fact, or be assured of anything beyond what was
immediately present to his memory and senses.

Suppose, again, that he has acquired more experience, and has lived so
long in the world as to have observed familiar objects or events to be
constantly conjoined to- gether; what is the consequence of this
experience? He immediately infers the existence of one object from the
appearance of the other.

Yet he has not, by all his ex- perience, acquired any idea or knowledge
of the secret power by which the one object produces the other; nor is
it by any process of reasoning, he is engaged to draw this inference.
But still he finds himself determined to draw it: and though he should
be convinced that his understanding has no part in the operation, he
would nevertheless continue in the same course of thinking.

There is some other principle which determines him to form such a
conclusion. This principle is Custom or Habit.

For wherever the repetition of any particular act or operation produces
a propensity to renew the same act or operation, without being impelled
by any reasoning or process of the under- standing, we always say, that
this propensity is the effect of Custom. By employing that word, we
pretend not to have given the ultimate reason of such a propensity.

We only point out a principle of human nature, which is universally
acknowledged, and which is well known by its effects. Perhaps we can
push our enquiries no farther, or pretend to give the cause of this
cause; but must rest contented with it as the ultimate principle, which
we can assign, of all our conclusions from experience.

It is suf- ficient satisfaction, that we can go so far, without
repining at the narrowness of our faculties because they will carry us
no farther. And it is certain we here advance a very intelligible
proposition at least, if not a true one, when we assert that, after the
constant conjunction of two ob- jects--heat and flame, for instance,
weight and solidity-- we are determined by custom alone to expect the
one from the appearance of the other.

This hypothesis seems even the only one which explains the difficulty,
why we draw, from a thousand instances, an inference which we are not
able to draw from one instance, that is, in no respect, different from
them.

Reason is incapable of any such variation. The conclusions which it
draws from consider- ing one circle are the same which it would form
upon surveying all the circles in the universe. But no man, having seen
only one body move after being impelled by another, could infer that
every other body will move after a like impulse. All inferences from
experience, therefore, are effects of custom, not of reasoning.

[^1] Custom, then, is the great guide of human life. It is that
principle alone which renders our experience useful to us, and makes us
expect, for the future, a similar train of events with those which have
appeared in the past.

Without the influence of custom, we should be entirely ignorant of
every matter of fact beyond what is immediately present to the memory
and senses. We should never know how to adjust means to ends, or to
employ our natural powers in the production of any effect. There would
be an end at once of all action, as well as of the chief part of
speculation.

But here it may be proper to remark, that though our conclusions from
experience carry us beyond our memory and senses, and assure us of
matters of fact which hap- pened in the most distant places and most
remote ages, yet some fact must always be present to the senses or
memory, from which we may first proceed in drawing these conclusions.

A man, who should find in a desert country the remains of pompous
buildings, would conclude that the country had, in ancient times, been
cultivated by civil- ized inhabitants; but did nothing of this nature
occur to him, he could never form such an inference.

We learn the events of former ages from history; but then we must
peruse the volumes in which this instruction is contained, and thence
carry up our inferences from one testimony to another, till we arrive at
the eyewitnesses and spectators of these distant events.

In a word, if we proceed not upon some fact, present to the memory or
senses, our reasonings would be merely hypothetical; and however the
particular links might be connected with each other, the whole chain of
inferences would have nothing to support it, nor could we ever, by its
means, arrive at the knowledge of any real existence. If I ask why you
believe any particular matter of fact, which you relate, you must tell
me some reason; and this reason will be some other fact, connected with
it.

But as you cannot proceed after this manner, in infinitum, you must at
last terminate in some fact, which is present to your memory or senses;
or must allow that your belief is entirely without foundation.

What, then, is the conclusion of the whole matter? A simple one;
though, it must be confessed, pretty remote from the common theories of
philosophy. All belief of matter of fact or real existence is derived
merely from some object, present to the memory or senses, and a
customary conjunction between that and some other object.

Or in other words; having found, in many instances, that any two kinds
of objects--flame and heat, snow and cold--have always been conjoined
together; if flame or snow be pre- sented anew to the senses, the mind
is carried by custom to expect heat or cold, and to believe that such a
quality does exist, and will discover itself upon a nearer approach.
This belief is the necessary result of placing the mind in such
circumstances.

It is an operation of the soul, when we are so situated, as unavoidable
as to feel the passion of love, when we receive benefits; or hatred,
when we meet with injuries.

All these operations are a species of natural instincts, which no
reasoning or process of the thought and understanding is able either to
produce or to prevent. At this point, it would be very allowable for us
to stop our philosophical researches. In most questions we can never
make a single step farther; and in all questions we must terminate here
at last, after our most restless and curious enquiries.

But still our curiosity will be pardonable, perhaps commendable, if it
carry us on to still farther researches, and make us examine more
accurately the na- ture of this belief, and of the customary
conjunction, whence it is derived.

By this means we may meet with some ex- plications and analogies that
will give satisfaction; at least to such as love the abstract sciences,
and can be enter- tained with speculations, which, however accurate, may
still retain a degree of doubt and uncertainty. As to readers of a
different taste; the remaining part of this section is not calculated
for them, and the following en- quiries may well be understood, though
it be neglected.

PART II NOTHING is more free than the imagination of man; and though it
cannot exceed that original stock of ideas fur- nished by the internal
and external senses, it has unlimited power of mixing, compounding,
separating, and dividing these ideas, in all the varieties of fiction
and vision. It can feign a train of events, with all the appearance of
reality, ascribe to them a particular time and place, conceive them as
existent, and paint them out to itself with every circumstance, that
belongs to any historical fact, which it believes with the greatest
certainty.

Wherein, therefore, consists the difference between such a fiction and
belief? It lies not merely in any peculiar idea, which is annexed to
such a conception as commands our assent, and which is wanting to every
known fiction.

For as the mind has authority over all its ideas, it could voluntarily
annex this particular idea to any fiction, and consequently be able to
believe whatever it pleases; contrary to what we find by daily
experience. We can, in our conception, join the head of a man to the
body of a horse; but it is not in our power to believe that such an
animal has ever really existed.

It follows, therefore, that the difference between fiction and belief
lies in some sentiment or feeling, which is annexed to the latter, not
to the former, and which depends not on the will, nor can be commanded
at pleasure. It must be excited by nature, like all other sentiments;
and must arise from the particular situation, in which the mind is
placed at any particular juncture.

Whenever any object is presented to the memory or senses, it
immediately, by the force of custom, carries the imagination to conceive
that object, which is usually conjoined to it; and this conception is
attended with a feeling or sentiment, different from the loose reveries
of the fancy. In this consists the whole nature of belief.

For as there is no matter of fact which we believe so firmly that we
cannot conceive the contrary, there would be no difference between the
conception as- sented to and that which is rejected, were it not for
some sentiment which distinguishes the one from the other.

If I see a billiard-ball moving toward another, on a smooth table, I
can easily conceive it to stop upon contact. This conception implies no
contradiction; but still it feels very differently from that conception
by which I represent to myself the impulse and the communication of
motion from one ball to another.

Were we to attempt a definition of this sentiment, we should, perhaps,
find it a very difficult, if not an impossible task; in the same manner
as if we should endeavour to define the feeling of cold or passion of
anger, to a creature who never had any experience of these sentiments.
Belief is the true and proper name of this feeling; and no one is ever
at a loss to know the meaning of that term; because every man is every
moment conscious of the sentiment represented by it.

It may not, however, be improper to attempt a description of this
sentiment; in hopes we may, by that means, arrive at some analogies,
which may afford a more perfect explication of it. I say, then, that
belief is nothing but a more vivid, lively, forcible, firm, steady con-
ception of an object, than what the imagination alone is ever able to
attain.

This variety of terms, which may seem so unphilosophical, is intended
only to express that act of the mind, which renders realities, or what
is taken for such, more present to us than fictions, causes them to
weigh more in the thought, and gives them a superior influence on the
passions and imagination.

Provided we agree about the thing, it is needless to dispute about the
terms. The imagination has the command over all its ideas, and can join
and mix and vary them, in all the ways possible.

It may conceive fictitious objects with all the circumstances of place
and time.

It may set them, in a manner, before our eyes, in their true colours,
just as they might have existed.

But as it is impossible that this faculty of imagination can ever, of
itself, reach belief, it is evident that belief consists not in the
peculiar nature or order of ideas, but in the manner of their
conception, and in their feeling to the mind.

I confess, that it is impossible perfectly to explain this feeling or
manner of conception. We may make use of words which express something
near it. But its true and proper name, as we observed before, is belief;
which is a term that every one sufficiently under- stands in common
life. And in philosophy, we can go no farther than assert, that belief
is something felt by the mind, which distinguishes the ideas of the
judgement from the fictions of the imagination.

It gives them more weight and influence; makes them appear of greater
importance; en- forces them in the mind; and renders them the governing
principle of our actions.

I hear at present, for instance, a person's voice, with whom I am
acquainted; and the sound comes as from the next room. This impression
of my senses immediately conveys my thought to the person, to- gether
with all the surrounding objects. I paint them out to myself as existing
at present, with the same qualities and relations, of which I formerly
knew them possessed. These ideas take faster hold of my mind than ideas
of an en- chanted castle.

They are very different to the feeling, and have a much greater
influence of every kind, either to give pleasure or pain, joy or sorrow.
Let us, then, take in the whole compass of this doctrine, and allow,
that the sentiment of belief is nothing but a conception more intense
and steady than what attends the mere fictions of the imagination, and
that this manner of conception arises from a customary conjunction of
the object with something present to the memory or senses: I believe
that it will not be difficult, upon these supposi- tions, to find other
operations of the mind analogous to it, and to trace up these phenomena
to principles still more general.

We have already observed that nature has established connexions among
particular ideas, and that no sooner one idea occurs to our thoughts
than it introduces its cor- relative, and carries our attention towards
it, by a gentle and insensible movement.

These principles of connexion or association we have reduced to three,
namely, Resem- blance, Contiguity and Causation; which are the only
bonds that unite our thoughts together, and beget that regular train of
reflection or discourse, which, in a greater or less degree, takes place
among all mankind.


Now here arises a question, on which the solution of the present
difficulty will depend.

Does it happen, in all these relations, that, when one of the objects
is presented to the senses or memory, the mind is not only carried to
the conception of the correlative, but reaches a steadier and stronger
conception of it than what otherwise it would have been able to attain?
This seems to be the case with that belief which arises from the
relation of cause and effect.
And if the case be the same with the other relations or principles of
associations, this may be established as a general law, which takes
place in all the operations of the mind.

We may, therefore, observe, as the first experiment to our present
purpose, that, upon the appearance of the picture of an absent friend,
our idea of him is evidently enlivened by the resemblance, and that
every passion, which that idea occasions, whether of joy or sorrow,
acquires new force and vigour.


In producing this effect, there concur both a relation and a present
impression. Where the picture bears him no resemblance, at least was not
intended for him, it never so much as conveys our thought to him: and
where it is absent, as well as the person, though the mind may pass from
the thought of the one to that of the other, it feels its idea to be
rather weakened than enlivened by that transition.


