Supplement 1
============

We take a pleasure in viewing the picture of a friend, when it is set
before us; but when it is removed, rather choose to consider him
directly than by reflection in an image, which is equally distant and
obscure. The ceremonies of the Roman Catholic religion may be considered
as instances of the same nature.

The dev- otees of that superstition usually plead in excuse for the
mummeries, with which they are upbraided, that they feel the good effect
of those external motions, and pos- tures, and actions, in enlivening
their devotion and quick- ening their fervour, which otherwise would
decay, if directed entirely to distant and immaterial objects.

We shadow out the objects of our faith, say they, in sensible types and
images, and render them more present to us by the immediate presence of
these types, than it is pos- sible for us to do merely by an
intellectual view and contemplation. Sensible objects have always a
greater in- fluence on the fancy than any other; and this influence they
readily convey to those ideas to which they are related, and which they
resemble.

I shall only infer from these practices, and this reasoning, that the
effect of resem- blance in enlivening the ideas is very common; and as
in every case a resemblance and a present impression must concur, we are
abundantly supplied with experiments to prove the reality of the
foregoing principle.

We may add force to these experiments by others of a different kind, in
considering the effects of contiguity as well as of resemblance. It is
certain that distance dimin- ishes the force of every idea, and that,
upon our approach to any object; though it does not discover itself to
our senses; it operates upon the mind with an influence, which imitates
an immediate impression.

The thinking on any object readily transports the mind to what is
contiguous; but it is only the actual presence of an object, that trans-
ports it with a superior vivacity. When I am a few miles from home,
whatever relates to it touches me more nearly than when I am two hundred
leagues distant; though even at that distance the reflecting on any
thing in the neigh- bourhood of my friends or family naturally produces
an idea of them.

But as in this latter case, both the objects of the mind are ideas;
notwithstanding there is an easy transition between them; that
transition alone is not able to give a superior vivacity to any of the
ideas, for want of some immediate impression.

[^2] No one can doubt but causation has the same influence as the other
two relations of resemblance and contiguity. Superstitious people are
fond of the reliques of saints and holy men, for the same reason, that
they seek after types or images, in order to enliven their devotion, and
give them a more intimate and strong conception of those exemplary
lives, which they desire to imitate.

Now it is evident, that one of the best reliques, which a devotee could
procure, would be the handywork of a saint; and if his cloaths and
furniture are ever to be considered in this light, it is be- cause they
were once at his disposal, and were moved and affected by him; in which
respect they are to be considered as imperfect effects, and as connected
with him by a shorter chain of consequences than any of those, by which
we learn the reality of his existence.

Suppose, that the son of a friend, who had been long dead or absent,
were presented to us; it is evident, that this object would instantly
revive its correlative idea, and recall to our thoughts all past
intimacies and familiarities, in more lively colours than they would
otherwise have ap- peared to us.

This is another phaenomenon, which seems to prove the principle above
mentioned. We may observe, that, in these phaenomena, the belief of the
correlative object is always presupposed; without which the relation
could have no effect.

The influence of the picture supposes, that we believe our friend to
have once existed. Contiguity to home can never excite our ideas of
home, unless we believe that it really exists. Now I assert, that this
belief, where it reaches beyond the memory or senses, is of a similar
nature, and arises from similar causes, with the transition of thought
and vivacity of conception here explained.

When I throw a piece of dry wood into a fire, my mind is immediately
carried to con- ceive, that it augments, not extinguishes the flame.
This transition of thought from the cause to the effect proceeds not
from reason. It derives its origin altogether from custom and
experience.

And as it first begins from an object, present to the senses, it
renders the idea or con- ception of flame more strong and lively than
any loose, floating reverie of the imagination.

That idea arises im- mediately.

The thought moves instantly towards it, and conveys to it all that
force of conception, which is derived from the impression present to the
senses. When a sword is levelled at my breast, does not the idea of
wound and pain strike me more strongly, than when a glass of wine is
presented to me, even though by accident this idea should occur after
the appearance of the latter object? But what is there in this whole
matter to cause such a strong conception, except only a present object
and a customary transition of the idea of another object, which we have
been accustomed to conjoin with the former? This is the whole operation
of the mind, in all our conclusions con- cerning matter of fact and
existence; and it is a satisfaction to find some analogies, by which it
may be explained.

The transition from a present object does in all cases give strength
and solidity to the related idea.

Here, then, is a kind of pre-established harmony between the course of
nature and the succession of our ideas; and though the powers and
forces, by which the former is gov- erned, be wholly unknown to us; yet
our thoughts and conceptions have still, we find, gone on in the same
train with the other works of nature.

Custom is that principle, by which this correspondence has been
effected; so neces- sary to the subsistence of our species, and the
regulation of our conduct, in every circumstance and occurrence of hu-
man life. Had not the presence of an object, instantly excited the idea
of those objects, commonly conjoined with it, all our knowledge must
have been limited to the narrow sphere of our memory and senses; and we
should never have been able to adjust means to ends, or employ our
natural powers, either to the producing of good, or avoiding of evil.

Those, who delight in the discovery and contem- plation of final
causes, have here ample subject to employ their wonder and admiration. I
shall add, for a further confirmation of the foregoing theory, that, as
this operation of the mind, by which we infer like effects from like
causes, and vice versa, is so essential to the subsistence of all human
creatures, it is not probable, that it could be trusted to the
fallacious de- ductions of our reason, which is slow in its operations;
appears not, in any degree, during the first years of infancy; and at
best is, in every age and period of human life, ex- tremely liable to
error and mistake.

It is more conformable to the ordinary wisdom of nature to secure so
necessary an act of the mind, by some instinct or mechanical tendency,
which may be infallible in its operations, may discover itself at the
first appearance of life and thought, and may be independent of all the
laboured deductions of the under- standing.

As nature has taught us the use of our limbs, without giving us the
knowledge of the muscles and nerves, by which they are actuated; so has
she implanted in us an instinct, which carries forward the thought in a
corre- spondent course to that which she has established among external
objects; though we are ignorant of those powers and forces, on which
this regular course and succession of objects totally depends. [^1]
Nothing is more useful than for writers, even, on moral, political, or
physical subjects, to distinguish between reason and experience, and to
sup- pose, that these species of argumentation are entirely different
from each other.

The former are taken for the mere result of our intellectual facul-
ties, which, by considering a priori the nature of things, and examining
the effects, that must follow from their operation, establish particular
prin- ciples of science and philosophy.

The latter are supposed to be derived entirely from sense and
observation, by which we learn what has actually resulted from the
operation of particular objects, and are thence able to infer, what
will, for the future, result from them.

Thus, for instance, the limitations and restraints of civil government,
and a legal constitution, may be defended, either from reason, which
reflecting on the great frailty and corruption of human nature, teaches,
that no man can safely be trusted with unlimited authority; or from
experience and history, which inform us of the enormous abuses, that
ambition, in every age and country, has been found to make so imprudent
a confidence.

The same distinction between reason and experience is maintained in all
our deliberations concerning the conduct of life; while the experienced
states- man, general, physician, or merchant is trusted and followed;
and the unprac- tised novice, with whatever natural talents endowed,
neglected and despised.

Though it be allowed, that reason may form very plausible conjectures
with regard to the consequences of such a particular conduct in such
particular circumstances; it is still supposed imperfect, without the
assistance of experi- ence, which is alone able to give stability and
certainty to the maxims, derived from study and reflection.

But notwithstanding that this distinction be thus universally received,
both in the active and speculative scenes of life, I shall not scruple
to pro- nounce, that it is, at bottom, erroneous, at least,
superficial.

If we examine those arguments, which, in any of the sciences above
mentioned, are supposed to be mere effects of reasoning and reflection,
they will be found to terminate, at last, in some general principle or,
con- clusion, for which we can assign no reason but observation and
experience. The only difference between them and those maxims, which are
vulgarly esteemed the result of pure experience, is, that the former
cannot be estab- lished without some process of thought, and some
reflection on what we have observed, in order to distinguish its
circumstances, and trace its con- sequences: Whereas in the latter, the
experienced event is exactly and fully familiar to that which we infer
as the result of any particular situation.

room for doubt or opposition.


