Supplement 2
============

They assert that the Deity is the immediate cause of the union between
soul and body; and that they are not the organs of sense, which, being
agitated by external objects, produce sensations in the mind; but that
it is a particular volition of our omnipotent Maker, which excites such
a sensation, in consequence of such a motion in the organ.

In like manner, it is not any energy in the will that produces local
motion in our members: it is God himself, who is pleased to second our
will, in itself impotent, and to command that motion which we erro-
neously attribute to our own power and efficacy. Nor do philosophers
stop at this conclusion.

They sometimes extend the same inference to the mind itself, in its
internal opera- tions. Our mental vision or conception of ideas is noth-
ing but a revelation made to us by our Maker.

When we voluntarily turn our thoughts to any object, and raise up its
image in the fancy, it is not the will which creates that idea: it is
the universal Creator, who discovers it to the mind, and renders it
present to us. Thus, according to these philosophers, every thing is
full of God.

Not content with the principle, that nothing exists but by his will,
that nothing possesses any power but by his concession: they rob nature,
and all created beings, of every power, in order to render their
dependence on the Deity still more sensible and immediate. They consider
not that, by this theory, they diminish, instead of magni- fying, the
grandeur of those attributes, which they affect so much to celebrate.

It argues surely more power in the Deity to delegate a certain degree
of power to inferior creatures than to produce every thing by his own
im- mediate volition.

It argues more wisdom to contrive at first the fabric of the world with
such perfect foresight that, of itself, and by its proper operation, it
may serve all the purposes of providence, than if the great Creator were
obliged every moment to adjust its parts, and animate by his breath all
the wheels of that stupendous machine.

But if we would have a more philosophical confutation of this theory,
perhaps the two following reflections may suffice: First, it seems to me
that this theory of the universal energy and operation of the Supreme
Being is too bold ever to carry conviction with it to a man,
sufficiently ap- prized of the weakness of human reason, and the narrow
limits to which it is confined in all its operations.

Though the chain of arguments which conduct to it were ever so logical,
there must arise a strong suspicion, if not an absolute assurance, that
it has carried us quite beyond the reach of our faculties, when it leads
to conclusions so extraordinary, and so remote from common life and ex-
perience.

We are got into fairy land, long ere we have reached the last steps of
our theory; and there we have no reason to trust our common methods of
argument, or to think that our usual analogies and probabilities have
any authority.

Our line is too short to fathom such immense abysses. And however we
may flatter ourselves that we are guided, in every step which we take,
by a kind of ver- isimilitude and experience, we may be assured that
this fancied experience has no authority when we thus apply it to
subjects that lie entirely out of the sphere of ex- perience. But on
this we shall have occasion to touch afterwards.

[^5] Secondly, I cannot perceive any force in the arguments on which
this theory is founded.

We are ignorant, it is true, of the manner in which bodies operate on
each other: their force or energy is entirely incomprehensible: but are
we not equally ignorant of the manner or force by which a mind, even the
supreme mind, operates either on itself or on body? Whence, I beseech
you, do we acquire any idea of it? We have no sentiment or consciousness
of this power in ourselves. We have no idea of the Supreme Being but
what we learn from reflection on our own faculties.

Were our ignorance, therefore, a good reason for rejecting any thing,
we should be led into that principle of denying all energy in the
Supreme Being as much as in the grossest matter.

We surely comprehend as little the operations of one as of the other.
Is it more difficult to conceive that motion may arise from impulse than
that it may arise from volition? All we know is our profound ignorance
in both cases.

[^6] PART II BUT to hasten to a conclusion of this argument, which is
already drawn out to too great a length: we have sought in vain for an
idea of power or necessary connexion in all the sources from which we
could suppose it to be derived.

It appears that, in single instances of the operation of bodies, we
never can, by our utmost scrutiny, discover any thing but one event
following another, without being able to com- prehend any force or power
by which the cause operates, or any connexion between it and its
supposed effect. The same difficulty occurs in contemplating the
operations of mind on body--where we observe the motion of the latter to
follow upon the volition of the former, but are not able to observe or
conceive the tie which binds together the motion and volition, or the
energy by which the mind produces this effect.

The authority of the will over its own faculties and ideas is not a
whit more comprehensible: so that, upon the whole, there appears not,
throughout all nature, any one in- stance of connexion which is
conceivable by us.

All events seem entirely loose and separate. One event follows an-
other; but we never can observe any tie between them. They seem
conjoined, but never connected.

And as we can have no idea of any thing which never appeared to our
outward sense or inward sentiment, the necessary conclusion seems to be
that we have no idea of connexion or power at all, and that these words
are absolutely, without any meaning, when employed either in
philosophical reasonings or common life.

But there still remains one method of avoiding this con- clusion, and
one source which we have not yet examined.

When any natural object or event is presented, it is im- possible for
us, by any sagacity or penetration, to discover, or even conjecture,
without experience, what event will result from it, or to carry our
foresight beyond that object which is immediately present to the memory
and senses. Even after one instance or experiment where we have ob-
served a particular event to follow upon another, we are not entitled to
form a general rule, or foretell what will happen in like cases; it
being justly esteemed an unpardonable temerity to judge of the whole
course of nature from one single experiment, however accurate or
certain.

But when one particular species of event has always, in all instances,
been conjoined with another, we make no longer any scruple of
foretelling one upon the appearance of the other, and of employing that
reasoning, which can alone assure us of any matter of fact or existence.
We then call the one object, Cause; the other, Effect.

We suppose that there is some connexion between them; some power in the
one, by which it infallibly produces the other, and operates with the
great- est certainty and strongest necessity.

It appears, then, that this idea of a necessary connexion among events
arises from a number of similar instances which occur of the constant
conjunction of these events; nor can that idea ever be suggested by any
one of these instances, surveyed in all possible lights and positions.
But there is nothing in a number of instances, different from every
single instance, which is supposed to be exactly similar; except only,
that after a repetition of similar in- stances, the mind is carried by
habit, upon the appearance of one event, to expect its usual attendant,
and to believe that it will exist.

This connexion, therefore, which we feel in the mind, this customary
transition of the imagination from one object to its usual attendant, is
the sentiment or impression from which we form the idea of power or
neces- sary connexion. Nothing farther is in the case.

Contem- plate the subject on all sides; you will never find any other
origin of that idea. This is the sole difference between one instance,
from which we can never receive the idea of con- nexion, and a number of
similar instances, by which it is suggested.

The first time a man saw the communication of motion by impulse, as by
the shock of two billiard balls, he could not pronounce that the one
event was connected: but only that it was conjoined with the other.

After he has ob- served several instances of this nature, he then
pronounces them to be connected. What alteration has happened to give
rise to this new idea of connexion? Nothing but that he now feels these
events to be connected in his imagination, and can readily foretell the
existence of one from the appearance of the other.
When we say, therefore, that one object is connected with another, we
mean only that they have ac- quired a connexion in our thought, and give
rise to this inference, by which they become proofs of each other's ex-
istence: A conclusion which is somewhat extraordinary, but which seems
founded on sufficient evidence.

Nor will its evidence be weakened by any general diffidence of the un-
derstanding, or sceptical suspicion concerning every con- clusion which
is new and extraordinary. No conclusions can be more agreeable to
scepticism than such as make dis- coveries concerning the weakness and
narrow limits of human reason and capacity.

And what stronger instance can be produced of the sur- prising
ignorance and weakness of the understanding than the present. For
surely, if there be any relation among objects which it imports to us to
know perfectly, it is that of cause and effect. On this are founded all
our reasonings concerning matter of fact or existence.

By means of it alone we attain any assurance concerning objects which
are removed from the present testimony of our memory and senses. The
only immediate utility of all sciences, is to teach us, how to control
and regulate future events by their causes. Our thoughts and enquiries
are, therefore, every moment, employed about this relation: yet so
imperfect are the ideas which we form concerning it, that it is
impossible to give any just definition of cause, except what is drawn
from something extraneous and foreign to it. Similar ob- jects are
always conjoined with similar.

Of this we have experience. Suitably to this experience, therefore, we
may define a cause to be an object, followed by another, and where all
the objects similar to the first are followed by objects similar to the
second. Or in other words where, if the first object had not been, the
second never had existed. The appearance of a cause always conveys the
mind, by a customary transition, to the idea of the effect. Of this also
we have experience.

We may, therefore, suitably to this experience, form another definition
of cause, and call it, an object followed by another, and whose
appearance always conveys the thought to that other.

But though both these definitions be drawn from circumstances foreign
to the cause, we cannot remedy this inconvenience, or attain any more
perfect definition, which may point out that circum- stance in the
cause, which gives it a connexion with its effect. We have no idea of
this connexion, nor even any distant notion what it is we desire to
know, when we en- deavour at a conception of it. We say, for instance,
that the vibration of this string is the cause of this particular
sound.

But what do we mean by that affirmation? We either mean that this
vibration is followed by this sound, and that all similar vibrations
have been followed by similar sounds; or, that this vibration is
followed by this sound, and that upon the appearance of one the mind
anticipates the senses, and forms immediately an idea of the other.

We may consider the relation of cause and effect in either of these two
lights; but beyond these, we have no idea of it. [^7] To recapitulate,
therefore, the reasonings of this section: Every idea is copied from
some preceding impression or sentiment; and where we cannot find any
impression, we may be certain that there is no idea.

In all single instances of the operation of bodies or minds, there is
nothing that produces any impression, nor consequently can suggest any
idea of power or necessary connexion. But when many uniform instances
appear, and the same object is always followed by the same event; we
then begin to entertain the notion of cause and connexion.

We then feel a new sentiment or impression, to wit, a customary
connexion in the thought or imagination between one object and its usual
attendant; and this sentiment is the original of that idea which we seek
for. For as this idea arises from a number of similar instances, and not
from any single instance, it must arise from that circumstance, in which
the number of instances differ from every individual in- stance.

But this customary connexion or transition of the imagination is the
only circumstance in which they dif- fer. In every other particular they
are alike.

The first instance which we saw of motion communicated by the shock of
two billiard balls (to return to this obvious illustra- tion) is exactly
similar to any instance that may, at present, occur to us; except only,
that we could not, at first, infer one event from the other; which we
are enabled to do at present, after so long a course of uniform
experience.

I know not whether the reader will readily apprehend this reasoning. I
am afraid that, should I multiply words about it, or throw it into a
greater variety of lights, it would only become more obscure and
intricate. In all abstract reason- ings there is one point of view
which, if we can happily hit, we shall go farther towards illustrating
the subject than by all the eloquence and copious expression in the
world.

This point of view we should endeavour to reach, and reserve the
flowers of rhetoric for subjects which are more adapted to them.

[^1] Section II.
[^2] Mr.

Locke, in his chapter of power, says that, finding from experience,
that there are several new productions in matter, and concluding that
there must somewhere be a power capable of producing them, we arrive at
last by this reasoning at the idea of power. But no reasoning can ever
give us a new, original, simple idea; as this philosopher himself
confesses. This, therefore, can never be the origin of that idea.

[^3] It may be pretended, that the resistance which we meet with in
bodies, obliging us frequently to exert our force, and call up all our
power, this gives us the idea of force and power.

It is this nisus, or strong endeavour, of which we are conscious, that
is the original impression from which this idea is copied. But, first,
we attribute power to a vast number of objects, where we never can
suppose this resistance or exertion of force to take place; to the
Supreme Being, who never meets with any resistance; to the mind in its
command over its ideas and limbs, in common thinking and motion, where
the effect follows immediately upon the will, without any exertion or
summoning up of force; to inanimate matter, which is not capable of this
sentiment.

Secondly, This sentiment of an endeavour to overcome resistance has no
known connexion with any event: What follows it, we know by experience;
but could not know it a priori.

It must, how- ever, be confessed, that the animal nisus, which we
experience, though it can afford no accurate precise idea of power,
enters very much into that vulgar, inaccurate idea, which is formed by
it.

[^4] [three greek words] [^5] Section XII.

[^6] I need not examine at length the vis inertiae which is so much
talked of in the new philosophy, and which is ascribed to matter. We
find by experience, that a body at rest or in motion continues for ever
in its present state, till put from it by some new cause; and that a
body impelled takes as much motion from the impelling body as it
acquires itself.

These are facts.

When we call this a vis inertiae, we only mark these facts, without
pretending to have any idea of the inert power; in the same manner as,
when we talk of gravity, we mean certain effects, without comprehending
that active power. It was never the meaning of Sir ISAAC NEWTON to rob
second causes of all force or energy; though some of his followers have
endeavoured to establish that theory upon his authority. On the
contrary, that great philosopher had recourse to an etherial active
fluid to explain his universal attraction; though he was so cautious and
modest as to allow, that it was a mere hypothesis, no to be insisted on,
without more experi- ments.

I must confess, that there is something in the fate of opinions a
little extraordinary. DES CARTES insinuated that doctrine of the
universal and sole efficacy of the Deity, without insisting on it.

MALEBRANCHE and other CARTESIANS made it the foundation of all their
philosophy. It had, however, no authority in England.

LOCKE, CLARKE, and CUDWORTH, never so much as notice of it, but suppose
all along, that matter has a real, though subordinate and derived power.
By what means has it become so prevalent among our modern
metaphysicians? [^7] According to these explications and definitions, the
idea of power is relative as much as that of cause; and both have a
reference to an effect, or some other event constantly conjoined with
the former. When we consider the unknown circumstance of an object, by
which the degree or quantity of its effect is fixed and determined, we
call that its power: and accordingly, it is allowed by all philosophers,
that the effect is the measure of the power.

But if they had any idea of power, as it is in itself, why could not
they Measure it in itself? The dispute whether the force of a body in
motion be as its velocity, or the square of its velocity; this dispute,
I say, need not be decided by comparing its effects in equal or unequal
times; but by a direct mensuration and comparison.

As to the frequent use of the words, Force, Power, Energy, &c.

, which every where occur in common conversation, as well as in
philosophy; that is no proof, that we are acquainted, in any instance,
with the connecting principle between cause and effect, or can account
ultimately for the pro- duction of one thing to another. These words, as
commonly used, have very loose meanings annexed to them; and their ideas
are very uncertain and confused.

No animal can put external bodies in motion without the sentiment of a
nisus or endeavour; and every animal has a sentiment or feeling from the
stroke or blow of an external object, that is in motion.
These sensations, which are merely animal, and from which we can a
priori draw no inference, we are apt to transfer to inanimate objects,
and to sup- pose, that they have some such feelings, whenever they
transfer or receive motion.

With regard to energies, which are exerted, without our annexing to
them any idea of communicated motion, we consider only the constant
experienced conjunction of the events; and as we feel a customary con-
nexion between the ideas, we transfer that feeling to the objects; as
nothing is more usual than to apply to external bodies every internal
sensation, which they occasion.


