Section Viii : of Liberity and Necessity Part I
===============================================

IT might reasonably be expected in questions which have been canvassed
and disputed with great eagerness, since the first origin of science,
and philosophy, that the meaning of all the terms, at least, should have
been agreed upon among the disputants; and our enquiries, in the course
of two thousand years, been able to pass from words to the true and real
subject of the controversy.

For how easy may it seem to give exact definitions of the terms
employed in reasoning, and make these definitions, not the mere sound of
words, the object of future scrutiny and examination? But if we consider
the matter more narrowly, we shall be apt to draw a quite opposite
conclusion. From this circumstance alone, that a controversy has been
long kept on foot, and remains still undecided, we may presume that
there is some ambiguity in the expression, and that the disputants affix
different ideas to the terms employed in the controversy.

For as the faculties of the mind are supposed to be naturally alike in
every individual; otherwise nothing could be more fruitless than to
reason or dispute together; it were impossible, if men affix the same
ideas to their terms, that they could so long form different opinions of
the same subject; especially when they communicate their views, and each
party turn themselves on all sides, in search of arguments which may
give them the victory over their antagonists.

It is true, if men attempt the discussion of questions which lie
entirely beyond the reach of human capacity, such as those concerning
the origin of worlds, or the economy of the intellectual system or
region of spirits, they may long beat the air in their fruitless
contests, and never arrive at any determinate conclusion.

But if the question regard any subject of common life and experience,
nothing, one would think, could preserve the dispute so long undecided
but some ambiguous expressions, which keep the antagonists still at a
distance, and hinder them from grappling with each other.

This has been the case in the long disputed question concerning liberty
and necessity; and to so remarkable a degree that, if I be not much
mistaken, we shall find, that all mankind, both learned and ignorant,
have always been of the same opinion with regard to this subject, and
that a few intelligible definitions would immediately have put an end to
the whole controversy.

I own that this dispute has been so much canvassed on all hands, and
has led philosophers into such a labyrinth of obscure sophistry, that it
is no wonder, if a sensible reader indulge his ease so far as to turn a
deaf ear to the proposal of such a question, from which he can expect
neither instruction or entertain- ment.

But the state of the argument here proposed may, perhaps, serve to
renew his attention; as it has more novelty, promises at least some
decision of the controversy, and will not much disturb his ease by any
intricate or obscure reasoning.

I hope, therefore, to make it appear that all men have ever agreed in
the doctrine both of necessity and of liberty, according to any
reasonable sense, which can be put on these terms; and that the whole
controversy, has hitherto turned merely upon words. We shall begin with
examining the doctrine of necessity.

It is universally allowed that matter, in all its operations, is
actuated by a necessary force, and that every natural effect is so
precisely determined by the energy of its cause that no other effect, in
such particular circumstances, could possibly have resulted from it. The
degree and direction of every motion is, by the laws of nature,
prescribed with such exactness that a living creature may as soon arise
from the shock of two bodies as motion in any other de- gree or
direction than what is actually produced by it.

Would we, therefore, form a just and precise idea of neces- sity, we
must consider whence that idea arises when we apply it to the operation
of bodies.

It seems evident that, if all the scenes of nature were continually
shifted in such a manner that no two events bore any resemblance to each
other, but every object was entirely new, without any similitude to
whatever had been seen before, we should never, in that case, have
attained the least idea of necessity, or of a connexion among these
objects.

We might say, upon such a supposition, that one object or event has
followed another; not that one was produced by the other. The relation
of cause and effect must be utterly unknown to mankind.

Inference and rea- soning concerning the operations of nature would,
from that moment, be at an end; and the memory and senses remain the
only canals, by which the knowledge of any real existence could possibly
have access to the mind.

Our idea, therefore, of necessity and causation arises entirely from
the uniformity observable in the operations of nature, where similar
objects are constantly conjoined together, and the mind is determined by
custom to infer the one from the appearance of the other. These two
circum- stances form the whole of that necessity, which we ascribe to
matter.

Beyond the constant conjunction of similar objects, and the consequent
inference from one to the other, we have no notion of any necessity or
connexion.

If it appear, therefore, that all mankind have ever allowed, without
any doubt or hesitation, that these two circum- stances take place in
the voluntary actions of men, and in the operations of mind; it must
follow, that all mankind have ever agreed in the doctrine of necessity,
and that they have hitherto disputed, merely for not understanding each
other.

As to the first circumstance, the constant and regular con- junction of
similar events, we may possibly satisfy ourselves by the following
considerations: It is universally acknowl- edged that there is a great
uniformity among the actions of men, in all nations and ages, and that
human nature remains still the same, in its principles and operations.

The same motives always produce the same actions: the same events
follow from the same causes. Ambition, avarice, self-love, vanity,
friendship, generosity, public spirit: these passions, mixed in various
degrees, and distributed through society, have been, from the beginning
of the world, and still are, the source of all the actions and
enterprises, which have ever been observed among mankind.

Would you know the sentiments, inclinations, and course of life of the
Greeks and Romans? Study well the temper and actions of the French and
English: You cannot be much mistaken in trans- ferring to the former
most of the observations which you have made with regard to the latter.
Mankind are so much the same, in all times and places, that history
informs us of nothing new or strange in this particular.

Its chief use is only to discover the constant and universal principles
of human nature, by showing men in all varieties of circum- stances and
situations, and furnishing us with materials from which we may form our
observations and become ac- quainted with the regular springs of human
action and be- haviour.

These records of wars, intrigues, factions, and revolutions, are so
many collections of experiments, by which the politician or moral
philosopher fixes the prin- ciples of his science, in the same manner as
the physician or natural philosopher becomes acquainted with the nature
of plants, minerals, and other external objects, by the ex- periments
which he forms concerning them.

Nor are the earth, water, and other elements, examined by Aristotle,
and Hippocrates, more like to those which at present lie under our
observation than the men described by Polybius and Tacitus are to those
who now govern the world.

Should a traveller, returning from a far country, bring us an account
of men, wholly different from any with whom we were ever acquainted;
men, who were entirely divested of avarice, ambition, or revenge; who
knew no pleasure but friendship, generosity, and public spirit; we
should immedi- ately, from these circumstances, detect the falsehood,
and prove him a liar, with the same certainty as if he had stuffed his
narration with stories of centaurs and dragons, miracles and
prodigies.

And if we would explode any forgery in history, we cannot make use of a
more convincing argu- ment, than to prove, that the actions ascribed to
any person are directly contrary to the course of nature, and that no
human motives, in such circumstances, could ever induce him to such a
conduct. The veracity of Quintus Curtius is as much to be suspected,
when he describes the super- natural courage of Alexander, by which he
was hurried on singly to attack multitudes, as when he describes his
super- natural force and activity, by which he was able to resist
them.

So readily and universally do we acknowledge a uni- formity in human
motives and actions as well as in the operations of body. Hence likewise
the benefit of that experience, acquired by long life and a variety of
business and company, in order to instruct us in the principles of human
nature, and regu- late our future conduct, as well as speculation.

By means of this guide, we mount up to the knowledge of men's in-
clinations and motives, from their actions, expressions, and even
gestures; and again descend to the interpretation of their actions from
our knowledge of their motives and in- clinations.

The general observations treasured up by a course of experience, give
us the clue of human nature, and teach us to unravel all its
intricacies. Pretexts and appear- ances no longer deceive us.

Public declarations pass for the specious colouring of a cause.

And though virtue and honour be allowed their proper weight and
authority, that perfect disinterestedness, so often pretended to, is
never ex- pected in multitudes and parties; seldom in their leaders; and
scarcely even in individuals of any rank or station.

But were there no uniformity in human actions, and were every
experiment which we could form of this kind irregular and anomalous, it
were impossible to collect any general observa- tions concerning
mankind; and no experience, however ac- curately digested by reflection,
would ever serve to any purpose.

Why is the aged husbandman more skilful in his calling than the young
beginner but because there is a certain uniformity in the operation of
the sun, rain, and earth towards the production of vegetables; and
experience teaches the old practitioner the rules by which this
operation is governed and directed.

We must not, however, expect that this uniformity of human actions
should be carried to such a length as that all men, in the same
circumstances, will always act precisely in the same manner, without
making any allowance for the diversity of characters, prejudices, and
opinions. Such a uniformity in every particular, is found in no part of
nature.

On the contrary, from observing the variety of conduct in different
men, we are enabled to form a greater variety of maxims, which still
suppose a degree of uniformity and regularity.

Are the manners of men different in different ages and countries? We
learn thence the great force of custom and education, which mould the
human mind from its infancy and form it into a fixed and established
character.

Is the behaviour and conduct of the one sex very unlike that of the
other? Is it thence we become acquainted with the different characters
which nature has impressed upon the sexes, and which she preserves with
constancy and regu- larity? Are the actions of the same person much
diversified in the different periods of his life, from infancy to old
age? This affords room for many general observations concerning the
gradual change of our sentiments and inclinations, and the different
maxims which prevail in the different ages of human creatures.

Even the characters, which are peculiar to each individual, have a
uniformity in their influence; otherwise our acquaintance with the
persons and our obser- vation of their conduct could never teach us
their disposi- tions, or serve to direct our behaviour with regard to
them.

I grant it possible to find some actions, which seem to have no regular
connexion with any known motives, and are exceptions to all the measures
of conduct which have ever been established for the government of men.

But if we would willingly know what judgment should be formed of such
irregular and extraordinary actions, we may con- sider the sentiments
commonly entertained with regard to those irregular events which appear
in the course of nature, and the operations of external objects. All
causes are not conjoined to their usual effects with like uniformity.

An artificer, who handles only dead matter, may be disappointed of his
aim, as well as the politician, who directs the conduct of sensible and
intelligent agents.

The vulgar, who take things according to their first ap- pearance,
attribute the uncertainty of events to such an uncertainty in the causes
as makes the latter often fail of their usual influence; though they
meet with no impedi- ment in their operation.

But philosophers, observing that, almost in every part of nature, there
is contained a vast variety of springs and principles, which are hid, by
reason of their minuteness or remoteness, find, that it is at least
possible the contrariety of events may not proceed from any contingency
in the cause, but from the secret operation of contrary causes.

This possibility is converted into cer- tainty by farther observation,
when they remark that, upon an exact scrutiny, a contrariety of effects
always betrays a contrariety of causes, and proceeds from their mutual
opposition.

A peasant can give no better reason for the stopping of any clock or
watch than to say that it does not commonly go right: But an artist
easily perceives that the same force in the spring or pendulum has
always the same influence on the wheels; but fails of its usual effects,
perhaps by reason of a grain of dust, which puts a stop to the whole
movement.

From the observation of several parallel instances, philosophers form a
maxim that the connexion between all causes and effects is equally
necessary, and that its seeming uncertainty in some instances proceeds
from the secret opposition of contrary causes.

Thus, for instance, in the human body, when the usual symptoms of
health or sickness disappoint our expectation; when medicines operate
not with their wonted powers; when irregular events follow from any
particular cause; the philosopher and physician are not surprised at the
matter, nor are ever tempted to deny, in general, the necessity and
uniformity of those principles by which the animal economy is
conducted.

They know that a human body is a mighty complicated machine: That many
secret powers lurk in it, which are altogether beyond our comprehension:
That to us it must often appear very uncertain in its operations: And
that therefore the irregular events, which outwardly discover
themselves, can be no proof that the laws of nature are not observed
with the greatest regularity in its internal operations and government.
The philosopher, if he be consistent, must apply the same reasoning to
the actions and volitions of intelligent agents.

The most irregular and unexpected resolutions of men may frequently be
accounted for by those who know every par- ticular circumstance of their
character and situation.

A person of an obliging disposition gives a peevish answer: But he has
the toothache, or has not dined.

A stupid fellow discovers an uncommon alacrity in his carriage: But he
has met with a sudden piece of good fortune.

Or even when an action, as sometimes happens, cannot be particularly
ac- counted for, either by the person himself or by others; we know, in
general, that the characters of men are, to a certain degree, inconstant
and irregular.

This is, in a manner, the constant character of human nature; though it
be appli- cable, in a more particular manner, to some persons who have
no fixed rule for their conduct, but proceed in a con- tinued course of
caprice and inconstancy.

The internal principles and motives may operate in a uniform manner,
notwithstanding these seeming irregularities; in the same manner as the
winds, rain, cloud, and other variations of the weather are supposed to
be governed by steady prin- ciples; though not easily discoverable by
human sagacity and enquiry.

Thus it appears, not only that the conjunction between motives and
voluntary actions is as regular and uniform as that between the cause
and effect in any part of nature; but also that this regular conjunction
has been universally acknowledged among mankind, and has never been the
subject of dispute, either in philosophy or common life.

Now, as it is from past experience that we draw all infer- ences
concerning the future, and as we conclude that objects will always be
conjoined together which we find to have always been conjoined; it may
seem superfluous to prove that this experienced uniformity in human
actions is a source whence we draw inferences concerning them.

But in order to throw the argument into a greater variety of lights we
shall also insist, though briefly, on this latter topic. The mutual
dependence of men is so great in all societies that scarce any human
action is entirely complete in itself, or is performed without some
reference to the actions of others, which are requisite to make it
answer fully the in- tention of the agent.

The poorest artificer, who labours alone, expects at least the
protection of the magistrate, to ensure him the enjoyment of the fruits
of his labour.

He also expects that, when he carries his goods to market, and offers
them at a reasonable price, he shall find purchasers, and shall be able,
by the money he acquires, to engage others to supply him with those
commodities which are requisite for his subsistence.

In proportion as men extend their deal- ings, and render their
intercourse with others more com- plicated, they always comprehend, in
their schemes of life, a greater variety of voluntary actions, which
they expect, from the proper motives, to co-operate with their own. In
all these conclusions they take their measures from past ex- perience,
in the same manner as in their reasonings con- cerning external objects;
and firmly believe that men, as well as all the elements, are to
continue, in their operations, the same that they have ever found them.
A manufacturer reckons upon the labour of his servants for the execution
of any work as much as upon the tools which he employs, and would be
equally surprised were his expectations dis- appointed.

In short, this experimental inference and rea- soning concerning the
actions of others enters so much into human life that no man, while
awake, is ever a moment without employing it.

Have we not reason, therefore, to affirm that all mankind have always
agreed in the doctrine of necessity according to the foregoing
definition and ex- plication of it? Nor have philosophers even
entertained a different opinion from the people in this particular. For,
not to men- tion that almost every action of their life supposes that
opinion, there are even few of the speculative parts of learn- ing to
which it is not essential.


