Preface
=======

In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلىٰ سَيِّدِنَا وَ نَبِيِّنَا مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ
الطَّاهِرِيْنَ وَ لَعْنَةُ اللهِ عَلىٰ أَعْدَائِهِمْ أَجْمَعِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and may the
blessings of Allah be** **upon our Master and Prophet, Muhammad, and his
pure progeny, and may the curse of Allah be upon all their enemies.**

Today, it is imperative to explain the teachings of Islam in the areas
of “beliefs” {*‘aqa’id*}, “laws” {*ahkam*} and “morality” {*akhlaq*} in
simple language based on Qur’anic verses and Prophetic traditions to
meet the needs of those who are interested.

Through divine succor {*tawfiq*}, the televised presentation of the
discussions on “Lessons from the Qur’an,” was welcomed by our religious
community for some years, and some of these discussions were published.
The discussions on the basic principles of religion {*usul ad-din*} and
the Day of Resurrection {*ma‘ad*} {in particular} are among them.

After these, discourses pertaining to the branches of religion
{*furu‘ad-din*} were also meant to follow. However, on account of urgent
need, “*Hajj*” was presented to you earlier. Now, prayer {*salah}* is at
your disposal, thanks to the blessings of the blood of martyrs.

Although useful and valuable books and brochures about prayer and other
branches of Islam have already been published, it is still hoped that
owing to its novelty of approach, simplicity of discussion, suitable
organization of the subjects, and reliance on ample Qur’anic verses and
*hadith*s,[^1] this volume would be useful to all readers, particularly
teachers, who are presenting the truths of religion in class sessions.
The main references used in organizing these discussions are the Qur’an,
and the *hadith,* for which both Sunni and Shi‘ah books have been
utilized.

The principal sources being consulted (apart from the Qur’an and *Nahj
al-Balaghah*)[^2] are *Bihar al-Anwar*, *Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah*, *Mustadrak
al-Hakim*, *Usul al-Kafi*, *Man La Yahdhuruh al-Faqih*, *Ghurar
al-Hikam*, *Kanz al-‘Ummal*, and others whose particular references are
indicated in the footnotes.

In preparing the contents of this treatise, valuable ideas and
supplementary suggestions offered have also been utilized, which are
hereby acknowledged with profound gratitude. The positive aspects of
this book are related to the luminous statements of God, the Prophet
(S)[^3] and the infallible *Ahl al-Bayt*[^4] (*‘a*)[^5] and written with
their blessings. Any weaknesses, however, are mine.

The translations of Qur’anic verses and *hadith*s are relatively free
translations and sometimes accompanied by explanations and addenda. It
should not remain unsaid that the content of this volume has been shown
earlier in the state television of the Islamic Republic of Iran. It has
been put into writing with some corrections and modifications.

I beseech God, the Exalted, for sincerity of intention {*ikhlas*},
dedication to purpose {*tawfiq*} and eloquence in speech and writing. I
hope that this trivial attempt at inclining people toward the great
obligatory act of prayer is fruitful and plays a vital role in the
dissemination of Islamic culture throughout the world—an obligation
which is incumbent upon each of us. It is also hoped that by clinging to
its religious identity and rich Islamic culture, our great Islamic
nation can serve as a formidable stronghold of truth and a strong refuge
for the deprived ones of the world.

Verily, He is the Bestower of Success {*innahu wali* *at-tawfiq*}.

**Muhsin Qara’ati**  
***Ramadhan 1410 AH***  
***Farvardin 1369 AHS***  
***(Circa March-April 1990)***

[^1]: Hadith (pl. ahadith): tradition or report, specifically the
traditions of the Prophet (S) and the infallible Imams (‘a), i.e. their
sayings, actions and tacit approvals of others’ actions, or the
narrations of these. {Trans.}

[^2]: Nahj al-Balaghah (Peak of Eloquence) is a collection of speeches,
sayings and letters of the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib (‘a) compiled by Sharif ar-Radi Muhammad ibn al-Husayn (d. 406
AH/1016). Contents of the book concern the three essential topics of
God, man and the universe, and include comments on scientific, literary,
social, ethical, and political issues. Except the words of the Glorious
Qur’an and of the Holy Prophet (S), no words of man can equate it in
eloquence. So far, more than 101 exegeses have been written on the Nahj
al-Balaghah, indicating the importance of this treatise to scholars and
learned men of research and investigation. For more information, visit:
http://www.al-islam.org/nahjul. {Trans.}

[^3]: The abbreviation, “S”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
sallallahu ‘alayhi wa alihi wa sallam {may God’s salutation and peace be
upon him and his progeny}, which is used after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S). {Trans.}

[^4]: Ahl al-Bayt: according to authentic hadiths recorded in both Sunni
and Shi‘ah sources, the term Ahl al-Bayt, and interchangeably ‘Itrah and
Al, is a blessed Qur’anic appellation that belongs exclusively to the
Prophet, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn (‘a). The members of this
Family of five, with the Prophet Muhammad (S) at its head, were the ones
present at the time the Qur’anic verses regarding their virtues were
being revealed to the Prophet (S). However, nine other Imams from the
descendants of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) are also in this chosen Family, the
final one being Imam al-Mahdi (‘a). For further information, visit:
http://www.al-islam.org/faq. {Trans.}

[^5]: The abbreviation, “‘a” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
‘alayhi’s-salam, ‘alayhim’us-salam, or ‘alayha’s-salam {may peace be
upon him/them/her}, which is used after the names of the prophets,
angels, Imams from the Prophet’s progeny, and saints (‘a). {Trans.}


