Prayer {Salah}
==============

We have discussed the acts of worship and their conditions and
philosophy. After stating those generalities, we shall now deal with
their manifestations and examine the most apparent form of servitude
which is prayer {*salah*}. First of all, we need to know the status of
prayer from the perspective of the (Qur’an and *hadith*). Thereafter, we
shall touch on its details and secrets. Let us recall some of the views
of the school of revelation {*maktab-*e *wahy*} regarding prayer:

• Prayer has been one of the most important commands of the prophets
(*‘a*) and one of the most apparent manifestations of worship. Hadhrat
Luqman says to his son:

***“O my son! Maintain the prayer.”***[^1]

• Prayer is a cure for forgetfulness and a means of remembrance of God:

***“And maintain the prayer for My remembrance.”***[^2]

• The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Prayer is the covenant of
Allah.”[^3]

• Prayer is like solace for our Beloved Prophet (S), since he said: “My
eyes find solace in prayer.”[^4]

• Prayer is a means of seeking assistance in times of adversity and
difficulty. God says:

***“And take recourse in patience and prayer.”***[^5]

• Prayer is a cure for arrogance. ‘Ali (*‘a*) says: “Allah has laid
down… prayer for purification from vanity.”[^6]

• Prayer is a means of thanking God for His blessings:

 ***“So pray to your Lord and offer sacrifice (in gratitude).”***[^7]

• Prayer is the physiognomy of our school {*maktab*}: “Prayer is the
physiognomy of your religion.”[^8]

• Prayer identifies the school of Islam. The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Prayer is the banner of Islam.”[^9]

• Prayer is a firm support of religion: “And it (prayer) is the pillar
of your religion.”[^10]

• Prayer is like a head for the body. The Prophet of Islam (S) said:
“The position of prayer in religion is like that of the head to the
body.”[^11]

• Prayer is the key to paradise.[^12]

• Prayer assesses people: “Prayer is a scale {*mizan*}.”[^13]

• Prayer is the basis of religion: “Islam is based on …prayer”[^14]

• Prayer is the first question that will be asked on the Day of
Resurrection: “The first thing to be accounted with respect to the
servant {*‘abd*} is prayer.”[^15]

• Prayer washes away sins. In a *hadith*, prayer is likened to a river
in which man takes a bath five times a day and no dirt remains on his
body.[^16]

• Prayer is the relationship of the creature {*makhluq*} to the Creator
{*khaliq*}; it acquaints man’s spirit with God and familiarizes him
physically with nature—water, earth, *qiblah*, sunrise, sunset, time,
etc.

• Prayer is the only form of worship which cannot be abandoned even at
the moment of drowning in time of and war. It is the loudest declaration
of man’s obeisance to God and total freedom from the dominance of the
powerful.

• Prayer revives the tradition of Ibrahim, Muhammad, Husayn, and the
Mahdi (*‘a*).

• Prayer is a means of gaining nearness to God.[^17]

• Prayer is the last injunction of the prophets (*‘a*) and the last
injunction of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) before his last breath. The Imam
asked all his relatives and children to gather around him and then said,
“Anyone who treats prayer lightly shall not be included in our
intercession {*shafa‘ah*} in the Day of Resurrection.”[^18]

• Prayer is a pleasure for divine saints {*awliya’*} but a heavy burden
for hypocrites {*munafiqun*}:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِنَّهَا لَكَبِيرَةٌ إِلاَّ عَلَى الْخَاشِعِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And it (prayer) is indeed hard except for the humble.”***[^19]

• Prayer defeats all the wiles of Satan.[^20]

Importance of Prayer
--------------------

Apart from the verses of the Qur’an and *hadith*s cited so far, the
conduct of the divine saints also expresses the important status of
prayer. Prayer has been part of the programs of the prophets (*‘a*).
While in the cradle, Hadhrat ‘Isa (Jesus) (*‘a*) says that God has
enjoined him to establish prayer and pay the poor-rate {*zakat*} so long
as he is alive:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ أَوْصَانِي بِالصَّلوٰةِ وَ ٱلزَّكوٰةِ مَادُمْتُ حَيًّا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He has enjoined me to {maintain} the prayer and to {pay} the
zakat as long as I live.”***[^21]

Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) did not neglect prayer even at noontime on the day
of *‘Ashura’* on the battlefield while facing the arrows of the
enemies.  
 Hadhrat Ibrahim (*‘a*) settled his wife and child in the wilderness of
the desert of Makkah which had no water or plants at that time, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ رَّبَّنَا إِنِّي أَسْكَنتُ مِن ذُرِّيَّتِي بِوَادٍ غَيْرِ ذِي زَرْعٍ
عِندَ بَيْتِكَ الْمُحَرَّمِ رَبَّنَا لِيُقِيمُواْ الصَّلاَةَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Lord! I have settled part of my descendants in a barren valley, by
Your sacred House, our Lord, that they may maintain the prayer.”***[^22]

Our infallible predecessors (*‘a*) used to tremble at the time of prayer
and say: “It is the time to discharge the divine trust in the Divine
Precinct and Court.[^23]

Although some people say their prayers in order to be admitted to
paradise or out of fear of the fire of hell, the Commander of the
Faithful (*‘a*) used to perform prayer not for trade (gain) or release
from hellfire but because of God being worthy of worship.[^24]

In order to teach the importance of prayer, Islam has enjoined parents
to persuade their children to pray before they reach the age of puberty,
, starting from the age of eight, in whatever way they can and
sometimes, also with the use of force because of their children’s
heedlessness.[^25]

Praying connects man with the Origin of the universe just like a pilot
maintains a link with the control tower.  
 Prayer remits sins and erases their after-effects. After enjoining
prayer, the Holy Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ الْحَسَنَاتِ يُذْهِبْنَ السَّـيِّئَاتِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed good deeds efface misdeeds.”***[^26]

Prayer as viewed by reason and conscience
-----------------------------------------

All humans, especially Muslims have rights upon each other. One of these
human rights is to be thanked for the love and goodness shown to others.
Even if we are not Muslims, we are duty-bound to be grateful for the
love and attention we get from others. This right is identical in every
language, race, nationality and country. Gratitude must be directly
proportionate to the graciousness enjoyed. Just think, is there anyone
who has more right to us than God? There can be no one because God’s
favors and blessings are innumerable, and He Himself is the Most
Generous Being of all.

God created us from a single cell and provided us with all that we need
in order to survive, such as light, heat, earth, air, water, bodily
limbs, instincts, strength, nature, plants animals, senses, intellect,
emotions, etc. He sent the prophets (*‘a*) for our guidance and
spiritual training through a set of laws.

He determined what was lawful {*halal*} and what was unlawful {*haram*}
equipped and our “material” and “spiritual” lives with perfect means and
methods. He made available the conditions for our worldly and
otherworldly growth, advancement and bliss. Who is the one who does us
more good than God and who deserves being worshipped more than God?

In the words of Sa‘di, every breath that is inhaled extends life and of
the air that is inhaled, energizes the inhaler. Thus, there are two
blessings in every breath, and thanks-giving is obligatory for every
blessing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
از دست و زبانِ كه برآيد كز عهده شكرش به درآيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whatever gratitude the hand and tongue can express must be given for
the air.*[^27]

He endowed us with the guidance of the prophets (*‘a*) and the
Infallibles (*‘a*). He made man conquer the world and nature and gave
him the power to benefit from the gifts of nature, to discover the
secrets of the world and to use them along the path of success and life.

Leaves and plants take the carbon in the atmosphere and release oxygen.

Rain drops make the atmosphere clean and fresh.

Sharks eat dead fishes in the sea and thus remove the foul smell from
the water.

Every instant our eyes take varied and exact pictures of all things from
different angles.

If our lips were not soft, we would not have the power to speak.

If tears were not salty, our eyes which are created from nerves would be
destroyed.

If the water was bitter or salty, trees would not grow.

If the earth had no gravity; if the distance between the sun and earth
were shorter; if at the time of birth we did know how to suck milk; if
the kindness of mother and father did not exist; and thousands of other
“ifs”… could we have survived?

However, we are not aiming to count the blessings of God as we cannot do
that. God Himself said that if we tried to count His blessings we would
not succeed in doing so.

If one million of us were enjoying these blessings from someone else,
would we not have been indebted to, and thank him for the rest of our
lives?

Our human duty and conscience demand that we express gratefulness for
the divine favors, establish prayer and worship God in gratitude for all
these blessings.

We should also worship God and we should become His servants because He
created us. We should not become slaves of the East or West.

Prayer is an expression of gratitude to God, and every wise and
conscientious person realizes the necessity of establishing prayer.

A dog expresses gratefulness for a bone given to it by wagging its tail,
and if a thief or a stranger enters the house, it will attack him. If
man is indifferent to all these favors of God and lacks the spirit of
giving thanks which is manifested in the form of prayer, is he not lower
than the dog in recognition of another’s worth?!

Some Questions and Answers
--------------------------

**Question:** Does God need our gratitude?

**Answer:** Never! Appreciation of a favor is a virtue for us and a sign
of our sense of justice, and not a sign of God’s need of our thanks. If
a teacher says to his student, “You have to acknowledge my efforts (in
teaching you) and study hard, the teacher does not mean that he is in
need of his student’s acknowledgment and seriousness in studies. It is
rather to enhance the excellence of the student himself.

**Question:** If we are supposed to thank God for His blessings, why
must we perform prayer?

**Answer:** Once we admit the essential need for expressing gratitude,
the manner of doing so must be according to the procedure outlined by
God. Once it is determined that it is necessary for a patient to consult
a doctor, the manner of taking the medicine is according to the doctor’s
prescription.

So, we must express gratitude according to the will of God. As soon as a
pilot consents to take flight in whatever part of the world he may be he
has to contact the control tower using the English language. So, we have
to learn the manner of giving thanks from the command of God and the
ways of the divine saints.

**Question:** Is it proper to express thanks for blessings, even if one
is living in the midst of unpleasant circumstances?

**Answer:** First of all, many of our troubles are the result of our own
making. For example, by not observing health instructions, we become
sick. Due to laziness and apathy, we experience stagnation in life.
Foolishly choosing a friend can cause troubles, etc.

Secondly, unpleasant circumstances are also good because they urge man
to strive more and make his talents blossom.

Thirdly, we should look at bitterness alongside sweetness and look at
afflictions alongside numerous blessings.

Fourthly, sometimes hardships and afflictions bring about spiritual
elevation, reevaluation of the self, and a renewal of faith in hearts
broken by expecting from ‘other-than-God’.

Negligence of Prayer
--------------------

Negligence of prayer means curtailing the establishment of a
relationship with the Creator of the universe, and this has painful
consequences in this world and in the hereafter. In the hereafter, the
inhabitants of heaven will ask the dwellers of hell, “What made you
inhabit the hellfire?” One of their answers shall be:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَمْ نَكُ مِنَ الْمُصَلِّينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We were not among those who prayed.”***[^28]

In another place, the Glorious Qur’an addresses those who are careless
and heedless of their prayer, sometimes performing it and at other times
not performing it, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَوَيْلٌ لِّلْمُصَلِّينَ ٭ الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَن صَلَاتِهِمْ سَاهُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Woe to them who pray—those who are heedless of their
prayers.”***[^29]

The Messenger of Allah (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ تَرك ٱلصّلاة مُتعمّدًا فَقَد كَفر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He who consciously neglects prayer has become an infidel.”[^30]  
 The Holy Prophet (S) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيْنَ ٱلعَبدِ وَ بَيْنَ ٱلكُفر تَرْكُ ٱلصَّلاةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“That which lies between faith and disbelief is the negligence of
prayer.”[^31]

Treating Prayer Lightly
-----------------------

Giving value to prayer is a sign of faith in God, and heedlessness is
caused by weakness of love and loss of interest in spiritualities.
Hadhrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “Verily, the worst of thieves among people is
he who steals his prayer.”[^32]

In another place, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “Those who treat prayer lightly
are like women who abort their fetuses; they can neither be called
pregnant nor having children.”[^33]

And the Imam (*‘a*) also said: “He who treats prayer lightly and ruins
it will also ruin other affairs.”[^34]

The Prophet of Islam (S) said: “He who spoils his prayer shall be with
Qarun and Haman on the Day of Resurrection. Woe unto him who does not
take care of his prayer!”[^35]

The Apostle (S) also said:  
 God shall take away the blessings, benefits and goodness from the life
and wealth of the one who treats prayer lightly. There will be no reward
for his deeds; his supplications will not be heard. At the time of
death, he will depart from this world with the feeling of hunger, thirst
and remorse. He will be tortured, chastised and pressurized in purgatory
{*barzakh*}.[^36] On the Day of Resurrection, he will be called strictly
to account.[^37]

He (S) also said: “He who treats prayer lightly is not of my *ummah*
{community}.”[^38]

The Holy Prophet (S) is also reported to have said:  
 “When a person pays attention to other than God during prayer, God says
to him: “To whom you are paying attention? Do you have a deity other
than Me? Is there any protector other than Me? Are you attached to a
compassionate being other than Me? I am the Most Compassionate… If you
will pay attention to Me, My angels and I will pay attention to
you.”[^39]

Unaccepted Prayers
------------------

We have said that it is possible for an act to be proper but not
accepted like a saleable item without a buyer. In the *hadith*s, the
prayers of some individuals have been considered unacceptable because of
various reasons, examples of which follow below:

### 1. Those who are Indifferent

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The prayer of those who are indifferent to
the barefooted and displaced people of the society, is not
accepted.”[^40]

### 2. Those who live on unlawful earnings

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “The prayer of those who live on unlawful
earnings is like constructing castles on sand.”[^41]

### 3. Those who are unmindful of their duties

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The prayer of a wife who enjoys the
income of her husband but does not discharge her divine obligation is
not accepted.”[^42]

### 4. Those who do not pay zakat {poor-rate}

In most instances, the payment of *zakat* {poor-rate} has been mentioned
in the Holy Qur’an alongside the establishment of prayer, and it has
been stated in many *hadith*s that the prayer of those who do not give
their *zakat* will not be accepted.[^43] One day, the Messenger of Allah
(S) entered the mosque and asked nine people to leave the mosque for not
paying *zakat*. He then offered his prayers. Yes, a relationship with
God must be built on a relationship with the deprived.

### 5. Those who are lackadaisical

The prayer of one who is impious, or does not perform his *ruku‘*
{kneeling down} and *sujud* {prostration} properly, is not
accepted.[^44]

### 6. Those who are “haqin wa haqib”

*Haqin wa haqib* refers to a person who holds his urine and feces, and
in doing so, exerts pressure on himself and experiences physical stress.
In addition to being harmful to health, this practice disrupts one’s
concentration in prayer. Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The prayer of such
a person is not accepted.”[^45]

### 7. Those who are unacceptable prayer leaders

Sometimes, it is possible that the people do not accept the prayer
leader in a mosque and for selfish reasons, he refuses to leave the
mosque or his position. Such a case will naturally lead to quarrels and
disruptions in the congregational prayer. It is stated in traditions
that the congregational prayer of such persons is considered
unacceptable.[^46]

Prayers of the Infallibles {ma‘sumin} (‘a)
------------------------------------------

The manner of prayer of the holy saints is both inspiring and
instructive, and a model for their followers. We shall survey some
examples of their manner of prayer:

The sound of *adhan* {call to prayer} was so attractive and delightful
to the Messenger of Allah (S) that at the time of prayer, he would say
to Bilal (the one calling to prayer): “O Bilal! Relieve us (from grief,
anguish and pain).”[^47] And the Prophet (S) used to say: “He who hears
the *adhan* but remains indifferent is unkind.”[^48]

At the time of prayer, ‘Ali (*‘a*) used to turn pale and start
trembling, saying: “The time of prayer has come—the time of the trust
offered by God to the heavens, the earth and the mountains, but they
refrained from shouldering it.”[^49]  
 This act of shouldering the burden of the divine trust is the greatest
honor of man. In the words of Hafiz,[^50]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آسمان بار امانت نتوانست كشيد قرعه فال به نام من ديوانه زدند
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Heaven was not able to carry the burden of the trust.*

*The lot fell upon me, the foolish.*

At the time of prayer, when Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*) would reach the point
of reciting “*maliki yawmi’d-din*” {You are the Master of the Day of
Judgment} (in *Surah al-Fatihah*), he would repeat it so many times that
listeners would imagine that he was on the verge of death.[^51] And
while in prostration {*sujud*}, he would sweat profusely.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “My father (Imam as-Sajjad) used to perform a
thousand *rak‘ah*s of prayer day and night.”[^52]

Whenever the time of prayer arrived, it seemed as if the Messenger of
Allah (S) knew no one for he would enter a strange spiritual state.[^53]
He used to say: “Hunger can be satiated and thirst can be quenched, but
my desire for prayer can never be satisfied.”[^54]

During the Battle of Siffin, ‘Ali (*‘a*) remained watchful of the sun’s
position in the sky. ‘Abd Allah ibn al-‘Abbas asked the reason for this.
The Imam said: “I do not wish to miss offering the prayer as soon as its
time begins.” “Now, on the battlefield?!” asked Ibn al-‘Abbas (in
astonishment). The Imam replied, “Yes!”[^55]

Yes, just as fishes are not tired of swimming, divine saints {*awliya’*}
are not tired of worship and prayer. Rather, with every act of worship,
they find more pleasure being in the Presence of God.

It is narrated that during the month of Ramadhan, the late ‘Allamah
Amini (author of the book, *Al-Ghadir*) used to perform a thousand
*rak‘ah*s of prayer every night.[^56] This is supposed to be the method
of someone who has learned the lesson of love from the saints of Allah.
At the time of prayer, the upright servants and divine saints used to
establish prayer with much fervor, apply perfume, wear the best of
clothes, welcome the prayer and experience fear and dread lest they do
not earn the favor of God, or they do not have the necessary amount of
humility and attention in prayer.

Prerequisites of Prayer
-----------------------

Observance of some rules related to prayer (such as brushing the teeth
{*miswak*}, cleanliness, attention to God, etc.) is contributory in the
perfection of this act of worship. Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ بِالْأقْبَالِ عَلىٰ صَلاَتِكَ فَإِنَّمَا يُحْسَبُ لَكَ
مِنْهَا مَا أَقْبَلْتَ عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Pay attention to God while in prayer because what is accepted in prayer
is that which is said with attention.”[^57]

The Imam (*‘a*) continued: “During the prayer, do not play with your
hand, head and face because all these things cause deficiency in prayer,
and do not perform prayer while in a state of sluggishness, sleepiness
and weariness because such a prayer is that of hypocrites
{*munafiqun*}.”[^58]  
 In a *hadith*, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَكْعَتَانِ مِنْ رَجُلٍ وَرعٍ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ أَلْفِ رَكْعَةٍ مِن
مَخْلَطٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person’s two *rak‘ah*s of prayer with piety {*wara‘*} are superior to
a thousand *rak‘ah*s of prayer with heedlessness.”[^59]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “At the time of prayer, neglect the world and
all it contains; focus all your attention on God; and remember the day
when you will be brought in front of the court of divine justice.”[^60]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “Sometimes, fifty years of prayer may
pass without even a single prayer being accepted.” And we also read in a
*hadith*: “Some stand in front of God and pray in such a manner that if
they talk in a similar manner with their neighbor, he will not answer
them.”[^61]

The Messenger of Allah (S) is reported to have said: “Two *rak‘ah*s of
prayer of a person who brushed his teeth are superior to seventy
*rak‘ah*s of the one who did not brush his teeth.”[^62]

Prayer and its Accompaniments
-----------------------------

In the numerous verses of the Qur’an in which prayer is mentioned, there
are also other accompany commands, such as paying *zakat*, giving
charity, enjoining what is good, forbidding what is evil, and spending
(in the way of Allah) by attending to the deprived. This shows the
universality of the devotional laws of Islam that alongside connection
with the Lord, economic and social issues as well as tackling with the
poor, and enjoining what is good and forbidding what is evil are also
raised and no issue can prevent paying attention to other issues.[^63]

And it is here that the verse,

***“Indeed the prayer prevents indecencies and wrongs,”***[^64]

becomes clearer and more understandable, and it is obvious that
implementing this divine precept will prevent the corruption of Muslim
society.

Prayer as Spiritual Ascension
-----------------------------

Prayer has been mentioned in the *hadith*s as “ascension of the
believer” {*mi‘raj al-mu’min*}. This ascension and flight, however, is
not in the open space of the sky but in the sphere of spirituality and
servitude, and it is aimed at attaining “nearness to God”, not reaching
mountain peaks thousands of feet above the ground.

One may compare the spiritual flight and mystical ascension of the one
praying with the flight of an airplane in the sky:

1. Most of the force and pressure is applied at the time of the
aircraft’s take off. In worship and prayer, the main difficulty is to
overcome carnal desire and commence the act of worship.

2. The importance of both flights lies in a safe and risk-free landing.
Worship also has value if its ending is wholesome and without the
blemish of self-conceit {*‘ujb*} and arrogance {*ghurur*}.”

3. For its energy, the airplane is in need of pure and special fuel. The
spiritual ascension of the one praying also necessitates pure attention
and negation of all other servitudes. By raising his hands up to the
bottom of his ears he negates and refuses everything other than God, and
thus attains the purity of intention.

4. The pilot must be physically and mentally sound for the flight. In
the prayer and to be in the Presence of God, “a sound mind and heart”
are also necessary.

5. The aircraft flies by means of two wings. In prayer also, along with
the discharging of the “right of Allah” {*haqq Allah*} one must also
discharge the “right of men” {*haqq an-nas*}. Along with
“*yuqimuna’s-salat*” {establish your prayer}, the Qur’an in most cases
has also “*yu’tuna’z-zakat*” {pay your alms-rate}.

6. In order to fly, the airplane covers a long distance on the ground to
acquire the ability to take off. The preliminaries of prayer, the
*adhan*, *iqamah*, and recommended invocations {*dhikr*} are also the
groundwork of this spiritual flight. (The supplications after the ritual
prayer and subsequent invocations also constitute the movement on the
ground after landing.)

7. In flying, the first mistake is also the last mistake and is
accompanied by crashing and annihilation. In worship also, polytheism
{*shirk*}, self-admiration {*‘ujb*} and ostentation {*riya’*} will lead
astray. By committing a single mistake, Iblis who had a record of six
thousand years of worship was cast out and accursed till eternity!

8. Every pilot makes a move on the order of the control tower. Prayer
and worship are also according to the order, and even a single minute
before or after the appointed period or against the law will render them
invalid.

9. The pilot rests between flights, while the aircraft goes through its
routine maintenance. Along with invocation and worship, sometimes man is
also in need of rest and lawful enjoyments as well as engagement in
earning a livelihood, and a person like the Messenger of Allah (S) would
sometimes say, “*kallimini* *ya* *humayra*.”(O, Humeyra, come and chat
with me).

10. For the pilot’s communication with the control tower, there is only
one officially recognized language. The contact of the one praying with
God is only through Arabic and in the devotional act of *Hajj*, the
state of *ihram*[^65] commences with the recital of “*labbayk allahumma
labbayk*” {Here I come, O Lord, here I come}.

11. Prior to flying, directions based on the weather forecast,
map-reading, determination of direction, etc. need to be followed. In
worship, preliminary pieces of information are also necessary, and
worship without knowledge and jurisprudence is worthless. Even in trade,
familiarity with the laws of God is also needed, let alone in prayer and
worship.

12. The higher the pilot, ascends the more the ground seems to become
small for him. The more a holy man is acquainted with the greatness of
God, anything other than God becomes more trivial in his sight. In the
words of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَظُمَ ٱلْخَالِقُ فِي أَنْفُسِهِم فَصَغْرَ مَادُوْنَهُ فِي
أَعْيُنِهِم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The greatness of the Creator is seated in their heart, and so,
everything else appears small in their eyes.”[^66]

13. The bigger the airplane, the smoother the flight and the more
comfortable the passengers will be. In prayer and worship also, that
which is done in congregation (the large gathering of people in the
congregation and *Hajj*) has more reward and the possibility of its
being accepted is greater.

14. Usually, there is a co-pilot accompanying the pilot for emergencies.
In the congregational prayer also, there are just and pious individuals
standing in the first row so that in case a problem (affecting the
ability of the Imam to continue leading the prayer) arises, one of them
can assume leadership of the prayer up to the end.

15. In physical flight, when the pilot and passengers are in the sky,
they are away from and uninformed of their domestic problems and
concerns. In spiritual flight also, when the soul is at its zenith, the
attention to material things become insignificant, so much so that an
arrow pulled from the foot of Hadhrat Amir (‘Ali) (*‘a*) was not felt at
all.

16. In flight, descending from the summit is called “lessening the
altitude” although it is still high in relation to those that are on the
ground. Although the worship of the saints of Allah is always high in
relation to the prayer and worship of common people, for them this
“lessening of the altitude” by coming down from the pinnacle is a sort
of shortcoming and degradation, and they always asked forgiveness
{*istighfar*} for it. This is the meaning of

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَسَنَاتُ ٱلأَبْرَارِ سَيِّئَاتُ ٱلْمُقَرَّبِيْن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The good qualities of the pious are blemishes for the anointed ones.”

To conclude, prayer is the uninterrupted attention of the worshipper
toward the Creator of the universe and the heart’s detachment from
worldly desires is regarded as a flight by the people of gnosis {*ahl
al-ma‘rifah*}—a flight higher than the flight of birds in the air or the
flight of aircraft in the earth’s atmosphere and beyond.

What causes man’s descent is his attachment to material things and
carnal desires?  
 In the words of Sa‘di,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طيران مرغ ديدى؟ تو ز پاى بندِ شهوت بدر آى تا ببينى طيران آدميت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Have you seen birds fly? Detach yourself from your carnal desires and
then watch the flight of man.*

[^1]: Surah Luqman 31:17.

[^2]: Surah Ta Ha 20:14.

[^3]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 279.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 77.

[^5]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:45.

[^6]: Nahj al-Balaghah (Subhi Salih), Saying 252; (Faydh al-Islam),
Saying 244.

[^7]: Surah al-Kawthar 108:2.

[^8]: Furu‘ al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 270.

[^9]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 279.

[^10]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 1, p. 172.

[^11]: Nahj al-Fasahah, Statement 3075.

[^12]: Nahj al-Fasahah, Statement 1588.

[^13]: Furu‘ al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 267.

[^14]: Wasa’il ash-shi’ah. vol. 1, p. 4.

[^15]: Nahj al-Fasahah, Statement 979.

[^16]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p. 7.

[^17]: Furu‘ al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 265.

[^18]: Furu‘ al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 264.

[^19]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:45.

[^20]: Fihrist ‘Azr al-Hikam, under “salah” {prayer}.

[^21]: Surah Maryam 19:31.

[^22]: Surah Ibrahim 14:37.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 81.

[^24]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Saying 237.

[^25]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p. 13.

[^26]: Surah Hud 11:114.

[^27]: Golestan-e Sa‘di, preface.

[^28]: Surah al-Muddathir 74:43.

[^29]: Surah al-Ma‘un 107:4-5.

[^30]: Muhajjah al-Baydha’, vol. 1, p. 301.

[^31]: Nahj al-Fasahah, Statement 1098.

[^32]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 242.

[^33]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 284.

[^34]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p. 19.

[^35]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p. 19.

[^36]: Barzakh, literally means an isthmus, is the interval between the
death of the individual and the general resurrection. It is mentioned in
the Qur’an (23:100): “And after them shall be a barzakh until the day
they shall be raised.” {Trans.}

[^37]: Safinah al-Bahar, vol. 2, p. 43.

[^38]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p. 15.

[^39]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 1, p. 173.

[^40]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 242.

[^41]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 258.

[^42]: Nahj al-Fasahah, Statement 54.

[^43]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 317.

[^44]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, pp. 253, 258.

[^45]: Muhajjah al-Baydha’, vol. 1, p. 354.

[^46]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 317.

[^47]: Muhajjah al-Baydha’, vol. 1, p. 377.

[^48]: Nahj al-Fasahah, Statement 132.

[^49]: Tafsir Safi, vol. 2, p. 370.

[^50]: Khwajah Shams ad-Din Muhammad Hafiz Shirazi (ca. 1325-1391) was
the fourteenth century Persian lyric bard and panegyrist, and commonly
considered as the preeminent master of the ghazal form. {Trans.}

[^51]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 247.

[^52]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 68.

[^53]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 258.

[^54]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 1, p. 174.

[^55]: Safinah al-Bahar, vol. 2, p. 44.

[^56]: As narrated by Ayatullah Murwarid in Mashhad.

[^57]: Muhajjah al-Baydha’, vol. 1, p. 354.

[^58]: Muhajjah al-Baydha’, vol. 1, p. 354.

[^59]: Nahj al-Fasahah, Statement 1672.

[^60]: Muhajjah al-Baydha’, vol. 1, p. 382.

[^61]: Al-Wafi, vol. 2, p. 13.

[^62]: Nahj al-Fasahah, Statement 1669.

[^63]: One may refer to the following verses of the Qur’an: wirh respect
to this, Surah al-Baqarah, verse 83; Surah al-Anfal, verse 3; Surah
at-Tawbah, verse 71; Surah Luqman, verse 17; Surah al-Muzammil, verse
20; and many other verses.

[^64]: Surah al-‘Ankabut 29:45.

[^65]: Ihram: the special two-piece seamless attire worn by pilgrims.
Also, the state of ritual consecration during which the pilgrim should
abstain from certain acts, such as not combing, not shaving, and
observing sexual continence. {Trans.}

[^66]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 191 (Khutbah al-Muttaqin or Hammam).


