The Post-prayer Supererogatory Devotional Acts {ta‘qibat wa nawafil}
====================================================================

Prayer means presence in the Court of God and participation in the
spiritual banquet to which God has invited His servants. Just as
attendance to a party has some preliminaries and protocol, the same is
true in discharging divine obligation.

Prior to the arrival of the time of prayer, our infallible Imams(*‘a*)
used to prepare themselves for it, and after the prayer, they also used
to engage in other post-prayer devotional acts {*ta‘qibat*}, such as the
remembrance of God, hymning His praises, with their faces toward the
*qiblah*. Were they not considering prayer as the apple of their eye?
Does man easily detach his heart and close his eyes from the apple of
his eye?

The *adhan* and *iqamah* are a form of welcoming prayer while
post-prayer devotional acts are its guide.

Heedlessness to post-prayer devotional acts and supplications is a sign
of lack of interest to the prayer itself.

As recorded in the *hadith*s, going early to the mosque and waiting for
the commencement of prayer have been encouraged and enjoined while the
person waiting for the prayer has been described as “guest of God”.[^1]
Performance of supererogatory acts and supplications after the prayer is
also recommended. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَإِذَا فَرَغْتَ فٱنصَبْ ٭ وَ إِلىٰ رَبِّكَ فَٱرْغَب ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when you are done, appoint, and turn eagerly to your
Lord.”***[^2]

Now, we shall deal with some issues pertaining to post-prayer devotional
acts {*ta‘qibat*}:

Post-prayer devotional acts {ta‘qibat}
--------------------------------------

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “As you finish saying your obligatory prayer,
engage in supplications and other devotional acts.”[^3]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also says: “Supplication after dawn {*subh*}, noon
{*zuhr*} and sunset {*maghrib*} prayers will be accepted {*mustajab*}
(by God).”[^4]

The Imam (*‘a*) also says elsewhere: “The *tasbihat* of Hadhrat Zahra
(*‘a*) (34 times “*Allahu akbar*,” 33 times “*al-hamdu lillah*,” and 33
times “*subhan Allah*”) is better in the sight of God than a thousand
*rak‘ah*s of recommended {*mustahabb*} prayer.”[^5]

We read in a *hadith* that anyone who recites this *tasbihat* has
observed the injunction in *“Remember Allah with much
remembrance.”*[^6][^7]

Of course, supplication {*du‘a’*} and other devotional acts have their
merits and so do work and struggle to earn an honest living, and one
should not pose as hindrance to the other. Some think that instead of
supplication (during its apportioned time) if they go to work, they will
end up more productive and successful.

The Messenger of Allah (S) says: “Supplication after the dawn {*subh*}
prayer is more effective for life and acquiring of sustenance.”[^8]

Invoking benediction and malediction
------------------------------------

Invoking benediction and salutations on the embodiments of human
perfection, and cursing and invoking malediction on the manifestations
of polytheism and personifications of disbelief and tyranny, are among
post-prayer devotional acts.

In those that are deemed as post-prayer supplications, we can come
across numerous cases of both *salawat* and curse {*la‘n*}, and it is an
instance of *tawalla* {befriending the truthful} and *tabarra* {being
inimical to the people of falsehood} in the living and guided school
{*maktab*}.

The narrated *salawat* has its own merit. The recital of “*Allahumma*
*salli ‘ala* *Muhammad wa* *ali Muhammad*” itself has been mentioned as
one of the post-prayer devotional acts.

Regarding the case of curse {*la‘n*}, Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) says: “After
you finish your obligatory prayer, do not rise up unless you invoke
curse upon the Umayyad tyrants.”[^9] This is because the said
ignominious and corrupt family is an example of the *taghut*s and one of
the most vivid portraits of opposition to the infallible Imams and
progeny of the Prophet (S), and thus, deserving every kind of curse and
aversion!

After every obligatory prayer, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) used to curse and
pray for damnation of four men and four women (who were among the stern
enemies of the station of Imamate).[^10]

How good Islam is for setting as part of its programs aversion to the
tyrants, corruptors and *taghut*s alongside its devotional and religious
programs! Its prayer, its *Hajj* and other acts of worship are
accompanied by disavowal {*bara’ah*} and declaration of aversion toward
infidels, polytheists and hypocrites.[^11]

So, post-prayer devotional acts also include invoking curse on enemies
of God and opponents of the line of divine leadership.

Tasbihat Hadhrat az-Zahra’ (‘a)
-------------------------------

Another post-prayer devotional act {*ta‘qibat*} is the *tasbihat* of
Hadhrat az-Zahra (*‘a*); that is, reciting 34 times “*Allahu akbar*,” 33
times “*al-hamdu lillah*,” and 33 times “*subhan Allah*” after finishing
one’s obligatory prayer. This *tasbih* {*tasbihat*} was taught by the
Messenger of Allah (S) to his daughter Fatimah(*‘a*), and its recital
has been highly emphasized as having huge spiritual rewards.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) says: “There is no eulogy better than the
*tasbihat* of Hadhrat az-Zahra (*‘a*), and if there were any, the
Messenger of Allah (S) would have taught it to his daughter.”[^12]

In numerous traditions, it is stressed that to have a rosary {*tasbih*}
with 34 beads from the sacred soil of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) and to
recite *tasbihat* with it has great rewards, and even counting its beads
without the recital of *tasbihat* is good and valuable.[^13]

And it is stated in a *hadith* that the beads themselves glorify
{*dhikr*} God.[^14]

The *turbah* of al-Husayn (*‘a*) is reminiscent of the epic in Karbala’
and reviver of the culture of martyrdom, and it makes human beings
familiar with the Doyen of the Martyrs (*‘a*) himself, divine
leadership, *jihad*, martyrdom, self-sacrifice, struggle against
tyranny, and remaining steadfast against oppressors.

The *tasbihat* of Hadhrat az-Zahra (*‘a*), as stated, has been mentioned
even in *hadith* books of the sunni people {Ahl as-Sunnah}[^15] but it
is nowhere mentioned that the name of the said *tasbihat* is *Tasbihat
Hadhrat az-Zahra’* (*‘a*)!

Prostration of Gratitude {sujud shukr}
--------------------------------------

Gratitude for the blessings endowed by God, the Exalted, is a sign of
gnosis {*ma‘rifah*}, courtesy and servitude. In the verses of the Qur’an
and Prophetic traditions, expressing gratitude for blessings has been
highly enjoined, and it has been stated that recollection of blessings
enhances a human being’s love for God and makes divine blessings
perpetual and abundant.[^16]

It is true that due gratitude for blessings is beyond the capability and
power of man, but he ought to express thanks as far as he can for the
favors and blessings of God. One form of expressing gratitude is to
prostrate on the ground and express gratefulness to the Lord.

And this prostration of gratitude {*sujud shukr*} is considered as one
of the post-prayer devotional acts {*ta‘qibat*}.[^17] The late ‘Allamah
Majlisi has allotted the entire volume 83 of *Bihar al-Anwar* (with the
exception of a few pages at the end of the volume) to the narrations
about post-prayer devotional acts while quoting 63 *hadith*s of the
infallible Imams (*‘a*) about the prostration of gratitude.

Prostration after prayer is a token of gratitude for successfully
offering the prayer.[^18]

In the *sujud shukr*, the recital of “*shukran lillah*” {thanks to
Allah} three times is enough, but it is stated in a *hadith* that if a
person would say “*ya* *rabb, ya* *rabb*” {O Lord, O Lord} in a single
breath, God will address him, thus: “*Labbayk! Ma* *hajatuk?*” {What is
your wish that I may grant you?}[^19]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The prostration of gratitude after the
obligatory prayer makes the prayer complete, earns the pleasure of God,
and elicits the admiration and approbation of angels. God will ask the
angels many times, “What is the reward for this grateful servant?

They will say to God, “your mercy, your paradise, solution to his wordly
problems, and any other reward that your angels many say. They hear no
response, saying: We do not know the reward for this *sujud*.” God will
say, “Just as he thanked Me, I will also give thanks to him.” And with
this statement, He teaches the angels that divine pleasure and gratitude
to him are more sublime than mercy, paradise and solution to worldly
problems.[^20]

It is mentioned in a *hadith* that God said to Hadhrat Musa (*‘a*): “The
reason why I appointed you to the station of prophethood was your
prostrations after prayer.”[^21]

Supererogatory prayers {nawafil}
--------------------------------

Apart from daily obligatory prayers (with seventeen *rak‘ah*s), there
are also other recommended prayers {*mustahabb*} which have abundant
rewards. And since these prayers are additions to obligatory prayers,
they are called *nawafil* (sing. *nafilah*). The Arabic word “*nafl*”
means surplus and addendum.

The number of *rak‘ah*s of supererogatory prayers is two times that of
obligatory ones, i.e. 34 *rak‘ah*s. They are as follows:

1. The *nafilah* of the dawn {*subh*} prayer has two *rak‘ah*s to be
performed before the obligatory prayer;

2. The *nafilah* of the noon {*zuhr*} prayer has eight *rak‘ah*s to be
performed before the obligatory prayer;

3. The *nafilah* of the afternoon {*‘asr*} prayer has eight *rak‘ah*s to
be performed before the obligatory prayer;

4. The *nafilah* of the sunset {*maghrib*} prayer has four *rak‘ah*s to
be performed after the obligatory prayer;

5. The *nafilah* of the night {*‘isha’*} prayer has two *rak‘ah*s to be
performed after the obligatory prayer; and

6. The *nafilah* of the night {*tahajjud*} has eleven *rak‘ah*s to be
performed before the *adhan* of the dawn prayer, the first eight
*rak‘ah*s of which is called “*salat al-layl*”; the next two *rak‘ah*s
“*salat* *ash-shafa‘*”; and the last *rak‘ah* as “*witr*”.[^22]

It is stated in a *hadith* that *nafilah* prayers are like a gift and
are accepted under all circumstances.[^23]  
 Notwithstanding all the emphasis and encouragement about the
performance of recommended {*mustahabb*} prayers, they must be said on
the basis of interest and love, and a person must not impose them on
himself. In the beginning, he has to acquire mental readiness as well as
interest of heart. Then and only then he should perform them.

Imam ar-Rida (*‘a*) has said: “Sometimes, hearts are willing and ready,
while at other times they are not. Perform the act of worship when the
heart is willing.”[^24]

For this reason, there are some leniencies and facilities in optional
prayers; things that are not present in obligatory ones. This ease is
meant to attract more people to perform recommended prayers. Some of
these leniencies and facilities are the following:

1. One may perform the recommended prayer standing or sitting.

2. One may only recite *Surah al-Fatihah* and then proceed to *ruku‘*.

3. One’s doubt whether he is in his first, or second *rak‘ah* does not
render the prayer invalid, and he may freely evaluate which *rak‘ah* he
is in.

4. The commission of one or more mistakes does not require any *sujud
sahwi* {prostration for forgetting a certain essential act or recital in
prayer}.

5. It is better for the worshipper to go to the mosque to perform
obligatory prayers but for recommended prayers, there is no such
injunction.

These leniencies are meant to encourage people to perform these
constructive acts of worship. Even if someone cannot perform an optional
prayer on its appointed time, he can do so later in a compensatory
manner {*qadha*}. For doing so, according to a *hadith*, God will
address the angels, saying: “Look at my servant! He is performing in a
compensatory manner something that I have not obliged him to!” (And in
another *hadith*, it is added: “I take you as witnesses that I have
forgiven him.”)[^25]

It is stated in a *hadith*, thus: “*nafilah* prayers are compensation
for deficiencies in obligatory prayers.”[^26]

And they are like alms that a person gives.[^27]

Night supererogatory prayers {tahajjud}
---------------------------------------

Among *nafilah* prayers, *tahajjud* occupies a special station, the
performance of which has been much emphasized in verses of the Qur’an
and *hadith*s, compared to other recommended prayers. For this reason,
the saints {*awliya’*} of God were heedful and used to offer the
*tahajjud* and mid-night vigils.

It is such that God has made incumbent upon His most beloved servant,
Hadhrat Muhammad (S), to perform the night supererogatory prayers by
commanding him, thus: *“And keep vigil for a part of the night, as a
supererogatory {devotion} for you.”*[^28]

In describing those who are observing the night vigils and performing
the *tahajjud*, the Glorious Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ ٱلْمُسْتَغْفِرِينَ بِٱلأَْسْحَارِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And pleading {Allah’s} forgiveness at dawns.”***[^29]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَعِبَادُ الرَّحْمَنِ... وَالَّذِينَ يَبِيتُونَ لِرَبِّهِمْ سُجَّدًا
وَقِيَامًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The servants of the All-beneficent are… those who spend the night
with their Lord, prostrating*** ***and standing {in worship}.”***[^30]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ كَانُوا قَلِيلاً مِنَ ٱللَّيلِ مَا يَهْجَعُون ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They used to sleep a little during the night.”***[^31]

We read in another verse that men of God forsake the warmth of their
beds in order to perform litanies at dawn and the night supererogatory
prayer. Their reward does not pertain to paradise, its nymphs and the
like. There are things that God has reserved for them which shall make
them joyful:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَلاَ تَعْلَمُ نَفْسٌ مَا أُخْفِيَ لَهُمْ مِنْ قُرَّةِ أَعْيُنٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“No one knows what has been kept hidden for them of comfort as a
reward for what they used to do.”***[^32]

As such, all the prophets (*‘a*) were heedful of the night
supererogatory prayer,[^33] and the Messenger of Allah (S) enjoined
Hadhrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) for several times, saying: “The night prayer {*salat
al-layl*} is {obligatory} upon you; the night prayer is upon you; the
night prayer is upon you.”[^34]

It is stated in a *hadith*, thus: “The nobility of the faithful lies in
his night prayer.”[^35]

And Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The houses in which the night prayer is
performed and the Qur’an is recited are like shining stars for
inhabitants of heaven.”[^36]

In addition, waking up early and breathing the fresh air at that time
bestows health to the body, as said in a *hadith*.[^37] And in another
*hadith*, in addition to its spiritual effects, its curative feature has
also been mentioned.[^38]

The night supererogatory prayer is a sign of man’s love and affection
for his Creator, and this interest distances him from sleep and urges
him to tell his secrets to the Beloved and pray for his needs at
midnight. If this love is not present, what would motivate a person to
cease resting and talk with his Loved One in a mystical fashion in the
darkness of the night?

We read in a divine hadith {*hadith qudsi*} that God says: “He is
telling a lie who claims that he loves me but when the night comes, he
sleeps. Does not every lover wish for privacy with his beloved?”[^39]

The night supererogatory prayer also requires opportunity and chance
{*tawfiq*} which must be sought from God.

Sometimes, sins and lies are the reason behind man’s deprivation of the
night supererogatory prayers, and the sweetness of worship and litany is
taken away from him.

It is thus mentioned in a *hadith*: “Verily, once a person tells a lie,
his lie makes him deprived of the night prayer {*salat al-layl*}.”[^40]

Through constant performance of *tahajjud* and other acts of worship at
night, man can attain a station of perfection, purity of soul and
proximity to God, in which condition he would possess divine eyes, ears
and hands (in the sense that he will no longer look at anything except
that which is wholesome, nor listen to anything but good, nor do
anything except good) and attain a stage where every supplication of his
will be accepted.[^41]

[^1]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 1, p. 336.

[^2]: Surah ash-Sharh 94:7-8.

[^3]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 1, p. 336.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:41

[^7]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah,vol. 4, p. 1023.

[^8]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 1, p. 336.

[^9]: Al-Wafi, vol. 2, p. 121.

[^10]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 1037.

[^11]: It is appropriate here to mention the four hundred martyrs of
Iran who, while shouting “Death to America” and “Death to Israel” on the
days of Hajj pilgrimage on the bloody Friday of Makkah in 1987, were
shot by the ruling Wahhabis in Hijaz and attained martyrdom. It is
lamentable to note that such slogans which are taken from the verse of
the Qur’an and are enjoined by the Qur’an (to declare disavowal and
immunity against the polytheists during the Hajj rites) have been
regarded by the crooked-minded ones as repugnant to the spirit of
worship in Hajj; hence, their murderous act!

[^12]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 1024.

[^13]: Jawahir, vol. 10, p. 405.

[^14]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 1033.

[^15]: For example, see: sahih Muslin, vol. 1, p. 418, sahih Bukhari,
vol. 1,p. 110, sunan ibn majah, vol. 1, p. 299 (in the discussion on
post-prayer devoitional acts.

[^16]: Surah Ibrahim 14:7: “If ye give thanks, I will give you more.”

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut Edition), vol. 83, p. 194. In this book,
around 87 Prophetic traditions and 38 verses of the Qur’an about the
issue of expressing gratitude have been quoted.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 83, p. 200.

[^19]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 1071.

[^20]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 1071; Al-Wafi, vol. 2, p. 123.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 83, p. 200.

[^22]: In Bihar al-Anwar, the whole Volume 84 has been allotted to the
traditions pertaining to the supererogatory prayers and hundreds of
hadiths have been narrated in this regard.

[^23]: Qassar al-Jamal, vol. 2.

[^24]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 47.

[^25]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 43; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p.
56.

[^26]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 1, p. 177.

[^27]: Qassar al-Jamal, under the word “nafilah”.

[^28]: Surah al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:79.

[^29]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:17.

[^30]: Surah al-Furqan 25:63-64.

[^31]: Surah adh-Dhariyat 51:18.

[^32]: Surah as-Sajdah 32:17.

[^33]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 136.

[^34]: Al-Wafi, vol. 2, p. 22.

[^35]: Al-Wafi, vol. 2, p. 21.

[^36]: Al-Wafi, vol. 2, p. 22.

[^37]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 5, p. 272.

[^38]: Al-Wafi, vol. 2, p. 22.

[^39]: It is quoted from Misbah ash-Shari‘ah.

[^40]: Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 204.

[^41]: Thawab al-A‘mal, p. 88.


