The Dark Night Sky Paradox
==========================

If the universe is infinite in spatial extent then light from infinite
number of stars would always be pouring down on the earth from the
skies. A simple mathematical calculation would show that the sky would
never be dark under such circumstances. The paradox can ONLY be solved
if we assume a finite age of the universe (a beginning).

In such a case which corresponds to reality, we are only able to see
the light which has had time to travel across space to earth since the
beginning of the particular star from which it comes (Davies :46).

**GOD NEEDED FOR THE BIG BANG:**

1. The Flatness Problem in Cosmology:

The actual density of the universe is average amount of matter or
mass-energy per unit of space. If the actual density of the universe is
greater than a particular critical density then the universe will
eventually stop expanding. Since after more than 10 billion years of
expanding, the universes actual density is pretty close to its critical
density, scientists conclude that at the time of the big bang, these two
figures must have been very close to each other. They do not know why
this was so.

If it had not been so, and the actual density differed from the
critical by even a tiny amount, either way, our universe would have
ceased to exist after only a few million years.. This is termed as the
flatness problem. They do not know why both the figures were where they
were supposed to be to make our universe still exist after 10 billion
years.

The Koran talked about the "expanding universe" as well, fourteen
centuries before scientists discovered it: " And the sky, we built it
with might and We cause the expansion of it." Koran 51:47

If the universe had been expanding too rapidly, the clouds that formed
the galaxies would have been spread thin and pulled apart before gravity
could dominate... On the other hand if the universe had started out
expanding too slowly, it would have come to a halt and started to
re-collapse with galaxies falling towards each other (Gribbins, Rees:
17)

If we push back to the earliest time at which our theories of physics
can be thought to have any validity, the implication is that the
"density-parameter" was set in the beginning, with an accuracy of 1 part
in 1060 (10 followed by 60 zeroes). Changing the parameter, either way,
by a fraction given by a decimal point followed by sixty zeroes and a
one; would have made the universe unsuitable for life as we know it.
(Gribbens, Rees: 18)

We are reminded of the "Flatness" of the universe, its smoothness in
this statement of the Koran:

"[It is God] who has created the multiple skies, one separate from the
other (as layers). You cannot see any flaw in the Merciful (God's)
creation. Look again, can you make out any rifts?" (Koran 67:3)

2. The Horizon or the Isotropy Problem:

At around 300,00 years after the big bang, all parts of the universe,
even separated by more than 20 times the horizon distance, and expanding
in opposite directions, in causally disconnected regions (i.e.. no cause
or physical effect could pass from one region to the other), began to
expand with the same expansion rate and temperature.

No natural explanation exists to explain how a chaotic explosion, the
big bang resulted in a uniform expansion pattern among causally
disconnected regions, expanding in opposite directions. Calculations
indicate that when the universe was a trillionth of a trillionth of a
trillionth second old, it consisted of 10 to the power 80 causally
disconnected regions, and no physical effect could have traveled from
one region to another and yet 300,000 years after, cosmic background
radiation proves that they all started expanding with the same expansion
rate and the same temperature. The Koran informs us of the uniformity of
cause in the early universe

"... And He (God) inspired in all the heavens their mandate (Koran
41:12)."

"And He (God) raised the sky and set the balance. (Koran 55:7)."


**How Galaxies Became Possible**

Calculations by cosmologists indicate that matter in the early universe
was uniformly distributed and hence gravitational contractions
(contraction is opposite of expansion) in an expanding universe could
not have taken place due to natural circumstances unless some special
features were built into they system about one second after the big bang
by intelligence. If the big bang was a chance event what we would see
would be a disorderly arrangement of matter with no galaxies and no
order.

An intelligent designer controlled things ".....and we decked the skies
of the world with lamps.... Such is the measuring of the Mighty (God),
the Knower." Koran 41:12 Einstein's General Theory of Relativity leads
scientists to conclude that in its earliest instant, the universe was
infinitely dense where its diameter was zero, i.e. nothing:, yes the
universe was nothing at one time. God creates out of nothing, just as
the Koran suggests.

**NATURAL AND SUFFICIENT REASONS FOR THE CONSTANTS?**

There can be natural and sufficient reasons for some physical
characteristics of the universe but not all. Without suitable constants,
life as we know it wouldn't have existed and there would be no one to
wonder about the cosmos.

Consider this analogy by a Canadian philosopher, John Leslie, suppose
you are facing execution by a fifty man firing squad. The bullets are
fired and you find that all have missed their target. Had they not done
so you would not have survived to ponder the matter. But realizing that
you are alive, you would legitimately be perplexed and wonder why (
Gribbens, Rees 271).

1. The law of conservation of mass and energy

: The mass-energy in the universe neither increases or decreases.
Therefore the total amount of mass-energy in the universe has been the
same and will remain the same. If someone were to figure out the
mass-energy total in the universe and give it a figure say X, no natural
explanation can exist on why it is X and not X+100 or X-100 and so on.

2. The Constants

: There are no natural and sufficient reasons why all of the universes
constants have the values they have. If they had different values, life
would cease to exist. However they have the values they have regardless
of any physical necessity if we take God out of the picture. Examples
like, the Planck's constant, the speed of light, the electron charge,
the gravitational constant. These constants with the exception of the
gravitational constant have not varied more than one percent since the
start of the universe and are same throughout. The gravitational
constant has varied around ten percent.

It should be noted at this point that these constants have been there
since the beginning of the universe, a time before life appeared. These
and other strange laws of nature defy any natural and sufficient reasons
for their existence, the only valid explanation left is that they were
set by an intelligent designer: "... the measuring of the Mighty (God),
the Knower." Koran 41:12 According to the principle of sufficient reason
stated by G.W. Leibniz, No fact can be real or existing and no statement
true unless there is a SUFFICIENT reason why anything is the way it is
and not otherwise.

Whereas scientists face an enigma here, which threatens the edifice of
their work, the followers of the Koran face no such enigma at all. God
is the sufficient reason. The cause of the constants: "To Him submits
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth." (Koran)


