The Enigma of Life's Origion
============================

The break between the living and non-living is the most fundamental of
all discontinuities seen in nature. Natural Selection failed to explain
this discontinuity, just as it failed to explain the discontinuity
between species which biochemistry made clear. Stanley Miller in the
60s, in his attempt to simulate creation of life in the early earth,
failed many times in his "intelligently designed" experiments before he
succeeded in obtaining some amino acids, the building blocks of
proteins.

However, we are deliberately not told that he manipulated various
scenarios of the early earth and not just one. Neither are we told in
popular science textbooks that he failed many times before he succeeded.
His experiments were intelligently designed and not random chance, which
make this entire effort worthless as it belies the basic premise of life
evolving without intelligence.

To form proteins from amino acids is a bigger problem than forming
amino acids, however, our professors don't encourage us to think that no
trial and error experiments were going on in the early earth using
chemical beakers and flasks. Do we ever stop and think that intelligent
experiments are being designed and used by these pseudo scientists to
deny that there was any intelligence involved in the origin of life?

The "soup-theory" mentioned briefly above is the most in thing among
all the theories of the origin of life in the scientific community.
However, it poses many questions and big problems and hence just like
the pre-Miller times, it still remains an enigma.

I) The "dawn-rocks" of Western Greenland, the earliest dated rocks on
earth, considered to be about 3900 Million years old (dating from about
400 million years after the formation of the earth) don't show any trace
of abiotically produced organic compounds. Sediments from various parts
of the earth dated between 3900 and 3500 million years old also show no
signs of any abiotically produced organic compounds. Like is the usual
case with evolutionary theory by Natural selection, paleontology doesn't
support it.

ii) In the Presence of oxygen, any organic compounds formed on the
early earth would be rapidly oxidized and degraded. It is for this
reason that advocates of the "soup" theory suggest (without any
geo-chemical evidence to support what they are conjecturing) an early
earth without oxygen. Only such an atmosphere would protect the
compounds, which would then collect as the "soup".

However this poses further problems. Without oxygen, there is no ozone
layer in the upper atmosphere, which protects the earth from a lethal
dose of ultraviolet radiation. In such a scenario, any organic compounds
formed would break down in an instant. The empirical absence of organic
compounds in Martian soil proves this. The late Carl Sagan recognized
this when he stated that in the absence of oxygen, a lethal dose of
ultraviolet radiation would reach the earth in 0.3 seconds.

iii) The presence of water inhibits amino acids from joining to form
proteins, since amino acids dissolve readily in water. To overcome this
however our ingenious atheist scientists have tried to "invent" another
scenario. Sidney Fox says that the amino acids got washed to a hot pan
like land. However, experiments have shown that heating amino acids
gives no proteins but a dark tar.

However, they did some other manipulations by mixing and matching one
part of three different amino acids to a beaker of purified amino acids
they managed some joining among them. However, that did not yield any
proteins but a chemically different product, which is now, called
proteinoid. The scientific community has thrown this theory out the
door. One of the strongest critics of this theory was Stanley Miller.

Hoyle and his colleague Wickramasinge calculated the odds of the random
formation of a single enzyme from amino acids anywhere on the early
earth's surface as being 1 in 10 to the power 20 (add 20 zeros after 10
to appreciate how impossible it is to get one enzyme anywhere on this
earth from amino acids given the soup). But wait there are not only one
but two thousand enzymes, so the chance of obtaining all of these
randomly would be 1 in (10 to the power of 20) the whole thing to the
power of 2000.

The number for the odds, is so small that it cannot be distinguished
from zero. It could never have happened even if the whole universe was
soup. Biochemical systems, like blood clotting, vision, and many
functions of the cell are Irreducibly complex. Many systems backed by
proper enzymes triggered by catalysts work together, automated to
precision, working towards one desired goal in synchrony, to generate
the result needed. No gradual system can ever explain their origin.

If one part is missing, the whole system fails. If one part is crude
the consequences are disastrous. If we scan the literature that seeks to
explain the development of these systems based on evolution by natural
selection, there is none. Darwinism at the macro level requires faith,
as there are no scientific facts to support it. (Behe 1996).

**Perverted Standards**

The human eye cannot see x-rays, electricity, magnetic fields etc, yet
no man of science would dispute with their existence based on fact and
proof. Yet, with just as much or more proof on God being the creator,
the same scientist makes the excuse, "We cannot see him."

If today we were to receive even one intelligent message from space,
scientists as a whole after confirmation would conclude that yes,
intelligent life in space has been confirmed. Yet, when millions of
intelligent messages are found in our DNA, the same scientists don't
even look at it in consideration of an intelligent creator.

Dogmatic scientists today have perverted standards. An example of these
perverted standards are theories like the "multiple universe" theory. It
is stated [as an escape from reality and the enigmas scientists face
when they seek naturalistic explanations] that an infinite number of
universes exist; however we only see ours. The rest do exist somewhere
else and all the possible combinations of constants are tried [by
chance] and we were the lucky mix, so we are alive to ponder the
universe.

What they do not realize is that in order to escape from the conclusion
of one intelligent designer they are evoking infinite invisible
universes that can never be verified. Occam's Razor makes all this
conjecture fall face down. The fact is that the world owes its being to
something other than itself. The laws of nature did not create the
universe since they cease to exist at the earliest point in creation.

The laws of mechanics did not originate the laws of mechanics because
when the universe was a singularity, they did not exist. The laws of
evolution (whatever they are) don't come about through the laws of
evolution because in order to work they require a preexisting order and
preexisting entities Note:

This paper DOES NOT present in any way the Christian Creationists
position on humankind's origin. The Koran does not set a time of 6000
years for the creation of the world neither does it support the
unscientific ideas in the Bible. The Koran does not validate the Bible
nor the scientific errors contained in the Bible.

**Bibliography:

**

1. Mahin, Mark, "The New Scientific Case for God's Existence." Mind
lifter Press. 1985

2. Bucaille, Maurice, "What is the Origin of Man" Seghers, Paris.
(Reproduced by permission of the author). 1987

3. Koran: Translation from the Arabic.

4. Asadi, Muhammed A. Koran: A Scientific Analysis. 1992.

5. Fred Hoyle And N. C Wickramasinge. Evolution from Space. Simon &
Schuster 1981. NYC.

6. Dietrick E. Thomsen, The Quantum Universe: A zero point
fluctuation.

7. Science News (3 August 1985), page 73.

8. J.P Moreland, Kei Nielsen. Does God Exist? Prometheus Books. NY
1990.

9. Gribbins, John and Rees, Martin: Cosmic Coincidences. Bantam Books
1989.

10. Behe, Michael J. Darwin's Black Box. The Free Press 1996. 11.
Davies, Paul. The Accidental Universe. Cambridge University Press, 1982.
12. Denton, Michael J. Nature's Destiny. 1998. New York: The Free Press.
SPACE TRAVEL AND THE KORAN " O Assembly of Humankind and Jinn. If you
can penetrate the regions of the skies and the earth, then penetrate
them. You will not penetrate them except with power.. (Koran 55:33)

"If We were to open to them a gate to the sky and they were to continue
ascending therein. They would say, 'Our sight is confused as in
drunkenness.. (Koran 15:14-15)

Astronauts in this century have experienced the opening of a gate to
the sky. The experience is just as was described in the Koran centuries
earlier: Confused sight as in drunkenness, a feeling of being bewitched.
Once above the earth's atmosphere, the heavens no longer have the azure
appearance we see from the earth. The human observer above the earth
sees a black sky with the earth surrounded by a bluish halo... a
completely new spectacle.


