Chapter 1 : Imam Muhammad Bin Ali (a.s.) Childhood
==================================================

Introduction: Imam Muhammad Bin Ali (A.S.) - known more by his title
Taqi (or the pious one) - is our ninth Imam. He was born on 10th Rajab
195 A.H. in Medina, and was martyred when he was only 25 years of age on
29th Zilqaad 220 AH. He was buried next to his grandfather, Imam Musa
Kazim (A.S.) in Kadhmain Iraq.

As a matter of fact, Kazmain (or the two Kazims) has acquired its name
from Imam Musa Kazim (A.S.) and Imam Muhammad Taqi (A.S.), the two
Kazims.

**HIS PARENTS:**

Imam Muhammad Taqi (A.S.) was the only son, and by many accounts, the
only child of Imam Reza (A.S.). His mother is known by several names
such as: Subaika, Sabika, Sukaina, Khizran and Susan.

She was a Nubian from north Africa, and from the same tribe as Maria
Kibtia (mary, the Coptic) one of the Prophet's wives.

She was a very pious person so much so that before even joining the
house hold of Imam Reza (A.S.) Imam Musa Kazim (A.S.) used to speak
about her in words of praise.

In fact, Imam Musa Kazim (A.S.) used to tell his family members to
remember to give her his greetings when any of them lived to meet her.
Imam Reza (A.S.) also used to have very high opinion about her.

He once told Ali Bin Jaffer that Imam Musa Kazim (A.S.) once told him
that the Prophet (S.A.W.W.)had told Imam Ali (A.S.) about Imam Muhammad
Taqi (A.S.) by referring to Imam Taqi's mother, calling her "The Best of
the Nubian maid."

**HIS MIRTH:**

Imam Reza's sister, Hakima, narrates that one day Imam (A S.) requested
her to stay in his house since a child was to be born from Khizran.

The news that a child was to be born from Khizran surprised Hakima
since no one had told her before that Khizran was expecting a child, and
more surprisingly, she showed no signs of pregnancy!

However, in obedience to her brother's request, she stayed behind and
even called two other women in the neighbourhood to be around to help
her take care of Khizian when she was ready to deliver a child.

After mid-night, Khizran started showing signs of pregnancy and went
into labour-pains. At dawn ('Subh Sadiq) a baby-boy was born. Me went
into prostration ('.Sajda') in prayers to Allah.

Imam Reza (AS.) then entered the scene. Hakima wrapped die child in a
white cloth, and handed him to the imam (A S.), who read 'Azan' in the
child's right ear and 'Ikamah' in his left ear.

The Imam (A.S ) then returned the child to his sister Hakima,
instructing her to keep him with her for three days. On the third day,
the child opened his eyes, looked at the sky and read the "Qalema".
Hakima was overjoyed.

She reported what she had seen and heard to her brother, Imam Reza
(A.S.) who then informed her that this unusual behaviour of the child
should not surprise her since this was not an ordinary child but Allah's
representative on the earth.

Then Imam Reza (AS) named the child Muhammad. "Manaqib", relates that
he saw the seal of Imamat on the place between the shoulders of Imam
Taqi (A.S.)

**CHILDHOOD**

He spent the first five years of his life with his father. As a matter
of fact, he was born many years after Imam Reza's marriage. Prior to his
birth, Imam Reza's enemies used to taunt the Imam (A.S.) for not having
a son to succeed him despite the fact that the Imam (A.S.) had told them
that Allah would soon grant him a son.

The Imam's friends and followers on the other hand, were worried that
there was no issue from the Imam to succeed him. The Imam assured them,
too, that Allah would soon grant him a son who would be the next Imam.

The birth of Imam Taqi (A.S.), therefore, was welcomed with anger and
disappointment by Imam Reza's enemies, and with relief and happiness by
the Imam's friends.

Because his mother was a Nubian and because the colour of his skin was
dark, Imam Taqi (A.S.) was called 'Aswad' (The Black one) by the enemies
of Imam Reza (A.S.). However to others he was known as "Taqi" (The Pious
one) and "Jawad" (The Generous one).

He was the first among Imams from the House of the Prophet to have been
separated from his father at a very young age. At the time of the
martyrdom of Imam Reza (A.S.) Imam Taqi (A.S.) was only nine years
old.

It was very important, therefore, that Imam Reza (A.S.) should make his
followers ready to accept Imam Taqi (A.S.) as their next Imam, despite
the fact that he was only a child by their standards.

A few instances are quoted here under from Al-Irshad to show how Imam
Reza (A.S.) introduced Imam Taqi (A.S.) to the community of the
followers:

When Ali Bin Jailer Sadiq (A.S.) acknowledged Imam Taqi (A.S.) as the
next Imam, Imam Reza (A.S.) was very happy and reminded him that Imam
Musa Kazim (A.S.) used to say that the Prophet (SAW W) once told Imam
Ali (A.S.) that the son of the best of the Nubian maid-servant would be
among his descendants.

He would be separated from his father and would be exiled. His Grandson
would go into occul-tation ("Ghayba").

Safwan Bin Yahya asked Imam Reza (A.S.) regarding his successor. The
Imam named his son Muhammad Taqi (A.S.).

Safwan expresses his suprise saying, "But he is just a child, only
three years old." The Imam replied that this should not really matter
for hadn't Prophet Issa (A.S.) given testimony of his mission when he
was less than three years old?

Muammar Bin Khalad heard Imam Reza (A.S.) say that his successor was
his son Muhammad (A.S.). The Imam then added, "We are the 'Ahlul Bayf.
Our young inherit our old, like one feather (on a wing) is followed by
another."

Al-Kahyrani says that he heard somebody ask Imam Reza (A.S.) about
Muhammad who at that time was very young. The man expresses his
suprise.
Imam Reza (A.S.) replied, that Allah had sent Prophet Issa as Prophet
and Messenger and the latter assumed his mission when he was younger in
age than Imam Muhammad Taqi (A.S.).


