Imam Muhammad Bin Ali (a.s.): His Adulthood
===========================================

**INTRODUCTION**

He was called upon to perform the duties of the Imam of the time at a
very young age of eight or nine years. And he left away this world also
at a very young age of 25. Therefore it is rather meaningless to talk of
his life in terms of childhood and adulthood.

However, for the sake of simplicity we look at his life in these two
phases - the way we did for all other infallible Imams from the house of
the Prophet (S.A.W.W.)

**MARTYRDOM OF HIS FATHER, IMAM REZA (A.S.)**

At the time when Imam Reza (A.S.) left for Marv in A.H. 200, Imam Taqi
(A.S.) was only five years. The parting of the father and the son was
very painful and has been described by an eye witness, by the name of
Umayya Ibne Ali who reports:

"Before his departure for Marv, Imam Reza (A.S.) went to Mecca to pray
in the house of Allah (Ka'ba). His son, Muhammad Taqi (A.S.) was with
him.

Imam Reza (A.S.) completed his last Tawaf of the Ka'ba and went at
Makame Ibrahim to pray. Imam Muhammad Taqi (A.S.) was with his servant,
Muwafaq, performing the 'TAWAF' of Ka'ba.

Having finished that, Imam Taqi (A.S.) retired in one corner of the
Mosque. Muwafaq asked the Imam to accompany him and go home but the Imam
was weeping; saying what was the use of going home without his
father."

Muwafaq went to call Imam Reza (A.S.) who came ad consoled his son,
asking him to bear his separation patiently as this was the will of
Allah.

"The father and the son then went out of the Mosque; the father left
for Marv, and the son for Medina."

Imam Reza (A.S.) never returned from this journey. For years later, he
was martyred. But before he departed this world, through a miracle, he
contracted his son Imam Taqi (A.S.), asking him to come to Marv.

When Imam Taqi (A.S.) learnt, through the special knowledge given to
him by Allah, that his father, Imam Reza (A.S.), had been poisoned in
Sanabad (Iran) and was about to leave this world, through special powers
given by Allah. He went to Marv to be by the side of his father, and to
offer all the ritual services given to the dead. After that he returned
to Medina.


**MAMOON CALLS HIM TO BAGHDAD IN AH 206**

As the Imam of his times, he started serving Islam in the same way as
his predecessors had done. His "headquarters", as it were, was the
Prophet's Mosque in Medina where people from all over the world would
come in search of knowledge and guidance and he would serve them all.

His biggest challenge was his age. However, anyone who cam in his
contact would immediately recognize his excellence and see in him the
extra ordinary qualities found in only the Imams appointed by Allah.

For his own selfish reasons, Mamoon invited Imam (A.S.) to Baghdad, and
offered his own daughter Ummul Fadhl to him, in marriage.

The noble men and courtiers from the clan of Abbas (The c Bani Abbasi')
were very angry with Mamoon for wishing to make Imam Taqi (A.S) his
son-in-law. They sent a strong delegation to Mamoon, expressing their
dissatisfaction with this arrangement.

A royal princess given to the "child-Imam" would humiliate the noble
house of Abbas1 Mamoon's reply was "Do not underestimate this child, he
has qualities that none amongst you has."

To satisfy them, Mamoon gave them permission to test the young Imam's
knowledge and any other skills that they wished. The Bani Abbasi were
very happy with this proposal.

They planned to have the Imam tested by the most renowned scholar of
the court, Kazi Yahya Ibne Aksam, who also happened to be the head of
the Judiciary of the Muslim empire at that time. ("Kazi-ul- Kuzzat").

**THE QUESTION - ANSWER SESSION IN THE ROYAL COURT.**

The Bani Abbasi were sure that the Imam (A.S) was no match to the
crafty Kazi. However, they wanted the whole world to see the young Imam
humiliated. By their insistence, Mamoon arranged for a full court
session and invited 900 scholars to be present to watch the Imam being
tested.

The Court was fully decorated for the occasion. Irnam (A.S) was offered
a place to the right of Mamoon.

Kazi Yahya, beaming with arrogance, turned to Mamoon, seeking formal
permission to begin testing the Imam (A.S).

Mamoon advised him to seek the permission from Imam (A.S) himself Kazi
Yahya Bin Aksam addressed the Imam saying, "May I ask you a question?"

The Imam replied. Yes, go ahead."

Yahya then paused his question "What fine does a person have to pay if
he hunts while he is still in 'Ihram" (If one is in 'Ihram" of
pilgrimage to Mecca, he is forbidden from doing 25 things one of them
being hunting).

Yahya had a reason for asking this question. In his wisdom, he thought
that however clever the child may be in Islamic "FIQH", his knowledge
would be limited to matters of "Salat", fasting etc.;

the child would hardly know matters on "Hajj" as this act is performed
but once in a year or once in life time. Yahya was proved wrong. The
Imam politely but firml replied, "Your question has no answer, because
it is totally incomplete."

This reply sent chill in die spine of Yahya and every one present in
the Court.

The Imam continued, "You have to tell me if this "Muhrim" (The one who
is wearing the special garment for performing pilgrimage when entering
Mecca) killed the animal in "HILL" (in the non-forbidden area) or
"HARAM" (the forbidden area)?

Did he do this act in ignorance, by mistake or purposely? Was the
"MUHR1M' a free person or a slave, young or old, an experienced hunter
or an inexperienced or: Was the animal which was hunted a bird or a
mammal, small or large? Was the hunter repentant or non-repentant? Was
the hunting done in day light or at night? Was the hunter in the Ihram
of 'Hajj' or "Umra"?"

After the Imam had re-stated question, everyone in the Court knew that
Yahya did not know the answer! There was a complete silence: Yahya
wished he was never born!

Mamoon turned to his courtiers and said, "Didn't I tell you that this
young man's knowledge is supreme and unmatchable?" He then requested the
Imam (A.S.) to reply the question as none knew the answer.

In reply the Imam said, "If the 'Muhrim' hunted in "Hill" a large bird
he would have to give Kaffara ('pay' as a fine) by sacrificing a sheep;
if this act was done at "Haram" the "Kaffara would be two sheep.

If the bird hunted was small and killed at "Hill" the "Kaffara" would
be a lamb that had stopped taking milk. The similar bird if hunted at
"Haram" would call for a Kaffara of a lamb and monetary value of a small
bird.

"As for wild animals at "Hill", if a wild, as was killed the "Kaffara"
would be a cow. If an ostrich was killed, the "Kaffara" would be a
camel. If a deer was hunted, the fine would be a sheep. If the hunting
was in the "Haram" the Kaffara would be double, to be offered in
Mecca.

"If the hunting was done in the Ihram of "HAJJ" the sacrifice would be
done at Meena, if the Ihram was for "Umra" the sacrifices would be
offered at Mecca."

The Imam's reply was such that even his worst enemies admitted that he
was not an ordinary child but one gifted with special qualities by
Allah.

The Imam (A.S.) now inquired from Yahya if he was willing to answer his
question. Yahya replied meekly, "Yes ask me whatever you want. If I know
the answers I will tell you, if not I will request you to answers it
yourself".

The Imam's question proved too hard for Yahya. If a scholar like Yahya
Bin Aksam could not reply the Imam's question, who else could? The Imam
(A.S.) replied it himself.

The Ban Abbasi who had come to the Court to Humiliate the Imam (A.S.)
were themselves humbled. They could do nothing but bow down their heads
in front of the Imam (A.S.).


