Chapter Four : Imam Muhammad Bin Ali (a.s.) His Miracle
=======================================================

**INTRODUCTION:**

As we have learnt in the previous units, Allah gives some extraordinary
powers to his Prophets and "Masoom" Imams to make the people recognize
them as His special representatives on earth.

The greatest miracle of Imam Muhammad Taqi (A.S.) was his intelligence
as we saw in the previous chapters. As a matter of fact, when Mualla Bin
Muhammad questioned him as to how he could claim to be an Imam from
Allah at such a young age.

Imam (A.S.) replied, "O Mualla! Allah has made me His sign the same way
as He made Prophet Isa His sign for whom Allah says "We gave him the law
while still a boy" (10:12)

Other than that there were several miracles that are associated with
him; we shall consider some of them in this chapter.

**MIRACLE 1.**

Ali Bin Khalid says that when he was in Samara he heard that a prisoner
had arrived from Damascus. His crime was that he claimed to be a
Prophet. Ali paid him a visit out of curiosity. The prisoner looked
pious and virtuous. He told his story to Ali Bin Khalid in the following
words.

"I am a resident of Damascus. I used to spend my nights praying at a
site where once Imam Husain's (A.S.) severed head had been kept, as I
considered this place to be a Holy site.

"One night a young, good looking and pious person came there. He asked
me to accompany him and 1 did so, We hadn't gone much when we found
ourselves in the Mosque of Kufa (Masjid-e-Kufa) he asked me if I knew
where we were and I said we were in the Mosque of Kufa, Both of us
prayed.

We then walked a little and we were in the Mosque of the Prophet in
Medina!

There too, we prayed and then we walked for a short while and found
ourselves standing near the Kaba, We performed the "Tawaf' (seven
rounds) of the Kaba Then, we walked for a little bit and we were back in
Damascus. Before I could find out who he was, the young man
disappeared.

"One year after this event, the nun appeared again, We went to all
those places which we had done in the previous year. However, tins time
before he could disappear I requested him to tell me who he was.

He introduced himself as Muhammad Bin Ah, Bin Musa, Bin Jaffer, Bin
Muhammad Bin AH Husain Bin AH Bin Abutalib (A.S.)

"In my joy, I went around telling people about the Imam's miracle. The
government accused rne of claiming for Prophethood and sent me lie re,
on the order of Muhammad Bin Abdulmalik Zayvat Ali Bin Khalid
incidentally knew Muhammad Bin Abdul Malik Zayyat personally.

He promised the prisoner that he would intervene for him and would
request Muhammad bin Abdul Malik Zayyat to free him True to his words
All Bin Khalid wrote a letter to Muhammad Bin Abdul Malik Zayyat
explaining to him in details the prisoner's case and requesting him to
set the prisoner free as he was innocent.

After a while Muhammad Bin Abdul Malik Zayyat responded to Ali bin
Khalid's letter. He returned the original letter with these comments in
the margin.

"Tell your friend to request his freedom from he who took him to the
Mosque of Kufa, the Mosque of the Prophet and the House of Allah, all in
one night" Ali bin Khalid says that his hopes of freeing this innocent
and God-fearing person were dashed.

Anyway, he went to where he had been kept as prisoner to console him.
He saw the wardens of the prison hopelessly from one place to another as
then prisoner had disappeared, although the doors were all locked!

Ali Bin Khalid says I knew what had happened The Imam (A.S.) must have
freed the innocent person Up to that moment Ali Bin Khalid was a Zaidi
and not the follower of Imam Taqi (A.S.).

Having witnessed Imam's miracle, he became a follower of Imam Muhammad
Taqi (A.S.).

Ali says that after this incident, one day he met the prisoner who told
him that, indeed, it was Imam Taqi (AS) who paid him a visit in the
prison and set him free.

**MIRACLE 2**

Imam Reza (A.S.) had taken a loan of 4000 Dirhams from a man known as
Al-Mitrafi. Imam (A.S.) was martyred before he could repay the loan.
Besides the lender and Imam Reza (A.S.), no one else knew about this
loan and there was nothing in writing There was no way, therefore for
Al-Mitrafi to claim for the loan.

He decided to write it off Then Imam Muhammad Taqi (AS) called him in
his house and asked him as to why he had not claimed for his 4000
Dirhams that he had lent to his father! The Imam (A.S.) then put his
hand beneath the prayers carpet, took out a pouch and handed it over to
Al-Mitrafi. On counting the money he found it to be exactly 4000
Dirhams.

**MIRACLE 3**

After the martyrdom of Imam Reza (A.S.), Momoon called the Imam's
servant, Abu Salt Harawi and demanded from him the "DUA" that the Imam
had taught him to read near the grave where fishes had appeared at the
time of Imam's burial. Abu Salt could not remember the DUA.

Mamoon sent Abu Salt to prison and vowed to keep him there as long as
he did not remember the DUA. Then one night Imam Taqi (A.S.) appeared in
the prison and he set Abu Salt free and promised him that Mamoon would
never see him again and would not, in anyway, cause harm to him. Abu
Salt never again saw Mamoon and was never bothered by Mamoon or his men
ever since.

**MIRACLE 4**

Muhammad bin Ali Al-Hashim reports that he visited Imam (A.S.) on the
day following his marriage to Ummul-Fazl. Because of the medicine he had
taken on the previous night, he was feeling very thirsty. However, he
did not want to trouble the Imam (A.S.) so he didn't ask for water.

But the Imam (A.S.) looked at him and told him that since he was
thirsty would he care to have water? Muhammad Bin Ali accepted the
offer. Imam (A.S.) asked his servant to bring water for Muhammad.

When the servant brought water, Muhammad feared that the water had been
poisoned. The Imam (A.S.) immediately took the water and having drunk
from it passed on to Muhammad Bin Ali.
Muhammad became thirsty again, The Imam f A.S.) again got water for him
tested it himself first and then passed it on to Muhammad Bin All
Al-Hashim.


