The Second Night's Lecture
==========================

As an introduction to tonight's lecture, I think it will not be
irrelevant to mention a few points before starting the main subject of
my lecture. These points which I will mention may not directly relate to
my basic words, but they are, nevertheless, vital and essential.

There is great urgency that they be mentioned. In the past few years,
intellectuals have come to the conclusion that speaking of our
sufferings is useless. As a matter of fact, up until now, we have only
talked about it. It is time to do something about it. The time for
talking is over. Everyone must begin to actively reform his family and
environment.

In my opinion, there is a kind of nonchalance which has occurred about
this subject because up until now we have not spoken about suffering. We
have not made a scientific and exact analysis of it. We have just
complained. It is obvious that simply groaning about pain is useless. Up
until now we have never talked of our psychological and social anguishes
correctly. A misunderstanding as to suffering may arise, but I must
regretfully say that we do not recognize it at all.

Those who have put the experience into practice, who have experienced
pain, who have seen difficulties, divisions, who have had misfortune,
are people who experience the actual stage. They know and sense how our
speaking about pain is really at a minimum. They know what little
possibilities and awarenesses we have to recognize pain, corruption and
deviations. Not only have we not spoken enough about our ideologies, our
school of thought and our religion, but we have not really spoken about
it at all.

How can we say that we know our sufferings and have talked about them
enough and that now it is the time for action? We are a religious
society. Our religion should be the basis of our science, but we do not
even know our religion as yet.

When my students ask me as a teacher for some books about the problems,
I am ashamed when I have to answer them. It is shameful that no books
exist about these problems.

Our nation has for centuries had the honor of following the Jafari
School of Islam and Ali. Iran accepted Islam in the first century of the
hegira. It replaced its former religion with Islam. It became the
follower of the School of Ali and his companions and his form of
government whether officially as now or in respect to sentiment, belief
and faith as before.

But today when a student wants a book in order to be able to study about
Ali or in order to be able to know who the first followers of Ali were
who laid the foundations of the history of Shi'ite Islam in the first
century and remained loyal to him in those most difficult times, I have
to tell him that there are none.

We know some existed, but we know them by name only. It is disgraceful
for a nation whose religion is the religion of Ali, not to have one good
book written about him and his companions. It is shameful that Georges
Jourdaq, a Christian, introduces Ali to us after 14 centuries and that
Jaudat as-Sahhar, a Sunni brother, introduces Abu Dharr.

Salman Farsi was the first Iranian who accepted Islam. He holds a place
of honor among the Aryan race and Iranians. He is a great man who
accepted the Prophet's invitation to Islam. He got so close to the
Prophet that he became part of his family. A man who holds such a place
of honor in both a national and a religious sense, does not have even
four pages of a book written about him in Persian. But, a Frenchman has
written about him.

I do not know how we can claim that the stage of knowing and speaking is
finished and that it is time for action. I don't want to say that it is
not the time for action for all of these things should go together. The
Prophet of Islam never divided his life into two parts where one part
would be devoted to action only and the other to speaking only.

It is not correct to say that we have talked too much and should not
speak at all. We have just complained. This and groaning should be put
aside and we should speak of suffering in a scientific manner. The
school we believe in should be the basis of our work, our activity and
our thoughts. We should know what kind of man Ali was. We should know
about Abu Dharr, Salman and the Companions of the Prophet and Ali.

Unfortunately, no valuable or readable book about them exists which is
both respected from the point of view of religion as well as from the
point of view of humanity. They come into Persian through translation We
have yet to write anything ourselves.

A person who knows the Qur'an nowadays is called a distinguished person,
not a scholar. Scholars are in a stage beyond. The distinguished are
they who know the Qur'an, the history of Islam and the Prophet and his
Companions. They explain and interpret the Qur'an and practice it. These
people are the distinguished which really means second-hand scholars of
Islam. If we look at it this way, the Prophet Muhammad himself, Ali and
Abu Dharr are among the distinguished men of Islam, not the scholars of
Islam.

Thus, I believe that the most urgent task before us is to speak of what
afllicts us, to speak about it exactly, study it scientifically and come
to know it. All the sufferings of those who tried to reform their
society in Islamic countries, proved to be either futile or with little
result. The reason was that while operating, they did not know what
needed to be done. It is certain that until we know what we want, we
will not know what to do. Therefore, our first task is to know our
religion and school of thought but, unfortunately, after centuries
connecting this religion, we are just now beginning to come to know it.

As I said in last night's lecture, there are different ways of coming to
know Islam. One of them is knowing God and comparing that knowledge with
the concept held in respect to other deities. Or, we can come to know
the Qur'an and compare it with other books. We can study the personality
of the Prophet of Islam and compare it with other personalities who as
reformers have existed throughout the long history of humanity. Or, we
can come to know the distinct and distinguished individuals of that
faith and compare them to ones in other faiths.

It is the duty of today's intellectuals to know Islam as a school which
revives humanity, that is, both the individual and society. The mission
of Islam is to direct the future of humanity. Intellectuals must see
this as an irreplaceable duty. They need to take a good look at this
religion and its outstanding personalities from the angle of whatever
their particular field of study happens to be. As Islam has many
different dimensions and manifestations, everyone can find new and
detailed areas which relate to his or her special subject.

As my study was the sociology of religion, I tried to compile a kind of
sociology of religion on the basis of Islam using the terms inferred and
acquired from the content of the Qur'an. In the course of my study, I
came up with new problems which I had never even imagined. For example,
as a result of studying Islam and the Qur'an, I discovered scientific
suggestions of history and sociology which reflect the Prophet's
customs. This is just the opposite of what happens when we try to
analyze and interpret the Qur'an as philosophy or when we use today's
science to study the policies of the Prophet or the political, social,
psychological and moral system which he presented to society.

No, the problem is something else. It is that I actually inferred many
new problems in history and sociology from the Qur'an. The Qur'an and
Islam gave me the idea but, I found new themes that relate to history,
sociology and the human sciences Upon turning to them, I continued my
research andI became certain that I had realized something important.

Through the help of the Qur'an, I have found some important problems in
today's human sciences which that science does not even take into
consideration. One is the question of migration. In my lecture entitled
'Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets,' the question was considered solely
from a historical point of view as the migration of a tribe from one
place to another. I have discovered that migration is just the opposite
of that which Muslims feel it to be when we look to the Qur'an, read
about migration and the Emigrants, [the people who accompanied the
Prophet from Mecca to Medina], the life of the Prophet and generally,
migration at the beginning of Islam. It was not just a historical
accident or event.

Muslims consider the migration to have consisted of a group of men who
were banned from Mecca and then ordered by the Prophet to go to Ethiopia
and Medina. Migration, in historic terms, is considered to be the
transfer of a primitive tribe from one place to another because of
geographic or political causes. Islam considers it to be an event which
took place and affected the life of Muslims and the Prophet of Islam.

Migration is a deep philosophic and social principle. By referring to
history, I discovered that migration is an extremely important and
magnificent principle. It is not simply what the historian sees it to
be. Even the philosophers of history have not paid attention to the
question of migration. What I say now is that migration has been a
factor infiuencing the whole of history.

All of the twenty-seven civilizations which we know historically,
resulted from migrations. There is not one exception to this rule.
According to records, a primitive tribe would become civilized and would
create a higher culture only when it moved from its place, when
migrating from the land it had lived in.

I have inferred this matter. There is no reference to it in history or
sociology. My inference came from Islam, from the subject of migration
as it is expressed in the Qur'an and the reference to it as a continuing
system.

All of the world's civilizations, from the most recent, that is,
America, to the oldest, which is Sumer, have been established through
subsequent migrations. This means that a primitive tribe remained
primitive while it remained in its own land. As soon as migration took
place and they were settled in a new land, it reached what could be
called civilization. Thus, all civilizations are the result of the
migration of primitive tribes.

There are many questions which I came to understand through the Qur'an.
The amount of information contained within it has helped me to better
understand historical and sociological problems and see them in a new
light. Therefore, I have arrived at this method which is to use the
special terms of the Qur'an. In this way, one can discover so many
approaches which can be applied to the newest of sciences, the human
sciences.

The greatest problem of history and sociology and, in particular, of the
sociology of Islam, is to find the main cause of changes of societies.
What is the main factor which causes a society to change and transform
or suddenly be overthrown and decay? What factor causes a society to
arrive at a positive mutation so that in one or two centuries its
material and spiritual form and content change and cause all individual
and social relationships to change, as well? This is a problem which has
continued for centuries.

For the last 110 years, it has been frankly considered with care in
sociological and historical studies. The question which is always
presented is “What is the motor of history and the fundamental factor
for change and transformation of human societies?”

Here is where the science of sociology breaks down when every school
emphasizes one aspect of the problem. Some schools actually do not
believe in history and consider history to be a collection of past
narrations. They consider it to be worthless. These groups do not accept
any law or fact as a standard for sociology. A kind of scientific
anarchism exists in the world which is actually pessimistic in regard to
the philosophy of sociology and human sciences. It regards accidents as
the major factor and says that changes, mutations and revolutions, which
exist in nations, are all created by accident.

For example, the Arabs attack Iran and Iran is accidently defeated. The
Iranians become Muslims and Ghengis Khan attacks Iran, by accident, and
Iran's government just happens to be weak so it is defeated along with
that of Islam and the Iranian way of life. They all change places. These
major factors are all regarded as accident.

The other group are the materialists who believe in a totalistic view of
history. They believe that history and society, from the beginning until
now, is like a tree. This tree, without a will of its own, was a seed
which split, grew out of the earth having established its roots and then
developed stem and leaf. It started to grow and has since developed into
a large tree. It is obliged to give forth fruits and blossoms at the
beginning of the spring. It is obliged to evolve and to decay.

This group also believes that throughout history, human societies
survive because of the effect of determining laws which exist in
society, like laws which are in nature. Therefore, the beliefs of
individuals do not in anyway interfere in the fate of their societies.
Society is a natural phenomenon which grows from the effects of natural
laws.

The third group believe that personalities direct history such as the
fascists and Nazis. Great scholars such as Carlyle, who wrote the life
of the Prophet of Islam, and Emerson, and so forth, are included in this
group. They believe that laws are mere tools in the hands of humanity
and that they have no effect upon society. To their way of thinking, the
average person or lower than average person has no share in changing
society. They are considered to be simply tools as well.

The only factor which reforms societies, develops them or causes their
decadence is great personalities. Emerson says, 'Give me ten great
personalities and I will tell you the history of humanity without
reading a book. Introduce me to the Prophet of Islam so I can tell you
the history of Islam. Introduce Napoleon to me and I will declare the
history of modern Europe?'

From this point of view, the fate of society and humanity is in the
hands of great personalities who are the leaders of our society.
Therefore, the rise or decline of societies neither depends upon the
people nor does it result from the effect of determined laws of the
environment and society, nor do they result from mere accidents. Rather,
everything is in the hands of great personalities who appear from time
to time in society and change its fate and sometimes change the fate of
humanity.

Carlyle writes, in describing the life of the Prophet of Islam, 'The
Prophet of Islam was rejected in his first invitation to his relatives.
Hazrat Ali, who was 10 years old, stood up and gave a positive answer to
the invitation and swore allegiance.' Then Carlyle sums up the basis of
his way of thinking, 'This small hand, which was placed upon the great
hand, changed the course of history.' There is no school of thought, new
or old, democrat or otherwise which believes that the masses of the
people are the major factor of the transformation and change in our
society. The schools of democracy believe that the best form of
government is a government in which people participate.

But from the beginning of the democracy of Athens until now, no school
has believed that people are the major factor in bringing about change
and transformation in society. This means that the more democratic of
sociologists believe that the best way to govern and form an
administrative organization is one in which people participate, vote and
choose the government. They do not however, regard those people as the
fundamental factor in the transition and change of society. But rather,
they either take the determinist point of view or great personalities as
being the essential factor or else they believe in accidents or the
probability of the divine will as being the main factor of change.

Those who follow the personality-cult theory are divided into two
groups. One group believes that a great personality like Buddha or Moses
or Jesus change society. These are the individualists. The other group
believes that first a personality appears and is then followed by a
group of specialists, geniuses and distinguished men of the tribe who
surround him and form a group. This group is called 'elite' and it is
they who will lead society towards their aims. They are known as
'elite-worshippers.'

But both Islam and the Qur'an have another point of view. As a rule, in
Islam, the greatest personality is the Prophet. If Islam were to believe
in the role of the great personality as the basic factor of
transformation and change in society and history, then they would regard
all the prophets and especially, the Prophet of Islam, as the basic
factor of transformation and change.

But it is other than this. It is something more than the qualities and
mission of the Prophet of Islam which are clearly described in the
Qur'an and relate to bringing a message. He is responsible for
communicating the message. He is the harbinger of good news. He even
gets upset when he cannot lead people the way he wants to and when they
do not listen to his words. God explains to him repeatedly, in so many
words, 'Your mission is only to communicate the message. You should not
be frightened. Give news to the people and show them the way. You are
not in any way responsible for their progress.'

The Prophet, in the Qur'an, is not regarded as the major factor in the
transformation and change of history, but is introduced as a messenger
who should reveal the school of thought and the way of Truth to the
people. His mission ends here. It is up to the people, then, to choose
that school of thought or not, to be guided or not. There is no room for
the accident theory in this religion because all of the affairs are in
the hands of God.

Therefore, accident, meaning an event without any cause or any final
goal in creation, is unimaginable either in nature or in human society.
Even the other prophets or great personalities who are recalled in the
Qur'an are done so with a feeling of pessimism. If it talks about them
as being righteous and pure, it never counts them as being an effective
factor in the transformation and change of their society.

Generally, the people addressed in every school of thought and religion
are the fundamental and effective factor of change of that society in
that school of thought. According to this, we see that in all the
various parts of the Qur'an, the people (al-nas) themselves are
addressed. The Prophet is sent on a mission to the people. He speaks to
the people. He is questioned and investigated by the people. He is a
transition factor to promote the people. The people are responsible for
society and history.

The word, people, is a valuable word. The only word that is close to it,
is mass (tudeh). In sociology, mass means the body of the people without
any regard to class distinction or indicators which would distinguish
them from other human groups. Therefore, mass means people without
considering the special, classical form or group of their society.

The words human being (insan) and mankind (bashar) also refer to people,
but human being connotes a moral quality and mankind refers to people
when their animal properties are included. The synonym, mass, means
simply, people, without any additional classification.

Here a new matter is inferred and it is that Islam is the first social
school of thought which considers the people to be the basis and
fundamental factor of society and history as well as responsible for the
divisions within history and society. It is not the chosen that
Nietzsche speaks about nor the nobles and aristocrats which Plato refers
to. It is not the great personalities of Carlyle and Emerson, nor the
pure-blooded people of Alexis Carrel nor the clergy and intellectuals,
but the fabric of the people.

It is important to study this and compare it with other schools of
thought. To whom do the different schools of thought speak? Some schools
talk to the educated and intellectuals; another to the distinguished or
chosen group. Another talks to a superior group or race and still
another to supermen. We find yet another which pays attention to a
special class of society such as the proletariat or the bourgeoisie.

But none of these privileged groups exist in Islam. The fundamental
factor of change and transition of society are people without regard to
their special form, face, class distinction or any other classification.

Another important factor inferred from the Qur'an is that, as it
addresses the people, they are responsible for the fundamental aims, at
the same time that they are the major force in shaping the fate of
society through personality, accident and tradition. Therefore, we can
say that personality, tradition, accident and the masses are the four
fundamental forces which cause transformation and change in society.

Tradition is inferred from Islam and the Qur'an. Society has an
undisputable origin. As the Qur'an points out, society has one way, one
policy, that is, a special nature. Actually all societies have
determined views of certain unchangeable laws. Society is like a living
creature which, like every living thing, follows certain determined,
unchangeable scientific laws. Because of this, all transformations and
changes of society are built upon certain traditions. At this point, it
seems like Islam approaches a deterministic interpretation of history
and sociology but Islam does not stop here. It emphasizes that both
human society and the individual are responsible for their fate.

***For them is the reward which they have earned and you shall have that
which you earn,*** **(2:134)**

and

***Verily God does not change the condition of a people until they
change what is in themselves,*** **(13:11).**

These two verses show social responsibility whereas, ***Every soul is
held in pledge for what it earned**,* shows the responsibility of the
individual .

Both society and the individual have a responsibility towards the
Creator while each, at the same time, determines his own destiny. Not
only are these two phenomena not contradictory, but they actually
complement each other.

It is the same in nature. A farmer is responsible for the fruit of the
trees of the garden and the growth of the plants. He is responsible to
get the best fruit from the plants and trees. Therefore, he is
responsible to a certain extent for the product. On the other hand, we
know that certain laws exist in nature which form the basis for the
changes and transformations of plants and vegetables. These are
determined, unchangeable laws.

Therefore, human beings, according to their particular science or field
of work, can employ the unchangeable laws inherent in the plants. A
farmer can never enact a new law in nature nor can he destroy any other
existing laws. The laws which exist in nature forcibly are imposed upon
the farmer and he cannot change them. At the same time, he has the power
to change the fixed customs and laws of botany through scientific
devices and employ these forced laws whose change is out of the
question. He can change an average fruit into a superior one through the
laws which exist. The responsibility of a human being in society is just
this. That is, society is like a garden, founded upon God's Customs.
Through these, it grows and evolves.

But the human being has a responsibility. He or she cannot simply accept
the fatalist's point of view or the view of historic determinism and by
doing so, release himself or herself from being responsible. A human
being cannot put aside his or her responsibility when faced with the
fate of that society. The Qur'an, while admitting that society is built
upon unchangeable laws, does not, in any way, deny the responsibility of
humanity and human beings. In this school of thought, they are
responsible to know the customs and to reform them as society evolves.
How? Through their own knowledge.

Why does a farmer have more responsibility to improve and develop his
fields? Because he has more knowledge of these customs and as a result
he has more freedom to change the fate of the trees and plants. The
greater the human being's knowledge of the customs and rules of society,
the more responsibility he has as well as more freedom in changing and
transforming society. The religion of Islam, if we see it as a
sociological school of thought, believes that the changes and
transformations of society are not just based upon accident, because
society is a living creature, and has unchangeable scientific and human
customs.

Human beings have a free will by which they can build and predict a
better fate for their society as well as the individual, through their
participation in its principles and customs. The responsibility of human
beings is created in the belief that society is like a living creature
which reacts according to scientific laws. Thus, from one point of view,
human being means, will, and from another, society, that is custom or
tradition. According to the Qur'an, customs are incapable of change and
the human being is directly responsible for the individual and society.
Therefore the human being is free to be active and to work but at the
same time, he is obliged to follow the rules existing in nature in order
to exercise that freedom.

Personality, in Islam, is not considered to be the creative force. Even
the prophets are not considered to be personalities who bring about new
customs in their society. From the point of view of sociology, virtues
of the prophets in relationship to other teachers— excluding their
prophetic function—is that they have known and understood the divine
hand in nature better than reformers do.

It is because of this that they have been better able to use their
freedom as human beings to succeed in their goals in society. History
has shown it to be true. The prophets were more successful than
non-prophetic reformers.

Reformers have often expressed better human theses and slogans in their
books but they have not changed their society. They have built no
civilizations. It is the prophets who have built societies and
histories. It is not that they have enacted new customs when faced with
the divine law as the fascists and hero-worshippers say.

Rather, they have discovered the customs of God in society and nature
through their prophetic powers. They attained their goal and their
mission by following these customs through their will power. The theory
of accident has no philosophic meaning in Islam either because God
actually directly and continously intervenes in all affairs. As accident
does not have a logical cause or a final goal, it cannot originate in
society or nature.

There is a kind of accident, if we look at its particular meaning, which
plays a role in the fate of humanity. For instance, Ghengis Khan appears
in Mongolia. He gains control through the current social customs. He
creates a great force, but the defeat of Iran at the hands of Ghengis,
is an accident which might not have occurred. Accidents such as these do
occur which may affect some societies.

As we have noted, there are four factors, personality, accident, custom
and the masses, which effect the fate of societies but from the point of
view of Islam, the most effective of them are the factors of the masses
and custom because the masses represent the will of the fabric of the
people and custom refers to scientific laws existing in society.

The ratio of the role of each of these factors in the fate of society
depends upon the conditions of that society. In a society where mankind
means the mass and the people are progressive, for the most part, and
they have reached the highest stage of discipline and culture, the role
of personality is less.

However, in societies which have not reached this stage of civilization
like a tribe or a family, a leader or personality can be more effective.
Therefore, in every different stage of society from the point of view of
development or backwardness, one of these four mentioned factors has
more effect as compared to the other three.

In Islam, the personality of the Prophet plays a fundamental role in the
transformation, change and mutation of the structure of the future
civilization as well as in changing the direction of history because the
Prophet of Islam appears in a particular geographic area (the Arabian
peninsula) where civilization is just like its geography. It is a
peninsula which is surrounded on three sides by the sea but it is
thirsty and dry and has no water. Its neighbors, on all sides, have
hosted great civilizations.

To the north there was the civilization of Greece and Eastern Rome; to
the east, Iran's civilization; on the southeast, the Indian civilization
and to the northeast, the Hebrew civilization. The religions founded by
Moses, Jesus, Zoroaster as well as the great Aryan and Semetic
civilizations all neighbor it.

When the Prophet of Islam appears, some of these civilizations are
thriving around the peninsula but in the same way that the special
geographic condition of this peninsula is such that the vapor of the
water of the sea does not enter the peninsula, none of these
civilizations leave the least trace upon the peninsula.

Therefore, according to sociologists, the Prophet of Islam is the
greatest factor in the change and transformation of his society. A
historian sees a great wave of accident which came into being in the 7th
century A.D. in the Arabian peninsula. It dissolved all of its
surroundings. It brought a great civilization and society into being. It
is here that the historian must necessarily relate the great wave and
all of the thoughts and changes of this greatest of transformations in
the history of mankind which is Islam, to the person of Muhammad, son of
Abdullah, after studying the peninsula, where there is a total vacuum of
culture and civilization and where the masses live under the most
difficult of circumstances. The personality of the Prophet contains
special and exceptional conditions.

There are, generally speaking, five factors which build human beings.
The first is the factor of the mother who builds the structure and
spiritual dimension of humanity. The Jesuits say, 'Give me your child
until the child is seven years old and after that, wherever the child
goes, he will remain a Jesuit until the end of his life. A mother
nourishes the human spirit, giving depth, subtlety and feelings to it.
Her special gestures give the nursing child its first lesson. The second
factor in building a human being is the father who constructs other
dimensions of the child's soul. The third factor which builds the form
and clear dimensions of the human being is a school. The fourth is
environment and society.

As the environment is powerful and greater, it will have more effect on
human beings. For example, the effect of the environment differs from a
person who lives in a village to one who lives in a big city. The fifth
factor in building human beings is the general culture of the nation or
the general culture of the world.

Therefore, five moulds or dimensions exist which, in total, make the
framework into which the human spirit is poured and later extracted.

Education takes a special shape which is given to the human spirit for
particular goals because if a person receives no education, he or she
grows in a way which proves to be useless for society and our aims. We
give the person shapes so that when he or she grows up, they are useful
to society.

But in the life of the Prophet of Islam, which should be the greatest
factor of personality in the transformation and change of history, none
of those above mentioned factors influenced his spirit. Actually it was
the intention that no shape be imposed upon him, no form of artificial
discipline be given to him as is normally given to a human being in his
own time and through his own environment. He had been sent to break all
idols and if he himself had grown into one, he would not have been able
to accomplish his mission.

It would be possible, for example, that he become a great physician but
in the Greek mould or become a great philosopher but in the Iranian
mould or become a mathematician but in the moulds suitable to that time.
However, he has been sent on a mission to grow in an environment empty
of culture and civilization and not to accept any of these moulds.

That is why, as he opens his eyes, he does not see his father but the
hand which should take him away from any form by leading him into the
desert. It was the custom of Arabs at that time to take their children
to the desert until they were two years old in order to spend the period
of breast feeding in the desert and then return to the city and grow
near their mother.

But Muhammad had just the opposite experience. As soon as he is taken to
Mecca, he is returned to the desert. He lives there until he is five
years old. His mother dies soon afterwards. These particular devices for
developing children are put aside and kept at a distance so that he can
later break the Greek, Arab, Jewish, Christian and Zoroastrian moulds
and create a new mould, a new shape.

Again on the excuse of being a shepherd, fate leads him from the city
into the desert so that the city and the environment of the city do not
print their suitable or favorable moulds upon his spirit which should
flow freely. Because the spirit of society does not influence him, he
develops in a society which is actually part of general culture. He is
unlettered. The school and its mould is not imposed upon him.

We see that the greatest encounter of the personality which is to have
this great mission is to keep him removed from all schools of thought,
all moulds which are acceptable in his time which moulds people to be
like them. This happens so that the man who has to destroy all fire
temples, close all academies and build mosques in their place, the man
who must break all racial, indigenous and regional moulds, will himself
have no particular mould before he is born so that one of the first
dimensions is not imprinted upon him.

His mother is kept at a distance from him so that the kindness and
caresses of a mother will not influence his spirit through the
delicateness of a lyric poem, for it must become hard and powerful. He
is born into a dry peninsula which is far from any general culture so
that this great spirit takes no culture, civilization or faith unto
itself. The spirit which must patiently bear and bring about this most
unusual mission, cannot take form in any normal mould. This constraint
is the greatest possible benefit which could be bestowed upon this
personality who must play the principal role in this unparalled event of
history.


