Chapter 2: Concerning the Prophet (P)
=====================================

The second question: On the infallibility of the Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------

Allah, Glory be to Him, the Most High, says concerning the rights of His
apostle Muhammad, (S.A.W.): ***"God will protect you from the people"
(5:67)***. He also says: ***"He does not speak from his desires, it is
nothing but a revelation revealed to him" (53:3)***. He further says:
***"What the Prophet brings to you accept it; what he prohibits you,
refrain from it" (59:7)***.

These verses clearly point to his complete infallibility under all
circumstances. You say that the Prophet of God (S.A.W.) is infallible
only in proclaiming the Qur'an. Apart from that, he is like other human
beings, he errs and does right. You derive proofs of his mistakes at
different occasions by traditions which you report in your *Sahih*
works.

If that is the case, what is the proof and evidence in your claim to
adhere to the book of God and the *sunna* of His prophet as long as this
*sunna* is, in your view, not infallible and there is a possibility of
error in it?

On this basis, then, clinging to the book of God and the *sunna*,
according to your belief, does not guarantee one from not being led
astray especially as we know that the whole Qur'an is explained and made
clear by the Prophetic *sunna.*. What is your proof that the commentary
and explanations are not contrary to the book of Allah, the most
exalted?

One of them expressed this opinion to me: "The Prophet of God certainly
opposed the Qur'an in many rulings according to the demands of the
occasion.” I said in a surprised manner: "Cite me one example of this
opposition.”

He said: ***"The Qur'an says: 'The adulteress and the adulterer, lash
both of them with one hundred lashings' (24:2)***. Whereas the Prophet
ordered the stoning of the adulterer and adulteress, this [ruling] is
not found in the Qur'an.”

I said: "The stoning is for the married person who fornicates, whether
male or female, whereas lashing is for the unmarried person if he/she
fornicates, whether male or female”.

He said: "In the Qur'an, there is no [mention of] unmarried or married
[person] as Allah does not specify it, rather, He uses the term
adulterer and adulteress without qualifying it.”

I said: "Then, on this basis, does this mean that every general ruling
in the Qur'an which was specified by the Prophet is thereby
contradictory to the Qur'an? Then, do you say that the Prophet opposed
the Qur'an in most of his rulings?" He replied diffidently: "The Qur'an
is only infallible because Allah has guaranteed its protection. As for
the Prophet, he is a man. He errs and does right. As the Qur'an says
about him: ***'Say I am nothing but a man like you'***".

I said: "Why do you pray the morning, midday, afternoon evening and
night prayer whereas the Qur'an used the general word, prayer, without
specifying its timings?" He replied: "In the Qur'an, it says: ***'Indeed
the prayer was a prescribed time for the believers’***. The Prophet
explained the timings of the prayers.” I said: "Why do you believe him
in the timings of the prayers and you refute him in the rulings on
stoning the adulterer?"

He tried his best to satisfy me with contradictory, barren philosophies
which do not stand against intellectual or logical proofs. For example,
he said: "One cannot doubt about the prayer because the Prophet of Allah
performed it during the whole of his life, five times every day.
However, we cannot be so sure about stoning since he did it only once or
twice during his lifetime.” Similarly, he claims that the Prophet does
not err when God commands him on an issue. However, when he judges by
his own reasoning, then he is not infallible.

Due to that, the companions would ask him in every case, is this from
himself or from God? If he said: "This is from Allah,” they obeyed him
without any argument.

If he said: "This is from me," then they would argue, dispute and advise
him. He would accept their advices and views. The Qur'an was at times
revealed in agreement with the views of some companions and opposed his
(the Prophet's) views as [happened] in the question of the prisoners of
Badr and other famous incidents.

I tried my best to persuade him but without any success because the
scholars of the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* are convinced by this [view]
and the *Sihah* are full of such traditions which destroy the
infallibility of the Prophet. It makes him [appear as] a person lower in
status than a pious person or a military leader or lower than a Sufi
*shaykh* of the path.

I would not be exaggerating if I said that he is lower in status than an
ordinary person. If we read some of the traditions in the *Sihah* of the
*ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a*, it would be absolutely clear to us the
degree of influence that the Umayyads, from their times, have had on the
thinking of the Muslims, and that their vestiges have remained with the
people even today.

If we searched for the aim or goal for that, we would reach a certain
and bitter conclusion, which is; those who ruled the Muslims during the
Umayyad dynasty, the chief of whom was Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan, did not
believe, for a day, that Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah was sent with God's
message or that he was truly God's Messenger.

Most probably, they believed that he was a magician who overwhelmed the
people and built a kingdom at the cost of the downtrodden people,
especially the slaves who supported and helped him in his claims. This
is not mere conjecture, since some conjectures can be sinful. When we
read the historical works to study the character of Mu'awiya and those
around him, and what he did during his lifespan, especially when he
ruled, the conjecture becomes a reality; there is no escape from it.

All of us know who Mu'awiya is and who his father Abu Sufyan and his
mother Hind are. He is the freed slave, son of a freed slave, who spent
his youth in the circle of his father mobilizing an army to fight the
Prophet of God and to opposing his mission with all effort. When all his
attempts failed and when the Prophet of God (S.A.W.) emerged victorious
over him and his father, he accepted Islam for pragmatic reasons without
any conviction.

The Prophet, due to his nobility and great character, forgave him and
called him the freed man (*al-taliq)*. After the death of the bearer of
the message, his (Mu'awiya's) father tried to instigate discord and
sedition in Islam. That was when, at night, he came to Imam 'Ali to
incite him to rise against Abu Bakr and 'Umar and tempting him with
property and men. Imam 'Ali (A.S.) knew his aim and so ignored him.

He remained living in rancor against Islam and Muslims for the whole of
his life until the Caliphate came to his cousin 'Uthman. At that time,
the disbelief and hypocrisy lying within him surfaced and he said:
"Seize it, seize it again, by what Abu Sufyan swears, there is neither
heaven nor hell.”

Ibn Asakir has reported in his historical work in the sixth volume, page
407, from Anas, that Abu Sufyan visited 'Uthman after he had become
blind. He asked him: "Is there anyone around?" They said: "No.” He said:
"O God, make the matters [as they were] at the time of the *Jahiliyya*
and the kingdom [belong] to the usurpers and make the Banu Umayyads the
tent pegs (*awtad*) of the earth.”

As for his son Mu'awiya, what do you know about Mu'awiya? There are no
bounds as to what one can say concerning what he did to the *umma* of
Muhammad (P) during his governorship in Syria and after gaining control
of the Caliphate through force and power.

The historians have mentioned [his acts] concerning his defiling the
Qur'an and *sunna* and transgressing all the boundaries of the
*shari'a*. His actions are those which even the pen cannot write and the
tongue cannot mention, due to their evil and corrupt nature. Bearing in
mind the feelings of our brothers amongst the *ahl al-sunna
wa'l-Jama'a,* we have devoted pages for those who have instilled the
love of Mu'awiya in their hearts and defend him.

It would not be out of place for us to mention the mentality of the man
and his belief in the bearer of the message. His belief is not too
different from the belief of his father. He was fed by the milk of the
one who ate human liver. She was well known as a prostitute and an
adulterer. Similarly, he inherited [the character of] his father, the
leader of the hypocrites. Islam did not find a place in his heart even
for a day. Just as we know the character of the father, the son is
expressing the same thing but in a more subtle and hypocritical way.

Al-Zubayr b. Bakar reported from Mutawwaf b. al-Mughira b. Shu'ba
al-Thaqafi. He said: "I visited Mu'awiya with my father. My father would
[often] visit him and narrate from him. Thereafter, he would come to me
and mention Mu'awiya and his mentality and would [often] be surprised at
what he saw. He came to me one evening.

However, he did not have dinner and appeared aggrieved. I waited for a
while thinking that something had happened between us or [it was due to]
what we did. I then said to him: 'What is the matter, I see you are
distressed since the evening?' He said: 'O my son, I have come from the
most evil of people.’ I said to him: 'How can that be?' He said: 'I said
to Mu'awiya when I was alone with him: 'O Commander of the Faithful, you
have attained your goal, if only you were to demonstrate justice and
spread virtue.

You have become old of age. If only you were to look after your
brothers, the Banu Hashim, and were to re-establish ties with them. By
God, they do not have anything today which you should be scared of. In
that there will be [something] for which you will be remembered and will
receive reward'. He said to me: 'Far be from it, far be from it. What
remembrance do I wish to leave behind me?

The brother of Taym (Abu Bakr) ruled and spread justice and did what he
did. As soon as he died so did his remembrance except that a person
[while mentioning him], would say "Abu Bakr". Then the brother of 'Adi
('Umar) ruled, persevered, and he remained active for ten years. As soon
as he died, so did his remembrance, except a person [while mentioning
him] would say "'Umar". Then our brother 'Uthman ruled.

Here was a man the like of whom there was nobody. He did what he did and
they did to him what they did. By God, as soon as he died, they forgot
his remembrance and forgot what was done to him. The brothers of Hashim
shout every day five times: 'I bear witness that Muhammad is the Prophet
of God'. What action and what remembrance will remain with this, O
motherless one, by God, except [for one] to die and be buried?'"

May God debase, disappoint and disgrace you (Mu'awiya), O one who wanted
to bury the remembrance of the Prophet of God with all efforts. You
spent everything you owned for that cause but all your efforts met with
failure. Allah, Glory be to Him, is observing you and He says to His
Prophet: ***"We have raised your remembrance.”*** You (Mu'awiya) can
never erase his remembrance which the Lord of power and might has
raised.

Plot your schemes and gather your group, you will not be able to
extinguish the light of God with your mouth. God will perfect His light
despite your hypocrisy and jealousy. Look here, you ruled the world east
and west, as soon as you died, so did your remembrance, except that one
who remembers you does so due to your evil deeds, through which you had
hoped to destroy Islam, just as it has been reported from the tongue of
the Prophet of God (S.A.W.).

The remembrance of Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah, the brother of Banu Hashim,
has remained during the course of centuries and generations, until God
establishes his rule on earth and on the people inhabiting it. Whenever
someone mentions him, they do so by sending greetings to him and his
family. [This is] despite your plots and the plots of the Banu Umayya
who tried, through your guidance and leadership, to prevail over them
and their excellences.

That only enhanced their status and eminence. You will meet Allah on the
Day of Judgment, when He will be angry with you due to what you
innovated in His law and He will give you what you deserve.

If we add to this their offspring, Yazid b. Mu'awiya, the shameless,
corrupt one and wine drinker, the one who openly indulged in sins and
debauchery, we find him to be having the same belief, which he inherited
from his father Mu'awiya and grandfather Abu Sufyan. He inherited from
them vileness, baseness, wine drinking, fornicating with prostitutes and
gambling. If he had not inherited these evil characteristics, his
father, Mu'awiya, would not have appointed him for the Caliphate and
imposed him over the neck of the Muslims.

All of them knew him the way he should be known, while they were alive.
Amongst them were prominent companions like al-Husayn b. 'Ali, the
master of the youths of paradise. I do not doubt that Mu'awiya passed
his life and spent his money which he earned through illegal ways, in
the path of destroying Islam and the true Muslims. We have seen how he
wished to bury the remembrance of Muhammad (S.A.W.).

He was not able to do that, so he initiated a war against his cousin
'Ali, the legatee of the Prophet, until it ended. He then attained the
Caliphate with force, deception and hypocrisy. He established an
inauspicious *sunna* and ordered his governors in all regions to curse
'Ali and the Prophetic household from all the pulpits and in all
prayers.

By doing that, he wanted to curse the Prophet of God. When all his plans
failed and his destined time arrived and he had did not attain his
purpose, he appointed his son as a ruler over the *umma* to continue
along the plan which he and his father Abu Sufyan had established, i.e.,
the destruction of Islam and returning to the Jahili era. That mad and
corrupted person accepted the Caliphate and prepared his entourage to
destroy Islam according to the desires of his father.

He began by seizing the city of the Prophet of God (S.A.W.) with his
disbelieving army. He did what he did in three days. He killed 10,000 of
the most virtuous companions in it and proceeded, after that, to kill
the master of the youths of paradise and the delight of the Prophet
(S.A.W.) and to kill the Prophetic household. They were the moons of the
*umma.* He [even] enslaved the free persons of the *ahl al-bayt.* From
Allah do we come, and to Him we shall return.

If Allah had not cut short his life, that wretched, evil person would
have destroyed Islam and Muslims. What we are concerned with in our
discussion is to unveil his beliefs, just as we unveiled the belief of
his father and grandfather.

Historians have narrated that after the terrible event of al-Harra and
the killing of 10,000 of the best Muslims (except women or children) and
raping of 1,000 virgins, about 1,000 women became pregnant in those days
without being married.

Then the remaining people paid allegiance and agreed that they were to
be slaves to Yazid. Whoever refused was killed. When Yazid was informed
of all these crimes and vile deeds, which the cowards had perpetrated
and which history has never witnessed the like of (even by the Mongols
or Tartars or the Isra'ilis), Yazid was happy by that and insulted the
Prophet of Islam.

He exemplified the speech of Ibn al-Zubara who composed a poem after the
battle of Uhud saying:  
 "If only my ancestors [who died at] Badr, had seen the wailing of the
Khazraj from the attacks of spears and of the sword, they would have
shouted and cried with joy and would have said: 'O Yazid, your hands
should not be paralyzed.’

We killed the master of their leaders, and we extracted revenge of Badr.

I would not be from the progeny of Khandaf if I did not take revenge
from the progeny of Ahmad for what he has done.

The Hashimites played with the Kingdom, no news came nor any revelation
revealed.”

The grandfather, Abu Sufyan, the first enemy of God and His Prophet,
says loudly "Seize it, O Banu Umayya, seize it again, by that which Abu
Sufyan swears, there is neither heaven nor hell.”

And the father, Mu'awiya, the second enemy of Allah and His Prophet,
said clearly (when he heard the caller to prayer bearing witness that
Muhammad is the Prophet of God) "What actions and what remembrance will
remain with this, O motherless one?"

The son Yazid, the third enemy of God and His Prophet, says loudly: "The
Hashimites played with the Kingdom, no news came, nor any revelation
revealed.”

We have known their beliefs about God and His Prophet and about Islam,
and we know of their disgraceful acts, through which they wanted to
destroy the pillars of Islam. [We have known of] their vileness towards
the Prophet of Islam, of which we have mentioned a few details for the
sake of brevity. If we wanted to expand on this, we could have filled a
huge volume on the actions of Mu'awiya alone which would have remained a
shame and disgrace forever, although some evil scholars have tried to
conceal and hide [these].

The Banu Umayya would give them perks and gifts which would make their
eyes blind. They sold their hereafter for this world and they confused
truth with falsehood whilst fully knowing this. Most of the Muslims
remained victims of these lies and falsehoods. If only they knew the
true victims, they would remember Abu Sufyan, Mu'awiya and Yazid with
nothing but curses and disapproval.  
 In this short discussion, what is important for us is to discern the
degree of influence these people, their partisans and followers, who
ruled the Muslims for 100 years, had. That influence is still at the
first stages.

There is no doubt that the influence of these hypocrites on the Muslims
was immense. They changed their beliefs, lives, etiquettes and dealings
and even their [forms of] worship. Otherwise, how can we explain the
desisting of the community from aiding the truth and the abandoning of
the friends of God and the siding with the enemies of God and His
Prophet?

How can we comprehend [the fact that] Mu'awiya, the freed man, son of a
freed man and accursed son of the accursed one, ascending the Caliphate,
[a position] which represented the status and the Caliphate of the
Prophet of Allah, (S.A.W.)? Keeping in view what the historians want us
to believe, that the people would tell 'Umar b. al-Khattab: "If we see
any deviation in you, we will straighten you with our swords", yet we
see them narrating from Mu'awiya when he ascended the throne of the
Caliphate by force and power.

The first sermon which he delivered to all the companions was: "I did
not fight you so that you should pray and fast but so as to rule over
you, I am now your commander". Yet no one moved a finger or opposed him,
on the contrary, they accompanied him and they named the year which
Mu'awiya came to power "the year of unity" whereas, in reality, it was
"the year of dissension".

Then we see them, after that, accepting his son Yazid, the corrupt one,
to rule over them, one who was well known by all of them. They did not
revolt nor move, except some upright ones whom Yazid killed at the
battle of al-Harra. Among those who survived, he extracted a pledge that
they were to be his slaves. How can we interpret all that?

We find after, that in the name of leading the believers, the corrupt
ones amongst the Banu Umayyads like Marwan b. al-Hakam and al-Walid b.
'Uqba and others attained the Caliphate .

The matter of leading the believers reached a level whereby they seized
the city of the Prophet, performed evil deeds in it, defiled its
sanctity and even burnt the house of God, the sanctuary, and killed
prominent companions in it. The matter of the leaders of the faithful
reached a stage whereby they spilled the blood of the Prophet of God
(S.A.W.) and that was due to their killing the delight of the Prophet of
God and his progeny. They deemed it permissible to enslave his children.
No one from the *umma* moved from the stationary position. The master of
the youths of paradise did not find a helper.

The matter of leading the believers reached a level whereby they tore up
the book of God whilst saying to it: "If you meet your Lord on the day
of resurrection, then say: 'O my Lord, al-Walid tore me apart.’” This
was what al-Walid, the Umayyad leader, did.

The matter of leading the believers reached a level whereby they cursed
'Ali b. Abi Talib from the pulpits and instructed the people in all
regions to curse him. By that, they meant to curse the Prophet of God.
Nobody moved from his stationary position. Whoever refused to comply was
either killed, crucified or maimed.

The matter of leading the believers reached a level whereby they openly
drank wine, fornicated, amused themselves with pleasure, songs, dances
and there is no limit to what one can relate.  
 If the matter of the Islamic *umma* had reached this level of decay of
morals, meekness and resignation, there must have been factors which had
influenced its beliefs. This is what will concern us in this discussion,
since it is connected with the question of the infallibility and
character of the noble Prophet (S.A.W.).

The first thing which deserves our attention here is that the three
Caliphs, Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman, prohibited the writing and even
the discussion of the traditions of the Prophet (P).  
 Abu Bakr gathered the people during his Caliphate and said to them:
"You relate traditions from the Prophet of God and differ about it. The
people after you will differ even more, [therefore] do not relate
anything from the Prophet. If anyone asks you, say: 'Between us there is
the book, so consider as lawful what is lawful in it, and prohibit what
is forbidden in it'".

Similarly, 'Umar was another one who forbade the people from narrating
traditions from the Prophet. Qarza b. K'ab said: "When 'Umar b.
al-Khattab sent us to Iraq, he walked with us and said: 'Do you know why
I followed you?' They said: 'To honor us.’ He said: 'Besides that, you
are going to the villagers. The Qur'an reverberates in them like the
reverberation of a bee. Do not occupy them with traditions. Make them
busy and recite the Qur'an, and reduce the narrations from the Prophet
and I am an associate to you [in this].'"

This narrator says: "I never narrated a tradition after 'Umar's
admonition.” When he arrived in Iraq, the people hastened to him asking
him about the *hadith.* Qarza said to them: "'Umar prohibited me from
that.”

Similarly, 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf said that 'Umar b. al-Khattab gathered
the companions from remote regions to forbid them from narrating
traditions of the Prophet to the people. He said to them: "Stand by me,
do not go away from me as long as I live.” They did not leave him until
he died.

Similarly, al-Khatib al-Baghdadi says, and [so does] al-Dhahabi in
*Tadhkira al-Huffaz*, that 'Umar b. al-Khattab imprisoned three
companions in Medina. These were Abu Darda, Ibn Mas'ud and Abu Mas'ud
al-Ansari due to their excessive narration of traditions. Furthermore,
'Umar commanded the companions to bring the books of traditions at their
disposal to him. They thought he wanted to organize them in a way so
that there would be no differences between them. They brought their
books; he burnt them all in the fire.

Then 'Uthman came after him. He continued the trend and notified all the
people that: "It is not permitted for anyone to narrate a tradition
which was not heard during the times of Abu Bakr and 'Umar."

After them came the time of Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan, and when he attained
the position of the Caliphate, he ascended the *minbar* and said: "O
people, it is forbidden to speak about *hadith* from the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.), except those *hadith* which were mentioned during the
Caliphate of 'Umar.”

Certainly, there had to be a secret motive behind the proscription of
traditions that were uttered by the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), *hadiths*
which did not agree with things that were happening at that time.
Otherwise, why were the *hadiths* of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
forbidden for the entire length of this period, and were not permitted
to be written except during the Caliphate of 'Umar b. 'Abd al-'Aziz (R)?

We can therefore deduce, based on the events mentioned, especially
bearing in mind the clear texts regarding the Caliphate which the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) had declared in the presence of the main
witnesses, that Abu Bakr and 'Umar prohibited the narration and
transmission of *hadith* from the Prophet, fearing that those *hadiths*
would spread to all regions, and even to the neighboring villages.

It would then become clear to the people that his Caliphate and the
Caliphate of his companion was not [valid] according to the *shari'a*.
Rather, it had been usurped from the divinely ordained Caliph, 'Ali b.
Abi Talib. We have discussed this topic and uncovered the truth in our
book, "So that I may be with the Truthful ones.” Whoever wishes further
confirmation [of this] can refer to it.

The surprising thing regarding 'Umar b. al-Khattab is his contradictory
stance especially in things related to the Caliphate. While we find him
to be the one who had urged the allegiance to Abu Bakr and [even]
coerced the people to it - at the same time he declares that it was a
sudden decision and that Allah had protected [the people] from its
disasters. At another time, we find him choosing six people for the
Caliphate saying: "If the bald one gets it (meaning 'Ali b. Abi Talib),
he will impose severity upon them.”

Since he confessed that 'Ali was the only person who could make the
people steadfast, then why did he not appoint him and end the matter,
thereby giving good advice to the *umma* of Muhammad? But we see him
instead, after this, contradicting himself and preferring the opinion of
'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf, then contradicting himself yet again saying:
"Were Salim, the slave of Abu Hudhayfa, alive, I would have appointed
him over you.”

More surprising than that was the issue of Abu Hafs. He forbade him to
[transmit] *hadith* from the Prophet (S.A.W.), and confined the
companions in Medina, forbidding them from leaving it. He also forbade
the emissaries he sent to other regions to speak of the *sunna* of the
Prophet (S.A.W.), and he [also] burnt the books that were in the hands
of the companions. In these books were the *hadiths* of the Prophet
(S.A.W.).

Did 'Umar b al-Khattab not understand that the *sunna* of the Prophet
clarified the Qur'an? Or had he not read the words of Allah, the
Glorified and Exalted: ***"And we have revealed the remembrance unto you
so that you may explain to the people what has been sent down to them"
(16:44)***. Or did he understand from the Qur'an something which the
bearer of the message and the one to whom the Qur'an was revealed, did
not understand?

This is what some confused people have tried to do, claiming that the
Qur'an on several occasions came to verify the opinions of 'Umar and it
opposed the views of the Prophet (S.A.W.). Grave indeed are the words
that come out of their mouths, they do not understand.

I was always perplexed when I read in al-Bukhari of 'Umar's refusal to
accept 'Ammar b. Yasir's narration, especially regarding the Prophet's
teaching him how to do *tayammum*, just as I was surprised at 'Ammar's
words: "If you wish, I shall not speak of it," in fear of 'Umar. This
proves clearly that 'Umar b. al-Khattab was severe on any one who
narrated *hadiths* from the Prophet, and would harass him.

If the companions amongst the Quraysh were afraid of the Caliph and
would not leave Medina, and even those who did go out desisted from
transmitting the Prophetic traditions, and then had their books, in
which they had recorded *hadiths,* burnt, yet no one amongst them said
anything, then what was the position of 'Ammar b. Yasir, an absolute
stranger, despised by the Quraysh for his stand with 'Ali b. Abi Talib,
and his love for him?

Let us go back to what we have recently discussed, specifically to the
Thursday that preceded the death of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), a day
which was called by Ibn 'Abbas "The day of calamity". [That was] when
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) ordered those who were present to bring
paper and ink for him to write a letter so that they would never go
astray.

We find on that day that 'Umar b. al-Khattab was the one who opposed the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), and accused him of being delirious, i.e.,
hallucinating and said: "We seek refuge in Allah" and then said: "The
book of Allah is sufficient for us.” This event has been narrated by
al-Bukhari, Muslim, Ibn Maja, al-Nasa'i, Abu Dawud, Imam Ahmad, as well
as other historians.

If 'Umar could prevent the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) from writing his
own *hadiths*, and could do so in the presence of many companions and
the *ahl al-bayt*, accusing him of being delirious, with insolence the
like of which history has never witnessed, then it is neither strange
nor surprising, for him to gather his aides after the death of the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) so as to prevent the people, with all possible
effort, from transmitting *hadith* of the Prophet, since he was now the
strong Caliph, possessing all power.

Either due to greed, fear or hypocrisy, no doubt he had amongst his
associates many helpers from the noteworthy Qurayshis, who had influence
over the tribes and clans, and who had been companions of the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.). We have seen them, despite their large numbers,
supporting 'Umar in his statement that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was
hallucinating.

We find them also participating with him in preventing the Prophet from
writing the letter. I believe that this was the main reason for the
Prophet (S.A.W.) to refrain from writing [it]; for he knew, through the
revelation from his Lord, that the plot was a strong one, and could
threaten Islam in its entirety if the letter was written.

This was the letter through which the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) wanted
to protect his *umma* from going astray, but the plotters turned the
position around so that the letter became (if it was written), a reason
for misguidance and reverting from Islam.

How could the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) not change his stance - may my
father and mother be sacrificed for him - for he was ill and on his
death bed, receiving revelation from his Lord which resounded in his
ears and filled his heart with sadness and suffering for his ill-fated
*umma* which [did not heed to] Allah's words: ***"If he dies or is
killed, will you then turn back upon your heels?"***

This verse was not revealed spontaneously but rather because of Allah's,
Glory be to Him, knowledge of their vileness, schemes and plots, for He
is aware of the deception of the eyes and what is hidden in the hearts.
What consoled the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was that his Lord had
informed him of all this and comforted him. He [also] rewarded him with
the best that any Prophet could be given from his *umma* and did not
hold him responsible for the apostasy of the *umma* nor its turning back
upon its heels.

For Allah had revealed beforehand: ***"On that day the wrongdoer will
bite his hands and say: 'If only I had followed the path of the
Messenger! Woe unto me! I wish that I had not taken so and so as my
sincere friend! Certainly he led me away from the remembrance (of God)
after it had come to me. The Satan is a deceiver to man'. Whereupon the
Prophet will say: 'O my Lord! My people took this Qur'an as if it was
foolish nonsense'. And thus we have made for every Prophet an enemy
among the sinners! So sufficient for you is your Lord for guidance and
assistance" (25:27)***.

In this research, we cannot escape from the painful conclusion which we
are forced to reach - that Abu Sufyan and Mu'awiya would not have
prevailed over the bearer of the message were it not for the previous
position of 'Umar, and his bold conduct in the very presence of the
Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.). This is especially so if we investigate his
stance during the entire life of the Prophet (P) and his opposing him on
several occasions.

The inescapable conclusion is that there was an extensive plot devised
to degrade the eminence of the character of the noble Messenger of Allah
(S.A.W.), to denigrate him, and to present him to the people who did not
know him as an ordinary person or of an even lower [status] than that.
He could be swayed by sentiments; he could give in to his desires and
deviate from the truth.

All of this was done to deceive the people into thinking that he was not
sinless. The proof [presented] is that 'Umar confronted him several
times and that the Qur'an (allegedly) came down to support Ibn
al-Khattab, to the point where Allah threatens His Prophet (P) who weeps
and says: "Were Allah to send an affliction unto us, none would be safe
except Ibn al-Khattab.”

Or [we are also told] that 'Umar used to command the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) to veil his wives and the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) did not do
that until [verses of] the Qur'an were revealed in support of 'Umar,
ordering the Prophet (P) to veil his wives. Or that Satan was not scared
of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), but that he was scared and fled from
'Umar and several other [such] disgraceful narrations that lower the
status of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), and enhance the status of the
companions.

'Umar established records in this objective, to the point where they
narrated (May Allah debase them) that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) used
to doubt his prophecy. This can be seen in the narration they reported
[to the effect] that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: "When Gabriel
delayed coming to me, I thought that he was going to 'Umar b.
al-Khattab.”

I believe that these *hadiths* and other traditions of this genre were
fabricated in the time of Mu'awiya b. Abi Sufyan when the plan to remove
'Ali b. Abi Talib from his rights was beginning to falter. He then
resorted to praising Abu Bakr, 'Umar, and 'Uthman and to ascribe
excellences to them so that they might be elevated in the eyes of the
people over 'Ali, attaining by this, two goals:

The first goal was to degrade the status of the son of Abu Talib (Abu
Turab) - as he called him - to degrade him in front of the people and
[to lead the people into] considering the three Caliphs who preceded him
to be better than him. The second goal, for his fabrication of *hadith*,
was [to make] the people accept their neglecting the commands of the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) and his testament that the Caliphate be
[confined to] his *ahl al-bayt*, especially al-Hasan and al-Husayn, who
were the contemporaries of Mu'awiya.

If it was possible for the three previous [Caliphs] to violate the
orders of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) in the [matter of the] Caliphate
of 'Ali (A.S.), why was it not possible for Mu'awiya (the fourth) to
disregard the commands of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) regarding the
children of 'Ali?  
 The son of Hind most certainly succeeded in his plan. The proof is that
today, when we speak of the knowledge of 'Ali and his bravery, his
closeness [to the Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.)], and his eminence in Islam
over the rest of the Muslims, there is always someone to say to us: "The
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: 'If the faith of my *umma* were weighed
against the faith of Abu Bakr, the faith of Abu Bakr would prevail.'"

And there too is one who confronts us saying: "Umar *al-Faruq* is the
one who differentiates the truth from falsehood.” And someone confronts
us saying: "'Uthman is the possessor of the two lights, and is the one
of whom even the angels of the Merciful one were shy.”

Anyone who pursues these discussions will find that 'Umar b al-Khattab
has taken the lion's share in the chapter on virtue, something which is
not accidental, rather, [it is due to] the numerous contradictory
positions that he took towards the bearer of the message.  
 The Qurayshis loved him [for that], especially for the role that he
played in distancing the Commander of the Faithful, the leader of the
legatees, 'Ali b. Abi Talib, from the Caliphate, and reverting the
matter (of leadership) to the Qurayshis to rule in the manner they
wished, so that the ones who were freed on the day of the conquest of
Mecca, and the accursed ones from the Umayyads, could covet it.

All the Qurayshis, the chief of whom was Abu Bakr, knew that the credit
in their leadership over the Muslims went to 'Umar. For he was the hero
of opposition to the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), he was the one who
prevented the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) from writing [a testament of]
the Caliphate for 'Ali. And 'Umar was the one who threatened the people
and made them doubt the death of their Prophet so that they would not
proceed to pay allegiance to 'Ali.

'Umar is also the hero of Saqifa; he is the one who ensured the
allegiance to Abu Bakr. He is [also] the one who threatened those who
remained in the house of 'Ali, to burn it and all those in it, if they
did not pay allegiance to Abu Bakr. And 'Umar is the one who instigated
the people into giving their fealty to Abu Bakr, through force and
coercion. It was 'Umar who used to appoint the governors and allocate
positions during the Caliphate of Abu Bakr. Indeed, we would not be
exaggerating if we were to say that he was the actual ruler during the
Caliphate of Abu Bakr himself.

Some historians relate that, in accordance with the custom they had
[established] with the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), those whose hearts
were to be attracted [to Islam] approached Abu Bakr to claim their share
which Allah has ordained for them. Abu Bakr wrote it [for them] and they
went to 'Umar to collect [their rights], but he tore it up and said: "We
have no need of you, for Allah has strengthened Islam and can dispense
with you.

If you accept Islam it will be better for you, and, if not, then the
sword [shall be] between you and us.” They returned to Abu Bakr and said
to him: "Are you the Caliph or is he?" Abu Bakr replied: "Rather he, if
God wishes" and he abided by what 'Umar had done.

On another occasion, Abu Bakr wrote that two companions be given a piece
of land, and sent the document to 'Umar to be implemented. The latter
spat at it and destroyed it. They insulted him and returned to Abu Bakr
and complained to him: "We do not know, are you the Caliph or is 'Umar?"
He replied: "Rather he is!" 'Umar then came angrily to Abu Bakr and said
to him: "It is not your right to give the land to these two". Whereupon
Abu Bakr said: "I told you that you are stronger than me in this affair,
however, you overruled me.”

From this, we can discern the special status which 'Umar b. al-Khattab
enjoyed with the Qurayshis in general and the Umayyads in particular, to
the extent that they gave him such titles as "the genius," "the inspired
one," "the differentiator [between truth and falsehood]," "the absolute
[personification of] Justice," and even to the extent that they
preferred him above the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.).  
 We have seen 'Umar's belief regarding the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
from the day of the treaty of al-Hudaybiyya to the day of the calamity.
I can add to this that he prevented the companions from paying respect
to the relics of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.).

He cut down of tree of the pledge of Ridwan. He also sought closeness to
al-'Abbas, the uncle of the Prophet, to make the people believe that
[since] the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) had died, and his rule had
ended, there was no point in remembering him. Therefore, there can be no
blame on the Wahhabis who say the same things, for they are not new
issues as some [people] wrongly assume.  
 From this too, the door was opened to the enemies of Islam and the
Orientalists, to deduce that Muhammad was a genius who knew that his
community was composed of idolaters who had been brought up worshipping
idols. Therefore, he removed the idols and replaced for them instead a
black stone.

After all of this, we observe that 'Umar is the hero who rejected the
writing of the Prophetic *hadiths*, to the extent that he confined the
companions to Medina and prohibited the others from (narrating)
*hadith*, burning the *hadith* books, to ensure that the Prophetic
traditions did not spread among the people.

We also can deduce from all this why 'Ali remained a prisoner in his
home, not going out except when he was summoned to judge a problem that
the companions were unable to deal with. 'Umar did not involve him in
any office or governorship, nor [did he give him] any responsibility or
[send him with] any deputation. In fact, he was also forbidden from
Fatima's inheritance, and had nothing which the people could desire from
him. As a result, historians relate that he was compelled to pay
allegiance after the death of al-Zahra (P) when he saw the faces of the
people turning away from him.

Allah is with you, O Abu'l-Hasan! How could the people not hate you,
when you were the one who had killed their heroes, divided their groups
and destroyed their dreams. You did not leave for them in the field of
merits a single merit whatsoever, nor in the field of good deeds, a
single good deed for them.

Furthermore, you were the cousin of the chosen one, you were also the
nearest of them to him, and you were the husband of Fatima, the leader
of the women of the universe, and you were the father of the two
*sibtayn*, the two leaders of the youths of paradise, and you were the
first person to accept Islam and the foremost of them in knowledge.

Your uncle was Hamza, leader of the martyrs, and Ja'far al-Tayyar was
the son of your mother and father. Abu Talib, the master of the elevated
places and the protector of the Prophet (P), was your father. And the
rightly guided Imams are all from your loin. You were before the
foremost ones and most distant from those who came later.

You were the lion of Allah and His Messenger (P) and you were the sword
of Allah and His Messenger, and you were the trusted one of Allah and
His Prophet, when you were sent by him (S.A.W.) to dissociate [from the
unbelievers], when none could be trusted but you. And you were the most
truthful one, after you none can say that of anybody else without lying.
You were the great differentiator who accompanied the truth and through
whom it was distinguished from falsehood. You were the manifest
knowledge and towering light.

The faith of a believer is known through the love for you, the hypocrisy
of a hypocrite is known by the hatred for you. You were the gate to the
city of knowledge, for whoever came to you arrived [at that city].
Whoever claims to have entered [it] and arrived through other means has
indeed lied.

Who amongst them has a share like yours O Abu'l-Hasan? And who amongst
them has excellences like yours? If there is a proof for honour, then
you are it. You are its beginning and end. They envied you due to
Allah's bestowal of His grace on you. They distanced [themselves] from
you when Allah had chosen you to be close to Him. Surely the oppressors
will know their fate.

Indeed the pen has written abundantly the conversations of the Commander
of the Faithful, the one who was oppressed in his life and death. In his
brother, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), there was, for him, the best
example, for he too was oppressed in life and in death. He spent his
life struggling, advising, and seeking to protect the believers, loving
and being kind to them. They confronted him at the last moment with evil
words, accusing him of delirium, confronting him with disobedience and
insolence due to the appointment of Usama [as the leader].

They hastened towards the Saqifa for the sake of the Caliphate, leaving
[behind] a forlorn corpse. They were not even concerned about the
preparation, bathing or shrouding of his body, may my mother and father
be sacrificed for him. After his death, they sought to disparage him in
the eyes of people and to denigrate his status, to retract from him the
infallibility which the Qur'an, as well as reasoning testifies to.

This was [done] for the sake of [attaining] temporary ruler ship and a
transitory world. We can discern, during the course of our
investigation, the position [adopted by] some of the companions towards
the character of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) for the sake of attaining
the Caliphate.

The Umayyad rulers, the chief of whom was Mu'awiya b. Abi Sufyan,
attained the Caliphate by inheriting it. They contented themselves in it
and it did not occur to any one of them that one day it would desert
them. Why did the Umayyads continue to denigrate the personality of the
Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.), and to concoct narrations that were
designed to reduce his status?

I feel that there were two main reasons for this:

The first reason: Behind the denigration of the character of the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) lay their grudges against the Banu Hashim, for they
had attained the honor and respect of all the Arab tribes since the
Prophet was from them. This becomes more clear when we realize that
Umayya used to vie with his brother Hashim and envied him, trying his
utmost to destroy him.

Moreover, 'Ali was the leader of the Hashimites after the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.), without any doubt. Everyone knew of Mu'awiya's hatred
for 'Ali and the wars that he waged against him to wrest the Caliphate
away from him. After his murder, he indulged in insulting and cursing
him from the pulpits. As far as Mu'awiya was concerned, the denigration
of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) lay in destroying the personality of
'Ali, just as the cursing and insulting of 'Ali was, in fact, directed
at the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.).

The second reason: In the denigration of the character of the Messenger
of Allah (S.A.W.) lay a justification for the vile, evil and heinous
acts which the Umayyad rulers perpetrated, [acts which] history has
recorded. If the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), as the Umayyads portray him,
could follow his lusts and love his wives to the extent that he forgot
his obligations, and he inclined to one of them so much so that he could
not treat them equally, and they had to send to him [people] requesting
equal treatment, then there can be no reproach directed towards ordinary
people such as Mu'awiya, Yazid and those like them.

And the danger hidden in the second reason is that the Umayyads
fabricated narrations and *hadiths*, attributing them to the Messenger
of Allah (S.A.W.). These [concoctions] became rules which were acted
upon in Islam, the Muslims accepted them as [they were] certain that
these were the words and actions of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.).
Therefore, these became, for them, the Prophetic *sunna*.

I will cite some examples of these disgraceful *hadith* which were
falsified to degrade the character of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), and
to lower his status. I do not wish to go into details on this subject,
and will therefore restrict myself to what al-Bukhari and Muslim have
related in their two *Sahihs* (disgraceful *hadiths* to degrade the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)).

1. Al-Bukhari narrated in "The Book of (ritual) Washing," in "The
Chapter on one who has Intercourse and repeats it," "From Anas that the
Prophet (P) used to visit his wives in a single hour during the night
and day and they were altogether eleven of them.” He said: "I said to
Anas: 'Did he have the strength for this?'

He replied: 'We used to say that he was given the strength of
thirty...'" Observe with me, O reader, this filthy *hadith* which
portrays for us an image of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) with this
insatiable desire for sex, that he has intercourse with eleven women in
one hour, and does so either at night or day with such speed that,
without taking a bath after the first one, he approaches the second
while he still had the secretions of the first [wife] on him.

You have no recourse, O reader, but to form a picture and think: "How
can a man throw himself upon his wife like an animal, without any
foreplay or greetings?" For we have observed that even among animals,
they are engrossed in a sexual act for a long time, since it requires
prelude and foreplay. How can this great Prophet conduct himself in this
manner?

May Allah fight and curse them for their fabrications. The Arabs of that
time - and men until today - took pride in their sex drives, reckoning
that as a sign of manliness. They attributed this anecdote to the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.). Allah forbid, for the Prophet himself used to
say: "Do not approach your women like animals, but instead do something
that attracts you and them.”

From such narrations, the enemies of Islam attack the Prophet (P)
describing him as a man of animalistic desires, and accusing him of
other things. Can we ask Anas b. Malik, the narrator of this anecdote,
as to who informed him? Who told him that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
used to have sex with all his wives in one hour, and that they were
altogether eleven in number?

Was it the Prophet who told him this? Is it proper for anyone of us to
speak to others about his sexual acts with his wife? Or did the wives of
the Prophet inform him of that? Does it behoove a Muslim woman to speak
to other men of her sexual acts with her husband? Or did Anas spy upon
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), and accompany him in the private chambers
with his wife, spying upon him from the holes of doors? I seek refuge in
Allah from the agents of the devil! May Allah's curse be upon the liars!

I do not doubt that the Umayyad and 'Abbasid rulers, notorious for their
many wives and slave girls, are the ones who fabricated such stories to
justify their deeds.

2. Al-Bukhari reported in volume 3, p. 132 in his *Sahih*, as well as
Muslim in volume 7, p. 136 of his *Sahih* that 'A'isha said: "The wives
of the Prophet (P) sent Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) to the Prophet.

She sought permission to enter while he was reclining with me in a
single garment. He allowed her in and she said: 'O Prophet of Allah!
Your wives have sent me to you to ask that you show fairness regarding
the daughter of Abu Quhafa'. I remained quiet. He said to Fatima: 'My
dear child do you not love what I love'? She said: 'Most certainly.' He
said: 'Then love her.....'"

The narration continues to the point where the wives of the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) sent a second message, this time with Zaynab bint Jahsh,
wife of the Prophet (P), pleading him to exercise justice regarding the
daughter of Abu Quhafa. She went to see him while he was reclining with
'A'isha, covered in her garment, in the same position that he was in
when Fatima visited him.

She pleaded with the Prophet to observe justice regarding the daughter
of Abu Quhafa, speaking on behalf of the other wives of the Prophet, and
then resorted to insultin*g* and reviling 'A'isha, who, in turn,
retorted and insulted Zaynab until she silenced her. Upon this, the
Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) smiled and said: "She is the daughter of Abu
Bakr.”

What can I say about this loathsome narration which shows the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) to be a man who follows his lusts and does not show
justice to his wives, although it is through his tongue that the Qur'an
ordered: ***“And if you fear that you cannot show fairness, then (marry)
one or (resort to) what your right hand possesses.”***

Furthermore, how can the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) permit his daughter
Fatima, the leader of women, to enter when he was reclining with his
wife wearing her garment and not to sit up or stand, but rather, remain
reclining and say to her: "O my child! Do you not love what I love?"

Similarly, when Zaynab came, imploring him to be fair, he smiled and
said: "She is the daughter of Abu Bakr.” Observe, O noble reader, this
despicable [conduct] which they attribute to the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.), [who is] the symbol of justice and equality, whereas they say
that justice died with 'Umar b. al-Khattab. They portray the Messenger
of Allah (S.A.W.) to be attaching little importance to upright
character, not knowing chastity or ideals of manliness. There are many
such traditions in the six *Sihah* [works].

The narrators intend to present, behind this, the superior merits of a
companion or of 'A'isha, especially as she is the daughter of Abu Bakr.
In doing so, they denigrate the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) knowingly or
unknowingly, since, as I have shown before in this discussion, these
traditions are fabricated to devalue the character of the Prophet. Let
us look at a third example [which is] similar to this one:

3. Muslim reported in his *Sahih* in "The Chapter on the Merits of
'Uthman b. 'Affan," on the authority of 'A'isha, the wife of the Prophet
(P), and also from 'Uthman, that they both said that Abu Bakr sought
permission to visit the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) while he was lying on
his bed wearing the garment of 'A'isha. He let him in while he was still
in that condition. He fulfilled his needs then Abu Bakr went out.

'Umar then sought permission to enter while the Prophet was still in
that state. He also fulfilled his needs and left. 'Uthman said: "Then I
requested permission to enter, whereupon he sat up and said to 'A'isha:
'Gather your clothes around you.' I finished my work with him and left.

'A'isha said: 'O Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), how come I did not see you
scared with Abu Bakr and 'Umar, as you were with 'Uthman?' The Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) said: 'Indeed 'Uthman is a very shy man, and I was
afraid that if I had granted him permission to enter while I was in that
state, he would not have presented his need to me.'"

This narration is similar to another, which al-Bukhari and Muslim
narrated, regarding the merits of 'Uthman. The gist [of the report] is
that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) had left his thighs uncovered, had
permitted Abu Bakr to enter without covering his thighs. He did the same
thing with 'Umar. When 'Uthman sought permission to enter, however, the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) covered his thighs and put his clothes on
properly. When 'A'isha asked him about that, he said to her: "Should I
not be shy of someone of whom [even] the angels are shy?"

May Allah debase the Banu Umayyad, who seek to debase the Messenger of
Allah (S.A.W.) so as to elevate [the status of] their master.

4. Muslim reported in his *Sahih* in "The Chapter on the Injunction to
take a Ritual Bath after the Meeting of the Private Parts of the
Spouses," on the authority of 'A'isha, the wife of the Prophet (P), that
while she was sitting [in his presence]: "A man asked the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.), if the bath was obligatory upon both parties when a man
has intercourse with his wife, and then he feels lazy [to have a bath].
The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) replied: 'I certainly do it, I and her,
then we have a bath.’”

I leave you, O reader, to consider this *hadith* for yourself. It seems
now the Messenger's pampering for his wife 'A'isha has reached the level
where he can discuss about his sexual relations with her to all people.
How many such reports have been transmitted on the authority of 'A'isha,
the daughter of Abu Bakr, which demean and disparage the status of the
Prophet (P).

One time she reports he put his cheek upon her cheek so that she could
enjoy the black dancers, and, at another time, carrying her upon his
shoulder. At another time, he raced with her and she won against him.
The Prophet of Allah (P) then waits, until she gains weight, and races
her (and wins) saying: "This is the equalizer.”

Yet, at another time, he is lying upon his back, with the women beating
drums and musical instruments of the devil in his own house, until Abu
Bakr rebukes them.

How often, in the *Sahih* works, do such disgraceful traditions occur,
traditions whose only aim is to denigrate the Prophet of Islam (S.A.W.),
such as the *hadiths* which state that the Messenger was subjected under
a magic spell so he did not know what he did or said. He [even] thought
that he had sexual relations with his spouses when, in fact, he had not.
And [other] narrations which state that he (P) used to wake up in the
mornings of Ramadan in a ritually impure state. (*janaba*), and that he
would sleep until he snored, then he would wake up and pray without
performing the ablutions (*wudu').*

[Others state] that he used to forget during his prayer, not remembering
how many *rak'as* (units of prayers) he had performed. And that the
Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) did not know his fate on the day of
resurrection and what would be done to him. [Others state] he used to
urinate while standing up, and when his companion went away from him, he
would call him back so that he could be near him until he finished
urinating.

Yes! The Prophet's (S.A.W.) pampering of his wife 'A'isha, the daughter
of Abu Bakr, reached a point whereby he detained himself and all the
Muslims to search for 'A'isha's necklace that had been lost. They had no
water with them and the people complained about 'A'isha to Abu Bakr
whereupon her father came and reproached and rebuked her. All this
happened while Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was asleep on his wife's lap!
Here is the narration in detail:

Al-Bukhari in his *Sahih* in "The Chapter on *Tayammum*" and Muslim in
his *Sahih*, also in "The Chapter on *Tayammum,*" both related on the
authority of 'A'isha, who said: "We went out with the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) on one of his journeys. We reached al-Bida or the military
encampment when my necklace broke. The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) started
searching for it, and the people went along with him. There was no water
to be found and they had none with them. The people came to Abu Bakr and
said: 'Do you not see what 'A'isha has done?

She has caused the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) to busy himself and the
people to undertake [this], when they have no water and there is none
available in this spot.' Abu Bakr then came whilst the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.), having rested his head upon my thigh, had fallen asleep. He
said: 'You have detained the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) and the people
have no water and cannot find any here.'" She said: "Abu Bakr continued
rebuking me for as long as Allah wished him to, then he started hitting
me with his hand on my hip.

Nothing prevented me from moving except that the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) was on my thigh. The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) slept till the
morning. There was still no water to be found so Allah revealed the
verses of *tayammum* and they performed it." Asyad b. al-Hudayr, one of
the leaders, said: "This is not the first blessing for you, O member of
the household of Abu Bakr!" 'A'isha said: "We made the camel, which I
was [riding] on, to get up and we found the necklace underneath it.”

Can any believer, who is aware of Islam, believe that the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) was lax about the matter of prayer to this extent and
that he would detain the Muslims, even though they were in an area where
there was no water and they had none with them, to search for his wife's
missing necklace?

Then he leaves the Muslims, who are worried about their prayer and
complain to Abu Bakr, and instead goes to his wife and falls asleep in
her lap, and is so engrossed in his sleep that he is totally unaware of
Abu Bakr's entry and his rebuking 'A'isha, and his striking her on her
hips? How is it allowable for this Messenger to leave the people who are
agitated due to the lack of water and the approaching prayer time, to
sleep on his wife's lap?

There is no doubt this narration was fabricated during the Caliphate of
Mu'awiya b. Abi Sufyan and is without foundation. Otherwise, how can we
explain [the fact that] an incident like this, at which all the
companions were present, was not known to 'Umar b. al-Khattab? He did
not know about it when he was asked concerning the *tayammum* as is
narrated by both al-Bukhari and Muslim in their *Sahihs* in the chapters
on *tayammum*.

The important point in all these discussions is that we realise the plot
against the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was evil and vile, with the goal
of belittling the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.), and of devaluing his
status to the extent where none of us today (in spite of the corruption
that has spread to the land and sea) would be personally pleased with
these types of conduct and deeds.

How can this be [allowed] then for the greatest personality that human
history has known, and he whom the Lord of Might and Glory has testified
is of the highest character?

In my view, the plots began after the farewell pilgrimage and after the
Prophet (P) had appointed Imam 'Ali as his successor on the day of
Ghadir Khum. Those who coveted the leadership knew then that in front of
them lay only opposition and rebellion due to this appointment, and that
these would be at a tremendous cost, even leading to their turning back
upon their heels in reversion.

Therefore, it seems proper to interpret the events that began with
opposing the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) in all his commands.

[This started with stopping him] from writing a letter; to his
appointment of Usama as [their] leader; to their not joining the army
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) himself had chosen. And so too [is it
proper to interpret] the events that followed his death (P) - from
forcing the people into pledging fealty by coercion and threatening to
burn the dissenters, among whom were 'Ali, Fatima and al-Hasanayn.
Similarly, [it seems proper to interpret] forbidding the people from
relating the *hadith* of the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.), and the
burning of books which contained the *sunna* of the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.), to their detaining the companions so that they may not spread
the *hadith* of the Prophet (P).

[It seems proper to interpret] also the killing of companions who
refused to pay the *zakat* to Abu Bakr, for he was not the Caliph to
whom they had, at the order of their Prophet, pledged fealty. [It seems
proper to interpret] their denying the rights of Fatima al-Zahra to
Fadak, her inheritance, and her portion of the *khumus* and to refute
her claims.

Similarly, the alienation of Imam 'Ali (A.S.) from any position of
responsibility, instead granting these [positions] to the corrupt ones
and hypocrites from the Banu Umayyad over the Muslims; and forbidding
the companions from paying respect to the relics of the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.), and to attempting to remove his name from the *adhan* and to
expose the army of disbelievers to al-Medina al-Munawwara to do therein
as they pleased.

[This varied] from attacking the sacred house, *bayt al-haram* with fire
and razing it, to killing the companions that were within. [It seemed
proper] to murder the progeny of the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.), to
curse and vilify them, and to force the people to do that; to kill and
exile those who loved the *ahl al-bayt* and followed them - to the point
where the religion of Allah became a [source of] amusement and subject
to ridicule; the Qur'an [became] something to be shredded and scoffed
at.

The plot still persists today, its influences and impact are still
prevalent in the Islamic *umma.* [It will continue] as long as there are
those Muslims who are pleased with Mu'awiya and Yazid, justifying their
deeds on the basis that they exercised their personal judgements, and
that for them lies a reward from Allah.

As long as there are those who write books and articles against the
Shi'as of the *ahl al-bayt*, hurling all sorts of insults and slander;
as long as there are those who allow the murder of the Shi'as of the
*ahl al-bayt* within the confines of the *bayt al-haram* and the season
of the *Hajj* - the plot will continue and will remain continuous until
such time as Allah wishes.

I am not able to neither discern the whole [plan] nor comprehend its
details and facets, but I will attempt, with my humble efforts, to do my
best to distance the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) from the disgraceful
narrations that have been attributed to him, and to defend him and his
infallibility.

I will attempt to convince the educated and free thinking Muslims that
this Prophet whom Allah sent for the guidance of all humankind and made
him a moon and shining light, is the highest, greatest, most noble, most
pure, pious and complete man that Allah has created. It is impossible
for us to remain quiet in the face of such narrations. The reporters
have no other intention but to denigrate his nobility and devalue his
status.

We are not, and never will be, happy with these narrations, even if all
the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* agree upon them, and relate them in their
*Sahihs* and *Musnads*. Even if all the mortals on earth were to agree
with them, Allah's words: ***"And you are indeed of the most exalted
character"*** is the final word and decisive judgment. Apart from that,
everything else is falsehood and wrong presumption.

This is the position of the Shi'a regarding the leader of human beings,
the one who frees them from blindness and misguidance, the one who leads
humanity to security and peace. So ponder over it, O you who perceive.

What the ahl al-dhikr believe about the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W)
----------------------------------------------------------------

Imam 'Ali says: "So that the grace of Allah, Glory be to Him, reach
Muhammad (S.A.W.), Allah brought him out of the best of sources and the
most honorable places from which things grow, from the same lineal tree
from which He brought forth His Prophets and selected their trustees.
Muhammad's progeny is the best progeny, his family the best family and
his lineal tree is the best of trees.

It grew in sanctity, surpassing all in honor. Its branches are tall and
its fruits cannot be reached.  
 He is the leader of all those who fear Allah, and insight for those who
seek guidance. He is a lamp whose flame is burning, a meteor whose light
is shining and a flint whose spark is bright. His conduct is upright;
his behavior guidance; his speech is the criterion [between right and
wrong] and his decision just.

Allah sent him, after an interval from the previous Prophets, when
people had fallen into errors of action and ignorance....then the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) exerted his utmost in giving sound advice,
staying on the right path, calling them towards wisdom and good
counsel..., his is the best abode and his origin the noblest of all,
coming from the source of honor and the cradles of security.

The hearts of the virtuous people incline towards him, and the eyes have
focused on him.

Through him, Allah buried all rancor and extinguished conflicts. Through
him, He brought people together in brotherhood and separated friends.
Through him, He elevated the lowly, and humiliated the arrogant and
mighty. His speech is clear and even his silence is (indicative) like
the tongue. He sent him with sufficient proof and satisfying
admonitions. His call eliminates deficiencies, through him; the unknown
laws were made manifest, the innovative practices subdued, and the
distinctive judgments made clear.

He sent him with light and gave him precedence in purity. He mended all
fissures. Through him, those conquering were [themselves] conquered,
difficulties were subjugated and hardships alleviated until he wiped out
misguidance all around him.”


