Chapter 3: Concerning the ahl al-bayt (A.S)
===========================================

The Third Question: Who are the ahl al-bayt?
--------------------------------------------

Allah, the most Glorified and High says: ***"Allah wishes to remove all
impurity from you, O members of the household, and to purify you
completely"*** (33:33).

The *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* maintains that this verse was revealed
for the wives of the Prophet (S.A.W.). They derive their proof from the
context of the preceding and following verses. According to their
claims, Allah therefore removed impurity from the wives of the Prophet
and purified them completely.

Among them are those who add to the [list of the] wives of the Prophet,
'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. But the truth, according to what
has been transmitted, as well as according to reasoning, logic and
history, refutes this explanation. [This is] because the a*hl al-sunna*
narrate in their *Sahihs* that the verse was revealed regarding five
people namely: Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and that
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) identified them and his noble self as
being referred to by the noble verse when he gathered 'Ali, Fatima,
al-Hasan and al-Husayn with him under the cloak. He said: "O Allah!
These are my household, so cleanse them of all impurity and purify them
completely.”

This narration has been reported by a large majority of Sunni scholars.
I’ve listed [some of] them:

1. Muslim in his *Sahih*, in "The Chapter on the Merits of the Prophet's
household": Vol. 2, p. 368.  
 2. Al- Tirmidhi in his *Sahih*; Vol. 5, p. 30.  
 3. *Al-Musnad*, Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal; Vol. 1, p. 330.  
 4. *Al-Mustadrak,* al- Hakim; Vol. 3, p. 123.  
 5. *Al-Khas'ais*, Imam al-Nasa'i; p. 49  
 6. *Talkhis*, al-Dhahabi; Vol. 2, p. 150.  
 7. *Mu'jam, a*l-Tabrani; Vol. 1, p. 65.  
 8. *Shawahid al-Tanzil*, Hakim al-Haskani; Vol. 2, p. 11.  
 9. Al-Bukhari in his Greater History; Vol. 1, p. 69.  
 10. *Al-Isaba*, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani; Vol. 2, p. 502.  
 11. *Tadhkira al-Khawas*, Ibn al-Jawzi; p. 233.  
 12. *Tafsir* of al-Fakhr al-Razi; Vol. 2, p. 700.  
 13. *The Fountains of Love*, al-Qanduzi al-Hanafi; p. 107.  
 14. *Manaqib* of al-Khawarizmi, p. 23.  
 15. *Al-Sira* of al-Halabi, Vol. l3, p. 212.  
 16. *Al-Sira* of al-Dihlaniya; Vol. 3, p. 329.  
 17. *Asad al-Ghaba*, Ibn al-Athir; Vol. 2, p. 12.  
 18. *Tafsir* of al-Tabari; Vol. 22, p. 6.  
 19. *Al-Dur al-Manthur*, al-Suyuti; Vol. 5, p. 198.  
 20. *Ta'rikh* of Ibn Asakir; Vol. 1, p. 185.  
 21. *Tafsir al-Kashshaf* , al-Zamakhshari; Vol. 1, p. 193  
 22. *Ahkam al-Qur'an* , Ibn al-Arabi; Vol. 2, p. 166.  
 23. *Tafsir* al-Qurtubi, Vol. 14, p. 182.  
 24. *Al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa* of Ibn Hajar, p. 85.  
 25. *Al-Isti'ab*, Ibn Abd al-Barr; Vol. 3, p. 37.  
 26. *Al-'Aqd al-Farid*, Ibn 'Abd Rabbih; Vol. 4, p. 311  
 27. *Muntakhab Kanz al-'Ummal*; Vol. 5, p. 96.  
 28. *Masabih al-Sunna*, al-Baghawi, Vol. 2, p. 278.  
 29. *Asbab al-Nuzul*, al-Wahidi; p. 203.  
 30. *Tafsir* of Ibn Kathir; Vol. 3, p. 483.

Other Sunni scholars [who have reported the *hadith*] are numerous, we
have not mentioned them [all], being content with these as [the list]
was compiled in haste.

If all these scholars admit that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) had
clarified the purport of the verse, of what value are the words of the
other companions or the successors of the companions, or commentators
who wish to construe its meaning contrary to what Allah and His Prophet
desire, seeking instead, to please Mu'awiya and desiring [to attain]
what he has?

Similarly, the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) also identified them on other
occasions, specifying that they were the *ahl al-bayt*, not others*.*
This occurred when the verse of Allah, the Glorified and the Highest,
was revealed stating: ***"Say: 'Come and let us call our children and
your children, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, and
let us take pray, invoking Allah's curse on those who lie'"*** (3:61).

Thereupon, he called 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn and said:
"These are our children, ourselves, and our women: So now bring
yourselves, your children, and your women". According to Muslim's
narrative, he said: "O Allah, these are my household.”

The *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* scholars, whom I referred to in the
preceding sources, also agree unanimously that the verse was revealed
concerning the five [figures] mentioned above, may Allah's blessings be
upon them all.

Moreover, the wives of the Prophet all knew the intent of the noble
verse, and, consequently, not one of them claimed to be from the *ahl
al-bayt*. At the head of these [wives] were Umm Salama and 'A'isha.
Every one of them narrated that the verse was specifically for the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. Muslim,
al-Tirmidhi, al-Hakim, al-Tabari, al-Suyuti, al-Dhahabi, Ibn al-Athir
and others, have all reported their (the wives') acceptance of this.

I would add to this the fact that the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.)
removed any confusion and resolved this problem, for he knew that the
Muslims might read the Qur'an and construe the [term] *ahl al-bayt* in
the context of the preceding and following verses, which [actually]
warned the wives of the Prophet.

He immediately hastened to teach the *umma* the meaning of the removal
of all impurities and complete purification by continuing, for a period
of six months, (after the revelation of the verse) to pass by the door
of 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn before starting the prayer and
reciting: "Allah wishes to remove all abomination from you, *ahl
al-bayt* and to completely purify you, so come to the prayer, may Allah
have mercy on you.”

This immediate action performed by the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) has
been reported by:

Al-*Sahih,* al-Tirmidhi, vol. 5, p. 31  
*Al-Mustadrak,* al-Hakim, vol. 3, p. 158  
*Al-Talkhis*, al-Dhahabi  
*Al-Musnad*, Ahmad b. Hanbal, vol. 3, p. 259  
*Asad al-Ghaba*, Ibn al-Athir, vol. 5, p. 521  
*Shawahid al-Tanzil*, al-Haskani, vol. 2, p. 11  
*Al-Dur al-Manthur*, al-Suyuti, vol. 5, p. 199  
*Tafsir*, al-Tabari, vol. 22, p. 6  
*Ansab al-Ashraf*, al-Baladhuri, vol. 2, p. 104  
*Tafsir,* Ibn al-Kathir, vol. 3, p. 483  
*Majma' al-Zawa'id*, al-Haythami, vol. 9, p. 168

When we add to the above list the Imams of the *ahl al-bayt* and the
Shi'a scholars, who do not doubt that the noble verse was restricted to
Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, there can remain
absolutely no regard for those who disagree with them from the enemies
of the *ahl al-bayt*, as well followers of Mu'awiya and the Banu
Umayyads who wish to extinguish the light of Allah with their mouths.
Allah has perfected His light, even though the disbelievers hate that.

Those who interpret the verse differently to the explanation of the
Prophet have shown that, in the past, they were merely the flatterers of
the Umayyad and 'Abbasid rulers, and that today they, even though
disguised in the garb of jurists and scholars, are amongst those who
hate 'Ali.

Furthermore, reasoning shows that the verse (i.e. cleansing of
abomination) could not include the wives of the Prophet (S.A.W.).

1. Let us, by way of example, take the case of the mother of the
believers, 'A'isha, who alleged that she was the most beloved wife of
the Prophet (P) and the closest one to him, to the extent that the rest
of the wives envied her and sent [a delegation] to the Prophet (P)
imploring him to show justice regarding the daughter of Abu Quhafa, as
previously discussed.

The verse then seems discordant. None of her aides or those who loved
her, neither from the earlier generations nor the later ones, can dare
to claim that 'A'isha was under the cloak on the day the verse was
revealed. How great Muhammad (S.A.W.) was in his sayings and actions and
how truly sagacious he was when he gathered the members of his *ahl
al-bayt* with him under the cloak, and even when the mother of the
believers, Umm Salama, the wife of the Prophet (P), sought to enter with
them under the cloak and asked the Prophet of Allah's (S.A.W.)
permission, he prevented her and said: "You are on the right path."

2. The general and specific purport of the verse indicates
infallibility. For the removal of abomination covers all sins, [acts of]
disobedience, major and minor vices. This is especially so if we add the
purification from the Lord of Power and Glory. If Muslims purify
themselves with water and dust physically, a purification which does not
exceed the outer body, then Allah purified the *ahl al-bayt* with a
spiritual purity wherein the intellect, hearts, and their minds were
cleansed, leaving no room for the insinuations of neither the devil nor
any act of disobedience. Their hearts became absolutely clean, pure,
sincere, devoted solely to their creator and sustainer in every activity
and inactivity.

3. In all cases, every one of these purified souls was an example to all
humanity, in [the fields of] asceticism, piety, sincerity, knowledge,
forbearance, bravery, manliness, chastity, free from blemishes, shunning
the world, seeking nearness to Him, the Glorified and most High. History
has not recorded any wrongdoing or sin from any one of them during their
entire lives.

This being the case, let us return to the first example, the wife of the
Prophet (P), 'A'isha, who attained a lofty and elevated position and
[achieved] great popularity which none of the other wives of the Prophet
(P) has been accorded. Even if we were to combine all their merits, they
would not be able to reach a tenth of the standing of 'A'isha, the
daughter of Abu Bakr.

This is what the *ahl al-sunna,* and those who claim that half the
religion can be learnt from her alone, say regarding her.  
 If we devote ourselves to the truth without any prejudice or bias, is
it reasonable to think that she was purified from sins and disobedience?
Or that Allah, Glory be to Him, withdrew His protection from her, after
the death of her husband, the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.)? Let us
examine the reality together.

'A'isha during the life of the Prophet (S.A.W.)
-----------------------------------------------

If we examine her life with her husband, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.),
we will find lots of sins and [acts of] disobedience, for she used to
frequently conspire with Hafsa against the Apostle until they compelled
him to declare as unlawful for himself what Allah had permitted for him,
as reported by al-Bukhari and Muslim. They also argued with him, as has
been established in all the *Sahihs* and books of *tafsir*, and even
Allah has mentioned the two incidents in His glorious Qur'an.

Envy so controlled her heart and her mind that she conducted herself in
the presence of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) without respect or
manners. On one occasion, she said to the Prophet (P), when he mentioned
Khadija in her presence:

"How can Khadija be compared with me! She was a red cheeked old woman
and Allah has given you [someone] better than her.” The Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) became very angry at this until his hair stood. And, on another
occasion, one of the mothers of the believers sent to the Prophet a dish
(he was in her house) that he really loved. She destroyed the dish,
together with the food in it. On another occasion, she said to the
Prophet (P): "You are the one who claims to be Allah's Prophet.” Another
time, she became angry with him and said: "Be just!"

Her father, who was present, struck her so hard that blood flowed. Her
envy reached a point whereby she lied to Asma' bint al-Nu'man, when she
had come as a bride to the Prophet (S.A.W.). She said to her: "The
Prophet (S.A.W.) loves a woman, who, when he approaches her, says to
him: "I seek refuge in Allah from you.”

Her underlying aim was to have the Prophet (S.A.W.) divorce this
innocent, naive woman, and who the Prophet (S.A.W.) did divorce due to
these words. Her evil conduct in the presence of the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) reached a point that while he was praying, she would spread her
feet towards his direction of prostration. When he prostrated and
pinched them, she retracted them. When he stood up for the rest of the
prayer, she would spread her feet out again.

On one occasion, she plotted with Hafsa against the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.), causing him to isolate himself from his wives for a period of
one complete month, and to sleep on a rough straw mat. When the words of
Allah: ***"Take back those of them that you please, and leave aside
those whom you please."*** were revealed, she said to the Prophet
unabashedly: "I only see Allah as [one] who hurries to [satisfy] your
desires.” If 'A'isha got angry - which she did quite often - she would
avoid [uttering] the name of the Prophet (S.A.W.). She would not mention
the name of Muhammad, but would say: "By the Lord of Abraham.”

'A'isha often used to offend the Prophet (S.A.W.) and caused him
distress, but the Prophet (P) was compassionate and kind, his character
lofty, his patience deep, therefore he frequently said to her: "Your
Satan has confused you, O 'A'isha.” Quite often, he used to be sorry
because of Allah's threat to her and Hafsa, the daughter of 'Umar. On
many occasions the Qur'an came down regarding her! Allah said to her and
to Hafsa: "You two turn in repentance to Allah, your hearts are so
inclined,” i.e., she had departed and deviated from the truth.

His words: ***"If you support each other against him, Allah is his
protector, as well as Gabriel and the righteous believers, after this,
the angels too are his supporters"*** is a clear threat from the Lord of
Power to her and to Hafsa, who used to frequently help her and act
according to her commands. Allah also said to both of them: ***"Perhaps
if he divorces you, his Lord will give him wives who are better than
you, who submit and believe."***

This verse was revealed concerning 'A'isha and Hafsa as testified by
'Umar b. al-Khattab and reported by al-Bukhari. The verse, in itself,
indicates that there were believing women among the Muslims who were
better than 'A'isha.

Once, when the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) wanted to propose to Sharraf,
the sister of Dihya al-Kalbi, he asked 'A'isha to go and look at her.
When she returned, her heart was filled with envy, and the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) asked her: "What have you seen O 'A'isha?" She responded:
"I did not see anyone worthy.” The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said to
her: "You have certainly seen someone worthy. You have seen her and your
saliva soured in your mouth.” She said: "O Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), no
secret is unknown to you. Who is able to hide anything from you?"

All of the plots which 'A'isha instigated against the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) were most frequently with the complicity of Hafsa, the daughter
of 'Umar. The strange thing is that we find there was mutual
understanding and complete harmony between the two women, 'A'isha and
Hafsa, like the harmony and mutual understanding between their two
fathers, Abu Bakr and 'Umar. The difference was that, with the women,
'A'isha was always the instigator and stronger one and would undertake
things and would tug Hafsa, the daughter of 'Umar, behind her in
everything.

Whereas her father, Abu Bakr, was weaker than 'Umar, the instigator and
stronger party and would undertake things. We have observed from the
previous discussion that even in [the matter of] the Caliphate, Ibn
al-Khattab was the actual ruler. Some historians have reported that when
'A'isha decided to leave for Basra to rise against Imam 'Ali in what has
become known as the "battle of the Camel", she sent a message to the
wives of the Prophet (S.A.W.), the mothers of the believers, asking them
to go with her.

None of them responded except Hafsa bint 'Umar, who prepared herself and
decided to leave with her. Her brother, 'Abd Allah b. 'Umar, however,
stopped and rebuked her, and she cancelled her trip. Allah, the most
Glorious had warned 'A'isha and Hafsa jointly in His words: ***“If you
two support each other against him, Allah is his protector, as well as
Gabriel and the righteous believers, and after that the angels too are
his supporters.”***

Allah also said: ***“You two turn in repentance to Allah, if your hearts
are indeed so inclined.”*** Allah provided for both of them a
significant parable in *Sura al-Tahrim* (66), to teach both of them and
the rest of the Muslims who believe that the mother of the believers
will enter heaven without any reckoning or punishment, simply because
she is the wife of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.). Most Certainly not!

For Allah has informed His servants, male and female, that mere spousal
relationship will neither harm nor benefit [a person], even if the
husband is the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.). What benefits or harms [a
person], in the eyes of Allah, are an individual's deeds. Allah said:
***"Allah has set forth an example to the disbelievers, the wife of Noah
and the wife of Lot. They were both married to two servants from among
our righteous servants. They were deceitful to their husbands. And they
profited nothing before Allah due to that. Instead they were told:
'Enter the Fire with those who enter'"*** (66:10).

***Allah cited an example for the believers, the wife of Pharaoh when
she said: "O my Lord, build for me a house in paradise, and save me from
Pharaoh and his deeds; and save me from the people who do wrong".***
***And Mary, the daughter of Imran who guarded her chastity and We
breathed Our spirit into her. She testified to the truth of the words of
her Lord and of His scriptures and she was one of the devout
[servants]"*** (66:11-12).

By this it becomes clear to all that spousal relationship and
companionship, even though they both have a lot of merits, do not, in
themselves, prevent the punishment of Allah unless they are accompanied
by righteous deeds. If they are not, punishment is, in fact, increased.
Allah's justice dictates that he does not punish the distant one who
does not hear the revelation like [he punishes] the close one in whose
house the Qur'an was revealed. A man who knows the truth and yet opposes
it is like an ignorant person who does not know the truth.

Now, O reader, we will cite a few narrations in some detail so that you
may know the personality of this woman who played the greatest role in
distancing 'Ali from the Caliphate, and summoned all strength and
resources to rise up in arms against him.

It should be further known that the verse of the removal of filth and
purification is as remote from her as the sky is from the earth, and
that most of the *ahl al-sunna* are the victims of lies and forgery for
they follow the Umayyads without realizing it.

'A'isha, Mother of the Believers, testifies against herself
-----------------------------------------------------------

Let us listen to 'A'isha speak about herself and how, due to jealousy,
she lost her sense of probity and conducted herself in the presence of
the Prophet (S.A.W.) without manners. She said: "Safiyya, the wife of
the Prophet (S.A.W.), sent a dish she had made for him when he was with
me. When I saw the maidservant, I trembled with rage and fury, and I
took the bowl and hurled it away.”

She further said: "The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) then looked at me; I
saw the anger in his face and I said: 'I seek refuge from Allah's
Apostle cursing me today.'" 'A'isha said: "He said: 'Undo it'. I said:
'What is its expiation, O Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)?' He said: 'The food
like her food, and a bowl like her bowl.'"

And on another occasion, speaking of herself, she said: "I said to the
Prophet (S.A.W.) 'Enough for you about Safiyya is such and such.' The
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said to me: 'You have uttered words which, if
they were mixed with the waters of the sea, would color it.'"

Glory be to Allah! How far was the mother of the believers from the
ethics and basic rights which Islam has enjoined concerning forbidding
of backbiting and slander? No doubt her speech: "Enough for you about
Safiyya is such and such" and the response of the Prophet of Allah:
(S.A.W.) "You have uttered words which, if they were mixed with the
waters of the sea, would color it" shows what 'A'isha said regarding
Safiyya was a grave thing and of immense concern.

I believe that the narrators of the *hadith* found it repulsive, but
respected her, and therefore changed the words to "so and so" as is
their normal practice in such issues.

And here is 'A'isha, the mother of the believers, narrating, once again,
of her envy of the [other] mothers of the believers. She said: "I have
never been as jealous of any woman as I have been of Marya. That was
because she had beautiful ringlets and the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was
captivated by her.

When he first brought her, she used to stay in the house of Haritha b.
al-Nu'man. We frightened her and I became concerned. The Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) sent her to a higher place and he would visit her there.
That was very hard upon us, and then Allah blessed him with a boy
through her and we shunned him.”

'A'isha's jealousy went beyond the person of Marya, her co-wife and was
directed even against Ibrahim, the innocent, newly born suckling baby.
She said: "When Ibrahim was born, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) brought
him to me and said: 'Look how much he resembles me'. I said: 'I do not
see any resemblance.’ The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: 'Don't you see
how robust and fair he is?'" 'A'isha said: "I said: 'Whoever is fed with
the milk of sheep becomes fair and robust.'"

When she was overcome by suspicion and devilish insinuation, her
jealousy crossed all boundaries and was beyond the expression of words,
leading her to suspect the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.). Quite often, she
used to pretend to be asleep when the Prophet stayed the night at her
house, but, in fact, she would closely observe her husband, spying upon
him in the darkness, following behind where he went. Here is a report,
in her own words, which was narrated by Muslim in his *Sahih,* and Imam
Ahmad in his *Musnad* and other [scholars].

She said: "When it was the night which the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
spent with me, he came in and put away his upper garment, took off his
shoes and put them near his feet, then spread out his lower garment over
the bed and lay down. He did not stay long until he assumed that I had
fallen asleep, whereupon he took his upper garment quietly and slowly,
put on his shoes, opened the door, went out and closed it behind him
quietly.

I put the upper garment over my head, covered myself, put on my shawl
and veil and I followed his tracks until he came to the Baqi cemetery.
He stood there for quite a long time, then raised his hands three times,
and then turned back. I also turned back. He quickened his pace and I
also quickened my pace. He moved faster and I also moved faster and he
reached home and I also arrived there. I preceded him and went into the
house.

No sooner had he entered the house he said: 'What is the matter O
'A'isha, I see that you are dressed up?'" She said: "I said: 'Nothing is
the matter.’ He said: 'Either you will tell me or the Gracious and
Omniscient Lord will inform me.'" 'A'isha said: "I said: 'O Messenger of
Allah (S.A.W.), my mother and my father be sacrificed for you, and I
informed him.’ He said: 'You were the black figure which I saw in front
of me?' I said: 'Yes'. So he pressed me on my chest and it hurt me. He
then said: 'Did you think that Allah and His Messenger will be unjust to
you?'"

On another occasion, she said: "I lost track of the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.), and I suspected that he had gone to another of his wives. I
went looking for him and I found him in prostration, saying: 'O My Lord!
Forgive me.'" On another occasion, she said: "One night, when he was
with me, the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) went out."

She said: "I became jealous. When he came and saw what I had done he
said: 'What is the matter, O 'A'isha? Are you jealous?' I replied: 'And
why should not those like me be jealous of those like you?' The Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) then said: 'Has your devil taken possession of you?'"

This last narration proves clearly that when she was jealous, she would
exceed her bounds and would do strange things like break dishes or tear
clothes. Due to that, she says in this report "When he came and saw what
I had done, he said: 'Has your devil taken possession of you?'"

No doubt 'A'isha was quite often overcome or confused by her devil, for
he found a way to her heart through jealousy. It has been narrated that
the Prophet (S.A.W.) said: "Jealousy for a man is faith and for a woman
disbelief", meaning that a man may get jealous concerning his wife, for
it is not, according to law, allowed for him to share her with anyone
else.

The woman, however, does not have the right to be jealous of her
husband, because Allah, Glory be to Him, has allowed him to marry more
than one wife. An upright and believing woman who submits to the rulings
of Allah, Glory be to Him, accepts her co-wife whole heartedly,
especially if her husband is just, upright and fears Allah. [That being
the case] how about the leader of humanity, the symbol of perfection,
justice and the most noble character?

Furthermore, we find a clear contradiction in the (alleged) special love
of the Prophet (S.A.W.) for 'A'isha, and what the *ahl al-sunna
wa'l-Jama'a* say about her being the most beloved and affectionate wife.
They [even] report that some of his wives gave up their turn [of
visitation] for her when they came to know that the Prophet (S.A.W.)
loved her and could not wait [for her turn].

This being the case, can we find any justification or explanation for
'A'isha's excessive jealousy? One would have assumed that the opposite
would have been the case, i.e., that the rest of the wives of the
Prophet (S.A.W.) would have been jealous of 'A'isha due to his intense
love for and inclination towards her, according to what they report and
claim. If she was pampered by the Prophet of Allah (P), what was the
need for the jealousy?

History reports only her traditions, while the biographical works are
replete with her praises, [they report] that she was the beloved of the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), and that he could not be separated from her.

I believe that all these [reports] are from the Umayyads who loved
'A'isha and gave her the highest preference when she served their
interests. She narrated for them what they loved [to hear], and she
fought against their enemy, 'Ali b. Abi Talib.

I also believe that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) could not love her
when she did [things] which we have reported. How could the Prophet
(S.A.W.) love someone who would lie, backbite, slander and would doubt
Allah and his Prophet, suspecting them of injustice? How could the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) love someone who spied upon him, going out of
her house without his permission to find out where he had gone?

How could the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) love someone who, in his
presence, insulted his wives even though they were dead? How could the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) love someone who hated his son Ibrahim, and
accused his mother Marya of lying? How could the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) love someone who once came between him and his wives by lying,
driven by malice, causing him to divorce her?

How could the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) love someone who hated his
daughter, al-Zahra, and who hated his brother and cousin, 'Ali b. Abi
Talib, to the extent where she could not mention his name and think any
good of him? All this and more [occurred] during the life of the Prophet
(S.A.W.), and after his death, [even] more occurred, discuss it without
any restraint.

All these deeds are detested by Allah and His Prophet (P), and they do
not love those who perpetrate them, for [with] Allah is the truth, and
His Messenger (S.A.W.) is the personification of truth, so it is not
possible for him to love one who is against the truth.

We will learn during the forthcoming discussions that the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) did not love her; indeed, he warned the nation against
her seditions.

I once asked some of our teachers the reason for the Prophet's (S.A.W.)
excessive love for 'A'isha, specifically to the exclusion of the other
wives. They came up with numerous answers, all of them false: One of
them said: "Because she was beautiful and young, and she was the only
virgin he had, for no man had [taken] her before him". Another said:
"Because she was the daughter of Abu Bakr, the truthful one, his
companion in the cave.”

A third said: "Because she memorized half the religion from the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) and was a learned jurist (*faqiha)*.” A fourth said:
"Because Gabriel came to him in her form, and he never used to visit the
Prophet (S.A.W.) unless he was in her house.”

As you can see, O reader, every one of these claims has no basis and is
not acceptable to either the intellect or to reality. We will refute
these answers with [indubitable] proofs. If the Prophet loved her
because she was beautiful and the only virgin that he had, what
prevented him from marrying the beautiful virgins who excelled her in
charm and beauty, and were the role models among the Arab tribes, and
who were at his beck and call? The historians, on the other hand, also
mention 'A'isha's jealousy towards Zaynab bint Jahsh, Safiyya bint
Huyayy and Marya the Copt, because they were more beautiful than her.

Ibn Sa'd and Ibn Kathir report that the Prophet (S.A.W.) married Malika
bint Ka'b who was known for her outstanding beauty. 'A'isha went to see
her and said to her: "Aren't you ashamed to marry your father's killer?"
She then sought refuge from the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), whereupon he
divorced her. Her people came to him and said: "O Prophet of Allah, she
is young and lacking in perception. She was deceived, so take her back.”
The Prophet (P) refused to do so. Her father was killed on the day of
the conquest of Mecca; his killer was Khalid b al-Walid al-Khandama.

This narration clearly proves that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was not
concerned with youth and beauty in his marriages, otherwise, he would
not have divorced Malika bint Ka'b when she was young and of outstanding
beauty. This narration, and others like it, also shows us the methods
which 'A'isha adopted in deceiving the innocent believing women, and
prohibited them from marrying the Prophet of Allah (P).

We have already discussed [how] she caused the divorce of Asma' bint
Nu'man, due to her envy of the latter's beauty. She said to her: "The
Prophet (S.A.W.) loves a woman to say to him when he approaches her: 'I
seek refuge in Allah from you.'"

Now we have [the case of] Malika, with ('A'isha) instigating in her
feelings for her father's death, and that the killer was the Apostle of
Allah (S.A.W.), saying to her: "Aren't you ashamed to marry your
father's killer?" What could this poor woman do but seek refuge against
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)? Perhaps she said more than that, at a
time when people still had traits of *jahiliyya* in them, which
instigated [people] to retaliation and reproached whoever did not exact
revenge against his father's killer.

It is now left for us to ask and it only right that we ask, why did the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) divorce these two innocent women, who both
fell victim to the plotting and deception of 'A'isha?  
 Before anything else, we must realize that the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) was infallible, he would not oppress anyone nor do anything
which was not right. In divorcing the two women therefore, there must
have been some wisdom known to Allah and His Prophet (S.A.W.).
Similarly, in spite of her deeds, there must have been [some] wisdom in
him not divorcing 'A'isha. We shall hopefully touch upon this in the
forthcoming discussions.

As far as the first woman is concerned, i.e., Asma' bint al-Nu'man; her
[naive] disposition became apparent when 'A'isha's tricks captured her,
and the first words that she greeted the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) with,
when he stretched out his hand to her were: "I seek refuge in Allah from
you.”

Despite her excessive beauty, the Prophet (S.A.W.) did not let her
remain due to her simple mindedness. Along with some other narrators,
Ibn Sa'd, in his *Tabaqat,* vol. 8, p. 145, on the authority of Ibn
'Abbas, said: "The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) married Asma' bint
al-Nu'man, and she was among the most beautiful and complete [women] of
her time.” Perhaps the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) wanted to teach us that
the importance of intelligence outweighs that of physical beauty, for
how many a pretty woman has been led by her foolishness towards
corruption?

As for the second woman, i.e., Malika bint Ka'b, who 'A'isha incited by
telling her that her husband was her father's killer, the Prophet (P)
did not want this poor girl (who was young and lacked perception as her
people testified) to live in fear and terror which would cause great
problems for her, especially since 'A'isha would never let her live in
peace with the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.). No doubt there are other
reasons known to the Prophet which are not known to us.

The important thing to realize is that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) did
not crave for beauty or physical and sexual desires, as some ignorant
persons and Orientalists assume. They claim that Muhammad was
preoccupied with beautiful women. We have observed how the Prophet
(S.A.W.) divorced these two women despite their tender age and beauty.
They were the most beautiful and complete women of their times, as
documented in the historical and *hadith* books.

The claim of those who say that the Prophet (S.A.W.) loved 'A'isha for
her youth and beauty is baseless and unacceptable. As for those who
allege that he loved her because she was the daughter of Abu Bakr, this
is also untrue.

We can say that he married her for Abu Bakr's sake, because the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) married into several tribes for political reasons so
as to placate their hearts and foster affection and feelings of mercy
between those tribes, replacing rancor and hatred.  
 The Prophet (S.A.W.) married Umm Habiba, the sister of Mu'awiya and the
daughter of Abu Sufyan, the foremost enemy of the Prophet (S.A.W.). That
was because he harbored no ill feelings, and [because] he was a mercy to
all the worlds. His compassion and love for the Arab tribes led him to
marrying Jews, Christians and Copts so that the people of the scriptures
could get closer to each other.

This is especially so if we realize, from our readings of the
biographical works, that it was Abu Bakr who asked the Prophet (S.A.W.)
to marry his daughter 'A'isha, just as 'Umar had asked him to marry
Hafsa. The Prophet (S.A.W.) accepted these [proposals] because his heart
encompassed all mankind.

Allah, the Exalted, says: ***"And if you were harsh and severe of heart,
they would have deserted you"*** (3:159).

If we return to the narration reported by 'A'isha, she said that the
Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) did not wait for long before he thought she
was asleep, then he took his upper garment, slowly opened the door, went
out and then closed it, we can perceive the lie of the claim that he
could not do without her.

This deduction is not a spontaneous assumption, which I have
conjectured. Most certainly not, for they are supported by proofs from
the six *Sahih* works. Muslim, like other Sunni *Sahih* works, has
reported in his *Sahih* that 'Umar b. al-Khattab said: "When the Prophet
(S.A.W.) separated himself from his wives, I entered the mosque and the
people were scratching the ground with stones and saying: 'The Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) has divorced his wives.'"

This was before they had been ordered to wear the *hijab*. 'Umar said:
"I said: 'I will certainly know that today.’ So I went to 'A'isha and
said: 'O daughter of Abu Bakr! Have you reached the point of offending
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)?' She replied: 'My [affair] has got
nothing to do with you, O son of Khattab! Look at your own defects.'"

He continued: "So I called upon Hafsa bint 'Umar and said to her: 'O
Hafsa! Have you reached the point of offending the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.)? By Allah! You know that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) does not
love you, had it not been for me, he would have divorced you.’ Whereupon
she wept bitterly...."

This narration clearly illustrates for us, without doubt, that the
Prophet's (S.A.W.) marriage to Hafsa was not due to love, but rather,
for the political needs that circumstances dictated.

What makes us certain of our deduction is the fact that 'Umar b.
al-Khattab swore by Allah that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) did not
love Hafsa. 'Umar further increases our certitude by saying that his
daughter also knew this painful truth, for he said to her: "By Allah!
You know that the Prophet of Allah does not love you.”

Therefore, not even the slightest of doubt is left in our minds about
the marriage to her being for political considerations when he said to
her: "Had it not been for me, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) would have
divorced you.”

This narration also gives us some idea about the Prophet's (S.A.W.)
marriage to 'A'isha bint Abu Bakr, and that, despite all her troubles,
he exercised patience and perseverance for the sake of Abu Bakr.
Otherwise, Hafsa was more worthy of the love and affection of the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), for she did not do a tenth of the things that
'A'isha, the daughter of Abu Bakr, did to offend the Prophet (S.A.W.).

If we study the actual events [which occurred], ignoring the spurious
narrations which the Umayyads composed on the merits of 'A'isha, we will
observe that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was, on many occasions,
troubled and angered by her. Here we relate a narration which al-Bukhari
and several others of the *ahl al-sunna hadith* transmitters have
reported. It speaks of the extent of aversion which 'A'isha felt towards
her husband, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.).

Al-Bukhari reports in volume 7 of his *Sahih*, in "The Chapter on the
Expression of a Sick Person: 'I am in pain' or 'my head hurts'". He
said: "I heard al-Qasim b. Muhammad say: ''A'isha said: 'My head hurts.’
The Prophet (S.A.W.) said: 'If that were to happen when I am still
alive, I would seek Allah's forgiveness for you and would pray for you'.
'A'isha said: 'A likely story! By Allah, I think you would love to see
me die. And that if that occurred, you would spend the other part of the
day marrying another of your wives.'" Does this narration indicate that
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) loved 'A'isha?

Lastly, we summarize by pointing out that the Banu Umayyad, foremost
amongst them Mu'awiya b. Abi Sufyan, hated the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.). From the time the Caliphate fell into their hands, they strove
to distort the truth and turn everything head over heels. They thus
elevated to the zenith of power people who were, during the life of the
Prophet (S.A.W.), ordinary, with no special standing, while they ignored
others who were at the acme of honor and nobility during the lifetime of
the Prophet (P).

I believe that their sole criterion in according honor or ignoring, was
their intense enmity and excessive hatred for Muhammad and the members
of his household, 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. They (the
Umayyads) elevated the status, and fabricated false *hadiths*, on the
merits of every person who opposed the Prophet (S.A.W.) and his *ahl
al-bayt* whom Allah has purified and from whom He removed all
abomination.

They sought nearness to them (those who opposed the Prophet), accorded
them high positions and grants so that they enjoyed favors and respect
among the populace. They sought to denigrate, fabricate defects, falsify
reports that denied the superiority and merits of anyone who used to
love the Prophet (S.A.W.) and [would] defend him.

Thus 'Umar b. al-Khattab, who used to dispute every command of the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), even accusing the latter of hallucination in
his last days, became the hero of Islam amongst the Muslims during the
time of the Umayyad dynasty.

On the other hand, 'Ali b. Abi Talib who was, to him, what Aaron was to
Moses, and who loved him, and who was loved by Allah and His Prophet, he
who was the guardian of every believer, was cursed from the pulpits for
eighty years.

Similarly 'A'isha, who caused the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) much torment
and disobeyed his instructions and the instructions of her Lord, rose
against the successor of the Messenger of Allah and caused the worst
strife known to the Muslims, [a strife] which resulted in the death of
thousands of Muslims, became the most famous lady in Islam, with
religious rulings being accepted from her.

But Fatima al-Zahra, the leader of the women of this world, she for whom
the Lord of Glory gets angry if she becomes angry, and she for whom the
Lord is happy when she is happy, became a forgotten woman, and was
buried in the secrecy of the night, after they had threatened to burn
her, after they forced the door of her house against her stomach,
causing her to lose her child. Not one amongst the *ahl al-sunna*
Muslims knows a single *hadith* which she reported from her father.

Similarly, Yazid b. Mu'awiya, Ziyad, the son of his father, Ibn Marjana,
Ibn Marwan, al-Hajjaj, Ibn al-'As, and others from the accursed
evildoers cursed in the text of the Qur'an and by the tongue of the
Prophet (S.A.W.), they became the commanders of the believers and the
guardians of their affairs. As for al-Hasan and al-Husayn, the masters
of the youths of paradise, the delights of the Prophet of this nation,
the Imams from the progeny of the Prophet (S.A.W.), the custodians of
this *umma*, they were banished, imprisoned, murdered, and poisoned.

In this way, Abu Sufyan the hypocrite, the leader in every battle that
was waged against the Prophet, came to be praised and thanked, until it
was said that whoever entered his house was secure.

As for Abu Talib, the protector and defender of the Prophet (S.A.W.)
with all that he had, [who] passed his life in hostility with his people
and relatives for the sake of his nephew's call, so much so that he
spent three years in the enclave with the Prophet in the valley of
Mecca, keeping his belief secret, for the benefit of Islam, so that some
bridges were still open with the Quraysh and so that they would not
persecute the Muslims as they wished (he was like the believer from the
family of Pharaoh who hid his belief), his (Abu Talib's) [supposed]
reward was a pair of slippers in the hellfire, his feet placed into it
and his brains popping out from the pain.

In this way, Mu'awiya b. Abi Sufyan, who was the freed man, son of the
freed man, the accursed one, and the son of an accursed one, he who used
to play with the injunctions of Allah and His Prophet, not attaching any
importance to it, he who used to murder the upright and innocent [ones]
so as to pursue his vile goals and [would] revile the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) whilst the Muslims would see and hear, became known as the
scribe of revelation. They say that Allah entrusted His revelation to
Gabriel, Muhammad and Mu'awiya. He came to be described as a man of
wisdom, political acumen and reflection.

As for Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, the earth did not carry and the sky did not
put its shadow on anyone more truthful in his speech than him; he was
treated as a mischief monger. He was beaten, exiled and banished to
Rabdha. Salman, Miqdad, 'Ammar and Hudhayfa and all the sincere
companions who took 'Ali as their leader and followed him, they met with
punishment, banishment and murder.  
 Similarly, those who followed the school of the Caliphs, the followers
of Mu'awiya and the companions of the schools founded by the tyrannical
rulers, they became the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* and they represented
Islam. Whoever opposed them was judged to be a disbeliever. If only they
had followed the Imams of the *ahl al-bayt*, the pure ones.

As for those who followed the school of the *ahl al-bayt* and followed
the gate to the city of knowledge and the first one to accept Islam, he
whom the truth revolved around wherever he was, those who followed the
*ahl al-bayt* and the infallible Imams came to be [seen as] the people
of innovation and misguidance, and whoever opposed and fought against
them came to be [seen as] a Muslim.

Surely there is no power and no strength except with Allah, the Highest,
and the most Powerful. Allah surely spoke the truth when He said: ***"If
it is said to them: 'Make not any mischief on earth,’ they say: 'We are
the righteous ones.’ Certainly they are indeed the corrupt ones but they
do not realize it. And if it is said to them: 'Believe as other people
have believed' they say: 'Shall we believe as the stupid ones believe'?
They are the stupid ones, though they know it not"*** (2:13).

If we return to the subject of the Prophet of Allah's (S.A.W.) [alleged]
love for 'A'isha, as she had memorized half the religion from him, and
that he used to say: "Take half your religion from this Humayra," [we
realise] that this *hadith* is false, it has no basis of truth. Neither
is it consonant with the ridiculous and sorrowful rulings that have been
reported from 'A'isha. It is not fitting that the Prophet (S.A.W.)
should have mentioned them.

It is sufficient for us to refer to the incident of the suckling of an
adult, which she used to report from the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), and
which was narrated by Muslim in his *Sahih* and by Malik in his
*Muwatta.’* We have fully discussed this matter in our book "So that I
may be with the Truthful ones.” Whoever wishes a detailed account of the
matter should refer to it.

It is sufficient for us [to note] regarding this detestable tradition,
that all the [other] wives rejected it and refused to act according to
it. Even the reporter of the *hadith* remained [silent for] a complete
year, scared to mention it, due to its repulsive and shameless nature.

Let us refer to *Sahih* al-Bukhari in the chapter on: "Whoever Leaves
his Place of Residence Must Shorten the Prayer.” He narrated: "On the
authority of al-Zuhri, from 'Urwa, from 'A'isha (R) [who] said: 'The
prayer was first decreed as two *rak'a*. Then this ruling was retained
for the prayer on journey, and the prayer in residence was made
complete.’ Al-Zuhri said: 'I said to 'Urwa: 'So how come 'A'isha
completes the prayer [during the journey]?’ He replied: 'She interpreted
[the ruling] as 'Uthman interpreted it.'"

Muslim also reported it in "The Chapter On The Prayer [recited by] the
Travelers and Shortening It" in more explicit words than those
[expressed] in al-Bukhari. He narrated on the authority of al-Zuhri from
'Urwa from 'A'isha, that: "The prayer was first decreed as two *rak'as*.

Then this ruling was preserved for the prayer during a journey, and the
prayer at [a person's town of] residence was made complete.” Al-Zuhri
said: "I said to 'Urwa: 'So how come 'A'isha [recites the] complete
prayer on a journey?' He replied: 'She interpreted [the ruling] as
'Uthman interpreted it.'"

There is a clear contradiction. For she is the one who reports that the
prayer of a traveller was decreed as two *rak'as*, but she opposes what
Allah has made obligatory, and what the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
followed, and instead interpreted it so as to change the ruling of Allah
and His Prophet, reviving the practice of 'Uthman.

Due to this reason, we see a lot of rulings in the *Sahihs* of the *ahl
al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a*, but yet they do not follow them, for, in most
cases, they adhere to the interpretation of Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman,
'A'isha, Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan and other companions.

If al-Humayra, from whom half the religion is supposedly taken, can
interpret the rulings of Allah how she wishes, I do not believe that her
husband, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), would be pleased with her and
would order the people to follow her. In fact, it has been related in
*Sahih* al-Bukhari, Muslim and the other *Sahihs* of the *ahl al-sunna,*
that obedience to her is disobedience to Allah. God willing, we will
deal with this at its [proper] time.

As for those who say that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) loved her
because Gabriel used to come to him in her form before he married her,
and that he only came to him in her house, these narrations would make a
mad person laugh. I do not know whether the form which Gabriel came to
him was in photographic or oil paint. In fact, the *Sahihs* of the *ahl
al-sunna* relate that Abu Bakr sent 'A'isha with a plate of dates to the
Prophet (P) so that he could see her, and that he asked the Prophet (P)
to marry his daughter.

Was there any need then for Gabriel to come in her form when she lived
just a few meters away from the residence of the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.)? I believe that Marya, the Copt, used to live in the land of
Copts, in Egypt, far away from the Prophet (S.A.W.), and since no one
expected her to come, it was more appropriate that Gabriel descend in
her form and to give the Prophet of Allah (P) the good tidings that
Allah would give him Ibrahim from her.

These narrations are from the forgeries of 'A'isha who had nothing with
which she could take pride over her co-wives except tales which her
imagination created. Alternatively, these are due to the forgeries of
the Banu Umayyads, and attributed to her, in order to elevate her
standing with those of simple minds.

And as for the allegation that Gabriel did not visit Muhammad (P) when
he was reclining except in 'A'isha's house, this is worse than the
preceding claim, since it is well known from the Qur'an that Allah
threatened her when she demonstrated against His Prophet. Allah
threatened her with Gabriel, the righteous believers, and the angels
would [also] support [the Prophet].

So the claims of our teachers and scholars are mere conjectures and
imaginations. "Indeed, conjectures do not lead to the truth. Say: 'Do
you have true knowledge with you? Then bring it forth. You follow
nothing but conjecture, you merely guess.'"

'A'isha after the Prophet (S.A.W.)
----------------------------------

If we study the life of the mother of the believers, 'A'isha, daughter
of Abu Bakr, after her husband met his Supreme Maker, may my soul be
sacrificed for him, we find that after the atmosphere had settled and
her father had become the Caliph and leader of the Islamic *umma*, she
became the foremost lady of the Islamic state because her husband was
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) and her father was the Caliph of the
Prophet of God.

She believed - or rather, she led herself into believing - that she was
the best of the Prophet's (S.A.W.) wives simply because he had married
her when she was a virgin, and that he had not married any other virgin.
When the Prophet (S.A.W.) died, she was in the full splendour of her
youth and the prime of her life. According to the best known reports,
she was eighteen years old at the most when her husband passed away. She
had not lived with the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) for more than six to
eight years, according to different reports.

She spent the first years of this period playing games that children
play whilst she was the wife of the Prophet (S.A.W.). She was, as
Barira, the slave girl of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), described her:
"A young girl, who sleeps leaving the dough (unguarded) that the goats
come and eat.”

Yes, eighteen years for a girl who has become a teenager as is said
today. She had spent half her life with the bearer of Allah's message
with nine or ten other co-wives. Yet there was another woman during the
lifetime of 'A'isha, whom we have failed to mention, a woman who was
harder for 'A'isha [to accept] than all the wives because the love of
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) for this woman transcended all
imagination.

This woman was Fatima al-Zahra, the daughter of the Prophet (P) through
Khadija and step daughter of 'A'isha. Do you know who is Khadija?
Khadija, the foremost believer, to whom Gabriel gave *salaams*, and gave
her glad tidings of a house [built] for her in paradise, a house which
has no noise or trouble.

The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) never lost an opportunity to mention
Khadija. This used to tear apart the liver of 'A'isha. Her heart would
burn with jealousy, and she would lose control of herself and forget her
manners. She would abuse (Khadija) as she liked, with no respect for her
husband's feelings. Let us listen to 'A'isha talk about herself,
especially concerning Khadija, as al-Bukhari, Ahmad, al-Tirmidhi, and
Ibn Maja report.

She said: "I have never been as envious of any wife of the Prophet as I
have been of Khadija. That was because of the Prophet's frequent
remembrance and praise of her. I said to him: "Why do you mention that
old woman of the Quraysh? She who had reddened cheeks that time had
destroyed! Certainly Allah has given you [someone] better than her".

She said: "The face of the Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) changed. I never
saw it change like this except when he was receiving revelation. He
said: 'No! Allah did not give me better than her. She believed in me
when others rejected me. She believed in me when others disbelieved me.
She gave me the wealth she had when others deprived me. Allah gave me
children through her whereas he did not through the other women.'"

There is no doubt that the retort of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
refutes the contention of those who allege that 'A'isha was the most
beloved and the best of the Prophet's (S.A.W.) wives. I am convinced too
that 'A'isha's jealousy and hatred increased when the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) scolded her with this reprimand and informed her that His Lord
had not given him [someone] better than Khadija.

Once again, the Prophet (S.A.W.) teaches us that he did not have any
sort of inclination for base desires, and had no inclination towards
beauty and virginity, because Khadija (P) had been previously married
twice and was older than him by fifteen years. Despite this, he loved
her and never ceased to praise her. By my life, this is the true
character of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), who loved for Allah's sake
and hated for Allah's sake.

There is a huge difference between this authentic *hadith* and the
forged one which claims the Prophet preferred 'A'isha, so much so that
his wives sent to him [someone] imploring him to show fairness with
regard to the daughter of Abu Quhafa.

Dare we ask 'A'isha, *Umm al-Mu'minin*, who never saw Khadija for a
single day in her life nor ever met her, how did she know that she was
an old woman with red cheeks? Is this the conduct of the average
believer who is forbidden to speak ill of anyone in their absence if
that person is alive?

How about if that person is dead and has been taken up to the Lord? And
how [severe is the crime] if the person being backbit is the wife of the
Prophet (P), the lady in whose house Gabriel came down and gave her the
tidings of a house in paradise, a house without noise or trouble?

Certainly, the hatred and envy for Khadija that was kindled in 'A'isha's
heart had to have an outlet; otherwise they would have exploded inside
her. 'A'isha did not find anyone [on whom to vent her fury] except
Fatima, Khadija's daughter, and her ('A'isha's) stepdaughter, who was,
according to various reports, about her own age or a little older.

The deep love that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) felt for Khadija was
certainly rooted and strengthened in his daughter, his unique one,
Fatima al-Zahra. She was the only one who lived with her father and
carried within her the qualities which the Prophet used to love in
Khadija; he used to call her "the mother of her father".

'A'isha's envy was further increased when she saw the Messenger of Allah
(S.A.W.) extolling [the virtues of] his daughter, calling her the leader
of the women of the world and leader of the women in paradise.
Furthermore, Allah bestowed to him, through her, the two masters of the
youths of paradise, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. She saw that the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) used to sleep at Fatima's place, watching over the
upbringing of his grandchildren.

He used to say: "My two children here are my fragrance of this *umma*,”
and he used to carry them on his shoulders. This further added to her
envy, as she was barren. Her envy increased until it covered Fatima's
husband, the father of al-Hasan and al-Husayn. This was for no other
reason than the love that the Prophet of Allah (P) showed towards him,
preferring him above her father Abu Bakr in all places. There is no
doubt that she was living through fateful times.

She saw that the son of Abu Talib way excelled her father on every
occasion and that the Prophet (P) continued to love him and preferred
him above everyone else. She also knew that her father had returned in
defeat with the forces who were with him on the day of Khaybar, and that
the Prophet (S.A.W.) was pained by this and said: "I will give the
standard tomorrow to a man who loves Allah and his Prophet, and who
Allah and his Prophet love, [a man] who will be steadfast and will not
flee.” That man was 'Ali b. Abu Talib, the husband of Fatima. After 'Ali
had captured Khaybar, he returned with Safiyya bint Huyayy who the
Prophet (P) married. This descended like a flash of lightning upon the
heart of 'A'isha.

She also knew that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) had sent her father to
proclaim the *Sura al-Bara'a* (chapter 9) to the pilgrims, but then had
sent 'Ali after him, to take [the responsibility] from him. Her father
returned in tears and asked the reason for this action, whereupon the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) responded: "Allah commanded me that none
should proclaim [this] except me or someone from my *ahl al-bayt.*"

She also knew that the Prophet (P) had appointed his cousin, 'Ali, as
the Caliph over the Muslims after him and had ordered his companions and
his wives to congratulate him for this leadership over the believers.
Her father was among the first people to say: "Congratulations,
Congratulations to you, O son of Abu Talib. You have become and will
remain the guardian of every believing man and woman.”

She also knew that the Prophet (S.A.W.) had put in command over her
father a youth with no hair [growing] on his cheek, for he was only
seventeen years old, yet he commanded him to go on military expeditions
under his leadership and to pray behind him.

There is no doubt that 'A'isha was influenced by these events. Deep
inside she was concerned for her father, and his competing for the
Caliphate, and the conspiracy that was among the leaders of the Quraysh.
Her envy and hatred for 'Ali and Fatima grew; she tried her best to
intervene at all costs to change the situation to her father's
advantage.

We have seen how she sent for her father, supposedly on behalf of her
husband, ordering him to lead the people in prayer, after she learnt
that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) had summoned 'Ali for this duty. When
the Prophet (P) learnt of this plot, he was forced to come out, remove
Abu Bakr from his place and lead the people in prayer while he was
sitting. He was angry at 'A'isha and said to her: "You women are like
the companions of Yusuf (meaning that their plots were great).”

A researcher of this event will find clear contradictions in several
different and discordant reports. The Prophet had called her father to
join the army and commanded him to embark under the leadership of Usama
b. Zayd three days before that prayer. It is known logically that the
leader of the army also leads the prayer. Usama b. Zayd therefore was
the Imam of Abu Bakr on that expedition. 'A'isha sensed this disdain and
understood the Prophet's motive, especially as he had not drafted 'Ali
b. Abi Talib into that army in which even the notable emigrants and
Ansars, leaders and people of stature from the Quraysh, had been
drafted.

She further perceived, as did most of the companions, from the Prophet
(P) that his days were numbered. She possibly shared 'Umar b.
al-Khattab's view that the Prophet had now begun to hallucinate, not
knowing what he did. Her burning envy incited her to behave in the way
she wished, elevating the status and esteem of Abu Bakr against his
rival, 'Ali. Because of all this, she denied that the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) had appointed 'Ali as his successor.

Therefore she tried to convince the simple minded people that the
Prophet (P) had died in her chambers lying between her lungs and chest.
She narrated that the Prophet (P) said to her when he was ill: "Call
your father and brother to me so that I may write a behest for them,
maybe someone might make an allegation which Allah and His Prophet and
the believers will refute unless it is [in favor of] Abu Bakr.” Did
anyone ask her as to what prevented her from summoning them?

'A'isha's position against 'Ali, the Commander of the Faithful
--------------------------------------------------------------

The researcher of her views regarding Abu'l-Hasan finds a strange,
surprising thing. There is no explanation for it except her envy and
enmity to the household of the Prophet. History has recorded her
incomparable hatred and malice towards Imam 'Ali. She reached the point
where she was not even able to utter his name, not able to stand the
sight of him.

When she heard that the people had paid allegiance to him for the
Caliphate after the murder of 'Uthman, she said: "I wished that the
skies had become like the earth before 'Ali had attained it.” She
exerted every effort into causing problems for him, leading troops
against him to wage a war of insurrection, and when the news of his
death reached her, she prostrated in thanks to Allah.

Like me, are you not surprised at the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* who
report in their *Sahihs* that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: "O
'Ali! none but a true believer loves you, and none but a hypocrite hates
you". Then they also report in their *Sahihs*, *Musnads* and history
books that 'A'isha hated Imam 'Ali so much that she could not mention
his name.

Is this not a testimony from them regarding the nature of the woman?
Just as al-Bukhari has reported in his *Sahih* that the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) said: "Fatima is a part of me. Whoever angers her angers me,
and whoever angers me angers Allah.” Then al-Bukhari himself relates
that Fatima died whilst she was angry with Abu Bakr, not speaking to him
to the time she died.

Are these traditions not [enough] testimony from them that Allah and His
Prophet are both angry at Abu Bakr? This is what all intelligent people
understand. I always say, therefore, that the truth will surface, no
matter how much the falsifiers try to hide it, no matter how much the
helpers of the Umayyads try to misrepresent and fabricate it. For the
proof of Allah is evident upon His servants from the day of the
revelation of the Qur'an until the final hour [of reckoning]. Praise be
to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.

Imam Ahmad reports that Abu Bakr once came to the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.), and sought permission to enter. Before he went in, he heard
'A'isha's voice raised, saying to the Prophet (P): "By Allah! I surely
know that 'Ali is dearer to you than me and my father", she repeated
this twice or three times.”

'A'isha's hatred for Imam 'Ali was so much that she always tried to
distance him from the Prophet (P) whenever she could find the means to
do so. The Mu'tazili Ibn Abi al-Hadid, in his commentary on the *Nahj
al-Balagha* said the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) beckoned to 'Ali to come
close. He came close until he sat between him and 'A'isha, and he and
the Prophet (S.A.W.) were clung together. She said to him: "Can you not
find a seat for this one except [on] my thigh?"

He also narrated that one day the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was walking
with Imam 'Ali and the conversation became prolonged. 'A'isha approached
as she was walking from behind until she came between them saying: "What
is it between you two that you are taking so long?" Upon this the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) became angry.

It is also reported that she once came upon the Prophet (S.A.W.) whilst
he was conversing quietly with 'Ali. She screamed and said: "What is it
with you and me, O son of Abu Talib? I have [just] one day with the
Prophet of Allah (P).” Thereupon the Prophet (P) became angry.

How often did she anger the Prophet (S.A.W.) with her conduct, which
arose due to her intense jealousy and furious nature and her offensive
words? Would the Prophet (S.A.W.) be pleased with any believing man or
woman whose heart was filled with hatred and malice towards his cousin,
the leader of his progeny, he of whom he said: "He loves Allah and His
Prophet, and Allah and His Prophet love him?" He also said about him:
"Whoever loves 'Ali has loved me and whoever hates 'Ali has hated me.”

And remain in your houses and do not venture forth
--------------------------------------------------

Allah, Glory be to Him, ordered the wives of the Prophet (S.A.W.) to
remain in their houses and not to go out from them, displaying their
ornaments. He also ordered them to read the Qur'an, to undertake the
prayer, to pay *zakat* and to obey Allah and His Apostle (P).

All the wives of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) obeyed the injunctions of
Allah, and the commands of His Prophet, who forbade and warned them
before he died: "Which one of you will ride the camel and have the dogs
of al-Haw'ab bark at her?" All of them [obeyed] with the exception of
'A'isha. She disobeyed all his orders and scoffed at all the warnings.
Historians relate that Hafsa bint 'Umar wanted to go with her (for the
battle of the Camel).

But her brother, 'Abd Allah reproached her and recited the
[aforementioned] verse to her. Hafsa then cancelled her plans. 'A'isha,
however, rode the camel and the dogs of al-Haw'ab barked at her.

Taha Husayn says in his book "*The Great Sedition*" (*al-Fitna
al-Kubra*): "On her route, 'A'isha passed by some water and some dogs
barked at her.

She asked about the water and was told that it was al-Haw'ab. She was
greatly shocked and said: ‘Take me back! Take me back! I have heard the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) saying while he was with his wives: 'Which one
of you will the dogs of al-Haw'ab bark at? 'Abd Allah b. Zubayr came,
having been instructed to pacify her, bringing fifty men from the Banu
'Amir who falsely swore that the water was not that of al-Haw'ab.”

I believe that this narration was fabricated during the time of the Banu
Umayyad to reduce the severity of *Umm al-Mu'minin'*s disobedience,
thinking that *Umm al-Mu'minin* would be exonerated after her nephew,
'Abd Allah b. al-Zubayr, deceived her, coming with fifty men who swore
by God and gave false testimony that the water was not that of
al-Haw'ab.

It is truly a foolish joke; they wanted to delude, through such reports,
those of shallow perception and to convince them that 'A'isha was fooled
because, when she passed the water and heard the barking of the dogs,
and enquired about the water, it was said that they were at al-Haw'ab.
She was distressed and said: "Take me back! Take me back.”

Do the idiots who forged this narration search for an excuse for
'A'isha's disobedience of the order of Allah, and what was revealed in
the Qur'an regarding the incumbency for her to stay in her house? Or do
they seek for an excuse for her disobedience to the order of the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) to stay within her house and the prohibition of riding
a camel before arriving at the well of al-Haw'ab, the watering place of
the barking dogs?

Do they find an excuse for *Umm al-Mu'minin,* after she rejected the
advice of *Umm al-Mu'minin* Umm Salama? Historians have recorded the
incident in which she said to her: "Do you remember the day the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) proceeded and we were with him and he turned left from
[a place called] Qadid and sat alone with 'Ali and whispered to him for
a long time? You wanted to force yourself on them; I tried to prevent
you, but you disobeyed me and intruded. It wasn't long before you
returned in tears. I asked: 'What happened to you?'

And you replied: 'I approached them and they were in conversation, so I
said to Ali: 'I get with the Prophet of Allah one day out of nine, so
can you not, O son of Abu Talib, leave me with him on my day?' The
Messenger of Allah came towards me and he was red with anger, and said:
'Go back! By Allah, none except those who have abandoned faith can hate
him.’ I returned repentant and sad.'” 'A'isha said: "Yes, I remember
that.”

Umm Salama continued: "I will also remind you too that you and I were
with the Prophet of Allah and he said to us: 'Which one of you will be
the rider of the trained camel, at whom the dogs of Haw'ab will bark,
and she will have deviated from the right path?' We said: 'We seek
refuge from Allah and His Prophet from that.’ He touched your back and
said: 'Don't be that one, O Humayra.'" 'A'isha said: "I remember that.”

Umm Salama said: "Do you not remember that day when your father came
with 'Umar, so we put on our veils. They came in and spoke about what
they wanted to, until they said: 'O Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) we do not
know how long you will be with us. If only you were to tell us who will
succeed you as Caliph over us, so that there will be after you a place
we can turn to.’ He said to them: 'As for me, I have seen his position
[infront of you].

Were I to do this, you would all fall into disunity as the Israelites
dispersed from Aaron.’ They remained quiet and left. After they had
departed, we came out to the Prophet of Allah and you said to him, as
you were more forthcoming with him than all of us: 'O Messenger of Allah
who did you appoint as Caliph over them?' He said: 'The wearer of the
mended shoe.’ We went out and we saw it was 'Ali.

You said: 'O Prophet of Allah, I do not see anyone apart from 'Ali'. He
replied: 'He is the one.’” 'A'isha said: "Yes, I remember that." Umm
Salama said to her: "So then, 'A'isha, how can you go ahead after this"?
She replied: "I venture forth to reconcile the people.”

Umm Salama sought to prevent her from the uprising, using strong words,
saying: "The pillars of Islam, if they lean, are not set erect by women;
and if they crack, are not joined by women. The praiseworthy things for
women are lowering their gazes and protecting their chastity.

What would you say if the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) appeared before
you in one of these deserts and finds you driving your camel from one
watering place to another? By Allah, if I were to embark upon this
journey of yours, then it was said to me: 'Enter paradise' I would be
ashamed to face Muhammad after having thrown off the veils he has placed
upon me.”

Just as *Umm al-Mu'minin* 'A'isha did not accept the advice of many
sincere companions, al-Tabari in his history related that: "Jariya b.
Quddama al-Sa'di said to her: 'O mother of the believers, by Allah, the
murder of 'Uthman is less despicable than you going out on this accursed
camel from your house and bearing arms. Allah has imposed on you the
veil and sanctity you have destroyed your cover and defiled your
respect. Surely, whoever sees your uprising sees your destruction. If
you come to us obeying, then go back to your house. If you have come to
us in coercion, then seek the help of the people.'"

The mother of the believers was the leader
------------------------------------------

Historians have recorded that she was the general leader, supervising,
separating [people] and issuing commands. Even when Zubayr and Talha
argued as to who should lead the prayer, and when both of them wanted to
lead, 'A'isha intervened and removed them both and ordered 'Abd Allah b.
Zubayr, her nephew, to lead the people in prayer.

She would dispatch messengers with letters which she sent to several
regions, requesting their assistance against 'Ali b. Abi Talib and
urging them with the *jahili* zeal. She even recruited twenty thousand
or more rabble and greedy Arabs to fight and depose the Commander of the
Faithful. Her urging resulted in zealous discord, where large numbers of
people were killed in the name of defending and aiding the mother of the
believers.

The historians say that when the companions of 'A'isha came to 'Uthman
b. Hanif, the governor of Basra, they took him along with seventy of his
officers who were in charge of the public treasury as prisoners. They
brought them to 'A'isha who ordered that they be put to death. They were
slaughtered as sheep are slaughtered. It is [even] reported there were
400 men in all and that they were the first Muslims whose heads were cut
off whilst they were patient.

Al-Sha'bi reported from Muslim b. Abi Bakra from his father: "When Talha
and Zubayr reached Basra, I put on my sword as I wanted to help them. I
visited 'A'isha, she was ordering, prohibiting; she was in command. I
remembered a *hadith* from the Prophet of Allah (P) which I used to hear
him say: 'A community which has its affairs administered by a woman will
never succeed.’ I [therefore] withdrew from them and left them.”

Al-Bukhari has reported from Abi Bakra: "Allah benefited me by a word
during the days of the [battle of the] Camel. For when the Prophet
(S.A.W.) heard that the Persians had made the daughter of Chosroes their
Queen, he said: 'The people that have their affairs administered by a
woman will never succeed.'"

One of the things that makes us laugh and weep at one time is that
'A'isha, *Umm al-Mu'minin,* went out of her residence in disobedience to
Allah and His Prophet and then ordered the companions to remain in their
houses. This is surely a strange thing. How, dear Lord, could this
occur?

The Mu'tazili Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, in the commentary on the *Nahj*
*al-Balagha,* reported, along with historians, that 'A'isha sent a
letter when she was in Basra to Zayd b. Sawhan al-'Abdi in which she
said to him: "From 'A'isha, the mother of the believers, daughter of Abu
Bakr, the truthful one, wife of the Prophet. To her devoted son, Zayd b.
Sawhan. Remain at home and make the people abandon the son of Abu Talib.
I hope to hear what I would love from you, since you are the most
trustworthy of my family...Wasalaam.”

This righteous man replied to her thus: "From Zayd b. Sawhan to 'A'isha
bint Abi Bakr: Allah issued a commandment to you and He also issued a
commandment to us. He ordered you to remain in your residence, and He
ordered us to fight. Your letter has come to me instructing me to do
contrary to what Allah has ordered me to do, [You have asked me] to do
what Allah has ordered you to do and that you do what Allah has asked me
to do. Your order to me is [something] that I cannot obey, therefore
there is no reply [necessary] to your letter.”

From this, it becomes clear to us that 'A'isha was not content with
leading the army of the Camel, but rather, she craved for absolute
control over the believers in all the corners of the land. In all
matters, she would command Talha and al-Zubayr, who had been nominated
for the Caliphate by 'Umar. Due to this, she made it lawful for herself
to correspond with the chiefs of the tribes and with the governors,
enticing them and seeking their help.

Due to this, she attained the status and fame among the Banu Umayyads,
to the point where she became the protégé and the source of reverence
for all of them, and [she became one] whose power and rebuke they all
feared.

If the heroes and men, famous for their courage, abandon and flee from
the lines of battle [when] facing 'Ali b. Abi Talib and would not stand
in front of him, she stood, inciting, screaming and arousing [the
people].

The mind is perplexed at all of this, the historians are bewildered, for
they knew her stance in the smaller battle of the Camel before the
arrival of Imam 'Ali, and in the greater battle of the Camel after the
arrival of Imam 'Ali. [They all know that] he summoned her to the book
of Allah and that she refused, obstinately insisting on the battle.
There is no explanation [for this], unless we understand the depth and
extent of the envy and hatred which the mother of the believers felt
towards her children, who were devoted to Allah and his Messenger.

The Prophet's (S.A.W.) warning against 'A'isha and her sedition
---------------------------------------------------------------

The Prophet (S.A.W.) sensed the depth and danger of the schemes that
revolved around him from all sides. No doubt he knew the influence and
discord women could generate on the men, as he also knew that their plot
was great enough to almost move mountains. He knew specifically that his
wife, 'A'isha, was the instigator of the dangerous role because of the
hatred and rancor that she felt towards his successor 'Ali in particular
and his family in general.

How could he not know, when he lived observing her role and her enmity
towards them? He sometimes got angry; sometimes his face would change
color and he would try to placate her at all times, informing her that
one who loved 'Ali loved Allah, and the one who hated 'Ali was a
hypocrite, whom Allah hated. Unfortunately those *hadiths* do not
permeate the depth of those souls which never accept the truth to be
true, unless it be for her ('A'isha's) benefit, and they do not
recognize anything to be correct unless it comes from her.

As a result, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was patient when he realised
that she was the test that Allah had sent to the *umma,* to examine it
as He had tested the previous nations. ***"Do the people think that they
will be left alone when they say: 'We believe' and they will not be
tested"*** (29:2)?

The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) warned the *umma* against her on several
occasions. He even stood one day and pointed towards her house saying:
"From there is the mischief, from there is the mischief from where the
horns of the devil will rise.” Al-Bukhari has reported in his *Sahih*,
in "The Book Concerning the Houses of the Wives of the Prophet
(S.A.W.),” on the authority of Nafi' b. 'Abd Allah (R) who said: "The
Prophet (S.A.W.) stood up, addressing [the people] and pointed towards
the residence of 'A'isha and said three times: 'From there is mischief
from where the horns of the devil will arise.'"

Muslim has also related in his *Sahih* from Ikrima b. 'Ammar from Salim
from Ibn 'Umar who said: "The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) emerged from the
house of 'A'isha and said: 'The pivot of disbelief is from here, where
the horns of Satan will rise.'"

There is no need to pay attention to the additions they have made [to
the *hadith*] by their explanation: "That means the east.” This is
clearly a fabrication to dilute [the accusation against] the mother of
the believers and to remove any accusation against her.

Al-Bukhari also reported: "When Talha, al-Zubayr and 'A'isha travelled
to Basra, 'Ali sent 'Ammar b. Yasir and al-Hasan b. 'Ali who met us in
Kufa. They ascended the pulpit, with al-Hasan ascending to the top while
'Ammar was standing below al-Hasan. We gathered towards him. I heard
'Ammar say: '’A'isha has journeyed to Basra and, by Allah, she is the
wife of your Prophet (S.A.W.) in this life and in the hereafter; but
Allah, the most blessed and exalted, is now testing you [to see] whom
you obey, Him or her.’”

Allah is the Greatest. This *hadith* also indicates that obedience to
her is disobedience to Allah, and to oppose and disobey her is to obey
Allah. We can also note in the *hadith,* that the Umayyad narrators have
added the phrase "and the hereafter" when saying "she is the wife of
your Prophet in this life and the hereafter" so that they may lead the
masses into thinking that Allah has forgiven her every sin she
committed, and allowed her to enter His heaven, and her husband is His
beloved Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.). Otherwise, how did 'Ammar know that
she will be his wife in the hereafter?

This is another trick which the falsifiers of *hadith* narrators
resorted to during the time of the Banu Umayyad. When they found that a
*hadith* was widespread amongst the people, and there was no way to deny
or refute it, they decided to add a paragraph or words, or to change
some phrases so as to dampen the impact [of the *hadith*] or to [make
it] lose its intended meaning. Just as they did with the *hadith*: "I am
the city of knowledge and 'Ali is its gate,” they added: "and Abu Bakr
is its foundation, 'Umar its walls and 'Uthman its roof.”

This [trick] is not hidden to the objective researchers who refute these
additions which, most of the time, indicate the lack of intelligence of
the falsifiers and their lack of wisdom and light of the Prophetic
traditions. For they can observe the saying that Abu Bakr is it's
foundation means the knowledge of the Prophet (P) is derived from the
knowledge of Abu Bakr, and this is disbelief. Likewise, the statement
'Umar is its walls means 'Umar prevents people from entering the city,
i.e., prevents them from getting to the knowledge.

The saying 'Uthman is its roof is necessarily absurd since there is no
city which has a roof, this is impossible. The researchers note too that
'Ammar swore by Allah that 'A'isha is the wife of the Prophet (P) in
this world and in the hereafter. This is a shot in the dark. How could
'Ammar take an oath about something he did not know? Did he have a verse
from the book of God? Or was it a covenant promised to him by the
Prophet (P)?

So we are now left with the true *hadith,* i.e., that 'A'isha travelled
to Basra, and that she is the wife of your Prophet, but Allah is testing
you through her to know whether you obey Him or her.  
 All praise is due to the Lord of the Worlds, who has given us
intelligence through which we can differentiate between the truth and
falsehood, and has made clear to us the [right] path and then tested us
by several things so that they can bear witness on the Day of Judgment.

Conclusion
----------

The important thing from what we have covered in our discussion,
although in a concise manner, is that 'A'isha, the daughter of Abu Bakr,
the mother of the believers and wife of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.),
was not counted amongst the *ahl al-bayt* from whom Allah removed all
abomination and purified completely. He preserved them from all errors
and purified them from every kind of filth. Due to this, they became
infallible.

Suffice it to say that 'A'isha spent the last days of her life in tears
and wailing, sadness and repentance, remembering her acts with her eyes
full of tears. Maybe Allah will forgive her errors, for He alone knows
the secrets of his servants and knows the truth of their intentions. He
knows the deception of the eyes and what is hidden in the hearts.

Nothing in the world nor in the sky is hidden from Allah, and it is not
for us or for any person to pass the judgement of heaven or hell for His
creatures. This is an imposition and intrusion on Allah. The exalted one
says: ***"All that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah.
Whether you exhibit what is in your souls or hide it, Allah will [make
you] account for it. He forgives whomsoever He wishes and punishes
whomsoever He wishes. Allah has Power over everything"*** (2:284).

Based on this, it is not for us to be pleased with her or to curse her.
We cannot, however, follow her nor [can we] condone her deeds. We speak
of all this so as to enlighten the people about the truth; maybe they
will be guided on the right path.

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam 'Ali said: "Do not be amongst those
who curse and swear, but rather say: 'They did so and so, for this is
more potent as a proof.’”

What the ahl al-dhikr believe about the ahl al-bayt
---------------------------------------------------

The Imam, Commander of the Faithful (A.S.), master of the progeny of the
Prophet (S.A.W.), said: "By Allah! I have learnt the proclamation of the
messages, the fulfillment of promises and perfection of words. With us,
the *ahl al-bayt,* are the doors of wisdom and the lights of all things.
Where are those who claim that they, instead of us, are deeply rooted in
knowledge? They do so lying and rebelling against us.

Allah has elevated us and degraded them, and has bestowed upon us and
deprived them, made us enter and expelled them. It is through us that
guidance is sought and blindness removed. Certainly, the Imams will be
from the Quraysh, they have been planted in the line of Hashim. The
Imamate is not right for others, neither is it for the governors to the
exclusion of others.”

"We are the close ones and the companions, the treasures and the doors.
Houses are not entered except by their doors; whosoever enters them in
any other way is called a thief.” Then he mentioned the *ahl al-bayt*
and said: "Within them is the nobility of the Qur'an, and they are the
treasures of the Merciful one. When they speak they utter the truth, and
when they are silent, none should speak before they do.”

"They are the life of knowledge and death of ignorance; their
forbearance tells you of their knowledge and their silence the wisdom of
their speaking. They do not go against the truth nor do they differ
about it. They are the pillars of Islam and the asylums of protection.
Through them the truth has returned to its rightful position, falsehood
has vanished and its tongue severed from its root. They have understood
religion attentively and carefully, not from hearsay or from relaters,
because the relaters of knowledge are many, but few observe it.

His progeny is the best of progenies and his family the best of
families. His tree is the best of trees, grown in sanctity and excelled
in generosity, for them are long branches and fruits that cannot be
reached.

We are the tree of prophethood, the station of divine message and the
place where angels visit. We are the mines of knowledge, the
fountain-heads of wisdom. Those who support and love us, can expect
mercy, our enemies and one who hates us, await the wrath [of God].

We are the noble ones, and our progeny is the progeny of the Prophets.
Our party is the party of Allah, the most Glorious and Majestic. The
rebellious group is the party of Satan. Whoever equates us with our
enemy is not from us.”

"Where do you go and how [much] do you lie? The standards are raised and
the signs clear. The minarets have been erected, so where are you
wandering? How can you wander blindly, when among you is the progeny of
the Prophet (S.A.W.) and they are the pillars of truth, standards of
religion, the truthful tongues? Accord to them the same position as you
do to the Qur'an and come to them as thirsty camels approach water
springs.

O people take it from the seal of the Prophets (S.A.W.), that he who
dies from amongst us is not dead, and he who decays from amongst us does
not really decay. Do not say what you do not understand, because most of
the truth lies in what you deny. Accept the argument of one against whom
you have no argument. It is me. Did I not act according to the weightier
thing (the Qur'an) and did I not leave for you the less weighty thing
(the descendants of the Prophet) and did I not fix for you the standard
of faith?"

“Examine the *ahl al-bayt* of your Prophet and follow their character
and footsteps and they will never lead you astray. They will never make
you return to destruction; if they lie down, then you lie down, and if
they arise, then you arise. Do not precede them otherwise you will go
astray. Do not lag behind them as you will be ruined.”

These are the words of Imam 'Ali (A.S.), especially regarding the
purified household from whom Allah has removed all filth and purified
thoroughly.

If we followed the speech of his progeny (A.S.) who delivered the
sermons to the people, for example Imam al-Hasan, Imam al-Husayn, Zayn
al-'Abidin, Ja'far al-Sadiq, and Imam al-Rida (A.S.), we find them all
saying the same thing and rejecting the same object, guiding the people
at every time and place to the book of Allah and to the family of the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) so as to save them from error and to bring
them towards guidance.

I would add that history is the best witness to the infallibility of the
*ahl al-bayt*. Nothing but knowledge, piety, virtue, asceticism,
generosity, nobility, forbearance and forgiveness has been recorded
about them. [They were also known] for every deed that Allah and His
Prophet love.

History is also the best witness that the righteous ones from this
*umma* and the Sufi ascetics and shaykhs of the different paths, the
Imams of the different schools and the upright past and contemporary
scholars all profess to their excellence and superiority in knowledge
and deeds, and place them closest to the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) in
nearness and honor.  
 Therefore, it is not proper for a Muslim to mix the wives of the
Prophet (S.A.W.) with the *ahl al-bayt,* those from whom Allah has
removed all filth and purified them thoroughly, and those whom the
Prophet gathered under his cloak.

Do you not see that the Imams of the *hadith,* scholars like Muslim and
al-Bukhari, al-Tirmidhi, Imam Ahmad, al-Nasa'i and others, when relating
*hadiths* of merits in their books and their *Sahih* works,
differentiate between the merits of the *ahl al-bayt* and [those of] the
wives of the Prophet?  
 Muslim reports in his *Sahih*, on the merits of 'Ali b. Abi Talib, from
Zayd b. Arqam that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: "I am leaving
behind [me] two weighty things among you. One of them is the book of
Allah, Glorified and Honored be He. It is the rope of Allah and whoever
follows it is guided right and whoever abandons it is misguided".

Then he said: "And my *ahl al-bayt*. I remind you in Allah's name of my
*ahl al-bayt*. I remind you in Allah's name of my *ahl al-bayt,* I
remind you in Allah's name of my *ahl al-bayt*.” We asked: "Are his
wives amongst the *ahl al-bayt*?" He (Zayd b. Arqam) replied: "No! By
Allah, a woman remains with a man for a while then [when] he divorces
her, she returns to her father and her people. The *ahl al-bayt* are his
roots, his group to whom *sadaqa* is forbidden after him".

Similarly, the testimony of al-Bukhari and Muslim has come to us that
'A'isha is from the family of Abu Bakr and not from the family of the
Prophet, in the incident of the verse of *tayammum*.  
 So why this persistence by some obstinate persons who attempt to revive
discord at any price and to distort the truth of which there is no
doubt? They curse the Shi'as only because they do not accord this
distinguished position to *Umm al-Mu'minin* 'A'isha. Why don't they
curse their own *Sahihs* and scholars who exclude the wives of the
Prophet from the *ahl al-bayt*? ***"O You who believe! Fear Allah and
say that which is correct, so that He may make your deeds pure and
forgive your sins. Whoever obeys Allah and His Prophet has surely
succeeded"*** (33:71).


