Chapter 5: Concerning the Three Caliphs, Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman
====================================================================

As discussed, the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* permit no criticism or
condemnation of any of his companions and maintain the belief in their
collective uprightness. If any free thinker writes about them and
undertakes to criticize the deeds of some companions, they defame him;
in fact, they deem him to be an unbeliever even if he is amongst their
own scholars.

This is what has happened to some of the free thinking Egyptian and
non-Egyptian scholars like Shaykh Mahmud Abu Rayya, author of "The
Lights on the *sunna* of Muhammad" and "*Shaykh al-Muzayra*", and like
Qadi Shaykh Muhammad Amin al-Antaki, author of "Why I chose the school
of *ahl al-bayt*,” and like Sayyid Muhammad b. 'Aqil who composed the
book "The complete advice for [he] who befriends Mu'awiya.” Indeed, some
Egyptian writers labeled Shaykh Mahmud Shaltut, grand Shaykh of the
University of Azhar, an infidel when he issued the ruling that it was
permissible to worship according to the Ja'fari *madhab*.

If the grand Shaykh of Azhar, the mufti of all of Egyptian schools, is
despised for merely recognizing the Shi'i school which is traced to the
teacher of the scholars, Ja'far al-Sadiq (A.S.); then what do you think
[they would do] to one who chooses to follow this school after research
and conviction, and undertakes to criticize the *madhab* he used to
follow, having inherited it from his fathers and forefathers?

This is what the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* will not permit, for they
consider it as heresy in religion and going out of [the fold of] Islam;
as though Islam is, in their reckoning, the four *madhabs* and
everything else is false. These are petrified and stagnant minds
resembling those minds which the Qur'an talks of, and that which the
Prophet's (P) call encountered.

It defied him intensely, for he invited them to monotheism and
abandoning the numerous gods. The most High says: ***"And they wonder
when a warner comes to them from amongst themselves, and the unbelievers
say: "This is a lying sorcerer, has he made all the gods as one? This is
a surprising thing"*** (38:5).

I am safe from the malicious attacks that will be directed against me
from those zealous persons who have kept themselves in authority over
others. [To them], no one has the right to oppose their writings even if
his writings do not take anything away from Islam. Otherwise, how could
one who criticizes some of the companions be judged to have gone out of
[the fold of] Islam and [become] a disbeliever when the foundations and
branches of religion does not have anything [to do] with that?  
 Some fanatics were propagating amongst themselves that my book "Then I
was Guided" is like Salman Rushdie's [work], in order to prevent people
from reading it and so as to encourage them to curse the book.

This is a plot, forgery and great slander which the Lord of the Worlds
will account for. How can they compare "Then I was Guided" which calls
to the belief in the infallibility of the Messenger (P), his being
beyond reproach, and [calls for] the following of the Imams of the *ahl
al-bayt* from whom Allah has removed all filth and purified completely,
with "The Satanic Verses" in which its accursed writer reviles Islam and
the Prophet of Islam (P) and considers Islam is [due to] the inspiration
of the devils?

Allah says: ***"O you who believe! Stand firmly for justice and bear
witness for Allah, even if it be against yourselves"*** (4:135).

Due to this noble verse, I care not except for the pleasure of Allah,
Glorified and Exalted be He, and I fear no criticism as long as I am
defending the correct Islam and distancing its noble Prophet from every
error, even if that is at the expense of criticizing some close
companions, even if they were among "the rightly guided Caliphs,”
because the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) is more worthy of distancing [from
error] than any mortal.

The unbiased, perceptive reader will understand from all my works what
is my desired goal for the issue is not to denigrate or degrade the
companions, it is to defend the Prophet of Allah (P) and his
infallibility, and to defend him against the misconceptions which the
Umayyads and the 'Abbasids cultivated about Islam and the Prophet of
Islam during the early centuries when they ruled the Muslims with
tyranny and force, changing Allah's religion according to what worldly
goals, base politics and evil desires dictated.

Their major plots have influenced a large segment of Muslims who
followed them out of good intentions towards them and accepted all the
distortions and lies they narrated, assuming them to be true and to be a
part of Islam; and that it was obligatory on every Muslim to follow
them, not to question [them].

Were the Muslims to know the truth of the matter, they would not accord
any importance to them or to their narrations. Had history narrated to
us that the companions obeyed the commands and prohibitions of the
Prophet of Allah (P) and had not argued with him or opposed his
judgments, and that they did not disobey him in numerous rulings during
the last days of his life, we would have judged all of them to be
upright and we would have had no such scope for discussion or speech
[against them]. However, amongst them were liars, hypocrites and corrupt
ones, according to the Qur'anic text and the authenticated correct
*sunna*.

They disagreed [with each other] in his presence and disobeyed him in
the matter of writing [the testament] to the point that they accused him
of hallucination and prevented him from writing. They did not to follow
his commands when he appointed Usama over them. They differed on his
Caliphate to the extent that they neglected his washing, preparation and
burial arguing, instead, about the Caliphate.

Some of them were happy about it and others rejected it. Indeed, they
differed on everything after him until they accused each other of
disbelief, cursed each other, fought and killed each other, and
dissociated from each other. [Due to this] Allah's one religion split
into different sects with divergent views.

Given this situation, it is necessary, therefore, that we search for the
cause and flaws that made the best and most desirable of nations created
for man to decay; it became the lowest, most ignorant and debased nation
on the face of the earth, it's respect destroyed, sanctity defiled and
its people colonized, banished and evicted from their lands; they could
not defend [themselves] against the transgressors nor could they remove
the shame on its face.

The sole cure for this difficulty, as I see it, is self criticism. Let
us forget the praising of our forebears, our false glories which have
evaporated and have become ruined museums, empty even of visitors. The
reality calls upon us to examine the reasons for our maladies, our
remaining behind, our fragmentation and our failures, until we discover
the disease and identify a beneficial cure for our well being; before it
overcomes us and affects the last one of us. This is the desired goal,
Allah is the only one worthy of worship; He is the guide of his servants
to the right path.

And as long as our goal is a correct one then there is no value to the
opposition of those fanatics who know nothing except insults and slander
in their arguments for defending the companions. We will neither rebuke
nor hate them after observing their situation, for they are deprived,
misguided by their good intention for the companions.

This has prevented them from arriving at the truth. They are like the
children of the Jews and Christians who have trust in their fathers and
grandfathers and do not impose upon themselves [the task of] research in
Islam; relying, instead, on the utterances of their predecessors, that
Muhammad was a liar and that he was not a Prophet. Allah says: ***"The
people of the book went astray only after clear signs came to them"***
(98:3).

With the passing of successive centuries, it has become difficult for a
Muslim today to convince a Jew or a Christian of the Islamic creed, what
if someone tells them that the Bible and Torah in circulation are
forgeries and proves that by the Qur'an, will this Muslim find a
sympathetic ear amongst them?

Similarly, with a simple Muslim who believes in the uprightness of every
companion and is zealous about it with no proof, is it possible for
anyone to convince him otherwise?

If they are not able to find fault and criticize Mu'awiya and his son
Yazid, and there are numerous others like them who distorted Islam by
their evil deeds - what if they are told about Abu Bakr, 'Umar and
'Uthman, the truthful one, the distinguisher, and one whom the angels
are shy of? Or of 'A'isha, mother of the believers, wife of the Prophet
(P), daughter of Abu Bakr, whom we have discussed in the preceding
chapter of how the reliable authors of the *Sihah* works, according to
the *ahl al-sunna,* have narrated from her?

Now we have reached the stage of the role of the three Caliphs. Let us
discover some of their deeds which the Sunni *Sahih* and *Musnad* and
reliable historical works have recorded against them, so that we can
illustrate firstly that the concept of collective uprightness of the
companions is incorrect and that righteousness was missing even from
[some] close companions.

Secondly, we will illustrate for our *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* brothers
that these criticisms do not amount to insults or slander or
denigration, rather, they are means of removing the veils so as to reach
the truth, and that they are not inventions or lies of the Rafidis, as
most people claim. On the contrary, they are narrations from books that
have been judged to be correct and they have obligated themselves to
[accept] it.

Abu Bakr during the life of the Prophet (S.A.W.)
------------------------------------------------

In volume 6 page 46 of his *Sahih*, in "The Chapter on the
Interpretation of *Sura al-Hujurat* of the Qur'an", al-Bukhari relates
that Nafi' b. 'Umar reported from Ibn Abi Malika that "The two pious
ones, i.e., Abu Bakr and 'Umar (R.) were very nearly destroyed, for they
raised their voices in the presence of the Prophet (S.A.W) when the
delegation from Banu Tamim came to him; one of the two recognized [as
their leader] al-Aqra b. Habis, the brother of Banu Majasha, and the
other recognized another person.

Nafi' said: 'I don't remember his name' whereupon Abu Bakr said to
'Umar: 'You only wish to contradict me.’ He replied: 'I did not wish to
contradict you.’ And their voices rose [in argument] over that matter,
and Allah revealed: ***'O you, who believe, do not raise your
voices...'*** Ibn Zubayr [later] said: 'After this, 'Umar's voice was
not heard by the Prophet to the extent that the Prophet (S.A.W.) had to
ask what he had said. And he ['Umar] didn't mention [the matter] about
his father, I mean Abu Bakr.'"

Similarly, in volume 8, page 145 in "The Chapter concerning Adherence to
the Qur'an and the *Sunna*" under the heading of "What is Disliked about
getting Embroiled [in Argument] and Contention" al-Bukhari relates:
"Waki' informed us from Nafi' b. 'Umar from Ibn Abi Malika that: 'The
two righteous ones, Abu Bakr and 'Umar, were nearly destroyed when the
delegation of Banu Tamim came to the Prophet (S.A.W.). One of them
pointed to al-Aqra b. Habis al-Tamim al-Hanzali, the brother of Banu
Majasha, and the other indicated someone else. Then Abu Bakr said to
'Umar: 'Surely, you only wish to contradict me.’

'Umar said: 'I did not wish to contradict you.’ And their voices rose in
front of the Prophet (S.A.W.), and the verse was revealed: ***'O you who
believe, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet nor
address him the way you do each other lest your deeds be in vain and you
perceive not. Those that lower their voices in the presence of the
Prophet, they are those whose hearts Allah has tested for piety; for
them is forgiveness and a great reward.'***"

Ibn Abi Malika said that Ibn al-Zubayr [later] said: "Thereafter 'Umar
didn't mention the matter regarding his father, i.e., Abu Bakr, and
whenever he spoke to the Prophet about something, he would do so in a
whisper and could not be heard to the extent that the Prophet had to
tell him to speak up.”

Similarly, in volume 5, page 116 in the "Section on Military Campaigns
(the delegation of Banu Tamim)" al-Bukhari in his *Sahih* relates from
Hisham b. Yusuf, on the authority of Ibn Jurayj, who informed them, on
the authority of Ibn Abi Malika, who related that 'Abd Allah b. Zubayr
informed them that a delegation from Banu Tamim came to the Prophet
(S.A.W.), and Abu Bakr said: Make the chief al-Qa'Qa'a b. Ma'bad b.
Zuraraî and 'Umar said: "Rather, select al-Aqra b. Habis".

Abu Bakr said: "You do only wish to contradict me", and 'Umar said: "I
did not wish to contradict you.” And they argued until their voices had
risen, and the following verse was then revealed: "O you who believe! Do
not put yourselves forward between Allah and his Apostle..."

It is apparent from these narrations that Abu Bakr and 'Umar did not
behave in a proper way, i.e., in accordance with proper Islamic conduct
in the presence of the Prophet (S.A.W.) and allowed themselves to
advance in front of Allah and His Prophet without permission; nor did
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) ask for their views in appointing anyone
from Banu Tamim as a leader; then, they were not content until they were
arguing in his presence and their voices had risen in front of him
(S.A.W.) with no respect or care for what is customarily decreed by good
character and morals, values of which none of the companions could have
been ignorant and which they could not have ignored after Allah’s
Prophet (S.A.W.) committed his life to their education and upbringing.

Had this event occurred in the early days of Islam, we would have sought
to find an excuse for the two shaykhs and would have tried to find some
explanation for this. But the reports have been indubitably established
that the event occurred in the last days of the Prophet (S.A.W.), since
the delegation from Banu Tamim journeyed to the Prophet (S.A.W.) in 9
A.H., and he only lived for a few months after that. Every historian and
*hadith* scholar who has mentioned the coming of the delegation to the
Prophet (S.A.W.) has testified [to it]. In addition, the noble Qur'an
also refers to it in one of the last chapters: ***"When help and victory
from Allah comes, and you see people entering Islam in large
groups..."***

That being the case, how can the apologists make excuses for the stance
of Abu Bakr and 'Umar in the presence of the Prophet (S.A.W.)? If the
account was restricted to the position here exemplified by the two
companions only, we would not have the scope for [wide] criticism and
objection. However, Allah, who is not shy of the truth, recorded [the
incident] and revealed a Qur'anic verse that followed.

It contains rebuke and warning for Abu Bakr and 'Umar to the effect
that, were they to repeat their deed, Allah would negate their [good]
works. Similarly, the narrator of the event began his report with the
statement: "The two pious men, Abu Bakr and 'Umar, were almost
destroyed..." And the narrator of the incident 'Abd Allah b. al-Zubayr,
attempted to convince us that 'Umar, after the revelation of this verse
concerning him, whenever he spoke to the Prophet (P), he did so in such
a low voice that he had to be asked [to repeat what he said].

In spite of the fact that he didn't mention the [equally reproachable
conduct] on the part of his grandfather Abu Bakr, the historical
accounts and the *hadith,* preserved by the *hadith* scholars, proves
the opposite of it. It suffices to mention the calamity of the Thursday,
[just] three days before the death of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.),
when we find the very same 'Umar uttering his sinister words: "Surely
the Prophet of Allah is hallucinating, the book of Allah is enough for
us.”  
 The people were differing between themselves, there being those who
said: "Draw near to the Prophet so that he may write [his behest] for
you;” and there were those who were saying what 'Umar said.

When the clamor and dissension had increased, the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) said to them: "Go away from me; it is not fitting that the
argument should occur near me.” It is to be understood from the
intensity of the rude talk, clamor, disagreement and contention that
they overstepped every limit that Allah had set for them in S*ura
al-Hujurat*, as we have already mentioned.

There is no possibility of our being convinced that their disagreement,
contention and clamor were done quietly in one another’s ears; on the
contrary, it is to be understood from all this that they raised their
voices so loudly that even the women, who were behind the curtain and
the veil, participated in the argument, saying: "Go close to the Prophet
(P) so that the letter may be written.”

Thereupon 'Umar said to them: "You are indeed the women of Yusuf - if he
is ill you squeeze tears from your eyes and if he gets better you ride
his neck.” The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) then said to him: "Leave them
alone, for they are better than you.”

Our conclusion from all of this is that they did not carry out Allah's
command: ***"O you who believe, do not advance before Allah and His
Prophet and do not raise your voices above the voice of the
Prophet..."*** nor did they respect the position of the Prophet or
behave properly when they slandered him with the term ì*hajara*î (i.e.
hallucinating).

Even prior to this, Abu Bakr had uttered abhorrent words in the presence
of the Apostle (S.A.W.) when he said to 'Urwa b. Mas'ud: "Go lick the
clitoris of al-Ab.” Regarding this expression, al-Qastalin, a
commentator on al-Bukhari said: "The expression to ‘Lick the
clitoris...’ is one of the crudest insults among the Arabs..." If such
expressions were being uttered in the presence of the Prophet (S.A.W.),
what then is the meaning of "and do not raise your voices over his as
you do with each other?"

The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was of exalted character (as his Lord
described him) and more shy than a virgin in her chambers (as is
reported by al-Bukhari and Muslim), for both have clearly reported that
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was neither corrupt nor obscene, and used
to say: "The best among you is the one possessing the most upright
character;” then how is it that the close companions were not influenced
by his exalted character?

I would add to all this that Abu Bakr did not carry out the command of
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) when he appointed Usama b. Zayd over him
and made him one of his soldiers, and severely rebuked those who stayed
behind till he said: "Allah has cursed whoever stays behind from the
army of Usama". This was after he had received the news about people
defaming him on the matter of appointing Usama as the leader, an
incident reported by most of the historians and biographers.

Similarly, he hurried to Saqifa and participated in the elimination of
'Ali b. Abu Talib from the Caliphate, and left the body of Allah's
Apostle (S.A.W.) a covered corpse, may my father and mother be
sacrificed for him. He did not concern himself with bathing, or
enshrouding, or preparing him for burial, or burying him; busying
himself, instead, with the position of the Caliphate and leadership for
which he extended his neck. Where then was the close companionship, the
alleged friendship and good character?

I am astonished at the attitude of these companions towards their
Prophet, who devoted his life to their guidance, nourishment, and
advice, these companions to whom the Qur'an advised; "What befalls you
concerns him, he is watching you, he is kind and merciful to the
believers.” Still, [we see them] leaving him [as] a stiffening corpse,
and hurrying instead to Saqifa to appoint one among themselves as
Caliph!

Today, we live in the twentieth century which we claim is the most
wretched one, wherein morals have vanished and values have evaporated;
yet, in spite of all this, if a neighbor amongst the Muslims dies, they
rush to him and busy themselves until they bury him in his grave, in
accordance with the saying of the Prophet (S.A.W.): "Honoring the dead
means burying him.”

'Ali b. Abi Talib, the Commander of the Faithful, disclosed these events
when he said: "By God, Ibn Abi Qahafa put the shirt [of Caliphate] on
himself while he surely knew that my position vies-a-vies the Caliphate
was like the position of a pivot to a grinding mill.” After this, Abu
Bakr allowed the attack upon the house of Fatima al-Zahra, and
threatened to burn it unless those who dissented from pledging
allegiance to him came out. What happened did happen, historians have
mentioned in their books and narrators have transmitted [it] generation
after generation. We are not going to mention it here, whoever wants to
know more should read the historical books.

Abu Bakr after the death of the Prophet (S.A.W.), his denial of the truthful and pure Fatima al-Zahra and his usurpation of her rights
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In volume 5, page 82 in "The Book of Military Campaigns" in "The Chapter
of the Conquest of Khaybar,” on the authority of 'Urwa, from 'A'isha,
al-Bukhari reports that Fatima (A.S.), the daughter of the Prophet
(S.A.W.), sent someone to Abu Bakr asking for her inheritance from what
Allah's Apostle had left behind. [This included] the *fay* property
bestowed on him by Allah*,* i.e., booty gained without fighting in
Medina and Fadak, and from what remained of the *khumus* booty from [the
battle of] Khaybar.

On that, Abu Bakr said: "Allah's Apostle said: 'Our property is not
inherited. Whatever we leave, is *sadaqa*, but the family of Muhammad
can eat of this property.’ By Allah, I will not make any change in the
state of the *sadaqa* of Allah's Apostle and will leave it as it was
during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle, and will dispose of it as he
used to do.” So Abu Bakr refused to give anything of that to Fatima. So
she became angry with Abu Bakr and kept away from him, and did not speak
to him till she died. She remained alive for six months after the death
of the Prophet.

When she died her husband ‘Ali buried her at night without informing Abu
Bakr. When Fatima was alive, the people used to respect 'Ali much, but
after her death, 'Ali noticed a change in the people's attitude towards
him. So 'Ali sought reconciliation with Abu Bakr and gave him the oath
of allegiance. 'Ali had not given the oath of allegiance during those
six months ..."

Muslim reports in volume 2 of his *Sahih*, in "The Book of *Jihad*" in
the Chapter "We do not leave Inheritance, but whatever we leave is
*Sadaqa*" on the authority of 'A'isha, the mother of the believers (R),
that Fatima (A.S.), the daughter of Allah’s Prophet (S.A.W.), asked Abu
Bakr al-Siddiq, after the Prophet’s death to apportion to her the
inheritance from what the Prophet (S.A.W.) had left from [his share] of
the spoils of war.

Thereupon Abu Bakr said to her: "The Prophet of Allah said: 'We do not
leave inheritance. What we leave is charity.'" Then Fatima, daughter of
the Prophet of God (S.A.W.), became angry with him and avoided him,
continuing thus until she died; she lived for six months after the
Prophet's death. 'A'isha said: "Fatima used to ask Abu Bakr for her
share from what the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) left behind of [his share]
of Khaybar and Fadak, and from his *sadaqa* in Medina.

Abu Bakr denied her request and said: 'I will abandon nothing which the
Prophet (S.A.W.) used to do, I will also do it. [This is] because I fear
that, should I depart from what he commanded, I would go astray.’ As for
the Prophet’s *sadaqa* of Medina, 'Umar has given it to 'Ali and 'Abbas,
and, [as for] the properties of Khaybar and Fadak, 'Umar withheld them,
and said: 'These two are charities from the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
his rights fall to his deputies, and their administration is for
whosoever is the leader. Thus they are till today.'"

The two Shaykhs (al-Bukhari and Muslim) abridged and shortened these
reports so that the truth may not be clear to the researchers. For them,
this is a familiar art, which they espoused in order to preserve the
honor of the [first] three Caliphs. (We have a separate treatise
concerning the two scholars on this issue, and, God willing, we will
present it in the near future).

In any case, the narrations they have reported are sufficient to
disclose the truth about Abu Bakr, who refuted the claim of Fatima
al-Zahra, which merited her anger upon him and her shunning him unto her
death (A.S.), and necessitated her burial at night in secret by her
husband; and, according to her will, Abu Bakr was not being permitted by
her to attend.

We also learn from these narrations that 'Ali did not pledge allegiance
to Abu Bakr for a period of six months, which is the period that Fatima
lived after her father and that he was compelled to take this oath when
he found that the faces of the people were turning against him, and so
he sought to reconcile with Abu Bakr.

What al-Bukhari and Muslim altered was Fatimaís (A.S.) claim that her
father, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), had given her Fadak as a gift
during his lifetime; and it (Fadak) was not therefore an inheritance.
Even if we were to assume that Prophets do not leave inheritances, as
Abu Bakr narrated from the Prophet (P), she refuted his claim and
opposed him by [quoting] the text of the Qur'an which states "And
Solomon inherited from David.” In any case, Fadak was not covered by
this alleged *hadith*, since it was a gift to her and was in no way a
part of inheritance.

Consequently, one finds that all historians and scholars of *tafsir,* as
well as of *hadith,* relate that Fatima (A.S.) claimed that Fadak was
her property and that Abu Baker refuted her, asking her to provide
witnesses to support her claim. She brought 'Ali b. Abi Talib and Umm
Ayman, but Abu Bakr did not accept their testimony, considering it
insufficient.

Ibn Hajar admitted this in his *al-Sawaíiq al-Muhriqa* when he reported
that Fatima claimed that the Prophet (S.A.W.) had given her Fadak as a
gift but had no witness to her claim except 'Ali and Umm Ayman. Yet
their testimony did not meet the stipulated conditions to be considered
as sufficient proof.

Imam Fakhr al-Din al-Razi said in his *Tafsir*: "After the death of the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), Fatima claimed that he had given Fadak as a
gift to her, whereupon Abu Bakr said to her: 'You are the dearest of
people to me in poverty, and the most beloved in richness, but I cannot
ascertain the truth of your claim. Therefore, I am not allowed to rule
in your favor.'" Imam al-Razi said: "Umm Ayman testified for her, as did
the trustee of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.). Abu Bakr then asked her to
bring a witness whose testimony could be accepted according to the
s*hari'a*, and there was none."

Fatima's claim that Fadak had been given to her as a gift from the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), and Abu Bakr's denial of her claim, are well
known to the historians, as well as his rejecting the testimony of 'Ali
and Umm Ayman. Indeed all [of them] have mentioned this, from Ibn
Taymiyya to the author *of al-Sira al-Halabiyah* and Ibn Qayyim
al-Jawziya, and others.

But al-Bukhari and Muslim abridged the narrations, and reported only
Fatima's request, specifically relating to the inheritance, so that the
reader should assume that Fatima's anger against Abu Bakr was improper
and that Abu Bakr had only acted upon what he had heard from the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W); and that she was the wrong-doer, Abu Bakr the victim.
All this was to protect Abu Bakr's honor.

There was no consideration to observe honesty in transmission, nor
reliability in *hadith* [transmission], a fact which would have exposed
the shortcomings of the Caliphs and [would have] refuted the lies and
pretexts composed by the Umayyads and the supporters of the "rightly
guided" Caliphate, even though this was at the expense of the Prophet
himself (S.A.W.), or his "part,” al-Zahra (A.S.).

Because of this, al-Bukhari and Muslim have won the leadership of the
*hadith* scholars among the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* and their books
have been regarded as the most authentic books after the book of Allah.
This invention is not based on academic proof, and we will, God willing,
research the subject in a separate chapter so that we may expose the
truth for those who wish to know it.

However, we still [have enough proof to] challenge Muslim and
al-Bukhari, who only transmitted a small amount of merits of Fatima
al-Zahra (A.S.). There is enough evidence for the conviction of Abu Bakr
who knew al-Zahra and her status with Allah and His Prophet (P) more
than al-Bukhari and Muslim did. Despite this, he refuted her, and did
not accept her testimony or that of her husband, of whom the Prophet of
Allah said: "'Ali is with the truth, and the truth is with 'Ali,
hovering about him wherever he goes.” Thus, let us compare the
testimonies of al-Bukhari and Muslim with what the bearer of the Message
(S.A.W.) confirmed about the merits of his [own] flesh and blood,
al-Zahra.

Fatima’s impeccability according to the Qur'anic text
-----------------------------------------------------

In his *Sahih*, volume 7 in "The Chapter of the Virtues of the *Ahl
al-bayt*" Muslim reports that 'A'isha said: "The Prophet (S.A.W.)
emerged one morning wearing a cloak of black hair. Al-Hasan came and he
covered him with the cloak. Then al-Husayn came, and he joined him. Then
Fatima came and he brought her within. Then 'Ali came and he covered him
too. Then he recited: ***'Allah desires to cleanse you from impurities,
O*** ***ahl al-bayt, and purify you completely'***.

Fatima al-Zahra was the only woman in the *umma* whom Allah had thus
cleansed and purified from every sin and disobedience. I wonder who was
Abu Bakr to reject her testimony and ask her for  
 Witnesses?

Fatima is the leader of all believing women and the leader of the women of the umma
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Al-Bukhari reported in his collection, volume 7, in "The Book of Seeking
Permission" under the section about "One who confides to his Companion
in the Presence of others, and does not inform of the secret of his
Companions until he dies" and Muslim reports in "The Book Of Merits"
that A'isha, the mother of the believers, said: "We, the wives of the
Prophet (S.A.W.), were all together with him, not one of us left, and
then Fatima (A.S.) came walking along, by Allah, her style was similar
to that of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.).

When he saw her, he welcomed her saying: 'Welcome my daughter' and then
he made her seat on either his right or his left and whispered to her.
She began to weep bitterly. When he perceived her sadness, he whispered
to her a second time whereupon she laughed. I said to her while I was
still with his other wives: 'The Prophet of Allah favored you among us
with a secret, and then you wept.’

When the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) left, I asked her: 'What was the
secret he told you?’ Fatima said: 'I cannot breach the confidence of the
Prophet of Allah.’ After he died, I said to her: 'I hold you by whatever
right I have over you to tell me'. She said: 'It is alright for me to do
so now' and she informed me: 'When he whispered to me the first time, he
informed me: 'Gibra'il used to present the Qur'an once every year to me,
and this year he had done so twice.

There could be no other reason for this except that my time is near. So
fear Allah and be patient. For I am the best of those who should go
before for you.’ Then Fatima (A.S.) said: 'Then I wept as you saw. And
when he saw my grief, he shared a second secret with me. He said: 'O
Fatima, are you not happy that you are the leader of the believing women
or the leader of the women of this *umma*?'"

If Fatima al-Zahra (A.S.), is the leader of the believing women, as is
affirmed by the Prophet of Allah, and yet Abu Bakr denies her claim to
Fadak and rejects her testimony, then what testimony is acceptable after
this, I wonder?

Fatima al-Zahra is the leader of the women of Paradise
------------------------------------------------------

In volume 4 of his collection, al-Bukhari reported in "The Book of the
Beginning of Creation" in "The Chapter on The Virtue of Closeness to the
Prophet (S.A.W.)" that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: "Fatima is
the leader of the women of paradise". It necessarily means, therefore,
that Fatima is the leader of the women of all the worlds, for the
dwellers of paradise are not only from the *umma* of Muhammad, as is
obvious.

How then could Abu Bakr, "the truthful one" have repudiated her
evidence? Don't they allege that he attained the title "al-Siddiq"
because he used to believe in everything that his companion Muhammad
said to him? Why did he not believe him regarding what he said of own
"part", al-Zahra? Or was it that the issue pertained not so much to
Fadak, charity and the gifts as it pertained to the Caliphate, which was
the right of 'Ali, the husband of Fatima?

His denial of Fatima and her husband, who bore witness on her behalf on
the question of the gift, was by far the better choice for him because,
in so doing, he closed the doors to any further claims she might make.
What a monstrous plot this was, nearly enough to make the mountains
disappear.

Fatima is a part of the Prophet (S.A.W.), and the Prophet (S.A.W.) is angered when she is angered
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In volume 4, in "The Book of the Beginning of Creation" under "The
Chapter of the Virtues of Fatima (A.S.), the daughter of the Prophet
(S.A.W.)" al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* that Abu Walid said that
Ibn 'Uyayna reported on the authority of 'Amr b. Dinar on the authority
of Ibn Abi Malika, on the authority of al-Miswar b. Mukhrima that the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: "Fatima is a part of me, and whoever
angers, her angers me".

"Fatima is a part of me, and whatever she detests, I detest and what
hurts her, hurts me.” If the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) becomes angry
when his part, al-Zahra, gets angry, and suffers for her suffering, it
follows therefore that she is preserved from all errors; otherwise it
would not have been permissible for the Prophet (S.A.W.) to say
something like this.

This is because it is permissible to cause suffering and to anger anyone
who commits a misdemeanor, regardless of his status, as the Islamic
*shari'a* does not allow leeway for [special treatment for] ties of
kinship, far or near, aristocrat or peon, rich or poor.

If the matter is as stated, then who was Abu Bakr to hurt al-Zahra and
not heed to her anger? In fact he angered her until she died; she was
offended and even shunned him, not speaking to him until she passed
away, supplicating against him in every prayer she prayed, as is
reported in the history of Ibn Qutayba and other historians.

Indeed these are bitter and painful truths which jolt the pillars and
shake our faith. The impartial researcher, devoted to the truth and
reality, has no alternative but to admit that Abu Bakr wronged al-Zahra
and usurped her rights. It was possible for him, as Caliph of the
Muslims, to placate her and give her what she claimed. This is because
she was truthful as even Allah, the Prophet and all the Muslims, among
who was Abu Bakr, attest to her veracity. But it was politics that
overturned everything; the truthful person became a liar and the liar, a
truthful person.

Yes, it was a part of a plot instigated to alienate the Prophet’s family
from the position that Allah had chosen for them. It had started with
the alienation of 'Ali from the Caliphate, and the wrongful seizure of
the gift and inheritance of al-Zahra; and also the repudiation of her
testimony, along with her humiliation, so that there would remain no
respect for her in the hearts of the Muslims.

It ended with the murders of 'Ali, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and all their
children, their wives, were taken as prisoners of war, whilst their
supporters and those who loved and followed them were killed. Perhaps
these plots continue even till today; their actions are still being
enacted and their fruits are still being reaped.

Certainly any free-thinking, unbiased Muslim will know when he reads the
history books and differentiates truth from falsity, that Abu Bakr was
the first to wrong the *ahl al-bayt*. Reading the collections of
al-Bukhari and Muslim suffices to expose the truth, if the researcher is
truthful [in his research].

Here we have al-Bukhari as well as Muslim admitting apologetically that
Abu Bakr used to believe any ordinary companion who petitioned him. But
he denied Fatima, leader of the women of paradise, the one about whom
Allah had affirmed [His] cleansing and [His] purifying her; and he (Abu
Bakr) repudiated [the testimonies of] 'Ali and Umm Ayman! Let us read
what al-Bukhari and Muslim have to say:

It is reported in volume 3 of Bukhari’s *Sahih*, in "The Book of
Testimonies,” in "The Chapter of one Ordered to Fulfill a Promise,” and,
likewise, by Muslim in "The Book of Merits" under the heading: "God’s
Prophet (S.A.W.) was never asked for something and he denied [the
request] and his [generous] giving,” that Jabir b. 'Abd Allah (R) said:
"After the Prophet (S.A.W.) died, some property came to Abu Bakr from
'Alaí b. Hadramiyy, and Abu Bakr said: 'Whoever has given a loan to the
Prophet (S.A.W.), or to whom he had promised anything, let him come to
us'".

Jabir said: "I said: 'The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) promised to give me
this and this..' and he thrice spread his hands.'" Jabir said: "And he
counted five hundred [dinars], then another five hundred and another
five hundred in my hands."

Did anyone ask Abu Bakr why he believed Jabir b. 'Abd Allah’s claim that
the Prophet (S.A.W.) had promised to give him this and this and this,
and filled his hands three times to the sum of fifteen hundred [dinars],
without asking him to produce a single corroborating witness? Was Jabir
b. 'Abd Allah more God-fearing and pious than Fatima, leader of the
women of all the worlds?

Even more strange than all of the above, is the fact that Abu Bakr
repudiated the testimony of her husband 'Ali b. Abi Talib, he whom Allah
had cleansed from all impurity and had purified; he upon whom the
invocation of blessings is an obligation for each Muslim, just as he
invokes on the Prophet (S.A.W.). The Prophet made love for him [an act
of] faith, hatred towards him [an act of] hypocrisy.

Furthermore, al-Bukhari has narrated another incident that gives us a
true picture of the oppression on al-Zahra and the *ahl al-bayt*. From
"The Book of the Gift and its Merits and the Strong Encouragement [to
give Gifts]" in the chapter entitled: "It is not lawful for someone to
take back his gift or charity," al-Bukhari relates in his *Sahih* that
the tribe of Suhayb, which was a client of Ibn Jadh'an, laid claim to
two houses and a room that they claimed that the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) had given to Suhayb. Marwan said: "Who will testify as witness
on your behalf?"

They said: "Ibn 'Umar”. So they called him, and he corroborated their
claim that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) gave Suhayb two houses and a
room. Marwan based his judgment on Ibn 'Umar's testimony.”

Observe, O Muslim, this behavior and the judgments that favor some but
not others. Is this not oppression and injustice? If the Caliph of the
Muslims could judge in favor of plaintiffs solely on the testimony of
Ibn 'Umar, then is it not appropriate for a Muslim to ask himself: "Why
were the testimonies of 'Ali b. Abu Talib and Umm Ayman rejected?"

The fact is that the [joint] testimony of a man and woman is stronger
than that of a man only, if we are seeking to fulfill of all the
conditions stipulated in the Qur'an [regarding the requisite number of
witnesses]. Or is it that the sons of Suhayb were more trustworthy in
their petitions than the daughter of the Prophet (A.S.)? Or was it that
'Abd Allah b. 'Umar was reliable in the eyes of the judges while 'Ali
was not?

As for the claim that the Prophet (S.A.W.) does not bequeath [an
inheritance], the *hadith* that Abu Bakr presented; this was refuted by
Fatima al-Zahra, who resorted to the book of Allah, that source of
evidence that is never to be rejected, for it has been proven that the
Prophet (S.A.W.) said: "If a *hadith* comes to you from me, compare it
with the book of Allah, and, if it agrees with the book of Allah, act
upon it, and, if it contradicts the book of Allah, then discard it.”

There is no doubt that this *hadith* was contradicted by numerous verses
of the noble Qur'an. Was there any one to ask Abu Bakr and the Muslims
at large, why was Abu Bakr's single testimony accepted in connection
with the narration of this *hadith*, which contradicts [other]
narrations, reason and is against Allah's book? And why were the
testimonies of Fatima and 'Ali, which were in agreement with [other]
transmissions, with reason, and were not against the book of Allah,
rejected?

On top of all this, Abu Bakr, however high his status might be, and
whatever his supporters and defenders may relate of his merits, cannot
attain the station of al-Zahra, the leader of the women of the world,
nor the station of 'Ali b. Abi Talib, whom the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
preferred above all the other companions in every field.

Let us cite, by way of example, the day when the Prophet of Allah gave
the standard and confirmed that he would issue it to one who loved Allah
and His Prophet and, in turn, Allah and His Prophet loved him. All the
companions longed for it, each wishing it to be given to him but he gave
it to none but 'Ali. The Prophet of Allah said of him: "Surely, 'Ali is
from me, and I am from him, and he is the guardian of every believer
after me.”

However much the extremists may doubt the authenticity of these
*hadiths*, they will not doubt this; that the blessings on 'Ali and
Fatima is a part of the blessings upon the Prophet (P), and that the
prayers of Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, all those given the glad tidings of
heaven, and all the companions along with all the Muslims, would not be
accepted if they did not invoke therein blessings upon Muhammad and the
family of Muhammad, whom Allah had cleansed of every impurity and has
purified, as is reported in the *Sihah* books of the *ahl al-sunna* such
as al-Bukhari, Muslim, and other *Sihah* works. [This reached the] point
that Imam al-Shafi'i said: "His prayer is invalid who does not invoke
blessings on you.”

If it is permitted to lie and make spurious claims against these
[members of the Prophet’s household], then [we can say] good-bye to
Islam, and perdition to the world. If you, however, ask why Abu Bakr's
testimony was deemed admissible and that of the members of the Prophet’s
household was rejected, the answer is that he was the judge; and it is
up to the judge to rule as he sees fit, for the truth is with him in all
cases. Thus, the claim of the strong is akin to the claim of the lion,
its proof resulting from the fang and the claw.

Come with me, O reader, so that the veracity of this statement may be
made clear for you. See what contradictions al-Bukhari relates in his
*Sahih,* especially regarding the matter of the inheritance of the
Prophet. Al-Bukhari relates that Abu Bakr reported [the following
*hadith*]: "We are the assembly of Prophets; we do not bequeath;
whatever we leave is charity.” This is the *hadith* that all the
Sunnites believe, on which they base their proof for Abu Bakr not
responding to Fatima al-Zahra's demand.

What clearly proves that the *hadith* was invalid, and was not known, is
that Fatima claimed her inheritance, and so did the wives of the
Prophet, the mothers of the believers, for they petitioned Abu Bakr,
seeking their inheritance. This is what al-Bukhari reported and what is
used as proof that Prophets leave no inheritance.

But al-Bukhari contradicted himself by verifying that 'Umar b.
al-Khattab distributed the Prophet’s inheritance among his wives. For,
in "The Book of Deputyship,” in "The Chapter of Sharecropping by
Division and the Like" al-Bukhari reports on the authority of Nafi' from
'Abd Allah b. 'Umar (R), who informed him that the Prophet concluded a
contract with the people of Khaybar to utilize the land on the condition
that half the products of fruits or vegetation would be their share.

The Prophet used to give his wives one hundred *wasaq* (share of the
crops) each, eighty *wasaq* of dates and twenty *wasaq* of barley. (When
'Umar became the Caliph) he gave the wives of the Prophet the option of
either having the land and water as their shares, or carrying on the
previous practice. Some of them chose the land and some chose the
*wasaq*, and 'A'isha chose the land.”

This narration clearly demonstrates that Khaybar, from which Fatima
claimed her share, was like an inheritance for her from her father. Abu
Bakr disallowed her claim on the basis that the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) did not bequeath an inheritance.

The narration also clearly shows that 'Umar b. al-Khattab divided
Khaybar in the days of his Caliphate among the wives of the Prophet
(S.A.W.) and gave them the option of owning the land or taking the
*wasaq* (i.e. share of the crops), with 'A'isha choosing the land. If
the Prophet (S.A.W.) did not bequeath, how is it that 'A'isha, the wife,
inherited? And how is it that Fatima, the daughter, did not inherit?

Give us a legal opinion on this, O you of perception, and for you there
will be rewards and blessings. In addition, 'A'isha, the daughter of Abu
Bakr, appropriated the house of the Prophet of Allah (P) completely and
no other wife got what 'A'isha did. She it was who buried her father in
that house, and buried 'Umar beside her father, and yet forbade
al-Husayn from burying his brother al-Hasan beside his grandfather,
which led Ibn 'Abbas to tell her: "You rode a camel, you rode a donkey,
and, if you live, you'll ride an elephant, for the ninth part is from
the eighth, and in everything you do what you like.”

In any case, I do not wish to prolong this subject, for it must be
[left] for the researchers to refer to the annals of history.
Nonetheless, it does not hurt to mention an excerpt from a speech that
Fatima al-Zahra (A.S.) delivered when Abu Bakr and other prominent
companions were present, so that who are destroyed are destroyed after
clear signs [come to them] and those who are saved are saved after clear
signs [come to them].

"Did you intentionally discard the book of Allah and hurl it behind your
backs? It says: 'And Solomon inherited David...' and it says, regarding
the story of Zakariyya: 'Grant me from Thyself an heir who will inherit
me and the family of Ya'qub, and make him, O my Lord, one with whom You
are well pleased.’

And Allah says: ***'Those who are related by birth are to inherit each
other in accordance with Allah's Criterion.’*** And Allah says:
***'Allah dictates to you regarding your [male] children, they get the
share of two females'*** and again: ***‘It is prescribed for you that,
if death approaches, you bequeath property, bequeath it to your parents
and your closest kin in the prescribed way. This is*** ***a duty on
those who are pious.’***

Did Allah dictate to you a special verse that my father had dismissed?
Or are you more knowledgeable than my father and cousin [i.e., 'Ali]
regarding the specific and general teachings of the Qur'an? Or is it
that you say people of different faiths cannot inherit each other? What
you do is recorded, sealed and waiting for you to stand before it on the
day of gathering! Yes, the best judge is Allah; the best leader is
Muhammad; and the specified time is the day of resurrection, when all
who have lied will be the losers.”

Abu Bakr kills the Muslims who refused to pay him the Zakat
-----------------------------------------------------------

Both al-Bukhari, in "The Book of Calling the Apostates to Repent" in
“The Chapter on Killing those who Refuse to Accept the Obligatory Laws
and those Associated with Apostasy;” and Muslim, in "The Book of Faith"
in "The Chapter on the Order to Fight People,” report, on the authority
of Abu Hurayra, who said: "After the Prophet had died, and Abu Bakr was
made his successor, there were [some] Arabs who turned to disbelief.
Umar said: 'O Abu Bakr! How can you fight the people when the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) has said: 'I have been ordered to fight the people until
they say: 'There is no God but Allah' and whoever says this, makes
himself and his property inviolable except by legal right, and his
reckoning is with Allah?' Abu Bakr replied: 'By Allah! I will fight
whoever differentiates between *salat* and *zakat*, for *zakat* is a
lawful right upon the property!

By Allah! Were they to withhold even a single animal that they used to
give the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), I will fight them over their
withholding it.’ Then 'Umar said: 'By Allah! I saw then that Allah had
opened the heart of Abu Bakr to [the cause of] fighting, and I realized
then that it was correct.'"

This is nothing strange with Abu Bakr and 'Umar, who had threatened to
burn the house of Fatima, the leader of the women, along with those
companions inside it who withheld the pledge of allegiance [to Abu
Bakr]. If the burning to death of 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and
a party of the best of companions who had refused the pledge was a
trivial thing for them, then the killing of those who refused the
*zakat* is just a simple matter. For what is the value of these distant
desert tribes, compared to the Prophet’s family and the virtuous
companions?

I would add to it that those who refused to give their pledge perceived
that the Caliphate was their right according to the designation of the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.). Even if we assume that there was no
appointment on them, then it was still their right to refuse, to
criticize and to voice their views if there was consultation, as they
claim. The threat of them being burnt to death is established by
overwhelmingly numerous reports.

Had 'Ali not capitulated and ordered the companions to go out and give
their pledge, to prevent the shedding of Muslim blood and to preserve
the unity of Islam, there would have been no delay in carrying out the
threat of burning them.

Yet the [controversy] subsided and their power grew strong; and there
was no more opposition mentioned after the death of al-Zahra and after
'Ali’s reconciliation with them. How could they then desist from [acting
against] some tribes that refused to pay the *zakat* to them? A refusal
based on the argument of waiting until the matters of the Caliphate and
what happened after the Prophet’s death were clarified, the Caliphate
being, as 'Umar himself admitted, a sudden decision.

It is not strange therefore that Abu Bakr and his government should have
undertaken the killing of innocent Muslims and the destruction of their
sanctity and the enslavement of their women and progeny. Historians have
documented that Abu Bakr sent Khalid b. al-Walid, who burnt to death the
tribe of Banu Sulaym.

He then sent him then to al-Yamama and to Banu Tamim, whom he
treacherously killed, having bound them and beheaded them while in
captivity. He killed Malik b. Nuwayra, an eminent companion whom the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) had entrusted with charity money of his
people, having confidence in him. He [Khalid] then slept with Malikís
wife on the same night of her husband's murder. There is no strength and
no power except with Allah, the Highest most Powerful.  
 Malik and his people were guilty of nothing [by way of opposition]
except that they had heard of what had transpired after the death of the
Prophet (S.A.W.); the alienation of 'Ali and the oppression of al-Zahra,
to the extent that she died still angry at them. Similarly, [they heard]
the opposition of the chief of the Ansar, Sa'd b. 'Ubada, and his
breaking of the oath, as well as the reports, which the desert tribes
had circulated, casting doubt on the validity of the pledge to Abu Bakr.
Due to all this, Malik and his people hesitated giving the *zakat*.

The [resulting] decree from the Caliph and his supporters was that they
be killed; their women and children taken as prisoners of war; their
sanctity be defiled and they be subdued, so that the views of the
dissidents and the arguments on the Caliphate may not spread to the rest
of the Arabs.

Most unfortunately, you will find those who defend Abu Bakr and his
government justifying his errors, despite the fact that Abu Bakr himself
admitted them. They say what 'Umar did: "By Allah, I perceived that
Allah had opened Abu Bakrís heart to fighting and I realized then that
it was right.”  
 Can we ask 'Umar the secret of his conviction concerning fighting the
Muslims, about whom he himself had said that the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) had forbidden fighting as they had professed [the declaration]
"there is no God but Allah?"

Indeed, 'Umar himself had opposed Abu Bakr with this *hadith*. How then
did he suddenly change his stance and convince [himself] about fighting
them and know that it was the right thing simply because he felt Allah
had expanded Abu Bakr's heart? How did this operation of expanding his
heart occur? And how did 'Umar alone perceive it, to the exclusion of
everyone else?

If this "opening of the heart was figurative rather than literal, how
would Allah open the hearts of a people to what would make them oppose
His rules, which He had dictated through the tongue of His Prophet
(S.A.W.)? How could Allah have said to His servants, through His
Prophet: "Whosoever says: 'There is no God but God' you are forbidden to
kill him, for his accounting lies with me,” then He opens the heart of
Abu Bakr and 'Umar to fighting them? Did revelation descend upon the two
of them after Muhammad (P)? Or was it personal judgment, (*ijtihad*)
dictated by political reasons, which discarded the laws of Allah?

As for those apologists who claim that they had reverted from Islam and
that it was therefore obligatory to kill them, this allegation is not
correct; whoever has read the historical books knows most certainly that
those who withheld the *zakat* had not reverted from Islam. How could
they have [done so] when they prayed with Khalid and his forces when he
came to destroy them?

Furthermore, Abu Bakr himself nullified this spurious claim by paying
blood money for Malik fom the state treasury and apologized for his
death. No apology is needed for the killing of an apostate, nor is any
blood money paid from the state treasury. None of the righteous
predecessors ever said that those who withheld the *zakat* had reverted
from Islam, except in the later periods when there sprang up [different]
schools of thought (*madhahib*) and sects.

The *ahl al-sunna* then tried their utmost, though unsuccessfully, to
justify the actions of Abu Bakr, and found it necessary to formulate the
charge of apostasy against them; for they knew that abusing Muslims was
wicked and that killing them was [tantamount to] disbelief.

This is what has been reported in the *Sahih* literature of the *ahl
al-Sunna*, and even when al-Bukhari reported the account of Abu Bakr and
his speech: "By Allah, I will fight whoever differentiates between
*salat* and *zakat*..." he gave the chapter the title, "Whosoever
refuses to accept the obligatory commandments, and what is attributed to
them with [charges of] apostasy;” this is clear proof that he did not
himself believe in the charge of their apostasy (as is obvious).

Yet, others have attempted explanations of the *hadith*, as did Abu
Bakr, that *zakat* is a right upon property. It is an interpretation
taken out of its rightful context.

Firstly: Because the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) forbade the killing of
whoever said "*la ilaha illa Allah*;” there are several narrations on
this, verified by the *Sihah*, as we will show presently.

Secondly: If *zakat* were a right on property, then the *hadith* allows,
in this instance, for the judge to take the *zakat* by force from those
who refuse it, without killing them or the spilling their blood.

Thirdly: If this explanation were correct, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
would have fought Tha'laba, who refused to give the *zakat* to him (the
story is well known, and there is no need to repeat it).

Fourthly: We quote what has been authenticated by the *Sihah* regarding
the prohibition of killing whoever says "*la ilaha illa Allah*" I shall
restrict myself to al-Bukhari and Muslim and to some traditions, for the
sake of brevity.

Muslim, in "The Book of Faith" in "The Chapter of Prohibition on the
Killing of a *Kafir* after he says "*la ilaha illa Allah*,” and
al-Bukhari, in "The Book of Military Expeditions" relates: "Khalifa
informed me, on the authority of Miqdad b. al-Aswad, that he said to the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.):

'What do you think, if I were to meet a man from the disbelievers, and
we were to fight, and if he struck one of my hands with his sword and
severed it, then fled from me to the shelter of a tree, beseeching: 'I
have submitted myself to Allah,’ should I, O Prophet of Allah, kill him
after he has said this?'

The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: 'Do not kill him.’ So he said: 'But,
O Prophet of Allah, he cut off one of my hands, then he said it after
severing it.’ The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: 'Do not kill him. Were
you to kill him, he would be in your position before you killed him, and
you would be in his position before he had uttered those words.'"

This *hadith* shows us that it is forbidden to kill the *kafir* who
professes "There is no God but Allah.” even after his attack upon a
Muslim and his cutting of his hand. There is no [question here of the]
acceptance of Muhammad as a Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), nor of the
[obligatory] *prayer*, *zakat*, fast of Ramadan, or pilgrimage. Where,
then, do you go and how can you interpret [this]?

Al-Bukhari relates in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Military Campaigns" in
the chapter [entitled]: "The Prophet (S.A.W.) sent Usama b. Zayd to
al-Haraqat from Juhayna.” and Muslim in "The Book of Faith" in "The
Chapter on the Prohibition of the killing of a *kafir* after he has said
'There is no God but Allah,” on the authority of Usama b. Zayd, who
said: "The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) sent us to al-Haraqat and we
arrived there at dawn and attacked them; I and an Ansari were in combat
with one of their men. After we defeated him, he said: 'There is no God
but Allah;’ the Ansari turned away from him, but I struck him with my
spear until I killed him.

When we returned, he informed the Prophet (S.A.W.) who said: 'O Usama,
did you slay him after he said: 'There is no God but Allah?' I said: 'He
was seeking to spare himself.’ He (the Prophet) kept on repeating this
until I wished I had not accepted Islam prior to that day.”

This *hadith* proves beyond a shadow of a doubt that it is forbidden to
kill whoever says "There is no God but Allah.” Because of this, we
observe the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) severely rebuking Usama until the
latter wished he had not accepted Islam prior to that day, acting in
accordance with the *hadith* "Islam cleans whatever was done before it;”
and he yearned for Allah's forgiveness for that grave sin.

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Clothing" in "The
Chapter On White Clothes;” and Muslim narrated in "The Book of Faith" in
"The Chapter on Whoever Does not associating anything with Allah will
enter heaven" that Abu Dharr al-Ghifari (R) said: "I came to the Prophet
(S.A.W.) and he was clothed in a white outfit and was asleep.

I came again and [this time] he was awake. He said: 'Any servant who
says 'There is no God but Allah' and then dies in this state, enters
paradise.’ I said: 'Even if he fornicates and steals?' He said: 'Yes,
even if he fornicates and steals'. I said: 'Even if he fornicates and
steals?' He said: 'Yes, even if he fornicates and steals'. I said: 'Even
if he fornicates and steals?' He said: 'Yes even if he fornicates and
steals, despite what Abu Dharr feels.'"

Whenever he used to relate the *hadith,* Abu Dharr used to say: "Despite
what Abu Dharr feels.” This is another *hadith* which confirms admission
to paradise for anyone who says: "There is no God but Allah" and then
dies in that state, killing him is forbidden. This is in spite of what
Abu Bakr or 'Umar and all their helpers, who interpreted away the
realities and turned them upside down, so as to protect the honor of
their predecessors and their seniors who changed the rulings of Allah,
might have felt.

Most certainly Abu Bakr and 'Umar knew these rulings for they were
closer than we are to grasping the rulings, and closer than others to
the bearer of the message. However, for the sake of the Caliphate, they
reinterpreted the bulk of the rulings of Allah and His Prophet (P), even
though they had knowledge and proofs.

Perhaps, when Abu Bakr resolved to fight those who withheld the *zakat*,
and 'Umar opposed him with the Prophetic *hadith* forbidding that, he
(Abu Bakr) convinced his companion that it was he ('Umar) who had
carried the firewood to burn the house of Fatima by himself, and that
the least that could be said for Fatima was that she used to testify,
"there is no God but Allah".

He perhaps also persuaded him that 'Ali and Fatima were still of high
standing in the capital city of the Caliphate whereas the tribes
withholding the *zakat*, if they were left alone to consult their
matters within the Islamic state, they would have a major influence on
the centre of the Caliphate. With that, 'Umar perceived that Allah "had
opened Abu Bakr's heart" to fighting [such tribes] and admitted that he
was right.

Abu Bakr prevents the writing of the Prophet's sunna as did 'Umar b. al-Khattab and 'Uthman b. 'Affan after him
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Whenever the researcher dwells into the history books and acquaints
himself with the inner workings of the governments of the three Caliphs,
he realizes with absolute certitude that they were the ones who forbade
the writing and recording of the noble Prophetic *hadiths*. Indeed, they
even prevented [people from] talking about the *hadith* and transmitting
it to the people, for they undoubtedly knew that it would not serve
their interests or, at the very least, that [the *hadith*] would oppose
and contradict a lot of their verdicts; and what they had interpreted
was based on their reasoning and according to what their interests
dictated.

The *hadith* of the Prophet (S.A.W.) is the second source for law in
Islam. In fact it explains and makes clear the primary source, the noble
Qur'an, and [this] was left forsaken and forbidden during their reign.
For this reason, the *hadith* scholars and historians agree that the
collection and recording of the *hadith* started during the time of
'Umar b. 'Abd al-'Aziz (R) or even a little later on. Al-Bukhari
reported in "The Book of Knowledge" in "The Chapter on How Knowledge is
Acquired" that 'Umar b. 'Abd al-'Aziz wrote to Abu Bakr b. Hazm [and
said]: "See what there is of the *hadith* of Allah’s Apostle (S.A.W.)
and commit it to writing.

I fear the studies of the sciences while the scholars pass away. Nothing
should be accepted but the *hadith* of the Prophet (S.A.W.); so let them
[i.e. the learned] spread the knowledge and let them sit together so
that the one who is ignorant will learn. Knowledge is not destroyed
until it becomes a secret.”

Yet, after the death of the Prophet (S.A.W.), here was Abu Bakr
delivering a speech saying: "You relate from the Prophet (S.A.W.)
*hadiths* about which you disagree, and those after you will differ
[over them] even more. So don't relate anything from the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) and to whosoever asks you [regarding them], say: "The
book of Allah is between us and you; therefore, enjoin whatever is
*halal* in it and forbid whatever is *haram* in it.”

By Allah, how surprising is this command of Abu Bakr. Here he is, a few
days only after that sad day (called "The Calamitous Thursday"),
agreeing exactly with what his companion 'Umar b. al-Khattab had said:
"The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) is hallucinating, but the book of Allah
is enough for us.”

Here is Abu Bakr saying: "Don't transmit anything from the Prophet. And,
to whosoever asks, you say: "The book of Allah is between us; therefore
enjoin whatever is *halal* in it and forbid whatever is *haram* in it.”

All praise be to Allah for his clear admission that they hurled the
*sunna* of their Prophet (S.A.W.) behind them, and it became a forgotten
thing for them.

The question that must now be posed to the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a,*
i.e., the people who defend Abu Bakr and 'Umar and reckon them to be the
best of creation after the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), is this:

If your *Sihah* [books] report, as you claim them to do, that the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: "I am leaving for you two things after
me. If you adhere to them you will never go astray; the book of Allah
and my *sunna*,” and, assuming we accept the authenticity of this
tradition, then how is it that the best of your men reject the *sunna*
and did not accord it any weight, rather, they prevented the people from
writing or speaking about it?

Did anyone dare ask Abu Bakr from which verse did he deduce the legality
of fighting Muslims who withheld the *zakat*, and the taking of their
women and children as prisoners of war?

For the book of Allah, which is between us and Abu Bakr, states: ***"And
among them are those who made a covenant with Allah thus: ‘If you bestow
your bounty upon us, we will most certainly spend in charity and we will
be righteous.’ Yet, when Allah showered them with His bounty, they
became miserly and turned back from their covenant, and were averse to
it. So Allah put hypocrisy into their hearts as a result, until the day
they will meet Him because they turned back from what they had promised
Allah and because of their lies....."*** (9:75-77).

This verse, by the consensus of all commentators, was revealed
concerning Tha'laba, when he refused to pay the *zakat* during the
lifetime of the Prophet (S.A.W.). I would add that Tha'laba rejected the
*zakat* and refused to give it to the Prophet (P), as he said it was
*jizya*. Allah, in this verse, showed Tha'laba's hypocrisy, but yet, in
spite of this, the Prophet (P) did not fight him nor take his property
by force, even though he was capable of doing so.

In the case of Malik b. Nuwayra and his people, they did not deny that
the *zakat* was an obligatory duty among the injunctions of the
religion, but rather, they rejected the one who had usurped the
Caliphate after the Prophet, having done so by force, oppression and
manipulation of opportunity.

The position that Abu Bakr took [became] even stranger and more
astonishing when he discarded the book of Allah behind his back, [even
though] Fatima al-Zahra, the leader of the women of the world, argued
against him by it, citing to his audience unambiguous clear verses from
the book of Allah which confirmed the inheritance of the Prophets.

He did not accept it; he nullified it completely with a *hadith* which
he brought forth to serve his personal need. If he [truly] said: "You
relate from the Prophet of Allah *hadith* about which you differ, and
those who come after you will differ even more over them. So do not
relate anything from the Prophet's *hadith*.

And to anyone who asks you [about it], say: 'The Book of Allah is
between us, so enjoin what is *halal* therein, and forbid what is
*haram* therein....'", then why did Abu Bakr not do as he preached, when
he argued with the truthful, purified one, who was a part of the chosen
Messenger (S.A.W.), regarding the *hadith* of the Prophet: "We Prophets
do not bequeath...?" Why did he not judge with her according to the book
of Allah, enjoining its *halal* therein and forbidding its *haram*?"

The answer is obvious: in this instance, he would have found the book of
Allah against him, and Fatima would have triumphed in all her claims
over him. If she were to have triumphed against him on that day, she
would have later argued on the appointment to the Caliphate for her
cousin, 'Ali. It was necessary therefore that Abu Bakr oppose and deny
her. Allah says regarding these matters: ***“O You who believe! Why do
you preach that which you do not practice? Grievous indeed is it with
Allah that you preach what you do not do.”***

Due to all this, Abu Bakr could not be comfortable if the *hadiths* of
the Prophet (S.A.W.) were circulating among the people and committed to
writing, to memory, to transmission from town to town, village to other
[villages]; when those *hadith* were manifest texts that opposed the
politics upon which his state was built. There remained no solution for
him therefore but to wipe away and conceal the *hadiths*, indeed, to
obliterate and burn them.

His own daughter, 'A'isha, testified against him. She reported: "My
father collected the *hadith* of the Prophet, and they were five hundred
in number. He spent the night being undecided [about them]. I said that
he was undecided because of a complaint or something that had reached
him. In the morning he said: 'O my daughter! Bring me all the *hadiths*
that are with you'. I gave them to him, and he burnt them..."

'Umar b. al-Khattab was more severe than his companion on the traditions of the Prophet of Allah and forbade the people from transmitting them
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We saw the politics of Abu Bakr in preventing [the preservation of]
*hadith* to the extent that he burnt all the *hadiths* that had been
collected in his time, all five hundred of them, so that they would not
spread to the companions and other Muslims who were thirsty to know the
*sunna* of their Prophet (P).

When 'Umar ascended to the Caliphate, according to Abu Bakr's will, he
pursued the same type of politics, though in his own well known severe
and harsh manner. He did not limit himself to the forbidding and
prevention of the transmission and recording of the *hadith*; but
rather, he intimidated and threatened and beat and even imposed [house]
arrest.

In volume one of his *Sunan* in "The Chapter on being Honest to the
*Hadith*" Ibn Maja narrated on the authority of Qarza b. Ka'b: "'Umar b.
al-Khattab sent us to Kufa and accompanied us, walking with us to the
mountain passes. He said: 'Do you know why I have walked with you?'
Qarza said: 'We said: 'For the right of companionship of the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.), and for the right of the Ansar.’ 'Umar said: "Rather, I
did so for something I wish to tell you, and I hope you will remember it
as I have walked with you.

You will come upon people in whose hearts the Qur'an is vibrating like
the vibration of a kettle. When they see you, they will stretch their
necks in awe and say: '[These are] the companions of Muhammad.’ So
reduce the traditions from the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), and I will
support you.'" And when Qarza b. Ka'b [later] came to them they said:
"Relate [*hadith*] to us". He said: "'Umar forbade us.”

Similarly, Muslim related in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Manners" in
"The Chapter on Seeking Permission" that 'Umar threatened to beat Abu
Musa al-Ash'ari because of a *hadith* he reported from the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.). Abu Sa'id al-Khudri said: "We were sitting with Ubay b.
Ka'b when Abu Musa al-Ash'ari came to us, upset.

He stopped and said: 'I beseech you by Allah! Have any of you heard the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) say: 'Permission is to be sought three times.
If it is granted, proceed, if not, return.’ Ubay said: 'What about it?'
Abu Musa said: 'Yesterday I sought permission three times from 'Umar. He
did not grant it, so I went away. I came to him today, and when I
entered, I informed him that I had come yesterday, greeted him three
times and then left.

Then 'Umar said: 'We heard you but at the time we were busy; you should
have kept on seeking permission until it was granted to you.'" Abu Musa
said: "I sought permission according to what I heard the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) say. He said [to me]: 'By Allah! I'll beat your back and
your stomach unless you bring someone to testify to this.’ Ubay b. Ka'b
said: 'By Allah none will go with you except he who is the youngest
amongst us.’ Go forth, O Abu Sa'id'. So I went until I came to 'Umar and
I said: 'I have heard the Prophet of Allah say this.'"

Al-Bukhari also reported this incident, but, as is his norm, he abridged
and edited from it 'Umar's threat to beat Abu Musa, in order to protect
'Umar's honor although Muslim added Ubay's address to 'Umar: 'O Ibn
al-Khattab! Do not inflict suffering upon the companions of the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.).'"

Al-Dhahabi transmitted in his *Tadhkira al-Huffaz* in volume 1, page 4
from Abu Salama who said to Abu Hurayra: "During the time of 'Umar, did
you transmit this?" He replied: "Had I narrated in his time as I narrate
to you now, he would have whipped me with his whip.”

'Umar, after forbidding the [collection of] *hadith* and threatening the
people to beat them, burnt the traditions the companions had collected.
He addressed the people one day thus: "O People! It has come to my
knowledge that certain books have appeared in your hands. I wish, by
Allah, that I could change and correct them.

Let there not remain anyone amongst you with a book except that he gives
it to me so that I may check it.” The people assumed that he wished to
examine them to correct them on an issue so that there would be no
differences in it, and so they brought their books to him whereupon he
burnt them in the fire.

In his *Jami' Bayan al-'ilm wa Fadlihi*, Ibn 'Abd al-Barr related that
'Umar b. al- Khattab wanted to write down the *sunna*, then it seemed
better to him not to do so. So he wrote to the cities ordering that
anyone in possession of it must destroy it.

In spite of his plan, however, and despite his threats, his
proscription, prohibition and his burning of books, some of the
companions still persevered in relating what they had heard from the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) whenever they met people on their journeys
outside of Medina who asked them about the *hadith*s of the Prophet
(S.A.W.). 'Umar deemed it proper to confine them within Medina, even
forcing house arrest on them and undertaking forceful measures.

Ibn Ishaq narrated from 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf who said: "'Umar did not
die until after he had summoned all the companions of the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) from the farthest places; 'Abd Allah b. Hudhayfa, Abu
Darda', Abu Dharr al-Ghifari and 'Uqba b. 'Amir. He said to them: 'What
are these *hadiths* that you have related in the outlying areas from the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)?' They said: 'Are you forbidding us [to do
so]?' He responded: 'No! But stay with me. By Allah! You will not leave
me as long as I am alive.'"

And after him came the third Caliph, 'Uthman, who followed the same
course as his two predecessors. He ascended the *minbar* and declared
openly: "It is not permissible for anyone to narrate from the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) any *hadith* that was not heard during the times of Abu
Bakr and 'Umar.”

In this manner, the restriction continued throughout the rule of the
three Caliphs, a period of twenty-five years. If only it had been
limited to that period, rather, it continued. When Mu'awiya grabbed the
reins of power, he ascended the pulpit and declared: "I forbid you the
*hadith,* except those [accepted] during the time of 'Umar, for he used
to make the people fear Allah.” This has been reported by Muslim in
volume 3 in "The Book of *Zakat*" in "The Chapter on the Prohibition of
Questioning.”

Thereafter, the Umayyad Caliphs adopted this path, forbidding authentic
*hadiths* of the Prophet while specializing in the fabrication of forged
and false *hadiths* against him. It reached to an extent that Muslims of
every age have been afflicted by contradictions, myths and legends that
do not have any connection whatsoever to Islam.

Here is what al-Mada'ini reports in his book, *al-Ahdath*: "Mu'awiya
wrote the same letter to all of his governors after the year of the
unity: 'Anyone who reports anything regarding the merits of Abu Turab
('Ali b. Abu Talib) and his family is exempt from [my] protection.’ The
preachers in every place, every *minbar* then took to cursing 'Ali and
dissociating from him, defaming him and his family.”

Mu'awiya then wrote to his governors in all the regions: "Do not accept
the testimony of any of those who follow 'Ali and his Family.” He
further went on: "Seek out from among you those who follow 'Uthman and
those who love him, as well as his friends and protectors and those who
relate his merits and praises. Associate with them, frequent their
gatherings make them close to you and honor them. Write to me anything
that each one of them narrates, and give me his name, his father's name
and his progeny.”

They did that until the merits and praises of 'Uthman were numerous, all
because of the rewards, cloaks, gifts and land grants he sent to them,
flowing out to the Arabs and the non-Arab clients. It multiplied in
every city and they competed for status and worldly gains. Every man who
came to the officials of Mu'awiya was welcomed when he related praises
or merits of 'Uthman; his name was recorded and he was befriended and
rewarded. This continued for a while.

Then Mu'awiya wrote to his officials: "The *hadith* of 'Uthman has
multiplied and spread to every city. When this letter reaches you ask in
favor of various dimensions the people for the *hadiths* regarding the
merits of the companions and the first Caliphs. Do not leave any
information that any Muslim narrates in favor of Abu Turab, except that
you come up with another one that contradicts it from one of the
*sahaba*.

This is dearer to me and more of a delight to my eye and more of a
refutation to the argument of Abu Turab and his party (Shi'a), and more
damaging to them than recounting the good deeds and merits of 'Uthman.”

His letters were read to the people and many narrations on the merits of
the companions were reported, most of them spurious, [there was] no
truth in them. And the people really exerted themselves in this until
they started doing so from the pulpits. The teachers in the learning
circles started doing this and taught the children and youths until they
began to narrate and learn them as they learnt the Qur'an. They even
taught their daughters and wives and their servants and entourage, they
kept on doing this as long as Allah willed.

Then Mu'awiya sent a common letter to his officials in every region:
"Seek out one against whom there is proof that he loves 'Ali and his
family, and then erase his name from the national register and cut off
whatever [stipend] he is given from the state.” He reinforced this with
another letter: "Whosoever you accuse of aiding these people, place him
in fetters and demolish his home.”

The affliction was most severe and rampant in Iraq especially in Kufa to
the extent that, if a Shi\`i was visited by someone whom he trusted, he
would bring him to his house and tell him his secrets and thereafter, he
would live in fear of his servants and slaves and would not speak until
he had taken a severe oath of silence from them. Several spurious and
calumnious *hadiths* surfaced; and the jurists and judges and those in
authority promoted them.

The worst perpetrators of this calamity were those who recited the
Qur'an to show off to others and those of weak faith who displayed
outward piety and performed rituals while forging *hadith*; so that they
could please those in authority and be in their gatherings, thus gaining
money, property and positions. This continued until the *hadith* and the
reports fell into the hands of the religionists, who could not allow
lies and accusations. Rather, they accepted these *hadiths* and
transmitted them assuming they were authentic, for, had they known they
were spurious, they would not have narrated nor acted upon them.

I say the responsibility of this falls on Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman
who prevented the recording of the true *hadiths* of the Prophet
(S.A.W.) on the pretext that they were afraid the *hadiths* would be
mixed with the Qur'an. This is what their helpers and defenders
maintain. This claim amuses even the lunatics. Are the Qur'an and
*sunna* sugar and salt so that, if they are mixed, they could not be
separated from each other?

Even sugar and salt do not mix for each is in a specific container. Did
it not dawn upon the Caliphs that they could have written the Qur'an on
one special scroll and the *sunna* of the Prophet in a separate book, as
is the situation with us today, and has been since the recording of the
traditions from the time of 'Umar b. 'Abd al-'Aziz (R)?

Why has the *sunna* not been mixed with the Qur'an, even though the
*hadith* books exceed hundreds? Moreover, the *Sahih* of al-Bukhari is
not mixed with that of Muslim, which in turn is not mixed with Ahmad b.
Hanbalís *Musnad* nor the *Muwatta*' of Malik b. Anas, let alone being
mixed with the noble Qur'an.

This argument is weak like the house of a spider; it cannot stand up to
the scrutiny of proof. In fact, the proof against it is even clearer.
Al-Zuhri reported on the authority of 'Urwa that 'Umar b. al-Khattab
wanted to commit the *sunna* to writing and sought the counsel of the
companions of the Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.).

They advised him to do so; but 'Umar prayed for guidance about this for
a month then one morning arose saying: "I had wanted to write the
*sunna* down then I remembered the people before you that wrote books
and chose to follow them, leaving the book of Allah! And By Allah, I
will not mix the book of Allah with anything, ever.”

Look, O reader, at this narration. The companions of the Prophet
(S.A.W.) advised 'Umar to write down the *sunna* and he went against all
of them and chose to impose his own view; claiming that the people
before them had written books and had chosen to follow these books to
the exclusion of Allah's Book. Where was the claim of mutual
consultation (*shura*), which the *ahl al-Sunna wa'l-Jama'a* invoke?
Where are these people who chose to adhere to their books, instead of
the book of Allah?

We have not heard of them except in 'Umar b. al-Khattab's imagination.
Assuming these people did exist, there is no ground for comparison as
they manufactured books from themselves to distort the book of Allah.
The Qur'an states: ***"Woe unto those who write the book with their own
hands then they say 'This is from Allah' to gain thereby a small prize.
Woe unto them for what they wrote and for what they gained by their
deed"*** (2:79).

As for books of the *sunna,* these are not like that, for they originate
from the infallible Prophet who did not utter anything from his own
desire but, rather, from the revelation that descended upon him. [The
*sunna*] clarified and explained the book of Allah. The most High
stated***: "We have sent unto you the reminder, to explain to the people
what has been revealed to them"*** (16:44). And the Prophet (S.A.W.)
said: "I was given the Qur'an and with it something similar to it.”

This is a simple matter for anyone who knows the Qur'an, for there is no
mention in it of five prayers, no specified amount for *zakat* or rules
of fasting or *hajj* and various other rulings which the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) has explained. Due to this, Allah said: ***“What the
Prophet has given you accept it; and from what he has forbidden you,
eschew it.”***

And He says: ***"Say! ‘If you love Allah, then follow me so that Allah
may love you.'"***

If only 'Umar knew the book of Allah and paid more attention to it in
order to learn from it obedience to the injunctions of the Messenger,
and not to argue or refute him. If only he had known the book of Allah
and given more attention to it so that he could learn the judgment of
al-Kalala which he did not know up to the time he died.

During his Caliphate, he issued rulings on it based on various
contradictory verdicts. If only he knew the book of Allah and paid more
attention to it to learn the rulings of *tayammum* which he did not know
even during the days of his Caliphate. He used to rule that he who
doesn't find water should not pray.

If only he knew the book of Allah and paid due attention to know the
laws of divorce of two utterances, after which one should live [with the
wife] in accordance with proper forms of behaviour or should separate
from her with kindness. Instead, he made all three divorces count as
one; and, by following his own view and personal judgment, he opposed
Allah's decrees, discarding them.

The truth that cannot be denied is that the Caliphs prevented the spread
of *hadiths*. They threatened and exiled whosoever spoke of them. This
is because it would have frustrated their plans and exposed their plots
and would not have given them any room for interpreting things as they
interpreted the Qur'an.

This is because Allah's book is silent and multifaceted, whereas the
*sunna* of the Prophet is comprised of the words and deeds of the
Prophet (S.A.W.), no one can oppose it. Due to this, the Commander of
the Faithful, 'Ali (A.S.), said to Ibn 'Abbas when he sent him to debate
with the Khawarij: "Do not oppose them with the Qur'an, for the Qur'an
has different interpretations. You will say things and they will say
[other] things; but debate them by using the *sunna*, for they will not
find any escape from it.”

Abu Bakr bestows the caliphate upon his companion 'Umar and, in doing so, goes against the clear texts
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

On this matter specifically, Imam 'Ali (A.S.) said: "By Allah! Ibn Abi
Quhafa has dressed himself [with the Caliphate]! Yet he knows that my
position to it is like that of a pole in relation to the hand mill! The
current flows from me and [even] birds cannot aspire to my heights. I
put a curtain against the Caliphate and detached myself from it.

I began to think whether I should fight [for my rights] with a fettered
hand (i.e. unsupported) or endure the blinding darkness of tribulations
wherein the old would become feeble, the young would become old, and a
believer would strive until he met his Lord.

I perceived being that patience was the wiser course for me. I adopted
patience although there was prickling in the eye and suffocation in the
throat.

I watched the plundering of my inheritance till the first one passed
away; but he handed [the Caliphate] to Ibn al-Khattab after him. (Then
'Ali quoted al-'Asha's verse: 'My days now pass on the camel's back
(i.e., with difficulty), while there were days (of ease) in the company
of Jabir's brother).’

It is surprising that, during his lifetime, he wished to be released of
the Caliphate, yet he confirmed it for the other one after his death.
How cleverly the two shared it's udders between themselves. This one put
the Caliphate in a tough enclosure with harsh speech and a rough touch.
Many errors were made, and so many excuses [offered].”

Every researcher and examiner knows that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
designated and appointed 'Ali b. Abi Talib to the Caliphate before his
death. Most of the *sahaba*, amongst whom Abu Bakr and 'Umar were the
most prominent, knew of it also. Because of this, Imam 'Ali used to say:
"He knows my position to it is like the pole to the hand mill..."
Perhaps it was this that caused Abu Bakr and 'Umar to forbid the
transmission of *hadiths* from the Prophet (P), as we have shown in the
preceding chapter, adhering only to the Qur'an.

The Qur'an, even though it contains the verse of successor ship, does
not clearly mention the name of 'Ali. The *hadiths*, however,
specifically mention his name; for example the Prophet's (S.A.W.)
saying: "Of whomsoever I am the master, this 'Ali is his master" and
"'Ali is to me as Aaron was to Moses;” and "'Ali is my brother and
successor and the Caliph after me;” and "'Ali is from me, and I am from
him, and he is the leader of every believer after me.”

This helps us understand the extent of success of the step which Abu
Bakr and 'Umar took in the proscription and burning of the *hadiths* of
the Prophet; thereby muzzling the people to the extent that even the
companions did not mention the *hadiths*, as has already been mentioned
in the report of Qarza b. Ka'b.

This restriction continued for a quarter century, i.e., the period of
the first three Caliphs, until the coming of 'Ali to the Caliphate. Now
we see he made the companions bear witness, on the day of assembling, to
the *hadith* of Ghadir Khum, thirty of them bearing witness, seventeen
of whom were veterans of Badr.

This is manifest proof that these companions, and there were thirty of
them, would not have spoken up had the Commander of the Faithful not
asked them to do so. Were 'Ali not the Caliph, with power in his hands,
they would have remained silent, fearing to bear witness.

This had actually happened in the case of some companions in whom fear
and jealousy prevented them from bearing witness, among them were Anas
b. Malik, Bara' b. 'Azib, Zayd b. Arqam, and Jarir b. 'Abd Allah
al-Bajli. The claim of 'Ali (A.S.) had reached them however; he was not
allowed to manage the Caliphate in peace. His days were filled with
trials, mischief and plots. Wars were waged against him from every side;
and their jealousy and grudges surfaced by [his showings] at Badr,
Hunayn, Khaybar until he fell martyred.

Those Prophetic traditions did not find receptive ears among those who
broke their pledges, the deviants, those who missed the truth and the
opportunists. They indulged in immorality, taking bribes and being fond
of the world during the Caliphate of 'Uthman. The son of Abu Talib could
not, within three or four years, rectify the corruption and deviation of
a quarter century, except by destroying himself, God forbid. 'Ali it was
who said: "I know very well what will correct you, but I will not cure
you by corrupting myself.”

It was not long before Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan ascended the Caliphate and
continued the same plan that we have already described, i.e. prohibiting
all *hadiths* except those which were prevalent at the time of 'Umar.
Indeed, he even went a step further and commissioned a group of the
companions and their followers to fabricate traditions. Thus the *sunna*
of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was lost in the web of their lies,
tales and their spurious merits.

The Muslims continued thus for a full century during which the *sunna*
of Mu'awiya was followed by the general Muslim public. When we say "the
*sunna* of Mu'awiya,” we mean the *sunna* that was pleasing to Mu'awiya
from the acts of the first three Caliphs Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman;
and also whatever else he and his followers added by way of lies,
forgeries, curses and insults against 'Ali and the members of his
household, and his followers amongst the sincere companions.

This is why I reiterate and repeat that Abu Bakr and 'Umar succeeded in
their plan to obliterate the *sunna* of the Prophet (S.A.W.), on the
pretext of referring to the Qur'an.

For you can clearly see today, after the passing of fourteen centuries,
if you argue by the successively transmitted Prophetic texts which prove
that the Prophet (S.A.W.) appointed 'Ali as his successor, it will be
said to you: "Let us leave aside the Prophetic *sunna* that is differed
upon, the book of Allah is sufficient for us; and the book of Allah did
not relate that 'Ali is the successor of the Prophet, but instead said:
"Your affairs are by mutual consultation.” This is their argument, every
scholar of the *ahl al-sunna* I talked to, spoke of the *shura* as their
slogan and standard practice.

Disregarding the fact that the Caliphate of Abu Bakr was a sudden event,
through which Allah shielded the Muslims from evil, it was not done by
consultation, as some claim. Rather, it was done by negligence and
force, by coercion, intimidation, and beatings. Several of the best
companions dissented and opposed it.

At the head of this group were 'Ali b. Abu Talib, Sa'd b. 'Ubada,
'Ammar, Salman, Miqdad, al-Zubayr, al-'Abbas and many others, as the
eminent historians of this event admitted. Nonetheless, let us leave
this matter alone and turn towards Abu Bakr's appointment of 'Umar as
successor after him; and let us ask the *ahl al-sunna* who brag about
the principle of *shura*: "Why did Abu Bakr appoint 'Umar as his
successor and impose it upon the Muslims rather than leaving the matter
[open for] mutual consultation, as you claim?”

For further clarification, as is our custom, we depend only on the books
of the *ahl al-Sunna*, and present to the reader how Abu Bakr appointed
his companion as his successor. Ibn Qutayba reported in his *History of
the Caliphs* (*Ta'rikh al-Khulafa'*), in "The Chapter of Abu Bakrís
illness and his Designation of 'Umar (R) as his successor": "Then he
summoned 'Uthman b. 'Affan and said: 'Write my will.’ So Abu Bakr
dictated and 'Uthman wrote thus: 'In the name of Allah, the Beneficent
the Merciful. This is what Abu Bakr b. Quhafa does decide as his last
will and testament in this world that he is about to leave, and the
first testament to the hereafter that he is about to enter.

I appoint 'Umar b. al-Khattab as my successor, if you perceive him as a
just man among you, and this is my opinion of him and hope in him. If he
distorts and changes, I only wish for [your] good, and I do not have
knowledge of the unseen. And those who do wrong will soon know their
fate.'"

He then put his seal upon the document and gave it to 'Uthman. When the
news that he had named 'Umar as his successor reached the emigrants and
the Ansar, they entered and said: "We see that you have placed 'Umar as
the Caliph over us.

You know and are aware of his severity with us even while you are among
us, how about when you leave us? Now you are going to meet Allah, the
Most High and Majestic, and He will ask you about it, what will you
say?" Whereupon Abu Bakr replied: "If Allah asks me, I will most
certainly say: 'I appointed as Caliph over them he who seemed to me to
be the best of them.'"

Some historians, such as al-Tabari and Ibn al-Athir, relate that when
Abu Bakr called 'Uthman to write his last testament, he lost
consciousness while he was dictating and 'Uthman wrote the name of 'Umar
b. al-Khattab. When he regained consciousness, he said: "Read what you
have written! So he read it and mentioned 'Umar's name. Abu Bakr asked
him: "From where did you get this?" He answered: "You were never wont to
oppose him.” Abu Bakr replied: "You are right.”

When he finished his will, some of the companions, Talha among them,
called upon him. Talha said to him: "What will you say to your Lord
tomorrow? You have chosen a severe, harsh man to govern us. People run
away from him and their hearts beat because of him.” Abu Bakr said: "You
all helped me, and he was my support. So now support him.” He said to
Talha: "Do you try to scare me with Allah? If I am asked about it
tomorrow I will say: 'I selected the best of your people to rule them.'"

Since the historians all agree that Abu Bakr appointed 'Umar as his
successor, without having sought the counsel of the companions, we can
only say that he did so despite the wishes of the companions who hated
'Umar. Whether it was Ibn Qutayba who reported that the Muhajirun and
Ansar entered and said: "You are fully aware of his severity with us" or
Tabari who said: "Some companions, Talha among them, called upon Abu
Bakr and Talha said: 'What will you say to your Lord now that you have
chosen to rule over us a harsh, severe man from whom people run away and
because of whom hearts beat [faster]?'"

The end result is still the same: that the companions did not decide
their affairs by mutual consultation; and they did not approve the
appointment of 'Umar, whom Abu Bakr had imposed upon them without
seeking their counsel. The result is that which Imam 'Ali foretold when
'Umar b. al-Khattab treated him so harshly to gain his pledge of
allegiance to Abu Bakr; for he said: "He has milked for you milk, half
of which will be for you; so enforce his [command] today and he will
return it to you tomorrow.”

This is exactly what one of the companions said to 'Umar b. al-Khattab
when he came out with the letter appointing him as the Caliph. He said
to 'Umar: "What is in the document, O Abu Hafs?" 'Umar said: "I don't
know, but I shall be the first to hear and obey.” Whereupon the man
said: "By Allah, I know what is in it. You made him the leader in the
first year, and now he has made you the leader.”

This clearly proves to us, beyond any doubt, that the principle of
*shura*, which the *ahl al-sunna* claim [as their standard], had no
basis for Abu Bakr and 'Umar. In other words, Abu Bakr was the first to
destroy and discard the principle, thereby opening the doors for the
Umayyad rulers to follow his action, a Caesar-like dynasty, handed down
from father to son. After them, the 'Abbasids did likewise; the idea of
*shura* remained a dream which the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* seek but
never actualize.

This reminds me of a conversation that took place between a Wahhabi
scholar from Saudi Arabia and me in a Nairobi mosque in Kenya concerning
the problem of the Caliphate. I was advancing the view that the
Caliphate was according to designation and that the entire affair was
Allah's to decide as He wished, and that there was no room for people to
decide in the matter. He was a proponent of the *shura* and was
defending it strongly.

He also had with him several of his students who were studying under him
and supporting everything he said, on the pretext that his argument was
based on the noble Qur'an, wherein Allah said to His Prophet (S.A.W.):
"And seek their counsel in the matter" and also: "Their affairs [are to
be decided by] a *shura* between them.”

I realized that I was overpowered by them, for they had learnt all the
Wahhabi ideas from their teacher and also that they would not listen to
the true *hadiths*, but rather, relied on some *hadith* which they had
memorized, most of which were false. I therefore surrendered to the
principle of *shura* and said to them and to their teacher: "Can you
convince the government of His Highness, Your King, of the principle of
*shura*, so that he might step down from his throne and follow the
example of your pious predecessors?

Thereby giving the Muslims in the Arab peninsula the freedom of choice
of their ruler? I don't think he will do that, for his father and
grandfathers not only ruled the Caliphate, but also the entire Arab
peninsula became part of their kingdom. They even called the entire
Hijaz 'The Saudi Kingdom.’

Upon that, their leader, the scholar, said: "We have no business with
politics; we are in the house of Allah wherein we are ordered to
remember his name and observe the prayers.”

I replied: "And also to seek knowledge.” He said: "Yes, it is so and we
also teach the youth here". I said: "And so we are [engaging] in an
academic discussion". He said: "And you have denigrated it by [touching
on] politics.”

I left with my companions; I felt sad for the Muslim youths whose minds
the Wahhabis had so controlled in every way and declared a war on their
fathers. They were all adherents to the Shafi'i *madhhab* which, I
think, is the closest to that of the Prophet’s family. The Shaykhs used
to have respect and piety from the educated and non educated people
alike, since most of them came from notable backgrounds of a pure
lineage.

Then the Wahhabis came and, taking advantage of their poverty, deluded
them with money and other material things and they changed their
outlook, i.e., [they convinced them] that such respect for the Shaykhs
was in fact idolatry because it entailed the veneration of a human
being. So the sons turned against their fathers. Regrettably, this is
what has happened in many of the Islamic countries in Africa.

Let us return to the topic of the death of Abu Bakr. We find him, just
before his death, regretting what he had done, for Ibn Qutayba reported
in his "*History of Caliphate*" Abu Bakr's words: "Yes, by Allah, I
regret only three things that I wish I had not done: (1) "If only I had
left the house of 'Ali.” In another narration, that "I had not violated
the house of Fatima even if they had declared war upon me;”

(2) "If only, on the day of Saqifa at Banu Sa'ida, I had instead pledged
to Abu 'Ubayda or 'Umar and that he were the leader and I the minister;”

(3) "If only, when I came upon Dhi al-Faja'a al-Sulami, while he was a
prisoner of war, I had slaughtered him or spared him instead of burning
him.”

And we add: "If only, O Abu Bakr, you had not oppressed al-Zahra, had
not hurt or angered her; and if only you had repented before her death
and had pleased her. This is specifically with regards to the house of
'Ali, which you exposed and allowed to be burnt.

Regarding the Caliphate, if only you had left your two companions and
cronies, Abu 'Ubayda and 'Umar, and given the pledge to the divinely
prescribed Caliph, who had been named as successor by the bearer of the
message, that he would be the leader. Then the world today would be
different from what we see and Allah's religion would have spread all
over the globe, as Allah had promised and His promise is always true.

With respect to al-Faja'a al-Sulami, whom you burnt to death, if only
you had not burnt the Prophetic traditions which you had collected, you
would have learnt the correct *shari'a* rulings from them and would not
have resorted to personal judgment by your own views.

Lastly, while you were on your death bed, if only you had thought about
your appointment of a successor and returned the truth to its owner, he
whose position to the Caliphate was like the pole to the millstone. For
you were the most aware of his merits, his excellence, his asceticism,
his knowledge and his piety; for he was like the Prophet himself
(S.A.W.), especially when he submitted the matter to you and did not
rise up against you, for the sake of protecting Islam.

You were free to advise the *umma* of Muhammad (S.A.W.) and to choose
for it one that would have corrected its affairs, governed it properly
and taken it to the summit of glory.

We ask Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, to forgive your sins, and to
placate Fatima and her father, as well as her husband and her sons for
your sake. For you angered a part of al-Mustafa and God gets angry when
she is angry and is happy when she is happy. One who hurts Fatima hurts
her father according to the text of his *hadith*; and, according to
Allah's words, 'whosoever causes suffering to the Prophet of Allah, and
for them is a painful punishment.'"

And we seek Allah's refuge from His anger and we ask Him to be pleased
with us and with all the Muslim men and women, the believing men and the
believing women.

'Umar b. al-Khattab contravenes the book of Allah with his personal reasoning
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The history of 'Umar, the second Caliph, is one filled with his
*ijtihad* (personal reasoning) as opposed to the clear texts from the
noble Qur'an and the noble *sunna* of the Prophet. The *ahl al-sunna*
use that as pride and virtue, for which they praise him. The objective
ones among them seek excuses and farfetched defenses for him, neither
reason nor logic can accept them.

How can one who opposes the book of God and the *sunna* of His Prophet
be one of those who exercises *ijtihad*? Allah says: ***"It is not
proper for any believing man or believing woman, if Allah and His
Prophet have decreed a matter, that they should have any option in their
matter. And whosoever disobeys Allah and His Prophet has most manifestly
gone astray"*** (33:36).

And our Glorious Creator also says: ***"Those who do not judge according
to what Allah has revealed, they are unbelievers, and those who do not
judge by what Allah has revealed they are indeed wrongdoers ... and
those who do not judge by what Allah has revealed, they are the corrupt
ones"*** (5:44/45/47).

In "The Book of Adherence to the Qur'an and *Sunna*" in "The Chapter on
what is Mentioned regarding Blameworthy Opinions, Strained Analogies,
and Acting and Saying about Things of which you have no Knowledge.”
al-Bukhari reported that the Prophet (S.A.W.) said: "Allah does not
arbitrarily take away knowledge after having bestowed it, but rather, He
takes it away with the passing away of the learned and their knowledge,
whereupon the people are left in ignorance, seeking and giving religious
opinions from their personal ideas. And in so doing, they are led astray
and lead others astray.”

Similarly, in the same book, al-Bukhari reports in his *Sahih* in the
next chapter: "The Prophet (S.A.W.), when asked about something for
which a revelation had not come, used to say 'I don't know'; or he did
not reply until a revelation came to him, he did not speak based on his
own opinion or on analogy, in accordance with Allah's words:
***'According to that which Allah has shown you.'***"

The scholars, old and new, have said one thing: "Whoever exercises his
personal judgment in the Qur'an has disbelieved," and this is clear from
the unambiguous verses and from the words and deeds of the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.).

How then can this rule be forgotten whenever the matter pertains to
'Umar b. al-Khattab or any of the companions or one of the Imams of the
four *madhabs*? Indeed, personal interpretation, even in contravention
to the judgments of Allah, gets one reward if it is wrong and two if it
is right!

One could well say that this point is agreed upon by both the Shi'as and
the Sunnis according to Prophetic *hadiths* accepted by both. However, I
reply that this is true but they differ on the issue of *ijtihad*. The
Shi'a enjoin *ijtihad* in matters where nothing has come down from Allah
or His Prophet (P). As for the *ahl al-sunna*, they do not restrict
themselves like this.

Taking the example of the Caliphs and pious predecessors, they do not
see any harm in *ijtihad* even in the face of clear texts. The great
scholar, al-Sayyid Sharaf al-Din al-Musawi relates in his book, *al-Nas
wa'l-Ijtihad,* more than 100 instances wherein the companions,
especially the three Caliphs, contravened the clear texts of the Qur'an
and *sunna*. The researchers should study this book.

Since we are essentially on this subject, it is necessary to mention
some of the instances wherein 'Umar went against clear texts, maybe due
to his ignorance of the texts, and this would be astonishing; for he who
is ignorant is not fit to judge what is legal and forbidden, from his
own volition. Allah says: ***"Do not say anything false that your
tongues may put forth that this is*** ***halal*** ***and this is***
***haram, so as to ascribe false things to Allah. Those who ascribe
false things to Allah will never prosper"*** (16:116).

An ignorant person cannot take up the position of Caliph and lead the
whole *umma.* Allah says: ***"Is he who leads to the truth more worthy
to be followed or he that cannot lead unless he is guided? What is with
you? How do you judge"*** (10:135)?

It is also possible that 'Umar was not ignorant of the texts; he knew
them yet relied on *ijtihad* due to what the circumstances dictated. The
*ahl al-sunna* do not consider this to be *kufr* or deviation; just as
[they assume] he must have been ignorant of the presence of one of his
contemporaries who knew the correct rulings.

[This defense] is baseless since he knew of Imam 'Ali's total command of
the Qur'an and *sunna*. Otherwise, he would not have sought 'Ali's
guidance in many dilemmas, so much so that he said: "Were it not for
'Ali, 'Umar would have perished.” Why, I wonder, would Umar then seek
'Ali's guidance in the matters in which he depended on personal
reasoning, which he knew had defects?

I believe that the unbiased Muslims will agree on this since this is the
type of *ijtihad* that corrupted the creed [of Islam] as well as its
legal rulings, nullified them, and caused dissension among the learned
of the *umma* and their fragmentation into numerous sects and schools of
thought. And from this spread dissension and opposition, the failure and
disappearance of the [Islamic] spirit and the material and spiritual
backwardness [of the *umma*].

We are left to imagine that, even with Abu Bakr and 'Umar in the seat of
the Caliphate and the removal of its divinely prescribed person, had the
former two collected the Prophetic *sunna* and preserved it in a special
book, they would have done themselves and the *umma* general good. Then,
no extraneous matter would have entered the Prophetic *sunna*, and Islam
then, with its Qur'an and *sunna*, would have been a one religion, one
people, one nation, one creed. Today, we see the opposite.

This is because the *hadiths* were collected, burnt and proscribed from
being recorded and transmitted even by word of mouth. This was a great
catastrophe, a major calamity. There is no power except with Allah, the
Most High, the Most Powerful.

Following are some of the clear texts to show that 'Umar exercised
personal reasoning as opposed to [resorting to] the Qur'an:

(1) The Qur'an states: ***"And if you have had sexual emission, then
purify yourselves. But if you are ill or on a journey, or one of you has
passed excrement or have had sexual intercourse, and cannot find water,
then make*** ***tayammum*** ***on clean earth...."*** (5:6).

It is well known from the Prophetic *sunna* that the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) taught the companions how to make *tayammum,* even in the
presence of 'Umar himself.

In "The Book of *Tayammum*" in "The Chapter [entitled] 'The pure earth
is the ablution of a Muslim in the absence of water,'" al-Bukhari in his
*Sahih* reports the following *hadith* on the authority of Imran: "We
were on a journey with the Prophet (S.A.W.). We journeyed until the last
hours of the night then we pitched camp. There is no sweeter camping to
the traveler than this. We did not wake up until the sun had risen.

The first to arise was so and so, then so and so ... whose names were
recollected by Abu Raja', but he forgot 'Awf, then 'Umar b. al-Khattab,
who was the fourth. When the Prophet (S.A.W.) slept, he was not awakened
by anyone until he himself arose. This was because we did not know what
was happening to him in his sleep. When 'Umar woke up and realized what
had befallen the people, and he was a very corpulent man, he cited the
*takbir* and raised his voice with it. He persisted in saying the
*takbir* and raising his voice until it awoke the Prophet (S.A.W.). When
he awoke, the men complained to him about what had befallen them.

He said: 'There is no good nor harm here, move from this place.’ So they
moved, not very far away, then he stopped and called for water with
which he made *wudu*, and then, after the call to prayer was pronounced,
he led the people in prayer. When he finished the prayer, he saw a man
who had separated himself, he had not prayed with the group. He said:
'What prevented you, O so and so, from praying with the people?' He
said: 'I am ritually impure and there is no water.’ The Prophet (S.A.W.)
said: 'Then use the earth, for that is sufficient for you.'"

However, 'Umar gave a verdict against the book of Allah and the *sunna*
of his Prophet by saying: "Whoever does not find any water must not
pray.” This was his opinion which was recorded by most of the *hadith*
scholars. In volume 1 of his *Sahih*, in "The Book of Purification" in
"The Chapter on *Tayammum*" Muslim reported that a man came to 'Umar and
said: "I have become ritually impure and cannot find water".

He said: "Then do not pray.” Whereupon 'Ammar said: "Don't you remember,
O Commander of the Faithful, when you and I were on an expedition [with
the Prophet]? We both became ritually impure and could not find water.
You did not pray whereas I rolled over in the dust and prayed. The
Prophet (S.A.W.) said: 'It would have been enough for you to strike the
earth with your palms, then blow upon them, then wipe your face and
hands.'” 'Umar said: "Fear Allah, O 'Ammar" The latter said: "If you
wish, I will not relate it.”

Glory be to Allah! 'Umar was not content with opposing the clear texts
from the Qur'an and the *sunna*, he even tried to prevent the companions
from opposing his views. 'Ammar was forced to placate the Caliph by his
offer: "If you wish I will not narrate it.” How can I and you not be
taken aback by this *ijtihad* and opposition and stubbornness on
reasoning despite the testimony of a companion of a clear text?

'Umar was not convinced and held this view stubbornly until his death.
His view influenced many companions who perceived things his way. In
fact, they sometimes preferred his view over the view of the Prophet of
Allah. Muslim reported in "The Book of Purification" in "The Chapter on
*Tayammum*,” volume 1, on page 192 on the authority of Shaqiq who said:
"We were seated with 'Abd Allah and Abu Musa when the latter said: 'O
Abu 'Abd al-Rahman, what do you think of a man who becomes ritually
impure and does not find water for a whole month? What does he do
regarding the *salat*?' 'Abd Allah replied: 'He does not make *tayammum*
even if cannot find water for a whole month.’

Abu Musa said: 'What about the *ayat* in *Sura al-Maíida*: 'And if you
do not find water then make *tayammum* on clean earth?'' 'Abd Allah
said: 'If it were permitted for them, according to this verse, they
would seek to make *tayammum* with earth [even] if the water became cold
for them'. Then Abu Musa said to 'Abd Allah: 'Did you not hear what
'Ammar said: 'The Prophet of Allah sent me on a mission and I became
ritually impure and could not find water, so I rolled in the dust as
does an animal.

When I met the Prophet (S.A.W.), I mentioned that to him and he said:
'It would have been enough for you to do with your hands thus: he struck
the earth with his hands once then wiped the left over the right hand,
over the backs of his hands and face.'” 'Abd Allah said: 'Did you not
narrate that 'Umar was not convinced by 'Ammar's story?'"

If we study this narration which has been authenticated by al-Bukhari,
Muslim and other *Sihah* [books], we understand how influential the
views of 'Umar were among a large number of senior *sahaba*, and from
this we also understand the extent of the contradiction in the legal
rulings, as well as the erosion and mutual contradiction of the
narrations.

Perhaps these are what led the Umayyad and the 'Abbasid rulers to
devalue Islamic rulings, not according them any importance and
permitting numerous discordant rulings on one matter. It is as though
they said to Abu Hanifa, Malik, Ahmad and al-Shafi'i: "Say what you wish
according to your own views, for if your head and Imam, 'Umar, said
whatever he wished instead of the Qur'an and the *sunna*, then there is
no blame on you, for you are merely the followers of the followers of
the followers, you are not innovators.”

Yet more surprising than all of this is what 'Abd Allah b. Mas'ud said
to Abu Musa: "Do not make *tayammum* even if you do not find water for a
whole month.” 'Abd Allah b. Mas'ud, who was among the most prominent
companions, felt that one who was ritually impure and could not find
water should leave his prayer completely and not perform the *tayammum*.

It appears that Abu Musa attempted to convince him [otherwise] by the
noble verse which was revealed specifically for this subject in *Sura
al-Ma'ida*. 'Abd Allah b. Mas'ud's retort was: "If it was permitted for
them by this verse, they would then seek to make *tayammum* with earth
if the water got cold for them.”

From this we also understand how they used their own *ijtihad* to
interpret the Qur'anic texts as they felt appropriate. Regrettably, what
they felt was severity and harshness for the *umma*, even though Allah
says: ***"Allah desires to make things easy for you and not
difficult"*** (2:185).

This poor fellow says: "If it were permitted for them by this verse,
they would seek to make *tayammum* if the water got cold for them.” Did
he put himself in the position of conveying the message from Allah and
His Prophet? Is he more protective and affectionate over the worshippers
than their Creator and Sustainer?

After this, Abu Musa tried to convince him with the *sunna* of the
Prophet reported by 'Ammar, and how the Prophet taught him to do the
*tayammum*. 'Abd Allah rejected this famous *sunna* of the Prophet by
saying that 'Umar was not convinced by 'Ammar's narration.

From this, we understand that 'Umar b. al-Khattab's view was the
convincing proof for some companions and that 'Umar's approval of a
*hadith* or a Qur'anic verse was the sole criterion for determining the
authenticity of a *hadith* or meaning of the verse, even if it
contradicted the words and actions of the Prophet (S.A.W.).

As a result, we see today the actions of many people contradicting the
Qur'an and *sunna*, whether it be in regards to the *halal* or the
*haram*. This is because the *ijtihad* of 'Umar, as opposed to the
texts, became a *madhab* to be followed. When some of the backsliders,
and some who had knowledge, saw that the *hadith* which had been
prohibited during the time of the Caliphs, were recorded later by the
narrators and scholars and were against 'Umar's *madhab*, they
themselves manufactured other false *hadiths* and attributed them to the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), so that they could support the *madhab* of
Abu Hafs.

Some examples are *mut'a* marriage, *tarawi* prayer, etc. Thus
contradictory narrations came into being, and have remained until today
a matter of disagreement between the Muslims. This will remain like this
as long as there are those who defend 'Umar, just because he is 'Umar,
and [as long as] no one desires [to do] any research to find the truth
and no one will say to 'Umar: "You erred 'Umar, the *salat* is not
forsaken due to lack of water! There is an *ayat* for *tayammum*
mentioned in the book of Allah... and that there are *hadiths* of
*tayammum* mentioned in every book of the *sunna*.

Your ignorance of them does not permit you to ascend the position of the
Caliphate, nor the leadership of the *umma*. And your knowledge of them
makes you a disbeliever, if you go against these rulings. When Allah and
his Prophet have decreed a matter it is not appropriate, if you are a
believer, for you to have an opinion in it so that you may judge by what
you like and reject what you wish. You are more aware than I am that
whoever disobeys Allah and His Prophet has certainly gone completely
astray.”

Allah says: ***"The*** ***sadaqa*** ***is for the needy, the poor, those
who are employed in its collection and those whose hearts need to be
placated, for those in bondage and in debt, and [to be spent] in the way
of Allah and for the wayfarer. This is a command from Allah and Allah is
full of knowledge, full of wisdom..."*** (9:60).

It was a well known practice of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) that he
would allot a special share for those whose hearts needed to be
placated, for their share which Allah had made obligatory for them.
However, 'Umar b. al-Khattab nullified this compulsory stipend during
his Caliphate and judged contrary to the text, saying to the people: "We
have no need for you. Allah has strengthened Islam; it has no need for
you". Indeed, he nullified this ruling during the Caliphate of Abu Bakr
when the people whose hearts were to be placated came to him, as was
their custom with the Prophet.

Abu Bakr wrote an authorization for them, and they went to 'Umar to
receive their allotment. 'Umar tore up the letter and said: "We have no
need for you. Allah has strengthened Islam; it has no need for you. If
you accept Islam, it is well; if not, the sword shall judge between us".
Thereupon, they returned to Abu Bakr and said to him: "Are you the
Caliph or is he?” He replied: "Rather he, if Allah wishes.” Abu Bakr
rescinded what he had written in agreement with 'Umar, his companion.

The surprising fact is that even today you find those who defend 'Umar
on this issue and count it as his merit and ingenuity. Among these is
Shaykh Muhammad (known as al-Dawalibi), for he states in his book "*Usul
al-Fiqh*" (p. 239), that: "Perhaps the *ijtihad* of 'Umar (R.) in
cutting off the stipend which the Qur'an had enjoined for those whose
hearts needed to be placated was in the forefront of those rulings he
issued which were in accordance with the changing requirements that come
with the passage of time, in spite of the fact that the Qur'anic text
still stands applicable, and has not been a  
 brogated.”  
 Then he further defends 'Umar by saying that the latter looked at the
reason for the text, and not at its apparent [or literal] meaning ...
and he continues to the end, which no sound mind can understand.

We, however, accept his admission that 'Umar changed the Qur'anic
rulings as a result of his view that rulings may be changed according to
the times. However, we reject his view that 'Umar looked at the reason
for the text, rather than its apparent meaning. We say, instead, to him
and to all others, that the text of the Qur'an and the *sunna* do not
change with the passing of time. The Qur'an explicitly states that even
the Prophet (P) himself does not have the right to make any changes.

Allah said: ***"And when our clear signs are recited unto them, those
who do not hope to meet us say: 'Bring us another Qur'an or change it'.
Say unto them: 'It is not for me to change it of my own accord; I only
follow what is revealed to me. Should I disobey my Lord, I fear the
penalty of that great Day'"*** (10:15). And the pure *sunna* of the
Prophet says: "What Muhammad has declared to be *halal* is *halal* until
the day of Judgment, and the *haram* is *haram* until the day of
Judgment".

However, according to the claim of al-Dawalibi and those who support him
concerning *ijtihad*, legal rulings change with the changing times;
there is no blame therefore on those rulers who change the rulings of
Allah for the rulings dictated by the people, forged rulings
necessitated by their needs. Certainly, this is against the judgment of
Allah. Among them are those who say: "Break your fast so that you may be
strong and overpower your enemy.

There is no need for fasting in this age wherein we fight backwardness,
poverty and ignorance. Fasting prevents us from production.” They [also]
prohibit polygamy for they see oppression and abuse of the women's
rights in that. There are those who claim that, in the time of Muhammad,
the woman was considered "a drop of urine", but now we have emancipated
her and given her full rights.

This President has looked at the reason of the text and not at its
apparent meaning, the same way as 'Umar looked at it, and has said: "It
is necessary now that the inheritance of the male and female be equally
divided between them, since Allah gave the man two shares on the grounds
that he was the one supporting the family at a time when the woman was
inactive. But today, because of stupendous efforts, the woman works and
supports the family.” He even cites as an example to the people his wife
who supports her brother and has become, as a result of her grace and
favor, a minister.

He also allowed fornication and said it is a personal right to whoever
has reached the age of maturity, as long as it is not done by force or
as a profession. He opened child care centers for illegitimate children,
claiming that he is merciful towards these illegitimate children, who
used to be buried alive for fear of poverty and disgrace. He also had
other well known opinions.

The strange thing is that, to some degree, this President admired the
personality of 'Umar for he mentions him sometimes with admiration, and
then on another occasion he says that he ('Umar) did not bear
responsibility, whether alive or dead, for the *ijtihad,* but that he
(al-Dawalibi) will bear responsibility whether alive or dead.

And yet another time, as if now aware that the Muslims rebutted his
interpretations, he said: "'Umar was among the first and greatest of
those practicing *ijtihad* in his time. So why then can I not make
*ijtihad* in my modern time, for 'Umar was the leader of a nation and I
too am the leader of a nation.”

Yet stranger still is that, whenever this particular leader mentions
Muhammad, the Prophet of Allah (P), one can observe in his speech
ridicule and scorn. He said in one of his sermons that Muhammad did not
even know geography for he said: "Seek knowledge even if it be in
China", assuming that China was the furthermost point on the globe and
that Muhammad did not picture that the world would reach this stage
wherein crafts of iron would fly in the air! So what do you think would
happen if he was told or they related to him about uranium, potassium,
nuclear sciences and laser weaponry?

I do not personally blame this poor soul who did not understand a thing
from the book of Allah and the *sunna* of His Prophet, yet found himself
one day ruling a country in the name of Islam, even though he ridiculed
Islam and followed Western civilization. He wanted to make his country
an advanced European state in keeping with his concept of advancement.
He followed the example of many Presidents and kings when he got
assistance, praises and accolades from the Western countries and
kingdoms.

They even gave him the title of "The Greatest Mujahid.” Yet I do not
reproach him, for what he has brought is not surprising; every cup can
only pour out what was poured into it. If I want to be neutral, I would
instead blame Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman who opened this door from the
day of the Prophet's (S.A.W.) death and caused every *ijtihad* which the
Umayyads and 'Abbasids undertook.

Seven centuries followed, and in every one of them, the truths of Islam
were wiped out by the texts and legal rulings of *ijtihad*, until
matters came to such a point where the leader, Imam of the Muslim
people, would deliver a sermon ridiculing the Prophet (S.A.W.) and
no-one would say anything against him, not from within or without the
state.

This is what I say now and what I say to some of the brothers from the
Islamic movement: "If today you reject the ruler who does not follow the
Qur'anic texts and the Prophetic *sunna*, then it is necessary that you
also reject those who started this innovation of *ijtihad* instead of
texts, if you are indeed objective and wish to follow the truth.”

But they do not accept what I say and criticize me; how can I dare to
compare the present day rulers with the rightly guided Caliphs? My
response is that the leaders and kings of today are the inevitable
result of what has happened in history. For, since the death of the
Prophet (S.A.W.) until today, when have the Muslims ever been free even
for a day? They say: "You are of the Shi'as who malign and insult the
companions, and if the day comes when we attain power, we'll burn you to
death.” I say: "Allah will never let you see that day.”

Allah says: ***"Divorce is permitted twice, after which there must be
harmonious cohabitation or separation with kindness. It is not lawful
for you (men) to take back anything of what you have given your wives
except when both partners fear that they would not be able to keep
within the limits ordained by Allah. Then there is no blame on either of
them if she gives something for her freedom. Those are limits set by
Allah so do not exceed them. And those who exceed the limits of Allah
are the wrongdoers.***

***When a husband divorces her, she is not lawful for him again until
she has married another husband and he has divorced her irrevocably.
Then there is no blame upon them if they reunite if they feel that they
can observe the limits ordered by Allah. Those are the limits of Allah,
which He makes clear for those who understand"*** (2:230).

The Prophet's noble *sunna* explained, with no ambiguity, that the wife
is not forbidden to her husband except after three divorces. And then,
it is not allowed for her husband to reunite with her, except after she
has married another man. If this man divorces her also, it is possible
for the first spouse to seek her hand in marriage again, the same way as
other men; and it is up to the woman to accept or reject, the choice is
hers.

'Umar b. al-Khattab however, as usual, transgressed Allah's limits,
which He had made clear for people who understand; he changed this
ruling with his own judgment by which he pronounced that a single
effective divorce, if done with three pronouncements, made the wife
unlawful for her husband. In this, he contravened the Qur'an and the
Prophet's *sunna.*

In "The Book of Divorce", in "The Chapter of the Three Divorces" Muslim
reported, on the authority of Ibn 'Abbas, that: "The triple divorce
during the time of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) and Abu Bakr, and for
two years of the Caliphate of 'Umar, were recognized as one. Then 'Umar
b. al-Khattab said: 'The men hasten in a matter wherein they are
required to have patience. We should endorse it for them.’ And he did
so.”

By God, how strange that a Caliph could dare to change Allah's judgment
in the presence of the companions, and that they agreed with him in
everything that he said and did. No one opposed or even questioned him;
yet they lead us poor souls into believing that one of the companions
said to 'Umar: "By Allah, if we see any crookedness in you, we will
straighten you with the sword.”

This is a lie and fabrication so as to brag that the Caliphs were the
best examples in freedom and democracy. History, however, refutes this
by the actual events that occurred. There is no importance in claims if
the actions are in complete contrast.

Or perhaps they feel that the crookedness was in the Qur'an and *sunna*,
and that 'Umar b. al-Khattab straightened and corrected them. We seek
Allah's protection from this folly.

I was in Qafsa, where often I had to give counsel to those who had
declared their wives unlawful by the pronouncement "You are forbidden
three times". They rejoiced when I informed them about the correct
rulings of Allah in which the Caliphs had not meddled with their
personal judgments. However, those who claimed to be knowledgeable
scared them by saying that everything is *halal* with the Shi'as.

I remember one of them who debated with me in a decent manner saying:
"If our master 'Umar b. al-Khattab (R) changed Allah's ruling in this
matter and in others, and the companions agreed with him, why did our
master 'Ali, may Allah brighten his face and be pleased with him, not
refute our master 'Umar?

I replied to him with the reply of Imam 'Ali (A.S.) when the Quraysh
said he was a courageous man but knew nothing about warfare:-

"May Allah free their parents from this! Is there anyone among them with
more experience in it than me, and more senior to it than me? I was in
the battle when I was not yet twenty and here I am now over sixty. But
then, no opinion is accorded to him who is not obeyed (sermon 27, *Nahj
al-Balagha*).”

Did the Muslims listen to Imam 'Ali except his Shi'as who believed in
his Imamate? He opposed him on the prohibition of *mut'a* and the
innovation of *tarawi* prayers, and he opposed every ruling which Abu
Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman changed. But his views remained confined to his
partisans and followers. The other Muslims waged war against him, cursed
him and tried their utmost to kill him and obliterate his memory.

There is no stronger proof of this opposition than the heroic stand he
took on the occasion when 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf called him and
nominated him for the Caliphate after the death of 'Umar, stipulating
the condition, having chosen him to be the Caliph, that he should rule
according to the practice of the two Caliphs, Abu Bakr and 'Umar. 'Ali
(A.S.) rejected this condition and said: "I will judge by the book of
Allah and the *sunna* of His Prophet.”

For this they abandoned him and chose 'Uthman b. 'Affan who accepted the
condition to rule according to the *sunna* of the two Caliphs. If 'Ali
could not go against Abu Bakr and 'Umar even in their death, how could
he have opposed them when they were still living?

So today we see that the gate to the city of knowledge, who was the most
knowledgeable of men after the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), the wisest
judge, the one who memorized the Qur'an and the *sunna* of His Prophet
most, abandoned by the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* who prefer instead
Malik and Abu Hanifa, al-Shafi'i and Ibn Hanbal.

They imitate them in every religious matter from worship to contracts.
And they do not refer in anything to Imam 'Ali. Their Imams like
al-Bukhari and Muslim did the same thing regarding the *hadith*. For you
see them relating hundreds of *hadith* from Abu Hurayra, Ibn 'Umar,
al-Aqra' and al-A'raj and those close and far, and relating only a few
*hadiths* from 'Ali which were attributed to him, in which there is a
defilement of the honour of the *ahl al-bayt*.

They were not satisfied with that, they further disclaim and declare as
unbeliever any of his sincere Shi'as who imitates and follows him. They
call them names like "Rawafid" (rejecters) and [other names] that are
disgraceful. The truth is that 'Ali's followers committed no sin except
that they followed 'Ali, who was shunned and alienated during the period
of the first three Caliphs. Then he was cursed and fought against by the
Umayyads and 'Abbasids.

Anyone who has any perception and knowledge of history will realize this
is the clear, manifest truth and will understand the inner workings and
plots that were wrought against him, his family, and his Shi'as.

'Uthman b. 'Affan follows the practice of his two companions in opposing the texts
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Perhaps when 'Uthman b. Affan pledged to 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf, on the
eve of his being sworn in as the Caliph, that he would govern according
to the *sunna* of the two Caliphs, Abu Bakr and 'Umar, he really meant
that he would use his personal judgment as they had done; and that he
would change texts of the Qur'an and the Prophetic *hadith* as they had
done.

Whoever studies his lifestyle during the period of his Caliphate will
find that he went much further in *ijtihad*, to the point where he made
people forget the *ijtihad* of his two companions, Abu Bakr and 'Umar. I
do not wish to prolong this subject which has provided copious material
for the history books, old and new, about the strange things that
'Uthman innovated which caused the people to revolt against him, costing
him his life. As usual, I will mention a few instances in order to
illustrate for the reader and every researcher what those who supported
personal interpretation innovated in the religion of Muhammad (P).

(1) Muslim in his *Sahih* in "The Book of the Prayer of the Traveller",
reports that 'A'isha said: "When Allah enjoined the *salat,* He made it
two *rak'as*. Then He finalized it at four for those [praying] at their
places of residence, but the prayer of the traveller was fixed to be two
*rak'as* this in accordance with the first injunction.”

In the same book, Muslim reported, on the authority of Ya'la b.Umayya,
who said: "I said to 'Umar b. al-Khattab: 'There is no harm on you if
you shorten the prayer if you fear *fitna* from those who disbelieve but
now the people have believed.’ 'Umar said: 'I was taken aback by what
startles you now, so I asked the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) about it and
he replied: 'It is a bounty which Allah has given as a charity to you,
so accept Allah's charity.'"

Muslim reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Shortening the Prayer of
the Travellers" from Ibn 'Abbas who said: "Allah enjoined the prayer
through the tongue of the Prophet (S.A.W.), four *rak'as* for those in
residence, and for those travelling two *rak'as*, and, in a state of
fear, one *rak'a*.”

Muslim also reported, on the authority of Anas b. Malik, who said:
"Whenever the Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) went on a journey of three
*amyal* (miles) or three *farsakhs*, he prayed two *rak'as*.” 'Ammar
also said: "We journeyed with the Prophet of Allah from Medina to Mecca
and he prayed two *rak'as* until he returned. I said: 'How long did he
stay in Mecca? He replied 'Ten [days].'"

From the above *hadiths* reported by Muslim in his *Sahih*, it is clear
that the noble verse which was revealed specifically for the shortening
of the prayer on a journey, was understood by the Prophet of Allah and
explained by word and deed to show that it was a dispensation and
charity which Allah had granted to the Muslims, and that it was
obligatory on them to accept it. This refutes the claim of al-Dawalibi
and those like him who argue in defense of 'Umar and seek to rectify his
errors; that he looked at the reasoning of the injunction and not at the
apparent meaning.

The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) taught him on the occasion of the
revelation of the verse to shorten the prayer. 'Umar expressed his
surprise that the established texts are not contingent upon the cause(s)
for their revelation, and, as a result, the prayer is to be shortened on
a journey even if the people may be secure and not afraid of being
harassed by the unbelievers. What 'Umar said was different from what
al-Dawalibi and the scholars of *ahl al-sunna* said, yet they seek
excuses for him because of their high regard for him.

Let us observe 'Uthman b. Affan. It was incumbent that he [also]
exercises his personal judgment in the Qur'an and *hadith* texts so that
he might be considered as being amongst the "rightly guided Caliphs". He
went so far as to make the prayer four *rak'as* on journey instead of
the two as legislated.

Many a time I have asked about the reason for the changing of this
injunction and the addition to it, and what are the arguments for it,
but I can only perceive that he wished to lead the people, especially
the Banu Umayya, into thinking that he was more pious and God-fearing
than Muhammad, Abu Bakr, and 'Umar.

Muslim, in "The Chapter on the Prayer of the Traveler and the Shortening
of the Prayer at Mina", on the authority of Salim b. 'Abd Allah, who
narrated from his father, who reported that the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) prayed the prayer of a traveler at Mina and at other places as
two *rak'as*, as did Abu Bakr, and 'Umar. 'Uthman did the same in the
early part of his Caliphate then he finalized it at four.”

It is also reported in Muslim that al-Zuhri said: "I said to 'Urwa: 'Why
does 'A'isha say the full prayer while on a journey?' He said: 'She
interpreted the same way that 'Uthman did'". This is how Allah's
religion and its rulings and texts have become subject to the
interpretations and explanations of people.

'Uthman also exerted his reasoning to support 'Umar's position regarding
the prohibition of the *mut'a hajj* and the *mut'a* marriage. Al-Bukhari
reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of *Hajj*,” in "The Chapter of
*al-Tamattu'* and *Iqran*,” from Marwan b. al-Hakam, who said: "I saw
'Uthman and 'Ali.

’Uthman used to forbid people to perform *hajj al-Tamattu'* and *hajj
al-Qiran* (*hajj* and '*umra* together), and when 'Ali saw this, he
assumed *ihram* for *hajj* and '*umra* together saying: '*Labbayk* for
'*umra* and *hajj,’* and he said: 'I will not leave the tradition of the
Prophet for the saying of anyone.’”

Muslim also reported in "The Book of *Hajj*" in "The Chapter on the
permissibility of *al-Tamattu*,” on the authority of Sa'id b.
al-Musayyab who said: "'Uthman and 'Ali met at 'Usfan. 'Uthman had
prohibited *mut'a* or the *'umra*, whereupon 'Ali said: 'What do you
want to do on a matter which the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) did, and now
you prohibit it?' 'Uthman said: 'Leave us alone'. 'Ali said: 'I cannot
leave you alone.’ When 'Ali saw this, he assumed *ihram* for *'umra* and
*hajj* together.”

Yes! This is the man 'Ali b. Abi Talib, (A.S.) for he could not abandon
the *sunna* of the Prophet (S.A.W.) for the word of any man. The second
narration illustrates to us that there were words exchanged between 'Ali
and 'Uthman. 'Uthman's words to 'Ali: "Leave us alone" shows us he would
go against everything and would not follow him in what he reported from
his cousin (S.A.W.). The narration has been abridged since it says: "And
'Ali said: 'I cannot leave you alone' when he saw that". What is it that
'Ali saw?

There is no doubt that the Caliph, in spite of 'Ali's reminding him of
the Prophetic *sunna*, insisted on following his own view even though it
was in conflict with the *sunna*. He forbade the people from
*al-tamattu;’* and upon that, 'Ali opposed him and consecrated himself
for both, i.e., the '*umra* and the *hajj*.

'Uthman b. 'Affan exerted his own reasoning in parts of the prayer and
did not say the *takbir* before the prostration nor upon rising from it.

In his *Musnad*, volume 4, p. 440, Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal reported, on the
authority of Imran b. al-Husayn, who said: "I once prayed behind 'Ali
and was reminded of a prayer that I prayed with the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) and the two Caliphs. He said: "So I went and prayed with him,
and he made *takbir* every time he prostrated and when he raised his
head from the *ruk'u*.” I asked him: "O Abu Najid! Who was the first to
depart from this?" He said: "'Uthman (R) when he became old and his
voice became weak he stopped doing it.”

Yes! In this way the *sunna* of the Prophet (S.A.W.) was discarded and
replaced instead by the *sunna* of the Caliphs, kings, companions, the
Umayyads, and the 'Abbasids; and everything was innovated, introduced
into Islam. Every innovation [leads to] misguidance; and every
misguidance leads to the fire, as the bearer of the message (S.A.W.) has
said.

As a result, you observe today different modes and types of prayer among
the Muslims. You think that they are one, but their hearts are divided.
For even though they line up for prayer in one row, you will see one
letting his arms hang by his sides, while another will fold his arms.

Another holding his folded arms in a specific way, placing his arms
above his navel while another places them near his heart. And still
another will place his feet together, while another will stand with his
feet apart. Each one thinks that he is right. If you ask anyone of them
about it, it will be said to you: "My brother, they are all modes; don't
pay any attention to them, but pray as you wish, for the important thing
is that you pray.”

Yes, this is true to a point, for indeed the most important thing is the
prayer. However, it is essential that the prayer be [the form of] the
prayer of the Prophet of Allah (P); for he said: "Pray as you have seen
me pray.” It is, therefore, necessary for us to make every effortt to
research the prayer of the Prophet (S.A.W.), for prayer is the pillar of
religion.

(d) 'Uthman was the one of whom the angels of the Merciful one were shy.
Al-Baladhuri said in volume 5 page 54 of his *Ansab al-Ashraf*: "When
the news of Abu Dharr's death at al-Rabdha reached 'Uthman, he said:
'May Allah have mercy upon him.’ Whereupon 'Ammar b. Yasir said: 'Yes;
and Allah has bestowed upon him mercy from our being weary [of him].’
'Uthman said to 'Ammar: 'O one who bites his father's penis! Do you
think I am sorry for exiling him?' Whereupon he ordered that he be taken
into custody, and said: 'Go to his place as well.’

When they were ready to leave, the Banu Makhzum approached 'Ali and
asked him to speak to 'Uthman about him. 'Ali said to him: 'O 'Uthman!
Fear Allah. You exiled a righteous Muslim, and he perished in your
exile. Now you seek to banish someone like him?' They exchanged words
until 'Uthman finally said to 'Ali: 'You deserve to be banished more
than 'Ammar.’ 'Ali said: 'Then do so if you wish.’

The Muhajirun then went to 'Uthman and said: 'If anytime someone speaks
to you, it is highly improper that you exile and banish him.’ Whereupon
he rescinded [his judgment against] 'Ammar.”  
 And in the *Ta'rikh* of Ya'qubi volume 2 p. 147, he reported that
'Ammar b. Yasir recited the funeral prayer over Miqdad and buried him
without informing 'Uthman, due to the testament Miqdad had made. 'Uthman
became extremely angry with 'Ammar and said: "Woe unto me because of
this son of a black woman! I wish I had known this.”

Is it possible for someone who is so modest that even the angels are shy
of him to be so foul in his speech in respect to the best of the
believers?

'Uthman was not satisfied with insulting 'Ammar and swearing at him: "O
one who bites his father's penis.” Instead he ordered his servant to
grab 'Ammar. They stretched his hands and legs whereupon 'Uthman kicked
him with his booted feet in the testicles, crushing them. He was weak
and old, he lost consciousness. This story is well known amongst the
historians, for a group of the companions recorded [many such] events
and requested 'Ammar to narrate [his misfortune].

'Uthman did the same to 'Abd Allah b. Mas'ud when he passed him with one
of his troopers, 'Abd Allah b. Zam'a. The latter grabbed 'Abd Allah b.
Mas'ud and carried him until they came to the door of the mosque,
whereupon he hurled him to the ground, breaking one of his ribs. All
this was because 'Abd Allah b. Mas'ud had voiced his opposition to
'Uthman's giving the corrupt Banu Umayya the property of the Muslims
without accounting for it.

Thus the revolt against 'Uthman began, the events transpired to the
extent that he was killed, and they prevented him from being buried for
three days. Four people came from the Banu Umayya to recite his funeral
prayer, but some of the companions prohibited them from doing so.

One of them said: "Bury him, for Allah and his angels have sent blessing
upon him.” They said: "No! By Allah, he will never be buried in the
burial ground of the Muslims!” He was eventually buried in the "Hash
Kawkab" - a place where the Jews used to bury their dead. When the
Umayyads came to power, they made this place a part of al-Baqi'.

This is a simple account of the history of the three Caliphs - Abu Bakr,
'Umar and 'Uthman. Though it is simple, due to our wish to be brief and
to provide only a few examples, it is still sufficient to remove the
veil covering the claim of the alleged merits and invented virtues. They
never knew such qualities nor did they, for a single day in their lives,
dream of exemplifying them. The obvious question that arises is: What do
the *ahl al-sunna wa'l-Jama'a* say regarding these facts?

For the people [practicing] the remembrance [of God], the answer is
this: "If you know these, then don't deny them, for your own *Sihah*
books have verified their veracity despite efforts to obscure them. You
have thereby destroyed the myth of the rightly guided Caliphate.

If you deny them and do not agree to their veracity, then you have
denied your own "*Sahih*" collections and your reliable books which have
reported them. Then you have destroyed all of your beliefs.”


