Chapter 7: Concerning the Noble Hadith
======================================

I will prove to the reader that the problem of *hadiths* is among the
most difficult of problems the Muslims live with today especially at the
present time; because the "Wahhabi Universities" graduate doctors who
specialize in the field of *hadiths*. You find them memorizing the
*hadiths* that concord with their schools and beliefs.

Most of these *hadiths* are [the product] of the fabrications by the
Umayyads, their predecessors, whose aims were also to extinguish the
light of the message [of Islam] and to portray the Prophet (S.A.W.) as a
feeble-minded clown not knowing what he says, not aware of his
contradictory traditions, and deeds which [even] a madman would laugh
at.

Despite the efforts of researchers and *ahl al-sunna* scholars to
cleanse and sift the traditions, there are still, most unfortunately, in
the authentic and reliable books, many [strange] things. Similarly, the
Shi'a books are not safe from interpolations and fabrications.

However, they admit that they do not have an authentic book except the
book of Allah. Apart from it, they (the books) contain lean and fat. As
for the *ahl al-sunna,* they agree that the *Sahihs* of al-Bukhari and
Muslim are the most correct books after the book of Allah; in fact, they
say that everything in them is correct.

Due to that, I will attempt to place in front of the reader some
examples of *hadiths* reported in al-Bukhari and Muslim which contain
what they contain, i.e., denigration of the sanctity of the great
Prophet (S.A.W.), or the members of his household (A.S.).

I will attempt here to repudiate some of the *hadiths* which were
fabricated to justify the actions of the Umayyad and 'Abbasid rulers.
They wanted, in reality, to destroy the infallibility of the Prophet
(P), so as to justify their crimes and their slaughter of innocent
people. Following are some examples:

The Prophet dupes
-----------------

In "The Book of Seeking Permission" and "The Book of Indemnity" in "The
Chapter of Whoever Peeps in the House of People and they Poke his Eyes
out, there is no Blood Money upon Them,” al-Bukhari, in his *Sahih*,
reported the following *hadith*, as did Muslim in his *Sahih* in "The
Book of Etiquettes" in "The Chapter of Prohibition to look into
Someone's House,” from Anas b. Malik: "A man peeped into a part of the
Prophet's (S.A.W.) room. The Prophet (S.A.W.) stood up holding an
arrowhead or arrowheads. It is if I am now looking at him trying to stab
the man.”

The most exalted character does not accord with this [kind of] behavior,
[especially] from the Prophet of mercy who was affectionate and
compassionate to the believers. It would be assumed that the Prophet
(S.A.W.) would go to this man who had peeped into his room and would
teach him Islamic conduct and make him understand that what he did was
forbidden.

Not to take an arrowhead and attempt to stab him and poke his eyes.
Probably the man could have meant well for the room was not his wives'
room. The proof of this is that Anas b. Malik was present in it. What a
great accusation this is against the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.); as it
portrays him as an ill-mannered and hard hearted person who attacks a
person without warning, i.e., assaults the man so as to take out his
eye.

It is sufficient to note that the commentator of al-Bukhari found it
disgraceful and said: "*Yakhtiluhu*", i.e., assaults him by coming upon
him from where he cannot see him. This is how they explained it. A
surreptitious attack is far from [the acts of] the Prophet (S.A.W.).

The Prophet inflicts a vile penalty and mutilates Muslims
---------------------------------------------------------

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Medicine" volume 7 p.
13, in "The Chapter on Medications by Camel's Milk" and also in "The
Chapter on Medication by Camel's Urine": Thabit informed us, from Anas
that some men who were sick said: "O Prophet of Allah! Give us food and
shelter".

The Prophet (S.A.W.) ordered them to follow his shepherd, i.e., his
camels, and to drink their milk and urine. So they followed the shepherd
and drank their milk and urine till their bodies became healthy. Then
they killed the shepherd and drove away the camels. When the news
reached the Prophet, he sent some people in their pursuit. When they
were brought, he cut their hands and feet and their eyes were branded
with heated pieces of iron. I saw one of them licking the earth with his
tongue until he died".

Can a Muslim believe that the Prophet of Allah (P), who forbade
mutilation, himself, mutilates these people, cutting off their hands and
feet, and branding their eyes because they slaughtered his herder? Had
the narrator said that these people had mutilated the herder, there
would have been some justification for the Prophet to punish them in the
same way.

That was not the case, so how could the Prophet of Allah (P) kill and
mutilate them in this way without investigation and cross examination
until it became clear who among them was the murderer so that he could
kill him for that? Perhaps some would say that they all participated in
killing him, could the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) not forgive and pardon
them for they were Muslims as proved by their words "O Prophet of
Allah?" Did the Prophet of Allah not hear Allah's words: ***"And if you
punish them, then punish them the way you were punished. And if you are
patient then that is better for those who are patient"*** (16:126).

This verse was revealed to the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) when his heart
was burning over his uncle, the master of the martyrs, Hamza b. 'Abd
al-Muttalib whose stomach they had slashed open, and eaten his liver and
cut his private parts. The Prophet was enraged when he saw his uncle in
that condition.

He declared: "Should Allah let me prevail over them, I will mutilate
seventy [of them]". Whereupon the verse was revealed unto him and he
said: "I shall be patient, O my Lord.” He then forgave Wahshi, the
murderer of his uncle as well as Hind who had mutilated his pure body
and ate his liver. This was the [true] character of the Prophet (P).

What proves the repulsive [nature] of the narration and that the
narrator himself found it abominable, is that he followed it up by
saying: "Qatada said: 'Muhammad b. Sirin informed me that this occurred
before legal punishments were revealed ...'" to justify, by that, the
actions of the Prophet (P). Far removed is the Prophet from judging by
himself before his Lord made matters clear to him. If he did not judge
in even trivial matters until revelation came to him, what do you think
about matters pertaining to blood and penalties?

It is very easy for anyone who reflects upon the matter to realize that
it is a narration forged by the Umayyads and their followers to please
the rulers who did not hesitate to kill innocent people based on
suspicion and accusation, mutilating them in a hideous manner.

The proof of this is what came in the end of the report itself which
al-Bukhari reported saying: "Salam said: 'I came to know that Hajjaj
said to Anas: 'Tell me the severest punishment the Prophet meted out,’
and Anas reported this [*hadith*].’ When al-Hasan came to know this he
said: 'I wish he had not told him this.'"

The *hadith* stinks of the smell of fabrication to please al-Hajjaj
al-Thaqafi who caused havoc in the land and murdered thousands of
innocent followers of the *ahl al-bayt,* mutilating them. He used to cut
off their hands and feet and brand out their eyes. He would take out the
tongues from the back of the heads and crucify those alive until they
were burnt by the sun.

Narrations such as these justify his actions for he was simply following
the Prophet of Allah: "And you have in the Prophet of Allah a good
example.” There is no power or strength except with Allah.  
 As a result, Mu'awiya became an expert in punishment and mutilation of
Muslims who were the followers of 'Ali. How many were burnt to death?
How many were buried alive? How many were crucified on branches of date
palms? One of the arts which his minister 'Amr b. al-'As invented was
that he mutilated Muhammad b. Abu Bakr, then clothed him in the skin of
an ass and then cast him into the fire.

To justify their craze and great infatuation with maidservants and
women, here are some narrations [which they quote].

The Prophet (S.A.W.) loves intercourse
--------------------------------------

In "The Book of Bathing,” under "The Chapter entitled 'If one has Sexual
Intercourse Then repeated [it] , and one who Rotates Between his Wives
with one Bath only,'" al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih*, Mu'adh b.
Hisham said: "My father reported to me from Qatada, who said: 'Anas b.
Malik said: 'The Prophet (S.A.W.) used to go around all his wives during
the night and day in one hour, and there were eleven of them'. He said:
'So I said to Anas: 'Was he able to?' Anas replied: 'We used to say he
had the power of thirty...'"

This is a false *hadith* to devalue the greatness of the Prophet
(S.A.W.) so as to vindicate the palaces of al-Rashid and the acts of
Mu'awiya and the deranged Yazid. How did Anas b. Malik know that the
Prophet (S.A.W.) used to copulate with eleven women in one hour? Did the
Prophet inform him of that or was he present there? I seek Allah's
refuge from lies. How did he know that he had the strength of thirty?

This is an accusation against the Prophet of Allah (P) who spent his
life in struggle, worship and in instructing and teaching his *umma*.
What do these ignorant ones think when they narrate such disgraces? It
is as if their minds are corrupted by their animalistic lusts. They used
to take pride with their mates of their over indulgence in sex and
strength of intercourse when, in reality, these are narrations falsified
to demean the sanctity of the Prophet (P). Secondly, [these narrations]
vindicated the shamelessness of the rulers and Caliphs whose castles
were filled with slave girls and women - with no limit, because they
were slave girls.

What did Anas b. Malik, the reporter of this *hadith,* say when he was
confronted by Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'isha, the wife of the Prophet (P) and
who used to say that he (S.A.W.) was like any other man in sex?

Muslim reported in his *Sahih*, in "The Book of Purification" in "The
Chapter of Water nullifies [the use of] Water, and the Injunction of
Bathing when the Private Parts Meet": "From Abu'l-Zubayr from Jabir b.
'Abd Allah from Umm al-Kulthum from 'A'isha, wife of the Prophet
(S.A.W.) who said: "A man asked the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) about a
person who has intercourse with his wife then he feels lazy. Do they
have to take a bath?" 'A'isha was sitting, and the Prophet of Allah
said: "I do that, I and this one here, then we both bathe.”

Then the commentator of the *hadith* added in the margins of *Sahih*
Muslim: "Then he feels lazy, the meaning in *al-Misbah* (a famous
dictionary) of "*aksala mujami'*" is when he withdraws without
ejaculation either because of weakness or otherwise". What does this
have to do with the claim that he has the strength of thirty [men]?

This is another narration fabricated by the forgers, may Allah destroy
them and increase for them a painful punishment. Otherwise, how can
reason accept such narrations about the bearer of the messages, he from
whom all shyness had gone, he says to men, in the presence of his wife,
what an ordinary believer would feel shy to talk of?

To justify songs and dancing which were famous in the time of the Umayyads here are some hadiths
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Apostle takes pleasure in dancing and listens to songs:

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Marriage,” under "The
Chapter of Beating the Drum During the Wedding and the Feast": Bishr b.
al-Mufaddal told us that Khalid b. Dhikwan said: "Al-Rabi' bint Mu'awwdh
b. Afra' said: 'The Prophet came to me after consummating his marriage
with me and sat down on my bed as you are sitting now, and small girls
were beating the tambourine and singing in lamentation of my fathers who
had been killed on the day of the battle of Badr. Then one of the girls
said: 'There is a Prophet amongst us who knows what will happen
tomorrow'. The Prophet said: 'Leave this talk and say what you were
saying before.'"

Al-Bukhari also reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Struggles,” in
"The Chapter on Tambourine,” as well as Muslim in "The Book of The Two
*'id* Prayers" "The Chapter on Permission of Games in which there is no
Sin [involved]":

On the authority of 'A'isha who said: "The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
came to my house while two girls were singing beside me the songs of
Bu'ath (a story about the war between the two tribes of the Ansar, i.e.
Khazraj and Aws). He reclined on the bed and turned his face to the
other side. Abu Bakr came and scolded me saying: 'The instrument of
Satan in the presence of Allah's Apostle?' The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
turned towards him and said: 'Leave them.’ When he became inattentive, I
waved the two girls to go away and they left.'"

On the authority of 'A'isha who said: "It was the day of '*id* when
Negroes used to play with leather shields and spears. Either I requested
the Prophet of Allah or he asked me: 'Would you like to see the
display?' I replied: 'Yes.’ Then he let me stand behind him and my cheek
on his cheek and he was saying: 'Carry on, O Banu Arfida.’ When I got
tired, he asked me: 'Have you had enough?' I replied: 'Yes.’ He said:
'Let us go.'"

Al-Bukhari narrates in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Marriage" in "The
Chapter on The woman looking at the Ethiopians and others without any
Doubt" that 'A'isha said: "I saw the Prophet (S.A.W.) covering me with
his *rida* (upper garment) while I was looking at the Ethiopians play in
the *masjid* until I got bored. Imagine how a young girl desires such
entertainment."

Similarly, Muslim narrated in his *Sahih* in "The Book of the '*Id*
Prayers,” in "The Chapter on The Permission of Entertainment" from
'A'isha who said: "The Ethiopians were playing on the day of '*id*
(i.e., they were dancing) in the *masjid*, and the Prophet (S.A.W.)
called me, and I put my head upon his shoulder and I began to look at
their games until I had had enough of watching them.”

Al-Bukhari also narrated in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Marriage,” in
"The Chapter of the Women and Children going to a Wedding,” from Anas b.
Malik who said: "The Prophet (S.A.W.) saw some women and children coming
from a wedding celebration, so he stood hastily and said: 'By Allah! you
are the most beloved of people to me.’ The commentator of al-Bukhari
said: "*Mumatinan*,” the meaning is that he stood up quickly and
forcefully because of his joy for them.”

To justify their addiction to wine and intoxicants, here are some
narrations:

The Prophet drinks nabidh
-------------------------

In "The Book of Marriage,” in "The chapter on The Women Standing And
Serving the Men at Wedding Celebrations,” and in "The Book of The Dried
Fruit and Drinking what does not Intoxicate at Weddings,” al-Bukhari
reported: From Abu Hazin from Sahl: "When Abu Usayd al-Sa'idi got
married, he invited the Prophet (S.A.W.) and his companions.

None prepared the food for them and brought it to them but his wife, Umm
Usayd. She soaked some dates in water in a stone pot overnight, and when
the Prophet (S.A.W.) had finished his food, she provided him with that
drink (of soaked dates).”

It is clear that they intended [to show] by this narration that the
Prophet (P) drank *nabidh*. Possibly, the connotation was not the
*nabidh* that is known, rather, it was an Arab custom of soaking dates
in water to take away the smell of water.

It therefore was not the actual *nabidh.* Some of them deem it proper to
use it. Muslim narrated this report under "The Book of Drinks,” in "The
Chapter on The Permissibility of [drinking] *Nabidh* which has not
Fermented nor become an Intoxicant". From here, the drinking of *nabidh*
began and the rulers allowed the drinking of wine, claiming it was
permissible as long as it did not intoxicate.

To vindicate what the Umayyads and 'Abbasids used to do, here are some
narrations:

The Prophet and debasement
--------------------------

In “The Book of *Hajj*,” in "The Chapter on Visiting on the Day of
Sacrifice,” al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* that 'A'isha said: "We
made *hajj* with the Prophet (S.A.W.) and went forth in multitudes on
the day of sacrifice. Safiyya started her menstruation and the Prophet
wanted from her what a man wants from his wife, so I said to him: 'O
Prophet of Allah, she is menstruating.'"

How astonishing is this Prophet (S.A.W.) who wishes to have intercourse
with his wife in the presence and knowledge of his other wife who
informs him that she (Hafsa) is menstruating, while the one with whom he
wanted to sleep knows nothing.

The Prophet does not feel shy
-----------------------------

Muslim reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Merits,” in "The Chapter
on The Merits of 'Uthman b. Affan" the following: "From 'A'isha, wife of
the Prophet (S.A.W.) and from 'Uthman. Both of them said: 'Abu Bakr
sought permission to visit the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) while he was
lying on his bed, wearing the garment of 'A'isha.

He let him in, while he was still in that condition. He fulfilled his
needs, and then Abu Bakr went out.'" 'Uthman said: ''Umar then sought
permission to enter while the Prophet was still in that state. He also
fulfilled his needs and left.” 'Uthman said: "Then I requested
permission to enter, whereupon he sat up and said to 'A'isha: 'Gather
your clothes around you'.

I finished my work with him and left. 'A'isha said: 'O Apostle of Allah
(S.A.W.), how come I did not see you scared with Abu Bakr and 'Umar (R)
as you were with 'Uthman?' The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) said: 'Indeed
'Uthman is a shy man, and I was afraid that if I had granted him
permission to enter when I was in that state, he would not have
presented his need to me.'"

What Prophet is this who meets his companions while reclining with the
clothes of his wife on his bed, with her beside him, wearing revealing
clothes so that when 'Uthman came, he sat up and ordered her to gather
her clothes?

The Prophet displaying his private parts
----------------------------------------

In "The Book of Salat,” in "The Chapter on The Abomination of Praying
Undressed,” al-Bukhari in his *Sahih* reported a *hadith* which Muslim
also did in "The Book of Menses,” in "The Chapter on Paying Attention to
covering the Private Parts,” from Jabir b. 'Abd Allah: "The Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) was carrying stones with them for [the building of] the
Ka'ba wearing an *Izar* (waist-sheet cover).

His uncle al-'Abbas said to him: 'O my nephew! [It would be better] if
you take off your *Izar* and put it over your shoulders underneath the
stones.’ So he took off his *Izar* and put it over his shoulders, but he
fell unconscious and since then he was never seen naked."

Look, O reader, at these spurious allegations at the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.), the one who made shame one of the tenets of faith. He was
shyer than a virgin in her private room. They were not satisfied with
their narrations of debasement and his exposing his thighs in front of
his companions. Now they accuse him in this false *hadith* of exposing
his private parts. In their view, was the Prophet of Allah (P) so
simple-minded that he listened to his uncle's advice and exposed his
private parts in front of the people?

I seek the refuge of Allah, the most Great, from the allegations of
these Satanic devils who lie about Allah and his Prophet (P). Although
the law allowed him to disclose his private parts, the wives and the
closest of people to the Prophet did not see them. Moreover, the mother
of the believers, 'A'isha said: "I did not look at nor ever see a
private part of the Prophet of Allah".

If this was his conduct with his wives who used to bathe with him in a
single vessel and he used to cover himself from them, and they never saw
him naked, how then [was his conduct] with his companions and the
general public?

Certainly these are all from the fabrications of the Umayyad beetles who
did not hesitate from anything. If one of their Caliphs, the Commander
of the Faithful, could be so overcome by the verses of a poet who
recited a line of a love poem, he got up, exposed himself then kissed
his penis; then it should not be surprising after this if they expose
the Prophet's private parts.

Their inner sickness has spread and has become a common thing today
amongst some licentious people who pay no regard to morals and shyness.
There are calls and gatherings of nudists in every place where men and
women get together with a common verse (O Lord! here we are as you
created us).

To justify their playing with religion and the *shari'a* laws, here are
some of their narrations:

The Prophet forgets in his prayer
---------------------------------

In "The Book of Etiquettes", in "The Chapter of What is Allowed to
Remind People" al-Bukhari reported a *hadith* in his *Sahih* as did
Muslim in "The Book of The *Masjids* and Places of Prayer" in "The
Chapter of Forgetfulness in Prayer and Prostration for it", from Abu
Hurayra who said: "The Prophet (S.A.W.) led us in *zuhr* prayer and
after two *rak'as*, made the *salam*, then went to a piece of wood in
the front of the mosque and placed his hands upon it.

Among the people at that time were Abu Bakr and 'Umar. They were afraid
to speak to him, and the people left in a hurry. They said: 'The prayers
were shortened'. Amongst the people, there was a man whom the Prophet
(S.A.W.) used to call "Dhu'l-Yadayn.” He said: 'O Prophet of Allah! Have
you forgotten or was the prayer shortened?'

He said: 'I did not forget, nor was the prayer shortened'. They said:
'Then surely you forgot, O Prophet of Allah'. He said: 'Dhu'l-Yadayn has
spoken the truth'. He then stood up and prayed two *rak'as* and then
made *salam*, then said "Allahu Akbar" then prostrated like his [normal]
prostration or a bit longer then raised his head and said "Allahu
Akbar,” then made another prostration as he normally did or a bit
longer, then raised his head and said "Allahu Akbar.”

Allah forbade that the Prophet forgot in his prayer and did not know how
many units he prayed, and when it was said to him that he had shortened
his prayer, he said: "I did not forget nor was it shortened.”

This is a lie to vindicate their Caliphs who used to come to the prayer,
often in a drunken state, and would not know how many *rak'as* they
prayed. The story of their leader who led in the Morning Prayer with
four *rak'as* then turned to them and said: "Should I add more or is
this enough for you?" is famous in the historical books.

Furthermore, in "The Book of The Call to Prayer" in "The Chapter If a
Man Stands to the Left of the Imam,” al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih*
from Ibn 'Abbas (R) who said: "I slept at the home of Maymuna, and the
Prophet (S.A.W.) was with her that night.

He made *wudu'*, then stood to pray so I stood on his left. He took me
and moved me to his right and prayed thirteen *rak'as*. Then he slept
until he snored, for when he slept he used to snore. The *muadhdhin*
(one who calls for prayer) then came to him, and he went out and prayed,
and he did not make *wudu.'*" 'Amr said: "I informed Bukayr about it and
he said: 'Kurayb informed me of that.'"

By such spurious narrations against the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), the
Umayyad and 'Abbasid Amirs, Sultans and others made mockery of the
prayer and *wudu',* and indeed of every [religious] matter until the
saying: "The prayers of leaders are on Fridays and [the days of] *'id*"
became widespread.

The Prophet takes an oath then breaks it
----------------------------------------

In "The Book of Military Expeditions, the story of 'Amman and
al-Bahrayn,” in "The Chapter on the Arrival of the Ash'aris and the
People of Yemen" al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* from Abu Qilaba from
Zahdam: "When Abu Musa arrived (at Kufa as a governor) he honored this
family of Jarm (by paying them a visit). I was sitting near him, and he
was eating chicken as his lunch, and there was a man sitting amongst the
people. He invited the man to [eat] the lunch, but the latter said: 'I
saw chicken eating something [dirty] so I consider them unclean.’

Abu Musa said: 'Come on! I saw the Prophet eating it.’ The man said: 'I
have taken an oath that I will not eat it.’ Abu Musa said: 'Come on! I
will tell you about your oath. We, a group of al-Ash'ariyin people, went
to the Prophet (S.A.W.) and asked him to give us something to ride but
the Prophet refused. Then we asked him for the second time to give us
something to ride but the Prophet took an oath that he would not give us
anything to ride.

After a while, some camels of booty were brought to the Prophet and he
ordered that five camels be given to us. When we took them we said: 'We
have made the Prophet (S.A.W.) forget his oath, and we will not be
successful after that.’ So I went to him and said: 'O Prophet of God!
You took an oath that you would not give us anything to ride, but you
have given us.’ He said: 'Yes, if I take an oath and later I see a
better solution than that, I act on what is better.'"

Look at this Prophet, who Allah sent to teach people to respect their
oaths and not break them except by [offering an] expiation; but here he
is ordering something and not following it. Allah said: ***"Allah will
not take you to account for thoughtlessness in your oaths, but will call
you to account for your deliberate oaths. Its expiation is the feeding
of ten poor people, at an average rate for the food of your families or
clothing them, or the freeing of a slave. He who cannot do this should
fast three days that is the expiation of your oath if you have sworn. So
guard your oaths. In this way, Allah makes clear his verses to you so
that you may be thankful"*** (5:89). Allah also said:

***"And do not break oaths after you have confirmed them"*** (16:91).
But they did not leave even a single merit or virtue for the Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) [untouched].

'A'isha frees forty slaves as an expiation for her oath
-------------------------------------------------------

Where does the Prophet (S.A.W.) stand as opposed to his wife, 'A'isha,
who offered expiation for an oath she broke by freeing forty slaves; is
she more pious and pure than the Prophet of Allah?

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Etiquettes" in "The
Chapter of Avoidance and the Saying of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.):
'It is not permissible for a man to avoid his brother for more than
three [days].'"Volume 7, p. 90. "'A'isha said that she was told that
'Abd Allah b. al-Zubayr on hearing that she was selling or giving
something given to her as a gift, said: 'By Allah, if 'A'isha does not
give this up, I will declare her incompetent to dispose [of her
wealth].’ I said: 'Did he say so?' They said: 'Yes.’

She said: 'I vow to Allah that I will never speak to Ibn al-Zubayr.’
When this desertion lasted long, 'Abd Allah b. al-Zubayr sought
intercession with her, but she said: 'By Allah, I will not accept the
intercession of anyone for him, and will not break my vow'. When this
was prolonged on Ibn al-Zubayr, he said to al-Miswar b. Makhrama and
'Abd al-Rahman b. al-Aswad b. 'Abu Yaghuth, who were from the tribe of
Banu Zahra: 'I beseech you, by Allah, to let me enter upon 'A'isha, for
it is unlawful for her to vow to cut relations with me'.

So al-Miswar and 'Abd al-Rahman, wrapping their sheets around
themselves, asked 'A'isha's permission saying: 'Peace and Allah's Mercy
and Blessings be upon you! Shall we come in?' 'A'isha said: 'Come in.’
They said: 'All of us?' She said: 'Yes, come in all of you,’ not knowing
that Ibn al-Zubayr was also with them.

So when they entered, Ibn al-Zubayr entered the screened place and got
hold of 'A'isha and started requesting her to excuse him and wept.
Al-Miswar and 'Abd al-Rahman also started requesting her to speak to him
and to accept his repentance. They said: 'The Prophet (S.A.W.) forbade
what you know of avoiding for it is unlawful for any Muslim not to talk
to his brother for more than three nights.’ So when they continually
reminded her and brought her down to a critical situation, she started
reminding them, and wept saying: 'I have made a vow and [the question
of] vow is a difficult one'.

They persisted [in their appeal] till she spoke with 'Abd Allah b.
al-Zubayr and she manumitted forty slaves as expiation for her vow.
Later on, whenever she remembered her vow, she used to weep so much that
her veil used to become wet with her tears.”

Even though the vow of 'A'isha was not proper because the Prophet
(S.A.W.) forbade a Muslim to avoid his brother for more than three days,
but she refused [to speak] until she gave an expiation for her vow by
freeing forty slaves. This is also another proof for us that she had her
own property, otherwise how could 'A'isha own forty slaves or their
value?

That is not an easy thing. History has not recorded that the Prophet
(S.A.W.) freed this large number [of slaves] during his life. They did
not leave any evil or defect without attaching it to him, all that [was
done] for justifying the acts of their leaders, may Allah destroy them
for their fabrications.

To justify their defiling the *shari'a* laws, here are some narrations:

The Prophet plays with the laws of God as he wishes
---------------------------------------------------

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Fasting", in "The
Chapter of The Bath of One who is Fasting" and Muslim in his *Sahih* in
"The Book of Fasting,” "The Chapter on Severe prohibition of Intercourse
during the day in Ramadhan on the one Fasting, and the Incumbency of
Major Expiation for it, it is obligatory for the Rich and Poor,” on the
authority of Abu Hurayra who said: "While we were sitting with the
Prophet (S.A.W.) a man came and said: 'O Allah's Apostle! I have been
ruined.’ He asked: 'What happened?’

He replied: 'I had sexual intercourse with my wife while I was fasting.’
The Prophet of Allah asked him: 'Can you afford to manumit a slave?' He
replied: 'No.’ He asked him: 'Can you fast for two successive months?'
He replied: 'No.’ The Prophet asked him: 'Can you afford to feed sixty
poor persons?' He replied: 'No.’ The Prophet (S.A.W.) kept silent and
while we were in that state, a big basket full of dates was brought to
the Prophet. He asked: 'Where is the questioner?' He replied: 'I [am
here].’

The Prophet said: 'Take this and give it in charity.’ The man said:
'Should I give it to a person poorer than I? By Allah, there is no
family between Medina's two mountains who are poorer than my family.’
The Prophet (S.A.W.) smiled till his pre-molar teeth became visible and
then said: 'Feed your family with it.'"

Observe how the laws and regulations of Allah which He enjoined for his
servants regarding the emancipation of a slave for the prosperous are
treated. [As for] those unable to free a slave, they only need to feed
sixty poor people, and if this is not possible and if he is poor, then
nothing [is incumbent] upon him except fasting.

This is the stipulated expiation for the poor who do not have enough
wealth to free a slave or feed the poor. But this tradition exceeds the
bounds of Allah which He legislated for his servants, it is sufficient
for this transgressor to say a word that makes the Prophet laugh till
his teeth show and for him to be negligent of the law of Allah and to
permit him to take the *sadaqa* to his household.

Is there any slander greater than this against Allah and His Prophet (P)
that the wrongdoer is allowed to sin willingly instead of being
punished? Is there any greater encouragement than this for the
disobedient and corrupt ones who will cling on to such false traditions
and dance with joy?

Due to such narrations, Allah's religion and His laws have become a
[type of] amusement and mockery. Now a fornicator takes pride in his
corrupt acts and, calling himself a fornicator, sings songs of praises
for it at weddings and parties, just as the one who breaks his fast in
the month of *Ramadhan* defies those who fast.

Al-Bukhari has also reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Faith and
Vows,” in "The Chapter If one breaks an Oath through Forgetfulness" from
'Ata on the authority of Ibn 'Abbas (R) who said: "A man said to the
Prophet (S.A.W.): 'I visited before stoning (i.e., I circumambulated the
house of Allah, *tawaf al-Ziyara*).’

The Prophet (S.A.W.) said: 'There is no objection [to it].’ Another man
said: 'I shaved my head before making the sacrifice.’ He said: 'There is
no objection [to it]'. Another one said: 'I made the sacrifice before
stoning.’ The Prophet (S.A.W.) said: 'There is no objection [to it].'"

From 'Abd Allah b. 'Amr b. al-'As who reported that while the Prophet
(S.A.W.) was delivering a sermon on the day of sacrifice, a man went up
to him and said: "O Messenger of Allah, I used to consider this and this
before that and that.” Thereafter, another person stood up and said: "O
Prophet of Allah, I used to consider this and this as part of the three
(shaving the head, sacrifice, and stoning).” The Prophet (S.A.W.) said:
"Do it! There is no objection to any of them today.”

Anything that he was asked about that day he said "Do it! Do it! There
is no objection [to it].'"

It is strange that when you read these objectionable narrations, some
obstinate people will confront you [saying] that the religion of God
means ease and not burden. And that the Prophet (S.A.W.) said: "Make
things easy, do not make things difficult.”

It is a true statement intended to [lead to] falsehood. For there is no
doubt that Allah desires ease for us and does not desires any hardship
upon us, and that he did not impose hardship upon us in religion.

However, the rulings and legislations which He has outlined and imposed
on us by way of the noble Qur'an and the pure Prophetic *sunna* and has
given us necessary concessions when the situation demands like
*tayammum* in the absence of water or fear of [using] cold water, or
like performing the prayer in a sitting position when required, or
breaking the fast and shortening [the prayer] while travelling, all of
this is true - but for us to go against His injunctions, Glory be to
Him, by, for example, structuring the *wudu'* or *tayammum* as we desire
so that we wash the hands before the face, for example, or wipe the feet
before the head - this is not permitted.

Nonetheless, the forgers wished that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) would
waive everything so that they could find a loophole, as many people say
today (when you argue with them on matters of law): "There is no burden
upon you, my brother! The only important thing is to pray! Pray as it
pleases you".

It is strange that al-Bukhari himself related, on the same page where
there are the words of the Prophet: "Do it! Do it! There is no objection
[to it]" an incident where the Prophet demonstrates extreme severity.

He reported, on the authority Abu Hurayra that a man entered the mosque
to pray while the Prophet (S.A.W.) was in a corner of the *masjid*. The
man came and greeted him. He said to him: "Return and pray for you have
not prayed.” So the man went back and prayed then greeted him; the
Prophet said "And unto you too. Return and pray for you have not
prayed!" The man repeated the prayer three times, and, on every
occasion, the Prophet said to him: "Return and pray for you have not
prayed.”

The man said to the Prophet: "Teach me, O Messenger of Allah" so he
taught him to be at ease in *ruku'*, and in prostration. He said: "Then
bow until you are at ease in the bowing position, and then raise your
head until you are standing erect, then prostrate until you are at ease
in the prostrate position. Then rise until you are balanced and are at
ease in the sitting position then prostrate until you are at ease in the
prostration, then rise until you are standing erect. Do this in your
whole prayer.”

In his *Sahih*, al-Bukhari narrated in "The Book of *Tawhid*,” in "The
Chapter On Allah's Words: ***'Recite from the Qur'an what is easy for
you'*** from 'Umar b. al-Khattab who said: 'I heard Hisham b. Hakim
recite *Sura al-Furqan* during the lifetime of the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) so I listened to his recitation and lo! He was reciting in a
mode which the Prophet of Allah had not taught me. I almost grabbed him
during the prayer, but I waited until he recited the *salam*.

Then I took hold of his lower garment and said: 'Who taught you to
recite this *Sura* which I heard from you?' He said: 'The Prophet of
Allah made me recite [this way].’ I said: 'You have lied! He made me
recite in a manner different from what you recited.’

So I went out with him and led him to the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.), and
I said: 'I heard him reciting *Sura al-Furqan* in a mode different from
what you have taught me.’ He said: 'Let him be. Recite O Hisham'! So he
recited the recitation I had heard him whereupon the Prophet of Allah
said: 'So it was revealed.’ Then the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said:
'Recite O Umar'! So I recited it in the manner he had made me recite. He
said: 'So it was revealed. Indeed this Qur'an was revealed in seven
different modes of recitation. So recite it in whichever way is easy for
you.'"

Does there remain any doubt, after this narration, that the falsifiers
were insolent to the sanctity of the Prophet (P) even to the noble
Qur'an, and that he taught his companions different recitations, telling
each one of them that it was revealed in this manner?

Had there not been a big difference in the mode of recitation, 'Umar
would not have come close to breaking Hisham's prayer and would not have
threatened him. This reminds me of the scholars of the *ahl al-sunna*
who insist on a specific recitation and do not allow anyone to recite
differently. One day, I was reciting "*Udhkuru ni'mati al-lati an'amtu
'alaykum*" ("Remember my bounty I have bestowed upon you").

One of them scolded me strongly and screamed saying: "Do not destroy the
Qur'an if you are ignorant of the recitation.” I asked: "How have I
destroyed the Qur'an?” He said: "*Udhkuru Ni'matiya and not Ni'mati.”*

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in volume 3 page 88 in "The Book of
Borrowing and the Repayment of Loans,” in "The Chapter of Disputes" from
'Abd al-Malik b. Maysara who informed me, he said: "I heard al-Nazzal, I
heard 'Abd Allah say: 'I heard a man recite a verse which I had heard
the Prophet (S.A.W.) recite differently. So I took him by the hand and
went to the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) who said: 'Both of you are fine."'
Shu'ba said: "I think he said: 'Don't disagree. For those who came
before you disagreed and were destroyed.'"

Glory and Praise be to Allah! How can the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
accept their difference and say: "Both of you are fine" and not refer
them to a unified [mode of] recitation, thereby eradicating differences?

Then, after that, he says to them: "Do not disagree for you will be
destroyed.” Is this not contradictory? O Servants of Allah! Give me your
opinion, may Allah have mercy upon you! Did they not differ except by
his permission, blessings and encouragement? Certainly not! Far be it
for the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) [to promote] this contradiction and
difference which reason shuns.

Do they not reflect upon the Qur'an which says: ***"Were it from other
than Allah, they would have found many contradictions in it"*** (4:82)?
Has a greater and more dangerous difference befallen the Islamic *umma*
than numerous modes of recitations which have changed the meaning of the
Qur'an to varying interpretations and views so that even the clear
verses of *wudu'* have become a matter of dispute?

The Prophet behaves like a child and then disciplines one who does not deserve punishment
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Al-Bukhari, in his *Sahih*, in "The Book of Military Campaigns,” in "The
Chapter On The Illness and Death of the Prophet (S.A.W.),” and also
Muslim in his *Sahih*, in "The Book of Peace,” in "The chapter of
Aversion to Medication Administered by Force" reported: "From 'A'isha
who said: 'We poured medicine in one side of the Prophet's mouth during
his illness and he started pointing to us, meaning to say: 'Don't pour
medicine in my mouth.’

We said: '[It is] a patient's dislike to medicine.’ When he recovered he
said: 'Didn't I forbid you to pour medicine in my mouth?' We said: '[We
thought it was due to] the dislike patients have for medicines.’ He
said: 'Let everyone present in the house be given medicine by pouring it
in his mouth while I am looking at him, except al-'Abbas as he has not
witnessed you [doing the same to me].'"

Strange indeed is the case of this slandered Prophet, whom the liars
made like a child who is made to swallow bitter medicine which he does
not accept. He indicates to them not to administer medicine to him, but
yet they force it upon him despite his protests!

When he recovers he says to them: "Didn't I forbid you to pour medicine
in my mouth?" They excuse themselves saying they assumed that his
prohibition was due to the aversion of a sick person from medicine, then
he decrees for all of them that they be given the medicine while he
watches to satisfy his rancor, and did not exclude anyone except his
uncle al-'Abbas since he was not present when they were administering
it.

Lady 'A'isha did not complete the story, was the Prophet's (S.A.W.)
order carried out on them or not, and to whom and how was this done to
the men and women present?

The Prophet leaves out some verses of the Qur'an
------------------------------------------------

In the book of "The Merits of the Qur'an,” in "The Chapter of
Forgetfulness of the Qur'an", as well as in "The Chapter of One Who Sees
No Problem in saying *Sura* so and so,” al-Bukhari reported the
following *hadith* as did Muslim in his *Sahih* in "The Book of The
Prayers of Travellers and Shortening it" in "The Chapter of The Order to
Abide by the Qur'an and the Hatefulness of saying 'I forgot verse so and
so....'": "Abu Usama informed us on the authority of Hisham b. 'Urwa, on
the authority of his father from 'A'isha who said: 'One night, the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) heard a man reciting from a chapter [of the
Qur'an]. He said: 'May Allah have mercy on him. He has reminded me of
verse so and so which I had forgotten from *sura* so and so.'"

Similarly, in another narration, al-Bukhari related from 'Ali b. Mushiri
from Hisham from his father from 'A'isha (R) who said: "The Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.) heard a reciter at night in the *masjid* and said: 'May
Allah have mercy on him. He has reminded me of verse so and so which I
left out from *Sura* so and so....'"

This is the Prophet whom Allah, Glory be to Him, sent with the Qur'an,
the eternal miracle, which he used to memorize from the day of its
revelation upon him, verse by verse, until its complete revelation.
Indeed Allah said to him: ***"Don't move your tongue to hasten to it"***
and He also said: ***"It is indeed a revelation of the Lord of all the
worlds, sent down through the Faithful Spirit to*** ***your heart so
that you may be among the warners speaking a clear Arabic tongue and it
is indeed in the revealed book of the former Prophets"*** (26:196).

But the liars, deceivers and the forgers are not satisfied until they
attribute false, nonsensical and legendary things to him which no sane
mind or intellect can accept. It is the right of the Muslim researchers
to dissociate the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) from such false traditions
which fill the *hadith* books, especially those counted amongst the
"*Sahihs*".

We have not transmitted [anything] except from the books of al-Bukhari
and Muslim which are seen by the *ahl al-sunna* as the most reliable
books after the book of Allah. If this is the status of the *Sahihs*,
specifically the blemish on the sanctity and infallibility of the
Prophet (P), then do not even ask about the other books.

All these are [due to the] interpolations of the enemies of Allah; the
enemies of His Apostle (S.A.W.) who sought to flatter the Umayyad rulers
during the time of Mu'awiya and those who succeeded him, until they
filled volumes and volumes with spurious *hadiths* through which they
desired the denigration of the bearer of the message (P); for they did
not believe in everything that he brought from Allah.

This is one perspective. The other perspective was to justify the vile
and disgraceful deeds of their leaders which Muslim history has
recorded. The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) had exposed them from the
beginning of his mission, and warned against them, exiling them from
Medina, and had cursed them. In his history, al-Tabari says: "The
Prophet (S.A.W.) saw Abu Sufyan was approaching on a donkey, with
Mu'awiya leading him, and Yazid, his son, herding it.

He said: "May Allah curse the leader, the rider and the driver.” Imam
Ahmad in his *Musnad*, on the authority of Ibn 'Abbas, said: "We were on
a journey with the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) when he heard two men
singing, one of them responding to the other. Whereupon the Prophet
(S.A.W.) said: 'See who they are.’ The people said: 'Mu'awiya and 'Amr
b. al-'As'.

The Prophet of Allah raised his hands and said: 'O Allah! Debase them
and confine them into the fire.'" And from Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, who
said to Mu'awiya: "I heard the Prophet of Allah say when you passed by
him: 'O Allah! Curse him and make his stomach full of nothing but
dust!'" Imam 'Ali (A.S.) said in a letter that he sent to the people of
Iraq:

"By Allah! Were I to meet them alone, and they filled the earth, I would
not be scared of them. I am sure of their going astray due to what they
indulge in; the guided path that we are in is reliable, clear, certain
and insightful. I am eager to meet my Lord and am waiting for His
bounteous reward.  
 Yet sorrow overtakes me and grief overwhelms me; the matter of this
*umma* will be taken away by the fools and corrupt ones; they will treat
the property of Allah as their personal property and the servants of
Allah as their slaves; they will fight the upright ones and will make
those who have deviated members of their groups.”

Since the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) cursed them as you have seen, and
they did not find the *hadith* to be distorted since the prominent
companions recognized it, they invented other traditions to change truth
to falsehood, and to make the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) seem an ordinary
person beset by the zeal of the period of *jahiliyya*, subject to severe
anger, defaming and cursing those not deserving it. To defend their
accursed leaders, they fabricated this *hadith*.

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Supplications,” in
"The Chapter of The Prophet's (S.A.W.) saying: 'Whoever I have wronged,
make it a charity and a blessing for him.’” Muslim also recorded in his
*Sahih* under "The Book of Kindness, Kinship and Good Manners,” in "The
Chapter of Whoever the Prophet (S.A.W.) Cursed or Insulted or Prayed
against, He did not Deserve it, it was made as a Charity, Reward and a
Mercy For Him": "From 'A'isha who said: 'Two men called upon the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) and spoke to him about something which I do not know.

They angered him and he cursed and insulted them. When they left, I
said: 'O Prophet of Allah! Whatever good comes, these two will not
receive it.’ He said: 'How so?' I said: 'You cursed and insulted them.’
He said: 'Don't you know what I have requested from my Lord when I said
'O Allah! I am just a man, so any Muslim that I curse or insult, make it
a charity and reward for him.'"

On the authority of Abu Hurayra, the Prophet (S.A.W.) said: "O Allah! I
have taken a covenant with You which you will never break. For I am only
a man so any believer whom I wrong, insult, curse or whip, cause that to
be a prayer and a charity for him through which he gets closer to you on
the day of resurrection.”

Due to such false traditions, the Prophet becomes angry for other than
Allah's sake. He insults and abuses. Moreover, he curses and whips one
who does not deserve it. What kind of Prophet is this who is so overcome
by Satan that he goes beyond the sphere of reason? Is it permitted for
an ordinary religious person to behave thus?

Or is such a deed by him not detestable? Due to such *hadith*s, the
Umayyad rulers, who the Prophet of Allah cursed, supplicated against and
whipped a few of them for the vile deeds they committed and exposed them
in front of the general populace, came to be [seen as] the oppressed
ones! Rather, they became chaste and deprived ones, attaining closeness
to Allah.

These spurious narrations are self revealing and disgrace the
fabricators. The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) was not an insulter, nor a
curser, nor a corrupt person, nor one using obscene language. Allah
forbid! Allah forbid! Grave indeed are the words that emerge from their
mouths that cause Allah to be angry with them, curse them and prepare
for them a painful chastisement!

One narration, which both al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated from 'A'isha,
is sufficient for us to refute these false allegations. Al-Bukhari
reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Etiquettes" in "The Chapter of
the Prophet (S.A.W.) did not commit Vile Deeds or use Foul Language" on
the authority of 'A'isha who said: "Some Jews came to the Prophet
(S.A.W.) and said: 'Assaamu 'alaykum! (death unto you).'" 'A'isha said:
"I said: 'And unto you, and may Allah curse and be angry with you.’

The Prophet (S.A.W.) said: 'Go easy O 'A'isha! Be friendly, do not be
harsh nor of vile deeds.’ I said: 'Did you not hear what they said?' He
said: 'Did you not hear what I said? I responded to them and my
invocation against them was answered, and their invocation against me
went unanswered.'"

Muslim also reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of Kindness, Kinship
and Etiquettes" that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) prohibited Muslims
from cursing. He even prohibited Muslims from cursing beasts and cattle.
When it was said to him: "O Prophet, curse the polytheists!" He said: "I
have not been sent as a curser, I have been sent as a mercy.”

This is what is in concordance with the supreme character and gentle
heart that were the special [traits] of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.).
He would not curse, abuse or whip those who did not deserve [such
treatment]. When he got angry, he did so for Allah's sake; if he cursed,
he did so upon one who deserved it; and if he ordered whipping, he did
so in order to carry out the penalties [prescribed] by Allah; he did not
whip the innocent ones against whom there was no clear proof, or
witnesses, or confessions.

They dwindled and their hearts burnt due to the dissemination of
narrations which contained curses on Mu'awiya and the Umayyads. They
invented these false traditions to confuse the people and to elevate the
status of Mu'awiya, the forger.

As a result, you find that Muslim, in his *Sahih*, after reporting these
*hadiths* which make the imprecations of the Prophet on Mu'awiya a
charity, mercy and [a medium for] attaining closeness to Allah, reports
a *hadith* from Ibn 'Abbas who says: "I was playing with the boys when
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) came, and I hid behind a door. He came and
got me and said: 'Go and call Mu'awiya for me.’ He said: 'I went and
said: 'He is eating'". He (Ibn 'Abbas) said: "He then said to me: 'Go
and call Mu'awiya for me.’ I went and said: 'He is eating'. He said:
'May Allah not satiate his stomach.'"

We find in the history books that, Imam al-Nasa'i, after writing a book
of traits which were special to the Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali b.
Abi Talib (A.S.), came to Syria. The people of Syria rebuked and asked
him as to why he did not record the excellences of Mu'awiya. He replied:
"I do not know of any virtue of him except that Allah does not satiate
his stomach.”

Whereupon they beat him around his private parts until he was martyred.
Historians relate that the prayer of the Prophet (S.A.W.) was effective,
for Mu'awiya used to eat and eat until he would get tired of eating, yet
he was not full.

In fact, I was not aware of these narrations which made the curse a
blessing and [form of] nearness to Allah, until one of the Shaykhs in
Tunis informed me about it. He was reputed for his knowledge and
erudition and we were in a gathering engaged in a conversation about
*hadith* until the issue of Mu'awiya b. Abi Sufyan came up. The Shaykh
had been speaking of him in profound awe, saying that he was intelligent
and famous for his sagacity and astuteness in managing affairs.

He started to speak about him and his politics and his victory over our
master 'Ali (May Allah brighten his face) in war. I held my patience
with anguish but he went to such an extent in his praise and adoration
of Mu'awiya until I could no longer bear it. So I said to him that the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) did not like him and had actually supplicated
against him and cursed him.

Those who were present were astonished, and there were those who were
angered at what I had said. But the Shaykh, with complete tranquility,
replied that he believed me, which increased the astonishment of those
present. They said to him: "We do not understand anything. On the one
hand you praise him and are pleased with him and, on the other hand, you
agree that the Prophet cursed him. How can this be correct?" And I too,
with them, asked how could this be correct?

The Shaykh responded to us with an answer which was perplexing and
difficult to accept. He said: "Whoever the Prophet of Allah has cursed
or insulted, it is for him a charity and a blessing, and [a means of]
getting closer to Allah, Glory be to Him.” Everyone asked in
bewilderment: "How is this [possible]?" He replied: "Because the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) said: 'I am a mere mortal like the rest of mankind and
I have asked Allah to make my supplications and curses a blessing and a
charity'". Then he added saying: "Even he who the Prophet of Allah
(S.A.W.) kills, he goes from this world directly to heaven!"

I approached him alone afterwards and questioned him about the source of
the *hadith* he had mentioned. He produced *Sahih* al-Bukhari and
*Sahih* Muslim and I studied those *hadiths* which only increased my
certainty regarding the plots which the Umayyads perpetrated to cover up
the realities and to hide their disgraces on the one hand, and to
destroy the infallibility of the Prophet (P) on the other.

Subsequently, I found several narrations leading to the same goal. To be
appeased, the plotters fabricated even more than that, attributing
[them] to the Lord of all the worlds. Al-Bukhari has related in his
*Sahih*, in "The book of *Tawhid*" in the Chapter of Allah's saying:
"They wish to change Allah's words,” from Abu Hurayra that the Prophet
of Allah (S.A.W.) said: "A man who never did any good deed said that if
he died they should burn him and throw half [the ashes] in the earth and
the other half in the sea, for, by Allah, if Allah should get hold of
him, He would inflict such punishment on him as He would not inflict on
anybody else in the world.

But Allah ordered the sea to collect what was in it (of his ashes) and
similarly ordered the earth to collect what was in it (of his ashes).
Then Allah said to him: 'Why did you do so?' The man replied: 'I was
afraid of You, and You know it better.’ So Allah forgave him.”

From Abu Hurayra also on the same page: "I heard the Prophet saying: 'If
somebody commits a sin and then says: 'O my Lord! I have sinned, please
forgive me' and his Lord says: 'My slave has known that he has a Lord
who forgives sins and punishes for it, I therefore have forgiven my
slave (his sins).’ Then he remains without committing any sin for a
while and then again commits another sin and says:

'O my Lord, I have committed another sin, please forgive me' and Allah
says: 'My slave has known that he has a Lord who forgives sins and
punishes for it, I therefore have forgiven my slave.’ Then he remains
without committing any another sin for a while and then commits another
sin and says: 'O my Lord, I have committed another sin, please forgive
me' and Allah says: 'My slave has known that he has a Lord Who forgives
sins and punishes for it. I therefore have forgiven my slave (his sin),
he can do whatever he likes.'"

What kind of Lord is this, O servants of Allah? From the first instance,
the servant knew that he had a Lord who forgives sins, even though his
Lord was not aware of this fact, so that on every occasion he had to
ask: "Does my servant know that he has a Lord who forgives sin?"

What kind of Lord is this who, because the repeated perpetration of sins
and repeated forgiveness, becomes tired and exhausted and says to his
servant: "Do as you wish. Give me rest, Allah will leave you alone.”

"Grave indeed are the words that come out of their mouths. They utter
not except falsehood, perchance you may kill yourself in their trail,
they will still not believe in this speech.” Yes, Indeed! They allege
that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said to 'Uthman: "Do as you wish, for
nothing of what you do will harm you after today.” This was when 'Uthman
helped substantially in preparing the army which was going to Tabuk.
According to what they say, it absolved the sins that the monks used to
give in exchange for an entry to heaven.

It was not surprising therefore when 'Uthman did those vile deeds that
resulted in the uprising against him and his being killed and buried in
a non-Muslim graveyard without being washed or [covered with] a shroud.
That is their protection [against punishment]. Say: "Bring your proof if
you are indeed truthful.”

The Prophet contradicts himself in his hadith
---------------------------------------------

In "The Book of Discord", in "The Chapter If Two Muslims meet with their
Swords", in volume. 8, page 92, al-Bukhari recorded in his *Sahih* from
'Abd Allah b. 'Abd al-Wahhab who said: "Hammad informed us on the
authority of a man he did not name, that al-Hasan said: 'I went out with
my weapons during the nights of sedition, and Abu Bakra met me saying:
'Where are you going?' I replied: 'I wish to assist the cousin of the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.).’ He said: 'The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
said: 'If two Muslims show up against each other with their swords, both
of them are the inhabitants of fire.’ It was said: 'This is the killer
but how about the one killed?' He replied: 'He wanted to kill his
companion.'"

Hammad b. Zayd said: "I mentioned this *hadith* to Ayub and Yunus b.
'Ubayd, for I wanted them to inform me about it. They said: 'Al-Hasan
related this *hadith* from al-Ahnaf b. Qays from Abu Bakra.'"

Similarly, Muslim has reported in his *Sahih,* in "The Book of Discord
and Signs of the Hour.” in "The Chapter if Two Muslims meet each other
with their Swords,” from the *hadith* of Abu Bakra from al-Ahnaf b.
Qays, who said: "I went to assist this man, and Abu Bakra met me and
said: 'Where are you going?' I said: 'I am going to help this man.’ He
said: 'Go back. For I heard the Prophet of Allah say: 'If two Muslims
meet with their swords [in combat], the killer and the killed are in the
fire.’ I said: 'O Prophet of Allah! This [is] the killer, how about the
one killed? He said: 'He was intent upon killing his companion.'"

From these false narrations, the reader can clearly understand the
reasons for forging them; it indicates Abu Bakra's enmity towards the
cousin of al-Mustafa and how he worked towards abandoning the Commander
of the Faithful.

He was not satisfied with that, however; he even prevented the eminent
companions who wanted to aid the truth against falsehood, and so
fabricated such *hadiths* which reason cannot accept and which neither
the Qur'an nor the true Prophetic *sunna* acknowledge. For Allah's
words, Glory be to Him, the Most Exalted: ***"So fight the party that
rebels until it complies with the order of Allah"*** (49:9) clearly
commands to fight rebels and oppressors.

As a result, you observe that the commentator of al-Bukhari wrote in the
side notes of the *hadith* the following: "Examine this *hadith*; is
there any proof for fighting the rebels as per Allah's directive:
***"And fight the party which rebels..."*** And if a *hadith*
contradicts the book of Allah, then it is a lie and is to be discarded.”
As for the true Prophetic *sunna* his words regarding 'Ali are: "Of
whomsoever I am the master, 'Ali is also his master.

My Lord! Befriend those who befriend him and oppose those who oppose him
and help those who help him. Forsake those who forsake him and let the
truth be with him wherever he goes.” For friendship of 'Ali is
friendship of the Prophet of Allah (P). And helping the Commander of the
Faithful is obligatory upon every Muslim and forsaking him is forsaking
the truth and is [equivalent to] supporting falsehood.

If you reflect upon the *hadith* of al-Bukhari you will find in the
chain of narrators an unknown person whose name he did not mention as he
said: "Hammad informed us on the authority of a man he did not name..."
This clearly proves that this unknown man was from the hypocrites who
hated 'Ali and exerted themselves to erase 'Ali's excellences or, to be
exact, to kill him and his memory as much as they were able to.

Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas, who also desisted from helping the truth, said:
"Come to me with a sword saying this one is on the truth and that one is
on falsehood so that I may fight him..." Due to such adulteration, truth
is confused with falsehood and the clear path lost, it is replaced with
darkness.  
 We find too in the reliable books of the *sunna*, that the Apostle of
Allah (S.A.W.) gave the good tidings of heaven to a lot of his
companions especially the ten who became famous among the Muslims as
having been assured of paradise.

Ahmad, al-Tirmidhi and Abu Dawud reported that the Prophet (S.A.W.)
said: "Abu Bakr is in heaven, 'Umar is in heaven, 'Uthman is in heaven,
'Ali is in heaven, Talha is in heaven, al-Zubayr is in heaven, 'Abd
al-Rahman b. 'Awf is in heaven, Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas is in heaven, Sa'id
b. Zayd is in heaven and Abu 'Ubayda b. al-Jarrah is in heaven.”

It has been authenticated from the Prophet (S.A.W.) that he said: "Give
good tidings to the family of Yasir for your place is in heaven. And his
words: "Heaven yearns for four: 'Ali and 'Ammar, Salman and al-Miqdad.”
Muslim reported in his *Sahih* that 'Abd Allah b. Salam was given the
glad tidings of heaven by the Prophet of Allah and it has been verified
that he said: "Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the two leaders of the youths
of paradise.”

It was verified from him also that Ja'far b. Abi Talib flies with the
angels in paradise. And that Fatima al-Zahra (A.S.) is the leader of the
women of paradise and that her mother Khadija was told by Gabriel of a
house of gold and silver embroidery in paradise. It was also
authenticated that he said: "Suhayb, the foremost of the Romans is in
paradise, and Bilal, the foremost of the Ethiopians, is in paradise, and
Salman, the foremost of the Persians, is in paradise.”

This being the case, why is the *hadith* of the good tidings of paradise
restricted to only these ten? You do not find a gathering or an assembly
when they discuss heaven, then they mention the ten [who were] given the
good tidings of paradise.

We do not envy them in this, nor do we not restrict the wide mercy of
Allah which encompasses everything, but we only say that these *hadiths*
are at variance and conflict with the *hadith* which says: "If two
Muslims meet each other with their swords in combat, then the killer and
the one killed are in fire.”

For if we believe this, then the *hadith* of the ten given the tidings
of heaven evaporates since most of them waged war, fought against and
killed each other. Talha and Zubayr were killed at the battle of the
Camel which was led by the mother of the believers 'A'isha against Imam
'Ali b. Abi Talib. Their swords were raised in combat; indeed, they
caused the death of thousands of Muslims.

Similarly, 'Ammar b. Yasir was killed at the battle of Siffin, the
flames of which were started by Mu'awiya b. Abi Sufyan. 'Ammar was
present with his sword with 'Ali b. Abi Talib; the rebellious forces
slew him. The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) prophesied this. Similarly, the
leader of the martyrs, the leader of the youths of Paradise, Imam
al-Husayn and the family of al-Mustafa were present with their swords in
combat against the army of Yazid b. Mu'awiya. They killed all of them;
no one survived among them except 'Ali b. al-Husayn.

According to the view of these liars then, all of these are in the fire,
the killers and those who were killed for they met [in combat] with
their swords.

Obviously, it is incorrect to attribute the *hadith* to one who does not
utter anything from his own desire but rather, [from] the revelation
sent unto him. It is also, as we have previously pointed out, in
conflict with logic and reason and contradicts the book of Allah and the
*sunna* of His Prophet (S.A.W.). The question that arises here is: "How
could al-Bukhari and Muslim be so negligent of such lies and not be
aware of them? Or did their school of thought believe in such
narrations?"

Contradictions regarding virtues
--------------------------------

Among the contradictory *hadiths* that you find in the "*Sahihs*" are
those regarding the superiority of the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) over
all the Prophets and Apostles, and other traditions which elevate Moses
to a level higher than him. I believe that the Jews, who converted
during the times of 'Umar and 'Uthman like Ka'b al-Ahbar, Tamim al-Dari,
and Wahb b. Munabbih, are the ones who fabricated those *hadiths*;
attributing them to some companions who used to admire them such as Abu
Hurayra, Anas b. Malik and others. Al-Bukhari narrated in his *Sahih* in
"The Book of *Tawhid*" in "The Chapter on Allah's words! ’And Allah
spoke to Moses.'"

From Anas b. Malik, a long tale regarding the nocturnal journey
(*isra'*) of the Prophet (S.A.W.), then his ascent to the seven heavens,
then to the remote tree (*al-sidrat al-muntaha*); and the story of the
fifty obligatory prayers which were enjoined upon Muhammad and his
*umma*, and which, by the grace of Moses, were reduced to five applied
[prayers]. In this [story] are clear lies and basest disbelief, like the
all-Conquering Lord of Power drew close until He was two bow lengths or
less away from the Prophet, and other fables.

However, what is of importance to us here in this narration is that when
Muhammad reached the seventh heaven, Moses, who had been elevated to the
seventh [heaven] because of Allah's speaking to him, was there. Moses
said: "My Lord! I did not think that anyone would be raised higher than
me.” Muslim reported in "The Book of Faith,” in "The Chapter On the
Beginning of Revelation to the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.),” and
al-Bukhari in his *Sahih* in "The Book of the Beginning of Creation,” in
"The Chapter of Accounts of the Angels” (peace be upon them), another
anecdote which resembles the first; speaking of the nocturnal journey
and ascension but states instead that Moses was in the sixth heaven, and
Abraham in the seventh. What concerns us is the following section:

The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: "We came to the sixth heaven. It was
asked: 'Who is this?' It was said: 'Gabriel'. It was said: 'Who is with
you?’ He said: 'Muhammad (S.A.W.).’ It was said: 'Has revelation
descended upon him?' He answered: 'Yes.’ It was then said: 'Welcome to
him! What a wonderful [person] has come!' I went to Moses and greeted
him and he said: 'Welcome to my brother and Prophet.’ When I went on, he
wept. It was said: 'What has made you weep?' He said: 'O Lord! The
followers of this youth who was sent after me will enter paradise in
greater numbers than my followers.'"

Muslim reported in his *Sahih*, in "The Book of Faith" in "The Chapter
[entitled] 'In the lowest of Paradise will be a House in It,'" from Abu
Hurayra, who said: "The Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said: 'I am the leader
of all mankind on the day of judgment, and do you know how that is?
Those who came before and those who came after will be gathered in one
area known as "al-Da'i". Their sight will be restored to them, then the
Sun will descend and the men will encounter such sorrow and affliction
that they will not be able to withstand it.

The people will then say: 'Don't you see what has befallen you? Shall
you not seek someone who will intercede for you with your Lord?'
Whereupon some will say to the others: 'Go to Adam.’ So they will go to
Adam (A.S.) and they will say to him: 'You are the father of mankind,
Allah created you with His Hands and breathed His Spirit into you, and
ordered the angels to prostrate before you. Intercede for us with your
Lord. Don't you see our condition? Don't you see what has befallen us?'

Whereupon Adam will say: 'Today my Lord got angry to a degree that He
has never got before. After this day, He will never be so angered again.
He prohibited me from the tree and I disobeyed Him. (I am) on my own! On
my own! On my own! Go to someone else. Go to Noah.'" The narration
continues and it is very long (we always wish [to cite] a brief
account).

It goes on to state that the people go to Noah, then Abraham, then Moses
then Jesus, and each of them said: "On my own! On my own! On my own!”
Each relates his error or his sin, with the exception of Jesus who does
not mention a sin but nonetheless says: "On my own! On my own! On my
own! Go to someone else! Go to Muhammad!” The Prophet of Allah said: "So
they come to me.

So I go forth and go under the throne, and fall in prostration before my
Lord the Powerful and the Glorious, then Allah allows for me, out of his
praises and beauty of adoration, something He had never allowed for
anyone before me. Then it will be said: 'O Muhammad! Raise your head!
Ask and you shall be given. Intervene and your intercession will
prevail!' So I raise my head and I say: 'My *umma* O Lord, My *umma*, O
Lord!’

Then Allah will say: 'O Muhammad! I allow entry from your *umma* those
who have no reckoning upon them through the right gate of paradise. And
they are to share with the others in the other gates besides this one.'"
Then he said: "By He in whose hand is my soul! Indeed, what is between
the levels of paradise is like what is between Mecca and Humayr or what
is between Mecca and Basra.”

In these *hadiths*, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) says that he is the
leader of mankind on the Day of Judgment. And he says that Moses said:
"O my Lord! I did not think that anyone would be elevated above me.” And
he says that Moses wept and said: "O Lord! The followers of this youth
who was sent after me will enter paradise in greater numbers than my
followers.”

We adduce from these *hadiths* that all the Prophets and Apostles from
Adam even Jesus through Noah and Abraham and Moses (upon them and upon
our Prophet be the choicest of blessing and the purest of greetings)
will not seek intercession with Allah on the day of reckoning, instead,
Allah will restrict it to Muhammad (S.A.W.) only.

We believe in all of that and we attest too to his superiority (S.A.W.)
over the rest of mankind. However, the "*Israiliyyun*" and their helpers
amongst the Umayyads could not tolerate this preference and superiority
of Muhammad (S.A.W.) and so they fabricated traditions on the
superiority of Moses over him.

We have already seen in a preceding discussion the words of Moses to
Muhammad on the night of the nocturnal journey and *mi'raj* that when
Allah enjoined upon Muhammad fifty prayers, Moses said to him: "I know
the people more than you.” This, though, was not sufficient so they
invented other narrations speaking of his superiority, i.e., Moses over
Muhammad by Muhammad himself. Following are some of these narrations:

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of *Tawhid*,” in "The
Chapter of Allah's Wish and Will and You do not Wish Anything except If
Allah Wills it,” from Abu Hurayra, who said: "A Muslim man and a Jew
quarreled, and the Muslim said: 'By Him who chose Muhammad over the
universe' in an oath he took, whereupon the Jew said: 'By Him who chose
Moses over the universe.’ Upon this, the Muslim raised his hand and
slapped the Jew.

The Jew then went to the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) and informed him of
what had transpired between him and the Muslim. The Prophet (S.A.W.)
said: 'Do not give me preference over Moses for the people will be
unconscious on the Day of Judgment, and I will be the first to recover.
There will be Moses falling upon the side of the throne. I will not know
whether he was among those who lost consciousness and recovered before I
did, or if he was among those exempted by Allah.'"

In another narration of al-Bukhari, he said: "A Jew who had been slapped
on the face came to the Prophet and said: 'O Muhammad! An Ansari
companion of yours slapped me on my face.’ The Prophet said: 'Call him.’
So he called him. The Prophet said: 'Why did you slap his face?' The man
said: 'O Prophet of Allah. I passed by the Jew and I heard him say: 'By
him who chose Moses above all mankind.’ I said: 'Over Muhammad?' So I
became angry and I slapped him.

The Prophet said: 'Do not give me preference over the Prophets for the
people will lose consciousness on the Day of Judgment and I will be the
first to recover and I will be with Moses holding on to one of the
pillars of the throne and I shall not know whether he recovered before
me or if he was being compensated for his unconsciousness in the
mountain.'"

Similarly, al-Bukhari has reported in "The Book of *Tafsir* of the
Qur'an for *Sura* Yusuf (A.S.)" in "The Chapter of His words: 'And when
the Prophet came to him...'" from Abu Hurayra, who said: "The Prophet of
Allah said: 'May Allah bestow His Mercy on (Prophet) Lot.

He wished he could have some powerful support; and if I were to remain
in prison for the period Joseph had remained, I would surely respond to
the call; and we have more right (to be in doubt) than Abraham. When
Allah said to him: 'Don't you believe?' Abraham said: 'Yes, (I do
believe) but [I ask] to be stronger in faith.'"

All these statements were not enough for them until they made the
Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) doubt even his standing with his Lord. He had
no [powers of] intercession, no praiseworthy position, and no preference
over the Messengers and Apostles and no good tidings of Paradise for his
companions, since he himself did not know his fate on the Day of
Judgment. Read along with me this narration of al-Bukhari and think what
you will of it.

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in "The Chapter of The Funeral,” in
"The Book of Eclipses,” in volume 2, page 71, from "Kharija b. Zayd b.
Thabit, that Umm al-'Ala, a woman of the Ansar, pledged fealty to the
Prophet (S.A.W.) and told him that the Muhajirin cast lots (by throwing
dice), and it fell on 'Uthman b. Maz'un, so we took him in our
household.

He became sick, an illness which caused his death. When he died and was
bathed and shrouded in his clothes, the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) came
in and I said: 'May Allah have mercy upon you, O Abu al-Sa'ib for I bear
witness that Allah has honored you.’

The Prophet (S.A.W.) said: 'How do you know that Allah has honored him?'
I said: 'May my father be sacrificed, O Prophet of Allah, who then has
Allah honored?' Whereupon he (A.S.) said: 'As for him, death has come to
him, and, by Allah, I wish him well. By Allah! I do not know what will
be done to me, I, the Prophet of Allah.’ I said: 'By Allah! Never will I
ascribe purity to anyone after this.'"

This, by Allah, is an astonishing thing. If the Prophet of Allah swore
by Allah that he does not know what will be done to him, what remains
after this?

And if Allah, Glory be to Him, says: ***"Every person is aware of his
[own] self.”*** And if He has also said to His Prophet: ***"We have
bestowed upon you a clear victory! For Allah has forgiven your past sins
and what may be done in the future to fulfill His blessing upon you and
to guide you to*** ***a straight path and to aid you most honorably"***
(48:1); and if the Muslims' entry into paradise depends upon following,
obeying and believing him, how can we believe this *hadith* of which
there is nothing more evil than it?

We seek Allah's refuge from the creed of the Banu Umayyads who did not
believe for even a day that Muhammad was truly the Prophet of Allah, but
instead, used to believe that he was a king, having overcome the people
by his intelligence and sagacity. This is what Abu Sufyan, Mu'awiya,
Yazid and other Caliphs and rulers of theirs have clearly said.

The Prophet contradicts science and medicine
--------------------------------------------

Science has established by indubitable proofs that certain diseases are
transmitted by infection. This is known to most people, even to those
who are uneducated. However, if one were to say to university medical
students that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) denied this, they would
deride him and would find a point to defame the Prophet of Islam
especially the German professors who are looking for such openings.

Most unfortunately, the *hadith* that al-Bukhari and Muslim have
reported support [the claim] against infection; yet in their books are
others that support [claims for] infection. When we record these
contradictions, under the heading "The Prophet Contradicts" we do not
believe that he (S.A.W.) contradicted himself even once in his words or
deeds, but rather, [this is done] in accordance with normal practice and
to attract the heart of the reader so that he might pay attention to the
*hadiths* that were fabricated to disparage and defame the infallible
bearer of the message.

[This is also done] so that he might know that our goal in relating such
*hadiths* is to exonerate the Prophet and to give him his [rightful]
place in education which he precedes every modern scientist, for there
is no true scientific theory which contradicts an authentic *hadith* of
the Prophet. If they conflict or contradict, we know on the one hand
that the *hadith* is falsely attributed to him (S.A.W.) and, on the
other hand, the *hadith* itself may be contradicted by other *hadith*
which support the scientific theory. As is obvious, it would be
necessary to accept the second *hadith* and discard the first one.

To cite an example, I shall use the *hadith* regarding infection. For it
is important to the discussion and gives us a true picture of the
disharmony amongst the companions, the narrators and the forgers. [It
does not imply] contradiction in the bearer of the message (S.A.W.),
that is never possible.

Al-Bukhari related the two *hadiths* in his *Sahih*. I shall limit
myself to his book, as it is regarded by the *ahl al-sunna* as the most
authentic book; also so that those interpreting from different schools
should not say al-Bukhari thinks a *hadith* is authentic whilst another
scholar (in another book) thinks the opposite [of the same *hadith*]. So
the reader should note that in this chapter, I am restricting myself to
al-Bukhari alone in the conflicting *hadiths*.

In "The Book of Medicine,” in "The Chapter of no *Hama*,” al-Bukhari in
his *Sahih*, said that Abu Hurayra reported: "The Prophet (S.A.W.) said:
'There is no infection, nor *safar*, nor *hama*.’ A Bedouin stood up and
said: 'Then what about my camels? They are like deer on the sand, but
when a camel afflicted with scab comes and mixes with them, they all get
infected with scab'. The Prophet said: 'Then who conveyed the disease to
the first one?'"

Observe this Bedouin, how he is guided by his instinct to the nature of
sickness of infection of all camels by a mangy camel when they mix. But
the Prophet does not find a convincing answer to the Bedouin's question
and instead says: "And who infected the first?" Thus he becomes the
questioner.  
 This reminds me of the doctor who asked a mother who had brought her
child suffering from measles. "Is there anyone at home or a neighbor who
has this disease?" The mother replied: "No way.” The doctor said:
"Perhaps he caught it in school.” The mother replied promptly: "Most
certainly not. He has not yet entered school for he is not yet five.”

The doctor said: "In kindergarten therefore.” The mother said: "No. He
does not go to kindergarten.” The doctor said: "Perhaps you took him to
visit to your relatives or some relatives visited you who were carrying
the germs.” The mother denied this. At that, the doctor said to her:
"Then the germs came through the air.”

Certainly, the air carries the germs and infectious diseases, a whole
village or entire city can be affected. For this reason, we have
inoculations and prevention [shots], for the wind can carry deadly
diseases such as epidemics and plague and others. How can this be not
known to one who does not say anything of his desire? He is the Prophet
of the Lord of the worlds.

He from whom nothing is hidden, nothing in the heavens or the earth can
be concealed, He who is the all hearing, the all knowing. Therefore, we
reject this *hadith* and can never accept it. We instead accept the
second *hadith* which al-Bukhari himself reported on the same page, the
same chapter. And in the same *hadith* he says: "Abu Salama heard Abu
Hurayra say afterwards: 'The Prophet (S.A.W.) said: 'Do not expose a
sick person to a healthy one.’ Abu Hurayra denied the first *hadith*'.

We said: 'Did you not say there is no infection?' He spoke
unintelligibly in Ethiopian. Abu Salama said: 'I have not seen him
forgetting any other *hadith.'*"

The two *hadiths* are contradictory (no infection, do not expose a sick
person to a healthy one). Muslim also reported them in his *Sahih* in
"The Book of Peace,” in "The Chapter of no Infection, no Evil Omen, no
*Hama* no *Safar* no Star promising Rain, no *Ghoul* and the sick person
should not be exposed to a healthy one.”

From an examination of these *hadiths*, we know that the *hadith*: "Do
not expose a sick person to a healthy one" is the true narration which
the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) said for it does not contradict science.
As for the *hadith* of no infection, it is falsely attributed to him,
for it is a saying of one who is ignorant of the natural facts. As a
result, some of the companions understood that the two *hadiths*
contradicted each other and opposed Abu Hurayra, astonished at the first
*hadith*. Abu Hurayra found no escape from this predicament and
exclaimed in Ethiopian. The commentator of al-Bukhari said: "He said in
anger something which was not understood.”

What increases our certainty that the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.) preceded
what modern science has established, especially in infectious diseases,
is that he used to warn the Muslims of plagues, leprosy and epidemics,
etc.

As al-Bukhari has reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of The Prophets",
the chapter entitled: "Abu al-Yaman informed us..." and Muslim in his
*Sahih* in "The Book of Peace" in "The Chapter on Plagues, ill omen and
magic.” From Usama b. Zayd who said the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W) said:
"The plague is a calamity which was inflicted on a tribe of Banu
Isra'il, or to those before you. So if you hear of it in a land, do not
approach it; and if it afflicts a land in which you are, do not flee
from there.” In another narration: "Do not leave except to flee from
it.”

A *hadith* has been verified from him (S.A.W.) in this meaning: "Flee
from leprosy the way you would flee from a lion" and his saying: "If you
drink, do not breathe in the utensil.” And his saying: "If the dog licks
your utensil, wash it seven times, once with earth.” All of this [he
said] so that he could teach his *umma* cleanliness and health and
prevention. He did not say to them: "If a fly falls in the drink of any
one of you, immerse it completely.” We have mentioned this *hadith*
before for those who wish to refer to it.

We find clear contradictions, even in that which is specific to
*al-hama*, which the Arabs used to regard as an evil omen. It is a
famous bird flying at night. It is said it was an owl; this is the
explanation of Malik b. Anas. If the Prophet (S.A.W.) said: "There is no
*al-hama*,” how could he then contradict himself and seek protection
from it?

Al-Bukhari reported in his *Sahih* in "The Book of The Beginning of
Creation,” in "The Chapter of those who Walk in Haste" in volume four,
page 119, from Sa'id b. Jubayr from Ibn 'Abbas (R), who said: "The
Prophet (S.A.W.) used to seek refuge for al-Hasan and al-Husayn and
would say: 'Your father used to seek refuge from it for Isma'il and
Isaac. I seek refuge in Allah's complete words from every Satan, a
*hama* and an evil eye.'"

In this chapter, we wanted to relate some examples of contradictory
*hadiths* which were attributed to the Prophet of Allah (S.A.W.)
although he is innocent [of these].

There are hundreds of other conflicting *hadith* which al-Bukhari and
Muslim have related in their two collections. We have devoted [special]
pages for them as we have habituated the reader to present things
concisely and with indicators. It is up to the researcher to study so
Allah may purify through them the *sunna* of His Prophet (P) and reward
them generously and become the means by which the truth is made manifest
from falsehood. They can perhaps give to the new generation valuable
dissertations that are an integral part of the message of Islam.

***"O You who believe, do not be like those who harassed Moses. Verily
Allah cleaned him of what they uttered against him; he was honored in
the sight of Allah. O you who believe, fear Allah and be righteous of
speech so that He may set your deeds right and forgive your sins.
Whoever, obeys Allah and His Prophet has obtained the ultimate
success"*** (33:71).


