1. Introduction
===============

English prepositions have always been a source of great difficulty for
English as a Foreign Language (EFL) learners regardless of his or her
mother tongue (Celce-Murcia, 1983:250). One reason for this is because
EFL learners usually try to relate the use of English prepositions to
their mother tongue (MT) prepositional system. In many instances, the
difference in the number of prepositions and the lack of a one to one
mapping between the English and the MT prepositions is the source of the
difficulty. In addition to this, since prepositional usage in English
can be highly idiomatic (especially in preposition verbs and prhasal
verbs), the nuances of idiomatic usage of English prepositions are
highly challenging to EFL learners and even native speakers are
sometimes unsure of the correct formÂ  (Gethin, 1983: 161). Furthermore,
problems EFL learners have with the prepositions are compounded by the
fact that prepositions, in general, are highly polysemous and represents
an ontological category that is highly conceptual. These means that EFL
learners are often confronted with making decisions as to which
prepositions to use since the conceptual mapping in the mother tongue
might be different. Thus, prepositions usage often stand in the way of
achieving grammatical fluency and accuracy for the EFL learners.

Among Arab EFL learners, prepositions are considered to be the most
difficult because of cross-linguistics differences between the Arabic
and English prepositional system. The language specific differences
between the Arabic and English prepositional system include some English
prepositions that are not present in the Arabic language. In learning
these prepositions , Arabic EFL learners sometimes transfer their mother
tongue system with a limited number of prepositions to transfer their
usage of English prepositions resulting in incorrect English
prepositional usage and the lack of idiomaticity. Sometime, inaccuracy
in prepositional usage (especially in translation) are also produced as
a result of the cross-linguistic differences (Zughoul, 1973).

This paper examines the problems Arab EFL learners have with the basic
English prepositions at, in and on and attempts to account for their
difficulties with these English prepositions through a comparative study
of the Arabic prepositional system.


