Findings
========

The researcher reveals the three results as follows:

1-Three (3) Students passed the exam (20%), and the others twelve  (12)
students  (80%) failed the exam.

2- Arab students may tend unconsciously to impose their patterns and
structures on English particularly when they express themselves orally
or in writing. What we are concerned here is the influence of Arabic
prepositions on English, which make them commit these errors.

3-The major reasons for these mistakes are, problems relating to the
dominance of mother tongue, imposing Arabic syntactic structure on
English and imposing Arabic meaning usage on English.

In the light of the results of this study, it is noticed that these
specific words in English language, which are called prepositions, cause
difficulties for Arab students. The misunderstanding of some of these
words used in the test caused Arab students to commit errors.

Arab learners are expected to find similar difficulties in the use of
English prepositions because although Arabic and English prepositions
have some characteristics in common, they differ in both number and
usage. There are only six Arabic prepositions while in English there are
more than thirty prepositions.

The main problem for Arab learners lies firstly in the fact that not
every Arabic preposition has an exact equivalent in English and vice
versa, secondly, not every English or Arabic preposition has a definite
usage and meaning, indicating only time or space or following/ preceding
a certain word. For example, the Arabic Preposition*fi* is used as (in*,
into, at, on,* and*inside etc.).* This particular preposition has
therefore great semantic power in both standard and colloquial language
use; it is the filter through which all these English equivalents must
pass. It is used to denote time and place and occurs with many different
Arabic words in abstract and metaphorical usages. Therefore*fi* as well
as other Arabic prepositions, interferes in the selection and usage of
English ones.

Another problem in this area is caused by the English language, which in
certain places allows a reasonable degree of freedom of choice with
regard to certain prepositions and prepositional phrases. These choices
sometimes, confuse the Arab learners to such an extent that he or she
may choose the wrong item, which would, again, negatively influence the
quality of the translation. These two main pitfalls in the prepositional
from Arabic into English. The dominance of the mother tongue and the
freedom of choice in English prepositions are discussed and illustrated
below.

Regarding problems relating to the dominance of the mother tongue, many
types of errors that students may commit in translating from their
native language into the target one could be attributed to the dominance
of their mother tongue, that is the traces by someone’s native tongue
upon the foreign language into which he or she is translating. Students
tend unconsciously to impose their own patterns, semantic and syntactic
or any other aspects of their language on the patterns and structures of
the target language. The extent and the influence of these traces vary
in their number according to the degree of closeness between the two
languages and cultures involved in the process of translation as well as
the degree of the learner proficiency and command of both the source and
target languages.


