The Term Taqwa
==============

***“Is he who founds his building on God wariness and [the pursuit of
Allah's] pleasure better off or he who founds his building on the brink
of a collapsing bank which collapses with him into the fire of hell? And
Allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot.” (9:109)***

Taqwa is the Islamic concept of having self-restraint. It is used 251
times in the Holy Qur’an as either a noun or a verb. The term taqwa
comes from the Arabic root “wa-qa-ya” which means “protection” or
“support.” Taqwa is not meant to mean “fear” or “avoidance”, but because
having fear is a prerequisite to protecting oneself from something and
to avoid it, it may sometimes refer to having fear.

Also, since protection from something requires a feeling of fear
alongside it, it may in some cases metaphorically refer to “avoidance”
or “fear”. Both meanings are accurate although there is no evidence to
confirm that this metaphorically means “fear” or “restraint.”

While it is widely believed that the commands ittaqu’llah means “fear
Allah” and ittaqunnar means “fear fire,” these commands actually refer
to protecting oneself from Allah’s punishment and the harm of fire.
Moreover, those who practice self-control by refraining from acting upon
desires that require patience and a resolute attitude are called
muttaqeen, which is an Arabic term for “those who practice taqwa.”

It is important to note that taqwa is not about performing religious
obligations such as prayer and fasting: it is about living a pious life.
A person possessing taqwa abandons living an animalistic life and
chooses to live a moral one. Though there are other definitions of it,
such as social and political taqwa, religious taqwa has a more superior
and elevated status. It is only on the basis of religion that a person
can create a well-grounded taqwa in himself. As stated in the Qur’an:

***Is he who founds his building on God wariness and [the pursuit of
Allah's] pleasure better-off or he who founds his building on the brink
of a collapsing bank… (9:109)***

In his*Al-Mufradat fi Gharib al-Qur’an* , Rāghib says that the meaning
of the word wa-qa-ya is to protect something against everything which
may damage it and taqwā means to put the soul under protection against
whatever threatens it. However, sometimes according to the rule of using
the cause instead of the effect and vice versa, the words fear and taqwā
are used interchangeably. In religious law, taqwā means keeping one’s
self from whatever leads him to commit sins so that he refrains from
prohibited acts.

Rāghib explicitly says that taqwā simply means to protect oneself. He
also says that this word can be translated as fear and does not denote
that in the example of*ittaqu’llah* the metaphoric meaning is intended.
And as we said, there is no reason to affirm that in such sentences any
metaphor is used. The strange thing is that this word is translated as
restraint (*parhizkari* ) in Farsi.

It has never been seen that any linguist ever claims that this word is
used in this meaning. As it was mentioned before, Rāghib translated this
word as fear but did not use it as restraint. It is not certain where,
when, and why this word became translated as piety in Farsi. I suppose
that only Farsi-speaking

people get the meaning of restraint from the word taqwā. No
Arabic-speaking person understands this word in this way. There is no
doubt that in practice, the prerequisite of having taqwā and
self-protection for something is to avoid it, but it does not mean that
the word “taqwā” has this meaning.


