Taqwa in Nahj al-Balaghah
=========================

The word “taqwa” is emphasized in the compilation of sermons and sayings
of Imam Ali (a) collectively known as*Nahj al-Balaghah* , and it has
always been used to mean the habit of strengthening and taming the
evil-prompting soul with its unquenchable desires. In this book, Imam
Ali (a) is quoted to have said:

<p dir="rtl">
إن تقوی الله حمت‏ اولياء الله محارمه و الزمت قلوبهم مخافته حتی اسهرت
لياليهم و اظمأت هواجرهم
</p>

Certainly fear of Allah has saved the lovers of Allah from the unlawful
and has given His dread to their hearts till their nights are passed in
wakefulness and their noons in thirst.5

In this passage, Imam Ali (a) clearly explains the meaning of “taqwa” as
a spiritual state which saves people from committing sins and considers
fear of God as one of its results. Thus, taqwa does not mean "to fear"
but one of the consequences of it is that it makes the hearts wary of
Allah. As stated in the beginning,*ittaqu’llah* does not mean the
command to “fear God”.

In another hadith, Imam ‘Ali (a) says:

<p dir="rtl">
ذمتی بما أقول رهينه و انا به‏ زعيم. ان من صرحت له العبر عما بين يديه من
المثلات حجزته التقوی عن‏ تقحم الشبهات . الا و ان الخطايا خيل شمس حمل
عليها اهلها و خلعت لجمها فتقحمت بهم فی النار الا و ان التقوی مطايا ذلل
حمل عليها اهلها و اعطوا ازمتها فاوردتهم الجنه
</p>

The responsibility for what I say is guaranteed and I am answerable for
it. He to whom experiences have clearly shown the past exemplary
punishments (given by Allah to peoples) is prevented by piety from
falling into doubts…

Beware that sins are like unruly horses on whom their riders have been
placed and their reins have been let loose so that they would jump with
them in Hell. Beware that piety is like trained horses on which the
riders have been placed with the reins in their hands so that they would
take the riders to Heaven.6

In this sermon, the definition of taqwa is to control or to dominate the
soul. A person who is not strong enough to disobey his desires and
surrenders his control to his soul is likened to an unskilled rider on
an unruly horse who lacks willpower.

The prerequisite of taqwa and self-control is increasing one’s willpower
and having a spiritual and rational personality, like a wise horseman
who skilfully rides his horse, and his horse, in turn, quickly obeys
him. The person who is riding the unruly horse of desires, lust,
avarice, and ambition is dependent on these vices and lets his reins of
will slip away from his hands would not be controlled by wisdom and
insight.

As for the one reliant upon taqwa, it is like he is riding the horse of
self-control and holds the reins of will. He handles himself in all
directions. In this regard, Imam Ali (a) says:

<p dir="rtl">
فان التقوی فی اليوم الحرز و الجنه و فی غد الطريق الی الجنه
</p>

Certainly, for today piety is a protection and a shield, and for
tomorrow (the Day of Judgment) it is the road to Paradise.7

The Imam (a) expands on piety by presenting a very moving example:

<p dir="rtl">
ان التقوی دار حصن‏ عزيز و الفجور دار حصن ذليل لا يمنع اهله و لا يحرز من
لجأ اليه
</p>

Know, O creatures of Allah, that piety is a strong house of protection
while impiety is a weak house which does not protect its people, and
does not give security to him who takes refuge therein.8

Here, piety (taqwa) is likened to a strong house of protection.

In yet another well-known sermon, titled “The Pious” (al-Muttaqīn), Imam
Ali (a) responds to the request of Hammām ibn Shuray who had asked him
(a) to describe who the pious are, so much so that he could clearly
visualize them.

At first, Imam Ali (a) gave a brief answer; however, Hammām was not
contented and insisted the Imam (a) expand on it. Thus, the Imam (a)
answered giving more than one hundred spiritual characteristics and
mental and moral qualities of the pious. According to historians, as
soon as the Imam (a) ended his speech, Hammām was so impressed that he
cried out and passed away.

Thus, it is clear that taqwa is a spiritual state which is like a
fortress, amulet, or a trained horse for the soul. In short, taqwa is a
spiritual power.


