Taqwa: Freedom or Restriction?
==============================

Taqwa is not a restriction; it is a protection. Even if we call taqwa a
restriction, then this restriction is truly a protection. Just as it is
erroneous to call a house a restriction even though it is built with
walls, rooms, solid doors, and windows to keep its inhabitants safe from
harmful weather and to keep its furniture and equipment in safe areas,
taqwa, like a house, is a protection. We can call something a
restriction when it deprives us of a gift or happiness, but something
that averts dangers from us and protects us against them is a safety,
not a restriction.

In the Qur’an, taqwa is defined as a garment in that it protects the
body from the cold and hot weather in the same way a house protects
people. In the Qur’an, after mentioning the clothing for body, it is
stated:

***O' Children of Adam! We have certainly sent down to you garments to
cover your nakedness and for adornment. Yet the garment of piety—that is
the best. That is [one] of God’s signs, so that they may take
admonition. (7:26)***

In providing guidelines for having taqwa, Imam Ali (a) states in one of
his sermons:

<p dir="rtl">
الا فصونوها و تصونوا بها
</p>

…you should take care of it and take care of yourselves through it….9

Furthermore, Imam Ali (a) holds that piety is a great cause of freedom.
He states:

<p dir="rtl">
فان تقوی الله مفتاح سداد و ذخيره‏ معاد و عتق من كل ملكه و نجاه من كل
هلكه بها ينجح الطالب و ينجو الهارب و تنال الرغائب
</p>

Certainly, piety is the key to guidance, provision for the next world,
freedom from all types of slavery, and deliverance from all ruin. With
its help the seeker succeeds and he who makes for safety escapes and
achieves his aims.10

Taqwa helps one to reach his goals and protects him against his enemies.
In the first place, taqwa gives human beings freedom in moral and
spiritual issues, frees him from the chains of slavery of long desires,
and gives him a relief from the sufferings of greed, envy, lust, and
anger. It also indirectly gives him social freedom. long desires, and
gives him a relief from the sufferings of greed, envy, lust, and anger.
It also indirectly gives him social freedom. long desires, and gives him
a relief from the sufferings of greed, envy, lust, and anger. It also
indirectly gives him social freedom.

Servitude and slavery in society are the results of spiritual slavery.
One who is a slave and obedient to wealth and position cannot live free
socially. Hence, it is true to say that taqwa gives human beings
“freedom from all types of slavery.” Thus, not only does taqwa not have
a chain or restriction, but it is in fact freedom itself.


