Protecting one’s Taqwa
======================

Thinking of taqwa as a fortress and protector might make some people
proud and ignorant and they would suppose that a person who has taqwa
never makes a mistake. This may result in never noticing the great risks
for taqwa. But the fact is that, although taqwa is a perfect state, it
involves some danger as well.

It is not impossible for a person to live under the protection of taqwa
and at the same time, he himself protects taqwa too. Imam Ali (a) has
referred to both kinds of protection in the following sentence: “You
should take care of it and take care of yourselves through it!” Thus, we
must protect taqwa and it should protect us. Also, we must seek
proximity to God through taqwa and also ask God to provide us with it.
Imam Ali (a) also stated:

<p dir="rtl">
اوصيكم عبادالله بتقوی الله فانها حق الله عليكم و الموجبه علی الله حقكم و
ان تستعينوا عليها بالله و تستعينوا بها علی الله
</p>

I advise you, O' creatures of Allah, that you should have fear of Allah
because it is a right of Allah over you and it creates your right over
Allah, and that you should seek Allah's help in it, and its help in
(meeting) Allah.11

However, the dangers that weaken taqwa must be taken into consideration.
It is seen in religious rulings that taqwa is known as a guaranteed
protection and immunity against many sins, but there are some limits for
the other sins which are more appealing.

For instance, it is not stated in religious rulings that being alone in
a place where there is a tool used for robbery, drinking wine, or
homicide, is forbidden. Or it is not forbidden to be alone in a house at
night, in which there are no obstacles for a person if he wants to drink
wine. Faith and taqwa will guarantee him protection.

But as for the sexual instinct which is stronger and more provocative,
taqwa does not guarantee it and it is forbidden to be alone with the
opposite sex because the sexual instinct is a danger that can destroy
taqwa even though taqwa is so strong.

There is a verse in a famous poem of Hafiz that whenever I come to it,
the issue I have mentioned comes to my mind, as if Hafiz wanted to state
this spiritual fact in the very sweet way of his own:

*Of coins, is it that they examination take*

*So that, after their own work, all the cloister-holders take?*

*In my sight, the counsel is that all work, friends*

*Should let go; and, the curl of the tress of a friend take.*

*The tip of the Saki’s tress, happily the companions take:*

*If the sky permits them, a little rest they take.12*

Then he says:

*To lovely ones, boast not of the strength of thy arm of chastity.* 13

*For, among this tribe, with a single mounted one, a fortress, they
take.* 14

In the above verse, taqwa is likened to a fence, just as Imam Ali (a)
had described. Then, it is said that the power of “the lovely ones” is
much more than this fortress and no one can cast it in their teeth. In
this corps, even a single rider can conquer a fence, and collective
attack is not needed.


