Chapter 1: Conception of the Universe
=====================================

Every doctrine and every philosophy of life is indispensably based on a
sort of belief, an evaluation of life and a sort of interpretation and
analysis of the world.

The way of thinking of a school in respect of life and the world is
considered to be the basis of the entire thinking of that school. This
basis is called the world conception of that school.

All religions, social systems, schools of thought and social
philosophies are based on a particular world conception. All the goals
which a school presents, the ways and methods which it brings into
existence are the corollaries of the conception of the world that it
entertains. The philosophers say that there are two kinds of wisdom:
practical and theoretical.

Theoretical wisdom is to know the existing things as they are.
Practical wisdom is to find out how one should lead his life. This
'should' is the logical result of 'how they are', especially those 'how
they are, with which metaphysical philosophy deals.

**Conception of the World and Perception of the World**

Evidently we should not confuse the conception of the world with its
sense perception. Conception of the world has the sense of cosmogony and
is linked with the question of identification. Unlike sense perception,
which is common to man and other living beings, identification is
peculiar to man, and hence conception of the world is also peculiar to
him. It depends on his thinking and understanding.

From the point of view of sense perception of the world, many animals
are more advanced than man, because either they are equipped with
certain senses which man lacks, as it is said that birds have a radar
sense, or their senses, although common to them and man, are sharper
than the senses possessed by man, as is said of the sight of the eagle,
of the sense of smell of the dog and ant and of the sense of hearing of
the rat. Man is superior to other animals because he has a deep
conception of the world. Animals only perceive the world, but man can
interpret it also.

What is identification? What is the relationship between perception and
identification? What elements other than perceptional ones are parts of
identification? How do they enter identification and from where? What is
the mechanism of identification? What is the standard by which correct
and incorrect identification are judged?

These are the questions which require a separate treatise, and at
present we are unable to take them up. Anyhow, it is certain that
perception of a thing is different from its identification. Many people
view a scene and all of them see it alike, but only a few of them can
interpret it, and they too often differ?


**Varieties of World Conception**

On the whole there are three kinds of world conception or world
identification or, in other words, man's interpretation of the universe.
It can be inspired by three sources: science, philosophy and religion.
So we can say that there are three kinds of world conception:

Scientific;

Philosophical;

Religious.


**Scientific Conception of the World**

Now let us see how and to what extent science helps us form an opinion.
Science is based on two things, theory and experiment. For the discovery
and interpretation of a phenomenon first a theory comes to the mind of a
scholar and then on its basis he carries out experiments in the
laboratory. If it is corroborated by the experiment, it gains acceptance
as a scientific principle and remains valid till a better and a more
comprehensive theory appears and is corroborated by experiment. With the
appearance of a new and more comprehensive theory, the old theory
becomes invalid.

That is how science discovers the cause and the effect of a experiment.
Then it again tries to discover the cause of that cause and the effect
of that effect. This process continues as long as possible.

The scientific work has many advantages and disadvantages as it is
based on practical experiment. The greatest advantage of the scientific
discoveries is that they are specific and particular.

Science can impart to man a lot of information about a particular. It
can give a volume of knowledge about one single leaf of a tree.
Furthermore, because it acquaints man with the particular laws governing
each thing, it enables him to control and use things his advantage, and
thus promotes industry and technology.

Though science can teach man thousands of things about a particular
thing, yet the knowledge imparted by science being specific, its scope
is limited. Experiments place a limitation in it. Science can go forward
only to the extent it is possible for it to make an experiment.
Obviously it cannot experiment with the entire creation and all its
aspects.

Science can go forward in pursuit of causes and effects only to a
certain extent and then it reaches the stage of 'unknown'. It is like a
powerful searchlight which illuminates a limited area, and does not
throw light beyond its range. No experiment can be made on such
questions whether this world has a beginning and an end or is it
infinite from both sides? When a scholar reaches this point, he
consciously or unconsciously resorts to philosophy to express his
opinion.

From the stand point of science this world is an old book the first and
the last pages of which have been lost. Neither its beginning is known
nor its end. The reason is that the scientific conception of the world
is the outcome of the knowledge of a part of, not of the whole. Science
informs us of the position of some parts of the world, not of the
features and the characteristics of the whole of it.

The scientific conception of the world held by scientists is like the
conception of an elephant acquired by those who passed their hands on it
in darkness. He who touched the ear of the elephant thought that it was
like a fan; he who touched its leg thought that it was like a pillar and
he who touched its back thought that it was like a raised platform.

Another drawback of the scientific conception of the world is that it
cannot be the basis of any ideology, for science is inconstant and
changeable from its practical aspect that is the aspect of showing
reality as it is and inviting faith in the nature of the reality of
creation. Scientifically the features of the world change from day to
day, because science is based on a combination of theory and experiment
and not on self-evident rational truths. The theory and experiment have
a temporary value only. As such the scientific conception of the world
is an inconstant and changeable conception and is not fit to become the
basis of faith. Faith requires a more stable or rather an eternal
basis.

The scientific conception of the world, because of the limitation
imposed on it by the tools of science (theory and experiment), is unable
to answer a number of questions, the definite answer of which is
essential for an ideology. Such questions are: From where has this world
come? Where does it go? From the viewpoint of time has the world a
beginning and an end? What is its position from the viewpoint of place?
Is or is not the existence, on the whole, something good and
meaningful?

Is the world governed by some essential and unchangeable norms and
laws, or does no such thing exists? Is the creation on the whole a
living and conscious unit or is man alone an accidental exception? Can
an existing thing become non-existent or a non-existing thing become
existent? Is the restoration of a non-existing thing possible or
impossible?

Is the exact re-creation of the world and history in all their details
possible even after billions of years (Theory of recurring in Cycles?)
Is unity preponderant or multiplicity? Is the world divided into
material and non-material, and is the material world a small part of the
entire world? Is the world rightly guided and perceptive or is it
imperceptible and blind? Are man and the world in a state of
reciprocity? Does the world show reaction to the good and bad deeds of
man? Does there exist an eternal life in the wake of this transient
life? There are so many other similar questions.

Science does not answer all these questions, for it cannot make an
experiment with them. Science can answer only limited and particular
questions, but is unable to draw a general picture of the world. We give
an example to make our point clear.

An individual may have a local knowledge of a big city. He may know a
part of it in detail and may be able to draw a picture of its roads,
lanes and even houses. Another person may have a similarly detailed
knowledge of another part of the city, and a third, a fourth and a fifth
person may know other parts of it. If we collect information from all of
them, we may get enough information about each part of the city.

But will this information be enough to have a complete and overall
picture of it? For example, can we know what shape the city is; whether
it is circular, quadrangular or of the shape of a leaf? If it resembles
a leaf, then a leaf of which tree? How are various areas of it connected
with each other? What sorts of automobiles connect them? Is the city on
the whole beautiful or ugly? Evidently we cannot get all this
information.

If we want to have such information and for example if we want to know
the shape of the city or want to know whether it is beautiful or ugly,
we should ride an aircraft and have an overall aerial view of it.

As we have said, science is unable to answer the basic questions
necessary to form a conception of the world. It cannot provide an
overall picture of the whole body of the universe.

Leaving all this aside, the value of scientific conception of the world
is practical and technical, not theoretical, while an ideology can be
based on theoretical value only. Had the reality of the world been as
depicted by science, that would have constituted the theoretical value
of science. Its practical and technical value lies in the fact that
irrespective of its depicting or not depicting reality,

it enables man to perform fruitful tasks. Modern industry and
technology demonstrate the practical value of science. It is really
amazing that in the modern world while technical and practical value of
science has increased, its theoretical value has been reduced.

Those who are not fully conversant with the role of science, may think
that along with its undeniable practical progress science has also
enlightened the conscience of man and has convinced him of the reality
as depicted by it. But that is not a fact.

From the foregoing it is clear that an ideology requires that kind of
conception of the world which (i) may answer the basic questions
concerning the universe as a whole, not only a part of it; (ii) may be
an eternal and reliable conception, not a transient and passing one; and
(iii) may have a theoretical and realistic value also not merely a
practical and technical one. Thus, it is also clear that the scientific
conception of the world, despite of its other merits, lacks all these
three requirements.


