Fidelity and Earnestness
========================

The cognition of Allah automatically influences the entire personality,
spirit, morals and the conduct of man. This influence is proportional to
the degree of his faith. The stronger the faith of a man the more
intense the influence of the cognition of Allah on him.

The effect of the cognition of Allah on man has many degrees and
stages, and according to their variation human perfection and man's
proximity to Allah varies. These degrees are called the degrees of
fidelity and earnestness.

As stated earlier, when we turn to Allah and worship Him, we show that
He alone deserves obedience and we absolutely submit ourselves to Him.
This kind of worship and the expression of total submission is not
permissible in respect of anyone except Allah. As for the question how
far we are earnest in our total submission to Allah and non-submission
to any other being that depends on our faith. Evidently all are not
alike from the viewpoint of fidelity and earnestness.

Some people make such a progress that inwardly and outwardly they are
controlled only by the commandments of Allah. No personal desires can
swerve them this side or that side, nor can any human being bring them
under his absolute control. They allow their desires to operate only in
accordance with the pleasure of Allah. Obviously to seek the pleasure of
Allah is the only way to attain perfection. Such people obey their
parents, their teachers etc. for the sake of Allah and only within the
limits allowed by Him.

Some go even a step further. Their sole love is Allah. They love His
creatures for being His signs and mementos. A few go even further from
this stage also. They do not see anything except Him and regard
everything else as His manifestation. They find Him in everything.

Imam Ali says:

"I have never seen anything, but saw Allah before it or along with
it".

If a worshipper tries to give a concrete shape in his life to what he
communicates to his Allah in the course of his worship, he attains
perfection and reaches the stage of fidelity.

For a worshipper his worship is a real contract by the conditions of
which he has to abide in his life. This contract has two main
conditions. The first is freedom from the obedience of everyone and
everything else including his own desires, and the second is a complete
submission to the commandments of Allah and their unqualified
acceptance.

For a worshipper the correct way of worship is the basis of his
education and spiritual development. It is a systematic instruction in
liberal-mindedness, self-sacrifice, love of Allah, love of humanity,
association with the right-thinking people, virtuousness and service to
mankind.

It is clear from what we have said that Islamic monotheism does not
accept any motive other than gaining the pleasure of Allah. The
evolutionary reality of man and the world is "to Him". Anything which is
not oriented to Him is false and opposed to the natural evolutionary
course. From Islamic point of view whatever a man does, whether he does
it for himself or for others, is for the sake of Allah. It is wrong to
say that 'for the sake of Allah' is identical with 'for the sake of
humanity' and that to do a thing for the sake of Allah minus humanity is
nothing but mysticism and pedagogism.

From the viewpoint of Islam the only way is that of Allah and the only
objective one should aim at is to please Him. Anyhow, the way of Allah
passes through the people.

To do a thing for oneself is egoism, to do a thing for the people is
idolatry, and to do a thing for Allah and the people both is polytheism
and dualism.

The true monotheism is to serve oneself and others for the sake of
Allah. According to Islam the monotheistic way is to begin things in the
Name of Allah, not in the name of the people or jointly in the Name of
Allah and the people both.

An interesting point may be derived from the Surah al-Ikhlas of the
Holy Qur'an. The point is that there is a difference in being mukhlis,
that is to do things purely for Allah, and being mukhlas, that is to be
pure in oneself.


**Unity and Singleness of the World**

Does the entire universe that is the temporal and spatial creations of
Allah really form one unit? Does the oneness of Allah, that is the unity
of His essence, the unity of His attributes and the unity of His work,
necessarily require that His creation also should have some sort of
unity? If the universe is a well-knit and coherent unit, what is the
nature of its coherence? Is it organic in the sense that the various
parts of the universe stand in the same relation to the whole of it as
the various limbs to a body, or is it mechanical and the various parts
of the universe are like the various parts of a machine?

We have discussed the nature of the unity of the world in our book,
Principles of Philosophy. In another book of ours, named Divine Justice
we have stated that nature is an indivisible whole, the non-existence of
a part of it being tantamount to the non-existence of the whole of it,
and that the annihilation of the so-called evils will amount to the
annihilation of the entire nature.

The modern philosopher, especially the great German philosopher Hegel
has supported the view that the relation between nature and its
different parts is that of a body and its limbs. Anyhow, the acceptance
of the arguments he has put forward depends on the acceptance of all the
principles of his philosophy.

The supporters of dialectic materialism have followed him in holding
this view. They defend it vehemently under the principles of reciprocal
effect and interdependence of contradictories, and claim that in nature
the relation between a part and the whole is organic, but when they put
forward their arguments, they can prove only mechanical relationship.

The fact is that on the basis of materialistic philosophy, it is not
possible to prove that the world as a whole is like a body, and the
relation of its parts to the whole is that of the limbs to a body. Only
the Divine philosophers, who have from the time immemorial held that the
world is the macro-man and man is the microcosm, have visualized this
relationship correctly.

Among the Muslim philosophers Ikhwanus Safa (the Brethren of Purity)
has laid much stress on it. Even more than the philosophers the Muslim
mystics look at the universe as one unit. According to their view the
whole Cosmo is one single manifestation of the Divine Reality.

The Gnostics call all that is besides Allah "sacred overflow' and
talking in similitudes say that it is like a cone, the pointed head of
which having contact with Allah is simply imperceptible and the base of
which is immensely extensive and outstretched.

At present we do not propose to deal with any of these statements of
the philosophers and the Muslim Gnostics, and again take up the point we
were discussing earlier. As we said, the reality of the world is 'from
Him' and 'to Him'. It is an established fact that the world is not
merely a moving and a flux reality, but is in itself an embodiment of
movement and fluxion.

This is a fact which Islamic philosophy alone has been able to prove.
In the course of the study of motion it has also been established that
the unity of the beginning, the unity of the end and the unity of the
course confers a sort of unity on the movements. Therefore, in view of
the fact that the universe has one beginning, one end and one
evolutionary course, it is obvious that it is a sort of one single
unit.

**Visible and Invisible**

According to the Islamic conception of the cosmos, the world is an
aggregate of the visible and the invisible things. This conception
divides the universe into the world of the visible and that of the
invisible. The Holy Qur'an itself has repeatedly mentioned the visible
and the invisible, especially the invisible. To believe in the invisible
is an article of faith in Islam. The Holy Qur'an says:

"Those who believe in the unseen."(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:2)

"With Him are the keys of all that is hidden. None but He knows them."
(Surah al-An'am, 6:59)

There are two kinds of the invisible or the hidden: the relatively
hidden and the absolutely hidden. The relatively hidden is that thing
which a person cannot perceive by means of his senses because it is at a
long distance from him. For example, for a person who is in Tehran,
Tehran is visible and Isfahan is invisible. But for him, who is in
Isfahan, Isfahan is visible and Tehran is invisible.

In the Holy Qur'an at several places the word 'ghayb' (invisible or
hidden) has been used in this very relative sense. The Holy Qur'an
says:

"These hidden (unknown) events which We have revealed to you, were
neither known to you nor to your people so far." (Surah Hud, 11: 49)
Evidently the events of the people of the past are 'hidden' as far as
the present day people are concerned, though they were 'visible' for
those who witnessed them.

At another place the same word 'ghayb' has been applied by the Holy
Qur'an to the realities which are absolutely invisible. There is a
difference between the realities which are perceptible through the
external senses, but are not visible on account of great distance, and
the realities which are imperceptible and invisible because they are not
corporeal and finite. Evidently when the Holy Qur'an says that the
faithful believe in what is invisible,

it does not mean what is relatively invisible, for everybody,
irrespective of his being faithful or infidel believes in that. Again
when it says that with Allah alone are the keys of all that is hidden,
it means all that is absolutely hidden, for the meaning of the verse
does not fit in with what is relatively hidden. The same is the case
with those verses in which the visible and the invisible have been
mentioned together. For example, the Holy Qur'an says:

"He is the knower of the visible and the invisible; and He is the
Beneficent, the Merciful." (Surah al-Hashr, 59:22)

This verse also refers to the absolutely invisible and not to the
relatively invisible.

How are these two worlds, the visible and the invisible related to each
other? Has the visible world any boundary line beyond which the
invisible world is situated? For example, is it that from the earth to
the sky there is the visible world and beyond that there is the
invisible world? Obviously such a conception is vulgar. Should we
suppose that there is a physical boundary line which separates the two
worlds that would mean that both the worlds are physical and material.

The relation between the visible and the invisible cannot be explained
in material terms. At the most what we can say to make their
relationship understandable is that they stand in almost the same
relation as a main body and a branch of it or a body and its shadow. In
other words this world is a reflection of another world. The Holy Qur'an
indicates that whatever there is in this world is a 'lowered form' of
the things existing in another world. What has been called 'keys' in the
verse quoted above has been named 'stores' in another verse. The Holy
Qur'an says:

"There is not a thing but with Us are the stories thereof; but We do
not send it down except in an appointed measure." (Surah al-Hijr,
15:21)

It is on this basis that the Holy Qur'an regards everything, even
stones and iron, as having been sent down.

"We send down iron." (Surah al-Hadid, 57:25)

This does not mean that all things including iron have been shifted
from a higher place to a lower place. In fact, whatever there is in the
world, has its 'root' and its 'essence' in another world, the world of
the invisible and whatever there is in that world, has its 'shadow' and
a 'lowered form' of it in this world.

The Holy Qur'an makes it obligatory to have faith in the unseen. The
same point is described in another way, when faith in the angels, the
Prophethood and the revelation is enjoined.

The Holy Qur'an says:

"The Messenger believes in that which has been revealed to him by his
Lord, and so do the believers. They all believe in Allah, His angels,
His Books and His Messengers." (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:285)

"He who disbelieves in Allah, His angels, His Books, His Messengers and
the Last Day, certainly has gone far astray." (Surah an-Nisa, 4:136)

In these two verses the Books of Allah has been mentioned separately.
Had they signified the Scriptures revealed to the Prophets, the mention
of the Messengers would have been enough. That is an indication that
here the books signify some different kind of realities. The Holy Qur'an
itself has referred to some hidden truths and given them the name of 'an
explicit book' 'a protected tablet', 'the mother book', 'a written book'
and 'a hidden book'. A faith in this sort of metaphysical books is a
part of Islamic creed.

The Prophets have come basically to enable mankind to have, as far as
possible, a general view of the entire creational system. The creation
is not limited to the perceptible and palpable things which come under
the purview of the experimental sciences. The Prophets want to raise the
outlook of man from what is perceptible to what is understandable, from
what is visible to what is invisible and from what are finite to what is
infinite.

Unfortunately, the wave of the materialistic and limited thinking which
has risen from the West has spread to such an extent that a section of
the people insists to bring down the vast and high Islamic conception of
the world to the level of the perceptible and material things.


**This World and the Next World**

Another basic principle of the Islamic conception of the cosmos is the
division of the world into the present and the next. What we said
earlier concerning the visible and the invisible pertained to a world
preceding this world - a world giving form to this world. Though from
one angle the next world is the invisible world and the present world is
visible, yet in view of the fact that the next world is subsequent to
this world and it is a world to which man returns, it deserves to be
dealt with separately. The invisible world is that from where we have
come and the next world is that to which we shall go. That is what Imam
Ali meant when he said:


"May Allah bless him who knows from where he has come, where he is and
where he will go".

Imam Ali did not say: May Allah bless him who knows from what he has
come, in what he is and to what he will go. Had he said so, we would
have taken that to mean that we have been created from dust, we will go
into dust and we will be raised again from dust. In that case he would
have referred to the following Qur'anic verse which says:

"From it (the earth) We created you, to it We will return you and from
it We will bring you forth once again." (Surah Ta Ha, 20:55)

What Imam Ali has said here refers to some other verses of the Holy
Qur'an and represents a higher conception. He meant "the world from
where we have come, the world in which we are at present and the world
to which we shall go".

From the viewpoint of the Islamic conception of the world, like the
visible and the invisible, the present and the next world also have an
absolute, not a relative sense. What is relative is the deeds which are
performed. If something is done to satisfy one's own desire, it is a
worldly act. In many cases if the same thing is done for the sake of
Allah and to gain His pleasure, it becomes the next worldly act. We are
going to discuss this world and the next in detail later under the
heading 'Eternal Life.


