Chapter 6: Profound Wisdom and Divine Justice
=============================================

In connection with the Divine conception of the world several questions
pertaining to the relation between Allah and the world, such as the
transience and the eternity of the world, origin of the existing things
and similar other questions are discussed in the science of divinity.

Anyhow, it is in the fitness of things that it may be mentioned here
that the questions of profound wisdom of Allah and Divine justice are
closely related to each other.

With reference to the question of profound Divine justice, it may be
said that the existing system of the world is the most wise and
judicious system. It is not only based on knowledge, consciousness and
will but is also the healthiest and the best possible system. No better
system is possible. The existing world is the most perfect.

Here a pertinent question arises. We observe that there are many
phenomena of the world which may be described as defective, vicious,
ugly or useless. Divine wisdom demands that perfectness instead of
defectiveness, virtue instead of vice, beauty instead of ugliness and
usefulness instead of futility should have prevailed. Genitive defects
and malformations in the body of man and animals, natural calamities and
misfortunes and repulsive and obnoxious scenes, all appear to be
contrary to Divine wisdom. A system can be called just only if therein
pain, distress and undue discrimination are not found and calamities and
misfortunes do not exist.

Annihilation and destruction should have no place in a just system, for
it is unjust to debar a being from the enjoyment of perfect conditions
after he has been brought into existence. If the present system of the
world is just, then why do all these discriminations and deprivations
exist? Why is it that one is white and another is black; one is ugly and
another is beautiful;

one is healthy and another is sick? Why has one been created a man and
another a sheep, a scorpion or an earthworm? Why has one been created a
devil and another an angel? Why have all not been created alike or in
some other way different from what they are? For example, why has the
one who is white, handsome or healthy not been created black, ugly or
sick? These and similar other questions about the world appear to be
puzzling. The monotheistic conception which considers the world to be a
work of Allah, the wise and the absolutely just, must answer these
questions!

In view of the fact that a detailed answer to these questions require a
detailed and voluminous book and furthermore, we have dealt with this
subject in our book, Divine Justice of which several editions have
appeared, here we content ourselves with mentioning some basic
principles, the knowledge of which should facilitate the solution of
this problem. After getting acquainted with these principles the reader
will be able to draw his own conclusion.

Principle of the self-Existence and Perfection of Allah

As Allah is absolutely self-existing and does not lack any excellence
or ability, He does not do anything to achieve any object of His own or
to make up any deficiency in Himself. His wisdom does not mean that he
chooses the best goals and employs the best means to secure them. This
sense of wisdom applies to man only and not to Allah.

His wisdom means that He works to enable the existing things to reach
the goal of their existence. He brings the non-existing things into
existence and leads them to their inherent perfection. The questions and
objections raised in this respect are partly due to the comparison of
Allah to man. A person, who questions as to the wisdom and the use of a
particular creation, presumes that Allah like man does a thing to
achieve some object and goal of His own.

Most of the queries of the questioner would have automatically been
answered if he had kept in mind from the beginning that what Allah does
no doubt has some purpose, but Allah Himself has no aim or purpose of
His own. The purpose of every creation is inherent in its own nature, to
which Allah leads it.

**Principle of Sequence**

Existence is a Divine favour that pervades the entire universe. It has
a special order. All existing things stand in an inexorable relation of
precedence and posteriority and cause and effect to each other. No
existing thing can move from its appointed position, nor can it occupy
the place of something else. Existing things have varied grades of
existence, and vastly differ from each other from the point of view of
defectiveness and perfection and strength and weakness.

This variation is an essential part of the grading of existence. It is
no discrimination and cannot be considered to be contrary to justice or
wisdom. Discrimination presupposes the existence of two beings of equal
potentialities on one of which a favour is bestowed and from the other
it is withheld. But where the disparity is due to any inherent
deficiency, the question of discrimination does not arise.

**Principle of Generality**

There is another misunderstanding which is the result of man's
comparing Allah with himself. A man takes a decision at a particular
time, at a particular place and under particular circumstances. Suppose
a man decides to build a house. In order to build it he joins together
by artificial means a certain amount of bricks, mortar, cement and
steel, which have no inherent link with each other. The final result is
the construction of a house.

Does Allah also accomplish His work in the same way? Does His creation
lie in the combining and joining together of several things, having no
connection with each other?

The creation of such artificial ties and bonds is the work of a created
being like man, who himself is a part of the world system and can
utilize within a limited scope only the forces and the qualities of the
existing things. Man does not create a thing. He only produces a motion
in an already existing thing.

Even the motion produced by him is forced and not natural. In contrast,
Allah is the Creator of all things and all their forces and qualities.

Man makes use of fire and electric which already exist. He makes such
an arrangement that he may use them when required, and in order to save
himself from their harmful effects, may put them off when not required.
In contrast, Allah is the Creator of fire, electricity and all their
effects and qualities. Their very existence means that they should
generate heat and motion and should burn.

Allah has not created them for any particular person or for any
particular occasion. Fire heats the hut of a poor person, but it also
burns his clothes if they fall in it, because Allah has created it with
the property of burning. If we look at fire in the context of the whole
system of the world, we are bound to find it useful and necessary. It is
immaterial whether in the case of any particular person or in a
particular instance, it is beneficial or not.

In other words, in the case of Divine wisdom the ultimate object and
purpose relates to the doing, not to the doer. Allah is wise in the
sense that He has created the best system to enable the existing things
to achieve objects for which they have been created. His wisdom does not
mean that He has arranged the best means to make up His own deficiency,
to give a practical shape to His potential ability or to achieve His own
evolutionary objects. Further, we must remember that the Divine acts aim
at securing general and not particular purposes.

Fire has been created to burn in general. It has not been created to
burn any particular thing on any particular occasion. Hence from the
viewpoint of Divine wisdom it is immaterial whether it is beneficial or
harmful in any individual case.

For the materialization of a reality it is not enough that Allah is
All-Powerful and Beneficent. In order to come into being the thing
concerned must have the capacity of receiving His favour. In many cases
the incapacity of some of the existing things is the cause of their
being deprived of some advantages and good points.. From the viewpoint
of the general system and its connection with the Self-existing Being,
the secret of the appearance of certain defects like ignorance and
disabilities lies in the incompetence of those having such defects.

As Allah necessarily exists in regard to His essence, so He is in
regard to all His attributes. Hence it is impossible that a thing be fit
for existence and the conferment of existence on it be withheld by
Him.

The evils and vices either mean the non-existence of a quality, as the
case is with ignorance, disability and poverty, or they are bad because
they cause destruction, as is the case with earthquakes, disease-causing
germs, floods, hailstorms etc. The things which cause destruction, their
mischief is relative and only in reference to other things. Anything bad
is not bad in itself, but it is bad for something else. The true
existence of everything is its own existence. Its relative existence is
only conceptual and derivative, though an integral part of its real
existence.

Good and bad are not the qualities independent of each other. The evil
is an integral quality of the good. The evils and vices which indicate
the non-existence of a quality represent the unfitness of a thing
potentially fit. As soon as it becomes practically fit, Divine favour to
it is inevitable. As for the evils-which do not constitute negative
qualities, their root lies invariably in the good.

There exists no pure and unadulterated evil. Non-existence is a prelude
to existence and perfection. Evils are a stage of evolution. It is true
that every dark cloud has a silver lining.

Laws and Norms: This world is governed by a causation system, and as
has been pointed out earlier, this system is based on universal laws and
norms. The Holy Qur'an expressly confirms this fact.

The world besides having an unexceptionable system, is in itself one
indivisible unit and constitutes one single body. Hence evils are not
separable from all that is good. The evils and nonexistences not only
cannot be separated from virtues and existences, but they also form one
single 'manifestation'.

On the basis of these ten principles, there are only two possibilities.
Either the world should exist with its peculiar system or should not
exist at all. It is not possible that the world should be existing, but
it should not be having its peculiar system or it should be having some
other system, in which, for example, the causes may take the place of
the effects and the effects may take the place of the causes. Therefore
what is possible from the viewpoint of profound Divine wisdom is that
either the world should exist with its entire present system or nothing
should exist at all. Evidently wisdom demands that existence should have
preference over non-existence.

As the things cannot exist except with all their essential and
inseparable qualities, it is unimaginable to think that virtues can be
separated from evils or that non-existence can be separated from
existence. From this point of view also Divine wisdom can either demand
the existence of evils and virtues simultaneously or their non-existence
altogether. It cannot require the existence of virtues and the
non-existence of evils.

Also what is possible to exist is the entire world in the form of one
unit. The existence of one part of it and the nonexistence of another
part of it is not feasible. Therefore from the viewpoint of Divine
wisdom the question which may be considered is the existence or the
non-existence of the whole of it, not of any part of it.

The above principles, if digested well, are enough to remove all doubts
and difficulties concerning Divine wisdom and Divine justice. We again
refer our readers to our book, Divine Justice and seek their indulgence
for finding it necessary to raise here the questions which are of a
level higher than that of this book.

In the end, in view of the fact that the question of Divine justice has
a special history and is considered by the Shiah to be one of the
articles of their faith, it will not be improper to touch briefly on its
history also.


