History of the Principle of Justice in Islamic Culture
======================================================

The Shiah believe the doctrine of justice to be an article of their
faith. In the preface of the Divine Justice, we have stated that the
doctrine of justice has two aspects: Divine Justice and Human Justice.
Divine Justice is again divided into two parts: (i) Creational and (ii)
Legislative Human Justice.

Legislative Human Justice also has two phases:

1. Individual justice

2. Social Justice.

The justice which is considered to be the characteristic of the Shi'ah
creed and is believed by the Shi'ah to be an article of their faith is
Divine justice.

It is this justice which is an integral part of the Islamic conception
of the world.

Divine justice means that Allah does no injustice and in both of His
creational and law-making systems acts according to what is right and
fair. The reason why the principle of justice became an article of faith
among the Shi'ah was that a section of the Muslims denied it in a way
that was totally contrary to human freedom. They denied the working of
the principle of causation in the world system as well as human affairs,
and maintained that Divine destiny operated direct and not through the
media of cause and effect.

According to them, fire did not burn. It was Allah who burnt it.
Similarly a magnet had no role in attracting iron towards it. It was
Allah who attracted iron to it. Man did not perform good or bad deeds.
It was Allah who accomplished them direct through the agency of human
beings.

Here an important question arises: If the system of causation did not
exist and man had no power of choice, why should an individual be
recompensed for evil or good done by him? Why does Allah reward some
people and send them to Paradise and why does He punish some others and
dispatches them to Hell, when He Himself performs all good and bad
deeds? If the human beings have no freedom and no choice of their own,
it is unjust and contrary to the indisputable principle of Divine
justice to punish them for the deeds over which they have no control.

Most of the Shi'ah and a section of the Sunnis, known as the Mu'tazilah
reject the theory of human compulsion and direct operation of Divine
destiny in the world. They consider this view to be contrary to the
principle of justice, and besides advancing arguments based on reason
quote from the Holy Qur'an and the hadith in support of what they
maintain. That is why they have come to be known as 'Adliyah, that is
the supporters of the justice.

From the above it is evident that notwithstanding the fact that the
principle of justice is a Divine principle and is related to one of the
attributes of Allah, it is also a human principle, because it equally
concerns human freedom and power of choice. Therefore a belief in the
principle of justice on the part of the Shiah and the Mutazilah means a
belief in human freedom, human responsibility and the constructive role
of man.

The question which often disturbs the minds in connection with Divine
justice, especially during modern times, concerns certain cases of
social inequality.

It is asked how is it that some individuals are ugly, while some others
are handsome; some are healthy while some others have poor health; some
are well-off and influential, while some others are poor and of little
consequence?

Is this inequality not contrary to the principle of Divine justice?
Does not Divine justice demand that all individuals should be equal in
regard to wealth, duration of life, number of children, social position,
fame and popularity, and there should be no disparity among them in
regard to these things? Can the disparity in respect of these things be
explained by any means other than believing in Divine destiny?

The root of this question lies in not paying attention to the way the
Divine destiny operates. It appears that the questioner thinks that
Divine destiny works direct and not through the medium of causes, and
that health, beauty, power, position, popularity and other bounties of
Allah are distributed to the people at their doorsteps by a hidden hand
direct from the Divine treasures.

Enough attention has not been paid to the fact that no bounties,
whether material or spiritual, are distributed direct. The Divine
destiny has set up a system and appointed a number of laws and norms.
Whosoever wants something he should seek it through that system and
according to those laws.

Another cause of misunderstanding is that due attention is not paid to
the position of man as a responsible being who makes struggle to improve
the condition of his life, combats the natural factors and strives
against social evils and human tyranny.

If there exist inequalities in human society and if there are some who
have everything at their disposal and there are others whose lot is only
to struggle for their subsistence every moment, the responsibility for
this situation does not lie with Divine destiny. Man, who is free is
himself responsible for the inequity.


