Philosophical Conception of the World
=====================================

Though philosophical conception of the world is not as exact and
specific as scientific conception, it is based on a number of principles
which are self-evident and undeniable by the mind. These principles
proceed logically and are general and comprehensive. As such they have
the advantage of being firm and constant. Philosophical conception of
the world is free from that inconstancy and limitations which are found
in scientific conception.

Philosophical conception of the world answers all questions on which
the ideologies depend. It identifies the overall shape and features of
the world.

Both the scientific and philosophical conceptions are a prelude to
action, but in two different ways. Scientific conception is a prelude to
action because it enables man to control nature and introduce changes in
it. Man by means of science can use nature to his advantage as he
wishes. Philosophical conception is a prelude to action in the sense
that it determines man's choice of his way of life.

It affects his reaction to his encounter with the world. It fixes his
attitude and gives him a particular outlook on the world and the
creation. It either gives an ideal to man or takes away an ideal from
him. It either gives meaning to his life or draws him to absurdity and
nothingness. That is why we say that science cannot give man a world
conception that may become the basis of an ideology, but philosophy
can.

**Religious Conception of the World**

If we regard every expression of an overall view of the world and the
creation as a philosophical conception, not taking into consideration
whether the source of this conception is a guess or reasoning or a
revelation from the unknown world, religious and philosophical
conceptions belong to the same domain. But if we take their source into
account, philosophical and religious conceptions of the world are
undoubtedly two different things.

In certain religions like Islam, religious conception of the world, has
taken a philosophical or argumentative colour and is an integral part of
the religion itself. The questions raised by religion are based on
reasoning and proof. Thus Islamic conception of the world is rational
and philosophical. Besides the two merits of philosophical conception,
namely eternity and comprehensiveness, religious conception of the world
unlike scientific and purely philosophical conceptions, possesses one
more merit of sanctification of the principles of world conception.

If we keep in view that an ideology, besides requiring faith in the
eternity and inviolability of the principles held sacred by it, requires
a belief in and adherence to a school of thought, it becomes clear that
its basis can be only that conception of the world which has a religious
colour.

From the foregoing discussion it may be inferred that a conception of
the world can be the basis of an ideology only if it possesses
stability, philosophical broad thinking and the sanctity of religious
principles.


**How to Judge an Ideology?**

A perfect ideology is that which:

(i) Can be proved and expressed in a logical form; in other words, is
logically and intellectually tenable;

(ii) Gives meaning to life and removes nihilistic ideas from the
mind;

(iii) Is inspiring;

(iv) Is capable of giving sanctity to the human and social goals;

(v) Makes man accountable.

If an ideology is logically tenable, the way is paved for its being
accepted intellectually and there being no ambiguity about it, action as
suggested by it becomes easy.

An inspiring ideology makes its school attractive and gives it warmth
and power.

The sanctification of the goals of a school by its ideology, makes it
easy for the adherents of this school to make sacrifice for its cause.
If a school does not declare its goals to be sacred, it cannot create a
sense of adoration and sacrifice in regard to its principle, nor can
there be any guarantee of the success of such a school.

The accountability of man declared by a conception of the world,
commits the individual to the depth of his conscience and makes him
responsible to himself and to society.


