Monotheistic Conception of the World
====================================

All these qualities and characteristics which are an essential
requirement of a good conception of the world are found in monotheistic
conception. It is the only conception which has all these
characteristics. Monotheistic conception means the realization of the
fact that the world has come out of a wise will and that its system is
founded on mercy, munificence and all that is good. It aims at leading
the existing things to a perfection befitting them. Monotheistic
conception means that the world is 'mono-axis' and 'mono-orbit'. It
means that the world is 'from Allah' and returns' to Allah'.

All the existing things of the world are harmonious and their evolution
proceeds towards the same centre. Nothing has been created in vain and
without having a purpose. The world is being managed under a series of
definite systems known as 'Divine law'. Among the existing things man
enjoys a special dignity, and has a special duty and a special mission.
He is responsible for his own promotion and perfection as well as the
reform of his society. The world is a school, and Allah rewards everyone
according to his intention and valid effort.

Monotheistic conception of the world is supported by logic, science and
sound arguments. Every particle of the world is a sign of the existence
of an All-Wise and All-Knowing Allah and every leaf of a tree is a book
of spiritual knowledge.

Monotheistic conception of the world gives to life a meaning, a spirit
and a goal. It puts man on a way to perfection on which he continues to
march forward without stopping at any stage.

Monotheistic conception of the world has a special attraction. It gives
vitality and vigour to man. It puts forward lofty and sacred goals and
produces selfless individuals.

Monotheistic conception of the world is the only conception of it which
gives meaning to the responsibility of people to each other. Similarly
it is the only conception that saves man from falling into the abyss of
absurdity.

**Islamic Conception of the World**

Islamic conception of the world is monotheistic. Islam has presented
monotheism in its purest form. From Islamic point of view, Allah has no
like of Him and nothing can be compared to Him:

"There is nothing like Him."(Surah ash-Shura, 42:11)

Allah is absolutely independent. All depend on Him, but He depends on
none:

"You are in need of Allah. And Allah! He is Absolute, Laudable."(Surah
al-Fatir, 35:15)

Allah is aware of everything. He can do whatever He likes:

"He is fully aware of everything." (Surah ash-Shura, 42:12)

"He is able to do all things." (Surah al-Hajj, 22:6)

Allah is everywhere. Every place, whether it is above the sky or in the
depth of the earth has the same relation to Him. To whatever direction
we stand, we face Him:

"Wherever you turn, there is Allah's countenance" (Surah al-Baqarah,
2:115)

Allah knows what is in the hearts of people. He is aware of their
intentions and aims:

"Indeed We have created man and We know what his soul whispers." (Surah
Qaf, 50:16)

Allah is closer to man than his jugular vein:

"We are nearer to him than his jugular vein." (Surah Qaf, 50:16)

Allah has all the good attributes and is free from every defect:

"Allah's are the fairest names." (Surah al-A'raf, 7:180)

Allah is not a material organism and cannot be seen with eyes:

"Vision does not comprehend Him, but He comprehends all vision." (Surah
al-An'am, 6:103)

From the stand point of monotheistic and Islamic conception of the
world, the universe is a creation and is looked after by Divine will and
attention. If Divine attention were withheld for a moment, the whole
universe would be annihilated in no time.

This world has not been created in vain or in jest. There are many
advantages implied in the creation of man and the world. Nothing has
been created unbecoming and futile. The existing system of the universe
is the best and the most perfect. It manifests justice and truth and is
based on a sequence of causes and effects. Every result is a logical
consequence of a cause and every cause produces a specific effect.

Divine destiny brings a thing into existence through its specific
causes only, and it is a chain of causes which constitutes the Divine
destiny of a thing.

Divine will always operates in the world in the form of a law or a
general principle. Divine laws do not change. Whatever changes take
place, they are always in accordance with some law. Good and evil in the
world are related to man's own conduct and his own deeds. Good deeds and
bad deeds, besides being recompensed in the next world, have their
reaction in this world also. Gradual evolution is a Divine law. This
world is a nursery for the development of man.

Divine destiny is supreme in the whole world. Man has been destined by
it to be free and responsible. He is the master of his own destiny. Man
has his special dignity. He is fit to be the vicegerent of Allah. This
world and the Hereafter are but two interconnected stages like those of
sowing and harvest, for one reaps what one sows. They may also be
compared to the two periods of childhood and old age, for the latter
period is the outcome of the former.


