Chapter 2: Realistic Conception of the World
============================================

Islam is a realistic religion. The word "Islam" means submission. This
indicates that the first condition of being a Muslim is to submit to the
realities and truths. Islam rejects every kind of obduracy,
stubbornness, prejudice, blind imitation, bias and selfishness, and
regards all of them as contrary to realism and realistic approach to
truth.

From the point of view of Islam a man who seeks truth, but fails in his
efforts may be excused, but the acceptance of truth by virtue of
imitation or heredity by a man who is otherwise stubborn and arrogant
has no value. A true Muslim, whether a male or a female, eagerly accepts
truth wherever he or she may find it. As far as the acquisition of
knowledge is concerned, a Muslim shows no bias.

He may go even to the farthest corner of the world for acquiring
knowledge. His efforts to gain knowledge and to find truth are not
confined to any particular period of his life nor to any territorial
region. Nor does he insist to acquire knowledge from any particular
person. The Holy Prophet has said that to seek knowledge is the duty of
every Muslim, whether a man or a woman. He has also asked the Muslims to
receive it even from an idolater.

There is another saying of the Holy Prophet which exhorts the Muslims
to seek it even if they have to go to China for that purpose. He is also
reported to have said: "Continue to seek knowledge from the cradle to
the grave". Superficial and partial notions of the problems, blind
imitation of the forefathers and submission to the absurd hereditary
traditions, being contrary to the spirit of submission to truth, are
censured by Islam and regarded as misleading.

**Allah is Absolute Reality and Source of Life**

Man is a realistic being. A new-born human child from the very first
moments of its life, while looking for its mother's breast, seeks it as
a reality. Gradually the body and the mind of the infant develop to the
extent that it can distinguish between itself and other things. Though
the new-born child's contact with other things is established through a
series of its thoughts, it knows that the reality of the things is
distinct from that of the thoughts which it entertains and uses as a
medium only.

**Integral Characteristics of the World**

The realities which man can perceive through his senses and which we
call the world, have the following integral characteristics:

Everything perceptible, from the smallest particle to the biggest star
has spatial and temporal limitations. Nothing can exist outside a
particular space and a particular period of time.

Certain things occupy a bigger space and last longer while some others
occupy a smaller space and last comparatively for a shorter time. But in
the final analysis they are all limited to a particular portion of place
and a particular period of time.

**(ii) Change**

Everything is subject to a change and is indurable. Nothing perceptible
in the world is in a standstill state. It is either growing or decaying.
A material and perceptible being throughout the period of its existence
passes through a constant course of change as a part of its reality. It
either gives something or takes something or gives as well as takes.

In other words, it either takes something out of the reality of other
things and adds it to its own reality or gives something out of its
reality or performs both the actions. In any case, there is nothing that
remains static. This characteristic also is common to all things
existing in this world.

**(iii) Attachment**

Another characteristic of the perceptible things is their attachment.
We find that they all are conditional. In other words the existence of
each one of them is attached to and, conditional on the existence of one
or more other things. None of them can exist if those other things do
not exist. If we look deeply into the reality of the material and
perceptible things, we will find that many 'ifs' are attached to their
existence.

We do not find a single perceptible thing which may exist
unconditionally and independently. The existence of everything is
conditional on the existence of something else, and the existence of
that something else in its turn is also conditional on the existence of
something else, and so on.

**(iv) Dependence**

The existence of all our perceptible things depends on the fulfillment
of the numerous conditions attached to it. The existence of each of
these conditions again depends on the fulfillment of a series of some
other conditions. There is no perceptible thing which may exist
independently, i.e. in the absence of the conditions on which its
existence depends. Thus dependence pervades all existing things.

**(v) Relativeness**

All perceptible things are relative as regards to their existence a
well as to their qualities. When we attribute to them greatness, power,
beauty, antiquity and even existence, we say so in comparison to other
things. When we say, for example, that the sun is very large, we mean
that it is larger than the earth and other planets of our solar
system.

Otherwise this very sun is smaller than many other stars. Similarly
when we say that such and such ship or such and such animal is powerful,
we compare it with man or something weaker than man. Even the existence
of a thing is comparative. Whenever we speak of any existence,
perfection, wisdom, beauty, power or grandeur, we take into
consideration a lower degree of that quality.

We can always visualize a higher degree of it also and then a further
higher degree. Each quality as compared to its higher degree is changed
into its opposite. Existence becomes non-existence, perfection is
changed into defectiveness. Similarly wisdom, beauty, greatness and
grandeur are changed respectively into ignorance, ugliness and
despicability.

The thinking power of man, the scope of which, contrary to that of the
senses, is not confined to the exterior features, but also penetrates
what is behind the screen of existence, tells us that existence is in no
way confined to these perceptible things which are limited, changing,
relative and dependent.

The scenery of existence which we observe appears on the whole to be
self-existing and self-dependent. Hence there must be an everlasting,
unconditional and ever-present absolute and infinite truth behind it on
which everything must depend. Otherwise this scenery of existence could
not stand so firmly. In other words nothing would have existed at all.

The Holy Qur'an describes Allah as Self-existing and Self-dependent,
and thus reminds us that all existing things, being conditional and
relative, are in need of a Self-existing truth to support and sustain
them. Allah is Self-dependent because everything else depends on Him. He
is Perfect, for everything else is hollow from within and needs a Truth
which may fill it with existence.

The Holy Qur'an describes the perceptible things as 'signs'. In other
words everything in its turn is a sign of an Infinite Being and His
knowledge, power and will. From the viewpoint of the Holy Qur'an the
world is like a book composed by a wise and sagacious being, every line
and every word of which is a sign of the wisdom and sagacity of its
author. From the point of view of the Holy Qur'an, the more a man comes
to know the reality of the things, the more he gets acquainted with
Divine wisdom, power and blessings.

From one angle every natural science is a branch of cosmology. From
another angle and from a deeper way of looking at things, it is a branch
of the knowledge (recognition) of Allah.

To elucidate the Qur'anic point of view in this respect we quote here
just one verse of the Holy Qur'an out of so many similar verses:

"Surely in the creation of the heavens and the alternation of night and
day, the ships which sail on the sea with (cargoes) beneficial to man,
the water that Allah sends down from heaven with which He revives the
earth after it is dead and replenishes it with all kinds of animal life,
in the movement of the winds and in the clouds held between the sky and
the earth, there are signs for the people who have sense."(Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:164)

In this verse the Holy Qur'an invites the attention of the people to
general cosmology, to the ship-building industry, to tourism and its
financial advantages, to meteorology, to the origin of winds and rain,
to the movement of clouds, to biology and zoology. It regards the
pondering on the philosophy of these sciences as something leading to
the recognition of Allah.


