Attributes of Allah
===================

The Holy Qur'an says that Allah has all the attributes and
characteristics of a perfect being.

"He has the most beautiful names."(Surah al-Hashr, 59:24).

"His is the sublime similitude in the heavens and in the earth" (Surah
ar-Rum, 30:27)

As such Allah is Living, Almighty, All-Knowing, Master of His Will,
Merciful, Guide, Creator, Wise, Forgiving and Just. There is no sublime
quality which He does not possess.

On the other hand He is not a body or a compound. He is neither weak
nor cruel.

The first group of the sublime attributes of Allah, denoting His
perfection is called His affirmative attributes and the second group of
His attributes denoting His freedom from every kind of defect and
imperfection is called His negative attributes. We both praise and
glorify Allah. When we praise Him we mention His affirmative attributes
and when glorify Him, we say that He is free from all that is not worthy
of Him. In both the cases we affirm His Knowledge to our own benefit and
thus uplift ourselves.


**Monotheism**

Allah has no associate or partner. There is none like Him. It is
basically impossible that there should be anyone like Him, for in that
case we shall have two or more Gods instead of one. To be two, three or
more is a characteristic of the limited and relative things. Plurality
has no meaning in regard to an absolute and infinite being.

For example, we can have one child. We can also have two or more
children. Similarly we can have one friend. We can also have two or more
friends. A friend or a child is a limited being, and a limited being can
have a like of him and can be multipliable. But an infinite being is not
multipliable at all. The following example, though not adequate may be
found useful for the purpose of elucidating the point.

In respect of the dimensions of the material world, that is the world
which we can see and perceive, the scientists have two theories. Some of
them maintain that the dimensions of the world are limited. In other
words this perceivable world reaches a point where it ends. But some
others are of the opinion that the dimensions of the material world have
no middle, no beginning and no end.

If we accept the theory that the material world is limited, a question
arises as to whether it is one world or more than one? But if we
maintain that this world has no limits, the question of the existence of
another world becomes absurd. Whatever we may presume to be another
world, it will either be identical with this world or a part of it.

This example applies to the material world as well as the material
beings which are limited, conditional and created. The reality of none
of them is absolute, independent and self-existing. The material world,
though limitless from the viewpoint of its dimensions, is limited from
the viewpoint of its reality. But as its dimensions are limitless, we
cannot presume the existence of another world.

Almighty Allah has an infinite existence. He is an absolute reality,
and He pervades everything. No space or time is devoid of Him. He is
closer to us than our jugular vein. Hence it is impossible that He
should have a like of Him. We cannot even suppose the existence of
another being like Him.

Furthermore, we see the signs of His wisdom and attention prevailing
everywhere and pervading everything. We observe that one single will and
one single system govern the entire world. That shows that our world is
unicentred, not multicentred.

Furthermore, had there been two or more Gods, evidently two or more
wills would have applied to everything and two or more realities having
a different centre would have existed in every existing thing. As a
result everything would have become two or more things. This being an
absurd proposition, in fact nothing would have existed at all. This is
what the Holy Qur'an means when it says:

"If there were therein (in the Universe) Gods besides Allah, then
surely both the heavens and the earth had been discorded." (Surah
al-Ambiya, 21:22)

**Worship and Adoration**

The acknowledgement of One Allah as the most perfect being, having the
most sublime attributes and free from every defect and deficiency, and
the recognition of His relation to the world consisting in His
creatorship, guardianship, munificence, compassion and mercy, create a
reaction in us which is called adoration and worship.

Worship is a kind of relationship which man establishes with his
Creator. It consists of man's submission to Allah and extolling and
thanking Him. It is a relationship which man can establish with his
Creator only. The establishment of such a relationship with anyone else
is neither conceivable nor permissible.

The acknowledgement of Allah as the only source of existence and the
only Master and Lord of everything makes it incumbent on us not to
associate any creature with Him in adoration. The Holy Qur'an insists
that Allah alone should be worshipped. There is no sin more deadly than
associating anyone or anything else with Him.

Now let us see what worship is and what kind of relationship is that
which is peculiar to Allah and which cannot be established with any
other being.

**Definition of Worship**

To make the meaning of worship clear and in order to define it
correctly, it is necessary to mention two points as a prelude:

(i) Worship may consist either of words or of actions. The former kind
consists of a series of words and sentences which we recite, such as
praising Allah, the recitation of the Holy Qur'an or the recitation of
the formulas normally recited while offering prayers, and pronouncing
'Labbayk' during Hajj.

The worship which consists of actions is represented by such acts as
standing, bowing and prostration in prayers, circum-ambulation of the
Holy Ka'bah, and staying at Arafat and Mash'ar. Most of the acts of
worship, such as prayers and pilgrimage (Hajj) comprise words and
actions both.

(ii) Human acts are of two kinds. Some acts have no remote purpose.
They are not performed as a symbol of something else, but they are
performed for their own natural effects. For example, a farmer carries
out the functions connected with farming in order to secure their
natural results. He does not carry them out as a symbol or to express
any feelings. The same is the case with a tailor when he is doing his
tailoring. When we proceed to school, we have nothing in mind except
reaching there. With this act we do not intend to convey any other
purpose or meaning.

But there are acts which we perform as a symbol of a series of some
other objects or in order to express our feelings. We lower our head as
a sign of confirmation, we sit in the doorway as a sign of humility and
bow to someone as a sign of reverence.

Most of the human acts are of the first kind and only a few of the
second. Anyway, there are acts which are performed to express our
feelings or to show some other objectives. These acts are used in place
of words to express an intention.

Now keeping in mind the above two points, we may say that worship,
whether it is performed by means of words or acts is a meaningful deed.
Man by means of his devotion gives expression to a truth. Similarly by
means of such acts as bowing, prostration, circumambulation etc. he
wants to convey what he says when he pronounces devotionals and
liturgy.

**Spirit of Adoration and Worship**

Through his worship, whether it is performed by means of words or acts,
man conveys certain things:

He praises Allah by pronouncing His peculiar attributes having a sense
of absolute perfection, such as absolute knowledge, absolute power and
absolute will. Absolute perfection means that His knowledge, power and
will are not limited by or conditional on anything else and are a
corollary of His total and complete independence.

He glorifies Allah and declares Him free from every defect and
deficiency such as death, limitation, ignorance, helplessness,
stinginess, cruelty etc.

He thanks Allah, considering Him to be the real source of everything
good and of all bounties, and believing that all favours are received
from Him alone. Others are only intermediaries appointed by Him.

He expresses total submission to Him and acknowledges that
unconditional obedience is due to Him. He, being the Absolute Master of
all that exists, is entitled to issue orders and we being slaves, it is
our duty to obey Him.

In regard to His above attributes Allah has no associate or partner.
None other than Him is absolutely perfect and none other than Him is
absolutely free from every defect. None other than Him is the true
source of all bounties and none other than Him deserves to be thanked
for all of them. None other than Him deserves total submission and to be
obeyed unconditionally.

Every other obedience like that of the Prophet, the Imam, the lawful
Muslim ruler, the parents and the teachers must culminate in His
obedience and be subject to His good pleasure to be lawful. That is the
appropriate response which a man should show to his Almighty Lord.
Except in the case of Allah this kind of response is neither applicable
nor permissible.


