Chapter 3: Degrees of Monotheism
================================

Both monotheism and polytheism have degrees and stages. Unless a man
passes through all the stages of monotheism, he cannot be a true
monotheist.


**I. Unity of the Essence of Allah**

To acknowledge the unity of His essence means that Allah is One in His
essence. The first impression of Allah which anybody has is that of His
Self-dependence. He is a Being who is not dependent on any other being
in any way. In the words of the Holy Qur'an, He is Ghani (the Absolute).
Everything depends on Him and seeks His help. He is independent of
everything. The Holy Qur'an says:

"O men, it is you who stand in need of Allah. As for Allah, He is above
all need, worthy of praise." (Surah al-Fatir, 35:15)

The philosophers describe Him as Self-existent or as a being whose
existence is necessary.

The second impression of Allah which everybody has is that of His
creatorship. He is the Creator and the ultimate source of all the
existing things. All things are "from Him". He is not from anything.
According to the philosophical terminology, He is the First cause.

This is the first conception of Allah which everybody has. Everybody
thinks of Allah, and while thinking of Him, he has this conception in
his mind. Then he decides whether there, really exists a truth, which is
not dependent on any other truth, and from which originate all other
truths.

Unity of essence means that this truth is not multiplicable, and has no
like of it. The Holy Qur'an says:

"Nothing is similar to Him." (Surah ash-Shura, 42:11)

"And there is none comparable to Him." (Surah at-Tawhid, 112:4)

The rule that an existing being is always a member of a species is
applicable to the created beings only. For example, if is a member of
the human species, we can presume that may be other members of this
species. But no such thing be presumed in the case of the Self-existing
Being. He is above all such notions.

The Self-existing truth being one, this world has only one source and
one end. It has neither originated from various sources nor will it
return to various sources. It has originated from one source and one
truth. The Holy Qur'an says:

"Say: Allah is the Creator of everything." (Surah ar-Ra'd, 13:16)

Everything will return to the same source and the same truth:

"Do not all things reach Allah at last?" (Surah ash-Shura, 42:53)

In other words, the whole universe has one centre, one pole and one
orbit.

The relation between Allah and the world is that of the Creator and the
created that is the relation of the cause and the effect, not that kind
of relation which exists between light and lamp or between human
consciousness and man. It is true that Allah is not separate from the
world. He is with everything. The Holy Qur'an says:

"He is with you wherever you are." (Surah al-Hadid, 57:4)

Anyhow, the non-separation of Allah from the world does not mean that
He is to the world as light is to a lamp or as consciousness is to a
body. Had it been so, Allah would have been the effect of the world, not
the cause of it, as light is the effect of a lamp. Similarly the
non-separation of Allah from the world does not mean that Allah, the
world and man, have the same orientation and they all move and live with
the same will and spirit. All these are the attributes of the created
and non-self-existing beings. Allah is free from them. The Holy Qur'an
says:

"Glorified be your Lord, the Lord of Majesty, from that which they
ascribe to Him." (Surah as-Saffat, 37:180)

**II. Unity of the Attributes of Allah**

The unity of His attributes means to recognize that the essence and the
attributes of Allah are identical and that His various attributes are
not separate from each other. The unity of essence means the negation of
there being any peer or likes of Allah and the unity of His attributes
means the negation of any kind of multiplicity or plurality within His
essence.

Allah has all the attributes implying the perfection of majesty and
beauty, but His attributes have no aspect really separate from Him. The
separation of the essence from the attributes and the separation of the
attributes from each other, are the characteristics of the limitation of
existence, and are not conceivable in the case of infinite existence.

Multiplicity, combination and the separation of the essence and the
attributes are inconceivable in the case of the Absolute Being. Like the
unity of the Divine essence, the unity of the Divine attributes is an
Islamic doctrine and one of the most valuable human ideas which has
exclusively crystallized in the Shi'ah school. We here quote a passage
from the first sermon of the Nahjul Balaghah[^13]which corroborates as
well as explains this idea:

"All praise is due to Allah, who cannot be adequately praised by any
rhetoricians, whose blessings cannot be counted by any enumerators, whom
due homage cannot be paid by the most assiduous, who cannot be fully
comprehended howsoever one may try, who cannot be reached by
intelligence howsoever deep it may go, whose attributes are not limited
by any limitation. There exist no words to describe Him fully."

As we see, in the above passage the boundlessness of the Divine
attributes has been emphasized. In the same sermon after a few sentences
Imam Ali says:

"Perfect devotion to Him means to deny the imputation of attributes to
Him, for the person to whom an attribute is imputed, bears witness that
he is different from the attribute imputed to him and every attribute of
him bears witness that it is different from the person to whom it has
been imputed. He who imputes an attribute to Allah compares Him (to
something and he who compares him. . .". (See: Sermon - 1, p. 137, Peak
of Eloquence, ISP, 1984

In the first passage it has been affirmed that Allah has attributes
(whose attributes are not limited by any limitation). In the second
passage also it is confirmed that He has attributes, but instruction has
been given to impute no attributes to Him. The wording of these passages
shows that the attributes which He has are unlimited like the
limitlessness of His own self,

that they are identical with His essence, and the attributes from which
He is free are those which are limited and separate from His essence and
from each other. Thus the unity of the Divine tributes means to
acknowledge the unity of Allah's essence and His attributes.


**III. Unity of the Work of Allah**

Unity of His work means to recognize that the world with all its
systems, ways, causes and effects is the work of Allah alone and has
originated from His will. Nothing in the world is self-existing.
Everything depends on Him. In the words of the Holy Qur'an, He is the
sustainer of the whole world. The existing things are not independent
with regard to their effect and causation. As a result, as Allah has no
partner in his essence, similarly He has no partner in His work.

Every agent and every cause owes its existence and effectiveness to Him
and depends on Him. All power as well as ability to do things belong to
Him alone.

Man is one of the existing things and hence a creation of Allah. Like
other things he is effective as far as his own work is concerned and
unlike of them, he is the master of his own destiny. But Allah has in no
way delegated His powers to him. Thus he has not got complete
discretion.

"By the power of Allah I stand and sit".

The belief that any being, whether man or a being other than man, has a
complete discretion, amounts to believing that being to be a partner of
Allah as far as independence of activity is concerned. As independence
in activity amounts to independence in essence it is contrary to Allah's
unity of essence, what to say of His unity of work.

"All praise is due to Allah who has taken no spouse nor a child. He has
no partner in His sovereignty, nor has He a helper to help Him out of
weakness. Therefore glorify Him a great deal." (Surah Bani Isra'il,
17:111)

**IV. Unity in Worship**

The three degrees of monotheism mentioned above are theoretical and a
matter of creed. They are to be recognized and acknowledged. But the
unity in worship is a practical matter. It is a form of 'being' and
'becoming'. The above degrees of monotheism involved right thinking.

This degree is the stage of becoming righteous. The theoretical stage
of monotheism means to have a perfect view. The practical stage of it
means to move forward to attain perfection. The theoretical monotheism
means to comprehend the Divine oneness and the practical monotheism
means man's becoming one.

The theoretical monotheism is the stage of seeing and the practical
monotheism is the stage of going. Before we further explain the
practical monotheism, it is necessary to mention one more point about
the theoretical monotheism.

The question is whether it is possible to know Allah together with the
unity of His essence, the unity of His attributes and the unity of His
work, and if possible, whether such a knowledge is conducive to human
weal and bliss; or out of the various degrees and stages of monotheism
it is only practical monotheism that is useful.

As far as the possibility of gaining such knowledge is concerned, we
have discussed this problem in our books, Principles of Philosophy and
the Method of Realism. As far its being useful or otherwise, that
depends on our own conception of man and his weal and bliss. The modern
wave of materialistic thinking has induced even the believers in Allah
to consider the questions related to His knowledge to be of little
use.

They regard such questions as a kind of mental exercise and an escape
from the practical problems of life. But a Muslim who believes that the
reality of man is not his physical reality alone, but his true reality
is his spiritual reality and that the essence of human spirit is the
essence of his knowledge, sanctity and purity, knows well that the so
called theoretical monotheism, besides being the basis of practical
monotheism, is in itself a psychological perfection of the highest
order. It uplifts man, leads him towards the Divine Truth and makes him
perfect.

"To Him good words ascend and the pious deeds does He exalt." (Surah
al-Fatir, 35:10)

Humanity of man depends on his knowledge of Allah. Man's knowledge is
not something separate from him. The more man attains knowledge of the
universe, its system and its source, the more will develop his humanity,
the 50% substance of which consists of knowledge.

From the point of view of Islam, especially the Shi'ah doctrine, there
is not the least doubt that the attainment of the knowledge of Allah,
irrespective of its practical and social effects, is in itself a goal of
humanity. Now we take up the question of practical monotheism:

Practical monotheism or unity in worship means to worship Allah alone;
In other words to be single-minded in respect of the worship of Allah.
Later we will explain that from the viewpoint of Islam, worship has a
number of degrees. The clearest degree of it is the performance of the
rites related to glorification and exaltation of Allah.

The performance of such rites in respect of anyone other than Allah,
means total exit from the pale of Islam. Anyhow, from the viewpoint of
Islam worship is not confined to this degree alone. Every form of
spiritual orientation and accepting something as one's spiritual ideal
is included in worship. The Holy Qur'an says:

"Have you seen him who has chosen for his god his own lust?" (Surah
al-Furqan, 25:43)

He who obeys someone whom Allah has not allowed to be obeyed and
submits to him totally, worships that person:

"They have taken their rabbis and their monks as their lords besides
Allah." (Surah at-Tawbah, 9:31)

"And similarly none of us shall take others as our lords besides
Allah." (Surah Ale Imran, 3:64)

Thus practical monotheism or unity in worship means to accept Allah
alone as fit to be obeyed unconditionally, regard Him alone as one's
ideal and the direction of one's conduct and to reject all others and
consider them to be unfit to be obeyed unconditionally or regarded as
one's ideal. Practical monotheism means to bow to Allah alone, to rise
for Him, to live for him and to die for Him.

"(Prophet) Ibrahim said: I have set my face earnestly to Him who has
created the Heavens and the earth. I am not a pagan. My prayers and my
sacrifice, my living and my dying all are for Allah, the Lord of the
universe. He has no partner. So have I been commanded, and I am the
first to submit to Him."(Surah al-An'am, 6:79 & 163- 164)

This monotheism of Prophet Ibrahim is the practical monotheism. This is
what the creed, 'There is no god but Allah", visualizes.


**Notes**

[^13] The Islamic Seminary has published this book in English language
under the caption, Peak of Eloquence, 1984


