Chapter 4 : Man and Unification
===============================

The unification of the existential reality of man in a psychological
system in consonance with his human and evolutionary tendencies and
similarly the unification of human society in a harmonious and
evolutionary social system are the questions which have always engaged
the attention of mankind.

As opposed to unification is the polarization of individual personality
and its split into discordant segments, and the division of society into
conflicting groups and classes. The question is: what is to be done to
ensure the harmonious development of human personality both from
psychological and social points of view? In this respect there are three
theories:

Materialistic theory;

Idealistic theory;

Realistic theory.

**I. Materialistic Theory**

The upholders of this theory think of matter only and give no
importance to soul. They claim that what splits an individual
psychologically and a society socially and cause discord and incongruity
is the existence of the system of private property. Man by nature is a
social being. In the beginning of history he led a collective life, and
was not conscious of his individual existence. At that time he had a
collective spirit and a collective feeling.

His life depended on hunting and everybody could obtain his means of
living from the river and the forest according to his requirements.
There was no question of surplus production till man discovered the art
of cultivation. With it the possibility of surplus production and the
possibility of some peoples' doing work and some others simply eating
without doing any work appeared.

That was the development which led to the practice of ownership. The
private ownership of the sources of production like water and land and
the production tools like plough, did away with the collective spirit
and split the society which was so far living as one unit, into 'haves'
and 'have not's.

The society which lived as 'We' took the shape of 'I'. As a result of
the appearance of ownership man became unconscious of his own reality as
a social being. Previously he felt that he was just a man like others.
Now he regarded himself as an owner instead of a man. Thus he became
unconscious of himself and began to deteriorate.

Only by abolishing the system of private ownership man can once more
regain his moral and social unity and his mental and social health. The
compulsory movement of history is already taking place in this
direction. Private properties, which have turned human unity into
plurality, and collectivity into dispersal, are like the turrets
mentioned by the Persian mystic poet,

Mowlavi in a beautiful simile. He says that the turrets and pinnacles
divide one single and extensive sunshine into compartments by
introducing shadow pieces in between. Of course Mowlavi visualizes a
Gnostic truth that is the emergence of plurality from unity and its
ultimate return to unity. But with a little twist, this simile can also
be used to illustrate the Marxist theory of socialism.

**II. Idealistic Theory**

This theory gives importance to man's spirit and his relation to his
inner self only. According to this theory, it is true that the relation
between man and the material things does away with unity, causes
plurality and dismembers collectivity.

It leads the individual to psychological split and divides society into
classes. But it is also to be remembered that in the case of the
attachment of one thing to another, it is the latter that causes the
split and dismemberment of the former. Hence the attachment of such
things as property, wife and position to man is not the cause of his
psychological split and the dismemberment of society.

In contrast, it is the heart-felt inner attachment of man to the
material things that causes this split and dismemberment. Ownership has
not alienated man from himself and society. It is his 'being owned' that
has alienated him. What dismembers his individuality from moral and
social point of view is not 'my property', 'my wife' and 'my position'.
It is 'my being property', 'my being wife' and 'my being a position'
which dismembers his individuality.

To change 'I' into 'we' it is not necessary to sever the relation of
the things with man. It is the relation of man with the things that
should be severed. Release man from the bondage of the things, so that
he may return back to his human reality. Give man his moral and
spiritual freedom. To release things from his ownership will serve no
useful purpose. The moral and social unification of man is a matter of
spiritual education and training. It is not an economic question.

What is required is inner development of man, not his outer
curtailment. Man is first an animal and then a human being. He is an
animal by nature and a human being by acquisition. Man can regain his
latent humanity by correct education. So long as he does not gain it, he
remains an animal by nature and there is no question of the unity of his
spirit and life.

It is unhumanistic to consider material things to be the cause of the
split and coalescence of man and to think that with their division man
is divided and with their unification he is united, and that his moral
and social personality is subservient to economic and production
situation. Such notions are the result of not knowing man and not
believing in his humanity and his faculties of understanding and will.

Furthermore, it is impossible to sever man's private relation with
other things totally. Even if his relation with wealth and property is
severed, it is not possible to do so in the case of wife, children and
family. Is it possible to introduce socialism in this field also, and to
establish sexual communism?

If this is possible, then why are the countries, which abolished
private property long ago, still sticking to private family system?
Suppose the natural family system is also socialized, what will be done
about jobs, positions, prestige and honour? Is it possible to distribute
these things also equally? What will be done about the physical and
mental abilities of the individuals? These relationships are an integral
part of the existence of every individual and are not separable from
him.

**III. Realistic Theory**

According to this theory, what splits and divides man from individual
and social point of view is neither man's relation with the things nor
the relation of the things with man. Man's bondage neither originates
from his ownership nor from his being owned. This theory gives first
importance to such factors as education, training, revolution, thinking,
ideology and spiritual freedom. It believes that man is neither a purely
material being nor a purely spiritual being. This worldly life and the
next worldly life are closely interconnected with each other. The body
and the soul interact.

A struggle should be made against the factors causing psychological
split with the help of faith and unity in worship, and a war should be
waged against discrimination, injustice, deprivation, oppression,
suffocation, and false gods.

This is the Islamic way of thinking. As soon as Islam appeared, it
started a movement and began to bring about a revolution. But it never
said that if discrimination and injustice were removed or private
property was abolished, everything would be all right. Nor did it say if
you reformed yourself from within, had nothing to do with the external
world, and improved your moral qualities,

society would automatically be reformed. Besides other things Islam
raised the slogan of internal monotheism to be secured through jihad and
a struggle against social inequities. The following verse which shines
on the firmament of human unity and which was incorporated by the Holy
Prophet in his letters addressed to the heads of various countries
manifests the all-round realism of Islam:

"Let us come to an agreement between us and you: that we will worship
none but Allah, that we will associate none with Him." (Surah Ale Imran,
3:64)

Up to this point this verse deals with the unity of man through faith,
a common ideal and attaining spiritual freedom. Thereafter it says:

"None of us shall take others as Lords besides Allah"

Should we act according to this teaching of Islam we will not be
divided into masters and slaves, and will be able to forestall wrong
social relationships that lead to discrimination?

Following the chaos and agitation during the caliphate of Uthman
leading to his murder, people rushed to pledge their allegiance to Imam
Ali, who was forced to accept the responsibilities of caliphate against
his personal liking. It was his legal duty which compelled him to accept
the caliphate. He describes his personal dislike and his legal duty in
the following words:

"Had not the people gathered round me, had not the presence of the
helper left me no choice and had not Allah taken a promise from the
learned not to agree to a situation in which people were divided into
the oppressors having too much and the oppressed having too little, I
would not have cared who becomes a caliph and my attitude would have
remained the same as it had been throughout". (See: Peak of Eloquence,
Sermon - 7)

We all know that Imam Ali after taking over his assignment gave the
foremost importance to two things. One was the spiritual and moral
reform of the people and the dissemination of Divine knowledge, the
examples of which we find in Nahjul Balaghah, and the other was his
struggle against social discrimination. He was neither contented with
inner reform nor regarded the mere social reform as adequate. Islam had
in one hand the programme of educating the people and of preaching faith
in Allah in order to secure individual and social unity of mankind, and
in other it had a sword in order to sever the unbalanced human
relationships, to break up class distinctions and to knock down the
false gods.

The classless Islamic society means a just society in which there is no
discrimination, no deprivation, no tyranny and no false gods.

It does not mean a society in which there is no disparity, for the
absence of disparity is in itself a form of injustice. There is a
difference between discrimination and disparity. In the creational
system there exists disparity, which gives it variety and beauty, but
there exists no discrimination in it. The perfect Islamic society is a
society that is against discrimination, but is not opposed to disparity.
Islamic society is a society of equality and brotherhood.

But its equality is positive and not negative. It takes into
consideration the natural differences of the individuals and does not
deprive anyone of his acquired distinctions. It establishes positive
equality by providing equal opportunities to all and by abolishing
unjust eminence and imaginary superiority.

The negative equality is similar to the equality narrated in a
legendary tale. A tyrant used to live in the hills. He received the
passers-by as his guests. When the guest retired for the night, he was
required to sleep on a particular bed. If by chance the body of the
guest was equal to the size of the bed, it was all right. But woe to the
poor guest if his body was not equal to it! If it was taller, the
servants of the tyrant chopped off a part of it from either side and if
it was shorter, they pulled it from both sides to make it fit in the
bed. The result in both the cases can easily be imagined.

The positive equality is like the equal treatment meted out by an
affectionate teacher to all his pupils. If in a test the answers of all
of them are correct, he awards them equal marks. If their answers vary,
he awards each of them as many marks as he deserves.

The Islamic society is a natural society. It is neither discriminative
nor a society of negative equality. The Islamic principle is 'work
according to one's ability, entitlement according to one's work'.

In a discriminative society relations of people are based on
subjugation and forcible exploitation. But in a natural society there is
no exploitation and nobody is allowed to live at the cost of others. The
relations of people are based on reciprocal service. All work freely
according to their ability and within the scope of their potentiality.
All serve each other.

In other words bilateral use of services is the rule. The more a man is
capable and the more forceful personality he has, the more he attracts
other forces to himself. For example, the more knowledge a man has, the
more seekers of knowledge he attracts to himself and uses their
services. The more technical know-how a man the more people have to work
in accordance with his instructions.

That is why the Holy Qur'an which opposes the existence of the lords
and the domineered in society acknowledges the existence of natural
disparity and different grades of capabilities created by Allah. It also
supports the relationship of "bilateral" use of services. The Holy
Qur'an says:

"Is it they who apportion their Lord's Mercy? We have apportioned among
them their livelihood in the life of the world, and raised some of them
above some others in rank so that some of them may take labour from some
others; and the Mercy of your Lord is better than the wealth they amass"
(Surah az-Zukhruf, 43:32)

A very fine point which can be inferred from this verse is that the
disparity in endowments is not unilateral. The people not divided into
two classes, viz. one of these having natural endowments and the other
of those bereft of them. Had it been so, Allah would have said: "We have
raised some of them in rank so that they may take labour from others".

But He has not said so. He has said that He has raised some of them in
rank above some others, so that some of them use the services of some of
others. That means that all have some or other endowments and all
utilize the services of each other. In other words, both the endowments
and services are bilateral

Another point is that the word 'Sukhriyya' used in this verse begins
with the vowel point of U(su) and means employment and utilization. The
same word has been used at two other places in the Holy Qur'an with the
vowel point of 'I' (si) and there, as the most of the commentators point
out, means mockery.

This verse describes the natural and inborn relation of men in their
social life, and says that their relationship is such that they all use
the services of each other. It may be said that this is the most
important verse from the viewpoint of the exposition of the social
philosophy of Islam.

Bayzawi in his well-known commentary on the Holy Qur'an and following
his example, Allam Fayz in his book As-Safi, explaining the verse says:
"The verse, 'so that some of them may take labour from some others',
means that all men utilize the services of each other to meet their
needs. This relationship is a means of creating in men a spirit of good
will and affection towards each other so that the affairs of the world
may go on smoothly"

There is a hadith (tradition) also which says that this verse means
that Allah has created men in such a way that they all are in need of
each other.

Though men depend on each other to satisfy their natural needs, there
is still an adequate scope of free competition in society. In contrast,
the life of the gregarious animals is based on a compulsory
relationship. Therefore man's sociality is different from that of the
bees or the termites. Their life is governed by inexorable laws, and
provides no field for competition. They have no possibility of going up
or coming down. Man, besides being social, is endowed with a sort of
freedom.Human society is a field of competitive progress and
development. Any restrictions placed on the individual freedom in this
respect prevent the blooming of human faculties.

The model man of the materialistic school, though has few external
restrictions, is unable to attain inner freedom. He is like a bird which
has no feathers though not confined within a cage, and as such is unable
to fly. The model man of the idealistic school has inner freedom but is
tied externally. He is like a bird having feathers, but the feet of
which are tied firmly. But the man of the realistic school is like a
bird which has feathers, the feet of which are free and which can fly
without any difficulty.

It is clear from the above that practical monotheism, whether it is
individual or social, means to be Unitarian in the worship of Allah and
to reject every other kind of heartfelt adoration such as the adoration
of one's base desires, adoration of money, adoration of honour and
privileges etc. In the case of society it also means to be Unitarian in
the observance of fair play and justice and the rejection of all false
values, discrimination and unfairness.

So long as the individual and society are not Unitarian, they cannot
attain happiness and prosperity, and they cannot be Unitarian unless
they are righteous. The Holy Qur'an describes the division of man's
personality and his bewilderment under the polytheistic system and his
attainment of unity and purpose under the monotheistic system in the
following words:

"Allah coins a similitude of a man who is owned by several part-owners,
quarrelling, and another man belonging wholly to one man. Are these two
alike?" (Surah az-Zumar, 39:29)

Under the polytheistic system man is like a straw being tossed every
moment by the waves of a sea in a different direction. Under the
monotheistic system he is like a boat fully equipped with guiding
apparatus, moving in a regular manner under the command of a
well-intentioned captain


