Chapter 5: Degrees of Polytheism
================================

As monotheism has degrees, so has polytheism. By comparing the two we
can know both monotheism and polytheism better, for comparison of
opposites makes the things clear. History shows that different kinds of
polytheism have always existed side by side with monotheism preached by
the Prophets.

**I. Belief in the Plurality of Divine Essence**

Certain nations have had belief in two (dualism), three (trinity) or
more original and eternal sources independent of each other. They have
believed that the world is multi-polar and multi-centred. What has been
the root of such ideas? Is each one of these ideas a reflection of the
social conditions of the people concerned?

For example, when the people believed in two original and eternal
sources and two original orbits of the world, their society was divided
into two different segments, and when they believed in three sources and
three gods, their social system was trilateral. In other words, in every
case the social system has reflected on the minds of the people in the
form of a doctrine. Is it also a fact that the Prophets preached
monotheism only when the social system tended to be unicentered?

This view stems from a philosophical theory which we discussed earlier.
According to this theory, spiritual and intellectual aspects of man and
the moral and conventional tendencies of society such as sciences, law,
philosophy, religion and art are subordinate to man's social systems,
especially to his economic system, and have no independent position. We
have already refuted this theory. As we believe in the intrinsic value
of thinking, ideology and humanity, we consider such sociological views
in respect of monotheism and polytheism to be baseless.

Anyhow, there is another question which should not be confused with
this theory. Sometimes a religious creed is mis-used in a social system.
For example, the idolatry system of the pagan Quraysh was a device of
safeguarding the interests of the Arab usurers. The Abu Sufyans, the Abu
Jahls and the Walids bin Mughirah did not have the slightest belief in
the idols. They defended them to preserve the existing social system
only.

When the anti-usury monotheistic system of Islam emerged their defense
of the idols took a serious turn. As the pagan usurers became
apprehensive of their own ruin, they advanced the plea of the sanctity
of the popular beliefs. The Holy Qur'an has alluded to this point at a
number of places, especially in the story of Fir'awn and Prophet Musa.
Anyhow it must be understood that this question is quite different from
the view that economic system is the infrastructure of any doctrinal
system and every intellectual system is the reaction of an economic and
social system.

What the school of the Prophets vehemently rejects is the idea that
every ideology is necessarily a crystallized form of the social desires
which in turn are created by the economic conditions. According to
materialistic theory, the monotheistic school of the Prophets is in
itself a crystallized form of the social desires and was produced by the
economic needs of the time of the Prophets.

The development of the implements of production originated a number of
social desires which were explained through the monotheistic idea. The
Prophets were in fact the expounders of this social and economic need.
There is a universal rule that every idea and every belief has an
economic infrastructure. This rule applies to the idea of monotheism
also.

As the Holy Qur'an believes that the innate nature of man is a basic
dimension of his existence, and maintains that this innate human nature
initiates a number of desires which can be met only by monotheism; it
considers the monotheistic call of the Prophets to be meeting a great
human need. It does not believe in any other infrastructure of
monotheism, nor does it regard the class conditions as a factor
compelling the emergence of any idea or a belief.

Had the class conditions been the infrastructure of man's belief,
everybody would have been bound to incline to the direction that his
class position required. In this case there would have been no choice in
the matter of belief for anybody. Neither the Fir'awns could be blamed
nor could their opponents be praised, for a man can be blamed or praised
only when he has a choice to be what he is not. Otherwise he can neither
be blamed nor can he be praised.

A negro or a white man cannot be blamed or praised for the colour of
his skin. But we know that man is not bound to think in accordance with
his class. He can revolt against his class interests, as Prophet Musa
did, though he was brought up under Fir'awnic luxuries. This proves that
the question of any infrastructure and superstructure besides depriving
man of his humanity is no more than a myth.

Anyhow, this does not mean that material and intellectual conditions do
not affect each other. What is denied is their being infrastructure and
superstructure respectively. Otherwise the Holy Qur'an itself says:

"Surely man is rebellious when he thinks that he is independent."
(Surah 'Alaq, 96:6 - 7)

The Holy Qur'an accepts that the rich and the powerful play a special
role in opposing the Prophets whereas the downtrodden and the
underprivileged play their role in supporting them. But because of their
human nature, they all are capable of accepting the truth.

From spiritual point of view the only difference is that one group in
spite of its human nature, has to cross a great barrier before it may be
persuaded to accept the truth for it has to relinquish its existing
material gains and unjust distinctions, whereas the other group has no
such obstacles. In the words of Salman, (the distinguished companion of
the Holy Prophet) those who have a light burden are saved.

Not only that, but the latter group has a positive incentive.
Consequent to its accepting the truth its living conditions improve and
its life becomes easier. That is why the majority of the followers of
the Prophets has consisted of the underprivileged. Anyhow, the Prophets
have always been able to recruit some of their followers from the
privileged classes and have been able to persuade them to fight against
their own class and its class interests.

The Holy Qur'an does not think that the Fara'ina and the Abu Sufyans
defended the polytheistic system of their times and provoked the
religious sentiments of their people against Prophet Musa and the Last
Prophet simply because they on account of their class position could not
think of doing otherwise or because their class requirements had
crystallized in the form of polytheistic beliefs. The Holy Qur'an
maintains that they were perfidious. By virtue of their Divine innate
nature they believed in Allah and realized the truth, but still they
rejected it and opposed it. The Holy Qur'an says:

"They denied Our signs, though their souls acknowledged them." (Surah
an-Naml, 27:14)

The Holy Qur'an describes their disbelief as the denial of what their
hearts believed. In other words, their denial was a sort of revolution
against their own conscience.

In this connection there exists a great misunderstanding. Some people
maintain that the Holy Qur'an endorses the Marxist theory of historical
materialism. We will discuss this question in detail when we undertake
the study of society and history in another section of this book. This
theory is neither in conformity with the actual reality of history, nor
is defensible from scientific point of view.

Anyway, a belief in several sources is a belief in the plurality of the
Divine essence, and is diametrically opposed to the belief in its unity.
Advancing an argument in this connection the Holy Qur'an says:

"If there were therein deities besides Allah, then surely the heavens
and the earth would have been disordered." (Surah al-Ambiya, 21:22) A
belief in the plurality of the Divine essence puts the holder of such a
belief outside the pale of Islam which totally rejects this belief in
every form of it.

**II. Plurality of Creatorship**

Some people acknowledge that Allah is peerless. They recognize Him to
be the only source of the world. Nevertheless, as far as His creatorship
is concerned, they associate some creatures with Him. For example, some
of them hold that evils have been created by some other beings, not by
Allah. This kind of belief is also tantamount to the belief in the
plurality of creatorship, and is diametrically opposed to the doctrine
of the unity of Divine actions. Anyhow, a belief in the plurality of
creatorship has several degrees. Some of them do not amount to open
polytheism and as such do not put the holders of the belief concerned
outside the pale of Islam.

**III. Plurality of Divine Attributes**

This being a subtle question is not raised by the common people. Only
some thinkers lacking deep insight have given a consideration to it.
Among the scholastic theologians the Asha'irah believe in the plurality
of the Divine attributes. As this belief does not amount to open
polytheism, it does not put its holders outside the pale of Islam.

**IV. Plurality of Worship**

There have been many peoples which have worshipped pieces of wood,
stone or some metal or they have worshipped an animal, a star, a tree or
a river. Formerly this kind of polytheism was common. It is still found
in several parts of the world. The plurality of worship is the opposite
of the unity of worship. All the degrees of polytheism mentioned
previously were the various kinds of theoretical polytheism. They may be
described as false cognition. The plurality of worship is practical
polytheism. It is a sort of false 'being' and false 'becoming'.

Anyhow, practical polytheism also has so many degrees. The highest of
them is that which puts a man outside the pale of Islam. It is called
plain polytheism. But there are many kinds of hidden polytheism. Islam
in the course of its programme of practical monotheism fights against
all of them. Certain varieties of polytheism are so minute and hidden
that they can hardly be observed. The Holy Prophet has said:

"Polytheism is more imperceptible than the crawl of an ant on a smooth
stone in the darkness of night. The slightest degree of it is to prefer
any act of injustice to an act of justice."

Religiousness is nothing but to love and hate for the sake of Allah.
Allah says:

"If you have love for Allah, then follow me so that He may love you."
(Surah Ale Imran, 3:31)

Islam regards any kind of self-indulgence, love of position, honour and
money as well as hero-worship as a sort of polytheism. In the story of
the conflict between Prophet Musa and Fir'awn the Holy Qur'an describes
the tyrannical rule of Fir'awn over the children of Isra'il as the
imposition of devotion and slavery.

Prophet Musa is described to have said in reply to Fir'awn:

"The favour for which you reproach me is that you have enslaved the
children of Isra'il (and imposed on them the devotion to you)." (Surah
ash-Shu'ara, 26:22)

It is evident that the children of Isra'il neither worshipped Fir'awn
nor were they his slaves. They were only under his tyrannical domination
as in another place Fir'awn himself is described to have said: "Surely
we have full power over them". Still at another place Fir'awn is
described to have said: "Their people (the people of Prophet Musa and
Harun) are our slaves and devoted to us)". In this verse the word 'our'
is significant. (See 7:127)

Even if we presume that the children of Israil were forced to worship
Fir'awn, it is unimaginable that they worshipped all his people. They
were forced only to submit to and obey Fir'awn and his nobles.

In a sermon Imam Ali, describing the pitiable plight of the children of
Isra'il under the tyrannical rule of Fir'awn, says: "The Fari'ina had
enslaved them".

He explains their enslavement in the following words:

"They tortured them and made their life bitter. The children of Isra'i1
lived under most oppressive conditions and could find no way to escape
from persecution and humiliation or to defend themselves". (See Nahjul
Balagha)

The verse that promises vicegerency of Allah to the believers is the
most express one in this connection. It says:

"Allah has promised to make those of you who believe and do the good
deeds, successors in the land, as He had made those before them, and
will establish their religion which He has chosen for them and change
their fear into security. They will worship Me, and ascribe nothing as a
partner to Me. Those who disbelieve henceforth are the wicked
indeed."(Surah an-Nur, 24:55)

This verse shows that when a rightful government and Divine vicegerency
are established, the believers get rid of the obedience of every tyrant.
The verse says that they worship Allah alone and ascribe no partners to
Him. This shows that from the viewpoint of the Holy Qur'an the obedience
of the ruler is an act of the worship of Allah provided he is obeyed for
the sake of Him. Otherwise it is a polytheistic act.

It is astonishing that forced obedience which is not morally regarded
as an act of worship, is considered to be so from a social angle. The
Holy Prophet says:

"When the number of the children of al-'As (ancestor of Marwan bin
Hakam and most of the Umayyad caliphs) reaches thirty, they will seize
the property of Allah and turn it into their private property, will
enslave the bondmen of Allah, and will interfere in His religion".

Here the Holy Prophet has hinted at the oppression and despotism of the
Umayyads. Evidently the Umayyads did not ask people to worship them, nor
did they make them slaves of theirs. They only imposed on them their
despotic rule. The Holy Prophet through his Divine foresight calls this
position enslavement and a sort of polytheism.


