Compulsion or Freedom
=====================

A. The Differences
------------------

Now comes the most vital difference amongst the Muslim sects; and that
is the question of com­pulsion or freedom of man in his actions.

There are four groups:

1. The Mu'tazilah say that man is completely free to do whatever he
wished, and that God has no power over his actions at all. This view is
known as *tafwiz*‑delegation of power by God to man. This group is also
known as Qadariyyah.

2. The Mujabbirah (also known as Jabriyyah) say that "man has no power
over any of his actions. He is a tool in the hands of Allah like pen in
our hand." This view is known as jabr‑compulsion.

3. The Asha'irah say that man has no power or will of his own in his
actions; but he still "earns" or "acquires" the action. The term they
use to describe their belief is *kasb which* literally means to earn, to
acquire. What they actually mean is a riddle.

4. The Shi'ah Ithna‑'Asharis says that man is neither completely
independent of Allah nor compelled by Allah, but the actual position is
between these two extremes. The Shiite belief is known as al‑amr *bayna
'l‑amrayn*. This will be explained later on.

It will be seen that the theories of Mu'tazilah, the Mujabbirah and the
Shi'ah are easily understood for what they stand. But the Asha'irah's
theory of kasb is as incomprehensible as the Christians' belief of
three‑in‑one god.

It is clear that they have used the term *kasb* as a mask to hide their
actual belief which is completely identical to the Mujabbirah's belief
of compulsion. 'Allamah Shibli Nu'mani, a famous Sunni scholar of India,
says, "Those who were bold enough, openly adopted the belief in
compulsion and came to be known as Jabriyyah.

Those who were hesitent to use the word *jabr,* used the guise of
*'kasb'* and *'iradah'.* This guise was invented by Abu 'l ­Hasan
al‑Ash'ari. [^1] I therefore, will treat both the Jabriyyah and the
Asha'irah as one. And as the present day Sunnis are all Asha'irah and as
the topic under discussion is of vital importance, I propose to deal
with it in some detail.

B. The Sunni’s Belief
---------------------

The position of the Sunnis in this respect has been explained by Imam
Abu Hamid al‑Ghazali as follows: "No act of any individual, even though
it is earned (kasb) by him, is independent of the will of Allah for its
existence; and there does not occur in either the physical or the
extra‑terrestrial world the wink of an eye, the hind of a thought, or
the most sudden glance, except by the decree of Allah, of His power,
desire and will.

This includes evil and good, benefit and harm, success and failure, sin
and rightqousness, obedience and disobedience, polytheism and true
belief." [^2]

It will not be out of place to mention that this belief was invented by,
and under the influence of, Banu Umayyah to provide a respectable mask
to their debauchery and tyranny As 'Allamah Shibli Nu'mani has admitted
in his book 'Ilmu 'l‑Kalam:

"Although all the causes were present which were responsible for the
differences in faith, yet the political differences started the ball
rolling. The reign of Banu Umayyah was full of cruelty and bloodshed;
and in reaction to that there was a spirit of revolt among the common
people.

But the well‑wishers of the government always silenced the people by
saying that 'whatever happens takes place according to the will of
Almighty, and as such people should not raise their voice at all.
Everything was destined beforehand; and whatever happens, good or bad,
happens according to the will of Allah; and we should bow down to that".
[^3]

I think this disclosure‑that the idea of *jabr* (and its disguised
version known as *'kasb')* was nothing but a weapon of tyrant rulers to
subdue the op­pressed masses‑is more than enough to discredit this
belief.

C. The Shiite Belief
--------------------

### 1. al‑Amr Bayna 'l‑Amrayn

The Shi'ah Ithna‑'Asharis, on the other hand, say that we know the
difference between falling down from a roof‑top and coming down by
ladders. The second act is done by our own power, will and intention;
while the falling down is not so. And we know that our actions are not
like falling down from the roof‑top; instead they are like coming down
the ladder with out own will and power. Therefore, what we do are our
own actions and should not be attributed solely to Allah.

Again, we see that there are some of our actions for which we are either
praised or blamed, while for other happenings we are neither praised nor
con­demned. It clearly shows that the first category is within our power
and will, and the second category is beyond our power and will.

For example, we may be advised to treat an ailment in this or that way,
but we cannot be advised to recover from the illness. It means that
getting treatment is within our power, but getting well is not within
the sphere of our activities.

Therefore, we say that there are many things and aspects of life which
are within our power and will, while some others are not within our
power. Those things for which we can be advised, praised or blamed, are
within our power and will.

And the commandments of religion (the *shari'ah)* come under this
category, because w e have been advised or ordered to do this and not to
do that, and because we are praised when we obey those commands and
blamed when we disobey them. Therefore, it is ab­solutely wrong to say
that our sins and righteous­ness, our obedience and disobedience, our
true beliefs and wrong belief are by decree of Allah and His desire and
will.

Shaykh as‑Saduq says, "Allah possesses foreknowledge of human actions,
but does not com­pel them to act in any particular manner." [^4]

But neither does this mean that man is complete­ly independent of Allah.
In fact, the power and wiil to act as we like is given to us by Allah.
Thus Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq (peace be upon him) said, "There is no
compulsion (by Allah), nor is there absolute delegation of power (from
Allah to man); but the real position is between these two extremes:
*al‑amr bayna 'l‑amrayn*. [^5]

The following example clearly portrays this "middle position". Suppose a
man's hand is totally paralysed to an extent that he cannot move even a
finger. A doctor has fitted an electrical device on his hand which, on
being switched on, enables the man to use his hand freely in a normal
way. The device is activated by a remote control which the doctor keeps
in his own custody.

When the doctor switches the device on, the man uses his hand in any way
he intends, but when the device is off, he cannot do nothing. Now if the
device is on and the patient does any work, can that work be attributed
inde­pendently to him? No, because the power comes from that device
which is fully controlled by the doctor.

Then can it be attributed to the doctor? No, because the man had done it
by his own free will and choice. This is exactly the position of our
activities. We are not under compulsion because the will and choice is
ours; nor are we completely independent, because the power to do
whatever we intend to do comes from God. [^6]

And at what point does our ability to do things start? Imam Musa
al‑Kazim (peace be upon him) said,

*"A man acquires that ability when four condi­tions are fulfilled:*

*1. when there is nothing to hinder his plans;*

*2 his health and*

*3 the faculties (needed for that work) are up to the required standard;
and*

*4 Allah provides him the occasion of that work. When all these
conditions are fulfilled, a man becomes capable of acting according to
his own free will."*

When asked for an example, the Imam said,

*"Let us suppose that there is a man, without any hindrance, of good
health and proper strength; yet he cannot commit adultery unless he
finds a woman. When he gets a woman (and the fourth condition is
fulfilled), then it is up to him to choose one of the two alternatives:
either he controls his evil emotions and saves himself as (Prophet)
Yusuf did, or he commits adultery. If he protects* *himself from that
sin, it will not be by compulsion of Allah (as some people think). And
if he commits the sin, it does not mean that he was above the power of
Allah (as others think)."* [^7]

### 2. Predestination & the Day of Judgement

According to our point of view, if any one believes in predestination,
then he cannot at the same time believe in the day of judgement
(qiyamat). If Allah decrees every act which is done by us, then why
should He inflict punishment upon us for those sins, evils and
transgressions, for polytheism, dis­belief and immoralities which He
Himself predes­tined for us. It will be gross injustice.

Here is a talk of Imam Musa al‑Kazim (peace be upon him) in his
childhood with Imam Abu Hanifah, the founder of the Hanafi school of
Sunni laws:

Abu Hanifah once went to meet Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq (peace be upon him).
The Imam was inside his house and Abu Hanifah was waiting for him to
come out. In the meantime, a small child came out and Abu Hanifah, just
to pass sometime, asked him, "O child, from whom is the action of man?"
The child at once said,

*"O Abu Hanifah, there are only three imaginable sources: either the
roan himself is the originator of his action; or God is the doer of that
action; or both together are the originators of that action. Now if God
is the doer of the actions of man, then why does He inflict punishment
on man for the sins? Is it not injustice (zulm)? And Allah says,
"Veri­ly Allah is not unjust to His creatures."*

*And if both man and God are partners in that crime, then is it not
gross injustice that the powerful partner (i.e., God) punishes the
weaker partner (i.e., man) for an action which both of them performed
together? And as these two alternatives are proved to be illogical and
impossible, the third theory is proved to be correct that man does his
actions by his own power and will."*[^8]

Abu Hanifah kissed the forehead of the child. That child was Musa, later
known as al‑Kazim, the seventh Imam of the Shi'ahs.

### 3. Abu Hanifah & Bahlul

Imam Abu Hanifah, of course, believed that man does nothing by his own
will a d power. In spite of the clever and logical discourse of Imam
Musa al­-Kazim, mentioned above, he did not charge his belief. Once his
theory led to a tragi‑comic event.

Bahlul means wise and chief. It was the name of a famous companion of
Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq who lived up to the last days of Imam 'Ali an‑Naqi
and saw Imam Hasan al‑'Askari also. As a twist of fate, he is commonly
referred to as Bahlul '*Majnun*' (*Bahlul*, the lunatic).

This is so because he pretended to be insane in order to save himself
from the respon­sibilities of judgeship offered him by the Caliph Harun
ar‑Rashid. But, wise as he was, he took ad­vantage of his supposed
lunacy and always cen­sured great people of his time (including the
kings) for their short‑comings.

Once he heard Imam Abu Hanifah (who lived in Kufa) telling his disciples
that, "I have heard three things from Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq which I think
are wrong." The disciples asked what those things were. Imam Abu Hanifah
said:

"First of all, Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq says that Allah cannot be seen. But
it is wrong. If a thing does exist, then it must be seen. Secondly, he
says that Satan will be punished in Hell. But it is absurd. Because
Satan was created from fire: how can fire do any harm to a thing or
person made of fire? Thirdly, he says that a man's action is done by his
will and power, and that he is responsible for it. But it is wrong
because all the actions of man are done by Allah's will and power, and
Allah is, actually, responsible for it."

The disciples' applaud had just begun when Bahlul took a lump of clay
and sent it hurtling towards Abu Hanifah. It hit him on the forehead, he
cried in anguish and pain. The disciples caught Bahlul, and Abu Hanifah
took him to the judge.

The judge heard the complaint and asked Bahlul whether the allegation
was true.

Bahlul: "O Judge! Imam Abu Hanifah alleges that he is suffering from a
searing pain in his head because of the clay which hit him. But I think
he is lying. I cannot believe him until I see the pain."

Abu Hanifah: "You really are mad! How can I show you the pain? Has
anybody ever seen a pain?" Bahliil: "But, O Judge, he was just teaching
his disciples that if a thing does exist, then it must be seen. As he
cannot show the pain, I submit that according to his own belief, he is
not suffering from any pain at all"

Abu Hanifah: "Oh! my head is splitting because of the pain."

Bahlul: "O Judge, there is another matter which I just remembered. He
was also telling his disciples that as Satan is made of fire, the fire
of Hell cannot do him any harm. Now man is made of clay, as the Qur'an
says, and it was a lump of clay which hit him: I wonder how can he claim
that a lump of clay did harm to a man made of clay?"

Abu Hanifah: "O Judge! Bahlul wants to go scot­free by his verbosity.
Please, take my revenge from him. "

Bahlul: "O Judge, I think Imam Abu Hanifah has very wrongfully brought
me in this court. He was just teaching his disciples that all the
actions of man are done by Allah, and that Allah is responsible for
those actions. Now, why did he bring me here? If he really is suffering
from the effect of that lump of clay, he should file suit against Allah
who did hit him with that clay. Why should a poor harmless person like
me be brought to the court. When all I am supposed to do was in fact
done by Allah?"

The judge acquitted Bahlul.

D. Man’s Will in Regard to Belief & Disbelief
---------------------------------------------

It has been mentioned earlier that God does nothing without a purpose.
So we may ask: what is the purpose of creating man?

God created man so that he may acquire those virtues which may bring him
nearer to God. Man comes in this world like a blank paper. During his
span of life various designs appear on that paper as the effect of his
thoughts and deeds. Virtues which he acquires are like beautiful
designs, and vices are like monstrous drawings. God says,

***"Blessed be He, Who created death and life so that He may try you
which of you is best in deeds." (67:1‑2)***

God gave wisdom, will arid power to man so that he may acquire the
virtues. He has shown him the right path and has warned him against
going astray. But He has not compelled him to do good deed nor to commit
vices. He has given him power to do as he wishes in this life. The
Qur'an says,

***"I swear by‑the soul and Him who made it perfect, then He inspired it
(the knowledge of) right and wrong for it. He who purifies it (i.e., the
soul) will indeed be successful; and he who corrupts it will indeed
fail." (91:7‑10)***

### 1. Tawfiq & Khidhlan

As the purpose of our creation is to acquire virtues by obeying God and
as we have been given freedom of choice, God does not compel us to
select a certain path. Still, in His infinite mercy, He helps a man who
sincerely wants to obey Him; but that help does not amount to any
compulsion from God.

Let us take the example of a mason who is asked to repair a roof. He
agrees to do the work, and starts preparation. But then he finds some
difficulty in obtaining a ladder of proper height. You known that he is
going to do the job any way; but you also know that he will face
difficulty because of the shortness of the ladder. So you loan him your
own ladder which is of proper height, and thus you make his work easier
for him.

But remember that the help was given to him when the mason had the firm
intention of doing the job, when he had made all his preparations. So
this help did not compel him to start his work, nor did it create the
intention or will or power to repair the roof. The power, the intention,
the will, all was there beforehand. What you did was just to help him in
carrying out his intention.

Such help from God, given to those persons who sincerely want to obey
His commands, is called *tawfi'q. Tawfiq* means helping someone to
succeed.

Now let us look at the other side. Suppose the mason did not want to
repair that roof and refused outright to accept the job; or even after
agreeing to do the work, he started delaying tactics and putting lame
excuses. You knew that he had no intention of doing the job.

Therefore, there was no sense in providing him with the ladder and you
did not offer it to him. Can it be said that by withholding the ladder
from him, you compelled him not to do the job? No. Because that man,
with his own free will and choice, had refused the job (or was
postponing it without any genuine cause). Your ladder had nothing to do
with his decision.

That withholding of the help from those persons who choose to disobey
the commands of God by their own free will and power, is called
*khidlan. khidlan* means abandonment.

You will find many verses in the Qur'an which refer to these two aspects
of God's act: helping and withholding the help. Take for example:

***Whomsoever Allah wills to guide, He opens his heart to Islam; and
whomsoever He wishes to leave stray­ing, He makes his heart narrow and
constricted, as if he was climbing into the heights - thus does Allah
heap the punishment on those who do not believe. (6:125)***

Mark that God does not mislead the un­believers‑He just leaves them
straying. It means that they had gone astray and then God left them to
wander. This meaning becomes more dear when you see the last phrase
"thus does Allah heap the punishment on those who do not believe."

It clearly shows that they were left in their wandering as a sort of
punishment for their disbelief. They had chosen, on their own accord,
not to believe in God; and then, as a result of that disbelief, God left
them straying. Another verse says:

***By it (i.e., the Qur'an) He leaves many straying, and many He leads
into the right path. But leaves not straying except those who transgress
divine com­mandments. (2:26)***

Here also only those have been left straying who had already
transgressed the laws by their own choice. It is dear that they were
left in their wander­ing because they had gone astray themselves by
their own wrong choice.

### 2. Knowledge of God & Action of Man

*Question:* God knows everything. He knew from ever that, for example,
Bakr would be an unbeliever. Now, if Bakr accepts Islam, it would mean
that the knowledge of God was wrong; and since God's knowledge can never
be wrong, therefore, it is necessary for Bakr to remain an unbeliever.
Does it not mean that Bakr had to remain an unbeliever because of the
previous knowledge of God?

*Answer:* It is one thing to know what is going to happen; and quite
another to cause that thing to happen. Suppose there is a doctor who,
after ex­amining a patient, declares that the patient cannot survive
more than half an hour.

Can it be said that the doctor caused the death of that patient because
he knew that the patient was going to die? Can a claim be lodged against
him that he killed the patient? No. Instead this incident will be quoted
to show how experienced that doctor is because he foresaw what was going
to happen to the patient after half an hour.

Let us look at this example again. The doctor knew that the patient was
going to die, because he was in such a condition that he could not
survive more than half an hour. So, that knowledge was derived from the
condition of the patient; not that the patient died because of the
knowledge of the doctor. The knowledge was the result of the condi­tion
of the patient; the condition of the patient was not the result of the
knowledge of the doctor.

This simple difference was overlooked by the majority of the Muslims who
though that as God knew everything which was to happen, so it must
happen accordingly. They failed to realize that Bakr was to die an
unbeliever, because he was going to die in the condition of disbelief by
his own will; that the knowledge of God was based upon that inde­pendent
will of Bakr; not that Bakr died an un­believer because of the knowledge
of God.

Of course, there is a difference between the knowledge of a doctor and
the knowledge of God; The knowledge of doctor is imperfect and
incomplete. Therefore, his forecast can be wrong at certain times. But
the knowledge of God is perfect and complete in every respect for ever.
Therefore, His knowledge cannot be wrong at anytime. Still it does not
mean that His knowledge causes the sin or polytheism or hypocrisy or
faith and virtue of His creature.

E. Lutf, The Grace of God
-------------------------

If a person can do some thing good to someone without harming any other
person and still he does not do so, then his reluctance from helping the
others is against virtue, it is evil. Therefore, if God can do any thing
beneficial for His creatures and then suppose that He does not do so, it
will be against the virtue of God, and not commendable. It is for this
reason we believe that "it is morally in­cumbent upon Allah to do every
act of *lutf* (grace) in dealing with mankind." [^9]

What is the meaning of *lutf* which has been roughly translated above as
"grace"? *Lutf is* the action on part of God which would help to bring
His creatures nearer to His devotion and‑obedience, and facilitate moral
correction. It must be mentioned here that "Allah has ordered us to be
just, but He Himself treats us with something better than justice, names
tafaddul‑ grace." (*Tafaddul has* same meaning as *lutf*.)

The belief that *lutf* is morally incumbent upon God is the distinctive
belief of the Shi'ah Ithna­'Asharis. The Sunnis do not believe that
*lutf* is in­cumbent upon God. They say that even justice (*‘adl*) is
not incumbent upon God, let alone *lutf*. According to the examples
given by them, if God sends good and virtuous persons to Hell and sends
Satan to Paradise, it will be quite right. There would be noth­ing
wrong.

Both *tawfiq* and *lutf*, as mentioned above, are primarily meant to
help the individuals or the groups in obeying the commandments of God.
However, sometimes such help is offered to an obstinate person not
because he is expected to take its advantage and perform his duties, but
just to close the door of argument, to refute all his excuses, so that
he may not claim that had he been given a bit of encouragement, he would
have been an obedient servant of God. This type of help is known as
*itmamu 'l‑hujjat.*

Some examples of *lutf*: Now we know that God created us to acquire
virtues in this life so that we may be nearer to God in the hereafter.
The question is: How are we to know what is virtue and what is evil?
Human intellect does appreciate inherent vir­tue or evil of many of our
actions, but can we expect everybody to act according to the perfect
reason? Certainly not.

Many are the times when desire or anger suppresses the voice of wisdom;
many are the times when an immediate benefit (obtainable by evil means)
seems more impressive than the fear of con­demnation by society or
losing the grace of God in the life after death.

If God had left mankind without any effective device to check their evil
thoughts and desires, it would have been tantamount to defeating His own
purpose. Therefore, He laid down some rules and sent the Prophets and
Imams to bring those rules to His creatures, and to explain and protect
those laws from corruption.

And He did not leave us at that, He also ap­pointed a day when all will
be gathered to give account of their beliefs and actions. And, He, in
His mercy and justice, sent us the news that there was to be a Day of
Reckoning, a Day of Judgement, a Day of Rewards and Punishments. This
information helps the creatures in obeying those laws which were brought
by the prophets.

Thus sending the *shari'ah is* a *lutf* which helps the mankind to
achieve the purpose of life. Also, send­ing the prophets and the Imams,
and appointing a Day of judgement are *lutf* for the same reason. And
because these acts are *lutf*, they are incumbent upon God.

\* \* \* \* \*

The rules of the *shari'ah* are called *taklif. Taklif* literally means
to put in hardship. As any law, thought it may be the simplest one,
appears to human nature as a 'hardship; the *shari’ah is* called
*taklif.* (By the way, lawlessness in the end brings real hardship and
calamities, while the law brings peace and happiness.)

Though the rules of the shari'ah are called 'hardship,' in reality they
are well below our strength and ability. God says,

***"On no soul does Allah place a burden but less than its
capacity."(2:286)***

Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq (peace be upon him) said,

*"Allah did not give orders to His servants but that they were less than
their strength ...Because He told them to pray five times a day, fast
one month in a year, pay zakat five dirhams in two hundred and to go to
hajj once in a life; but the people have strength to do more than this
minimum."* [^10]

Significantly, the word used‑in the above verse is not *taqdt*‑strength
and ability, but wus' which car­ries the idea of "ease" and "comfort"
and here means "less than its strength or capacity. This is one aspect
of God's infinite mercy as He says,

***"'Allah intends every facility for you and He does not want to put
you in difficulties." (2:185)***

Some more explanation about the shari'ah will be given in Chapter Three.

[^1]: Shibli Nu'mani, 'Ilmu 'l‑Kalam, p. 28.

[^2]: al‑Ghazali, lhya 'Ulumi 'd‑Din (Kitab Qawa'idu'l‑'Aqad), vol,1,
p.193; also see al‑Ash'ari, Kitab 'l‑Luma', p. 53,239.

[^3]: Shibli Nu'mani, 'Ilmu 'l‑Kalam, p. 25.

[^4]: as‑Saduq, al‑I'tiqadat, chp. 4, p. 58.

[^5]: Ibid, chp. 5, p. 58.

[^6]: al‑Khui, al‑Bayan fi Tafsiri'l‑Qur an, p.102. This example has
been slightly modified by us.

[^7]: as‑Saduq,  al‑I'tiqadat, chp. 9, p. 60.

[^8]: at‑Tabrasi, al‑Ihtijaj vol. 2, pp. 387‑388; al‑Majisi, Biharu
l-Anwar, vol. 5, p. 4, 27.

[^9]: al‑Hilli, al‑Babu 'l‑Hadi 'Ashar, p. 99

[^10]: as‑Saduq, Risalatu'l‑I'tiqadat, chp. 3, p. 57


