Introduction
============

For a long time, a need was felt for a brief book that captures the
essence of the way of life and teachings of the Prophet Muhammad, and at
the same time serves as an easy introduction for the layperson to the
greatest personality that mankind has ever known. Despite the many
reference and scholarly books on the subject, few give a glimpse of the
magnificent character and conduct of the final messenger of God in the
way the works of Grand Ayatollah Imam Muhammad Shirazi do.

The life and teachings of the Prophet were central and omnipresent to
the many books written by Imam Muhammad Shirazi, where he extensively
refers to the Prophet's teachings or his policies, citing the stances
the Prophet had in various events, or the policies he had adopted with
respect to particular issues, and bases his analyses on the teachings of
the Prophet Muhammad may Allah bless him and his impeccable family.

Presented in this book are extracts from three different works by the
author about the Prophet Muhammad and some of his teachings. However,
this is not intended to be a collection of all the works by the author
about the Prophet Muhammad, which number tens of books.

This work is not intended to be a comprehensive chronological
presentation of the life of the Prophet, nor does it aim to detail all
his teachings. It is intended to give some idea about the historic
transformation that has been initiated by the Prophet and the change he
induced in the course of mankind's life.

ix

To help appreciate the significance of the universal renaissance that
the Prophet Muhammad began some fourteen centuries ago, it is necessary
to be aware of the status quo that prevailed at the time prior to start
of his prophetic mission, even if outlined very briefly. As an
eyewitness of the state of affair of the human society at the time, Imam
Ali says:

"Allah sent Muhammad some time after the other messengers, and after
the nations of the world had been slumbering for a long time. Strife had
become entrenched, affairs disparate, and wars raging. The light of the
world had become obscured, and vanities had become foremost. The leaves
of life had then become yellow, its fruits rare, and its water dried up.
The lighthouse of guidance had crumbled, and the signs of ruin had
become manifest. The world scowled upon its people, frowned in the face
of those who sought after it. Strife was the only fruit, carrion the
only food, fear the only motto, the sword the only clothing."

In another speech Imam Ali describes the "Age of Ignorance"
that prevailed before the prophetic mission:

"Allah sent Muhammad when the people were astray and in confusion, lost
in strife. Their vain desires had overcome them, and arrogance had
brought them down. The ignorance of the times had made them make light
of the ignorant ones. They were helpless, caught in the earthquake and
calamity of ignorance. So Muhammad went to great lengths to give wise
counsel and walked the right path and called to wisdom and fine
preaching."

It was with this kind of background that the Prophet of Islam began his
mission to teach and educate the masses, to promote virtue and prohibit
vice; to encourage them to reflect upon and therefore reform their state
of affairs and determine their destiny.

This work is a small presentation of events in which the prophet was
involved, to help reflect on the supreme personality that has left its
mark on the course of humanity, and it shall continue to do so for as
long as man lives on this planet.

On some occasions in this work some of the events may be similar or the
same, this is because it was decided that the chapters that were taken
from the various books by the author remain in tact as much as possible
and with minimum alteration, although some minor editing were made.

In the majority of cases the events are cited without much or any
comments or analysis. This is due to a number of reasons:

o To keep this work as short and brief as possible, and not lengthy and
tiresome;

o To allow the reader to draw his/her own conclusion(s), which in most
cases are self- explanatory. Even the quotes from western intellectuals
that have been cited by the editorial board have been placed towards the
end of the book, so that these may not influence the mind of the reader
prior to reading this work.

The book is comprised of six chapters. Chapters Two to Five are
extracted from the author's original works. Chapter One presents a short
outline by the editor, of the biography of the Prophet Muhammad. This
part was included to give the reader a glimpse of the life of the
Prophet from his birth up to his death.

Chapter Two addresses some of the moral qualities and values of the
Prophet; whether in their outward manifestation such as his interactions
with others be it friends, foes, or even animals, or in innate and
personal virtues such as his humility, abstinence, steadfastness,
bravery, and prayers. This part is taken from the author's work al-sirah
al-fawwahah, 'The Perfumed Path', which is a brief presentation of the
life and the teachings of the Prophet Muhammad.

Chapter Three outlines the general policies and stances the Prophet had
at times of conflict. It addresses the etiquettes and strategies the
Prophet adopted for battle, his efforts to avoid fighting by giving his
opponents the choice of war or peace, his tolerance towards his
opponents and his forgiveness of traitors, his teachings on the
treatment of prisoners and the prohibition of torture, his conduct upon
victory, and finally his position in the eyes of his foes. An overview
of this topic is extracted from the author's work as- sabil ila inhad
al-muslimin, 'Towards a Muslim Renaissance', and the rest of this part
is taken from author's wa li awwal marrah fi ta'rikh al-calam, 'The
Prophet Muhammad: Unique in World History', Imam Shirazi's two volume
biography of the Prophet Muhammad.

Chapter Four sheds some light on the Prophet's social policies as well
as his personal conduct mostly when the Islamic community took hold in
the city of Medina. The Prophet continued to win hearts and minds of the
public through his social and fiscal policies. This part is taken from
the author's work as-sabil ila inhad al-muslimin, 'Towards a Muslim
Renaissance'.

Chapter Five presents various teachings and sayings of the Prophet
Muhammad on a variety of ethical and social issues that signify the
characteristics of an Islamic society. Such teachings, which in general
address every aspect of life in this world, and also matters concerning
the hereafter, are traditionally referred to as the hadith of the
Prophet, and the conduct of the Prophet, and the manifestation of those
teachings - known as Sunnah - are adhered to by the devotees. This part
is taken from the author's work al-sirah al-fawwahah, 'The Perfumed
Path' of the Prophet Muhammad.

The author's works "wa li awwal marrah fi ta'rikh al-calam",
'The Prophet Muhammad: Unique in World History' and the relevant
chapters of al-sirah al-fawwahah, 'The Perfumed Path', were translated
by Ali Adam, and the work as-sabil ila inhad al-muslimin, 'Towards a
Muslim Renaissance' was translated by Yaseen Jibouri.

Chapter Six is a selection of statements by western thinkers about the
Prophet Muhammad.

At the end of the book a section is provided on transliteration that is
used for some of the Arabic words and names that appear in this book.
The significance of this book lies in the fact it presents the role
model to humanity in the person of the Prophet Muhammad who gave the
best possible that can be given and sacrificed with all he had in order
to guide humanity to the path that guarantees prosperity for it in this
world and in the hereafter, and indeed he succeeded in doing so in the
best possible manner. It is therefore not unexpected when non- Muslim
intellectuals consider him to be the most influential person in the
history of mankind, as the American scholar Michael H. Hart states in
his work "The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in
History":

[Muhammad] was the only man in history who was supremely successful on
both the religious and secular levels.

The writer George Bernard-Shaw says:

I hold the religion of Muhammad in the highest esteem for its
astounding vitality. It seems to me to be the only religion which is
equipped to suit the changing faces of life and which is appropriate for
all ages. I have studied the life of this amazing man and I believe that
he deserves to be called the saviour of the human race.

And thus the prophet not only deserves to be a role model for humanity,
but in fact he is the best role model mankind can ever find. The
Almighty states in the Qur'an, Ye have indeed in the Messenger of Allah
an excellent exemplar Addressing the Prophet himself, the Almighty
states:

And indeed you have sublime ethics And finally Imam Ali peace be upon
him declares, "Whoever seeks a role model, let the Prophet be his role
model; otherwise, he shall have no safeguard against perdition."

Z. Olyabek
Muharram 1426
February 2005


