Chapter Six
===========

The religion of Muhammad will be the system upon which peace and
contentment will be founded. The world today is in dire need of a man
like Muhammad to solve its complex problems.

**Sir George Bernard-Shaw**

The Prophet as Seen by Western Thinkers The following are some
observations on the Prophet Muhammad, by well-acknowledged Western
scholars and thinkers of modern times: There is no doubt that the
Prophet Muhammad was a great reformer who did a magnificent service to
human society. It is honour enough to say that he guided a whole nation
to the light of truth and caused it to incline towards stability and
peace and to prefer an ascetic lifestyle. He prevented it from shedding
blood and presenting human sacrifices. He opened up for it the way of
prosperity and civic living. This is a tremendous achievement which can
only be undertaken by a powerful personality. A man like this is worthy
of respect and honour.

The renowned Russian writer Count Leo Nikolayevich Tolstoi

I wanted to know the best of the life of one who holds today an
undisputed sway over the hearts of millions of mankind.... I became more
than ever convinced that it was not the sword that won a place for Islam
in those days in the scheme of life. It was the rigid simplicity, the
utter self- effacement of the Prophet the scrupulous regard for pledges,
his intense devotion to his friends and followers, his intrepidity, his
fearlessness, his absolute trust in God and in his own mission. These
and not the sword carried everything before them and surmounted every
obstacle. When I closed the second volume (of the Prophet's biography),
I was sorry there was not more for me to read of that great life.

Mahatma Gandhi, statement published in 'Young India' 1924

My choice of Muhammad (570 CE - 630 CE) to lead the list of the world's
most influential persons may surprise some readers and may be questioned
by others, but he was the only man in history who was supremely
successful on both the secular and religious level. ...It is probable
that the relative influence of Muhammad on Islam has been larger than
the combined influence of Jesus Christ and St. Paul on Christianity.
...It is this unparalleled combination of secular and religious
influence which I feel entitles Muhammad to be considered the most
influential single figure in human history.

Michael H. Hart, "The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in
History", New York, 1987.

No other religion in history spread so rapidly as Islam. The West has
widely believed that this surge of religion was made possible by the
sword. But no modern scholar accepts this idea, and the Qur'an is
explicit in the support of the freedom of conscience. James Michener
'Islam: The Misunderstood Religion' Reader's Digest, May 1955, pp.
68-70

I hold the religion of Muhammad in the highest esteem for its
astounding vitality. It seems to me to be the only religion which is
equipped to suit the changing faces of life and which is appropriate for
all ages. I have studied the life of this amazing man and I believe that
he deserves to be called the saviour of the human race.

If any religion had the chance of ruling over England, nay Europe
within the next hundred years, it could be Islam. I believe that if a
man like him were to assume the dictatorship of the modern world he
would succeed in solving its problems in a way that would bring it the
much needed peace and happiness: I have prophesied about the faith of
Muhammad that it would be acceptable to the Europe of tomorrow as it is
beginning to be acceptable to the Europe of today."

Sir George Bernard Shaw 'The Genuine Islam' Vol. 1, No. 8,

Europe has begun now to sense the wisdom of Muhammad and has developed
a passion for his religion. It will also come to exonerate Islamic
doctrine from all the false accusations laid at its door by Europeans in
the Middle Ages. The religion of Muhammad will be the system upon which
peace and contentment will be founded. From his Philosophy, Europe will
derive the solution to perplexities, problems and complexities . . .
Many of my fellow countrymen and other Europeans venerate the teachings
of Islam. Hence I confirm my prophecy by saying that the first stirrings
of the age of European Islam are near, this is inevitable.

Yes, the world today is in dire need of a man like Muhammad to solve
its complex problems.

Muhammad was abstemious and simple in his abode, his food and his drink
and his clothing and in the rest of his life and conditions. His food
consisted mainly of bread with dates and water. He often mended his own
clothes. What could be more honourable than this? Hail Muhammad the
Prophet of rough clothing and food, who strived, was active during the
day and awake during the night and persistent in promoting the religion
of Allah. He was not one to covet that which lesser men covet such as
rank, empire and power. He is in truth the Prophet of the sublime
morals.

A silent great soul, one of that who cannot but be earnest. He was to
kindle the world, the world's Maker had ordered so. The lies which
well-meaning zeal has heaped round this man [Muhammad] are disgraceful
to ourselves only. The English philosopher Thomas Carlyle 'Heroes, Hero
Worship and the Heroic in History' 1840

Never has a man set for himself, voluntarily or involuntarily, a more
sublime aim, since this aim was superhuman; to subvert superstitions
which had been imposed between man and his Creator, to render God unto
man and man unto God; to restore the rational and sacred idea of
divinity amidst the chaos of the material and disfigured gods of
idolatry, then existing. Never has a man undertaken a work so far beyond
human power with so feeble means, for he (Muhammad) had in the
conception as well as in the execution of such a great design, no other
instrument than himself and no other aid except a handful of men living
in a corner of the desert. Finally, never has a man accomplished such a
huge and lasting revolution in the world, because in less than two
centuries after its appearance, Islam, in faith and in arms, reigned
over the whole of Arabia, and conquered, in God's name, Persia, Western
India, Abyssinia, Syria, Egypt, all the known continent of Northern
Africa, Spain, etc.

If greatness of purpose, smallness of means, and astounding results are
the three criteria of human genius, who could dare to compare any great
man in modern history with Muhammad? The most famous men created arms,
laws and empires only. They founded, if anything at all, no more than
material powers which often crumbled before their eyes. This man moved
not only armies, legislations, empires, peoples and dynasties, but
millions of men in one-third of the then inhabited world; and more than
that, he moved the altars, the gods, the religions, the ideas, the
beliefs and souls . . . his forbearance in victory, his ambition, which
was entirely devoted to one idea and in no manner striving for an
empire; his endless prayers, his mystic conversations with God, his
death and his triumph after death; all these attest not to an imposture
but to a firm conviction which gave him the power to restore a dogma.
This dogma was twofold, the unity of God and the immateriality of God;
the former telling what God is, the latter what God is not.

Philosopher, Orator, Apostle, Legislator, Warrior, Conqueror of Ideas,
Restorer of Rational beliefs... The founder of twenty terrestrial
empires and of one spiritual empire, that is Muhammad. As regards all
standards by which human greatness may be measured, we may ask, is there
any man greater than he?

Alphonse de La Martaine 'Historie de la Turquie', v. ii, Paris, 1854

His simple eloquence, rendered impressive by the expression of a
countenance wherein awfulness of majesty was tempered by an amiable
sweetness, excited emotions of veneration and love; and he was gifted
with that authoritative air of genius which alike influences the learned
and commands the illiterate. As a friend and a parent, he exhibited the
softest feelings of our nature . . . With all that simplicity which is
so natural to a great mind, he performed the humbler offices whose
homeliness it would be idle to conceal with pompous diction; even while
Lord of Arabia, he mended his own shoes and coarse woollen garments,
milked the ewes, swept the hearth, and kindled the fire, Dates and water
were his usual fare, and milk and honey his luxuries. When he travelled
he divided his morsel with his servant.

John Davenport "An Apology for Mohammed and the Koran" London 1869

Head of the State as well as the Church, he was Caesar and Pope in one;
but he was Pope without Pope's pretensions, and Caesar without the
legions of Caesar: without a standing army, without a bodyguard, without
a palace, without a fixed revenue. if ever any man had the right to say
that he ruled by the divine right, it was Mohammad, for he had all the
power without its instruments and without its supports. He cared not for
the dressings of power. The simplicity of his private life was in
keeping with his public life.

In Mohammedanism everything is different here. Instead of the shadowy
and the mysterious, we have history.... We know of the external history
of Muhammad.... while for his internal history after his mission had
been proclaimed, we have a book absolutely unique in its origin, in its
preservation.... on the Substantial authority of which no one has ever
been able to cast a serious doubt.

Reverend Bosworth Smith "Mohammed and Mohammedanism" London 1874

The good sense of Mohammed despised the pomp of royalty. The Apostle of
God submitted to the menial offices of the family; he kindled the fire;
swept the floor; milked the ewes; and mended with his own hands his
shoes and garments.

Mohammed was distinguished by the beauty of his person, an outward gift
which is seldom despised, except by those to whom if has been refused.
Before he spoke, the orator engaged on his side the affections whether
of a public or a private audience. They applauded his commanding
presence, his majestic aspect, his piercing eye, his gracious smile, his
flowing beard, his countenance which painted every sensation of his
soul, and the gestures that enforced each expression of the tongue. In
the familiar offices of life, he scrupulously adhered to the grave and
ceremonious politeness of his country; his respectful attention to the
rich and powerful was dignified by his condescension and affability to
the poorest citizen of Mecca; his memory was capacious and retentive,
his wit easy and social, his imagination sublime, his judgement clear,
rapid and decisive. He possessed the courage both of thought and action;
bears the stamp of an original and superior genius.

Edward Gibbon "Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" 1823

History makes it clear, however, that the legend of fanatical Muslims
sweeping through the world and forcing Islam at the point of sword upon
conquered races is one of the most fantastically absurd myths that
historians have ever repeated. De Lacy O'Leary 'Islam at the Crossroads'
London, 1923

Incidentally these well-established facts dispose of the idea so widely
fostered in Christian writings that the Muslims, wherever they went,
forced people to accept Islam at the point of the sword.

Lawrence E. Browne 'The Prospects of Islam' 1944

To suppose Muhammad an impostor raises more problems that it solves.
Moreover, none of the great figures of history is so poorly appreciated
in the West as Muhammad.... Thus, not merely must we credit Muhammad
with essential honesty and integrity of purpose, if we are to understand
him at all; if we are to correct the errors we have inherited from the
past, we must not forget the conclusive proof is a much stricter
requirement than a show of plausibility, and in a matter such as this
only to be attained with difficulty.

**W. Montgomery Watt 'Muhammad at Mecca' Oxford, 1953**

Muhammad, the Messenger of Islam, exhibited for most of his life if not
all of his life a striking moderateness. His final victory points to a
greatness of character rarely to be found in history. He ordered his
army to give quarter to the old and the weak, the children and the
women, and warned them against destroying houses or pillaging or cutting
down fruiting trees. He ordered them not to draw their swords except in
dire need. It is even said that he used to rebuke some of his generals
and physically put right their mistakes.

Emil Dirmargen, Orientalist, "The life of Muhammad"

Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah was courageous in fighting battles
himself giving strength and endurance to the hearts of those who were
weaker. He was merciful with the weak, and would give refuge to a great
number of the needy in his house. Although he maintained a reverential
aura, he had a plain manner about him with no affectation whatsoever. He
was cheerful and easy to deal with and with an even temper not easily
angered by inquisitive people and always had a smile on his face. There
is no doubt that he had many traits which made him attractive to the
people of his time, but he had conveyed to those people a sublime
example in religion and morals, and transcended the old notions under
which they were suffering. When he had gathered them as one body under
the banner of this sublime example, he made from them a power which
later shook the very foundations of the Ancient world.


