Chapter One
===========

We have sent thee not except as a mercy to all the Worlds The Holy
Qur'an, The Prophets (21): 107

We have sent thee not except as a giver of glad-tidings and a warner to
all the peoples The Holy Qur'an, Sheba (34): 28

A Brief Biography of Prophet Muhammad Muhammad was the son of Abdullah,
who was the son of Abdul-Muttalib, who was the son of Hashim; whose
ancestry reaches the Prophet Ismael son of the Prophet Abraham, peace be
upon them.

The Prophet Muhammad was born in the city of Mecca, in Arabia, on a
Friday, the 17th day of the lunar month of Rabi'- I, in the year 570CE
into a noble family whose fathers and ancestors were amongst the chiefs
of the Quraysh tribe, and the Bani-Hashim clan. His Prophetic mission
began in the year 610CE on the 27th day of the month of Rajab, when he
first received the divine revelation. Then the Qur'an was revealed to
the Prophet progressively according to the circumstances of the time
over a period of 23 years.

The Prophet Muhammad was killed by poisoning on the 28th day of the
month of Safar in the 11th year of the Hijrah1, 630CE.

1 The occasion of the Hijrah (literally migration, and by extension the
migration of the Prophet Muhammad from Mecca to Medina to thwart those

**His Childhood**

Muhammad's father Abdullah son of Abdul-Muttalib was the best and most
pious among the sons of Abdul-Muttalib and his most beloved. Abdullah
died while Muhammad was still in his mother's womb. All that he left
behind were five camels and a servant girl named Barakah, also known as
Omm Ayman, who was Muhammad's nanny. Abdullah was a true believer and a
monotheist.

After Abdullah's death, Muhammad's grandfather, Abdul- Muttalib, became
his guardian. Abdul-Muttalib was one of the chieftains of the tribe of
Quraysh, and a believer in Allah [in the way of Prophet Abraham], as was
Abu Talib, a brother of Abdullah. Abdul-Muttalib always respected and
honoured treaties and adopted the finest of morals. He loved the poor
and helped pilgrims. He would even feed the wild beasts and the birds of
the mountaintops. He would feed people in times of famine and would
restrain wrongdoers.

Muhammad's mother was Aamenah daughter of Wahab son of Abd Manaf son of
Kilab. She was also a believer in Allah. When Muhammad was born his
mother said: 'As soon as I put my child on the ground he leaned with his
hands on the ground, raised his head to the skies and looked at the
horizons all the while speaking in phrases of monotheism. Then a voice
called out to me saying: 'The best of mankind has been born so name him
Muhammad.'

Then Aamenah sent for Abdul-Muttalib. He came to her and she said: 'A
wondrous boy has been born to you.' Then she brought baby Muhammad to
him. Abdul-Muttalib looked at

from the Quraysh who had plotted to assassinate him) marks the
beginning of the Islamic calendar. The Hijrah took place around 622CE.

**A Brief Biography of Prophet Muhammad**

him then took him and entered the Ka'bah2 and prayed to Allah. Then he
left the Ka'bah and returned him to his mother and named him Muhammad.
Muhammad was not yet seven years old when his mother died. After his
mother's death, his grandfather Abdul- Muttalib assumed guardianship of
him. Because of his knowledge of the status of the child and his faith
in him he treated Muhammad with more care and attention than his other
children. A group of the Medlaj Clan came to Mecca and when they saw
Muhammad they said to his grandfather: 'Take good care of him for we
have never seen another of his station.'

Abdul-Muttalib said to Abu Talib in his will to heed what they say and
take care of him. Muhammad was eight when his grandfather died, and he
was taken into the care of his uncle Abu Talib.

Abu Talib, chief of the Bani-Hashim clan within the Quraysh3, then
became the guardian of Muhammad from his eighth year. Abu Talib went on
to protect and serve the Messenger of Allah, defending him and honouring
him throughout the testing times of his Prophethood, until the last
breath of his life.

2 The Ka'bah is a cubical structure symbolising the House of God that
was built by the Prophet Adam on instructions from the Almighty God in
an uninhabited valley, which in turn brought about the creation of the
holy city of Mecca around it. 3 The Quraysh is a collection of clans and
tribes all of whom are blood related.

**His Adulthood**

Muhammad grew up to become a fine young man. He became known for his
excellent manners, and because of the honesty in his conduct and
dealings he was referred to as al- Saadiq (The Truthful One) and al-Amin
(The Trustworthy One).

As a youngster Muhammad used to accompany his uncle on his business
trips to Syria. When the Messenger of Allah reached the age of twelve he
journeyed with his uncle Abu Talib as far as Busra. There he was seen by
a Christian monk named Georges who recognised him by his description. He
took his hand and said: 'This is the chief of the Worlds, God will send
him as a mercy to the Worlds.' Abu Talib said:

'How do you know this?' He said: 'We find mention of him in our books.'
He asked Abu Talib to take him back fearing for his safety.

As an adult, Muhammad worked as a trader between the cities of Mecca
and Damascus, and earned a great reputation in the process. Having heard
of the reputation of Muhammad, Lady Khadijah, one of the noblest of the
Quraysh, on one occasion commissioned him to take charge of some of her
trading business between the two cities. Lady Khadijah sent one of her
servants, Maysarah, along with him to keep an eye on him and report back
to her. Having seen his performance in the business, and the returns he
had produced as well as his honesty, Lady Khadijah put Muhammad in
charge of her business. Although she had many proposals of marriage from
various dignitaries of the Quraysh, Lady Khadijah declined them all. It
is reported that it was Lady Khadijah who, albeit indirectly and
discreetly, made the marriage proposal to Muhammad. Some historians have
reported that when they married in 595CE they were both 25.

Lady Khadijah gave birth to three children. All of the Prophet's
children were from Khadijah except Ibrahim who was from Mary the Copt,
who was born in Medina and lived for a year and ten months. The male
children who were all born in Mecca were; al-Qasim which is where
Muhammad's epithet (Abul-Qasim; meaning Qasim's father) comes from, and
Abdullah. The boys all died young during the lifetime of the Prophet.
His only daughter was Fatimah, who married Imam Ali son of Abu Talib,
and bore him Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn, Zaynab and Omm Kolthuom, and
another son who was named Mohassen by the Prophet before his birth.
Fatimah was the only one of the siblings to survive the Messenger of
Allah. The Prophet Muhammad used to say Hasan and Husayn are two Imams
(leaders) whether they rise up (against tyranny) or not.

Ali was born to Abu Talib and his wife Fatimah bint Assad in 600CE.
Ali's birth was associated with a particularly significant phenomenon.
When Fatimah bint Assad was in labour she came to the Ka'bah pleading to
God for help with her labour.

It is reported by various narrators and recorded by many chroniclers
that as she was engaged in her prayers by the southern wall of the
Ka'bah, the wall split open and she entered the House, whereby the wall
returned to its normal state. Having observed this extraordinary
phenomenon, people who were present tried to follow her into the House
through the opening but did not succeed. They then tried to go inside
the House through its door but could not unlock the door. Reports
indicate that she was inside the House for three days, and when she left
the House with her newborn she did so in the same manner as she entered
the House.

The Prophet Muhammad took particular interest in baby Ali, and he
played a major role in Ali's upbringing and education.

Ali would be the most ardent supporter of the Prophet throughout the
difficult years of the Prophet Muhammad's mission to convey the divine
message and the teachings of Islam to the masses.

**Start of His Mission**

The Prophet Muhammad used to spend much time in prayer and worship of
the one God. This he used to do in a cave, known as Hira, in the al-Noor
mountain near the city of Mecca.

In 610CE, at the age of forty, Muhammad received the first of the
divine revelations when he was engaged in devotion and prayer inside the
cave of Hira: \>In the name of Allah the Merciful, the Compassionate;
Read in the name of thy Lord who created, Created man from a clot, Read
and thy lord is the most noble, Who taught by pen, Taught man what he
knew not . . .@ 4 The Prophet Muhammad conveyed the news and the Message
to Ali and Lady Khadijah. Ali and Lady Khadijah both embraced the new
revelation instantly and without any hesitation.

Khadijah was thus the first woman to believe in the Messenger of Allah
and the first woman to pray with him. She supported him wholeheartedly
and spent all her wealth in the way of Allah. She was the first woman
that the Prophet married and he married no other during her lifetime.
She was immensely loyal to the Prophet. The Angel Gabriel ordered him to
convey a special greeting and a blessing from God as well as ordering
that he give the land of Fadak to Fatimah as
4 The Holy Qur'an, The Clot (96): 1-5

an appreciation for what her mother had spent in the way of Allah.

The Prophet Muhammad begins to invite individuals to the new revelation
but in secret. There were very few supporters and believers. When the
Prophet used to perform a congregational prayer, those who were with him
were Lady Khadijah and Ali. This low-key approach continued for three
years.

Afterwards, on instructions from the Almighty, the Prophet's invitation
to Islam started to became more and more public. The Almighty instructs
His messenger to begin with his clan, \>And warn your nearest kinsmen@5.
For this purpose the Prophet Muhammad prepared a banquet and invited the
elders and chiefs of the Bani-Hashim, who totalled forty. After they
were served with a good feast, the Prophet invited them to Islam, called
upon them to support him in his mission, and promised them that whoever
does so would be appointed as his successor,

but none took up the offer dismissing the Prophet and his mission as
nonsense, with the sole exception of Ali. Ridiculing the whole thing,
they turned to Abu Talib saying, "Your son will be your commander, you
should obey him!" Nevertheless the mission continues unabated albeit
with very few supporters.

**Resonance of His Call**

The followers of the new religion start to grow, and so does the
concern of the Quraysh towards them. The elders of Quraysh send Abu
Talib, the trusted uncle of the Prophet to him, asking him to stop his
call for this new religion, and in return they would give him whatever
he would want. "If you

5 The Holy Qur'an, The Poets (26): 214

want wealth, we will give you as much as you want, if you want women we
will marry you the most beautiful women of Arabia, and if you want
position and status we will make you the owner-king over us." When Abu
Talib conveys the message of the elders of Quraysh to his
nephew-prophet, the Messenger of Allah replies, "I swear by the Almighty
that if they put the Sun in my right hand and the Moon in my left on
condition that I desist from this affair I would not leave it until
Allah causes it to prevail or I die in the process." Then the Messenger
of Allah began to weep and rose and made to leave, but Abu Talib called
him and said: 'Come back my nephew. Say what you like my nephew, for by
Allah I will never hand you over to them ever.'

The Quraysh realised that it is dealing with a true and determined
prophet. From then on, open hostility towards this new religion, its
prophet, and its followers started to increase. Lady Khadijah dedicates
all her wealth and resources for the cause of her prophet-husband's
mission. The extent of this hostility reaches blatant persecution of the
followers of the new religion and its prophet.

'Neutralise the Messenger and his Message' Then the Quraysh plotted
amongst themselves about the companions of the Messenger of Allah who
had entered Islam with him from amongst the tribes. Each tribe pounced
upon any of its own who were Muslims by tormenting them and forcing them
from their religion. Abu Talib protected the Messenger of Allah, and
seeing what the Quraysh were doing to the sons of Hashim and
Abdul-Muttalib, he called for them to protect the Messenger of Allah
just as he was protecting him. So they gathered with him and stood up
with him, except for Abu Talib's brother Abu Lahab and his sons who had
assisted the Quraysh against the Prophet.

Then the Quraysh openly decided to kill the Messenger of Allah. When
this news reached Abu Talib he gathered the sons of Hashim and
Abdul-Muttalib and took the Messenger of Allah to his quarter and
protected him from those who sought to kill him.

The Quraysh imposes total and complete embargo against the Prophet and
his followers in all its forms; social, economic, political, etc. No
citizen of Mecca is allowed to buy from or sell to them, no one is
allowed to marry anyone of them, or even befriend or socialise with
them, not even help them. Nor should a peace settlement be accepted from
them ever, nor should they be shown mercy until they hand over the
Messenger of Allah to be killed.

The Quraysh agreed to draw up a document to this effect, and one of
them wrote this document in his own hand, which subsequently was
afflicted by paralysis, and then they hung the document inside the
Ka'bah.

The Prophet and many of his followers, and members of the Hashim clan
withdrew to Abu Talib and entered the Abu Talib Quarter known as She'b
Abu Talib, which had become their virtual open-top prison. Their
condition deteriorated as time went by, and although some friends of
sympathisers managed to smuggle in some help to the Muslims, but this
was few and far between. There they remained in the quarter for three
years until they were exhausted. The voices of the children could be
heard from the quarter crying of hunger. They also increased the
pressure on those who had entered Islam but had not entered the quarter.
The trials became grave and the Muslims were severely shaken. It is
reported that Ali son of Abu Talib used to secretly leave the quarter in
disguise and fetch foodstuff to the besieged, carrying it on his back,
into the quarter.

On one of the divine revelations made to him, the Messenger of Allah
informed his uncle Abu Talib that Allah had sent woodworms to their
document that had eaten every word except the name of Allah. Having
heard this Abu Talib said: 'No by the falling stars, you have not lied
to me.'

Abu Talib set out with a group of the clan of Abdul-Muttalib until he
reached the vicinity of the Ka'bah, which was full of the people of
Quraysh. He spoke and said to them:

'Something has occurred which may be a cause for a settlement between
you and us so bring out your document. They said: 'The time has come for
you to accept and recant. Only one man has caused the split between us
and you, and you have put your people in jeopardy because of him.'

Abu Talib said: 'I propose a matter for you in which there is fairness.
My nephew has told me and he has not lied to me, that Allah distances
Himself from this document and has erased all your treachery and enmity
and all that remains written is His name. If it is as he has said then
by Allah, we will never hand him over to you until the last of us dies.
If what he has said is false then we will hand him over to you so that
you may kill him or spare him as you wish.'

They said: 'We agree.' Then they opened the document and found it as
they had been told but some of them clung to their falsehood and
obstinacy and said: 'This is sorcery from your companion.'

Then some of those who had made the pact spoke and tore up the
document.

**End of One Torment and Start of Others**

The clan of Hashim then felt safe enough to emerge from their quarter
and once more mingle with the people. This was in the tenth year of the
noble prophethood, circa 620CE.

It was less than six months after the end of this trial when Abu Talib
passed away. Then the Prophet's wife Lady Khadijah also died only three
days after Abu Talib according to some accounts. The Messenger of Allah
was very saddened and named this year the 'Year of Sorrow'. The loss of
Abu Talib and Lady Khadijah dealt a severe blow to the Prophet at a time
when he needed these two most. The death of Abu Talib cleared the last
hurdle for the Quraysh, and if the presence of Abu Talib imposed certain
limits and drew some red lines for the Quraysh that they could not
cross, now his death leaves them free to do what was the unthinkable to
the Prophet while Abu Talib was alive.

With the death of Abu Talib, the trials meted out by his tribe to the
Messenger of Allah grew more naked and audacious. When the Prophet was
praying by the Ka'bah, one of the idolaters approached and violently
tried to strangle him.

The Quraysh encouraged the foolish ones to throw dirt on the Prophet's
face and head. They used to throw filth and blood and thorns at his
door. Ommayah ibn Khalaf used to insult the Prophet until his face
became red but still the Prophet would not say anything to him.

When a fool threw the dirt in the face of the Messenger of Allah, he
entered his house with the dirt still on his head. Fatimah began to
clean the dirt from his head and crying and the Messenger of Allah
saying: 'Do not cry my daughter, for Allah will protect your father.'

He also said: 'The Quraysh could not harm me until Abu Talib died.'

It is related from Khabab who said: 'I approached the Prophet when he
was reclining in the shade of the Ka'bah. This when we had received some
harm from the Polytheists. I said to him: 'O Messenger of Allah, will
you not invoke Allah?' He sat up red of face and said: 'Among those who
came before you there were those whose skins would be scraped off with
combs of iron down to the bone and this did not divert them from their
religion. Allah will complete this matter until a rider may travel from
San'a to Hadramaut with nothing to fear but the wolf getting to his
sheep.'


**Migration of the Messenger of Allah**

The Quraysh and their allies make the decision that Muhammad must be
physically eliminated in order to finish with him and his religion once
and for all. But whoever does this would have to deal with the
consequences and face the wrath of the respectable Bani-Hashim clan. In
order to divide the guilt between as many clans and tribes as possible,
forty clans are made to be involved in the task. The best warrior from
each clan is chosen for the task. They are instructed to storm the house
of Muhammad and every single one of them is to ensure to strike Muhammad
with his sword at least once. This is so that if Bani-Hashim, Muhammad's
clan, were to seek revenge for his blood, they would be confronted with
forty clans, and thus making it impossible for them to seek any
retribution.

The Almighty instructs the Prophet Muhammad to leave for the city of
Yathreb, which later became known as Medinat al- Rasul or the City of
the Messenger, or Medina for short.

In 622CE, after some thirteen years of calling the people to Islam, the
Messenger of Allah left Mecca for Medina. The Prophet Muhammad asked Ali
son of Abu Talib to stay behind to deal with a number of issues, and Ali
volunteered to sleep in the Prophet's bed acting as a decoy. The
Messenger of Allah manages to slip through those who were surrounding
his house just before they stormed it. When they stormed the house to
kill him they found Ali instead in the Prophet's bed with no sign of
their target.

On his way out of Mecca, Abu Bakr came across the Prophet as he was
leaving the city, and asked the Prophet where he was going at that time.
The Prophet Muhammad could not tell him other than the truth, and
thereafter the Messenger of Allah asked him to join him on his migration
to Medina, in order to keep the news of this mission secret until he is
out of danger.

With first daylight, the forty brave warriors set off in pursuit of the
Prophet by following his track. They used an expert guide to help them
track him, and the guide led the warriors to the cave of Thawr, some
five miles outside Mecca, where the Prophet Muhammad and his companion
were actually inside, but the pursuers did not enter the cave. It is
reported that the pursuers did not enter the cave since by the time they
had arrived, through divine intervention, a spider had spun its web
across the opening of the cave, and a pigeon had placed its nest near
there, after the two had entered the cave. The chasers did not attempt
to enter the cave on the presumption that had anyone entered the cave,
the spider web and the pigeon nest would have been disturbed.

Having failed to capture the Prophet, the Quraysh announced a reward of
100 camels for anyone capturing him or giving information leading to his
capture.

The Prophet Muhammad left Mecca on the eve of the first day of the
lunar month of Rabi'-I, and arrived at the outskirts of Medina, some 400
km north of the city of Mecca, on Monday the 12th day of the same
month.

Another task that Ali ibn Abu Talib had to do when the Prophet had left
Mecca was to return any goods and valuables that people had given to the
Prophet for safekeeping. Many of those who were the Prophet opponents
also used to give their valuables to the Prophet for safekeeping every
time they went on a long journey and such like. This is because the
Prophet was recognised for his trustworthiness even towards his foes;
they could not trust their best friends for safekeeping of their
valuables, but they trusted Muhammad al-Amin (the trustworthy one). Ali
returned all the goods and valuables that were given to the Prophet for
safekeeping, including those of the Prophet's foes.

When Ali had returned all the goods he was given by the Prophet
Muhammad to their rightful owners, he went to the roof of the Ka'bah and
yelled at the top of his voice, "if anyone has any claim against
Muhammad, or had entrusted him with anything that he has not got back
yet, then they should come forward." It is reported that nobody did.

Having discharged all his tasks in Mecca, Ali set off for Yathreb
together with his mother Fatimah bint Assad, Fatimah the daughter of the
Prophet, and Fatimah daughter of Zubair.


