Chapter Three
=============

Muhammad, The Prophet of Islam gained the love of the world and the
love of his enemies in particular. This when he set an example in the
finest of morals by freeing ten thousand prisoners who had previously
been working to kill and destroy him and his companions . . . Lord
Hadleigh Policies of the Prophet at Times of Conflict

**An Overview**

The Apostle of God was able, in a very short span of time, to unite
antagonistic, opposing and warring factions who were taken by their own
egotism, nationalism, factionalism or tribalism. This was because these
people recognised that the governance of the Apostle of God was
consultative, compassionate, clement and merciful, and that even the
most avowed of his enemies could live under its banner in complete peace
and well being, provided they would lay down their arms. Indeed, they
could live as leaders and chieftains since the Apostle had said to them:
'Testify that there is no deity but God and that I am the Apostle of God
and you will be kings.'

It was in this way that the Apostle was able to unite those warring
tribes of Arabia as well as the various peoples of diverse nations. The
issue was not one of colour, race, nationalism, or artificial
geographical boundaries and the like, but rather the issue was one of a
general Islamic fraternity. Furthermore, even if a person was not a
Muslim the Apostle

60

**Policies of the Prophet at Times of Conflict**

of God would take him under his wing. For example, when the Apostle
liberated the city of Mecca the majority of the people did not enter
Islam but the Apostle did not coerce a single one of them to accept
Islam and he granted amnesty to the wrongdoers amongst the unbelievers.
What he did was to let the people sense that Islam was a better option
for them than the pre-Islamic customs; better for their honour, for
their property, for their persons and for their authority.

Chroniclers have mentioned that when the Apostle of God liberated Mecca
he put a young man named !It"b in place to govern the city and provided
for him a modest stipend of four dirhams (approximately two measures of
silver) daily. The Apostle of God said to him: 'Act well towards those
who act well and overlook those who act wrongly.' This was one of the
reasons for the transformation of this city, at the hands of !It"b, from
being a city of tyrants, rebels, infidels, murderers and criminals, one
which had made war on the Apostle of God for twenty years, into an
extremely civil city. This was because they knew that if they acted
wrongly he would overlook it and if they acted well he would act well
towards them. By virtue of this constitution the city of Mecca did not
rebel against the Apostle of God afterwards despite the fact that he had
placed no army or security force there. Rather he had captured people's
hearts with his compassion, his grace, his love and his beneficence.

When the Apostle of God came to power he said: 'Islam waives whatever
came before it'128, meaning that whoever has previously done something
wrong such as spilling blood or plundering or making war or joining with
the Polytheists [against the Apostle] will be forgiven when they enter
Islam.

128 ghurar al-9ikam: p.73, 9adith 53.

When the Apostle of God liberated the city of Mecca he was asked: 'O
Apostle of God, will you not stay in your own house?', for the Apostle
used to have a house in Mecca. He said: 'Do I have a house?' This means
that the Apostle gave up [his rights] even to the house that the
Infidels had confiscated before his arrival in Mecca. He realised that
the unbeliever who had taken his house was sure to have let other people
stay in that house; tenants or family or the like, and that if he were
to take back his house it would mean that he would have to evict those
people. The Apostle did not seek to exercise even this much of his
rights in case some said: 'When the Apostle of God took control of Mecca
we were living in this house and he evicted us from our dwelling and
abode.'

Imam Ali did the same thing when he was pledged in as the Caliph some
twenty-five years after the death of the prophet. He did not even take
back the land of Fadak which was his and his sons' personal property as
the inheritance of Lady F"Uimah al-Zahr"' despite the fact that from the
day [he was pledged in as Caliph], it was within his power to do so.
This is mentioned in the book nahj al-bal"ghah (The Path of Eloquence, a
collection of Imam Ali's sayings).

Imam Ali was not such a worldly person that he had any need for rich
furnishings and mansions and palaces and fine horses and camels and the
like. He took a farsighted approach and tried to see how to unite the
Muslims under the banner of Islam and how to win their hearts. Had he
taken back Fadak then certainly those who had been benefiting from the
lands, during the time of reign of the third ruler Othm"n ibn Aff"n,
would be deprived of that benefit and would say: 'It would have been
better for us had Ali not come to power.'

It is related in the traditions that an infidel who warranted death was
brought before the Apostle of God. The angel Gabriel descended and said:
'O Apostle of God, your Lord conveys you a greeting of peace and says:
'Forgive this person for he is noble.' So the Prophet said to the man:
'You are forgiven so go as you please.' The man said: 'Why, O Muhammad?'
The Apostle said: 'Because Gabriel has told me that you are noble and
God loves the noble.' This became the reason for the man entering Islam.
The Prophet had appreciated the nobility in this man and for this reason
forgave him even though he was a polytheist and had committed crimes
deserving death.

The Prophet Muhammad wanted to draw the people to what is best for them
in this world and in the hereafter, he did not want to adhere to
dictatorship or authoritarianism, or wealth and position, like other
rulers, kings and Caesars do. Islam is underlined by a system of equal
opportunities and respects professionalism and expertise, and therefore
when it assumes power, its policy would be to forgive and forgo of acts
perpetrated before, and take into account the role and impact of
expertise on the society's future.

The Islamic government has certain functions:

" The preservation of social justice so that no-one transgresses
against another.
" The protection of the [Muslim] land from enemies.
" Facilitating the nation's progress in all areas of life - order,
health, employment, manufacturing and agriculture, culture and
education, economics, virtue, piety, faith etc.

The ruler in Islamic lands is not to be a dictator. As Imam Ali said:
'He is not to be a ravening lion,' meaning that he will take people's
property and freedoms and stifle their breaths and limit their
movements. In the Islamic regime the people's property, honour, lives,
and their freedoms including those of the non-Muslims who live in the
Islamic lands are guaranteed security, peace, prosperity and well
being.

It is related that the Apostle of God sent Kh"lid ibn al-Wal:d to a
community of unbelievers who subsequently professed Islam but Kh"lid
nonetheless killed a number of them. When reports of this atrocity
reached him, the Apostle raised his hands to the heavens and said:

" O God, I distance myself from what Kh"lid has done. O God, I distance
myself from what Kh"lid has done. O God, I distance myself from what
Kh"lid has done. "

When Kh"lid came to the Apostle of God he said: 'O Apostle of God, they
only professed Islam as a ruse and a plot and falsely.' The Apostle said
to him: 'Did you dissect their hearts (to see whether Islam had entered
their hearts as a ruse and a plot?')

Then Apostle of God gave Imam Ali an amount of money and said to him:
'Go to them and give them compensation for their dead.' So Ali came to
them and gave them satisfaction and gave them compensation for the
animals that had been killed and gave compensation for the fear
experienced by the women and for things that had been lost such as the
halters of camels.

One of the chroniclers reports that when Odayy ibn H{"tam saw that the
Apostle of God had gained control of the area he fled from the H{ij"z to
Syria and was opposed to the new established government. Then one of his
friends wrote to him and said: 'O Odayy, Muhammad is a Prophet and is
not a king. The Prophet is merciful, kind, beneficent, consults (with
others) and he is reasonable, determined and forward thinking so there
is no need to flee so return to the land.'

Odayy decided to return because he trusted that friend. When he
returned he stood outside the Prophet's mosque. When the Prophet emerged
Odayy saw an old woman come in front of the Prophet to ask him something
and the Prophet stopped for her with all kindness and answered her
question and solved her problem. Odayy said to himself: 'This is not a
king and this is not the behaviour of sultans, kings or princes. This is
the behaviour of Prophets and those connected with heaven.' Because of
this, love for the Prophet entered the heart of Odayy and he stepped
forward to the Prophet and introduced himself. When the Prophet
recognised him he honoured him, treated him well, and greeted him with a
smile and kindness and honour, and took him to his house. He entered the
house of the Prophet and entered Islam at his hand when he saw the
openheartedness of the Prophet and his fine morals. Then when he came
out, his friend said to him: 'How did you enter Islam?' He said: 'I
entered Islam because I saw in him the morals of the Prophets and the
attributes of the Apostles.'

The Islamic rule of law should not only be just, but should also be
beneficent. Islam has no place for torture or confiscation of wealth,
and nor for executions and imprisonment, except under extraordinary
circumstances; and its ruling is the same as that of the eating of
carrion or the drinking of wine as is detailed in Islamic jurisprudence
[which are normally expressly forbidden except when, under exceptional
circumstances, not to do so would endanger one's life, such as if in a
desert or such like one was dying of hunger and nothing was available
but carrion.

Then he would be allowed to eat only the minimum amount to save himself
from death, but not to eat to be satiated]. When the people saw that
Islam is merciful and that it does not execute, confiscate, torture,
imprison or banish they were naturally attracted to it. The Prophet of
Islam and Imam Ali adopted this policy even when they were able to be
severe and violent. Instead, they preferred to be kind and clement and
forgiving even towards the criminals as can be found in many well- known
accounts.

The Islamic government should also be a paradigm in granting freedoms
to Islamic political parties and enhancing the progress of the people
and should not interfere in the affairs of the people. Not in their
commerce, their agriculture, their manufacturing, their travelling,
their dwelling, in expressing their opinions, in their free association,
in their writing, their teaching. Were the Islamic government to be a
paradigm to this extent, today it would surely attract the eyes of the
world to its excellent qualities just as the eyes of the world are still
attracted to the achievements and characteristics of the Prophet
Muhammad and Imam Ali.

**In the Eyes of His Opponents**

It is related that Abdullah ibn Abbas said: 'A group of infidels, who
had formed a pact by swearing to oppose the Prophet, met at sunset at
the Ka'bah129 and said to each other:

129 Ka'bah is the symbolic House of God located in the holy city of
Mecca, which was first built by the Prophet Adam. On instruction from
the

'Send word to Muhammad and speak to him and argue with him until you
leave him no excuse. So they sent someone who said to him: 'The nobles
of your tribe have met so that they may address you so come to them.'

The Messenger of God came to them, while he was concerned for them;
that they be guided and it was heavy upon him that they suffered [by
virtue of being non-believers], then he sat with them.

They said: 'O Muhammad, we have sent for you so that we may address
you. By God, we do not know of a man of the Arabs who has done to his
tribe what you have done. You have insulted our forefathers, criticised
our religion, slandered our gods, discredited our dreams, and shattered
our unity. No mean deed remains which you have not done to us. If you
have come with this speech seeking wealth then we will gather wealth for
you until you are the wealthiest amongst us. If you seek rank with it
then we will make you our chief. If you seek kingship then we will make
you a king. If the Jinn that have possessed you have overcome you then
we will pay for treatment until you are relieved of it. If you want a
wife then we will marry you to the most beautiful girl of all the
Arabs.'

The Messenger of God said to them: 'It is not like you say. I have not
come to you with what I have come with, seeking wealth or honour or
kingdom, but God has sent me to you as a Messenger and has sent down to
me a book and has ordered that I be a herald of glad tidings and a
warner. I have delivered the messages of my Lord and given you good

Almighty the House was later renovated by the Prophet Abraham. Some of
the most important Hajj rituals are performed in the Grand Mosque that
encompasses the Ka'bah, which includes circumambulation around it.

counsel. If you accept what I have brought then that will be to your
good fortune in this world and the next, but if you reject then I will
wait for the command of God and until He judges between me and you.'

They said: 'O Muhammad, if you will not accept what we have offered,
then you know that there are none whose land is less constrained than
ours or with less water or with a more difficult life, so ask your Lord
who has sent you with what he has sent you to take away these mountains
from us which confine us so that our land may be flat and let your Lord
make rivers like those of Syria erupt in the land and let Him send back
to us your forefathers including Qusayy ibn Kilab who was a master of
truth so that we may ask him whether what you say is true or false. If
they confirm you are truthful and you do as we ask then we will believe
you and by this we will recognise your station in the sight of God and
that he has sent you as a Messenger as you say.'

The Messenger of God said: 'It is not with this that I have been sent
to you. I have only come to you from God with what He has sent me for
and I have delivered to you that which I have been sent with. If you
accept then it will be to your good fortune in this world and the next
and if you reject then I will wait for the command of God and until He
judges between me and you.'

They said: 'If you will not do this then choose between [the
following]. Ask your Lord to send an angel who will confirm what you say
and will repel us from you, and if not, then let Him make for you
gardens and palaces and treasures of gold and silver which will relieve
you of what we see you seeking; for you stand in the markets seeking a
livelihood like the rest of us. By this we can recognise your virtue and
station from your Lord if you are a messenger as you claim.'

The Prophet said: 'It is not for me to do this, I do not ask from my
Lord but He is the one who has sent me as a bringer of tidings and as a
warner and if you accept then that will be to your good fortune in this
world and the next, and if you reject, then I will persevere by the
command of God, and until he judges between me and you.'

They said: 'Then bring the sky down upon our heads as you have claimed
that your Lord can do if he wishes.'

The Prophet said: 'That is for God, if He wishes to do that with you
then He will.'

They said: 'O Muhammad, then your Lord did not know that we were going
to sit with you and ask you what we have asked you so that He might
teach you what you should do to divert us, or inform you what He would
be doing to us if we do not accept what you have been sent to us with.
We have heard that this is taught to you by a man in al-Yamamah named
'al-Rahman'. By God, we will never believe in this 'al-Rahman' ever. We
have warned you O Muhammad, by God, we will not let you be for what you
have done to us until we destroy you or you destroy us.'

Then the Messenger of God rose and left them for his family in sorrow
and sadness for them. Then Nadr ibn Harith ibn Kaldah got up and said,
"O Quraysh! By God you are gripped with an issue that you have not found
a solution for. While Muhammad was a young man he was the most pleasant
amongst you, the most truthful in speech, and the most trustworthy of
all amongst you . . . he was so until you started to see the grey hair
in his beard, and then he came with what he has come to you with. You
said he is a sorcerer, but by God, he is not so, for we have seen the
sorcerers and we know the traits and tricks. Then you said he is a poet,
whereas we have heard the poems and their various categories. Then you
said he is crazy, but by God, he is not mad for we have seen madness . .
. O Quraysh! Look into this affair of yours, for by God a matter of
great importance has descended upon you.

**Conducts and Strategies of Battle**

The Prophet used to consult his companions in battle and meeting the
enemy and the choice of positions. One of the companions related: 'I
have not seen anyone who consults his companions more than the Messenger
of God.' He used to stay in the rear guard when marching to urge on the
weak ones and to seat behind him those who became detached from the main
force. He was most attentive to his companions during marching.

If he wished to make an excursion he would keep it a secret and make a
diversion so that the killing would be kept to a minimum. He would send
out reconnaissance and advance parties and post sentries.

Whenever he faced the enemy he would stop to pray to God and ask for
His succour. He and his companions would invoke the name of God much and
lower their voices.

When the blows intensified the others would take him as a shield. As
mentioned in nahj al-balaghah, Imam Ali says: 'In the heat of the battle
we would shield ourselves with the Messenger of God for no-one was
closer to the enemy then he was.'

He was always the closest of his men to the enemy. The Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali is quoted as having said: 'The Apostle of God forbade
the use of poison against the Polytheists.' 130

On the way to a sortie the Messenger of God and his companions passed
near by the lands of Ashja' and the Damrah tribe. There was already a
state of truce between him and the Damrah.

The companions said to the Messenger of God: 'O Messenger of God, the
Damrah are near to us and we fear that they will cross us on the way to
Medina or assist the Quraysh against us, so we should attack them.'

The Messenger of God said: 'Not at all, they are the most respectful of
the Arabs to their parents and the best in maintaining the bonds of
kinship and most honest in fulfilling their promises.'

If he sent out a troop he would enjoin upon them fear of God and say:
'Go in the name of God and fight those who deny God. Do not mutilate and
do not betray and do not kill children, women, and old men.'

He would also say: 'Go in the name of God and in the way of God and
upon the religion of the Apostle of God. Do not plunder and do not
mutilate and do not be treacherous and do not kill old men or children
or women. Do not cut down trees except when forced to do so. And if any
man of the Muslims be he of low or high rank gives respite to any of the
Polytheists then he has sanctuary so that he may hear the 130 bi9"r
al-anw"r, vol. 19, p. 177, 9ad:th 23

word of God. If he then follows you then he is your brother in faith
and if he refuses then send him away in safety, and seek the aid of
God.'131 During battle he would give his men special code words and
signals so that they would be known when they spoke.

He used to order the commanders of his troops to invite the enemy to
Islam and migration132, or Islam only so that they would be like the
Bedouins who did not have a share in the spoils of war, or to ask them
to pay the Jizyah tax. If they agreed this would be accepted from them.
If not, then he should seek help from God and fight them.

If he won the day he would send out a herald and gather all the booty.
He would begin with the things that had been pillaged and would return
them to their rightful owners. Then he would take out a fifth (khums) of
what was left and would use it for the benefit of the Muslims as
instructed by the Almighty. Then he would use some of the rest for those
who did not have a normal share like the women and the children and the
servants. Then he would distribute the remaining bulk equally amongst
the army: a horseman would get three shares, one for himself and two for
his horse and the foot soldier would get one share. He would treat the
strong and the weak alike in the share of the spoils except in the share
of public estates.

131 bi9"r al-anw"r; vol.19, p.177, 9ad:th 21.
132 i.e. to migrate to Muslim land with centres of excellence to learn
more about Islam.


