Kindness To Captives
====================

When Imam Ali conquered the Jewish fortress of Khaybar, among the
captives he took was Safiyyah the daughter of Huyyay ibn Akhtab. He
summoned Bilal and put her in his custody and said to him: 'O Bilal,
only give her over to the Apostle of God until he does as he sees fit
with her. Bilal took her and on the way to the Apostle of God they
passed by the dead and Safiyyah almost died of grief. When the Apostle
of God heard of this he said to Bilal: 'Have you been stripped of mercy
O Bilal?'

Then he offered her Islam and she accepted and he freed her, and he
offered to marry her which she accepted. She was a well mannered woman
and whenever she wanted to mount a camel and the Apostle of God bent to
help her mount she would refuse. He saw a green mark near to her eye and
asked her about it. She said: 'O Apostle of God, before you came to us I
saw in a dream the moon and it was as if it had left its place and
descended into my lap. I told my husband this and he struck my face and
my eye became green. He said: 'This means nothing other than that you
desire the king of the Hijaz.' i.e. the Prophet.

**The Protectorate**

When Imam Ali had conquered the important fortresses of Khaibar and
killed Marhab and his brother Yasir and up to one hundred other Jewish
braves while they had only killed fifteen of the Muslims, the Jews were
frightened and sought refuge by way of secret tunnels in the last castle
that remained in their hands wherein was their wealth and their
foodstuffs.

The Apostle laid siege to the castle and one of the Jews went to him
and said: 'O Muhammad, will you grant me the security of myself, my
family and my possessions and sons if I show you how to conquer the
castle?'

The Apostle of God said: 'Yes you are safe.'

He said: 'You should order that this place be dug for it is where the
water of the castle runs. Then you must block the channel and the castle
will be without water and they will surrender.' The Apostle of God
refused his suggestion and said: 'God will bring about another way.'

When the siege tightened on the Jews and they realised that they would
not be able to resist or fight, their leader Ibn Abil- Haqiq sent word
to the Apostle of God that they wished to negotiate and asked whether he
could descend and speak with him.

The Apostle of God agreed and Ibn Abil-Haqiq descended and made a
treaty with the Apostle of God on condition that none in the fortress
would be harmed and that the fighters would leave Khaybar, with their
woman and children and they would leave the land, animals, wealth and
weapons to the Apostle of God.

**The Jews Enter Islam**

When the people of Khaybar descended from their forts under the peace
treaty and prepared to leave the land, they came to the Apostle of God
with a proposal and said: 'O Muhammad, let us remain in this land and
you will have one half of the crop for we know the land best and have
lived here longest.'

The Apostle of God agreed on the condition that if he wished to expel
them he could and if he wished that they remain they would remain. When
the crops matured, he sent Abdullah ibn Rawahah to collect the half
share from them. When he came he gave them an evaluation for the crop
and said: 'Either you take the crop and give us half the price or we
take the crop and give you half the price.'

The Jews said: 'This is justice; by this the heavens and the earth were
established.' After this they entered Islam because of what they had
seen of the justice of Islam and the ethics of the Apostle of God.

It is said that when the wealth of Khaybar was divided up the Muslims
were satiated and they found a comfort hitherto unknown. One of them
said: 'We never ate our fill until we conquered Khaybar. Another said:
'When Khaybar was conquered we said: 'Now we will eat our fill of
dates.'

**Forgiveness Not Revenge**

When a state of calm reigned and the Apostle of God had finished with
Khaybar, the Jewess Zainab daughter of al- Harith ibn Salam ibn Mushkam,
the niece of Marhab gifted the Apostle of God a roast sheep. She had
asked: 'Which part of the sheep is most liked by the Apostle of God.
They said to her: 'The shoulder.' So she put a great deal of poison
there and poisoned the rest of the sheep.

Then she brought the sheep to him and placed it before him. He took the
shoulder and took a bite from it and then spat it out. Bishr ibn Barra'
ibn Ma'mur was with him and he also took a bite and swallowed it.

The Apostle of God said: 'Lift your hands, for the shoulder of this
sheep is telling me that it has been poisoned.' Then the Jewess was
summoned and she confessed. The Apostle of God said to her: 'What made
you do this?'

She said seeking an excuse for what she had done: 'You did something to
my people that I could not forgive. So I said: 'If he is a Prophet he
will be informed, and if he is a king then we will have been relieved of
him.' The Apostle of God overlooked her transgression. Then when she saw
the conducts and morals of the Apostle of God she entered Islam and
said: 'Now I know that you are a Prophet of God and I bear witness to
you and who is with you that I will follow your religion. I bear witness
that there is no deity but God and that you, Muhammad, are the Apostle
of God.'

**A Jew's Word was Enough**

The Apostle of God remained in Medina after his return from Khaybar
until the month of Shawwal in the seventh year of the Hijrah. During
this time he sent some sorties to consolidate the security of Medina and
to warn those who still considered attacking the Muslims and also to
deliver the message of Islam and explain its high-minded rules and
teachings to them.

One such sortie was that of Osamah ibn Zaid. The Apostle of God sent
him with some horsemen to a Jewish village said to be named al-Harqah to
invite them to Islam. A Jewish man named Mardas ibn Nuheik approached
the horsemen saying: 'Peace be upon you. I testify that there is no
deity but God and that Muhammad is the Apostle of God.' But when Osamah
ibn Zaid passed by him he speared Mardas and killed him.

When Osamah returned to the Apostle of God and told him of this the
Prophet said: 'You killed a man who testified that there is no deity but
God and that I am the Apostle of God?'

Osamah said: 'O Apostle of God, he only said that to save himself from
death.' The Apostle of God said: 'You did not lift the cover from his
heart! You neither accepted what his tongue was saying nor did you know
what was in his mind!'

In this regard God revealed: eAnd do not say to those who offer you a
greeting of peace: you are not a believerf 140 Then the Apostle of God
sent compensation to the family of Mardas ibn Nuheik.

**The Bearer of the White Banner**

The Apostle of God had sent al-Harith ibn 'Omeir al-Azdi with a letter
to the king of Busra the absolute ruler of greater Syria in which he
invited him to Islam. When he stopped at Mu'tah the king's agent
Sharhabil ibn 'Amr al-Ghasani arrested him and when he knew that he was
the Prophet's messenger to the king he went against the prevailing
customs of the time and killed him. No other messenger of the Apostle of
God was killed despite the vast number he sent from Medina to kings and
leaders after the treaty of Hodaybiyah.

When the news of the death of al-Harith reached the Apostle of God he
was very saddened, and gathered the Muslims and told them that al-Harith
had been killed as well as the group of missionaries. They made haste
and left Medina and made camp at al-Jarf. The Apostle of God led them in
the noon prayer, and then gave a sermon and advised them saying: 'I
enjoin upon you the fear of God. Fight in the name of God and in the way
of God. Fight those who disbelieve in God, and do not use treacherous
means and do not plunder. Do not kill children or women or old people,
and do not cut down any date palms or trees and do not destroy any
buildings.'

Then the Apostle of God raised a white banner and handed it to Ja'far
ibn Abi Talib whom he appointed as the commander of the squadron, and
said: 'When you meet your enemy the 140 The Holy Qur'an: The Women (4):
94.

Polytheists then invite them to one of three things and whichever of
them they choose then accept it from them and stay your hands from them:
Invite them to Islam and if they agree then accept it from them and
leave them be. Then invite them to leave their abode for the abode of
the Muhajirun. If they accept, then inform them that they have the
rights and responsibilities of the Muhajirun (the emigrants)141. If they
enter into Islam and prefer to remain in their abode then they will be
treated as the Bedouin Muslims; God's rule will be in force amongst them
but they will have no rights over the spoils or booty until they fight
along side the Muslims. If they refuse (these two options) then call
them to pay the Jizyah tax142 and if they do so then accept it from them
and stay your hands from them. If they refuse all this then seek the aid
of God and fight them.

**The Prophet Forgives the Traitor**

The Apostle of God told the Muslim community that he was going to Mecca
and ordered them to prepare for the journey. He said: 'O God, keep the
spies and news from the Quraysh so that we can surprise them in their
lands.' Hatib ibn Balta'ah wrote a letter to the people of Mecca
informing them that the Apostle of God was coming to them and gave the
letter to a woman whose name was Sarah with ten Dinars for her to take
the letter to the people of Mecca.

Sarah was the servant of Abu Amr ibn Sayfi ibn Hisham. She had come to
the Apostle of God from Mecca to Medina. The 141 This is for them to go
to the 'centres-of-excellence' to learn about the teachings of Islam.
142 And hence to live under the protectorate.

Apostle of God had said to her: 'Have you come as a Muslim?' She said:
'No.'

He said: 'Have you come as an emigrant?' She said: 'No.'
He said: 'What have you come for?'

She said: 'You have been my family and patrons. But my patrons have
gone and I am in dire need. So I have come to you so that you may give
to me and clothe me and provide a mount for me.'

He said: 'Where do you stand amongst the young Polytheists?' She had
been a singer, who used to sing for the fighters of Quraysh to boost
their morale, during their battles with the Prophet.

She said: 'They have not asked me for anything else since the battle of
Badr.' So the Apostle of God urged the Bani Abdul-Muttalib to clothe her
and provide her with a mount and with funds which they did. While the
Apostle of God was preparing to conquer Mecca, Hatib came to her and
gave her the letter and ordered her to take it by a little known route.
When Sarah left with the letter, Gabriel descended upon the Apostle of
God and told him of this.

The Apostle of God summoned Imam Ali and said to him:

'One of my companions has written a letter to the people of Mecca
telling them of our plans. I have already asked God to hide our news
from them. The letter is with a woman who has

taken it by a different road. So take your sword and catch up with her
and take the letter from her. Then let her go and return to me with it.
Then he summoned al-Zubeir and said to him: 'Go with Ali ibn Abi Talib
on this errand.' So they went and when they caught up with her al-Zubeir
said to her: 'Where is the letter you have with you?' But she denied it
and swore an oath and wept.

Al-Zubeir said turning to Imam Ali: 'I do not see that she has a letter
with her O Abu al-Hasan, so let us return to the Apostle of God and
inform him of her innocence.'

Imam Ali said: 'The Apostle of God informs me that she has a letter
with her and orders me to take it from her and you tell me that she has
no letter with her!'

Then he drew his sword and stepped towards her and said:

'By God you will either produce the letter or I will strike your neck
with this sword.' When she saw this earnestness she said: 'If I must do
this then at least turn your face away from me O Son of Abu Talib.' So
he turned his face from her and she opened her veil and took out the
letter from her hair. Then Imam Ali took it and went with it to the
Apostle of God.

The affair of Hatib being as it was warranted that public opinion be
turned against him so that others who were considering acting in a
similar manner would be prevented. Perhaps for this reason we see that
the Apostle of God ordered that congregational prayers be held and then
he ascended the pulpit and took the letter in his hand and said: 'O
people, I have asked God to keep information about us from the Quraysh,
but a man from amongst you has written to the people of Mecca and told
them of our news. So let the owner of the letter rise or revelation will
expose him.'

No-one rose so he repeated it and then Hatib ibn Abi Balta'ah rose and
said: 'O Apostle of God, I wrote the letter but I have not become a
hypocrite after my Islam nor have I become a doubter after my
certainty.' The Apostle of God said: 'Then what made you write the
letter?'

Hatib said seeking an excuse: 'O Apostle of God, I have a family in
Mecca but I do not have a tribe that will defend my family, so I wanted
to have influence with the people there so that God might defend my
family and property. All of the Muhajirin have a tribe there to defend
their families and wealth.'

So the Apostle of God excused him and forgave him and said to his
companions: 'Do not say anything but kind words to him.' One of the
companions said: 'O Apostle of God, let me strike the neck of this
hypocrite. He has betrayed God and His Apostle.' The Apostle of God
said: 'Leave him.' And he stopped him from attacking Hatib.

Then God revealed the following verses about Hatib:

eO ye who believe, do not take my enemy and your enemy as allies
offering them your lovef until the verse: eOf no profit to you will be
your relatives and your children on the Day of Resurrection: He will
judge between you, and God sees well all that you do f 143

[Hatib was forgiven despite his treacherous behaviour, betraying some
of the most sensitive secrets at times of war, thus blatantly
undermining national security . . .]

**Before Entering Mecca**

Then the Apostle of God ordered al-'Abbas to hold Abu Sufyan [one of
the prominent leaders of Quraysh who instigated many wars against the
prophet] where the valley narrowed at the front of the mountain where
the soldiers of God would pass by him. This he did and the tribes passed
by him under their banners.

Al-Abbas relates: 'Every time a tribe passed by, Abu Sufyan would say
to me: 'O Abbas, who are they?'

I would say: 'Salim.'

He would say: 'What have I to do with Salim'

Then another tribe would pass by and he would say: 'O Abbas, who are
they?'

I would say: 'Muzaynah.'

He would say: 'What have I to do with Muzaynah' Not a tribe would pass
but he would ask me about them and I would inform him of them and he
would say: 'What have I to do with such and such a tribe.'

Then the Apostle of God passed by with his detachments including the
Muhajirun and the Ansar with eyes of steel. 143 The Holy Qur'an: The
Woman Examined (60): 1-3. He said: 'O Abbas, who are they?!'

I said: 'That is the Apostle of God with the Muhajirun and the Ansar.'
He said: 'No-one has any capability or power over them.' Then he said:
'I swear, O Abu al-Fadl, the kingdom of your nephew has become great
indeed.' I said: 'O Abu Sufyan, this is the Prophethood, (not
kingdom).'

Abu Sufyan said: 'Indeed.' Then I said: 'Your people are safe.'

The banner of the Ansar was with Sa'ad ibn 'Ibadah and when he passed
by Abu Sufyan he said to him: 'Today is the day of slaughter, today the
women will be captured. O tribes of Aws and Khazraj, this is your
revenge for the day of the mountain (Ohud).' Abu Sufyan heard him and
kept it to himself until the Apostle of God passed by him when he said:
'Do you know what Sa'ad ibn 'Ibadah has said? He has said such and
such.'

The Apostle of God said: 'What he has said is of no consequence.' Then
he sent someone to Sa'ad and took the banner from him and passed it to
Imam Ali and said: 'Enter with kindness.' Imam Ali took the banner and
began to proclaim: 'Today is the day of mercy, today the honour of the
women will be protected.' Then the Apostle of God turned to Abu Sufyan
and said to him: 'O Abu Sufyan, proceed to Mecca and let them know of
the sanctuary.'

So Abu Sufyan went until he reached the Quraysh and shouted at the top
of his voice: 'O people of Quraysh, Here is Muhammad come with such that
you cannot contend with. Whoever enters the house of Abu Sufyan has
sanctuary and whoever enters the sacred quarter [around the Ka'bah] has
sanctuary.'
They said: 'God slay you! Your house will not save us.' He said: 'And
whoever bolts his door has sanctuary.' So the people left for their
houses and for the mosque and the Apostle of God proceeded and entered
Mecca from the heights.


