Sura An-nur, No. 24
===================

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

**The Grand View of Sura An-Nur**

This Sura contains 64 verses and it has been sent down in Medina. The
reason why it has been named An-Nur (light), is its thirty fifth verse
in which Allah has been introduced as "the Light of the heavens and the
earth".

Since this holy Sura has recommended all believers, and specially women
to be virgin and chaste, Islamic narrations do give much prominence to
teaching and reciting this Sura by women. In fact, it can be considered
as the Sura of virginity, chastity, and struggle against sexual
defilements, because the main part of its commandments is about removing
society from sexual defilements through different ways, and this aim has
been set in several steps:

1) It is the statement of severe punishments of adulterers and
adulteresses which is mentioned with full decisiveness in the second
verse of this Sura.

2) Executing this severe prescribed punishment is not an easy issue,
and from the view of Islamic judicial scales it has strict condition. If
a man accuses his wife of adultery, the program 'Li'an' (Conjugal
anathema) must be carried out, we will explain it later. And if a person
accuses someone of fornication, that person must present 4 witnesses.
Even if someone accuses other person of fornication, but he cannot prove
it in the court of Islamic judgment, he will be extremely punished (one
forth of prescribed punishment of fornication), so that no one can
easily think of Islamic punishment of others by accusing them, otherwise
that penalty will be imposed on himself.

3) Then, in this connection, the famous tradition known as 'Ifk' and
the accusation that was pinned on one of the wives of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) are mentioned. The Holy Qur'an follows this issue,so that it
becomes completely clear that how great the sin of inventing rumour
about virtuous persons is.

4) In order to prevent this thought that Islam is only content with
punishing wrongdoers, the Sura mentions one of the important ways of
preventing sexual defilements. It in details explains the issue of
preventing men from gloating women and preventing women form casting
amorous, coquettish, or lecherous glances at men, because one of the
important factors of sexual deviations is voyeur and non-veiling of
women. And defilements would not be expunged unless these are
eradicated.

5) Again, to prevent engaging in unchaste actions, the commandment of
easy and simple marriage is issued, so that unlawfully satisfying sexual
instinct will be struggled by its lawful way.

6) Some of the rules of etiquette and principles of training offspring,
concerning parents, are mentioned; stating that there are some times
when husband and wife may want to be alone and isolated, so that issues
must not enter their rooms without permission, for offspring may deviate
intellectually thereby. For this end, it states some other rules of
family life, though they may be unrelated to sexual matters.

7) Some of the discussions that are about monotheism, origin,
resurrection, and resignation to the command of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
are mentioned before these discussions, because what support all
practical and ethical programs are the very doctrinal issues and the
belief in origin, resurrection, and rightfulness of prophecy. There will
not be any branch, leaf, flower, and fruit, if such a root does not
exist.

Meanwhile, in connection with discussions about faith and righteous
deed, the establishment of the worldly government by the believers is
stated and some of other Islam commandments are brought up. On the
whole, the Sura has formed a comprehensive collection.

**Virtue of Sura An-Nur**

The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) in a tradition has said: "Whoever reads Sura
An-Nur (and applies it in his life), for each faithful woman and man who
were in the past and will be in the future Allah will give him 10 good
acts as reward."

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says: "Protect your property and preserve your
chastity by reading Sura An-Nur and immunize your own wives against
deviations through obeying its commandments, because whoever continues
reading this Holy Sura in every day and night none of his family members
will commit indecency as long as he lives."[^1]

Paying attention to the content of the Sura which stands against
immodesty through various ways of efficient struggles with factors of
deviation from the path of chastity makes clear the main idea of the
above-mentioned tradition as well as its practical concept.

[^1] Majma' ul-Bayan under the verse, the Thawab ul-'A'mal by Saduq(As
it is narrated from Nur-uth-Thaqalyn Vol. 3, p. 568)


**Section 1 : Punishment for Adultery Prescribed Commentary : Verse
1**

The law relating to the punishment for adultery - False charge of
adultery - The dealing with the accusation of adultery by the husband
against his wife

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

1. سُورَةٌ أَنزَلْنَاهَا وَفَرَضْنَاهَا وَأَنزَلْنَا فِيهَآ ءَايَاتٍ
بَيّـِنَاتٍ لَّعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ

1. "(This is) a Sura which We have sent down and which We have
enjoined, and in it We have sent down clear signs, so that you might
remember." Commentary:

The Qur'anic word 'Sura' is an appellation taken by Allah for a
collection of verses in the holy Qur'an. What we know is that the name
of this Sura is Nur, and it is because of Nur verse, No. 35, which is
one of the most conspicuous verses of the Sura. Furthermore, the content
of the Sura is especially luminous. It grants men and women in families
and societies the light of chastity and virginity. It gives tongues and
speeches the light of piety and veracity. It gives hearts and souls the
light of monotheism, theism, belief in the resurrection, and resignation
to the godly invitation of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.).

The first verse of the Sura concisely indicates all of the discussions
in the Sura. It says:

"(This is) a Sura which We have sent down and which We have enjoined,
and in it We have sent down clear signs, so that you might remember."

The Arabic word /surah/ is derived from the word /sur/, meaning the
height of a building. Then it was applied to the high walls that were
built around cities for protecting against enemies' attacks. And since
these walls separated city from the surrounding regions, this word
gradually has been applied to a section or a part of something,
including a section or piece of the Qur'an separated from the rest of
it.

Some philologists have also said that the word /surah/ is applied to
high, beautiful, erected buildings as well as various parts of a big
structure. With the same proportion, it is applied to the various, parts
of the Qur'an which are separated from each other.[^1]

Anyway, this sentence refers to the fact that all ordinances and
subjects of this Sura, including rules, rites, and doctrines, are
extraordinarily important, because all of them have been sent down by
Allah.

Specially the sentence /faradnaha/ ("...We have ... which We have
enjoined ...") emphasizes this meaning, considering that the meaning of
the word /farada/ is 'assertion'.

[^1] Lisan ul-'Arab, Vol. 4, article 'sur'

Using the holy phrase /'ayatin bayyinat/ (clear signs) may point to
some facts about monotheism, origin, resurrection, and prophecy, which
are presented in it. This phrase is for the clause /faradna/ (We
enjoined) which points to the ordinances and commandments which are
stated in this verse. In other words, one refers to 'beliefs' and the
other one refers to 'religious ordinances'.

Another possibility is that the purpose of /'ayatin bayyinat/ (clear
signs) is some reasons that are mentioned for the obligatory
commandments that are presented in this Sura.

The sentence /la'allakum tauakkaran/ ('... so that you might
remember.') again illustrates this fact in minds that all beliefs and
doctrines and all practical programs of Islam are rooted in the very
innate disposition of humans. Thus, their explanation is a kind of
admonition and remembrance.

In this holy verse, there are three signs that indicate the
magnificence of Sura An Nur:

A) The word 'surah' that is in the beginning, is the sign of
greatness.

B) The Arabic nunnation of the word 'surah' is for greatness.

C) The Qur'anic word /'anzalna/ (We have sent down) has been mentioned
twice in due verse.


