Commentary : Verse 32
=====================

32. وَأَنكِحُوا الاَيَامَي مِنكُمْ وَالصَّالِحِينَ مِنْ عِبَادِكُمْ
مَآئِكُمْ إِن يَكُونُوا فُقَرَآءَ يُغْنِهِمُ اللَّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ
وَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ

32. "And marry those among you who are single and the righteous among
your servants, male or female. If they are poor, Allah will enrich them
out of His grace, and surely Allah is Ail-Embracing, All-Knowing."

**Commentary:**

Marriage is venerated and emphasized in Islam. Islamic society is
responsible for marrying off those who are celibate. Parents who do not
marry their offspring are partner in sin that their issues commit.

Thus, from the beginning of the Sura up to here various calculated ways
have been brought up for preventing sexual defilements, the ways each of
which are playing an influential role in preventing or struggling
against these defilements.

In this verse, one of the most important ways of struggling against
wickedness that is simple, easy, sincere, friendly marriage, is
mentioned. Because it is obvious that in order to wind up the issue of
sin the approach of satisfying and gratifying the instincts is applied.
In other words, no 'negative struggling' is successful without 'positive
struggling'.

Therefore, in this verse the Qur'an says:

"And marry those among you who are single and the righteous among your
servants, male or female...."

The Arabic word /'ayama/ is the plural form of /'ayyim/, which
originally means a woman who has no husband. Then it has also been
applied to man who has no wife. Thus, the totality of all unmarried men
and women, whether they are virgin or widower or widow, are included in
this verse.

Although marriage is an optional affair and depends on the will of two
parties, the general idea that is derived from the word /'ankihu/
(marry) is to prepare preliminaries of marriage by giving financial aids
if necessary, finding a proper spouse, encouraging others to get
married, and finally mediating for solving problems that will not be
settled without intercession of others. Summarily the concept of the
verse is so extensive that it includes every word or action which is for
this sake.

Without doubt, the principle of Islamic cooperation necessitates
Muslims to help each other in all cases and fields, but emphasizing on
this matter which is specified in marriage is for the reason that
marriage is specially important.

This is so important that Imam Ali (a.s.) in a tradition said: "The
best intercession is to mediate between two persons for the sake of
marriage so that they get married."[^1]

In a tradition by Imam Kazem masa Ibn Ja'far (a.s.) we read: "There are
three groups who are under protection of Allah's Throne in the Day of
Resurrection, the day in which no protection exists save Allah's: the
man who prepares the preliminaries of his Muslim bother's marriage;
those who help another Muslim who needs help; those who hide other
Muslim brother's secrets."[^2]

The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "For each step one takes and each word one
says in this way the reward of one year worshiping that in its nights
the one establishes prayers and in its days he fasts, will be recorded
in one's book of deeds."[^3]

[^1] Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, Vol. 14, p. 27

[^2] Ibid

[^3] Ibid

Since an almost public pretext for escaping marriage is poverty and not
being financially supported, the holy Qur'an answers them and implies
that you should not be afraid of their poverty; because, as the verse
says:

"... If they are poor, Allah will enrich them out of His grace, and
surely Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing."

And Allah is powerful to do such a thing, because He is so omnipotent
that His power covers the entire universe and He is so omniscient that
He is aware of every one's intentions; especially He is aware of the
intention of those who decide to get married in order to save chastity
and virginity. He blesses and favours all such ones.

Therefore, Imam Sadiq(a.s.) said: "Life will be prosperous by getting
married."

Again Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: "One who does not get married for fear of
poverty is suspicious of Allah."

And the same Imam (a.s.) said: "Two unit (rak'at) prayers performed by
a person who is married is better than 70 unit (rak'at) prayers which is
performed by a person who is not married."[^1]

There is a famous tradition by the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) who said: "Get
married so that generations will be increased, because in the Day of
Resurrection I will be glorified before other nations with increase of
your population even with aborted children."[^2]

In another tradition by the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) we read: "One who gets
married has saved one half of his religion and must protect the other
half."[^3]

[^1] Nur-uth-Thaqalyn

[^2] Safanah-tul-Bihar, Vol. 1, p. 561

[^3] Ibid

The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "The worst of you is the one who is
unmarried."[^1]

The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "After Islam no favour and blessing is
better than having a Muslim wife and spouse, because when he looks at
her he will be happy and when he enjoins her she obeys and when he is
absent she protects his property and reputation."[^2]

The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) in a tradition said: "Marry virgin girls because
their mouth is sweet and charming and their uterus is more proper and
they learn soon and their kindness is more stable."[^3]

[^1] Majam'ul-Bayan, under the verse

[^2] Man la Yahduruh ul-Faqih, Vol. 3, p 255

[^3] Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 103, p. 237


**Commentary : Verse 33**

33. وَلْيَسْتَعْفِفِ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَجِدُونَ نِكَاحاً حَتَّي
يُغْنِيَهُمُ اللَّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ وَالَّذِينَ يَبْتَغُونَ الْكِتَابَ
مِمَّا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُمْ فَكَاتِبُوهُمْ إِنْ عَلِمْتُمْ فِيهِمْ
خَيْراً وءَاتُوهُم مّـِن مَّالِ اللَّهِ الَّذِي ءَاتَاكُمْ وَلاَ
تُكْرِهُوا فَتَيَاتِكُمْ عَلَي الْبِغَآءِ إِنْ أَرَدْنَ تَحَصُّناً
لِتَبْتَغُوا عَرَضَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَن يُكْرِههُّنَّ فَإِنَّ
اللَّهَ مِن بَعْدِ إِكْرَاهِهِنَّ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ

33. "And let those who do not find the means to marry keep (themselves)
chaste until Allah enriches them out of His grace. And those of your
slaves who seek a writing (of emancipation), write it for them if you
know any good in them, and give them of the wealth of Allah which He has
bestowed upon you; and do not compel your slave girls to prostitution
when they desire chastity, in order that you may make a gain in the life
of the world; and whoever compels them, then (unto them), verily after
their compulsion, Allah will be Forgiving, Merciful."

**Commentary:**

Not having spouse will not give someone permission to commit sin,so one
must be patient and chaste. In order to save public chastity and purity,
both the youth must try to save themselves and government must get down
at it and the rich must embark on it."... and give them of the wealth of
Allah..."

Of course, authorities of the society and the rich must be first
recommended to do something, and then unmarried individuals must be
advised to be chaste and pure.But since in spite of all attempts and
endeavours carried out by individuals and others, marriage does not take
place and one has to, willingly or unwillingly, remain single for a
length of time, so this person must not think that he is permitted to be
sexually defiled. Therefore in this holy verse the command of purity is
issued though observing it may be difficult for them. It says:

"And let those who do not find the means to marry keep (themselves)
chaste until Allah enriches them out of His grace...."

In this crucial and trial phase the unmarried ones should not get
involved in this defilement and exempt ones' selves, because no excuse
is accepted, but the power of faith, personality, and piety must be
tested in this phase.

Today the issue of marriage gets so complicated that it is turned into
an arduous or impassable path because of wrong customs and even
superstitions, yet marriage is, regardless of all these manly-added
things, an innate matter and in line with the rule of creation. Man
needs a sound and healthy marriage for continuation of human generation,
for tranquility of psyche and body, and for solving problems of life.
And man must protect himself from any kind of pollution.

Then, in view of the fact that in any occasion that slaves are
mentioned, Islam pays a special attention to their freedom, the verse
turns from the discussion of marriage to the discussion of manumitting
and freeing slaves, which is done through 'Mukatibah' (entering a
written contract in which slaves work and pay their employer some money
by installment and then they will be free). It says:

"... And those of your slaves who seek a writing (of emancipation),
write it for them if you know any good in them, ..."

The purpose of the Qur'anic sentence /'alimtum fihim xayran/ (if you
know any good in them) is that they (slaves) must have grown enough and
be competent enough to carry out such a contract. They must be able to
live independently when the amount of money they promised to pay is
shelled out completely. But if they cannot do it and on the whole this
matter causes them losses and consequently they will be a burden to
society, this matter should be delayed until the time that they are
competent and able.

Then, in order to make no trouble for slaves when they pay this money
by installment, it is said:

"... and give them of the wealth of Allah which He has bestowed upon
you; ..."

Commentators have different opinions upon the purpose of this 'wealth'
that must be given to slaves:

Many commentators say: its purpose is to pay them a part of alms-tax,
as it is said in verse 60 of Sura At-Taubah, so that they can pay their
debt and then be free.

Some others say: its purpose is that the owner of the slave spares some
of the debt and if he has received it he returns it to them so that they
can afford more to get freed from slavery.

Another possibility is that at the beginning when slaves begin working
and they do not have financial means, the owner must give them subsidy
or some capital so that they can start a business and can manage their
life and carry out their installments both.

Of course the above three comments are not inconsistent and it is
possible that all of them to be included in the concept of the verse.
The real purpose is to get Muslims help this poor and oppressed group so
that they get freed sooner. It is clear, of course, that the matter of
slavery is a social phenomenon, which was prevalent before Islam and
Islam did not develop it.

Therefore Islam not only does not approve it, but also it sets various
ways and methods to limit this phenomenon and wipe out this evil tree.
Islam first struggled against the interests of slavery. In the old times
if a debtor could not afford his debts, he would become the salve of the
leaner. Islam barred this approach. In old times defeated soldiers
became the salves of victorious army. Islam freed those who were
defeated in the Battle of Badr on the condition of teaching those who
were illiterates and also Islam freed some through paying compensation.
Then Islam paved grounds in Islamic society to make the path of getting
free for.slaves.

One of the uses of alms-tax is buying and freeing slaves. In Islam, if
an owner wounds his slave, that salve is free. Breaking fast, accidental
homicide and failing in performing an oath must be atoned and it is
possible that a person frees some slaves as atonement.

One of the ways is 'Mukatibah' that is recommended in the above verse
and it is advised that if there is some good in slave you may free
him.Possibly this is its purpose that if there is benefit for the slave
to be free you must answer his request positively. There happen many
times that this freedom is not good for him, and maybe it is because of
this that Islam has struggled with slavery gradually.

The Arabic word 'Mukatibah' is derived from the word 'Kitibat' and the
word 'Kitabat' is derived from the Arabic word 'Kataba', which means to
gather. The act of writing in Arabic called 'Kitabat' because alphabets
and words are gathered in a phrase. And since in 'Mukatibah' a contract
is usually written between the owner and a slave, it is called
'Mukatibah'.

Contractual enfranchisement is a contract that is between these two
persons; wherein the slave is obliged to obtain some money through free
business and pay to his owner by installment and so regains his freedom.
The payment must be in a way that the slave can afford. And it has been
commanded that the sum of these successive payments must not be more
than the value of the slave.

And if the slave cannot pay his debts for some reasons, his debts must
be paid by allocating a part of ahns-tax (Zakat) as well as through
Muslim public treasury. Even some Islamic jurists specify that if the
owner is to pay alms-tax, he himself must substitute his slave's debts
for his ahns-tax that is to be paid.

Moreover, if Muslims are the victorious party of a war and take war
prisoners, there are some different choices to treat these prisoners:

1 . To free all prisoners at once and in this case war begins again.

2 . To kill all of them and that is the sign of Muslims' cruelty.

3 . To set up a camp for them and sustain them by using Muslim public
treasury. In this way innocent people must pay the expense of the
wrongdoers.

4. To sent them among Muslims so that they view Islam and Muslims
morals. In this way they may gradually be influenced and become Muslim,
and then we free them through various ways. This plan is the best and
Islam's plan is the same.

Let us pass this matter, for the system of war was in this way at that
time, that a prisoner was used as a slave and Islam reciprocated it. As
today prisoners are kept in camps and we also must observe international
rules of war to the extent that these rules are consistent with our
religion.

Then one of the evil acts of some worldly persons toward slaves is
mentioned in the verse, where it says:

"... and do not compel your slave girls to prostitution when they
desire chastity, in order that you may make a gain in the life of the
world;..."

Some of commentators have said about the occasion of revelation of this
phrase: Abdullah Ibn 'Ubayy had six salve girls. He compelled them to
sell their honour for earning money for him. When the ordinance of Islam
about struggling against unchaste acts (in this Sura) was issued, the
slave girls came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and complained about this
matter. Then, at this time, the above verse was revealed and prohibited
this action.[^1]

This verse shows that people were so much involved in immoral
corruption and deviation in the Age of Ignorance that even after the
advent of Islam some people used to continue their previous acts. This
status existed until the time when this verse was sent down and put an
end to this condition. But unfortunately in our age, in some countries
(that they advocate civilization and human rights,) this action is seen
very easily.

Even in our country, when the previous regime was ruling, this matter
was carried out terribly, where the innocent girls and ignorant women
were deceived and led to the centers of wickedness, and they were forced
to be unchaste by means of devilish schemes. They could not escape at
all. In this way a lot of money was earned and explanation of this
poignant matter cannot be done here.

Slavery does not apparently exist as before but, in this so-called
civilized world, some crimes are committed which are worse than the age
of slavery. May Allah save the people of the world from these
pseudo-civilized men! We thank Allah

[^1] Majma' ul-Bayan and QurtAbi Commentary

that such shameful crimes have considerably been wound up in Iran after
Islamic Revolution.

It is necessary to mention that the purpose of the Qur'anic sentence:
/'in aradna tahassunan/ "... when they desire chastity ..." is not that
if women themselves would like to do this evil act, there is no problem
to force them. When there is compulsion to do something, willingness to
do it is not meaningful. Reluctance is true when there is lack of
willing or tendency, otherwise, being unchaste and encouraging others to
be unchaste is a great sin, anyway.

This sentence is for the fact that if the owners of these salve girls
had a little jealousy, their jealousy would be hurt. The concept of this
verse is that these slave girls who were apparently at a lower social
level would not like to be unchaste, why did they go along with this
wickedness?

At the end of the verse, as it is the approach of the Holy Qur'an, the
path of return is not closed to wrongdoers and they are encouraged to go
back, repent and atone. It continues saying:

"... and whoever compels them, then (unto them), verily after their
compulsion, Allah will be Forgiving, Merciful."

As we said before, this sentence may refer to the condition of the
salve girls' owners who were penitent for their gloomy and evil past and
they were ready to do repentance and edify themselves. Or it refers to
the women who were compelled and forced to this unchaste action.


