Commentary : Verse 34
=====================

34. وَلَقَدَ أَنزَلْنَآ إِلَيْكُمْ ءَايَاتٍ مُّبَيّـِنَاتٍ وَمَثَلاً
مِنَ الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِن قَبْلِكُمْ وَمَوْعِظَةً لّـِلْمُتَّقِينَ

34. "And certainly We have sent down unto you clear revelations, and an
example of those who passed away before you, and an admonition unto the
pious ones."

**Commentary:**

This noble verse, as it is the method of the Qur'an, refers to the
pervious discussions as a summery or conclusion, and says:

"And certainly We have sent down unto you clear revelations, and an
example of those who passed away before you, and an admonition unto the
pious ones."

In other words, the addressee of this noble verse is all those who are
fully capable from the time of descending of the Qur'an to the time of
the universe destruction. What the holy Qur'an says is divided here into
3 parts:

First part: (clear verses). They are about the reasons of monotheism,
stating the mission of prophets, the characteristics of Resurrection,
stating the religious ordinances, whether they are obligatory or
religiously prohibited or conventional, and fair virtues and other
religious duties that are all clear and in line with wisdom and common
good.

Second Part:It is about the life of past prophets and nations who
gained their consequences as the result of Faith. It is also about those
nations who were each chastised in a way because of corruption,
polytheism, paganism, oppression, and denial of prophets.

Third part: It consists of some advise, admonition, and exhortation,
but only the pious uses and get profit from them because they accept
them. And wrongdoers will be chastised because of their deeds.

It is often of no avail to give advice to the dark hearted persons.
Their likeness is the iron nail which naturally does not go into a
stone.


**Section 5 : Allah Is Light Commentary : Verse 35**

Allah, He is the Light of the Heavens and the Earth - Similitude of the
Radiance of the Divine Light - Allah guides unto His Light whomsoever He
pleases - In which Holy House the Divine Light Burns - The Divine
qualities the holy members of the Sacred House posses - Allah provides
sustenance to whomsoever He pleases without a measure - The similitude
of the disbelievers gone astray

35. اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضِ مَثَلُ نُورِهِ كَمِشْكَاةٍ
فِيهَا مِصْبَاحٌ الْمِصْبَاحُ فِي زُجَاجَةٍ الزُّجَاجَةُ كَاَنَّهَا
كَوْكَبٌ دُرّ‌ِيٌّ ٌّيُوقَدُ مِن شَجَرَةٍ مُبَارَكَةٍ زَيْتُونَةٍ لاَّ
شَرْقِيّـِةٍ وَلاَ غَرْبِيَّةٍ يَكَادُ زَيْتُهَا يُضِيءُ وَلَوْ لَمْ
تَمْسَسْهُ نَارٌ نُّورٌ عَلَي نُورٍ يَهْدِي اللَّهُ لِنُورِهِ مَن
يَشَآءُ وَيَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الاَمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ وَاللَّهُ بِكُلّ‌ِ
شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ

35. "Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The similitude of
His light is as a niche wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The
glass is as it were a glittering star, lit from a blessed olive-tree,
neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil would almost glow forth
(of itself) though no fire touched it. Light upon light, Allah guides
unto His Light whom He pleases, and Allah sets forth similitudes for
mankind, and Allah is All-Aware of all things."

**Commentary:**

'Light' is something that is itself bright and causes the brightness of
other things. In Islamic culture, several things have been mentioned as
'light', including: The Holy Qur'an, tradition, knowledge, wisdom,
faith, guidance, Islam, the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.), and the Infallible
Imams (a.s.).

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "Nothing I saw unless I saw Allah before it,
after it, and along with it."[^1]

Concerning the Pure Essence of Allah a famous Persian poet says:

When I look at desert,

I see You.

When I look at sea,

I see You.

Whatever I look at, mountain and plain,

I see a sign of Your elegant stature.

For commenting on the above verse, there have been said many words, and
commentators, philosophers, and Islamic mystics have discussed a lot.

The relation of this verse with the previous verses is in this way that
in the former holy verses the discussion focused on chastity, struggling
against indecency by means of various ways, and since what guarantees
the execution of all Divine ordinances, especially controlling
unrestrained instincts, more importantly sexual instinct, which is the
most powerful one, can not be done without having 'faith' as support,
finally the

[^1] The Commentary book: 'Nur', following of the verse, and for more
information, you may refer to Kitab ul-Wafi, Vol. 1, p. 382, and
TauHud-i-Saduq, chapter Ar-ru'yah, p. 107

discussion is led to 'faith' and its powerful influence, when the verse
begins saying:

"Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth..."

What a nice, interesting, and valuable sentence! Yes Allah is the Light
of the heavens and the earth. He is the brightness and illuminator of
all of them.

Some commentators have interpreted the word 'Light' here as guider and
leader[^1]; and some of them have interpreted it as 'lighter' and some as
'beautifying'.

All these meanings are true, but the concept of the verse is still more
inclusive. In the Qur'an and Islamic Narrations some entities are called
as 'light':

1. The Glorious Qur'an: As Sura Al-ma'idah, No. 5, verse 15 is recited:
"... indeed there has come to you light, from Allah, a Light and a clear
Book." Also recite in Sura Al-'A'raf, No. 7, verse 157: "... Then those
who... and follow the light which has been sent down with him: these are
they that are the prosperous ones."

2. Faith: We read in Sura Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 257: "Allah is the
Guardian of those who have faith; He brings them out of darkness into
the light..."

3. Divine Guidance and clear-sightedness: As it is mentioned in Sura
Al-An'am, No. 6, verse 122: "Is he who was dead (with ignorance and
polytheism) and We gave him life (by Our guidance), and provided him
with a light by which he walks among the people, as one whose likeness
is in the utter darkness (of ignorance and polytheism) whence he cannot
come forth from thema ..."

[^1] Burhan and Safi commentary, because of this noble tradition by Imam
Rida (a.s): "Allah guides all dwellers of the skies and the earth to
what is their best"

4. Islam Religion: It is said in Sura At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 32: "...
and Allah refuses but to perfect His Light, though the infidels detest
it."

5. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.): In Sura Al-Ahzab, No. 33, verse 46 we read
about the Prophet (p.b.u.h.): "And as a summoner unto Allah by His
permission, and as a light-giving torch."

6. Imams and the Infallible Leaders: As we read in Ziyarat-i-Jami'ah:
"Allah created you (as) lights, then He set you encircled (His Throne)."
In the same Ziyarat we read: "You are the light for the good ones and
guiders of those who do good deeds."

7. Science and Knowledge: This is also mentioned as light, as we read
in a famous tradition: "Knowledge is a light that Allah casts in any
heart that He wills."[^1]

The above mentioned matters are on one side and, on the other side, we
must study carefully the special characteristics of light some of its
properties and qualities are as follows:

a. Light is the most beautiful and delicate entity in the world of
material. It is the source of all beauties and delicacies.

b. As scientists say, light has got the highest velocity in the world;
300,000 kilometers per second. Light can circulate the earth 7 times in
less than a second (in a wink), therefore, extraordinarily great
astronomical distances are only measured by the speed of light per year.
It means the extent that light, with its extraordinary speed, can go in
a year.

c. Light is a means for making things comprehensible and for viewing
different creatures of the world. Without it we cannot see anything,
therefore, it is both visible and making visible.

[^1] Bihar, Vol. 1, p. 325; and mazan ul-Hikmah, p. 6016

d. The light of the sun, which is the most important light of our
world, grows flowers and plants. It is in fact the secret of all living
creatures' survival, and it is impossible for any one or any creature to
continue to live without light (directly or indirectly).

e. Today, it has been proven that all the colours that we see are the
result of sunlight or other similar lights, otherwise, creatures have no
colour in absolute darkness.

f. All existing energies in our environment, except atomic energy, are
resulted from sunlight. The movement of Winds, falling of rain, movement
of rivers, floods, and waterfalls and, finally, the movement of all
living creatures are derived from sunlight.

The source of warmness, heat and what warms creatures is the very
sunlight. Even the heat of fire that is gained from wood of trees or
coal or petroleum and its derivatives are from the heat of sun, because
all of them go back, according to scientific researches, to plants and
animals that have acquired heat from sun and have stored it in
themselves. Therefore, the movement of engines is because of it, too.

g. The light of sun kills kinds of microbes and harmful insects. And if
there were not the shining of this blissful light, the earth would turn
into a great hospital whose inhabitants would be coming to grips with
death.

Shortly, as we look more and closely at this strange phenomenon of the
world (light), its valuable benefits and blesses will be more obvious.

Now, with these two introductions, if we want to choose a parallel or
comparison from among sensible creatures of this world for Allah's Pure
Essence (although He, the Almighty, is higher than any comparison), can
we select any word other than 'light'? He is the same Lord Who is the
Creator of all universe. He is the Lighter of the world of creation, all
living creatures are alive because of His command, and all creatures are
sustained by Him, so that if for a second He stops His blissful looking
at creatures, all will be inexistent.

It is interesting that as much as any being is related to Him, it
acquires luminousness with respect to it:

The Holy Qur'an is light, because it is His words.

Islam is light, because it is His religion.

The prophets are light, because they are His messengers.

Infallible Imams (a.s.) are Divine lights, because they are guardians
of His religion after the prophets.

Faith is light, because it is the secret of relationship with Him.

Knowledge is light, because it brings familiarity with Him. Therefore,
"Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth..."

If we consider a wider meaning for light, that is: 'anything whose
essence is obvious and apparent and clears other things', in this case
applying the word 'light' to His Pure Essence is not likening, because
nothing in the world of creation is more apparent and obvious than Him,
and all other things than Him are apparent because of Him.

In the book named: TauHud we read a tradition by Imam Ali Ibn
mas-ar-Rida (a.s.). That Imam was questioned about the interpretation of
the verse, "Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth...", and he
said: "He guides both the inhabitants of the earth and the inhabitants
of the heavens."

In fact, this is one of the qualities of the Divine Light, but it is
certainly not limited to it. Thus, all the mentioned commentaries of
this verse can be included in what was said. Each of them refers to one
of the dimensions of this unique Light.

It is interesting that in the 47th part of Jushan KAbir supplication,
which is a collection of Allah's attributes, we read: "...Oh Light of
lights! Oh Lighter of lights! Oh Creator of lights! Oh Administrator of
light! Oh Measurer of light! Oh Light of all lights! Oh Light before any
light! Oh Light after any light! Oh Light that is superior to any light!
Oh Light that has no parallel!"

Therefore, all lights of universe come from His Light and return to the
Light of His Pure Essence.

Mentioning the above fact, the holy Qur'an specifies the manner and the
way of Divine Light by means of an exact and nice similitude. It says:

"... The similitude of His light is as a niche wherein is a lamp. The
lamp is in a glass. The glass is as it were a glittering star, lit from
a blessed olive-tree, neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil
would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched it. Light
upon light, Allah guides unto His Light whom He pleases, and Allah sets
forth similitudes for mankind, and Allah is All-Aware of all things."

To explain this example, paying attention to some matters is
necessary:

The Arabic word/miskat/ is, in fact, a hole and a tiny place which was
used to be created in a wall and old common lanterns were kept in it in
order to be protected from wind and storm. And sometimes a ledge was
made in the room and the side of that part of the wall, toward the yard,
was covered with glass.

Thus, both inside of the room and the yard were lighted, meanwhile the
lantern was saved from any wind and storm. Again 'Mishkat' was also
applied to the glass cases that were made in the form of cubic
rectangle, which had a lid and on the top of it there was an opening for
letting air out and it was used for putting light in it. In short,
'Mishkat' is a case for protecting light against wind and storm and,
since it was often made in wall, the light was focused and reflected.

The Arabic word /Zujajah/ means glass. In fact, it is applied to
transparent stones and since glass is made of stone materials and it is
transparent, it is also called /zujajah/. Here it means a bulb that is
put on the lamp to protect its flame and to lead the movement of air
from bottom to the top and to increase the lightness of the torch.

The Arabic word /misbah/ means a lamp that usually has a wick and a
flammable oil material and the wick is burned.

The Qur'anic sentence "... lit from a blessed olive-tree, neither of
the East nor of the West, ..." refers to an energetic material which is
particularly suitable for this lamp, because olive oil is pressed from a
blissful and fruitful tree. It is one of the best oils for burning. It
comes from a tree that all its branches and stems must be equally
exposed to sunlight and it must be neither located in the eastern part
of the garden near wall nor in the western part of it, where one side of
it is in expose of sunlight, otherwise, its fruits will be half ripe and
half unripe nor its oil will be pure.

Now we realize that for having a full light of this lamp, we must have
4 factors: a lantern which protects the lamp completely, and focuses
light without decreasing its light. A bulb that regulates the movement
of air and it must be so transparent that does never prevent lighting. A
lamp that produces light by using wick. And, finally, an energetic
material that is pure and clean and must be so flammable that as though
it is going to be burnt without touch of fire.

All of these, on one side, show the reality of material and its
appearance. On the other side, great Islamic commentators have different
opinions about the concept of this likening; or, in other words, to what
Divine Light it is likened:

Some say that its purpose is that guiding light that Allah casts in the
heart of the believers; in other words, its purpose is 'faith' that is
placed in the hearts of the believers.

Some say that it is the holy Qur'an that casts light in the heart of
man.

Some say that the similitude refers to the noble Prophet (p.b.u.h.).

Some say that it refers to the reasons of monotheism and Allah's
justice.

Some commentators have interpreted it as the spirit of piety and
obedience, which is the cause of goodness and prosperity.

In fact, all the extensions that are for the spiritual light in the
holy Qur'an and Islamic narrations are mentioned here as commentary. The
spirit and concept of all of them is, in fact, one thing and that is the
light of 'guidance', which comes from the holy Qur'an, revelation, and
prophets, and it develops by reasons of monotheism and its result is
submitting to Allah's command and piety.

Note: The light of faith that is in the heart of the believers has all
these 4 factors which exist in a lighting lamp.

"Misbah" is those very flames of faith that appear in the heart of the
believer wherefrom the light of guidance comes.

"Zujajah" and bulb is the heart of the believer that controls faith in
his entity. And "ieshkat" is the chest of the believer or, in another
word, it is the collection of his personality, knowledge, sciences, and
thoughts that saves his faith from mishaps.

The meaning of the Qur'anic phrase which says: "... a blessed
olive-tree, ..." is the very Divine revelation whose essence is fully
pure and sincere and the believers' faith is fruitful and flaming by
it.

In fact,this is the Light of Allah,the light which illuminates the
heavens and the earth, and it comes from the center of the believers'
heart and lights all their entity and being.

The reasons that are gained through wisdom and intellect are mixed with
the light of revelation and will be the extension of 'light upon
light'.

And it is by this that the receptive hearts are guided to the Divine
light, and the concept of "... Allah guides unto His Light whom He
pleases ..." is applied to them.

Therefore, for saving this Divine Light (the light of faith and
guidance), a collection of Islamic teachings, knowledge,
self-edification,and ethic is necessary to protect this "Misbah" as a
"Mishkat" does.

It also needs an apt and receptive heart to regulate this program like
'zujajah'. And help through revelation is needed to give energy to it,
like the blessed olive tree.

And this light of revelation must be free from deviating money-oriented
tendencies that are western and eastern and cause decay, evilness and
darkness.

It must be so pure, and clear, free from deviation that it mobilizes
all man's powers without help of anything and becomes the extension of
"... whose oil would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire
touched it..."

Any kind of interpretation by personal opinion, incorrect prejudice,
personal tastes, imposed ideas, inclination to west and east, and any
superstitions that defile the fruit of this blessed tree will decrease
the luminosity of this lamp and sometimes put out the light.

This is the example that Allah has stated for His Light in this verse
and He is All-Aware of all things.

We understand from the above matters that if we see in narrations by
the infallible Imams that 'Mishkat' is interpreted as the heart of the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.), 'Misbah' as the light of knowledge, 'Zujajah'' as
Imam Ali (a.s.), his successors, and 'Shajaratin Muburakah' (the blessed
tree) as 'IbRuhim Khalil who is the root of this family, and the
Qur'anic sentence: "neither of the East nor of the West" as negation of
inclination to Judaism and Christianity, these are in fact the other
face of that light of guidance and faith and are the statement of a
clear extension of them, but it is not limited to them only.

And also if some commentators have interpreted this Divine Light as the
holy Qur'an or intellectual reasons, or the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.), it
has a root in common with the commentary of the above verse, too.


