Commentary : Verse 36
=====================

36. فِي بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللَّهُ أَن تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ
يُسَبّـِحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالْغُدُوّ‌ِ وَالآصَالِ

36. "(This lamp of guidance is found) in houses which Allah has allowed
to be exalted and that His name be mentioned therein. There glorify Him
therein in the mornings and the evenings,"

**Commentary:**

Up to now we behold the characteristics of this Divine Light, the light
of guidance and faith, through likening it to a very luminous lamp, now
we must see that where this lamp is located and how its place is. By
specifying its place, all the things that are necessary for this will be
clear.

Therefore, this verse implies that this lamp is found in the houses
which Allah hath allowed its walls to be exalted so that enemies,
devils, and the promiscuous ones can not reach it. They are houses that
His name shall be remembered therein and the verses of the Qur'an and
the facts of revelation are read in them. The verse says:

"(This lamp of guidance is found) in houses which Allah has allowed to
be exalted and that His name be mentioned therein...."

Many commentators consider the above verse to be related to the
pervious verse, as we have commented on it; but some say that it is
related to the next sentence, the relation which does not seem very
correct.

But that some say what effect the existence of such lamp in the houses
whose characteristics are stated has, we must say that a house, whose
walls are exalted and decisive alert men guard it, guarantees the
protection of this luminous lamp. Moreover those who seek such source of
light will be aware of its place and hasten to enjoy it.

But what is the purpose of the Qur'anic word /buyut/ (Houses)? Its
answer will be clear in the characteristics mentioned in the rest of the
verse, where it says:

"... There glorify Him therein in the mornings and the evenings,"

**Some points:**

1. We read in Ziyarat Jami'ah, when we address the Imams (a.s.) of
Sh'iite: "...and Allah has placed you in houses that Allah (s.w.t.) has
permitted to be exalted ..." Therefore, the sanctuaries of the
infallible Imams (a.s.) are counted as one of the extensions of the
Qur'anic phrase /fi buyutin/ (in houses) mentioned in this holy verse.

2. The Arabic word /turfa'/in the verse means the height of a place,
too, such as the verse which says: 'And (remember) when Abraham and
Ishmael raised up the foundations of the House..."[^1]

3. Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: "Those houses are the houses of prophets,
sages and the infallible Imams."[^2] Tha'lAbi says in his commentary that
one day the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)

was reciting this verse when then Abibakr said: "Is the house of Ali
(a.s.) and Fatimah (a.s.) the extension of this verse?" The Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) said: "Yes, it is the best extension of this verse."[^3]

[^1] Sura Al- Baqarah, No. 2, verse 127

[^2] Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, the Commentary

[^3] Ruh ul-Ma'ani, the Commentary

4. Imam Kazim (a.s.) said: "The purpose of the phrase '... in the
mornings and the evenings", mentioned in the verse, is the punctual
ritual prayers."[^1]

5. In the Holy Qur'an, there are many cases in which 'glorification' is
used instead of 'ritual prayer'. Sura 'Al-i-'Imran, No. 3, verse 41:
"... and glorify (Him) in the evening and early morning." Sura Ta-Ha,
No. 20, verse 130: "... and glorify your Lord by praising Him before the
rising of the sun and before its setting, ..."

[^1] Bihar, Vol. 23, p. 326


**Commentary : Verse 37**

37. رِجَالٌ لاَّ تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلاَ بَيْعٌ عَن ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
وَإِقَامِ الصَّلاَةِ وَإِيتَآءِ الزَّكَاةِ يَخَافُونَ يَوْماً
تَتَقَلَّبُ فِيهِ الْقُلُوبُ وَالاَبْصَارُ

37. "Men whom neither merchandise nor any sale diverts from the
remembrance of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and paying the
poor-rate; they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes will be
overturned;"

**Commentary:**

Men of Allah try their best for their worldly life while they are not
ignorant of the Hereafter, because abandoning business is not a value,
but if business is done along with remembrance of Allah, praying and
giving alms-tax, then it will be respected high. Therefore in this noble
verse it is implied that those men who are not prevented from
remembering of Allah, performing ritual prayer and paying alms-tax by
neither business nor selling and buying, fear the day in which hearts
and eyes will be capsized. The verse says:

"Men whom neither merchandise nor any sale diverts from the remembrance
of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and paying the poor-rate; they
fear a day in which the hearts and eyes will be overturned;"

These characteristics show that the aforementioned houses are the very
centers that are fortified by Allah's commandment and Allah is
remembered in them. In these centers Islam facts and Allah's ordinances
are circulated. In this extensive and comprehensive meaning, mosques are
the houses of prophets and saints; especially the house of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) and the house of AM (a.s.) are included.

There is no reason for the matter that some commentators in their
commentaries have limited it only to the mosque or houses of prophets
and such like. And there are some narrations in which its clear
extensions are mentioned:

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: "This verse refers to the houses of prophets
and the house of Imam Ali (a.s.) is included in it, too."[^1]

Another tradition indicates that when The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) was
reciting this verse he was asked: "What is the purpose of/buyut/
(houses)?" The Prophet said: "The houses of prophets" Again Abibakr
asked: "Is this house (pointing to the house of Fatimah (a.s.) and Ali
(a.s.)) included in it, too? The Prophet said: "Yes, it is the best of
them."[^2]All of these denote the clear examples.

In another tradition upon the commentary of this verse by Imam Sadiq
(a.s.), recorded in the book Raudah Kafi, he has said: "Verily Mishkat
is the heart of Muhammad (p.b.u.h.), and Misbah is the very light of
knowledge (and guidance), and Zujajah is the heart of Ali (a.s.) or his
self, (in which Misbah was placed after departure of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.))."[^3]

Also in the book TauHud, by Saduq, we read a tradition by Imam Baqir
(a.s.) who said: "Verily Mishkat is the light of knowledge in the heart
of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and Zujajah is the heart of Ali (a.s.).... And
/Nurun 'ala Nur/ is Imams who are from the family of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) and they come one after the other. These Imams are assisted
by the light of knowledge and wisdom. And this trend has been since the
creation of Adam and will continue to the end of the world.

[^1] Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, Vol. 3, p. 607

[^2] Majma' ul-Bayan, following the verse

[^3] Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, Vol. 3, p. 602 & 603

These are the very testamentary guardians who are appointed as caliphs
by Allah in the earth. There is not and there will be not any age or
time that the earth can be empty of one of them. They are Allah's
Authorities over His servants."[^1]

In another tradition by Imam Sadiq (a.s.), 'Mishkat' has been
interpreted as Fatimah (a.s.), 'Misbah' as Hassan (a.s.), and 'Zujajah'
as Hussayn (a.s.).[^2]

There is another authentic tradition by Imam Baqir (a.s.), in which
Ghattadah, a famous Islamic jurist from Basrah, had a conversation with
Imam (a.s.) and he expressed his heartily amazement concerning Imam's
peculiar grandeur. Imam said to him whether he knew that where he was
sitting; in front of those about whom Allah has said: '(This lamp of
guidance is found) in houses which Allah has. allowed to be exalted and
that His name be mentioned therein.

There glorify Him therein in the mornings and the evenings,' 'Men whom
neither merchandise nor any sale diverts from the remembrance of Allah
and the keeping up of in prayer and paying the poor-rate,...'. Then Imam
said: "You are what you said (a jurist from Basrah), and we are what the
holy Qur'an says."

In answer, Ghattadah said: "You are true, may Allah make me your
sacrifice! By Allah that the purpose is not stone and clay houses (but
its purpose is the houses of revelation, faith, and guidance)."[^3]

In another tradition it has been narrated about this group of Divine
men who guard revelation and guidance: "They are businessmen who are not
ignorant of Allah's remembrance

[^1] Ibid

[^2] Ibid

[^3]Ibid, p. 602

because of trading or doing business. When it is the time of prayer,
they pay its due unto Allah therein (perform prayer)."[^1]

This refers to the matter that while they are carrying out economic
good activities, all of their actions are overshadowed by Allah's name
and they consider nothing preceding it.

Yes, any place or center which is set by Allah's command and Allah's
name is mentioned in it and every morning and evening some believing
men, who do not forget Allah's remembrance because of worldly life,
praise Allah and perform prayer, is the center of Divine lights
(Mishkat), faith and guidance.

In fact, this kind of house has some characteristics:

First, it is set by Allah's command.

Second, its bases and walls are so exalted and fortified that they
protect it from the penetration of Satan.

Third, it is the center for remembering Allah.

Fourth, some men guard it who praise Allah every morning and every
evening, and the worldly beguiling attractions do not make them ignore
the Truth.

These houses with such characteristics are the sources of guidance and
faith.

It is also important to mention the matter that in this verse both the
Arabic word /tijarat/ (merchandise) and the word /bay'/ (sale) have been
used. Although it seems that both of them mean one thing, the difference
between them may be that /tijarat/ refers to a continuous job and /bay'/
refers to an impermanent action which is done for one time.

It is also necessary to pay attention to the matter that it does not
say that 'they are men who do not do business or sale', but it says:
"Men whom neither merchandise nor any

[^1] Ibid, p. 609

sale diverts from the remembrance of Allah and the keeping up of prayer
and paying the poor-rate ..."

They always fear the day of Hereafter and Allah's justice court, in
which hearts and eyes will be capsized because of its awe. (The Arabic
verb /yaxafan/ is a form of verb which in the Arabic language indicates
the continuity of their fear of the resurrection day. It is a sort of
fear that compels them to their duties and missions.)

Moreover, great commentators have different opinions about the Qur'anic
phrase /Nurun 'ala Nur/ ('Light upon light'):

In Majma'-ul-Bayan, the deceased Tabarsi says: it refers to prophets
who come one after another from one root and continue the path of
guidance.

Fakhr-i-Razi says: it refers to gathering of light rays and their
concentration, as it is said about believers: 'A believer has 4
positions. If he receives a favour or bless, he thanks Allah. If he
receives a disaster, he is patient and withstands it. If he says a word,
he tells the truth. If he judges, he seeks justice. He is like a living
man among the dead when he is among ignorant people. He moves among 5
lights: his saying is light. His deed is light. His place of arrival is
light. His place of exit is light. His aim is the light of Allah in the
Day of Hereafter."

It is also probable that the first light in the verse refers to the
light of Divine guidance through revelation, and the second light refers
to His guidance by means of intellect. Or the first light is the light
of religious guidance, and the second light is Divine guidance,
therefore, it is 'light upon light'.

Thus, this holy phrase is sometimes interpreted as different sources of
light (prophets), and sometimes as various kinds of light, and sometimes
as its various phases, while all of them are possible and can be
included in the meaning of the verse and, therefore, its concept is
vast. (Take care)

**Some notes to be studied:**

1. Some traditions indicate that the objective of the persons mentioned
in this noble verse is those businessmen who stop working and get
prepared to perform ritual prayer when they hear the call to
prayer.[^1]

2. Business is not the only factor that entertains man and prevents him
from remembering Allah, but there are also other factors mentioned in
the Qur'an, such as: multiplication of wealth, desires, bad friend and
offspring.

3. Olive tree has been described as 'blessed tree' in the above verses.
And if in that age the importance of this phrase was not clear when the
Qur'an was descended, now we know it fully, for great scientists have
spent many years to study the different properties of plants and they
tell us that this tree produces a blessed fruit which contains one of
the most useful and valuable oils and it plays an important role in the
health of body.

Ibn 'Abbas says that all parts of this tree is valuable and good, even
its ash has also got property and benefit. It is the first tree that
after the Flood of Noah (a.s.) grew, and prophets have uttered
invocation prayed for it to be a blessed tree.

[^1] Nur-uth-Thaqalyn


