Commentary : Verse 44
=====================

44. يُقَلّـِبُ اللَّهُ الَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ
لَعِبْرَةً لاُِوْلِي الاَبْصَارِ

44. "Allah alternates the night and the day; verily there is a lesson
in this for those with sight."

**Commentary:**

The shift and change of night and day is not accidental, but it is
based on an exact system.

A person of insight can learn lesson from all times and all places.

The phenomena of the universe provide us lessons, that we do ponder
them.

In this noble verse, one of the signs of creation and Allah's grandeur,
which is the creation of day and night, is mentioned. It says:

"Allah alternates the night and the day; verily there is a lesson in
this for those with sight."

Commenting this holy verse, there are stated different opinions about
how this revolution is:

Some consider it as the coming and going of day and night; day comes
and makes the night invisible and vice versa.

Some say that it means shortening of one of them and prolonging of the
other one, which happens gradually, and the formation of seasons depends
on it.

Finally, some say that it refers to the changes such as warmness,
coldness, and other events that happen during the day and night.[^1]

[^1] The Commentary of: Fakhr-i-Razi, Majma'-ul-Bayan, and
Ruh-ul-Ma'ani

It must be mentioned that the above commentaries are not in conflict
with each other, and it is possible that all of them are included in the
Qur'anic phrase /yuqallibu/ ('alternates').

Undoubtedly, as it is scientifically proven, both coming and going of
the day and night, and gradual changes of them, are vitally important
for man and it is a lesson for 'those with sight'.

Constant shining of sun increases temperature of the air, bums living
creatures, and mentally wearies men, but when the darkness of night
comes after this shining, it modifies it totally.

The gradual changes of day and night, which is the factor of formation
of four seasons, play an important role in the growth of plants, the
life of all living creatures, the descending of rain, and storing water
in the ground.


**Commentary : Verse 45**

45. وَاللَّهُ خَلَقَ كُلَّ دَآبَّةٍ مَن مَآءٍ فَمِنْهُم مَن يَمْشِي
عَلَي بَطْنِهِ وَمِنْهُم مَن يَمْشِي عَلَي رِجْلَيْنِ وَمِنْهُم مَن
يَمْشِي عَلَي أَرْبَعٍ يَخْلُقُ اللَّهُ مَا يَشَآءُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَي
كُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ

45. "And Allah has created every animal from water; so of them is (a
kind) that walks upon its belly and (a kind) that walks upon two legs
and (a kind) that walks upon four. Allah creates what He pleases. Verily
Allah is Ail-Powerful over every thing."

**Commentary:**

All of creatures are created by His will. In this noble verse, one of
the main aspects of creation system, which is one of the most obvious
reasons of monotheism, that is the issue of life with its various forms,
reference has been made to. It says:

"And Allah has created every animal from water; ..."

All of them are made of water, but they have different and wonderful
forms;

"... so of them is (a kind) that walks upon its belly and (a kind) that
walks upon two legs and (a kind) that walks upon four. ..."

Yet this is not limited to these things and life has got
extraordinarily various forms, including creatures that live in the sea,
or insects that have thousands species and thousands faces. Therefore in
the end of the verse, the Qur'an says:

"... Allah creates what He pleases. Verily Allah is All-Powerful over
every thing."

**Some Points:**

First: There are different opinions about the matter that the verse
under discussion refers to what kind of 'water'. There are three
commentaries on it:

A) The purpose of water is the drop of seed. Many of commentators have
chosen this commentary and in some narrations it has been referred to,
too.

The problem that this commentary faces with is that not all creatures
are created from the drop of seed. For there are unicellular organisms
and some other animals that are the extensions of animal and are created
through cell division, an asexual reproduction, and it must be said that
the above subject has got a typical aspect, not a common and general
aspect.

B) The purpose of it is the creation of the first creature, for
according to some Islamic narrations, the first creature that Allah
created was water and men were created after water. Moreover, according
to the new scientific theories, the first sign of life appeared in the
seas and this phenomenon ruled in the depth of seas or in the shallows
of seas before it appeared anywhere else. (Of course, the power that
created the living creature with all of its complexity in the first
phase and then guided it in other phases was Allah's will, a
supernatural force.)

C) The last commentary is that the purpose of the creation of living
creatures from water is that now the main material that makes up them is
water and the main part of their body is made of water and that without
water no living creature can continue to live.

Of course, these commentaries are in line with each other, but the
first and the second ones seem more correct.

Second: The question that raises here is that animals are not limited
to these three groups (reptiles, bipeds, quadrupeds), but there are many
creatures that have more than four legs?

The answer to this question lies in the verse itself, for it is said in
the next sentence: "... Allah creates what He pleases ..." Moreover, the
most important animals that man is to deal with are these three groups.
Besides, some believe that even some animals that have more than four
feet rely mainly on four feet and the rest of feet functions as helping
means.[^1]

Third: Undoubtedly the strangest phenomenon of this world is life, the
issue that is still an unsolved riddle for scientists. All of them say
that living creatures are created from lifeless materials of this world,
but no one knows how and under what circumstances this mutation has
happened, for in no laboratory the changing of lifeless materials to
living creatures is observed, although thousands of scientists have
thought about this and experimented a lot during very many years.

What is certain is that the secrets of life are so complex that the
entire manly knowledge and sciences,with their whole development,are not
able to discover and understand them yet.

In current condition of the world, living creatures are created from
only living creatures and no living creature is created from a lifeless
creature. Certainly it was not so in a long time ago and; in other
words, life in the earth has got a history of creation that no one knows
how its condition was and it is a riddle to man.

More strange than that is the species of life. There are completely
various aspects of life; unicellular organisms that are seen only by
means of microscope unto huge whales that

[^1] The Commentary by QurtAbi, and Fakhr-i-Razi, following the verse

are more than 30 meters long and they are mountain of floating meet.
From insects of which hundreds of thousand species are discovered to
birds that are thousand and thousands species, each of which have a
world full of secrets.

Zoology books that today constitute a great part of great libraries of
the world show only a little of these secrets. Sea, that has always been
full of secrets, specially its animals, is still unknown to us with all
knowledge that we have about it.

Verily how magnificent is Allah Who has created these various animals
and has bestowed them what they have needed. How great is His power and
knowledge that He has bestowed them what is needed proportionate to
their conditions. And it is strange that all of them at first were
created from water, and some little of the simple materials of the
earth.


**Commentary : Verse 46.47**

46. لَقَدْ أَنزَلْنَآ ءَايَاتٍ مُبَيّـِنَاتٍ وَاللَّهُ يَهْدِي مَن
يَشَآءُ إِلَي صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ

47. وَيَقُولُونَ ءَامَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَبِالرَّسُولِ وَأَطَعْنَا ثُمَّ
يَتَوَلَّي فَرِيقٌ مّـِنْهُم مِن بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ وَمَآ اُوْلَئِكَ
بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ

46. "Verily We have sent down revelations explanatory, and Allah guides
whom He pleases unto a straight way."

47. "And they say: 'We believe in Allah and in the Messenger, and we
obey'. Then, after that, some of them turn away, these are not (really)
believers."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

Commentators have mentioned 2 occasions of revelation for a part of
these verses:

First: One of the hypocrites had some quarrel with one Jewish man. That
Jewish man asked that apparently-Muslim hypocrite to go together to the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) to have their quarrel settled down, but the hypocrite
did not accept it and asked the Jewish man for going to Ka'b Ibn Ashraf
YaHudi (a Jewish man) for issuing judgment. (Even according to some
narrations, the hypocrite said it was possible that Mohammad (p.b.u.h.)
might not judge between them justly.) The above verses were sent down
and reprimanded such persons very severely.

Second: An argument happened between Imam Ali (a.s.) and Othman, (or
according to a narration, between that Imam and Muqayrat-Ibn Wa'il). And
it was for a land that he had bought from Imam Ali (a.s.) and then some
stones were found in it and the buyer wanted to cancel the bargain
because of it.

Imam Ali (a.s.) asked for the judgment of the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
between them, but Hakam Ibn Abee Abil-'As, one of the hypocrites, said
to the buyer not to do that for if he went to Ali's cousin, the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.), he would certainly judge between them in favour of him. The
above verse was descended and rebuked him.[^1]

**Commentary:**

Since the words in previous verses were about belief in Allah, the
reasons of monotheism, and His signs in the world of creation, the
concerned verses talk about the signs of faith, reflections of
monotheism in man's life and his yielding to the Truth. First it says:

"Verily We have sent down revelations explanatory,..."

These are some verses that lighten the hearts by the light of faith and
Unity. Of course, the existence of these 'explanatory revelations' paves
the ground for faith, but the main role is played by Divine guidance,
because:

"... and Allah guides whom He pleases unto a straight way."

We know that Allah's will and providence is not undue, and the light of
guidance is cast on those hearts that are receptive for accepting it;
that is, they have started spiritual struggle and taken steps towards
Him.

[^1] Majma'-ul-Bayan, Ruh-ul-Bayan, Tibyan, QurtAbi, Fakhr-i-Razi, Safi,
Nur-uth-Thaqalyn

Then hypocrites, who have no faith and only speak about faith and faith
cannot be cast on their hearts, are reprimanded. The verse proclaims:

"And they say: 'We believe in Allah and in the Messenger, and we obey'.
Then, after that, some of them turn away, these are not (really)
believers."

What kind of faith is it that it is only uttered by their tongue and it
is not manifested in other fields of their deeds?

It is understood from this verse that if a person's faith remains only
at the level of tongue and he does not really believe in Allah, he is
not a believer, for if he were a believer his faith would not be
rejected in this verse.


