Commentary : Verse 55
=====================

55. وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُمْ فِي الاَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُـمَكّـِنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَي لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدّ‌ِلَنَّهُم مّـِن بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْناً يَعْبُدُونَنِي لاَ
يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئاً وَمَن كَفَرَ بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فَاُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْفَاسِقُونَ

55. "Allah has promised those of you who believe and do righteous
deeds, that He will certainly appoint them successors in the earth as He
appointed successors those before them; and that He will certainly
establish for them their religion which He has chosen for them; and that
certainly He will, after their fear, give them security in exchange.
They will do worship Me (alone) and not associate aught with Me; and
whoever disbelieves after this, then these are they that are
evil-doers."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

Many commentators, including Suyuti in Asbab-ul-nuzul, Tabarsi in
Majma'-ul-Bayan, Sayyid Qutb in Fi-Zilal, and QurtAbi in his commentary,
upon the occasion of revelation of this verse have said: When the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and Muslims migrated to Medina and were warmly
welcomed by Ansar (Helpers), all Arabs became their enemy and it was
such that they were to carry a weapon when they went to bed and to be on
the alert all the time.

The continuation of this state became difficult for the Muslims. Some
of them declared their feeling explicitly: "To what day would this state
continue? Would a time come that we could rest calmly in the night and
peace and tranquility rule over us and we fear no one but Allahu" The
above verse was sent down and gave them this good tiding that of course
such a day would come.[^1]

**Commentary:**

Islam is a universal religion. In future victory belongs to the
believers and pagans are doomed to be defeated. The key of achieving the
Truth and authority of the world is 'Faith' and 'good deeds'. Those who
believe and do good deeds glad tidings of victory are given to, not to
those who are barely believers.

Religion is not separated from politics, but politics and government
are for saving religion.

Since the previous holy verses talked about obeying the commandments of
Allah (s.w.t.) and the Prophet (p.b.u.h), the concerned verse continues
this matter and mentions the result of this obedience which is the
worldly government, and the Qur'an emphatically announces:

"Allah has promised those of you who believe and do righteous deeds,
that He will certainly appoint them successors in the earth as He
appointed successors those before them; and that He will certainly
establish for them their religion which He has chosen for them; and that
certainly He will, after their fear, give them security in exchange.
They will do worship Me (alone) and not associate aught with Me;..."

It is certain that after the dominion of the government of Monotheism
and settlement of the Divine religion when any kind of anxiety,
insecurity and infidelity disappear, those who resist to be disbelievers
are wrong-doers. The verse continues saying:

"... and whoever disbelieves after this, then these are they that are
evil-doers."

However, the totality of the verse denotes that three things are
promised by Allah to be bestowed on those Muslims who have faith and do
good deeds:

1. Succession and authority over the earth.

2. Establishing the factual religion of Truth everywhere fundamentally,
firmly, and deeply, (which is understood form the Qur'anic word
'Tamkin').

3. Abolishing all the factors that cause fear and insecurity.

The result of these abovementioned affairs will be worshipping Allah
absolutely with utmost freedom, and obeying His commandments. There will
be no partner for Him among people and pure monotheism will rule
everywhere. Of course, we will explain that at what time this Divine
promise has been fulfilled, or when it will be fulfilled.

**Some Points:**

1. The commentary of the Qur'anic sentence: "... as He appointed
successors those before them ...":

Commentators have different opinions about the matter that to whom this
sentence refers that they had got authority on the earth before
Muslims.

Some say that it refers to Adam, David and Solomon, because in verse 30
of Sura Al-Baqarah we read about Adam: "... 'Verily I am appointing on
the earth a deputy' ...". And it is said about David in Sura Sad, No.
38, verse 26: "(And it was said unto him): O' David! Verily We have set
you a viceroy in the earth ..."

And since Solomon was the heir of David's authority, he became
caliphate on the earth; "And Solomon was David's heir..." (Sura An-Naml,
No. 27, verse 16)

But some others, such as the great commentator 'Allamah TAbitba'i said
in Al-Mizan that this concept is improbable, because he does not
consider the sentence /'allaoina min qablihim/ (to those before them')
to be proper for prophets. For this sentence has not been used for
prophets in the Qur'an, therefore it refers to nations that were
faithful and did good deeds and became the rulers on the earth.

However, some others believe that this verse refers to the Children of
Israel who achieved authority on the earth when Moses (a.s.) appeared
and Pharaoh was defeated, as it is mentioned in Sura Al-'A'raf, No. 7,
verse 137: "And We made the people, who were abased, the inheritors to
the east (parts) of the land and the west (parts) of it which We had
blessed therein, ..."

It is also said about them (the believers of the Children of Israel):
"And to grant them power in the earth ..." (Al-Qasas, No. 28, verse 6)

It is true that there were some wicked and insincere persons among the
Children of Israel and even they might be pagan, but government was in
the hand of the righteous believers, (therefore the fault that some
commentators find with this commentary is rejected,) and, thus, the
third commentary seems more correct.

**2. To Whom Does Allah Promise?**

In this verse we read that Allah has promised the authority of the
earth, establishment of the chosen religion and complete security to
those who are believers and do righteous deeds, but commentators are of
different opinions about the extension of these persons:

Some of them say that it refers to the Companions of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.), who ruled the earth after Islam and defeated pagans at the
time of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.). (Of course, the purpose of the word
'Ard' (the earth) is not all of the earth or all countries, but it is a
concept that is true about a part and the whole both.) Some say it
refers to the first four caliphates' authority. And some consider its
meaning so wide-ranging that it includes all Muslims who have such an
attribute.

Some say that it refers to government of Mahdi (may Allah hasten his
appearance!), which includes western and eastern parts of the world and
the religion of Truth will widespread. Fear and war will be abolished on
the earth, and sincere worship will be materialized for all people of
the world.

Undoubtedly this holy verse includes the first Muslims and certainly
the full extension of this verse is the government of Mahdi (may Allah
hasten his appearance!), which according to the opinion of all Muslims,
whether Shi'ite or Sunni, will make the earth peaceful and full of
justice after oppression and tyranny rule the world. However, it is not
against the generality and extensiveness of the concept of the verse.

So, whenever Muslims are verily faithful and do righteous deeds
whole-heartedly, they will consequently achieve a strong and influential
authority.

Some say that the word /'ard/ is absolute and general which includes
all of the earth, but this is only limited to the government of Mahdi
(may we get sacrificed for him!) and it is not consistent with the
Qur'anic sentence /kamastaxlafa/ (as He granted it), because the
predecessors' government and authority did not certainly include all of
the earth.

Moreover, the occasion of revelation of the verse indicates that at
least an example of such government was achieved for Muslims at the time
of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.), although it was at the end of his life.

But we repeat again that the product of all prophets' struggles and
attempts, their continual propagation and pursuit and complete example
of monotheism sovereignty, complete security, and sincere worship with
no polytheism will be materialized when Mahda (may Allah hasten his
appearance!), the offspring of the prophets and the progeny of the
Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.), will reappear.

The same person about whom all Muslims have narrated this tradition
from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) who said: "If only one day of the world's
lifetime is remained, Allah will make that day so long that a man from
my progeny, whose name is like my name, will rule the earth and fill the
earth with justice as it has been filled with oppression and
tyranny."[^1]

It is interesting that the Lale Tabarsi says about this verse that it
is narrated from the household of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) (Ahl-ul-Bayt
(a.s.)) that: "This verse is about Mahdi, who is from the family of the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.)."[^2]

In Ruh-ul-Ma'ani and many other Shi'ite commentaries, upon the
commentary of this verse, there has been narrated from Imam Sajjad
(a.s.) who said: "By Allah, they are our Shi'ites (followers)
(Ahl-ul-Bayt). Allah does this for them by the hand of a man who is from
us and he is Mahdi (the guide) of the Ummah. He will fill the earth with
justice and fairness as it has been filled with oppression and tyranny.
He is the

[^1] In the book Muntakhab-ul-'Athar, 123 hadiths are mentioned about
this matter and they are narrated from different Islamic references,
especially from Sunni ones. Refer to this books from page 247 on.

[^2] Majma'-ul-Bayan, following the verse

man about whom the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: 'If one day of the world's
lifetime has remained ..."

As we said, these commentaries do not mean to limit the meaning of the
verse, however, they are for stating its full extension, but because
some commentators, such as 'alusi who has not pay attention to this
matter in Ruh-ul-Ma'ani, have negated these traditions.

QurtAbi, the famous Sunni commentator, narrated from Miqdad-Ibn-'Aswad
who heard from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.), who said: "No clay or stone house
will remain unless Allah causes Islam enters that house (and faith and
monotheism get widespread on the earth.)"[^1]

For more explanation about the government of Mahdi (a.s.) and its vast
and proven documents in Sunni and Shi'ite books, you may refer to the
book Muntakhab-ul-'athar, PP. 247 on where they are taken especially
from Sunni sources.

**3. The final aim is sincere worship:**

The Qur'anic sentence /ya'budunani la yusrikuna bi say'a/ (They will do
worship Me(alone) and not associate aught with Me) from the point of
literature, whether its tense is present, or it is ultimate, its concept
is that the final aim is establishing the government of Truth, embedding
the religion of Truth, and spreading security and peace, which is the
very fortifying the foundations of worshipping and monotheism, hi
another verse of the Qur'an it is mentioned as the aim of creation,
where it says: "And I have not created the jinn and the humankind except
that they should worship Me."[^2]

[^1] The Commentary by QurtAbi, following the verse

[^2] Sura Ath-Thariyat, No. 51, verse 56

A kind of worship which is the high education center of men that
edifies their spirit and soul. The worship that Allah does not need but
servants need it desperately for paving the path of perfection and
development.

Therefore, Islamic insight, contrary to worldly approaches whose final
aim is the extreme welfare of worldly life,does not follow such a thing
as an aim, even the worldly life is valuable when it is used as a means
for achieving that spiritual aim.

But we must pay attention to this matter that worshipping that lacks
polytheism, and negates both none-divine laws and authority of low
desires, is possible only by establishing a government of justice.

It is possible that you invite some persons to Truth by teaching,
edification, and propagation, but for generalizing this matter in the
society we must establish government of the righteous who are faithful.
That was why the great prophets attempted to do this, especially the
Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.), at the first possible opportunity,
established such a government after migrating to Medina.

So it can also be concluded that all the attempts and struggles carried
out for war and peace, and even educational, cultural, economic,
military programs are planned in such a government are for the sake of
worshipping Allah which is free from any polytheism.

It is also necessary to mention that the meaning of the righteous'
government, obedience from the True religion and sincere worship is not
a society that has no wrongdoer and sinner in it, but it means that the
government is in the hand of the righteous believers and no public
polytheism is seen in the society, otherwise, when man is free to choose
his way and has got the freedom of will, it is possible to have deviated
individuals in the man's best divine societies.


**Commentary : Verse 56**

56. وَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلاَةَ وءَاتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ

56. "And establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey the Messenger,
so that mercy may be shown to you."

**Commentary:**

Ritual prayer, alms-tax, and obeying divine leader is an obvious
example of faith and righteous deed of the believers to whom sovereignty
of the earth was promised in the former verse: ("Allah hath promised
those of you who believe and do righteous deeds ...")

In Islam worshipping issues (ritual prayer), financial issues
(alms-tax), and political and governmental issues (obeying Allah's
prophet) are not separated from each other. So, in this verse, people
are mobilized for preparing the ground for such a government. At first,
it says:

"And establish prayer..."

The same ritual prayer that is the key of relation between the Creator
and creatures, and it guarantees their continuous connection with Allah,
and it is an obstacle between them and corruption and wrong action.
Then, after that, the verse continues saying:

"... and pay the poor-rate ..."

It is the same alms-rate that is the sign of relationship with Allah's
creatures and it is an effective means for decreasing the distance
between them and causes their affectionate relations to be strengthened.
So, the verse continues:

"...and obey the Messenger,..."

This obedience, which is general and indicates that we should be
obedient unto the Messenger of Allah in all things, causes us to be
among the righteous believers who deserve to have the authority of the
earth. It is in this case and under the shade of fulfilling these
commandments that haply we may find mercy, and be among those righteous
believers who are worthy of leading the government of justice. The verse
concludes:

"... so that mercy may be shown to you."

Some traditions on ritual prayer and alms-tax:

1. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "The first thing that Allah obligated
upon my people to do was the five ritual prayers and the first deed of
them that will ascend is the five ritual prayers, and the first thing
that will be asked about is the very ritual prayers."[^1]

2. Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: "Islam is founded on five things: ritual
prayer, amls-tax, ritual pilgrimage, fasting, and the guardianship (of
Ahl-ul-Bayt)"[^2]

3. Imam Sadiq (a.s) said: "The first thing that a servant will be
reckoned of is ritual prayer, so if ritual prayer is accepted, other
deeds will be accepted. If his ritual prayer is not accepted, the rest
of his deeds will be rejected, too."

4. Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: "When our offspring become five years old,
we enjoin them to perform ritual prayer, so when your issues get seven
years old, tell them to keep up prayer."[^3]

5. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Never the time of ritual prayer comes
unless an angle cries: O' people stand up and put off the fires that you
have kindled."[^4]

[^1] Kanz-ul-'Ummal, Vol, 7, Tradition No. 18859

[^2] Bihar, Vol. 82, p. 234

[^3] Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, Vol. 3, p. 12

[^4] Bihar, Vol. 82, p. 209

6. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "When a person stands up to perform ritual
prayer, Satan looks at him jealously, for he sees that Allah's mercy has
covered him."[^1]

7. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "The five ritual prayers are like a
pleasant stream that is before the door of your house. If someone washes
oneself in it five times a day, no dirt will remain." (A person who
performs five ritual prayers per day will be cleaned from any spiritual
deviations.)[^2]

8. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Allah said: '(Oh Prophet!) I enjoined
your people five ritual prayers and I promised with Me to send to
Paradise everyone who protects them in their proper times, and there
will not be promised with Me for the one who does not protect (perform)
them'."[^3]

9. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "I advise you to pay alms-tax. I heard the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) saying: "Alms-tax is the bridge of Islam. So whoever
pays it will cross the bridge and whoever does not pay it will fall down
of it, and (payment of) alms-tax soothes Allah's wrath."[^4]

10. The narrator of the tradition says that he heard Imam Ali (a.s.)
saying: "The pillars of Islam are three, and none of them is useful
without the other ones: ritual prayer, alms-tax and guardianship."[^5]

11. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Heal your patients with charity, and
save (and insure) your property with alms-tax."[^6]

[^1] Bihar, Vol. 82, p. 207

[^2] Kanz-ul-'Ummal, Vol, 7, Tradition No. 18931

[^3] Kanz-ul-'Ummal, Vol, 7, Tradition No. 18872

[^4] Bihar-ul-'Anwar, Vol. 77, p. 407

[^5] Bihar-ul-'Anwar, Vol. 68, p. 386

[^6] Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, p. 66

12. Imam Musa-Ibn-Ja'far (a.s.) said: "Verily Alms-tax is set for being
the food of the poor, and for increasing their wealth."[^1]

13. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "When alms-tax is not paid the earth
holds back its (favours and) blessings."[^2]

14. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: "The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) has set alms-tax
for 9 things, (which are) wheat, barley, date, raisin, gold, silver,
camel, cow, and sheep, and let off other ones."[^3]

15. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: "Every Muslim is enjoined to pay alms
(given on the festival of the end of Ramadan). One who does not pay it
may expire." Then Imam was asked: "What does expire mean?" He said:
"Death"[^4]


[^1] Ibid, p. 46

[^2] Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, 146

[^3] Ibid, 34

[^4] Bihar-ul-'Anwar, Vol. 96, p. 109


