Commentary : Verse 60
=====================

60. وَالْقَوَاعِدُ مِنَ النّـِسَآءِ اللاَّتِي لاَ يَرْجُونَ نِكَاحاً
فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْهِنَ جُنَاحٌ أَن يَضَعْنَ ثِيَابَهُنَّ غَيْرَ
مُتَبَرّ‌ِجَاتٍ بِزِينَةٍ وَأَن يَسْتَعْفِفْنَ خَيْرٌ لَهُنَّ وَاللَّهُ
سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ

60. "And (as for) women advanced in years, who have no hope of
marriage, it is no sin for them if they put off their (outer) clothes in
such a way as not to show adornment. And if they refrain themselves, it
is better for them; and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing."

**Commentary:**

Islam rules are in accord with realties, necessities, needs, and social
abilities. Therefore we should slacken it for an old woman who does not
have inclination for husband and does not apply cosmetics.

Thus in this verse an exception for the ordinance of the veil of women
is mentioned by which exempts old women from this ordinance. It says:

"And (as for) women advanced in years, who have no hope of marriage, it
is no sin for them if they put off their (outer) clothes in such a way
as not to show adornment...."

In fact, there are two conditions for this exception:

1. Reaching an age in which there is usually no hope of marriage in
them. In other words, they have lost any sexual attraction completely.

2. They should not have any cosmetics when they take away their veil.

It is clear that with these two conditions there will be no mischief
when veil is discarded in them. For this reason Islam exempts them from
this ordinance.

It is also obvious that its purpose is not to be naked and to take off
all clothes, but it means to remove outer garments that in some
narrations it has been interpreted into veil (chador) and scarf.

In a tradition Imam Sadiq (a.s.) about this verse says: "The purpose
(of it) is veil (chador) and scarf." The narrator says he asked Imam:
"Before every one?" Imam said: "Before every one, but she must not apply
cosmetics and she must not wear adornments."[^1]

Some other narrations with the same content are narrated from Imams,
Ahl-ul-Bayt (a.s.).[^2]

It is added at the end of the verse implying that yet if they refrain
and cover themselves it is better for them, because from the view point
of Islam the more a woman observes her veiling and chastity, she will be
more admirable, pious, and pure. The verse says:

"... And if they refrain themselves, it is better for them;..."

Since some old women may misuse this calculated and lawful freedom and
so have possibly improper talking with men and have impure thoughts
altogether, in the end of the verse, as a warning, it says:

"... and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing."

He hears what is told and He knows what is in the hearts and what is in
minds.

[^1] Wasa-'il-ush-shi-'ah, the book of An-Nika-h, Vol. 14, P. 147, Ch.
110
[^2] For more explanation refer to the above book (the same reference)

In short, the matter of veiling is one of the stable and necessary
ordinances of Islam, but the issues of how the veil should be is
depended on the matter of not stirring sexual desires and saving
chastity and modesty.

So, the principle that this group of women are excepted from the
ordinance of veiling is not a matter of discussion among Islam scholars
and learned people, because the text of the Qur'an expresses it, but
there are some words about its characteristics, including: the age of
these women, in what age the ordinance of 'women advanced in years'
covers women.

In some Islamic narration, it has been interpreted as old women.[^1]
While in other narrations it has been interpreted as women retirement
from marriage.[^2] But some Islamic jurists and commentators think that
it means the end of menstruation, the age of barrenness and people's
reluctance to marry such women.[^3]

Apparently, all of these meanings refer to one reality that women must
get so old that no one would like to marry them, although some of such
women may rarely get married.

Moreover, about the part of the body that these women can show, there
are some different interpretations in Islamic Traditions, while the Holy
Qur'an says vaguely that there is no problem for such women to take off
their garments, of course, their outer clothes.

In some narrations we read the answer of this question that which
garments can be taken off; Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

[^1] Wasa-'il-ush-shi-'ah, Vol. 14, the book of An-Nika-h, C.110,
Tradition No. 4

[^2] The above book

[^3] Jawa-hir Vol. 29, P.85 and Kanz-ul- 'Irfan, Vol. 2, p.226

"Chador."[^1] While in other narration it has been interpreted as chador
and scarf.[^2]

Apparently, there is no inconsistency between these Islamic traditions.
The purpose is that there is no problem for such women to uncover their
head and to bare their hair, neck, and face. Even in some traditions and
jurists' words, the wrist is exempted, but we have no reasons about more
than this very extension for its exemption.

Anyway, all of these are for the time that such women do not apply
cosmetics, and to cover their hidden adornments as others are enjoined
to do. Also they must not wear garments that attract attentions and, in
other words, they are permitted to go out without (chador) and scarf
while wearing a simple garment and without applying cosmetics.

Yet, this ordinance is not obligatory, but if they do veil themselves
as other women do, it is more preferred, as it is explicitly mentioned
in the end of the verse, because there is the possibility of deviation
and offence in such people, although very rarely.

[^1] Wasa-'il-ush-shi-'ah, the book of Al-Nekaah, C.110, Tradition
No.1

[^2] The above book, Traditions 2 and 3


**Commentary : Verse 61**

61. لَيْسَ عَلَي الاَعْمَي حَرَجٌ وَلاَ عَلَي الاَعْرَجِ حَرَجٌ وَلاَ
عَلَي الْمَرِيضِ حَرَجٌ وَلاَ عَلَي أَنفُسِكُمْ أَن تَأْكُلُوا مِنْ
بُيُوتِكُمْ أَوْبُيُوتِ ءَابَآئِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ أُمَّهَاتِكُمْ أَوْ
بُيُوتِ إِخْوَانِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ أَخَوَاتِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ
أَعْمَامِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ عَمَّاتِكُمْ أَوْبُيُوتِ أَخْوَالِكُمْ أَوْ
بُيُوتِ خَالاَتِكُمْ أَوْ مَا مَلَكْتُم مَّفَاتِحَهُ أَوْ صَدِيقِكُمْ
لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَأْكُلُوا جَمِيعاً أَوْأَشْتَاتاً فَإِذَا
دَخَلْتُم بُيُوتاً فَسَلّـِمُوا عَلَي أَنفُسِكُمْ تَحِيَّةً مّـِنْ عِندِ
اللَّهِ مُبَارَكَةً طَيّـِبَةً كَذَلِكَ يُبَيّـِنُ اللَّهُ لَكُمُ
الاَيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ

61. "There is no blame upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor
any blame upon the sick nor on yourselves that you eat from your houses,
or the houses of your fathers, or the houses of your mothers, or the
houses of your brothers, or the houses of your sisters, or the houses of
your fathers' brothers, or the houses of your fathers' sisters, or the
houses of your mothers' brothers, or the houses of your mothers'
sisters, or(from that) whereof you hold the keys, or (from the house) of
your friend. No sin shall it be for you whether you eat together or
apart. But when you enter houses, salute one another with a greeting
from Allah, blessed and good. Thus does Allah make clear His revelations
for you, so that you might understand."

**Commentary:**

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: "efore Islam the blind, the lame and the sick
were not allowed to eat food with healthy people. This verse permitted
them to eat food in group, with healthy people or if they wanted they
could eat food lonely."[^1]

Anyway, since the previous verses talked about taking permission at
certain times or when entering special place of parents, the concerned
verse is, in fact, an exception from this ordinance, indicating that a
group can enter their relatives' home and the like in certain conditions
and without taking permission, and they can even eat food without having
permission. At first, the verse says:

"There is no blame upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor any
blame upon the sick nor on yourselves that you eat from your
houses,..."

According to some narrations, before converting to Islam, the people of
Medina prevented the blind, the lame and the sick to eat with them at a
table. They did not eat with those people and they hated such a
matter.

And, on the contrary, after Islam some people thought that this kind of
people must eat lonely, not because they hated eating with them, but
maybe because they thought that the blind could not see the existing
good food while they could and they ate, which was against ethics, and
also the lame and the sick were not as fast in eating as healthy people
were so they tarried. Anyway, they did not eat food with such people for
any reason they had , so the blind, the lame and the sick withdrew
themselves, because it was possible that they caused others to worry and
also thought that this was a sin.

[^1] Nar-uth-Thaqalyn, the Commentary

This matter was presented to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and this verse was
sent down, indicating that there is no blame upon the blind, nor any
blame upon the lame nor any blame upon the sick, nor on yourselves that
you eat food with together.[^1]

The writer of Jawami'-ul-Jami' says: In the advent of Islam, some of
believers brought the disabled and the afflicted persons to the houses
of their wives, to the houses of their own offsprings, their relatives'
houses, and their friends' houses, and they fed them. Gradually these
believers thought that this job might be counted a sin for them, and so
they avoided this deed. Then this verse was sent down and indicated that
this deed is not as sin.

The purpose of: "There is no blame ... nor on yourselves..." is that
there is no heaviness and sin for you and for the believers who are like
you.

Some have said that the sick and the poor did not eat and associate
with other people, because they thought people might not like their
company.

Some others have said that when Muslims wanted to go to war, they gave
the key of their houses to the disabled so that these people could eat
whatever they found in those houses. But they thought that this
interference might be unlawful for them, then they avoided eating food
of their houses. Then Allah said that there is no blame on them and you
in this eating.

Then the holy Qur'an adds implying that there is not any blame on
yourselves if you eat from these houses without permission: from your
houses, (the objective is the children

[^1] Dur-ul-Manthar and Nar-uth-Thaqalyn, following the verse. A part of
other commentators also have mentioned this narration in their books
such as: Tabarsa in Majma‘-ul-Bayan, the deceased Fiyd in
Tafsar-us-Safa, Fakhr-i-Raza in Tafsar-ul-Kabar, and Shaykh Tasa in
Tibyan.

and wives which have been rendered into 'your houses'). The verse
continues:

"... or the houses of your fathers, or the houses of your mothers, or
the houses of your brothers, or the houses of your sisters, or the
houses of your fathers' brothers, or the houses of your fathers'
sisters, or the houses of your mothers' brothers, or the houses of your
mothers' sisters, or (from that) whereof you hold the keys, or (from the
house) of a friend. No sin shall it be for you whether you eat together
or apart...."

It seems that, at the advent of Islam, some Muslims avoided eating food
lonely and if they could not find anyone as company for eating food,
they would remain hungry for a time. Then the Qur'an taught them that
eating lonely, or with other persons, is lawful.[^1]

Some commentators have also said that some Arabs believed that, as a
respect, the food of their guest must be served separately and they
ought not to be with him during eating food (lest the guest might become
shy or feel uneasy). This verse removed these considerations and taught
them that this was not an admirable custom.[^2]

Another group of commentators have said that some people believed that
the poor must not eat with the rich, and class division must be observed
even at the time of eating food. The holy Qur'an rejected this wrong and
unjust custom with the above sentence.

There is no problem if this verse refers to all of above affairs. Then
the verse refers to another ethical matter, where it says:

[^1] Tibyan, the Commentary, following the verse

[^2] Ibid

"... But when you enter houses, salute one another with a greeting from
Allah, blessed and good...."

And finally it says:

"... Thus does Allah make clear His revelations for you, so that you
might understand."

That which houses are the purpose of the Qur'anic word /buyut/
(houses), some say that it refers to 11 houses that are mentioned in
above.

Some others say it refers specially to mosques. But, as it is clear,
the verse is unconditional and it embraces all houses, including those
11 ones which a person enters for eating food, or other houses such as:
friends' houses and relatives' houses and so on, because there is no
reason for limiting the vast concept of the verse.

There are some commentaries on the purpose of the Qur'anic phrase: /fa
sallimu 'ala 'anfusikum/ 'saluting one another':

Some say that it means 'to salute one another' as in the story of the
Children of Israel the holy Qur'an says /faqtulu 'anfusakum/: "... and
slay one another (the wrong doers) ..."![^1]

Some commentators say that ,it means to greet to wife, issues and
family, because they are considered as man himself and therefore, it is
stated in the verse in the form of/'anfus/. In the verse of mutual
cursing (Sura 'Al-i-'Imran, No. 3, verse 61) we see such a meaning, and
it shows that sometime when a person gets relationally closed to one
another the word /'anfus/ (self, man himself) will be used, as Imam
Ali's closeness to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) is stated in this way.

Some commentators say that this verse refers to the houses in which no
one lives and when one wants to enter them one

[^1] Sura Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 54

salutes himself with this sentence: "Our greeting and peace will be
from our Lord." or "Our peace be upon us and upon Allah's righteous
servants," We think there is not any inconsistency between these
commentaries; entering every home we must salute, believers must salute
believers, household must salute each other, if there is no one we must
salute ourselves, because all of these, in fact, refer to saluting
oneself.

On the commentary of this verse, Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: "The purpose
of saluting household at the time of entering home is that they will
naturally answer him and returns peace and salutation on himself, and
this is saluting oneself."[^1]

Again, Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: "When a person enters his home and sees
some one there so he must salute him (or her), and if there is no one
there, he must say, peace be upon us from Allah, as Allah has said in
the holy Qur'an: "... a greeting from Allah, blessed and good ... "[^2]
Some Points:

1. Do we not need to take permission for eating others' food? As the
above verse has mentioned, Allah has permitted man to eat food from
close relatives' houses and some friends' houses and such like (on the
whole these houses are 11). In this verse taking permission was not
mentioned as its condition and certainly it does not need taking
permission,because when permission is taken we can eat everyone's food
and it will not be limited to these 11 houses. But, is obtaining inward
consent necessary as a condition because of intimacy and close
acquaintance that is between two parties?

[^1] Nar-uth-Thaqalyn, vol. 3, p. 627

[^2] Ibid

The holy verse apparently rejects this condition, too, and considers it
enough if only he or she is likely consent.

But if the status of two parties is in a way that certainly there is no
assent, although the verse apparently includes all cases from this
viewpoint, it is not impossible that the verse excludes such a case,
especially when such people are rare and general applications do not
cover these rare people.

Therefore, the above verse particularizes, in a certain field, verses
and narrations that limit using others' property to having permission
from their owners save in a special boundary; but we repeat that this
particularization is inside a certain field, such as eating food as it
is necessary and without immoderation.

What was said above is well known among our Islamic jurists and some of
it is mentioned explicitly in narrations from Ahl-ul-Bayt (a.s.).

We read in an authentic narration that when Imam Sadiq (a.s.) was asked
about the Qur'anic phrase /'a Saduqikum/ (or of a friend), he said: "By
Allah! Its purpose is that man enters his friend's (brother's) home and
eats food without having permission."[^1]

There are numerous narrations mentioned that have the same concept and
in them it is said that taking permission is not necessary in these
cases.

On 'lack of corruption and immoderation',some narrations have also
mentioned it explicitly.[^2]

The only thing that remains is a narration that is about this matter.
It says: "Only special nutritional materials can be

[^1] Wasa’il-ush-Sha‘ah, Vol. 16, p. 434, the book of “At‘imah wa
Ashribah”, chapters of ’adab-ul-Ma’idah, C. 24, Tradition No. 1

[^2] Ibid

eaten, not every food." But since this narration is objected by Islamic
jurists, its document would not be valid.

Some Islamic jurists have excepted some foods which are superior and
special, and possibly the landlord has kept for himself or for an
honored guest or for some particular times. It is not impossible that
the verse excepts this case.[^1]

**2. The philosophy of this Islamic ordinance:**

Comparing with other severe divine ordinances that prohibit usurpation,
this ordinance may raise question how Islam permits such a thing while
it is very exact and fastidious in the issue of usurping others'
property.

We think that this question is proper for fully material environments,
such as western societies, in which parents may force their children to
go out of their house when they become a little old! And when parents
get old and disable, they will be dismissed! They do not want to be kind
and gratitude towards them, because in those societies all affairs are
based on economical and financial relationships and usually humane
sentiments do not exist.

With regard to the Islamic culture and humane profound sentiments,
especially between the members of the family, relatives and particular
friends, which dominate this culture, there is nothing to get surprised
at.

In fact, Islam considers close relationships of relatives and friends
as being superior to these issues. This, in fact, indicates the ultimate
friendship and peacefulness that must dominate an Islamic society, and
conceits, exclusionisms, and selfishness must be wiped out from it.

Undoubtedly, the ordinances of usurpation exist in fields other than
this, but in this special field Islam gives priority to

[^1] For more explation refer to the book Jawahir-ul-Kalam, Vol. 36, p.
406

sentimental issues and humane relationships and it is, in fact, an
example for other relations of relatives and friends.

**3. Who does /sadiq/ mean?**

Undoubtedly friendship and friendliness has got a vast meaning, and
here its purpose is certainly those special and close friends that have
very close relationship with each other and whose relation necessitates
going to each other's house and to eat from their food. In such cases,
as we said before, there is no need for being sure about the consent of
other party, if only someone is not sure about the discontentment of
that one, this will be enough.

Thus some commentators have said about this phrase that the purpose is
a friend who treats sincerely with you in his friendship. Some others
say that the purpose is a friend that usually has outwardly and inwardly
the same relation with you. Apparently, all of these statements refer to
one matter.

Meanwhile, in short, it gets clear that those who are not in this
extent generous and forgiving toward their friends, are not in fact
friend.

It is appropriate here to mention a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) who declared comprehensive conditions of friendship and its vast
concept. He (a.s.) said: "Friendship is materialized only when its
conditions and terms are met. Count a person who has all of these terms,
or some of them, as friend. And a person who has nothing of these terms
is not a friend. (Conditions and terms of friendship)

A) His outward and inward are the same for you.

B) He considers your honour, reputation, and enhancement as his and he
counts your fault and gracelessness as his.

C) His rank, wealth and status do not change his position toward you.

D) He does not withhold from you what he can do.

F) A person who has got all of the above attributes does not leave you
alone when you are down on your luck."[^1]

**4. The commentary of /mamalaktum mafatihahu/ ('(from that) whereof
you hold the keys'):**

In some occasions of revelation we read that at the advent of Islam,
when Muslims went to war, they sometimes gave the key of their house to
the disabled who could not fight and even permitted them to eat whatever
food was in the house, but they avoided eating food, because they
thought that this might be sin.

According to this narration, the purpose of this phrase is 'the houses
that you have become the owner of whose keys'[^2]

It has been narrated from Ibn Abbass who said the purpose of this
sentence is man's lawyer or agent due to his domestic animals, farming,
ground, and water. Such person is permitted to eat fruit from the garden
and to drink milk from the animals as much as he needs. Some others also
have interpreted it as storekeeper who has the right to eat some of the
foodstuff.

But, with regard to other groups that are mentioned in this verse, it
seems that the purpose of the phrase is those who give the key of their
house to other person for the sake of close relationship and trust.
Their close relationship has caused them to be like close relatives and
friends, whether he is formally lawyer or not.

If we read in some narrations that this phrase has been interpreted as
a lawyer who is responsible for someone's property, it is, indeed, only
expressing the extension of the meaning and it is not limited to it.

[^1] ’Usal-i-Kafa, Vol. 2, p. 467

[^2] Qurtaba, the Commentary, following the verse

**5. Salutation and greeting:**

As we said before, the Arabic word /tahiyat/ is derived from the word
/hayat/ (life) and it means to pray for someone's health and life,
whether this prayer is in the form of 'Salamun 'Alaykum' (peace on you),
or 'As-Salamu 'Alayna' (Peace on us), or 'Hayyaka Allah' (Allah salutes
you). But usually every kind of expression of kindness that is done in
the beginning of a meeting is called 'Tahiyyat'.

The purpose of the sentence "... a greeting from Allah, blessed and
good ..." is to join greeting with Allah in a way, that is, the purpose
of 'Salamun 'Alaykum' will be that 'Allah salutes you' or 'I ask Allah
your health.", because in the opinion of a believer every prayer that is
in this form is both full of blessings (Muburak) and pure (Tayyib).

Some Islamic traditions on salutation and its importance and obligation
to answer every kind of greeting:

1. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "The stingiest person is the one who is
reluctant to salute (and to greet), and the most generous person is one
who spends his wealth and his life in the path of Allah."[^1]

2. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Salutation is recommended and
answering salutation is obligatory."[^2]

3. Imam Hussayn (a.s.) said: "Salutation has got 70 good points of
which 69 belong to one who begins salutation and one belongs to one who
answers it."[^3]

4. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: "(This is the sign) of modesty that you
salute to whom you meat."

[^1] Bihar, Vol. 73, p. 12

[^2] Ibid

[^3] Bihar, Vol. 75, p. 471

5. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: "One who starts saluting is more prior to
(have the blessing and favour of) Allah and the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)."

6. Imam Rida (a.s.) said: "One who salutes the poor in a way that is
different from the way he salutes the rich will meet Allah, Almighty and
Glorious, on the Day of Hereafter while He is angry at him."[^1]

7. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "The stingiest individual is one who
meets other Muslim and does not salute him."[^2]

8. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "When someone salutes you, you salute him in a
better way, and when someone confers you a blessing, you confer him a
better blessing. But prior is the one who has started saluting and
offering blessing."[^3]

[^1] Wasa’il-ush-Sha‘ah, Vol. 5, p. 442

[^2] Bihar, Vol. 75, p. 12

[^3] Nahj-ul-Balaqah, Translated by Fiydul-Islam, p. 1114


