Commentary : Verse 4.5
======================

4.وَالَّذِينَ يَرْمُونَ الْمُـحَصَنَاتِ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَأْتُوا
بِاَرْبَعَةِ شُهَدَآءَ فَاجْلِدُوهُمْ ثَمَانِينَ جَلْدَةً وَلاَ
تَقْبَلُوا لَهُمْ شَهَادَةً أَبَداً وَاُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ

5. إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ تَابُوا مِن بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ وَأَصْلَحُوا فإِنَّ
اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ

4. " And those who accuse chaste women (with adultery) but do not bring
four witnesses, then scourge them (with) eighty stripes and do not
(afterward) accept their testimony forever, and these are they that are
evil-doers,"

5. " Save those who repent thereafter and make amends, for verily Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful."

**Commentary:**

Accusation is like shooting arrow to the honor and dignity of people
and not observing it. And, the punishment of accusing married and chaste
women is more severe.

Since the pervious verses consist of a heavy punishment for men and
women who commit fornication, and it is possible that some impious
malicious individuals accuse a few pure and chaste persons, thus
immediately after mentioning of severe punishment of adulterers, the
punishment of those who accuse others and intend to misuse this
ordinance is declared, so that the honor and respect of chaste families
can be saved from the threat of such persons, and no one dare denigrate
people. At first, it says:

" And those who accuse chaste women (with adultery) but do not bring
four witnesses, then scourge them (with) eighty stripes ..."

After this heavy punishment, two more ordinances are added, where it
says:

"... and do not (afterward) accept their testimony forever, and these
are they that are evil-doers,"

Thus, in this way, not only such persons are heavily punished, but also
their testimony and speech is invalid and invaluable in a long term, so
that they cannot defame pure individuals. Moreover, the mark of impurity
is set on them and they will be scandalized in the society.

This austereness in saving reputation of pure people is not limited to
this case here, but it is also seen in many Islamic teachings. It
indicates how extremely Islam values reputation of pure female and male
believers.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) in a tradition said: "When a Muslim accuses his
Muslim brother of a matter (that is not done by him), faith will vanish
from his heart as salt melts in water."[^1]

However, in view of the fact that Islam never closes the path of return
to anyone, and it uses every opportunity to encourage wrongdoers to
purify themselves and atone for the former errors and mistakes, in the
next verse the Qur'an adds:

"Save those who repent thereafter and make amends, for verily Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful."

Therefore, according to the traditions narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
and other Imams (a.s.), by repenting both their testimony is valid in
the future and the judgment of being mischievous is abrogated of them in
all fields, because a person who has repented and become just again, the
title of being mischievous will be taken from him.

**Some Traditions on Repentance:**

1. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "An individual who repents his sin is
like a person who is sinless."[^1]

2. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Nothing is more liked before Allah
than a faithful man and woman who regret about sin and then
repent."[^2]

3. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "Impart the pleasant odour of seeking
forgiveness, so that the offensive smell of sins does not stigmatize
you."[^3]

4. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: "The favorite servant before Allah is a
well-doer who repents a lot."[^4]

**Pay attention to some points:**

**1. What does the word 'Ramy' mean here?**

The Arabic word /ramy/ basically means throwing stones or shooting
arrows and like, and it is natural that in many cases it harms.Then this
Arabic word has been used sarcastically in accusation of individuals,
cursing, abusing and unfair imputation, because as if these words and
speeches are like arrows that hit the body of a person and wound him.

Perhaps it is for this reason that this word has been used in an
absolute form in the verses under discussion and later verses. For
example, it has not mentioned, "Those who accuse chaste women of
adultery", because considering verbal contexts, the word 'fornication'
has been omitted in the concept of the word /yarmana/. Moreover, the
lack of clearly expressing it, when chaste women are mentioned, is-
considered as a kind of courtesy, respect, and chastity in words.

**2. Why Four Witnesses?**

We know that in Islam two just witnesses are usually enough for proving
crimes and asserting rights. Even in the case of homicide when there are
two witnesses, the crime is proved, but in the question of accusation to
adultery four witnesses are especially necessary. The reason that
witness outweighs here is possibly the fact that many people accuse
others very easily and they always mar reputation and honour of
individuals suspiciously or not suspiciously. Islam is rather
uncompromising in this respect so that people's honour can be saved. But
in other issues, even homicide, individuals' tongue is not so defiled.

Moreover, in homicide there is only one party, i.e. the criminal is
one, but in adultery two persons are charged with the crime, and if we
require two witnesses for each of them, there will be four witnesses.

This statement is the content of a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq
(a.s.). Abi Hanifah, the famous Sunni jurist, says: "I asked Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) that whether fornication is more condemnable than homicide. He
said: 'No, homicide is.' Then I said: 'Why are two witnesses enough in
proving homicide, but fornication requires 4 witnesses?' He said: 'What
do you say about this matter?" Abi Hanifah could not answer explicitly.
Imam said: "This is because there are two prescribed punishments in
fornication, one of them is for man and the other one is for woman. So
two witnesses are needed. But in homicide only one prescribed punishment
is inflicted on murderer."[^1]

Of course there are some cases of fornication for which prescribed
punishment is inflicted on one party (e.g. rape and suchlike), but these
are the exceptional instances. What is common and obvious is the one
that is committed with mutual agreement, but we know that the philosophy
of ordinances depends on prevailing individuals.

**3. Important condition of repentance:**

We have reiterated this fact that repentance is not only asking Allah's
forgiveness or feeling remorse about past deeds or even deciding to
relinquish an evil act in the future, but in addition to all these
things the wrongdoer must put his best foot forward to amend the past.

If he has really marred reputation and honour of a pure man or woman,
he must, in order to make his repentance accepted, deny what he has said
in the presence of those who have heard his accusation, so to speak, he
must rehabilitate the disgraced person.

The Qur'anic holy phrase /wa 'aslahu/ ("...who ... make amends ...")
that has come after the phrase /tabu/ ("... who repent ...") indicates
this fact that such persons must repent from their sins and then must
atone what wrong they have committed. This is not right that another one
accuses a person of lying in public (or by means of press or mass media)
and then, in his home, when he is alone, he asks Allah's forgiveness.
Allah never accepts such repentance.

Therefore, there are some traditions narrated from the leaders of Islam
as an answer to the question that whether the testimony of those who
accuse someone of dishonour is accepted after they repent and are
prescribedly punished; their answer is "Yes". And when it was asked how
his repentance is done, they said: "He will come to Imam (or Islamic
judge) and will say: 'I accused so and as and I repent of what I have
said'."[^1]

**4. The ordinances of 'Qathf': (false accusation of unlawful
intercourse)**

In the book entitled: "Hudud" (prescribed punishments), there is a
chapter which is called: "the prescribed punishment of Qathf". The word
'Qathf' (on the rhythm of 'Hazf') means hurling something to a far away
place. But in these cases, like the Arabic word /ramy/, it alludes to
dishonouring accusation of an individual. In other words, it is
scurrility and foul language related to these matters.

Whenever 'Qathf' is done explicitly and affirmatively in any language
and in any form, its prescribed punishment is 80 stripes, as it was
mentioned above. If it is not explicit and affirmative, it is subject to
the ordinance of discretionary punishment (the purpose of 'discretionary
punishment' is those sins that have no definite prescribed punishment in
religion, but it is up to the Islamic judge to decide the measure and
the way of punishment in a certain case with regard to the
characteristics of the criminal and the quality of crime as well as
other conditions).

Even if a person accuses a group of people of such a crime, swears at
them and accuses them one by one (singly), there will prescribed
punishment of Qathf for each accusation separately. But if he accuses
them on the whole or altogether, and if they jointly and intemperately
ask punishment for him, he will be inflicted with one prescribed
punishment, but if they separately take legal action against him, for
each accusation he will be imposed with one independent prescribed
punishment.

This is so important that if a person is accused of such a crime and
this person dies, his heirs can sue accuser and ask prescribed
punishment for the accuser. Of course, since this ordinance is among the
personal rights, and if an entitled person forgives wrongdoer, his
prescribed punishment will be canceled, unless this offence is repeated
so many times that reputation and honour of society is threatened, in
this case this crime will be treated differently.

If two persons use bad language about reputation of each other, there
will be no prescribed punishment for both of them, but they will be
imposed with discretionary punishment as judge decides. Thus, no Muslim
has right to answer back foul language, but he can only demand his
rights through the judge of religion and asks for punishment of bad
language user.

Anyway, the purpose of this Islamic ordinance is, first: saving men's
honour and reputation, and second is, preventing ample social and moral
corruptions which bedevil the society, because if corrupted persons are
to be free, they will swear at and accuse every one unjustly and then
they are saved from punishment.

In this condition, people's reputation and honour are always at risk
and even these unjust accusations make a spouse cynical of other half.
And father will be skeptical of his issue's legitimacy. In short, the
existence of family will be threatened, atmosphere of suspicion and
skepticism prevails society, rumour-mongers drive a roaring line, and
all chaste persons will be stained in the opinion of people.

Here, there will be the demand of decisiveness, the same decisiveness
which Islam has presented to these bad language users.

Yes, they must be flogged with 80 stripes as penalty for their evil and
accusing swearing, so that they will never fiddle with people's
reputation and honour.


**Commentary : Verse 6.7.8.9.10**

6. وَالَّذِينَ يَرْمُونَ أَزْوَاجَهُمْ وَلَمْ يَكُن لَّهُمْ شُهَدَآءُ
إِلآَّ أَنفُسُهُمْ فَشَهَادَةُ أَحَدِهِمْ أَرْبَعُ شَهَادَاتٍ بِاللَّهِ
إِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ

7. وَالْخَامِسَةُ أَنَّ لَعْنَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْهِ إِن كَانَ مِنَ
الْكَاذِبِينَ

8. وَيَدْرَؤُا عَنْهَا الْعَذَابَ أَن تَشْهَدَ أَرْبَعَ شَهَادَاتٍ
بِاللَّهِ إِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الْكَاذِبِينَ

9. وَالْخَامِسَةَ أَنَّ غَضَبَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْهَآ إِن كَانَ مِنَ
الصَّادِقِينَ

10. وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ
تَوَّابٌ حَكِيمٌ

6. " And (as for) those who accuse their wives (with adultery), and
have (in support) no witness except themselves, then the testimony of
one of them (shall be taken) four times (swearing) by Allah that verily
he is of the truthful (ones);"

7. "And the fifth (oath to be) that the curse of Allah be on him if he
is one of the liars."

8. "And it shall avert the punishment from her if she bears witness
four times (swearing) by Allah that verily he is one of the liars,"

9. "And the fifth (oath) should be that the wrath of Allah be upon her
if he is of the truthful (ones)."

10. "And had it not been Allah's grace and His mercy on you, and that
Allah is Oft-Pardoning, All-Wise, (you would have been ruined and
undone)."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

Among some of the Companions, Sa'ad Ibn 'Ibadeh (the great of The
Helpers) told the Prophet (p.b.u.h.): "O' Prophet of Allah! When
accusing someone of this unchaste action has such a punishment that if
an accuser can not prove it, he will be flogged with 80 stripes, so what
can I do when I enter my home and I do see that a miscreant man is
having sexual intercourse with my wife?

If I wait for four persons to come and see and then testify, the time
has passed and that evil man has done his job, and if I want to kill
him, no one believes me without witnesses and I will be retaliated
justly as a murderer; and if I tell what I have seen to judge, I will be
flogged with 80 stripes." Some minutes later his cousin (son of his
uncle) by the name of Hilal-Ibn 'Umayyah entered to report to the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) that he had seen a miscreant man with his wife at
night. He explicitly said: "I have seen this fact with my own eyes and I
heard their voice with my own ears."

At this time the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) became so annoyed that the sign of
his unhappiness appeared in his blessed face. Hilal said: "I see by your
face how annoyed you have become, but, by Allah, I tell the truth and I
hope Allah Himself helps me." At this time Gabriel came down and
revealed this verse and its following four verses to the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) and presented Muslims its real exact solution.

Here, the Holy Qur'an has excluded some cases from the judgment of
Qathf (false accusation); if a husband accuses his wife of unchaste
action and says that he has seen her while she was doing sexual
intercourse with a strange man, Qathf judgment will not be imposed on
this husband, and, on the other hand, the husband's claim about his wife
will not be accepted without reason and witness.

Here, the holy Qur'an suggests a proposition that the problem will be
solved justly and in a most excellent way. That proposition is that the
husband must first testify four times for proving that his claim is
true. As the Qur'an says:

" And (as for) those who accuse their wives (with adultery), and have
(in support) no witness except themselves, then the testimony of one of
them (shall be taken) four times (swearing) by Allah that verily he is
of the truthful (ones);"

And in the next verse the Qur'an says:

"And the fifth (oath to be) that the curse of Allah be on him if he is
one of the liars."

Thus it implies that the husband repeats this sentences for four times,
saying: he testifies by Allah that he is telling the truth in accusing
his wife of adultery!

In the fifth time the husband says that: May he be cursed by Allah if
he tells a lie.

Now the wife is facing a dilemma; if she confirms her husband's words
or she does not agree to deny this accusation, according to the way that
is mentioned in the next verse, she will decisively be imposed with
prescribed punishment of fornication. Thus in the next verse it says:

"And it shall avert the punishment from her if she bears witness four
times (swearing) by Allah that verily he is one of the liars,"

And the next verse mentions:

"And the fifth (oath) should be that the wrath of Allah be upon her if
he is of the truthful (ones)."

Thus, the wife testifies five times that her husband's
five-time-declared testimony that she has committed adultery is untrue.
Four times she repeats this sentence:"I testify by Allah that he is
telling untruth in his accusation of my adultery."

In the fifth time she declares an oath saying: "Should be that she
solemnly invokes the wrath of Allah upon herself if he (her accuser) is
telling the truth."

The fulfilment of this Islamic custom in Arabic is called /li'an/
(conjugal anathema, or imprecation) because of the word /la'n/ (curse)
mentioned in the above sentences. Doing /li'an/ leads to four certain
judgments for these two spouses.

A) Without the formula of repudiation (divorce), they will immediately
separate from each other.

B) This wife and husband will be perpetually unlawful to each other;
and there will never be the chance of a new marriage between them.

C) There will be no Qathf punishment for this husband and the
prescribed punishment of adultery for the wife.

D) The issue that is created through this phenomenon will not be
related to husband, but the issue's affinity with wife remains.

Finally in the last one of the concerned verses, it says:

"And had it not been Allah's grace and His mercy on you, and that Allah
is Oft-Pardoning, All-Wise, (you would have been ruined and undone)."

In fact this holy verse is as a compact indication that puts emphasis
on the above judgments, because it shows that the custom of /li'an/ is a
Divine bounteousness that solves the problem of relationship between
wife and husband in a right way.

First, it does not compel husband to be silent when he saw his wife has
committed a wrong action and to withdraw from instituting legal
proceedings.

Second, as soon as the accusation takes place, it does not declare wife
to the prescribed punishment of adultery and it grants wife the right to
defend herself.

Third, it does not demand husband to go after four witnesses when he
saw this scene and so lets the cat out of the bag.

Fourth, it divorces this wife and husband who are unable to continue
their married life and even it does not allow them to be spouses with
each other again in the future, because if this accusation is true, they
can not psychically continue their married life and if it is a lie,
wife's sentiment is so spoiled that returning to a new life becomes
difficult, because the result of such affair is animosity and hostility
not chilly detachment.

Fifth, it also settles the situation of the issue.

By using a delicate, measured, and just solution, Allah has cleared up
this difficult problem. He has shown His bless, bounteousness,
forgiveness, and intellect towards His servants. If we contemplate this
matter, we see that the main judgment that demands four witnesses is not
totally cancelled, but in case of wife and husband each of these four
'testimonies' are substituted for one 'witness' and some of its
judgments are taken into consideration.

**Some matters to be mentioned:**

**1. Why is Qathf allocated to spouses?**

The first question that is brought up here is that what characteristics
do two spouses have that such an exceptional judgment has been declared
about thema The answer of this question can be, on one hand, found in
the occasion of revelation of the verse, and that is when a man sees his
wife with a strange man he can not be silent, if he possibly wants. How
does his jealousy allow him to show no reaction against infringement of
his honour and reputation? If he wants to go to judge and say something,
he will be imposed with Qathf punishment, because the judge does not
know he is right, perhaps he tells a lie. If he wants to go after 4
witnesses, it will be against his face and reputation; moreover, it is
possible that the affair ends during finding of witnesses.

On the other hand, strange persons accuse each other of this evil
action very soon, but wife and husband accuse each other less. Thus,
having 4 witnesses is necessary for strange persons, otherwise Qathf
punishment will be carried out, but it is not the same for wife and
husband. Therefore, this judgment is because of their characteristics.

**2. Li'an, a Special Program:**

According to explanations that were given in the commentary of the
verses, to annul Qathf punishment of man who accuses his wife of
adultery, man must testify four times by Allah that he is telling the
truth. As a matter of fact, in this special case, each of these four
testimonies takes place of a witness. And in the fifth time he most
heartedly and willingly wishes Allah's curse, if he tells a lie.

Considering that these regulations are usually carried out along with
religious obligations in an Islamic environment, and when one person
sees that he must so decisively testify by Allah in the presence of an
Islamic judge, and he must curse himself, most of times this bad action
(accusation) is not committed. And this prevents man from untrue
accusations.

The fact that the wife must testify four times by Allah that this
accusation is untrue, is to equalize the testimony of wife and husband.
And, since wife is the one who is accused of adultery, she defends
herself in the fifth time with a more severe sentence than that of the
men and she demands Allah's wrath if the husband tells the truth. We
know that 'La'nat' (curse)means not enjoying Allah's mercy, but 'Qadab'
(wrath) is something worse than being aloof of Allah's mercy,because
wrath demands a punishment that is more than cursing. Thus, in the
commentary of Sura Al-Hamd, we said that 'Maqdub-i- 'Alayhim' ("...not
(the path) of those inflicted with Your wrath") are persons who are
worse than 'Dallan' ("...(those) gone astray."), though 'Dallah' or
those who go astray do not certainly acquire Allah's mercy.

**Some Traditions on Calumny:**

1. Imam Rida (a.s.) narrated from his fathers who said: "The Messenger
of Allah (p.b.u.h.) said: 'One who calumniates a faithful man or woman,
or says something about her (or him) which is not in him (or her), in
the Resurrection Day Allah, the Exalted, will set that calumniator on a
heap of Fire so that what he has said about him or her comes out of him,
(and he will be cleaned by suffering that chastisement)."[^1]

2. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "A believer does not deceive his (religious)
brother, nor does he betray him, nor does he disappoint him, nor does he
slander him, nor does he says: 'I hate you'."[^2]

3. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "The (sin of) culminating someone (who is
clean and pure) is heavier than skies."[^3]

4. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "No shamelessness is like culmination."[^4]

5. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Whoever calumniates a Muslim in order
to bother him, on the Day of Judgment Allah will keep him in the bile
sludge of Hell-dwellers till He judges between people."[^5]


