Commentary : Verse 19.20
========================

19.إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُحِبُّونَ أَن تَشِيعَ الْفَاحِشَةُ فِي الَّذِينَ
ءَامَنُوا لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالاَخِرَةِ وَاللَّهُ
يَعْلَمُ وَأَنتُمْ لاَتَعْلَمُونَ

20. وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ
رَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ

19. "Verily those who love that indecency should be spread concerning
those who believe, theirs will be a painful punishment in the world and
the Hereafter; and Allah knows, while you do not know."

20. "And had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy on you,
and Allah is Compassionate, Merciful, (you would have been
chastised)."

**Commentary:**

Interest in spreading indecency is sometimes materialized by tongue and
pen and sometimes by setting up some centers of abomination and
wickedness, encouraging others to commit sin, and providing others with
facilities for doing wrong action and committing sin.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: "One who hears or sees something about a
believer and retells it for others is among the examples of this
verse."[^1]

There is a tradition that says one who gives publicity to an evil
action is like the one who commits it.[^2]

Therefore in this verse, for leaving no doubt, the words are changed
from expressing a private phenomenon into statement of a general and
comprehensive rule. It says:

"Verily those who love that indecency should be spread concerning those
who believe, theirs will be a painful punishment in the world and the
Hereafter;..."

It is worth-studying that the verse does not say: those who spread
indecency, but it says "Verily those who love that indecency should be
spread', and this is The ultimate emphasis on this field.

In other words, it says it must not be thought that such insistence and
emphasis is just for the sake that the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.),
or someone as important as her, is accused, but if such a thing happens
to anyone and to every faithful person, this emphasis and insistence
will be applied to that person, because other aspects will be added to
it.

By the way, we must pay careful attention to the fact that spreading
indecency is not allocated to only spreading false baseless accusation
of a faithful man and woman and to accuse them of an unchaste action.
This is one of its examples and it is not limited to it. This phrase has
got a wider concept that involves every kind of dissemination of
corruption, spreading indecency and giving help to its development.

Of course, in the holy Qur'an, the Arabic word /fahisah/,or /fahsa/, is
mostly applied to sexual deviations and obscenity in honour,
(defilements of honour), but philologically, as Raqib says in the book
Mufradat, 'Fuhsh', 'Fahsha', and 'Fahishah' refer to any behaviour and
speech that the obscenity of it is very bad and great. And, in the holy
Qur'an, it is sometimes used in the same vast meaning, such as the verse
which says: "And those who shun the great sins and indecencies, ..."[^1]
Thus, the extent of the concept of the verse gets completely clear.

But, the sentence "... theirs will be a painful punishment in the
world..." may refer to religiously prescribed punishments, social
reactions, and individual gloomy consequences that in this very world
will catch those who commit these actions. Moreover, their deprivation
from the right of testimony and their condemnation to disgrace and
iniquity are also its other worldly signs.

The agonizing punishment of the Hereafter is Hell Fire, Divine wrath
and fury, and not enjoying Allah's bless.

At the end of the verse, it says:

"... and Allah knows, while you do not know."

Allah is well aware of the gloomy consequences and fatal results of
spreading indecency both in the world and the Hereafter, but we are not
aware of its different dimensions.

He does know in whose heart the interest and love of committing this
sin lies. He knows those who carry out this evil action under beguiling
names, but we do not know them. He knows how to reveal His ordinances to
prevent this wicked and indecent action.

In the last verse in question, that is the last verse which is about
'Ifk', 'struggling with indecency', and 'Qathf, again emphasis is put on
the fact that: Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto
you, and if Allah were not Clement, Merciful on you, He would have sent
such a great and painful chastisement upon you in this world that your
life could be ruined. The verse says:

"And had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy on you, and
Allah is Compassionate, Merciful, (you would have been chastised)."

**Pay attention to some matters:
1- What is Spreading Indecency?**

Since man is a social creature, the great community in which he lives,
from one point of view, is like his home and its enclosure are counted
as that of his home. The pureness of society helps his pureness and its
defilement helps his defilement. Consequently, Islam is against anything
that pollutes the atmosphere of the society and severely struggles with
anything that defiles it.

If we see that backbiting is severely struggled with in Islam, one of
its philosophies is that backbiting divulges secret faults and
dishonours society.

If we see that it is commanded to hide faults, one of its reasons is to
prevent sin from being common and widespread.

We see that open and seen sin is more important than hidden and covered
sin. It is so important that Imam Rida (a.s.) says: "One who
disseminates sin is rejected and one who hides sin is divinely
forgiven."

If we see that in the above verses spreading indecency is severely
reprimanded and condemned, is also because of this.

Essentially sin is like fire. When this fire is stirred in a part of
society, it must be tried to put off the fire or at least to encircle
it. But if we spread fire and move it from one part to the other part,
fire will increase and no one can control it.

Moreover, the importance of sin in the opinion of people and saving the
superficial aspect of society are great bars against corruption.
Spreading slander and sin and pretending wickedness unbar it, belittle
the sin and make being involved in it easy.

The Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) in a tradition said: "One who disseminates
a wickedness is like one who has first (committed and) established
it."[^1]

Also there is a tradition that says: "One day a man came to Imam masa
Ibn Ja'far (a.s.) and said: 'May I lay down my life for you!One of
brothers retold me something about a religious brother, the thing which
I disliked. I asked him (that religious brother), but he denied it,
while some of trustworthy persons narrated this.' Imam said: 'When
something bad is told about your brother, do not believe your eye and
ear.

Even if 50 persons take oath that he has done it and he says he has not
done it, accept him. Do not disseminate anything that causes him
disgrace and slander in society. If you do it, you will be one of those
about whom Allah says: 'Verily those who love that indecency should be
spread concerning those who believe, theirs will be a painful punishment
in the world and the Hereafter...[^2]'."[^3]

It is also necessary to mention that 'spreading indecency' has got
different forms:

Sometimes there are centers that cause corruption and disseminate
wickedness. Sometimes the case is in the form of providing people with
means of sin, or encouraging people to commit wrong action. Finally the
result is being no more decent and modest and then they commit sin in
public. All of these are examples of 'spreading indecency', because the
concept of this phrase is vast and extensive.

**2- The Calamity of Rumour-mongering:**

Vamping and circulating false rumours is one of the main branches of
conspirators' psychological warfare. When enemy cannot bring damage to
the other party face to face, it resorts to spreading rumour. In this
way enemy worries public opinion and makes people self-busy, so people
are diverted from their main and crucial issues.

Rumour vamping is one of the ruinous weapons to mar the reputation of
pure and good persons and to scatter people who are around them.

In the concerning verses, according to the famous occasions of
revelation, for weakening and marring the reputation of the Messenger of
Allah (p.b.u.h.), some hypocrites fabricated and circulated the most
unfair rumour. And, using a proper opportunity, they expressed doubts
about pureness of some of the wives of the great Prophet of Islam
(p.b.u.h.).

For a relatively long period, they upset Muslims so much that the real
and steadfast believers twisted like the person who is bitten by a
snake. And then the divine revelation was sent down to help them and it
castigated the hypocrites so much that others would take lessen.

Though in societies in which there is political repression, spreading
rumour is considered a kind of campaigning, other motivations such as
retaliation, settlement of personal accounts, ruining public trust,
marring some great persons' notability, and deviating people from
thinking about political issues are also counted as the main factors of
mongering rumour.

This is not enough for us to know what motivation is the cause of
fabricating rumour,but it is important to give warning to people to
avoid being puppet of rumour-fabricators and the factor of its
circulation, and so they do not get the means of society destruction
provided. People must be aware that when they hear a rumour, they must
bury it immediately; otherwise we have made the enemy happy and
successful. Moreover, we will be imposed with painful punishment of the
world and the Hereafter, which has been mentioned in the above verses.

**3- Sin should not be counted trifle:**

One of the issues that were reprimanded in the above verses was that
people commit a sin, such as spreading calumny and slander, while they
consider it rather little.

Verily belittling sin is itself one of the sins. A person who commits a
sin, and then magnifies it and is upset by his action, tries to repent
and make amends, but a person who belittles sin and even sometimes he
says: "How blessed I am, because I have only committed this sin", is in
a dangerous path and still he continues his sin.

Thus, Imam Ali (a.s.) in a tradition said: "The severest sin is the sin
whose committer considers it light."[^1]


**Section 3 : Slandering Chaste Women Commentary : Verse 21**

Not to follow Satan’s steps for bids filth and evil – Slandering chaste
women shall be punished in this world and in the Hereafter

21. يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا لاَ تَتَّبِعُوا خُطُوَاتِ
الشَّيْطَانِ وَمَن يَتَّبِعْ خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ فَإِنَّهُ يَأْمُرُ
بِالْفَحْشَآءِ وَالْمُنكَرِ وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ
وَرَحْمَتُهُ مَا زَكَي مِنكُم مِن أَحَدٍ أَبَداً وَلَكِنَّ اللَّهَ
يُزَكّـِي مَن يَشَآءُ وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ

21. “O you who believe! Do not follow the steps of the Satan. And
whoever follows the steps of the Satan, then verily he commands
indecency and wrong. Had it not been Allah’s grace and His mercy on you,
not one of you would have ever been pure. But Allah purifies whom He
pleases; and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”

**Commentary:**

The Arabic word /xutuwat/ is the plural form of the word /xutwat/ that
means ‘step’. The holy Qur’an has used the phrase /xutuwatis saytan/
(‘the footsteps of the Satan’) when it is the matter of calumny and
lust, in order to indicate that Satan encourages man step by step to do
some sins.

Though these verses do not follow the subject of ’Ifk, they complete
the content of that matter. It is a warning for all believers that evil
thoughts and deeds sometimes penetrate gradually and invisibly. If they
are not controlled and hindered in their first steps, man will get
alerted when the die is cast. Thus when the first temptations of
spreading lewdness or any sin get manifest, they must be immediately
withstood, so that defilement does not get prevalent.

In the first verse, addressing the believers, it says:

“O you who believe! Do not follow the steps of the Satan. And whoever
follows the steps of the Satan, then verily he commands indecency and
wrong....”

If ‘Shaytan’ is interpreted into the vast meaning of the word, as any
‘ruinous, felonious, cunning creature’, the extensiveness of this
warning in all dimensions of life becomes clear.

A pure and faithful man can never be all of a sudden involved in
corruption, but it is done step by step:

First step: hobnobbing and getting familiar with wicked persons

Second step: attending their parties

Third step: thought of sin

Fourth step: committing questionable examples and errors

Fifth step: committing lesser sins

Finally he will do the worst sins and he is just like a person on whom
an offender’s yoke is laid and the offender leads him to precipice step
by step, so that he falls down and will be ruined. Yes, these are ‘the
footsteps of the Satan’.[^1]

Then the verse refers to one of the most important Divine favours and
blessings which are bestowed on man in the path of guidance. It says:

“... Had it not been Allah’s grace and His mercy on you, not one of you
would have ever been pure. But Allah purifies whom He pleases; and Allah
is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”

Undoubtedly, Divine grace and bless rescue men from defilements, sins
and deviations, because He has conferred, on one hand, the gift of
intellect and, on the other hand, the grace of the existence of the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and ordinances that have been sent down by
revelation. Moreover, His special help, and supernatural aids that cover
deserving, receptive, and apt men are the most important factors of
purification and cleanness.

The Qur’anic holy phrase /manyasa’/, as we have said repeatedly, does
not mean unreasonable will and desire, but Allah does not do any
guidance and does not confer any grace, unless attempt and exertion is
carried out by servants. One who has decided to go this path and tries,
Allah will hold his hands, saves him from devils’ temptations and so
leads him to the destination.

In other words, Divine grace and bless has sometime religious aspect,
that has come forth through mission of prophets, revelation of heavenly
books, legalization of ordinances, glad tidings and warnings. And it is
sometime genetic or inherent, that comes forth through Divine spiritual
helps. The verses in question (out of indication of the sentence ‘man
yasha’) mostly concern the second section.

Meanwhile, we must pay attention that the words ‘Zakat’ and ‘Tazkiyah’
originally mean ‘to grow’ and ‘to cause to grow’, but in most cases they
have been applied in the sense of: ‘to become clean’ and ‘to clean
something’. They may have one root, because no growth and development
occurs when evils and corruptions are not got rid of.


