Commentary : Verse 22
=====================

22. وَلاَ يَأْتَلِ اُولُواْ الْفَضْلِ مِنكُمْ وَالسَّعَةِ أَن يُؤْتُوا
أُولِي الْقُرْبَي وَالْمَسَاكِينَ وَالْمُهَاجِرِينَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ
وَلْيَعْفُوا وَلْيَصْفَحُوا أَلاَ تُحِبُّونَ أَن يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ
وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ

22. "And let not those who possess dignity and ease among you swear
against giving to the near of kin and the needy, and fugitives for the
cause of Allah. And they should pardon and overlook. Do you not like
that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."

**Commentary:**

The Arabic word /Safaha/ means to ignore, which is more important than
forgiveness. Some have said that /safh/ is a forgiveness that is without
rebuke and reproof.

Some commentators have narrated an occasion of revelation for this holy
verse, which shows how this verse is related to the pervious verses.

They say that this holy verse was revealed about some Companions of the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.). After the event of 'Ifk, they took an oath to
withdraw their financial helps from those who were involved in that
event and spread this great calumny. They decided to give them no
generous succour, in anything. But this noble verse prevented them from
this violation and harshness. It orders them to be forgiving and
lenient.

This occasion of revelation has been quoted by QurtAbi in his
commentary narrated from Ibn Abbas;and Dahhak, as well as the deceased
Tabarsi, have narrated it from Ibn Abbas and other persons, and it is
general.

But some Sunni commentators insist that this verse is revealed about
Abi Bakr who terminated his financial help to Mastah Ibn 'Athathah, his
maternal aunt's son or his sister's son, who helped to the circulation
of 'Ifk. However all pronouns that are used in the verse are plural.
This matter shows that a group of Muslims decided to put an end to their
helps unto these wrongdoers, and this verse prohibited them from this
decision.

Anyway, we know that the verses of Qur'an are not limited to occasion
of revelation, and they involve all believers till Doomsday. The holy
verse implicitly recommends Muslims not to be influenced by hot vehement
feelings and they should not make rough and excessive decisions against
wrongdoers' errors and faults.

With regard to this occasion of revelation, we return to the commentary
of the verse. The holy Qur'an says:

"And let not those who possess dignity and ease among you swear against
giving to the near of kin and the needy, and fugitives for the cause of
Allah...."

This way of saying shows that a group of those who were involved in
'Ifk were from among the Emigrants in the way of Allah. They were
deceived by hypocrites and because of their past records Allah did not
allow them to be ostracized from Islamic society and He did not let the
Muslims decide some horrible things about them that were more than the
limit they deserved.

Meanwhile the Qur'anic holy phrase /la ya'til/ is whether derived from
the word /'iliyyah/ (on the rhythm of /'itiyyah/), meaning to take an
oath, or from the word /'alw/ (on the rhythm of 'Dalw'), meaning to
abandon and to shrink. Thus, the verse, according to the first meaning,
prohibits taking an oath to terminate such helps. And, according to the
second meaning, the verse precludes withdrawal of such action. Then to
encourage Muslims to continue such good deeds, it adds:

"... And they should pardon and overlook...."

As we expect Allah's forgiveness, we must not forget to forgive others.
The verse continues saying:

"... Do you not like that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful."

It is interesting that, on one hand, the companions of 'Ifk were
severely reprimanded, but, on the other hand, to prevent extremists from
resorting to measures beyond the norm and to control their feelings, 3
sentences, each of which is more interesting and remarkable than the
others, were used: first, it is ordered to be forgiving and condoning.

Then it says: "... Do you not like that Allah should forgive you? ...",
(so you must forgive). Finally, two of Allah's attributes that are
'Forgiving' and 'Merciful' are mentioned as an emphasis. It indicates
that they could not be more legalistic than Allah's commandment.
Allah,Who Himself has issued this judgment, is Forgiving and Merciful.
He enjoined them not to terminate the helps, so what did they want to
say?

Undoubtedly, all Muslims who were involved in 'Ifk affair did not have
a before-hand scheme, but some pseudo-Muslim hypocrites set it and a
group of deceived Muslims followed them. Certainly all of them were on
the wrong side of the law and were guilty, but there were a lot of
differences between these two groups. They could not be treated alike.

Anyway, the above-mentioned holy verses are today and tomorrow a great
lesson for Muslims and all future generations; when some persons commit
a sin or make a mistake we must not exceed in the limits of
punishment.They must be excluded from Islamic society and must not be
barred from helps so that they resort to enemy and become one of foes.

The above verses, in fact, portray the balance of Islamic repulsion and
attraction; the verses of 'Ifk and the severe punishment of those who
made false statements about people's wives compose the great power of
repulsion. The verse in question, that mentions Allah's mercifulness,
forgiveness, and clemency, represents the attraction!


**Commentary : Verse 23**

23. إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَرْمُونَ الْمُـحْصَنَاتِ الْغَافِلاَتِ
الْمُؤْمِنَاتِ لُعِنُوا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالاَخِرَةِ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ
عَظيمٌ

23. "Verily those who accuse chaste, believing women unaware (of evil),
are cursed in this world and the Hereafter, and for them shall be a
grievous chastisement,"


**Commentary:**

Of course unbelievers, murderers, advocates of illegitimate rulers,
hypocrites, mischief-makers, polytheists, the arrogant, oppressors,
liars, perjurers, and those who disclaim the Truth have been cursed in
the Qur'an, but the curse of the world and the Hereafter along with
great punishment, covers only those who stigmatize pure persons.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) considers this verse as evidence for the fact that
unjust accusation of pure and chaste women is one of the great
sins.[^61]

Thus, in this verse the Qur'an returns to the issue of Qathf and
accusing chaste faithful women of unchaste action, and it decisively
says:

" Verily those who accuse chaste, believing women unaware (of evil),
are cursed in this world and the Hereafter, and for them shall be a
grievous chastisement,"

In fact, three attributes are mentioned for these women. Each of these
attributes is a reason for the importance of the oppression that is
imposed on them through calumny. These attributes are: 'Mohsanat'
('virtuous women'), 'Qafilat' ('far from and unaware (of any
pollution)'), and 'Mu'minat' ('believing women'). In this way it is
indicated how oppressing and unfair is accusing these persons of
inadmissible accusations and this action deserves a great
punishment.[^1]

By the way, the application of the Qur'anic word /qafilat/ is an
interesting meaning. It specifies the ultimate of their pureness from
any deviation and unchasteness. It means that they are so heedless of
sexual defilements that as if they are not at all aware of it. For
sometimes the attitude of a person toward sin is in a way that thought
of sin goes out of his mind, as if there were not existed at all such an
action. This is the supreme grade of piety.

Another possibility is that the purpose of /qafilat/ is the women who
are not aware of the unjust accusations attributed to them; therefore,
they do not defend themselves. So, this verse mentions a new matter
about such accusations, because the pervious verses referred to the
calumniators who could be recognized and then would be punished, but,
here, the rumour-fabricators,

who have hidden themselves from punishment and religiously prescribed
punishment, are brought up. The Qur'an implies that they should not
think that by this action they can escape from the Divine punishment
forever. Allah, the Almighty, curses them in the world and, in the
Hereafter, they will have an awful chastisement.

With regard to the fact that the above verse is placed after the story
of 'Ifk, and it seems that its revelation had some relation with this
affair, but like,many verses that are sent down for a special case and
their content is general, this verse is also not limited to a certain
case.

It is strange that some commentators such as Fakhr-i-Razi, in his book:
'Tafsir-i-KAbir' and some others insist that the

[^1] Al-mazan, Vol. 15, p. 122

content of this verse is limited to calumniation of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.)'s wives. They mainly equal this sin to paganism and consider
the word /lu'inu/ (cursed), mentioned in the verse, as reason for it.

Of course calumniation is a great sin and if it is about the wives of
the Prophet (p.b.u.h.), it is greater and more cardinal, yet it does not
by itself bring paganism. Thus, the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) did not treat
those who were involved in that affair as apostates, but, as we
explained in the commentary of the holy successive verses, he
recommended the Muslims to be being merciful toward them and not to be
excessively violent toward them, which is not consistent with
paganism.

The word /la'n/ is 'being away from Allah's bless', which is applied to
pagans and those who commit cardinal sins. Therefore, in the verses that
are about the punishment of Qathf (in the ordinances of /li'an/
(conjugal anathema)), the word /la'n/ has been applied two times about
liars.

In Islamic narrations, the word /la'n/ (curse) is frequently applied to
those who commit great sins. The tradition which says: "Allah has cursed
ten groups concerning wine..."[^1] is very famous.

[^1] Khisal, by Saduq, Chapter 'Asharah


