Section 4 : Control and Regulation of Morals Commentary : Verse 27
==================================================================

Restrictions against uncontrolled visits to other’s residences -
Guarded dealings between males and females -Exhortation for chastity
among men as well as women – Display of personal beauty and adorning
prohibited - Appearance of women before males, other than her husband,
regulated - Wedlock commanded - Liberation of slaves enjoined -
Compulsion to slaves to yield to unchaste ways prohibited – Allah’s
Pardon for the repentant promised

27. يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا لاَ تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتاً غَيْرَ
بُيُوتِكُمْ حَتَّي تَسْتَأْنِسُوا وَتُسَلّـِمُوا عَلَي أَهْلِهَا
ذَلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ

27. “O you who believe! Do not enter houses other than your own houses
until you have asked permission and saluted those in them. That is
better for you, so that you might be admonished.”

**Commentary:**

The Arabic word /’istanas/ means to ask permission and to declare one’s
entrance or coming in. According to some Islamic narrations, entrance to
a place can be stated by saying Allah’s name, or by footfall, or by
greeting calling hello, and the like.[^1]

Some one asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) whether he had to ask permission
for entering his mother's house. He said:

[^1] Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, the Commentary

“Yes.” That man said: “Except her no one lives in the house, and except
me no servant she has!” The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: “Do you like to see
your mother nude?”The man said: “No.” Then the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said:
“So ask permission.”

There is another narration in which the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) prohibited
men from entering the houses in which women’s guardians are not
present.[^1]

In narrations we read that we must ask permission for three times so
that those people in the house may have time enough to get ready. (Of
course, permission is asked only for entering others’ house. Man can
enter his house without prior notice.) For saving a person who is
sinking in the water, the oppressed and one who is trapped in fire no
permission is needed.[^2]

Whenever the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) wanted to enter a house, he did not
stand in front of its door for asking permission, but he stood either on
the left or right so that his blessed look might not fall inside the
house.[^3]

In another authentic narration we read that when the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
wanted to enter the house of his daughter, Fatimah (a.s.), he put his
hand on the door and then pushed it aside a little. Then he said: “Peace
be upon you!” Fatimah (a.s.) answered her father. Then the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) said: “May I enter?” Fatimah (a.s.) said: “Yes, O’ Messenger
of Allah (p.b.u.h.)!” The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: “May my companion
enter the house, too?” Then she said: “I have no veil on my head.” When
she veiled herself in an Islamic way, the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) made
salutation again and Fatimah (a.s.) answered. Again he (p.b.u.h.) asked
permission for himself. And after her

[^1] Nur-uth-Thaqalyn

[^2] Tafsir-i-KAbir by Fakhr-i-Razi

[^3] Tafsir-i-KAbir, and Fi Zilal

agreement, he asked permission for his companion, Jabir Ibn
‘Abdullah.

This tradition shows well how exactly the noble Prophet (p.b.u.h.), who
was a paragon for common Muslims, observed these matters.

Even in some narrations we read that 3 times we must ask permission.
The first time for hearing the voice of the person who asks permission.
The second one is for getting ready. The third one lets the household to
issue permission or not.

Even some say that some time must be passed between each time of
getting permission so that if landlord has not worn a proper clothing,
or he is in a state that he does not like anyone to see, or sometimes
room is messed up, or there are some secrets in the house that must not
be discovered, he may have time to get ready. And if he does not give
permission, we must leave him without getting upset.

Anyway, we must always withdraw anything that may violate modesty or
reverence.

Thus in this noble verse, some of proprieties and social orders of
Islam that have a very close relation with the issues of saving common
chastity are stated, and that is how to enter people’s homes and how to
ask permission for entrance.

The verse says:

“O you who believe! Do not enter houses other than your own houses
until you have asked permission and saluted those in them. ...”

So, in this way the announcement of your decision to enter the house is
expressed beforehand and the household’s agreement is always achieved.

It is interesting that,here, the Arabic phrase /tasta’nisu/ has been
used, not the word ‘Tasta’oinu’, because the second word only refers to
asking permission, but the first word which is derived from the Arabic
word /’uns/, implies a permission that is along with kindness,
familiarity, and truthfulness. It shows that even begging permission
must be done politely, friendly and without any violation.

Thus if we split the sentence, many of customs that are related to this
matter are summarized in it. It means not to cry, not to knock at the
door hard, not to use harsh obscene words for begging permission, and
also that when permission is given we must not enter the house without
greeting, a salutation that is the sign of peace, tranquility, and
messenger of kindness and friendship.

It is worth-studying that this ordinance,whose humane and sentimental
aspect is clear, is accompanied with two sentences: /oalikum xayrun
lakum/ (“That is better for you”), and /la‘allakum taoakkaran/ (“... so
that you might be admonished”). This way of statement indicates that
such ordinances are rooted in humane sentiments, ration, and intellect.
If man contemplates them, he will get aware that they are good for him.
The verse continues saying:

“... That is better for you, so that you might be admonished.”

Anyway, purification and self-edification are achieved through
observing people’s rights and applying Islamic customs. When we want to
enter common centers, we must remember Allah and we must know that Allah
watches our thoughts and behaviour. The Qur’an says: “... and Allah
knows what you proclaim reveal what you conceal.”[^1]

[^1] Sura Al-Ma'idah, No. 5, verse 99


**Commentary : Verse 28**

28. فإِن لَّمْ تَجِدُوا فِيهَآ أَحَداً فَلاَ تَدْخُلُوهَا حَتَّي
يُؤْذَنَ لَكُمْ وَإِن قِيلَ لَكُمُ ارْجِعُوا فَارْجِعُوا هُوَ أَزْكَي
لَكُمْ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ عَلِيمٌ

28. "And if you find no one therein, still do not enter them until
permission is given to you. And if it is said to you: 'Go back', then go
back, for it is purer for you; and Allah is cognizant of what you do."

**Commentary:**

Entering people's house needs permission, whether the giver of
permission is its owner or he is some legal person. Thus, in this holy
verse, it says:

"And if you find no one therein, still do not enter them until
permission is given to you...."

Maybe it implies that sometimes there are some persons at home, but
someone who is in charge or someone who is the head of household is not
present, in this case we are not allowed to enter the house.

Or there is not any person in the house. Or it is possible that the
landlord is in neighbour's home or is near to his house, so when he
hears our voice or our knocking at the door, he comes and allows us to
enter. In this case we can enter the house. Anyway, what is important is
that we can not enter a house without permission.

Then the verse continues saying:

"... And if it is said to you: Go back, then go back, for it is purer
for you;..."

It refers to the matter that we must not get upset because of a
negative answer. Maybe the landlord is in a condition that he does get
displeased if we see him in that way. Or his home or his room is not
ready for receiving any guest.

Since when we hear a negative answer, we become curious to know its
reason and so we start thinking of looking from some hole or
eavesdropping in order to find out some secrets from the inside of the
house; at the end of the verse, it says:

"... and Allah is cognizant of what you do."


**Commentary : Verse 29**

29. لَّيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتاً غَيْرَ
مَسْكُونَةٍ فِيهَا مَتَاعٌ لَّكُمْ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تُبْدُونَ
وَمَا تَكْتُمُونَ

29. "(It is) no sin for you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein
you have some goods, and Allah knows what you reveal and what you
conceal."

**Commentary:**

Public places that have no special inhabitants, such as: hotels,
caravanserais, shops, and baths which are open to all and people can
enter and enjoy their advantages, are treated differently than personal
homes and require no permission for entrance. Therefore, in view of the
fact that each ordinance has some exceptions through which problems and
difficulties are solved rationally, in this verse it says:

"(It is) no sin for you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein you
have some goods,..."

In the end of the verse, the Qur'an adds:

"... and Allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal."

The above phrase perhaps refers to this matter that some individuals
may sometimes misuse this exception and enter uninhabited homes on the
pretext of this ordinance to find out some secrets. Or they sometimes
enter some inhabited houses on the excuse that they did not know they
are inhabited. But Allah (s.w.t.) is aware of all of these affairs and
knows well about those who misuse. Thus, going to public centers while
having no beneficial aim and only for wandering or meandering is often
forbidden.


