Commentary : Verse 30
=====================

30. قُل لّـِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يُغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَيَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ذَلِكَ أَزْكَي لَهُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
يَصْنَعُونَ

30. "Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their
modesty. That is purer for them, verily Allah is All-Aware of what they
do."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

In Kafi book there is a narration by Imam Baqir (a.s.) about the
occasion of revelation of this noble verse. A young man of The Helpers
met a woman on his way while her veil was put behind her ears (naturally
some part of her neck and breast was visible). The woman's face
attracted the young man and he gazed at her and when the woman passed by
him he was still looking at her while she was going her own way. Then he
entered a narrow alley, and still he was looking behind himself, when
suddenly his face hit against the wall and the sharp point of a bone, or
a piece of glass, that existed in the wall cut his face! Then the woman
went away when the young man came to his senses and saw that blood was
pouring forth from his face and his clothes and chest were stained with
blood.

He became very displeased. He said to himself: "I take oath by Allah
that I will go to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and retell him this event."
When the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) saw him, he asked the young man what the
matter was. The man told him the event. At this time Gabriel, the
harbinger of Allah's revelation, came down and brought the above
verse.[^1]

[^1] Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, Vol. 14, p. 139, Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, Al-mazan,
and Ruh ul-Ma'ani


**Commentary:**

Sin must be prevented from its origin and piety must be set out from
eyes. Immodesty and ogling prevent man's spiritual development to grow
up.

We said before that this Sura is in fact the Sura of chastity and
purification from sexual deviations. So its discussions, from this point
of view, have a clear coherency. The verses in question mat state the
ordinances of looking, ogling, and veil are also related to this matter.
Moreover, the relation of this discussion to the discussions that are
about accusations of immodesty is known to everyone.

At first, the verse implies that the believing men should be told to
lower their gaze from a woman who is related within forbidden degrees
and from what is illegal to look at, and be modest. The verse says:

"Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their
modesty...."

The Arabic word /yaquddu/ is derived from the word 'Qazz', which
originally means to decrease or to lessen. In many cases it is used in
the sense of: to lower voice or to lessen looking. Thus the verse does
not say that the believers must close their eyes, but it says that they
must lessen or shorten their looking. This is a delicate way of
speaking, because if a man really wants to close his eyes when he sees a
woman who is related within forbidden degrees, he can no -longer walk,
but if he casts down his gaze and does not look at her face and her
body,it is as though he has shortened his gaze and has totally deleted
the scene, that is forbidden, from the scope of his eyes.

It is worth-studying that the holy Qur'an does not specify the thing
that a person must cast down gaze from (so as to say complement of the
verb is omitted), in order that it will be a general rule; that is, one
must cast down gaze from whatsoever is unlawful to look at.

But, with regard to the context of these verses, specially the
following verse that mentions veil, it will be clear that it means not
looking at women who are related within forbidden degrees (or are
marriageable). The occasion of revelation, mentioned at the beginning,
confirms this matter, too.

From what was said this matter is understood that the verse does not
signify that men must not gaze or stare at women's face so that some
people misuse it and say that not staring look is permitted. However,
its purpose is that when a man looks or sees, the scope of his vision is
vast, and at the time of entering a woman who is related within
forbidden degrees in the scope of his vision, he must cast down his look
in a way that the woman exits the scope. It means he does not look at
her, but he must see his way and path; and that it is said that the word
/qacld/ has been applied with the sense of 'to decrease' means the same.
(Take care)

The second command that is mentioned in the verse is to guard ones
modesty and to be modest.

The Arabic word /farj/ in fact means a split or opening between two
things, but in such cases it connotes pudendum. In Persian language, is
used instead of it, for keeping its-connotative meaning.

The purpose of 'being modest', according to Islamic narrations, is
covering the pudendum for not to be seen by others. In a tradition by
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) we read: "Every verse of the holy Qur'an that mentions
'guarding modesty' indicates warding of fornication, except this verse
that means keeping it from others' look."[^1]

Since sometimes it comes to mind that why Islam has prohibited this
action that is in line with one's lust and wish, at the end of the verse
it is added:

"... That is purer for them,..."

Then those who look at women flirtatiously, amorously and consciously,
and sometimes they consider it unintentional, are warned:

"... verily Allah is All-Aware of what they do."

In other words, Allah is aware of whatever kind of manner they have;
whether they look openly or secretly, or other forms. A few Traditions
upon Gaze:

1. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Whoever supplies his eyes with what is
unlawful, in Hereafter his eyes will be filled with fire, unless he
repents."[^2]

2. We read in a tradition that all the eyes will shed tear in
Hereafter, except 3 groups of eyes: the eyes that have shed tears out of
Allah's fear, the eyes that are closed to sins, and the eyes that are
open for the sake of Allah.[^3]

3. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "If your look is cast on a woman (who is
related within forbidden degrees) for the first time, there will be no
problem, but if your looking is continued, (there will be problem,
because) it causes disorder and temptation."[^4]

4. We read in a tradition (recorded in Sahih Bokhari) that the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) said: "Do not sit on the way of people!"

[^1] 'Usul Kafi and the commentary by Ali ibn IbRuhim, Nur-uth-Thaqalyn
Vol.3, p. 587

[^2] Bihar ul-'Anwar, Vol. 76, p. 336 and Man layahdaroh ul-Faqih

[^3] Kanz ud-Daqa'iq, the Commentary

[^4] Ibid

The audience said: "We have no choice." The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said:
"Then honour what is true and right!" They asked: "What is the right?"
The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Withdrawal from ogling and bothering
people, answering others' salutation, enjoining what is right and
forbidding what is wrong."[^1]

5. Hadrat 'Isa (a.s.) said: "Withdraw from looking at women who are
related within forbidden degrees, because it plants the seed of lust in
the heart and only this is enough to get man involved in seduction or
temptation."[^2]

6. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "The eye drags the heart." "The eye is Satan's
trap or snare." (Guarding eyes is the best way for being away from
lusts.)[^3]

7. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Evil look is one of Satan's fatal
arrows. Whoever closes his eyes for the awe of Allah, Allah will bestow
him a faith that he feels its sweetness and taste in his inward."[^4]

8. Concerning permissible looking at a woman, Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:
"Looking at her face, palms, and front part of the feet is lawful (but
purely and chastely)."[^5]

9. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "Allah's wrath is very severe against a
married woman whose eyes are filled with individuals other than her
husband (and persons related in forbidden degrees) (looking deliberately
and lustfully at a man who is not related within forbidden degrees).
When she does so,Allah, Almighty and Glorious, rejects and nullifies all
good deeds and worships she has done.When she lies with a person

[^1] Ruh ul-Bayan, the Commentary

[^2] Ibid

[^3] Urar ul-Hikam

[^4] Bihar ul-'Anwar, Vol. 104, p. 38

[^5] Kanz ud-Daqa'iq

other than her husband, Allah has right to burn her after He chastises
her in the purgatory world."[^1]

10. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "A man who funs a woman who is not
related to h

im in any form of marriage contract, Allah will confine him in
chastisement for a thousand years for every word that he has jested
her."[^2] 11. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "One who dominates neighbor's
house and looks at a man's pudendum or a woman's hair or part of their
body will be rightly and definitely gathered by Allah with hypocrites
who intended to look at women's covered limbs. And until Allah Almighty
defaces him in the world he will not leave this world. Allah also will
divulge all his sins and faults in the Hereafter and disgrace him before
other men (therein)."[^3]

[^1] Man Layahduruh ul-Faqih

[^2] Ibid

[^3] E'aqaab Al-A'amal


**Commentary : Verse 31**

31. وَقُل لّـِلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِنَّ وَيَحْفَظْنَ
فُرُوجَهُنَّ وَلاَ يُبْدِينَ زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلاَّ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا
وَلْيَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلَي جُيُوبِهِنَّ وَلاَ يُبْدِينَ
زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلاَّ لِبُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ ءَابَآئِهِنَّ أَوْ ءَابَآءِ
بُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَآئِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَآءِ بُعُولَتِهِنَّ
أَوْإِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي أَخَوَاتِهِنَّ
أَوْ نِسَآئِهِنَّ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُنَّ أَوِ التَّابِعِينَ
غَيْرِ اُوْلِي الإِرْبَةِ مِنَ الرّ‌ِجَالِ أَوِ الطّـِفْلِ الَّذِينَ
لَمْ يَظْهَرُوا عَلَي عَوْرَاتِ النّـِسَآءِ وَلاَ يَضْرِبْنَ
بِاَرْجُلِهِنَّ لِيُعْلَمَ مَا يُخْفِينَ مِن زِينَتِهِنَّ وَتُوبُوا
إِلَي اللَّهِ جَمِيعاً أَيُّهَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ

31. "And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and guard their
modesty, and do not display their adornment except that which is
(ordinarily) apparent of it, and to draw their veils over their bosoms,
and not to reveal their adornment save to their own husbands or their
fathers or their husbands' fathers, or their sons or their husbands'
sons, or their brothers or their brothers' sons or their sisters' sons,
or their women, or those whom their right hands possess (their slaves),
or the male attendants void of sexual stimulant, or the children who
know naught of women's nakedness. And let them not stamp their feet (in
walking) so as to reveal what they hide of their adornment. And turn
unto Allah all together, O' believers, in order that you may succeed."

**Commentary:**

Allah has not mentioned the number of units (Rak'at) in ritual prayers
and that of ritual circumambulation of the Ka'bah and has charged the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) with the task of stating the amount and measure of
alms-tax and many other issues, but Allah has paid attention to minimum
issues of family, upbringing, and moral corruptions. By using female
pronoun 25 times in this verse, Allah has paid attention to women.[^1]

Thus, in this verse, the women's duties and responsibilities are
mentioned; first, it refers to the ones that are like the men's
responsibilities and duties when it says:

"And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and guard their
modesty,..."

Therefore ogling is forbidden to women as it is to men. As all men are
obliged to veil their pudendum, all women are also obliged to veil their
pudendum from the eye of other women and men.

Then in three sentences the issue of veil, which is the women's
characteristics, is referred to:

1) "... and do not display their adornment except that which is
(ordinarily) apparent of it,..."

Upon the purpose of the adornment which women must not display, as well
as the visible adornment which women are allowed to display, mentioned
in the verse, commentators have stated different ideas.

[^1] QurtAbi, Commentary

Some of them say that hidden adornment is the very natural adornment
(women's beautiful body), whereas the Arabic word /zanat/ has rarely
been applied in this sense.

Most of commentators have considered it as the place of adornment,
because the display of adornment itself such as ear-rings, bracelet, and
armlet is not forbidden. But displaying where they are used such as
ears, neck, arms and hands is forbidden.

Therefore, women totally are not allowed to display their adornments
that are usually hidden, although their limbs are not shown.
Consequently showing special ornate clothes that women wear under their
usual clothes or veil (chador) is not permitted, because the holy Qur'an
prohibits the display of such adornments either.

In many traditions narrated from Imams of Ahl-ul-Bayt (a.s.) we see the
same matter that the interior adornment, in Arabic, is interpreted as
'Qalladah' (necklace), 'Dumlaj' (armlet), 'Khalkhal' (anklet).[^1]

Moreover, since in many numerous Islamic narrations, the apparent
adornment has been interpreted as ring, eyeliner, and so on, we see that
the purpose of interior adornment is also the adornments that are
hidden.

2) The second ordinance that is brought up in this verse is:

"... and to draw their veils over their bosoms..."

The Arabic word /xumur/ is the plural form of /ximar/, which originally
means veil, but it is usually applied to the thing with which women veil
their head (scarf).

The Arabic word /juyub/ is the plural form of the word /jayb/, that
means the collar of a shirt which is rendered to the

[^1] Ali-ibn-IbRuhim, the Commentary

throat and it is sometimes applied to the upper part of the breast,
because it is located near it.

It is understood from this verse that before the revelation of this
verse, women wore their scarf in a way that they put their scarf behind
their head so that their neck and a part of their breast were visible.
The Holy Qur'an enjoined them to wear their scarf in a way that that
part of their neck and breast that are visible to be veiled.

3) In the third ordinance both the cases in which women are allowed to
unveil themselves and display their inward adornment are specified. The
verse says:

"... and not to reveal their adornment save to ..."

They must not display their adornment except in twelve instances:

1. To their own husbands ("... their own husbands ...")

2. To their fathers ("... or their fathers ...")

3. To their husbands' fathers ("... or their husbands fathers ...")

4. To their sons ("... or their sons ...")

5.To their husbands' sons ("... or their husbands' sons ...")

6. To their brothers ("... or their brothers ...")

7. To their brothers' sons ("... or their brothers' sons...")

8. To their sisters' sons ("... or their sisters' sons ...")

9. To their women ("... or their women ...")

10. To their slaves ("... or those whom their right hands possess
(their slaves)...")

11. To those who do not have desire for women ("... or the male
attendants void of sexual stimulant... ")

12. To kids who know nothing of pudendum ("... or the children who know
naught of women's nakedness ...")

4)Finally the fourth ordinance is stated in this way, saying:

"... And let them not stamp their feet (in walking) so as to reveal
what they hide of their adornment..."

Women must be so exact and strict in observing chastity and avoiding
affairs which kindle lust in men's heart and may cause deviation from
the path of chastity that they must withdraw from letting strange men
hear their anklet sound. This indicates how exact and precise Islam is
in these affairs.

In the end of the verse, all the believers, irrespective of men and
women, are invited to repent and return to Allah, where the Qur'an
says:

"... And turn unto Allah all together, O' believers, in order that you
may succeed."

If they have committed such sins, now that the facts of the ordinances
of Islam are explained, they must repent their wrong actions and go to
Allah for salvation and deliverance, because successfulness is found
only with Him. On our way there are slippery slopes from which no one
can be saved, and we must trust to Allah!

The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said about the commentary of the Qur'anic
sentence: /'ilia libu'ulatihinna/ (save to their own husbands): "Allah
has cursed those women who do not apply cosmetics to their hair and face
for the sake of (their) husband or do not fulfil what the husband
demands."[^1]

**The Philosophy of Veil**

1. Undoubtedly in our age, which some persons have called the age of
sexual liberty and nudism and Western exponents who regard women's
promiscuity as part of women's liberty,speaking about veil is not
welcomed by them and sometimes it is considered as legends of the past
times!

[^1] Nur-uth-Thaqallyn, the commentary

But umpteen corruptions and increasing problems and difficulties that
are caused by these unrestrained freedoms cause gradually some people to
pay attention to such words.

The issue is that whether women (I ask your pardon) must be at the
mercy of all men for abuses through various aural, visual, and physical
means (save sexual intercourse), or they must be limited to their own
husbands.

The question is that whether women must be engaged in a contest for
showing their body and stirring men's lust and defiled low desires or
whether these issues must be removed from the society and be confined to
family environment and the life of man and wife.

Islam is in support of the second plan and veil is part of this plan,
while western-fascinated persons are in favour of the first plan.

Islam says that sexual gratifications, including sexual intercourse and
physical, visual, aural relishing, are only limited to spouses. Anything
other than that will defile and corrupt the society. The sentence /aoka
lahum/ "... That is purer for them ...", mentioned in the previous
verse, refers to this matter.

The philosophy of veil is not something hidden and invisible,
because:

A)Women's nakedness that naturally has the consequences such as:
applying cosmetics, coquettishness and the like, sets men, specially
young ones, in a state of continual temptation (always tempts them), and
that subjects them to tension and stress. It causes nervous diseased
excitements and sometimes it is the source of psychological
abnormalities. How much can human bear such excitements? Do not all
psychotherapists say that continual excitement is the cause of
illness?

We must specially pay attention to this fact that sexual instinct is
man's most powerful and deepest instinct and in the course of history it
has sowed the seeds of fatal events and gruesome crimes and so it is
said: "No important event there is save a woman plays a role in it!"

Is not it playing with dynamite to stir this instinct through showing
naked women? Is it a rational job?

Islam wants Muslim men and women to have a calm psyche, a sound nerve,
and pure eye and ear. This is one of the philosophies of veil.

B) The documented figures show that divorce and separation in spousal
relationships has constantly increased with the increase of nakedness in
the world, because whatever eye sees heart often desires it. And
whatever heart, that is unrestrained low desires, wants man pursues it
at any price it may be, and so every day he is after one woman and says
goodbye to the other one.

In a community that vile exists (and other Islamic conditions are
observed) two spouses belong to each other and their sentiments, love
and feelings are limited to each other.

However, in 'the open market of nakedness' in which women have been
practically turned into common products (at least at the level of
non-sexual intercourse), sacredness of marriage contract is no longer
meaningful, and families will be quickly and easily destroyed, like
spider web, and children will be without guardian.

C) Spreading indecency and the increase of illegitimate children are
the sorest consequences of unveiling, which do not need any statistics
and figures, we think. Its reasons are especially so fully visible in
western countries that they need no explanation We do not say that the
main factor of indecency and illegitimate children is only unveiling. We
do not say that shameful colonialism and destructive political issues
are not playing role in it, but we say that one of its most influential
factors is nakedness and unveiling.

With regard to the fact that 'indecency' and worse than that
'illegitimate children' have been and are the source of kinds of crimes
in human societies, the perilous dimensions of this issue will be made
clearer.

D) The issue of 'woman's meanness' and her degradation is very
important after all, which does not need statistics and figures, too.
When society desires nakedness of woman, it is natural that every day it
demands her more make-up and more ostentation and display. When woman is
used as a means for attracting tourists and sight-seers in waiting rooms
and shops, because she is physically beautiful and attracting, woman's
personality is degraded to a doll or a valueless product and her high
humane values are totally forgotten. And her only pride is her youth,
beauty and display. Thus, she turns into a means for satisfying
unrestrained desires of some wicked, deceiving, beastly men.

How can a woman with her moral characteristics achieve high status and
show her knowledge in such a society?

It is really sorrowful that, in western countries and
western-influenced countries, lewd and promiscuous women are most famous
and acquire the highest earning and every thing is in favour of them,who
are known as artist and actress. Wherever they go, they are welcomed by
organizers of defiled places,in which people fall over themselves for
them. We had, of course, such a situation in Iran before Islamic
Revolution.

We thank Allah that it is wound up in Iran and woman is changed from
being just a doll, worthless product and wickedness into a personality
who has found her status again. She veils herself, but she is not
isolated from society. She has participated in all good and edifying
activities and even in the holy defense she has appeared with veil.

This was a part of clear philosophies of veil in Islam, the
philosophies that are appropriate to our discussion.

2. The commentary of the Qur'anic sentence: /'ulil
'irbat-i-min-ar-rijal/ (the male attendants void of sexual stimulant).

The Arabic word /'irbah/ is derived from the word /'arab/. As Raqib
says in Mufradat: It means desperate need that man finds ways to gratify
it. And it is sometime used as absolute need. The purpose of the phrase
/'ulil 'irbat-i-min-ar-rijal/ here is those persons who have sexual
desire and need spouse. Therefore the Qur'anic phrase /qayr-i-'ulil
'irbah/ includes the ones who do not have such desire. That to whom this
sentence refers, is a matter of discussion between commentators:

Some of them say that it refers to the old men who have sexual desire
no longer, such as /'al-qawa'idu min-an-nisa'/ (the women who are
unsexed or the women who are beyond the conventional age for
marrying).

Some other commentators say it refers to men who are castrated.

And some commentators say that its purpose is those who are neuter,
that is: they have no sex organ at all.

However, what must be emphasized and it is mentioned in some valid
traditions by Imam Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is that the
purpose of this sentence is those insane men who have no sexual desire
at all. These men are usually hired to do simple jobs and work as
servants. The application of the Arabic word /'at-tabi'an/ also
strengthens this meaning.[^1]

[^1] Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, chapter 124, Tradition 8

Since this quality, that is the quality of the lack of sexual desire,
is correct about a group of old men, it is possible that this verse can
include such old men. Imam Kadhem (a.s.) emphasized such group of old
men in a tradition. However, the verse does not imply that such men are
like those who are unmarriageable. It is certain that veiling some part
of head or some part of hand, and the like, before such men is not
compulsory.

3. Which children are the exceptions of this ordinance?

We said that the 12th group before whom veil is not compulsory is
children who have not yet enjoyed desire.

The Qur'anic sentence /lam yazharu/ has sometimes been interpreted as
/lam yatta li'u/ (are not aware), and sometimes as /lam yaqdiru/ (are
not able), because this word has been used in both meanings and in the
Holy Qur'an it is sometimes used to mean this and sometimes to mean
that.

For example, in Sura Al-Kahf, No. 18, verse 20 we read: "... if they
prevail against you, they, will stone you, ..."

And in verse 8 from Sura At-Taubah we recite: "How (can be?) For if
they prevail against you, they will observe towards you neither ties of
relationship nor treaty. ..."

However this differentiation in the concerned holy verse has no
significant influence on the conclusion of discussion. Its purpose is
children who are neither perceptive nor potent because of lack of sexual
desire.

Therefore ladies must veil themselves before those children who have
reached an age in which such a desire and ability is dully developed.

4. Every kind of tempting factor is forbidden!

The last matter is that at the end of this verse the Qur'an implies
that women should not walk in a manner that the sound of their anklet
can be heard. This shows that Islam is so exact and fastidious in the
issues concerning common chastity that even such a thing is not allowed.
Of course a fortiori, things that set youths' lust on fire, such as
circulation of tempting pictures, blue movies, sexy novels and stories,
are not permitted. Undoubtedly Islamic society must be free from such
matters that lead people, girls and boys, to centers of corruption and
wickedness.


