Preface to the First Edition
============================

This book is the result of a need which I sensed after my first three
years in Canada. A person in my position as a religious guide is always
confronted by people with questions related to their religious and
personal problems.

Unlike the atmosphere in the East where the contact is more on a
personal level, the contact in this part of the world is more through
correspondence and telephone calls. I soon realized that whenever the
question was 'embarrassing' or related to sexual behavior, the caller
would prefer not to give his or her name.

And, of course, I had no reason to insist on knowing the identity of the
callers; my only duty is to listen and convey the Islamic view to those
who seek.

However, what was most interesting about these 'embarrassing' questions
was that in majority of cases the callers were feeling guilty for
actions that were absolutely permissible in Islam. But because of their
ignorance or misinformation, they had been feeling guilty for things
which were not at all forbidden in the Islamic shari'ah.

And I said to myself: There must be many more people out there who are
going through similar experience, feeling guilty and depressed; and all
this because of ignorance! Not all have the courage to talk on such
issues or even call without revealing their identity. And so I decided
that I have to do something.

I started writing on the sexual morality of Islam. This was in 1986.
When I finished the initial draft, I thought that the material might be
considered too controversial, and so I decided to test the water before
publishing the book.

A lecture on 'Sex and Marriage in Islam' was organized on November 9,
1986 at the Shi'a Muslim Community Center in Vancouver. The vast
majority of the community members responded very positively. A lady from
the audience wrote a letter which expresses the reaction of the
majority. She wrote:

"Thank you very much for the excellent lecture you delivered us on
Sunday, November 9th. I must say that you are very brave and you
presented the material with great calmness and poise. So far we have
never had a Maulana who shared such an invaluable knowledge to educate
our community... From my own experience, your educative lecture has
clarified many doubts as to what is allowed in our shari'ah..."

Later on I came to know that the video cassette of the lecture was sent
to different places as far as England and East Africa. Since I had
mentioned in the video that this is the draft of a forth-coming book, I
started getting inquiries about it. The response further encouraged me
to go ahead with the publication of the book.

However, the publication was, unfortunately, delayed for three years
because of my involvement in some other activities. During the last
months of 1989, Almighty Allah blessed me with the opportunity to
finalize the book. While finalizing the book, I started adding many
discussions which eventually doubled the size of the initial draft of
1986 and increased its academic value. This, I hope, will redeem me in
the eyes of my readers for the three years delay.

\* \* \*

Chapter One gives a short historical review of the Western sexual
morality. This sets the tone for the next chapter which presents the
basic view of Islam on marriage and sex. In this chapter, I have also
critically reviewed the ideas of an Arab feminist, Fatima Mernissi, on
woman's sexuality in Islam. The remaining three chapters deal with the
practical aspects of marriage: sexual relations; contraceptives and
abortion; and new techniques in human reproduction.

\* \* \*

In the last three chapters of the book, the reader will find a variety
of opinions among the Shi'ah *mujtahids.* (*Mujtahids* means jurists,
the experts of Islamic laws.) The difference of opinion is an essential
part of *ijtihad* which is still a live institution in Shi'ah Islam. I
have also clearly given the opinions of the most high-ranking Shi'ah
*mujtahids* of our time, in particular Ayatullah al-'uzma Sayyid Abu
'l-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khu'i and the late Ayatullah al-'uzma al-Imam
Sayyid Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khumayni.

However, I must clarify at the very outset that there are some issues on
which the present writer has given his own opinions. This has been done
mostly in those cases where the present *mujtahids* have no opinion. In
any case, since all the views have been mentioned clearly, the
*muqallidin* (followers) of the present *mujtahids* can use this book
without any concern about the validity of their actions.

I hope this book will receive even better reception than the video of
1986; and I pray to Allah, *subhanahuwa ta'ala*, to guide me to the best
of opinions and accept this work as a small contribution towards serving
Islam. *Inna rabbi la Sami'u 'd-du'a.*

S. M. Rizvi  
 Richmond, B.C.  
 Jamadi II 1410  
 January 1990


