Glossary of Frequently Used Terms
=================================

**Haram: forbidden, prohibited.** It is necessary to abstain from the
acts which are haram. If someone performs a haram act, he will be
punished either by the Islamic court or in the hereafter or both.

**Ihtiyat Wajib: precautionarily wajib.** Its significance is the same
as that of wajib with the difference that whenever a mujtahid says that
"it is precautionarily obligatory," his followers have the option of
leaving his taqlid (following) in that particular problem and following
the fatwa of the second best mujtahid provided the latter has a
different opinion.

**Jaâ€™iz, Halal, Mubah permitted, allowed, lawful, legal.** The acts or
things which are permitted and lawful. There no reward for performing it
nor any punishment for neglecting it.

**Marja' (pl. Maraji'):** literally, it means the point of reference. It
is used to describe the high ranking mujtahids who are a point of
reference for the people.

**Makruh: reprehensible, disliked, discouraged:** It is used for the
acts which are disliked but not haram. If one does a makruh act, he will
not be punished; however, if he refrains from it, then he will be
rewarded

**Mujtahid or Faqih (pl. Fuqaha'): a jurist,** a religious scholar who
is an expert of Islamic laws, the shari'ah. Usually it is used for the
high ranking mujtahids who are followed by the people.

**Sunnat or Mustahab: recommended, desirable, better.** It refers to the
acts which are recommended but not wajib . If one neglects them, he will
not be punished; however, if one performs them, he will be rewarded.

**Wajib: obligatory, necessary, incumbent.** An act which must be
performed. One will be punished for neglecting a wajib act, e.g., the
daily prayers.


