Introduction
============

A. Why This Book?
-----------------

Writers do not normally have to justify their subject. If they think
that what they are writing will be useful to the people in their
practical life or in their intellectual pursuit, then they feel no need
to justify their work. The present book has both qualities: it is useful
and of intellectual interest. But there are many people, even among the
Muslims, who think that sex is a taboo subject in all religions.
Therefore, it is very appropriate to begin with the question: *Is
discussion of sexual morality allowed in Islam?*

To answer this question one has to look at the definition of religion
from the Islamic point of view. Anyone who has studied Islam even on
surface can easily know that "religion" in Islamic definition is "a
complete system of life" which covers all aspects of human life from the
day a person is conceived up to the day he or she is laid in grave.

Islam is not only concerned with the spiritual upliftment of human
beings, it is equally concerned about their material and physical
well-being. Islam guides its followers in financial and economic
matters, in social and political affairs, and also in moral and personal
spheres of human life. In moral and personal matters, Islam has specific
dietary guide-lines, hygienic rules, dress codes, and also rules about
marriage, divorce and inheritance.

The Islamic laws of marriage do not stop at how to marry and whom to
marry, it also deals with the sexual morality of human beings. This
sexual morality, as we shall see in the following chapters, has been
discussed in the Qur'an, and by the Prophet and his Ahlu'l-bayt very
thoroughly and openly. Thus there should be no doubt in the mind of
anyone about the permission Islam has given for open discussion of
sexual morality.

This was about the basic permission which Islam has given to discuss the
sexual morality. But this explanation will not be enough for some people
who will confront me with the next question: *"Is it necessary to
discuss sex?"*

There are three reasons for the necessity of discussing sexual morality.
The first reason applies to all Muslims and the other two reasons are
relevant to the Muslims in the Western world who are the primary
audience of this book.

Firstly, all Muslims agree that it is the duty of every Muslim to follow
the *shari'ah* Islamic laws; and the laws of Islam are not confined to
prayers, fasting, pilgrimage, and other ritual acts. The shari'ah has
specific rules about sex also. Therefore, if a Muslim wants to follow
Islam fully, then he or she must know the sexual morality of Islam, just
as he or she must learn how to perform the daily prayers.

Secondly, the necessity of learning the Islamic sexual morality for the
Muslims who are exposed to the New Sexual Morality of the West cannot be
over-emphasized. At present, the propagandists of the new sexual
morality are presenting their ideas through all the available means of
communication: books, magazines, television, movies and videos.

The Muslims in the Western world are, in one way or another, exposed to
the unIslamic sexual norms of the West. (This is an understatement; in
reality even the Muslims in the East are exposed to the Western culture!
) Therefore, it is absolutely necessary for them to know the Islamic
views about sex so they may live an Islamic life.

Thirdly, children in the Western world have excess to sex education to
an extent unimaginable by the previous generation, and therefore, it is
very important for today's parents to be aware of the right and the
wrong in this subject. Only an informed Muslim parent will be able to
face this problem correctly and responsibly. These reasons should be a
sufficient justification for this book to those who, in the Qur'anic
expression, have 'a heart or give ear with a present mind.'

B. Sex Education
----------------

The third reason given above does not necessarily mean that I am in
total agreement with the way sex education is handled in the Western
school systems. I have no problem with the basic ideas that children
should be educated about sex. However, I disagree with the age at which
sex education begins and with its contents. This issue by itself
deserves a detailed discussion which is beyond the scope of my present
study. Nonetheless, I will briefly mention my thoughts on these two
issues.

### Age

Sex education should begin in mid-teens when the children become
sexually mature. The aim of sex education at this level should be to
help them in understanding that they are responsible and accountable for
using their sexual organs.

They should be taught how to deal with sexual tension. (However, by
looking at the proportionally high level of child sexual abuse in the
Western world [which reflects the degree of its moral decay], I am
prepared to accept those programs for young children which aim at
educating them as how to protect themselves from sexual abuse. But this,
in my view, is not sex education and therefore would not apply to our
present discussion.)

### Contents

In this permissive society, the emphasis on sex education is more on
preventing unwanted pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases. No
serious attempt is made in making the youngsters aware of the virtue of
chastity and abstinence till they get married. This is not just because
the Western society is a secular, liberal society, it is also related to
its consumer-orientated economy. If sex education means only how to
prevent unwanted pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases, then the
students learn nothing but the importance of using pills, condoms and
other contraceptive devices.

In other words, such sex education is nothing but a promotional program
for the manufacturers of contraceptive aids! Germaine Greer, a famous
feminist, wrote about promoting contraceptives in the Third world as
follows, "The sex reformers, who exhibit no respect for traditional
values and address themselves to sexuality without interest in or
comprehension of the whole personality, are the bawds of
capitalism."[^1] I totally agree with her not only in relation to the
third world but even in case of the sex education in the West.

The reason why sex educators are under pressure not to talk about the
natural methods of birth control is not only because such methods are
not hundred percent reliable (otherwise, even the condoms are not
hundred percent reliable!), the real reason seems to be that if natural
methods (like coitus interrupts or abstinence) which involve no expense
become more popular, then who will buy the condoms and the pills?

In short I agree with the necessity of sex education for youngsters
provided it exhibits respect for their religious and moral values, and
addresses the issue comprehensively and not just end up as a promotional
program for 'the bawds of capitalism'.

[^1]: Greer, Sex and Destiny, p. 219.


