Chapter One: The Western Sexual Morality
========================================

Is sex inherently evil? A Muslim would be surprised by this question.
Such a thought would never cross his mind. But the relevance of this
question to Christianity and the Western world will become clear from
the following pages.

In the last eighty years, especially after the two World Wars, the
sexual morality of the West has undergone a great change which is
commonly described as the "sexual revolution.‚Äù On the ruins of the dying
Christian morality, the west is trying to build a liberal sexual
morality known as the "New Sexual Morality". To understand the social
and historical background in which the new morality is emerging, we must
study the sexual morality of the Christian Church.

A. Christian Sexual Morality
----------------------------

Although Christianity is commonly thought to be a religion based on
Jesus Christ's teachings, I use the word "Christianity" in this book for
the teachings of the Church establishment. I am justified in doing so
because the Bible has recorded nothing from Jesus Christ on marriage and
sex. The exception being the sermon condemning visual and physical
adultery:

Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not
commit adultery. But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman
to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.
And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee
for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.[^1]

The first person in Christianity to talk on sexual morality was St.
Paul. He says, "It is good for a man not to touch a woman."
(*Corinthians I,* 7:1) In simple words this means that the Christian
Church teaches that celibacy is better than marriage, and that the human
body is not for sexual pleasure but for the Lord only. "The body is not
meant for fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body...Do
you know that your bodies are members of Christ? (*Corinthians I,*
6:13,15)

St. Paul knew that celibacy means suppressing human nature but human
nature cannot be suppressed. He knew that if marriage is totally
forbidden, then people will still indulge in sexual gratification
unlawfully. So he says, "Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every
man have his own wife and every woman have her own
husband."(*Corinthians I,* 7:2)

Then as if to prevent the people from forgetting the holiness of
celibacy, he continues: "I say this by way of concession, not of
command. For I wish that all men were as I myself am...Therefore, I say
to the unmarried and the widows that it is good for them to remain
singles as I am. But if they cannot exercise self-control, let them
marry: for it is better to marry than to burn." (*Corinthians I,* 7:6-9)
So marriage, when compared to fornication, is the lesser of two evils!

St. Paul further goes on to describe that marriage means distress: "Now
concerning the unmarried...I think that in the view of the present
distress it is good for a person to remain as he is...Are you free from
a wife? Then do not seek a wife. But if you marry, you do not sin, and
if a girl marries, she does not sin. Yet those who marry shall have
trouble in flesh." (*Corinthians I,* 7:25-28)

According to the Bible, marriage and pleasing God are antipathetic to
each other. St. Paul says, "I want you to be free from anxieties. The
unmarried man is anxious about the affairs of the Lord, how to please
the Lord, but the married man is anxious about worldly affairs, how to
please his wife and his interest is divided...The unmarried woman cares
for the affairs of the Lord, that she may be holy in body and spirit;
but a married woman cares for worldly affairs, how to please her
husband.

I say this for your own benefit, not to lay any restraint upon you, but
to promote good order and to secure your undivided devotion to the
Lord." (*Corinthians I,* 7:32,35) He concludes the Christian position as
follows: "So that he who marries his betrothed does *well,* and he who
refrains from marrying will do *better*." (*Corinthians I*, 7:38)

So the Christian view on marriage, in its original form, can be
summarized as follows:

(a) Celibacy is good and should be adopted;

(b) in order to refrain from fornication, marriage is allowed; but it is
regrettable and one should try his or her best to avoid it;

(c) marriage retards salvation and is antipathetic to pleasing God.

Three centuries after St. Paul, came a theologian known as St.
Augustine. Like his predecessor, he believed that sex was a threat to
spiritual upliftment: "I know nothing which brings the manly mind down
from the heights more than a woman's caresses and that joining of bodies
without which one cannot have a wife."[^2]

He went even further than St. Paul by associating guilt with sex. He
acknowledged that was essential for reproduction but argued that the act
of sexual intercourse itself was tainted with guilt because of the sin
of Adam and Eve. Sexual intercourse was transformed from something
innocent to something shameful by the original sin of Adam and Eve,
which is passed on from generation to generation.

In his *The City of God,* St. Augustine says, "Man's transgression
[i.e., Adam and Eve's sin] did not annul the blessing of fertility
bestowed upon him before he sinned, but infected it with the disease of
lust."[^3]

In short, he preached that: (a) sex was something shameful because of
the original sin of Adam and Eve; (b) chastity and celibacy was of a
higher morality than marriage; (c) celibacy was a prerequisite for
priests and nuns.

B. The Victorian Era
--------------------

There is no doubt that the survey of the Christian sexual morality is
essential for understanding the sexual revolution of this century; but
to fully comprehend the historical background in which the new sexual
morality has emerged, it is equally important to look at the Victorian
era.

"While the Christians in the pre-Victorian era were content with
restricting sex to marriage, Victorians were concerned with how best to
harness sex and rechannel it to loftier ends. For Victorians a moral man
abstained from sex outside of marriage and was highly selective and
considerate in sexual expression within marriage. And a moral woman
endured these sporadic ordeals and did nothing to encourage them.
Pleasure was not an appropriate goal for either sex, but especially not
so for a woman."[^4]

The following can be stated as the sexual morality of the Christian West
in the nineteenth century:

(a) sex is morally degrading compared to celibacy;

(b) sexual passion in human beings is a result of the original sin,
therefore sex for pleasure is sinful;

(c) sex without pleasure is allowed only with the intention of
procreation.

At the dawn of the twentieth century, the prevalent view was that sex is
inherently evil and is acceptable only as a lesser of two evils of
fornication and marriage.

C. The Sexual Revolution
------------------------

What you read above was a brief historical and social background of the
Christian West against which the New Morality was emerging. The Church
made a serious error in suppressing the most natural urge of human
beings, the very means of their perpetuity. And it is obvious that
natural urges can never be suppressed. 'Allamah Rizvi writes:

If a religion shuts its eyes to the intricacies of family problems, its
followers, sooner or later, will revolt against it, destroying all
religious tenets in the wake of the rebellion...Christianity ignored the
claims of human nature, extolling the idea of celibacy. Many zealous
people tried to live up to that ideal. Monks and nuns shut themselves in
monasteries. For a short period, this scheme worked well.

Then nature took its revenge; the monks and abbots cultivated the idea
that they were representatives of Christ, and the nuns were given the
titles of 'brides of Christ.' So with easy conscience they turned the
monasteries into centres of sexual liberties.[^5]

Commenting on the attitude of the Christian clergy, Russell writes, "It
was only towards the end of the thirteenth century that the celibacy of
the clergy was rigidly enforced. The clergy, of course, continued to
have illicit relations with women..."[^6]

Pope John XII was condemned for adultery and incest; the abbot-elect of
St. Augustine, at Canterbury, in 1171 was found to have seventeen
illegitimate children in a single village; Henry III, Bishop of Leige,
was deposed in 1274 for having sixty-five illegitimate children.

The writers of the Middle Ages are full of accounts of nunneries that
were like brothels, of the vast multitude of infanticides within their
walls, and of incest among the clergy which forced the church to
announce that priests should not be permitted to live with their mothers
and sisters.[^7]

This and nothing else could have been the consequence of an unnatural
sexual morality. Those who could not suppress their natural urges,
indulged in sinful acts secretly; others, like Martin Luther, revolted
against the church and started the reformation movement which abandoned
celibacy.

And when the Christian Church lost its influence in social affairs of
the Western world and a separation between the Church and the state took
place, even the lay man revolted. This revolt gained momentum after the
two World Wars; and the Christian West started the sexual revolution in
reaction to the sexual suppression.

A reform movement takes the society from extremes towards moderation;
whereas a revolution, in its early stages, takes the society from one
extreme to the other. ' Allamah Rizvi comments, "Nature can be compared
to a steel spring which, when pressed down, jumps back with equal force.
When it took its revenge upon Christians, it turned Christian societies
into the most permissive, libertine and undisciplined ones the world had
ever seen."[^8]

Thus the New Morality emerged in the West and leaped to the other
extreme. From the extreme of suppressing natural desires, some preachers
of the new morality went to the extreme of unrestrained sexual freedom
which is the realm of the animal world. They propounded the idea of "sex
for fun," "sex for its own sake" and "free sex" which eventually would
have completely destroyed the concept of family, the fabric of human
society.

In the late eighties, it can be said that the spring of nature is
returning to its normal position. Katchadourian and Lunde, writing in
1980, say, "The morality of 'sex for fun' or 'sex for its own sake'
never appealed to even the majority of the young. The romantic ideals of
marriage, fidelity, and a stable home life for rearing children were
still very much alive and influential in American life. A new synthesis
of values is arising.

Many of the changes in sexual attitudes of the 1960s have been retained,
but the more radical beliefs have been found to be unacceptable by most
people. Many individuals are willing to approve of premarital
exploration, but they want to be certain that no one gets hurt. Many
have found that 'sex for its own sake' was not as gratifying as it
looked when it first became popular; and others have seen so many people
hurt by irresponsible sex that they are asking for a new morality of
responsible sex."[^9]

\* \* \*

To summarize, we can say that firstly, the West traveled from one
extreme (that of sexual suppression exemplified by the Christian Church)
to the other extreme (that of free sex and sex for fun exemplified by
the liberal sexual morality). Secondly, the West has realized that free
sex and sex for fun is not acceptable to human sensibilities. Finally,
after jumping from one extreme to the other, the West is longing for "a
new morality of responsible sex." In our view, the morality of
responsible sex is the balanced sexual morality of Islam to which we
shall turn soon.

\* \* \*

The reason why I discussed the religious and social background in which
the sexual revolution has taken place is to let the Muslims In the West
and the East know that this revolution was not a by-product of science
and technology per se (although some scientific technologies like
contraceptives have made it easier); rather it was a reaction to the
suppressive sexual morality of the Christian Church. This, I hope, will
also break the myth among many Asians and Africans, especially the elite
class, that every behavior and norm of the West is based on sound
scientific reasons!

[^1]: Matthew, 5:27-29.

[^2]: Basic Writings of St. Augustine, p. 455.

[^3]: The City of God, p. 21

[^4]: Fundamentals of Human Sexuality, p. 483.

[^5]: The Family Life of Islam, p. 8.

[^6]: Marriage and Morals, p. 64.

[^7]: History of European Morals, vol. II p. 350-351.

[^8]: The Family Life of Islam, p. 8-9.

[^9]: Fundamentals of Human Sexuality, p. 420.


