Chapter Three: The Islamic Sexual Morality (2) Its Structure
============================================================

This chapter deals with the practical side of sexual morality. We will
first talk about marriage at the age of puberty, followed by a look into
the possible ways unlawful as well as lawful of handling sexual urge if
one decides not to marry soon after puberty, and finally the marriage
procedure and sexual techniques will be discussed comprehensively.

It is necessary to mention that the last part of this chapter is very
explicit because religious do's and don'ts have to be spelled out in
very clear terms. As the saying goes, "There is no room for shame
(haya') in [learning or asking about] religion."

A. The Beginning of Sexual Life
-------------------------------

### 1. Bulugh & Rushd

Sexual desire is aroused in human beings at the age of puberty. In
Islamic legal definition puberty (*bulugh*) is determined by one of the
following:

1. *Age:* fifteen lunar years for boys and nine lunar years for girls;

2. *Internal change (in boys only):* The first nocturnal emission. Semen
accumulates in the testicles from puberty onwards and more semen may be
formed than the system can assimilate; when this happens, semen is
expelled during the sleep. This is known as nocturnal emission wet dream
or *ihtlam* in Arabic.

3. *Physical change:* Growth of coarse hair on lower part of abdomen.

Since the sexual urge begins at puberty and as Islam says that sexual
urge should be fulfilled only through marriage, it has allowed marriage
as soon as the boy and the girl reach the age of puberty. In the case of
girls, it not only allows them to be married as soon as they become
mature, but also recommends such marriage.

It is based on such teachings that Islam discourages girls from
postponing their marriage because of education; instead, it says that
girls should get married and then continue their education if they wish
to do so.

Physical maturity by itself, however, is not enough for a person to
handle the marriage responsibilities; *rushd* (maturity of mind) is
equally important. On the other hand, our present way of life has become
so much complicated that a considerable gap has appeared between puberty
and maturity both in financial and social affairs.

A recent article on the American youths says, "Young Americans entering
the 21st century are far less mature than their ancestors were at the
beginning of the 20th. The difference is evident in all areas of
youthful development: sex, love, marriage, education and work.

Physically, today's youths are maturing earlier than previous
generations, but emotionally they are taking much longer to develop
adult attachments."[^1] Consequently, it is not easy for boys and girls
of our atomic era to marry as soon as they become physically mature.

### 2. What Should the Youths do?

What can the Muslims do about their next generation? In spite of the
problem mentioned above, I believe there are ways by which Muslim youths
in their late teens can get married without worrying about the financial
aspect. Here I can suggest four possibilities:-

#### First: With Family’s Support

If the parents are well to do and can support their young married
children till they are financially independent, then I would strongly
suggest that they encourage their children to marry and support them
till they can stand on their own feet. While talking about the contract
of freedom made between a slave and his master, the Qur'an says,

***". . . and give them of the wealth of Allah which He has given
you..."*** ***(24:33)***

If Islam puts so much emphasis on financially supporting one's freed
slave so that he may stand on his own feet, it is needless to say how
virtuous it would be to help one's own children to stand on their feet!

#### Second: With Community’s Support

On a broader level, the Muslim organizations should create funds (e.g.,
long term interest-free loans) to support the young Muslims who want to
get married but lack financial resources. Once a person guilty of
indecent sexual behavior was brought to Imam 'All. After punishing him,
the Imam arranged for his marriage at the expenses of the government.

The Imam set an example of how the society can help the youths in
starting a family life. By looking at the situation in the Western
world, the Muslim organizations should at least morally feel obliged to
provide such support for their youths. This is not a matter of charity;
it is a matter of surviving as a Muslim community in a morally hostile
environment.

#### Third: Married Minus Financial Burden

The boy and the girl can do their *'aqd* (Islamic marriage contract) but
postpone the marriage ceremony till after they have finished their
education. In other words, they would be married but still staying with
their parents. They can meet each other without any *shar'i* objection;
and if they decide to have sexual relations, then they should use
permissible contraceptive means to delay the child-bearing process. In
this way, they would be able to fulfil their sexual desire and be free
from financial responsibilities.

#### Fourth: Married Plus Simple Life-Style

The boy and the girl can do their *'aqd* and even the marriage ceremony
but delay the child-bearing process **and** adopt a very simple
life-style. Thus they will be able to fulfil their sexual desire and
also be free from heavy financial burden.

However, I cannot overemphasize the importance of the role played by
parents in supervision of all such arrangements. I would not at all
support the idea that a boy and a girl decide such matters on their own
without the parents' input or without registering such arrangements at
the community center. This will protect the reputation of the girl in
case things do not work out properly.

Moreover, what I have suggested above also means that parents and
youngsters both will have to radically change their outlook towards the
materialistic aspect of life. They will have to adopt a very simple
life-style.

If today's youths intend to have a 'standard' financial footing before
getting into marriage, then it will not be possible in the late teens;
they will have to wait till they are in their thirties! The article
mentioned above says that the youths "are marrying later than their
parents did partly for economic reasons and many college graduates are
postponing marriage beyond age 30."[^2]

One important benefit of these suggestions is that a youngster of
college age will be free from sexual anxieties and will be able to
concentrate fully on his or her studies. If a Muslim youth raised in the
Western society without any religious upbringing is not provided with
financial and moral support by his parents, then he is at risk of
melting into the permissive culture that tolerates teenage sex outside
marriage. And if this happens, God forbid, the youth will no longer
regard a sexual relationship as a matter of value or commitment.

"Most of us got one-night stands out of our system in college," writes
Nancy Smith, 25, in a recent essay for *the Washington Post* on her
generation's struggle with adulthood. "Sex outside a relationship is not
so much a matter of right or wrong as: Is it really worth the hassle?"
[^3]

And this type of sexual behavior has serious social consequences:
abortions, unwanted babies, increase in divorce ratio and single parent
families. Add to this the emotional suffering the people in general and
the children in particular go through in such crises.

B. Handling Sexual Urge before Marriage
---------------------------------------

If a person cannot marry soon after becoming sexually and mentally
mature, then how should he or she handle the sexual urge? In this
section we will survey some ways of fulfilling the sexual urge and see
whether they are permitted by Islam or not.

### 1. Immoral Ways

#### (A) Pre-Marital Sex

Pre-marital sex is absolutely forbidden in Islam, no matter whether it
is with a girl-friend or a prostitute. Pre-marital sex is fornication
*(zina).*

It is also an irresponsible sexual behavior; there is no responsibility
involved in such relationships. The most vulnerable person in such
relationships is the woman. Statistics can overwhelmingly prove that man
has often cheated innocent women in pre-marital sex.

Today half of all American men and women in their thirties cohabited
before marriage, many of them on the assumption that it is better to
look deeply before they leap. But studies now demonstrate that couples
who cohabit before marriage are more likely to divorce than those who do
not.[^4]

Glen Elder, a sociologist at University of North Carolina, has this to
say about cohabitation: "It's a relationship that attracts those, mainly
men, who are looking for an easy way out and it is uncertain what, if
anything, it contributes to marriage." A twenty-four year old lady wrote
the following in a letter to Ann Landers: "...The line [in a previous
letter] that struck home was from the teenager who said she knew lots of
girls her age who had several partners 'just for the fun of it.' I found
that odd because I was having sex at 16 and it was no fun at all.

Sleeping with guys wasn't exciting or thrilling, it was degrading. It
made me feel lonelier and emptier than ever. I also worried from month
to month about being pregnant. That can be a real hell...if I could talk
to the young girls who read your column, I would tell them that teenage
sex doesn't solve problems, it creates more. It doesn't make a girl feel
loved. It makes her feel cheap. I'd let them know that it doesn't make a
girl 'more of a woman,' it can make her less of one."[^5]

Allah says:

***Do not go near adultery,*** ***surely it is an indecency, and an evil
way [of fulfilling sexual urge].*** ***(17:32)***

Fornication and adultery have severely been condemned in the saying of
the Prophet and the Imams. In Islam, pre-marital sex is considered an
immoral act against the rights of Allah and one's own sexual organs.

Pre-marital sex is a sin punishable by the Islamic court. If an
unmarried man and an unmarried woman are found guilty of fornication in
an Islamic court, their punishment will be as the following:

***The woman and the man who fornicate scourge each of them a hundred
whips; and in the matter of God s religion, let no tenderness for them
seize you if you believe in God and the Last Day; and let a party of the
believers witness their punishment.*** ***(24:2)***

If the unmarried man or woman commit fornication more than once, then
they will be punished three times by hundred wipes, and if they are
proven guilty for the fourth time, then they will be put to death.[^6]
(As for adultery, its punishment is even more severe because married
persons have no excuse, whatsoever, to commit adultery. The *shari'ah*
says that married persons guilty of adultery should be stoned to death.)

Therefore, pre-marital sex is out of the question as a means of
fulfilling the sexual urge.

#### (B) Masturbation

In Islamic terminology, masturbation *(istimna)* means self-stimulation
of the sexual organ till one achieves emission of semen or orgasm.
Masturbation in form of self-stimulation is forbidden in Shi'ah fiqh.
While describing the believers, the Qur'an says*,*

***"The believers are... those who protect their sexual organs except
from their spouses... Therefore, whosoever seeks more beyond that [in
sexual gratification], then they are the transgressors."***
***(23:5-6)***

The last sentence makes it very clear that any sexual gratification
outside marriage is considered a transgression of the law of God. And
this verse also implies that sex is an act in which two people are
involved.

Once when Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq was asked about masturbation, he recited
this very verse and mentioned masturbation as one of its examples.[^7]
In another, the Imam was asked about masturbation; he said, "It is an
indecent act..."[^8]

Masturbation is a sin for which a person can also be punished by the
Islamic court. Of course, the nature of the punishment is upon the
judge's discretion. Once a person was caught masturbating and was
brought to Imam 'Ali. The Imam punished him by beating on his hands
until it turned red; then he made arrangement for his marriage on
government's expenses.[^9]

These days some scientists are telling us that there is no harm in
masturbation; rather it is a natural act. To prove that it is natural,
they give examples of some wild animals, like monkeys. Actually they
represent those who have gone to the other extreme of sexual morality.
They have degraded human beings to the level of wild animals, and then
justify their deeds by finding examples in the animal world. They are,
in Qur'anic expression,

***"Like cattle, nay they are more astray; they are the heedless
ones."*** ***(7: 179)***

The irony is that when Muslims talk about following Islam which came
just 1400 years ago, they are labeled by the secularists as
'reactionaries,' 'those who want to turn the clock backwards,'
'anti -progress,' and now these very people are going millions of years
back (according to their own counting) and following the wild animals or
the primitive societies to determine what is natural for us and what is
not natural!

Many different types of sexual behavior could be found in primitive
societies, but that does not automatically make it natural or right. On
the contrary, in some cases, masturbation was considered an abnormal and
abhorrent act! For example, Lewis Cutlow writes about the Amazon Indians
that:

...Xinguanos are deeply disturbed by civilizados who are sexually
frustrated; they cannot understand how a man can become aroused at the
sight of a nude woman. In his 25 years of daily life with Indians,
Orlando told me, he had never seen an Indian with an erection. It would
be absurd to them. Nor has Orlando seen or heard any instances of sexual
deviation among the Indians. They did not know what masturbation was
until they saw a civilizado telegraph operator doing it.

From then on the telegraph operator was a problem to Orlando and his
colleagues at the Park. The Indians despised him because, in their eyes,
he had done something reprehensible. There was nothing to do but remove
him from the Park.[^10]

Sometimes the scientists justify masturbation by saying that many people
do it! But if a majority does something, it does not automatically prove
that it is right. Otherwise, drugs should also be declared 'normal'
because the majority of Americans, at one time or another took drugs.

The surveys made by sexologists like Kinsey, Masters and Johnson, and
the Hite Report just reveal what the American people do in the privacy
of their bedroom; it does not necessarily prove that what they do is
natural and right!

Many modern psychologists say that masturbation is just like normal
sexual intercourse, rather even better because you are master of
yourself, you don't have to worry about your partner's feelings!

This is an example of how low the materialist society has sunk into its
self-centered and selfish attitude that even in sex it prefers to seek
self-gratification with the exclusion of the spouse. "They seem to
forget that in sexual intercourse all the senses contribute to the
stimulation and orgasm: Man and woman see their partner, touch each
other, say endearing words to each other and hear the stimulating
sounds; and even the senses of smell and taste are utilized.

And the penetration of male organ into the female leads to the final
excitement and orgasm. But in masturbation the only source of
stimulation is imagination, in which no other sense takes any part. The
whole burden is loaded upon the mind; and, as a result, while normal
sexual intercourse causes happiness and joy, masturbation creates
emotional and psychological depression."[^11]

This is not just an opinion of a Muslim scholar. Even the Hite Report on
Male Sexuality, says: "Similarly, many men said that they enjoyed
masturbating physically, but that emotionally it was depressing."[^12]
In one of the replies, a man writes: "It is physically enjoyable, but it
can leave one emotionally empty or lonely for the real thing. You can do
it when you feel like it, come when you want, bring up your own images,
but there is no warmth or closeness, no one to share pleasure with, no
companionship. . . "[^13]

After saying that the physical effects of masturbation are negligible,
Leslie D. Weatherhead in *The Mastery of Sex* writes: "Psychologically
the results are more serious. Masturbation in the adult is nearly always
due to a maladjustment..." [^14]

**The Cure for** **Masturbation:** It is easy to stay away from
fornication because it involves another person. But the danger of
getting into the habit of masturbation is always there, therefore it is
necessary to know how to combat this perverted sexual behavior. The
following is a guide-line for releasing a person from the habit of
masturbation. This has been taken from Weatherhead's *The Mastery of
Sex* and 'Allamah Rizvi's *Your Questions Answered.*

1. Strengthening will-power: This is possible only if one honestly and
sincerely wants to get rid of this habit. Pray to Allah to help you
overcome this habit, concentrate on religious teachings, and build up
the spirit of *taqwa*, piety.

2. More and more stay in the company of other persons: If in the daytime
you feel like masturbating, get up from your bed or chair and get into
the presence of other people and talk to them. If it happens at bedtime,
sit up in bed, read a book or write a letter. Do something to switch
your mind on to other things.

3. Adopt some hobby or sports which will provide you with an outlet for
the energies of your body.

#### (C) Homosexuality

One way of fulfilling the sexual urge which is now becoming acceptable
in the Western world is sexual relations between members of the same
sex: homosexuality (which by definition includes lesbianism). By saying
that it is becoming acceptable in liberal societies I do not mean to say
that homosexuality is a 20th century phenomenon; no, not at all.

But there is one big difference between the past and the present: in the
past, homosexuality was considered a perverted sexual behavior whereas
now it is being labeled as 'natural' and as a result of 'inborn
tendency'!

All revealed religions, Judaism, Christianity and Islam form a united
front against such sexual behavior. It has been clearly condemned in the
Bible and the Qur'an. The Qur'an describes the people of Lut (Lot) as
follows:

***When We sent*** ***Lut, he said to his people, "What! do you commit
the indecency which none in all the nations had committed before you?***
***Look at you!*** ***You approach the men lustfully instead of***
***approaching your*** ***women! No, you are a people who have exceeded
the limits." The only answer of his people was that they said, 'Expel
them from your city, surely they are a people who seek to keep
themselves clean!" So We delivered him and his followers, except his
wife; she was one of those who tarried behind. We sent upon them a rain.
So behold how was the end of the guilty people.*** ***(7:80-84)***

The Qur'an also describes how Prophet Lut tried to reason with his
people when they approached his three guests (who were actually angels
in human form):

***When the people of Lut*** ***saw the handsome young men, they***
***came to him, running towards him.*** ***Lut had anticipated this
because*** ***they had been doing evil deeds from before.***

***When the people reached close to his house,*** ***Lut said***
***pointing towards his daughters that,*** ***"O my people! These are my
daughters, they are purer for you. Fear Allah and do not disgrace me in
regard to my guests. Isn't there among you a man of right mind?"***

They said,

***"You know better that we have no desire for your daughters; and you
surely know what we desire."*** ***(11 :78-79)***

Explaining the details of the punishment, Allah says,

***So when Our punishment came*** ***upon the people of Lut,*** ***We
turned the city upside down and showered them with stones of baked clay,
one after another.*** ***(11:82)***

So we see that as far as the Qur'an is concerned, homosexuality is an
"indecency," and that Allah had destroyed a whole nation because of this
indecent sexual behavior.

In the Islamic legal system, homosexuality is a punishable crime against
the laws of God. In the case of homosexuality between two males, the
active partner is to be lashed a hundred times if he is unmarried and
killed if he is married; whereas the passive partner is to be killed
regardless of his marital status.

In the case of two females (i.e., lesbianism), the sinners are to be
lashed a hundred times if they are unmarried and stoned to death if they
are married.[^15]

Why is Islam so severe in matters of fornication, homosexuality and
lesbianism? If the Islamic system had not allowed the gratification of
the sexual urge by lawful means (without even associating guilt with
it), then it would be right to say that Islam is very severe. But since
it has allowed the fulfillment of sexual instincts by lawful means, it
is not prepared to tolerate any perverted behavior.

The homosexuals are considered as the high risk group for Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). This shows that nature has not
accepted it as a normal sexual behavior among mankind. The homosexuals
are told that in order to have safe sex, they must use condoms.

If homosexuality without condoms is not safe sex, then how can it be
natural? Isn't the statement that "it is natural but not safe" a
contradiction in itself?

The moral bankruptcy of the West is clearly evident in the present trend
where some Christian churches are willing to consider modifying the
Biblical moral values to accommodate the whims of those who want to
justify their immoral behavior!

A high ranking Anglican cleric in Canada says that it's time his church
approved some form of service or rite that would bless the union of
committed same sex couples.[^16] After a three-hour debate in 1987, the
General Synod of the Church of England "decided that homosexuality is
wrong, but has refused to condemn it as a sin."[^17]

It seems that instead of providing moral and ethical leadership, the
church is being led by the special interest groups. Such groups even
want the public schools to change the definition of family so as to make
their life-style acceptable.

### 2. Lawful Temporary Ways

If a Muslim cannot marry soon after puberty, then he or she just has two
options: temporary abstinence or temporary marriage.

#### (A) Temporary Abstinence

Islam has allowed marriage as soon as a person becomes physically
mature, and it also strongly recommends that at least during the early
years of marriage to adopt a simple life-style so that the lack or
paucity of financial resources does not obstruct a happy life.

But if a person decides, for whatever reason, not to marry soon after he
or she becomes physically mature, then the only way is to adopt
temporary abstinence. After strongly recommending the marriage of single
people, the Qur'an says,

***"And those who cannot marry should practice restrain (or abstinence)
till Allah enriches them out of His bounty."*** ***(24:33)***

However, abstinence from all the forbidden ways of fulfilling the sexual
urge is not easy. Therefore, a few guide-lines would not be out of
place. Once a man came to the Prophet and said, "I do not have the
(financial) ability to marry; therefore, I have come to complain about
my singleness."

The Prophet advised him how to control his sexual urge by saying, "Leave
the hair of your body and fast continuously."[^18] By saying that "leave
the hair of your body," the Prophet is asking not to remove the hair
which grows on pubic area, chest, etc, by shaving or using lotion or
wax; rather one should just trim the hair.

This *hadith* is indicating that removing the excessive hair increases
one's sexual urge. (Probably, that is why the *shari'ah* has recommended
the men to shave the excessive hair every forty days, and the women to
remove the excessive hair by lotion or cream every twenty days.)

In retrospect, it means that not removing the hair will decrease the
sexual desire and help the person in abstinence. Imam 'Ali says,
"Whenever a person's hair increases, his sexual desires have also
decreased."[^19] I have not yet come across any scientific discussion on
the relationship between removing of the hair and sexual urge, but I am
told that the *hakims* believed that removing the hair from the pubic
area increased the chances of direct pressure on that area and,
consequently, the blood flow to the sexual organs.

The other method of decreasing the sexual urge is fasting. It is obvious
that one of the greatest benefits of fasting is the strengthening of
one's will power. And no doubt, abstinence in the sexual context mostly
depends on the will-power of the person. So fasting will strengthen the
will-power of the person and make it easier for him or her to restrain
the sexual feelings.

#### (B) Temporary Marriage (Mut 'a)

If a person does not marry soon after maturing and finds it difficult to
control his or her sexual desire, then the only way to fulfill the
sexual desire is *mut'a*.

In Islamic laws, according to the Shi'ah fiqh, marriage is of two types:
*da'im*, permanent and *munqati'*, temporary. The *munqati'* marriage is
also known as *mut'a*. This is not the place to discuss the legality or
the illegality of the temporary marriage (*mut'a*).

It will suffice to say that even according to Sunni sources, *mut'a* was
allowed in Islam till the early days of the caliphate of 'Umar ibn
al-Khattab. It was in the latter period of his rule that 'Umar declared
*mut'a* as *haram*. It goes without saying that a decision by 'Umar has
no value in front of the Qur'an and the *sunnah*!

As for the relevance of the *mut'a* system in modern times, I will just
quote what Sachiko Murata, a Japanese scholar, wrote in her thesis on
this subject: "Let me only remark that the modern West has not come near
to solving all the legal problems that have grown up because of
relatively free sexual relationships in contemporary society.

If any real solution to these problems is possible, perhaps a certain
inspiration may be drawn from a legal system such as *mut'a* which, with
its realistic appraisal of human nature, has been able to provide for
the rights and responsibilities of all parties."[^20] For a detailed
discussion on the social aspect of mut'a, see Mutahhari, *The Rights of
Women in Islam*[^21] and on the legal aspect, see Kashifu 'l-Ghita',
*The Origin of Shi'ite Islam and Its Principles* [^22]. For an in depth
study on the Qur'anic verse and ahadith of mut'a, see at-Tabataba'i
al-Mizan, vol. 8.[^23]

The main difference between the two types of marriage is that in
permanent marriage, Islam has clearly defined the duties and obligations
between the spouses. For example, it is the duty of the husband to
provide the basic necessities of life for his wife and the wife is
expected to not refuse sexual relations without any religious or medical
reason.

But in temporary marriage, Islam has given the prospective spouses the
right of working out their own duties and expectation plans. For
example, the husband is not obliged to maintain the wife unless it has
been so stipulated in the marriage contract. Likewise, the wife can put
a condition in the marriage contract that there will be no sexual
relations.[^24] Such conditions are invalid in a permanent marriage but
allowed in temporary marriage.

I cannot overemphasize the temporary nature of *mut'a*. The message of
Islam is quite clear: marry on a permanent basis; if that is not
possible, then adopt temporary abstinence; if that is not possible, only
then use the *mut'a* marriage.

The temporary nature of *mut'a* can also be seen from the following
saying of the Imams: Once 'Ali bin Yaqtin, a prominent Shi'ah who held a
high post in 'Abbasid government, came to Imam 'Ali ar-Riza to ask about
*mut'a*.

The Imam said, "What have you to do with it because Allah has made you
free from its need."[^25] He has also said, "It is permitted and
absolutely allowed for the one whom Allah has not provided with the
means of permanent marriage so that he may be chaste by performing
*mut'a*.” [^26]

C. Marriage
-----------

In this section, we shall discuss some general laws and rules concerning
marriage, marriage ceremony, practical aspect of sex within marriage and
some of the often asked questions.

### 1. Whom Can You Marry?

Islam places certain restrictions as far as the choice of your spouse is
concerned. These restrictions are based on blood relationships and
religious affiliations of the person.

#### (A) Restrictions based on Relationship

There are certain blood relations which are considered *haram* for you
as far as marriage is concerned. (As a general rule, anyone who is your
*mahram* is forbidden to you for marriage. *Mahram* means a
blood-relative in whose presence *hijab* is not required.) The list of
such relatives is given in the Qur'an as follows:

For Man mother daughter paternal aunt maternal aunt niece foster-mother
foster-sister mother-in-law step-daughter daughter-in-law all married
women sister-in-law (as a 2nd wife)[^27]

For Woman father son paternal uncle maternal uncle nephew
foster-mother's husband foster-brother father-in-law step-son son-in-law

It worth noting that cousins have not been included in this list which
means that: firstly, cousins are not *mahram* to each other, so hijab
has to be observed between them; secondly, cousins can marry each other.

#### (B) Restrictions based on Religion

Marriage between two people who do not follow the same religion creates
problems in the day-to-day life of the couple because no aspect of our
life is outside the jurisdiction of the Islamic *shari'ah*. Consequently
restriction in marriage based on religious differences is quite natural

A Shi'ah Muslim Man

· can marry:

a Shi'ah Muslim woman.

a non-Shi'ah Muslim woman.

however, if there is danger of being misled, then it is haram.

a Jewish or Christian woman in mut'a only.

· cannot marry: a woman of any other faith.

A Shi'ah Muslim Woman

· can marry:

a Shi'ah Muslim man.

a non-Shi'ah Muslim man,

although it is better not to do so; and if there is danger of being
misled, then it is haram.

· cannot marry: a non-Muslim man.

### 2. Some Often Asked Questions

#### (A) Do parents have any right over the marriage of their children?

The father and paternal grandfather have full authority over the
children who have not yet reached the age of puberty.

When a child reaches the age of puberty, then there are three different
situations:

(a) a child who is *baligh* but not mentally mature: in this case, the
father and the grandfather still have their authority over him or her.
Such a child cannot take a decision on marriage without the approval of
the father or the grandfather.

(b) a male child who is *baligh* and also mentally mature: in this case,
he has full right to decide about his own marriage.

(c) a girl who is *baligh* and mentally mature: There are four different
opinions on this issue.[^28] But the majority of the present *mujtahids*
say that in her first marriage, a *baligha* and mentally mature girl
cannot marry without the permission of her father or grandfather. And if
such a girl had already married before. then she has full right to
decide for herself in the case of her second marriage.[^29]

This law is in place to act as an extra protection for the honor of a
teenage girl. However, if the father or grandfather refuses to give his
consent to a proposal of a suitable man, then a religious judge can
over-ride the decision of her father or grandfather. Similarly, if the
father or grandfather is inaccessible, then there is no need for his
permission.

#### (B) By considering the hijab in Islam, is a boy permitted to look at the girl before marrying her?

A man is allowed to see without *hijab* the woman whom he intends to
marry. However, this permission is just for the man or the woman to see
the prospective spouse once;[^30] it is not a perpetual license to go
out together! I strongly recommend that such a meeting should take place
with the supervision of the parent or the guardian.

#### (C) Can a boy and a girl who are engaged meet each other or go out together?

In Islam, there is no ceremony known as engagement. According to the
*shari'ah,* engagement is a revocable agreement between two persons to
marry each other, nothing more; it does not make the two persons
*mahram* to each other. They still have to observe the rules of *hijab*.
But if two persons who are engaged wish to meet each other, then the
only way to legalize that Islamically is by performing *mut'a* marriage
between the *fiance* and the *fiancee*.

They can even put a condition in the *mut'a* that there will be no
sexual relations. This way, they will be able to meet each other without
any objection from the *shari'ah.* This method can be adopted by those
also who wish to go through the engagement ceremony in which the
*fiance* puts a ring on the *fiancee's* finger.

However, as mentioned earlier, a girl who has not married before will
need her father's or grandfather's approval even in such a *mut'a*
marriage.

### 3. The 'Aqd

In the Islamic *shari'ah*, marriage is an '*aqd*, a contract.

As a contract, it depends on *ijab* (proposal from the bride) and
*qubul* (acceptance from the groom). The contract can be verbally made
by the parties themselves or by their representatives. The language of
this contract must be Arabic.

Although just one sentence for proposal (like *ankahtuka nafsi* = I have
given myself to you in marriage) and one word for acceptance (like
*qabiltu* = I have accepted) is enough but it is the norm to solemnize
the marriage by using all forms of legal terms for this purpose; for
example*, ankhatu, zawwajtu* together with the mentioning of *mahr;
sidaq,* etc.

It is also recommended to begin with a sermon (*khutba*) praising Allah,
*subhanahu wa ta ala*, asking for His blessings on Prophet Muhammad and
his progeny, and also reciting a Qur'anic verse and a couple of
*ahadith* on virtue of marriage.

One of the necessary conditions of an Islamic marriage contract is
*mahr. Mahr* is usually translated as dowry, and it means the marriage
gift which the groom agrees to give to the bride. It is actually the
right of the bride and it is for her to specify or fix the *mahr*; and
for the groom to either accept it or negotiate with his prospective
bride.

The *mahr* can consist of a material item or a benefit (like training
for something); it can be paid up front or can be in form of promise to
pay upon demands decided prior to the solemnization of marriage.

### 4. The Time of Marriage

#### (A) When to marry?

Are there any special days in the Islamic calendar when marriage is
encouraged or discouraged? Basically marriage is allowed at all times.
However, there are some days on which marriage is not recommended; some
of these are based on *ahadith* and some on cultural, historical
reasons.

Generally, we can categorize these days into three:

(a) There are some *ahadith* which say that it is *makruh* (not
recommended) to have a marriage ceremony on the days when the moon is in
the constellation of the Scorpio (this is known as *al-qamar fil aqrab*
or *qamar dar aqrab*), during the last two or three days of the lunar
months, and on Wednesdays.

(b) There are some *ahadith* which say that certain days of each month
are ill omen days (*nahas*); these days are the 3rd, 5th, 13th, 16th,
21st, 24th and 25th of lunar months.

However, the *ahadith* for both the above categories would not stand the
scrutiny of the scholars of *hadith*. Our *mujtahids* do not normally
apply their full expertise in matters not related to obligatory or
prohibitive commands. They relax the criteria for acceptability of
*ahadith* in matters related to *sunnat* and *makruh* acts.

This is not done out of negligence or lack of interest, it is done on
the basis of a widely accepted rule in *usulu'l-fiqh* (the Principles of
Jurisprudence) known as *qa'idatu't-tasamuh,* that is, the rule of
leniency (in ascertaining the acceptability of *hadith*).[^31]

This has been mentioned very clearly by Ayatullah al-Khu'i in his manual
of *fatwas*. He says, "Most of the *mustahab* acts mentioned in the
chapters of this book are based on the *qa'idatu't-tasamuh* in sources
of the *sunnat* acts.

Therefore, whatever has not been proved as *sunnat* in our view should
be done with intention of *raja'il matlubiyyah.* The same applies to the
*makruh* acts; these should be abstained from with the intention of
*raja'il matlubiyyah."*[^32]

As far as the two categories for marriage days are concerned, it will
suffice to quote Ayatullah Gulpaygani, one of the leading *mujtahids* of
our time who says: "One may follow these *mustahab* and *makruh* acts
with the intention of *raja'il matlubiyyah,* because there is no clear
evidence for some of these things."[^33]

(c) There are certain days of the Islamic calendar which have become
associated with the early events of the Islamic history; for example,
the 10th of Muharram is the day of mourning for the massacre at Karbala
or the day of the Prophet's death in Safar, etc. Since such days are
commemorated by the Muslims as days of mourning, it is socially and, to
some extent, religiously not recommended to have a marriage ceremony on
such days.

#### (B) The Wedding Night:

I must explain why I have written wedding 'night' and not 'day'. The
*hadith* says, "Take the bride to her new home during the night."[^34]
Based on this saying, it is recommended that the wedding should take
place at night. After all, Allah has made the night

***"so that you may rest in it."*** ***(10: 67)***

After the bride has entered the room, the groom is recommended to take
off the bride's shoes, wash her feet (in a washbowl) and then sprinkle
the water around the room.

Then the groom should do wuzu and pray two rak'at sunnat prayer and then
recite the following *du'a:*

Allahummar zuqni ulfataha wa wuddaha wa rizaha bi; war zini biha, waj
ma' baynana bi ahsani ijtima'in wa anfasi i'tilafin; fa innaka tuhibbul
halal wa tukrihul haram.

O Allah! Bless me with her affection, love and her acceptance of me; and
make me pleased with her, and bring us together in the best form of a
union and in absolute harmony; surely You like lawful things and dislike
unlawful things.

Then he should ask the bride to do wuzu and pray two rak'at sunnat
prayer.

When they are ready to go to bed, the groom should put his hand on the
bride's forehead and pray the following *du'a* while facing the
*qiblah*. (So don't forget your *qiblah* compass!)

Allahumma bi amanatika akhaztuha wa bi kalimatika s-tahlaltuha. Fa in
qazayta li minha waladan, faj-'alhu mubarakan taqiyyan min Shi'ati Al-i
Muhammad (sal-lal-lahu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam) wa la taj-'al lish
Shaytani fihi shirkan wa la nasiba.

O Allah! I have taken her as Your trust and have made her lawful for
myself by Your words. Therefore, if you have decreed for me a child from
her, then make him/her blessed and pious from among the followers of the
Family of Muhammad [peace be upon him and them]; and do not let the
Satan have any part in him/her.[^35]

Is it necessary to have sexual intercourse on the very first night after
the wedding or can it be delayed? As far as the *shari'ah* is concerned,
it is neither obligatory nor forbidden to have sex on the first night.
It is a private decision between the newly wed couple; it has nothing to
do with others. However, I must say that the groom should take the
feelings of his bride into consideration; after all, she is new to him
and to the surroundings.

### 5. Days & Times for Sex

#### (A) Is sex forbidden at any time in marriage?

Yes, by considering the discomfort for the women during the monthly
periods, Islam has forbidden both the husband and the wife from engaging
in sexual intercourse during menstruation.

The Qur'an says:

***They ask you about menstruation. Say: "Menstruation is a discomfort
(for women). Do not establish sexual relations with them during the
menses and do not approach them (sexually) until the blood stops. Then
when they have cleansed themselves, you go into them as Allah has
commanded you."*** ***(2:222)***

According to the *shari'ah*, the duration of the monthly period is
between three to ten days. If the bleeding was for less than three days,
it is not menstruation; if it is for more than ten days, then it is
menstruation for ten days and then it is counted as *istihazah*,
irregular bleeding during which sex is permitted.[^36]

The prohibition of sex during the periods is limited strictly to sexual
intercourse; other intimate contact (with the exception of the vagina
and anus) is allowed. However, it is better not to play with her body
between the navel and the knees.

If a person who is engaged in sexual intercourse with his wife discovers
that her period has begun, then he should immediately withdraw from her.

It is clear from the verse mentioned above *(until the blood stops)*
that once the blood has stopped, intercourse becomes lawful even if the
woman has not performed the major ritual ablution *(ghusl).* But on the
basis of the subsequent sentence *(then when they have cleansed
themselves...),* most mujtahids say that it is better to refrain from
intercourse till she performs the *ghusl* or, at least, washes her
private parts.[^37]

Sexual intercourse is also not allowed during the post-natal bleeding
(10 days), during daytime in the month of Ramadhan, and when a person is
in *ihram* during the pilgrimage to Mecca. At all other times, sexual
intercourse is allowed.

#### (B) Is it discouraged (makruh) to have sex at any time or on any day?

There are certain *ahadith* which say that sexual intercourse during
some days and at some times is *makruh*, but not *haram*.

These days and times are as follows:

i. during frightful natural occurrences, e.g., eclipse, hurricane,
earthquake;

ii . from sunset till maghrib;

ii. from dawn till sunrise;

iii. the last three nights of lunar months;

iv. eve of the 15th of every lunar month;

v. eve of 10th Zil-hijjah;

vii. after becoming junub.

Some of these are self-explanatory: I don't think any one would be in
the mood for sexual intercourse during a hurricane or earthquake. The
second and third examples are of the prayer times; obviously, a Muslim
is expected to spend that time in meditation and prayer. One must
remember, firstly, that it is *makruh*, not *haram*, to have sexual
intercourse at these times.

Secondly, the *ahadith* for such issues have been accepted on basis of
the *qa'idatu 't-tasamuh* mentioned earlier. Thirdly, the reasons given
for this *karahat* are mostly about possible deformity of a child
conceived at that time. By looking at these reasons, I am inclined to
restrict this *karahat* only in cases of couples who plan to have
children, and not extend it to those who practice birth control.

I would therefore advise the readers to be considerate to your spouse
and not to put him or her in unnecessary tension; It your spouse is very
sensitive about these *makruh* days then try to accommodate your likes
and dislikes accordingly. Mutual understanding is the key.

#### (C) Are there days and times when sexual intercourse is recommended?

Yes we have certain *ahadith* which say that it is better to have sexual
intercourse at these times:

i. Sunday night;

ii. Monday night;

iii. Wednesday night;

iv. Thursday noon;

v. Thursday night;

vi. Friday evening;

vii. whenever the wife wants to have sex.

Thursday and Friday are weekends in the Islamic calendar!

#### (D) Are there times when it is obligatory (wajib) to have sexual intercourse?

Yes! It is wajib on man to have sex with his wife at least once in every
four months; this is considered as one of the conjugal rights of the
wife. This obligation stays in force unless there is a valid excuse or
the wife waives her right.

### 6. Sexual Techniques

Before I start writing anything about sexual techniques, it is necessary
to say that no rules and laws exist either in foreplay or in
intercourse. The only laws and rules are the ones reached by the lovers
by mutual and often unspoken understanding.

Whatever is pleasing and satisfying to both the husband and the wife is
right and proper; and whatever is mutually displeasing is wrong. The
only I imitation to this general rule would be any *shari'ah* rule which
goes against the wishes of the husband or the wife.

#### (A) Foreplay

Man often forgets that woman also has been created with the same desires
as himself. Asbagh bin Nubatah quotes Imam 'Ali that, "Almighty God
created sexual desires in ten parts; then He gave nine parts to women
and one to men." But then Allah also gave them "equal parts of
shyness.''[^38] Many times this shyness makes the man ignore the desires
of his wife.

Based on this reality, Islam emphasizes on foreplay. Imam 'Ali says,
"When you intend to have sex with your wife, do not rush because the
woman (also) has needs (which should be fulfilled)."[^39]

Sex without foreplay has been equated to cruelty. The Prophet said,
"Three people are cruel: . ..a person who has sex with his wife before
foreplay.''[^40]

Another *hadith* equates sex without foreplay to animal behavior: "When
anyone of you has sex with his wife, then he should not go to them like
birds; instead he should be slow and delaying."[^41]

The Prophet said, "No one among you should have sex with his wife like
animals; rather there should be a messenger between them." When asked
about the messenger, he said, "It means kissing and talking."[^42]

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq has been quoted as follows, "...there should be
mutual foreplay between them because it is better for sex."[^43] The
Prophet said, "...every play of a believer is void except in three
cases: horse-riding, archery and mutual foreplay with his wife these are
haqq."[^44]

As for the role of a woman in sexual foreplay, the Imams have praised a
wife who discards shyness when she is with her husband. A *hadith* was
quoted earlier from Imam 'Ali which said that women have been given
nine-tenths of the sexual desire but Allah has also given them
nine-tenths of shyness.[^45] I had promised in Chapter Two to explain
the rationale behind this *hadith*. There might seem to be a
contradiction in this act of God, but it is not so.

Both the sexual desire and the shyness have been placed for very
specific purpose. The sexual desire is to be unleashed, yes unleashed,
when a woman is with her husband, but it must be shielded with shyness
when she is with other people.

This has been very eloquently explained by Imam Muhammad al-Baqir when
he said, "The best woman among you is the one who discards the armor of
shyness when she undresses for her husband, and puts on the armor of
shyness when she dresses up again."[^46] After all, modesty and chastity
in public is the hallmark of a Muslim lady.

These sayings clearly show that the husband and the wife should feel
completely free when they are engaged in mutual stimulation which is
known as foreplay. There is nothing wrong, according to Islam, for a
woman to be active and responsive during sex.

This is diametrically opposed to the sexual morality of the Christian
Western world before the sexual revolution. Russell says, "Western women
of a generation or two ago can recall being warned by their mothers that
sexual intercourse was an unpleasant duty which they owed to their
husbands, and that they were 'to lie still and think of England'.[^47]
What else but a sexual revolt could such a morality breed?

As for the Islamic *shari'ah*, all the mujtahids are unanimous in saying
that the act of sexual foreplay in itself is *mustahab* (recommended).
Likewise, it is recommended not to rush into sexual intercourse.[^48]
The operative word is mutual pleasure and satisfaction.

#### (B) Techniques of Foreplay

As far as the methods of mutual stimulation in foreplay are concerned,
the *shari'ah* allows the husband and the wife to see, kiss, touch,
smell and stimulate any part of each other's body. Therefore, oral sex,
as it is known in this part of the world is allowed. Imam Musa al-Kazim
was once asked, "Can a person kiss his wife's vagina?" The Imam said,
"No problem."[^49] The only restriction is that no foreign object should
be used. And this restriction is quite understandable: nothing can
really substitute the things Allah has created in our bodies!

The restriction I am placing on the use of foreign objects is based on
the following *hadith*. 'Ubaydullah bin Zurarah says that he had an old
neighbor who owned a young slave-girl. Because of his old age, he could
not fully satisfy the young slave-girl during sexual intercourse. She
would therefore ask him to place his fingers in her vagina as she liked
it.

The old man complied with her wishes even though he did not like this
idea. So he requested 'Ubaydullah to ask Imam ' Ali ar-Riza (a. s.)
about it. When 'Ubaydullah asked the Imam about it, the Imam said,
"There is no problem as long as he uses any part of his own body upon
her, but he should not use any thing other than his body on her."[^50]

In an earlier discussion, we said that masturbation (i.e.,
self-stimulation of one's own sexual organ till emission of semen or
orgasm) is not allowed. However, in the case of married persons, there
is no problem if the wife stimulates her husband's penis till the
emission of semen or the husband stimulates his wife's vagina till
orgasm.[^51] This is allowed because it does not come under
"self-stimulation;" it is stimulation by a lawful partner. The Qur'an
clearly says that,

***"The believers are.. . those who protect their sexual organs except
from their spouses." (23: 5-6)***

And stimulation of sexual organs by a lawful partner surely comes under
the definition of protecting one's organ s "except from their spouses."

#### (C) Sexual Intercourse

Is there any particular position for sexual intercourse which is
forbidden in Islam? No! As far as the basic coital positions are
concerned, there are no restrictions. I am using the term 'basic coital
positions' for the positions known as the man above, face to face, woman
above face to face; side position, face to face; rear-entry position in
which the husband penetrates the vagina from the rear. Actually, the
*shari'ah* has left it on the husband and the wife to explore and
experiment as they wish.

In the early Islamic period, an event took place which clarified this
issue for all. The people of Medina, influenced by the Jews, used
man-above face to face position during sexual intercourse; whereas the
Meccans liked to experiment various positions.

After the migration of Muslims to Medina, a Meccan married a Medinan
woman and wanted to have sex with her in his own way. The woman refused
and said that he can have sex with her only in one position. The case
was reported to the Prophet; so Allah revealed the verse saying,

***"Your women are a tilth for you, so go in to your tilth as you
like."*** ***(2:223)***

That is, in any position.[^52]

However, it is *makruh* to adopt a standing position, or to face the
qiblah or keep it on the backside during the intercourse. It is
advisable to refrain from the acrobatic positions given by some
sexologists of the East and the West which might even cause physical
harm. Remember, the basic rule is mutual pleasure and flexibility. If
one partner does not like a particular position, then the other should
yield to his or her feelings.

#### (D) Anal Intercourse:

The opinions of our mujtahids vary on the permissibility of anal
intercourse. Before mentioning the preferred and correct view, I would
like to explain why the mujtahids have differed in their opinions.

This variance in *fatwas* is because of the difference in the *ahadith*
we have on this issue. There is a *hadith*, for example, from Imam
Ja'far as-Sadiq quoting the Prophet that "The anus of women is *haram*
for my community."[^53] Now this *hadith* categorically forbids anal
intercourse. But, according to 'Allamah al-Hilli and ash-Shahid
ath-Thani, the chain of narrators of this *hadith* is not completely
flawless.[^54]

When faced which such conflicting *ahadith*, most mujtahids have tried
to bring them together by taking the apparently more authentic *hadith*
(which approves anal intercourse) as a qualifier for the *ahadith* which
totally forbid such sex. And in conclusion, they say that the
prohibition in such *ahadith* is not on the level of *haram*, instead it
is on the level of *makruh*.[^55]

This conclusion of theirs is supported by a third category of *ahadith*
on this subject in which the Imams have clearly and strongly discouraged
their followers from anal intercourse. An example can be found in the
question asked by Safwan al-Jammal to Imam 'Ali ar-Riza (a.s.) in which
the latter clearly expressed his personal dislike for such act.[^56]

Therefore the majority of the Shi'ah mujtahids have derived two
conclusions:

(l) that anal intercourse is not *haram* but strongly disliked
(*karahatan shadidah*) provided the wife agrees to it.

(2) and if she does not agree to it, then all mujtahids say that it is
precautionarily wajib to refrain from it.[^57]

With all due respect to the great mujtahids who hold the above opinion,
I would like to present the preferred opinion. It is true that we have
conflicting *ahadith* from our Imams on anal intercourse, but the
*ahadith* which approve anal intercourse are not suitable for deriving
an opinion. Why? Because, in the case of conflicting *ahadith*, the
mujtahid has to contrast them with the Sunni view prevalent at the time
when the *ahadith* were issued by the Imams.

And, then, those which agree with the Sunni view are to be considered as
statements issued under *taqiyyah* and, therefore, not suitable for use
in *ijtihad*.[^58]

Using this method of solving the conflicting *ahadith* gives strength to
the prohibitive *ahadith* and brings us to the preferred view that anal
intercourse is not allowed.[^59] Probably, it was such a consideration
which caused the late Ayatullah al-Khu'i to change his view on this
issue.

During the last decade of his life, Ayatullah al-Khu'i departed from the
majority view and gave the ruling that it was precautionarily wajib to
abstain from anal intercourse no matter whether the wife agrees to it or
not.[^60]

I would strongly advise against anal intercourse, and would like to end
this section with the saying of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq and Imam 'Ali
ar-Riza about anal intercourse: "Woman is a means of your pleasure,
therefore do not harm her."[^61]

#### (E) Decency & Privacy

There was a time when people need not be reminded of some of the basic
moral and ethical values, but now we are living in an era where moral
values are changing like worn-out car tires!

One such issue is decency of dress at home and privacy at the time of
sexual intercourse or intimate contact between husband and wife. There
are some people in the West (of course, a minority) who think that it is
okay, nay healthy, to stay naked in presence of their children! On a
collective basis, they also organize nude camps. Why?

So that the children will not think negatively about their own
sexuality. Such parents also feel that there is nothing wrong in sexual
intercourse in the presence of their children. This behavior is an
example of the extreme reaction to the rigid Christian morality. To
protect their children from associating sex with evil, some of these
parents go to the extent of completely opening up to their children!

Such behavior is not only condemned by those who still abide by
religious moral systems, it is equally condemned by those who are
familiar with child psychology. A sexual manual read by millions of
Westerners says, "Never involve children in adult sexual activities:
militant and exhibitionist liberals who try to acclimatize children to
the naturalness of sex by letting them in any level of their own sex
lives probably do at least as much harm as was ever done by the
prohibitive sex-is-dirty generation."

We have quite a few *ahadith* in which the Prophet and the Imams have
emphasized that when you engage in sexual intercourse, make sure that no
child (or, for that matter, any other person) sees you or hears you. Abu
Basir quotes Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq as follows, "Be careful not to have
sex with your wife while a child can see you. The Prophet used to
dislike this (attitude) very strongly."[^62] If a child sees and hears
the parents engaged in sexual intercourse, he might go through a
shocking psychological experience. It might also create a problem in his
own adult life.

The manual quoted earlier says, "Most young children are biologically
programmed to interpret the sight or sound of adult coition as evidence
of a violent assault (they are aware of it earlier than you would
expect, so don't keep babies in the bedroom), and the awareness of
mother-father sexual relations is on all counts far too explosive a
matter to be monkeyed with in the interest of Reichian experiments."

Islam has laid down clear guide-lines about the privacy of adults.
Referring to the children who have not yet reached the age of puberty
(*bulugh*), the Qur'an says:

***O you who believe! ... Those of you who have not yet reached puberty
should ask you for permission (before entering your bedroom during)
three times: before the dawn prayer, when you put off your garments at
midday (for siesta), and after the night prayer these are three times of
privacy for you. Besides (these three times), there is no blame on you
or them if you go to one another (without announcing yourselves). Thus
God makes clear to you the signs, and God is All-Knowing, Wise.***
***(24:58)***

Then referring to the children who have reached the age of puberty, the
Qur'an says:

***When your children reach puberty, they should ask your permission (at
all times before entering your bedrooms) just as those who were before
them had asked permission. Thus God makes clear to you the signs, and
God is All-Knowing, Wise.*** ***(24:59)***

These two verses give us the following rules about privacy within and
without the family circles:

1. There are three times in a day night, early morning and afternoon
which are considered as times of privacy.

2. The minor children should be taught that during times of privacy they
are not allowed to enter the bedroom of their parents or adults without
first asking their permission. Obviously, by minor we do not mean
infants; we mean the children who can understand what is right and what
is wrong. I would put that at age five and above. The parents will have
to ingrain this teaching to their minor children gradually.

3. At other times, the children are free to come and go into the bedroom
of their parents without asking for their permission. In retrospect,
this means that the parents should be decently dressed at those other
times.

4. As for the mature children and adults, the Qur'an is clear that they
may enter the bedroom of their parents or other adults at all times only
after asking their permission.

[^1]: Newsweek, Special Edition Spring 1990, p. 55.

[^2]: Newsweek, p. 55.

[^3]: Newsweek, p. 55.

[^4]: Newsweek, p. 57.

[^5]: The Vancouver Sun, Dec. 5, 1989.

[^6]: See the chapter on "hudud" in Sharaya' and Sharh Lum'a also
a;-Khu'i, Takmilah, p. 37-8.

[^7]: Wasa'il, vol. 18, p. 575.

[^8]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 267; vol. 18, pp. 574-5.

[^9]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 267; vol. 18, pp. 574-5.

[^10]: The Twilight of the Primitive, p. 16-7 as quoted in Sex and
Destiny, p. 88.

[^11]: Rizvi, S.S.A., Your Questions Answered, vol. 3, p. 40-1.

[^12]: The Hite Report on Male Sexuality, p. 489.

[^13]: The Hite Report on Male Sexuality, p. 489.

[^14]: The Mastery of Sex, p. 103.

[^15]: See the chapter on "hudud" in Sharaya and Sharh Lum'a also
al-Khu'i, Takmilah, p. 42-44.

[^16]: See the statement of The Very Rev. Duncan Abraham. Dean of St.
James Cathedral in Toronto. The Toronto Sun, Nov. 24, 1993.

[^17]: The Globe & Mail (Toronto) Nov. 12, 1987.

[^18]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 178

[^19]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 178

[^20]: Murata, Temporary Marriage in Islamic Laws (Qum: Ansariyan, 1991)
p. 4.

[^21]: Tehran: WOFIS, 1981

[^22]: Qum: Ansariyan

[^23]: English translation, pp. 130-161.

[^24]: Al-Khui, Minhaj, vol. 2, p. 267.

[^25]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 449.

[^26]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 449-450.

[^27]: See the Qur'an, ch. 4, verse 23-24

[^28]: Muhaqqiq al-Hilli, Sharaya', p. 500: Shahid ath-Thani, Sharh
Lum'ah, vol. 2. p. 71.

[^29]: Al-Yazdi. al-'Urwah, p. 654; al-Khui, Minhaj, vol. 2. p 255:
al-Khumayni. Tahrir, vol. 2. p. 254; for details, see ash-Shahid
ath-Thani, Masalik, vol. 1, p 449-452.

[^30]: Muhaqqiq al-Hilli, Sharaya', p. 493; Shahid ath-Thani, S'harh
Lum'ah, vol. 2, p. 67; al-Yazdi, al-'Urwah, p. 625; al-Khu'i, Minhaj,
vol. 2, p. 253; al-Khumayni, Tahrir, vol. 2, p. 254: 'Allamah al-Hilli,
Tazkirah, vol. 2, p. 572; Shaykh at-Tusi, an-Nihayah, p. 484.

[^31]: For more information on qa'idatu't-tasamuh, the specialist
readers may refer to as-Sadr, Durus fi 'Ilmi 'l-Usul, vol. 2 p 204 and
vol. 3 (part 1) p 258 and an-Naraqi's 'Awa'idu 'l-Ayyam, pp. 269-271.

[^32]: Minhaj, vol. 1, p. 14. Raja'i 'l-matlubiyyah means doing
something not because it is sunnat but with the intention that it might
be expected of us to do so.

[^33]: See his annotations on al-'Urwatu 'l-Wuthqa, p. 623.

[^34]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 62.

[^35]: Al-'Urwah. p. 624.

[^36]: For further details, see my Ritual Ablutions for Women.

[^37]: Wasa'il, vol. 1, p. 576.

[^38]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 40.

[^39]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 40.

[^40]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 40.

[^41]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 82.

[^42]: Tahzibu'l-Ihya, vol. 3, p. 110.

[^43]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 82.

[^44]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 83.

[^45]: See p. 32.

[^46]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 14-15.

[^47]: As quoted in Sex and Destiny, p. 94.

[^48]: Al-'Urwah, p. 625.

[^49]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 77; for similar views of present mujtahids
see al-'Urwah, p. 625.

[^50]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 77.

[^51]: This issue has also been clearly mentioned by the late Ayatullah
al-Khu'i in answer to some questions sent by an 'alim from London

[^52]: At-Tabataba'i, al-Mizan, vol. 3 (English translation) p. 319.

[^53]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 104.

[^54]: See Hilli's Tazkiratu'l-Fuqaha, vol. 2, p. 576-7; Shahid's
Masalik, vol. 2, p. 303) On the other hand for example, we have a hadith
from 'Abdullah bin Abi Ya'fur whose chain of narrators is authentic in
which Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq was questioned about a man who had had
intercourse in the anus of his wife. The Imam said, "There is no problem
in it if she agrees." (Wasa'il 'sh-Shi'ah, vol. 14, p. 103).

[^55]: See ash-Shahid ath-Thani, Sharh Lum'ah, vol. 2, p. 68 and
Masalik, vol. 1, p. 438-9.

[^56]: Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'ah, vol. 14, p. 102-103

[^57]: See the fatawa of all contemporary mujtahids in their annotations
to al-'Urwatu'l-Wuthqa, p. 628.

[^58]: For this methodology, the specialist reader may refer to Shaykh
Murtaza al-Ansari, Rasa'il, p. 464-468.

[^59]: For further details on this view, the specialist reader may refer
to the late Ayatullah Syed Rahat Husayn al-Golalpuri, al-Intisar fi
hurmati'l-adbar, Lucknow, al-Wa'iz Safdar Press, 1354 AH. To know the
views of some prominent Sunnis of the Early Islamic period who approved
anal intercourse, the English readers can refer to at-Tabataba'i,
al-Mizan vol. 3 (English translation) pp. 320-321.

[^60]: See al-Khu'i, Minhaju 's-Salihiyn, vol. 1 (Beirut: 22nd edition)
p. 64.

[^61]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 101-102.

[^62]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 94-95


