Chapter Four: Contraceptives & Abortion
=======================================

A. Introduction
---------------

The question of birth control has created much debate in the Western
world. This question is related to the basic view of sex. On one hand,
if you relate sex to the original sin and equate it with evil, and allow
sexual intercourse only for the purpose of procreation then, obviously,
you will be totally opposed to birth control.

Allowing birth control would mean allowing sex for pleasure. On the
other hand, if you consider sex to be a natural act whose purpose is
two-fold: procreation and/or fulfillment of sexual desire, then you
would allow birth control. The debate on the use of birth control,
moreover, is intertwined with the issue of abortion.

On the whole, there are three opinions on birth control and abortion. On
the one extreme, the Roman Catholic Church[^1] forbids birth control as
well as abortion; ('Allamah Rizvi comments on the Catholic view as
follows: "The Vatican seems oblivious of [the] simple difference between
underlying reason of a law and the law itself. That is why it has
totally prohibited use of contraceptives, on the plea that it goes
against the philosophy of marriage.

But does Vatican have the conviction of courage to take this 'argument'
to its logical end? Is it prepared to forbid intercourse with a pregnant
wife, or ban marriage of infertile men or women? They should have banned
these and other examples...because they too cannot produce pregnancy.
The prelates of the Roman Catholic Church all unmarried men are perhaps
unaware that lawful satisfaction of sexual urge is in itself a valid
underlying reason of marriage."[^2]

And on the other extreme, the libertarians and feminists consider birth
control and abortion as the basic rights of women. In between these two
extremes, Islam allows birth control but forbids abortion.

According to the Shi 'ah *fiqh*, family planning as a private measure to
space or regulate the family size for health or economic reasons is
permissible. Neither is there any Qur'anic verse or *hadith* against
birth control, nor is it wajib to have children in marriage. So
basically, birth control would come under the category of *ja'iz,*
lawful acts.

Moreover, we have some *ahadith* (especially on the issue of *'azl,
coitus interruptus*) which categorically prove that birth control is
permissible. Imam 'Ali once said, "One of the two (means) of affluence
is to have few dependents.'[^3]' Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq said that, "[Imam]
'Ali ibnul Husayn (peace be upon him) saw no problem in *coitus
interruptus* and he used to recite the verse that,

***â€˜When your Lord brought forth from the children of Adam (i.e., from
their loins) their seed...'[7:172]***

So from whatsoever [seed] Allah has taken a covenant, it is sure to be
born even if it is [spilled] on a hard rock."[^4] The Imam is saying
that the creation is in the hand of Allah alone. Whether or not we
practice birth control, if Allah wills, the child will be conceived. In
effect, these *ahadith* are a positive proof that birth control is
allowed in Islam.

\* \* \*

However, sometimes the issue of birth control is politicized by the
imperialists and racist regimes; and in such cases, the supreme mujtahid
has the right to temporarily forbid the use of birth control on the
basis of secondary reasons (*hukm thanawi*).

For example, if the Russian communist government plans to impose or
promote birth control in its Muslim provinces not because of health
reasons but because it fears that the high birth rate among the Muslims
might offshoot their minority status, then the mujtahid can issue a
*fatwa* saying that to practice birth control in Soviet Russia (without
any health reasons) would be *haram*.

Or if the Israeli government, for example, promotes birth control among
the Muslims inside the occupied Palestine, then the mufti can prohibit
it. Similarly, if the Indian government or the Maronite government of
Lebanon intends to promote birth control among their Muslim citizens,
then the supreme mujtahid can prohibit the use of birth control. Such
*fatwas* will just be of a temporary nature; once the issue is
depoliticized, the primary law will be applied again.

B. When Does Pregnancy Begin?
-----------------------------

Islam allows the preventing of pregnancy, but does not allow its
termination. However, the problem arises in defining the beginning of
pregnancy from the *shari'ah* point of view. Before we look at various
methods of birth control, we must first define the beginning of
pregnancy; and only then will we be able to say which method is
permissible and which is not.

My research has failed to find a discussion in the classical *fiqhi*
books on the *shari'ah* definition of pregnancy. Even the present
mujtahids have not discussed it. I intend, by putting my trust in Allah,
to briefly study the issue in light of the scientific explanations and
try to arrive at a *shar'i* definition of pregnancy.

A few words on the criteria of *shar'i* definitions is necessary in
order to understand the purely legal discussion on the definition of
pregnancy.

### 1. Criteria of Shar'i Definitions

There are three possible criteria for definitions of things and concepts
in fiqh: *shar'i, 'urfi* and *'ilmi.*

(1) If something is clearly defined in the *shari'ah*, then it is known
as the *shar'i* definition; for example, the definition of the word
*"salat"* as the ritual prayer consisting of specific actions and
recitations.

(2) *'Urf* means conventional, common tradition. *'Urfi* definition
means a definition acceptable to the common people without any
scientific or *shar'i* precision.

(3) *'Ilmi* definition means a definition presented by science; for
example, the definition of pure water as H20, a liquid compound
consisting of 2 parts of hydrogen and 1 of oxygen, or the definition of
the beginning of day as the astronomical twilight.[^5]

If the *shari'ah* defines something, then we must follow the *shar'i*
definition. But if it is silent on the definition of certain things,
then should we follow the *'ilmi* definition or the *'urfi* definition?
Anyone who is familiar with the *shari'ah* will agree with me that in
the absence of a *shar'i* definition, one has to follow the *'urfi*
definition. One has to go by the common perception of things, not the
scientific perception.

For example, when the *shari'ah* says that the water for ritual ablution
must be pure (*mutlaq*) does it mean scientifically pure? Certainly not!
Otherwise, the running water in this part of the world is not
scientifically pure, it has some purifying chemicals in it, for example,
fluoride. The *shari'ah* says that such water will still be classified
as pure unless the common people can sense (without the help of a
scientific lab) the difference in its color, taste or smell.

However, there is one case where the *ilm* definition will prevail: in
cases where the common people have no way of defining the issue. So in
cases where the *shari'ah* is silent and the *'urf* has no opinion, one
has no choice but to follow the *'ilmi (*scientific) definition.

The definition of the beginning of pregnancy is one such case where the
*'ilmi* definition would prevail; this is so because the *shari'ah* is
silent, and it is beyond the common people to define when pregnancy
begins. Therefore, in this case, we will first see how science describes
the beginning of pregnancy and then attempt to find secondary proofs
from *shari'ah* sources to arrive at a conclusion.

### 2. The Shar'i Pregnancy

The process of conception and pregnancy according to modern science is
as follows: After the semen is ejaculated into the vagina, the sperms
move into the uterus, cross the uterus and enter the fallopian tube. The
woman's ovum is in the fallopian tube. The sperms travel into the
fallopian tube in search of the ovum.

When the sperms reach the ovum, normally only one of them succeeds in
penetrating the ovum. This coming together of man's sperm and woman's
ovum is known as fertilization. After fertilization, the ovum starts to
travel towards the uterus; and after coming into the uterus, it gets
implanted on to the wall of the uterus. This process is known as
implantation of the fertilized ovum in the womb.

To determine the *shar'i* pregnancy, one has to answer the following
question: From the *shari'ah's* point of view, does pregnancy begin

(1) with the entering of semen into the uterus or

(2) with the fertilization of an ovum by a sperm in the fallopian tube
or

(3) with the implantation of a fertilized ovum in the uterus?

It is my contention that the combination of three things form the
*shar'i* pregnancy: the sperm, the ovum and the uterus. If any two of
these things combine without the third, then it is not a *shar'i*
pregnancy. As I shall prove below, the *shar'i* pregnancy begins when
the fertilized ovum implants itself onto the wall of the uterus.

\* \* \*

In my search for a *shar'i* definition, the closest issue I could come
to was the discussion under the indemnity for abortion. In Shi'ah fiqh,
the indemnity for abortion differs according to the various stages of
pregnancy. However, what is relevant to our discussion is the indemnity
for the first four months of pregnancy. The child in its mother's womb
during this time goes through five stages gradually with distinctive
names:

*nutfah*, when it is a sperm;

*'alaqah,* when it is a blood-like clot;

*muzgah,* when it is a lump of flesh;

*'azm,* when bones are formed,

*yaksu lahman,* when bones are clothed with flesh.[^6]

The first stage is very crucial in our search for the beginning of
pregnancy. Most *ahadith* simply say that the lowest indemnity is for
aborting "a *nutfah* sperm."[^7] At the first look it would seem that
according to these *ahadith*, pregnancy starts as soon as the sperm
enters into the uterus.

This would mean that preventing the semen from entering into the uterus
is allowed but once it has entered the uterus, then it is forbidden to
abort it. But this is not so. This would have been correct if the word
*"nutfah"* is taken only in its literal sense in which it means "a
sperm".

However, in *fiqh* and *hadith*, the word *"nutfah"* is used both for a
sperm as well as for a fertilized ovum. Fortunately this extended
meaning of the word *"nutfah"* has been clarified in *hadith*; for
example, the following *hadith* by Imam Zaynu 'l-'Abidin (a.s.).

Sa'id bin al-Musayyab asked Imam 'Ali Zaynu 'l-'Abidin about a person
who hits a pregnant woman with his leg and, as a result, she lost what
she had in her womb. The Imam said, "If it is a (*nutfah*) sperm, then
he must pay her 20 dinars." Sa'id asked, "What is the definition of
*nutfah*?" The Imam said, "It is a substance which, when placed in the
womb, settles down in it for forty days."[^8]

The Imam has used two words to describe the *nutfah*: (1) *wuzi'at
fi'r-rahm* it is placed in the uterus, and (2) *fastaqarrat fihi* it
settles down in it (i.e., the womb). It seems the Imam is emphasizing
that the earliest stage of abortion is not when the sperm enters the
uterus for the first time and just passes through it, rather when it
settles down in it.

Obviously the "settling down of the sperm in the uterus" and
"implantation of a fertilized ovum in the uterus" are one and the same
thing.

It is needless to say that the distinction between the entrance of sperm
into the womb, then the fertilization of ovum in the fallopian tube and
finally its implantation was not clearly known to the scholars of *fiqh*
and the scientists till a century ago. But the word "*istiqrar* =
settling down" shows that our *'ulama'* were not completely unaware of
the fact that the sperm goes through various stages before "settling
down" in the uterus.

If they had been completely unaware, then they would not have used the
word *istiqrar*, instead they would have just said "the entering of the
sperm into the uterus." This difference becomes more clear in the
writing of the *'ulama'* of post-seventh Islamic century. Before the
seventh century, we find the expression such as *"ilqa'u 'n-nutfah"*
(the entering of the sperm into the uterus).[^9]

But after the seventh century, the *'ulama'* consistently began using
the expression of *"istiqraru 'n-nutfa"* (the settling down of the sperm
in the uterus).[^10]

Even the present mujtahids describe the earliest stage of abortion as
follows: "aborting a sperm after its settling down in the womb (*ba'd
istiqrari 'n-nutfah fi 'r-rahm*)."[^11]

Moreover, the Qur'an has always used the word "*haml*" to describe
pregnancy.[^12] "*Haml*" means to carry, and it is obvious that a woman
carries the child in her uterus and not in her fallopian tube. And
*haml* starts with implantation and not before it.[^13]

In conclusion, I can say that the beginning of pregnancy from the
*shari'ah* point of view is the stage when the fertilized ovum is
implanted (*istiqrar*) onto the lining of the uterus. And, therefore,
whatever prevents implantation is all owed but whatever aborts an
implanted ovum is *haram*.

A year after reaching my decision in 1986, I wrote to Ayatullah al-Khu'i
asking for his opinion on this issue: "From medical point of view, after
the sperm enters the vagina, it crosses the uterus and enters the
fallopian tube. In this tube, the sperm joins the ovum. Then the
fertilized ovum enters the uterus and implants itself onto its wall.
[^14]

I think the answer of the Ayatullah needs some explanation for those not
familiar with the *fuqaha's* style. In the first part of his answer, the
Ayatullah agreed that what is forbidden in relation to birth control is
the act of aborting the sperm after it had settled down in the womb.

In the second part of his answer, he declined to take it upon himself to
specify when does "the settling down of the sperm" occur: soon after the
sperm enters into the uterus or after its return from the fallopian
tube?[^15]

Based on the scientific explanation given earlier and the use of the
word *istiqrar* in the *hadith* in relation to the *nutfah* and the
writings of our *'ulama'* on the earliest stage of abortion, I consider
the implantation of a fertilized ovum onto the wall of the uterus as the
beginning of pregnancy from the *shari'ah* point of view.

Now we can easily decide on the permissible means of birth control. Any
method that prevents pregnancy before the implantation of the fertilized
ovum is allowed, and any method that terminates pregnancy after the
implantation is not allowed and will be considered as abortion. It is in
the light of this criterion that we should look at the various methods
of birth control that are presently available.

It was interesting to know that two years after I reached my conclusion
on the *shari'ah* basis, Dr. Clifford Grobstein, a leading embryologist
of America, published the same conclusion on the basis of his scientific
research.

Dr. Grobstein, whose evenhanded approach has won him places on the
ethics committees of both the American Fertility Society and the
Catholic Health Association, published his Science and the Unborn in
1988. He writes,

"In the last several decades, chiefly as the result of extensive studies
of mouse development, it has become clear that in the earliest stages of
each new generation, mammals (including humans) go through a preliminary
pre-embryonic phase before they become embryos in the usual scientific
sense...

"In mammalian development, which normally occurs within the body of the
mother (internal gestation), it is now evident that the early changes
undergone by the zygote first establish multicellularity and, second,
prepare for penetration into the maternal uterine wall, or implantation.
The second step, as we have noted, is the true beginning of gestation or
pregnancy."[^16]

C. The Contraceptive Methods
----------------------------

The contraceptive methods during our time work in different ways. We
shall examine some of the most commonly used contraceptive methods and
determine whether they are permissible in Islam or not. It must be
mentioned that we are studying the permissibility of these methods from
the *shari'ah* point of view only. For the medical opinion about the
reliability or any side-effects of these methods, the reader must
consult his or her physician.

### 1. Oral Contraceptives

Birth control pills prevent conception by inhibiting ovulation. The
pills alter hormonal levels and suppress the hormonal signal from the
gland for the ovaries to release an ovum. These pills are taken orally
on a precise schedule for 20 or more days during each menstrual cycle.

Since all such pills inhibit ovulation, there is absolutely no problem
in using them. However, the individual must consult the physician about
possible side-effects.

There are some pills which work after the intercourse has taken place,
for example, the 'morning-after pill' or the recently developed RU486
pill. Since in our definition, pregnancy begins at implantation, use of
any pill which may prevent implantation is alright. Therefore, the pills
like the 'morning-after' and RU486 may be taken after the intercourse
BUT not after feeling or knowing that pregnancy has already occurred.

### 2. Depo-Provera

Depo-Provera works exactly like the pills, but instead of taking it
orally it is injected once every three months. This and other similar
contraceptive methods by injection are also permissible.

### 3. Intrauterine Devices (IUD)

IUDs are plastic or metal objects, in a variety of shapes, that are
implanted inside the uterus. The medical experts do not exactly know how
IUD works. Presently there are two opinions: one says that IUD prevents
fertilization; and the other says that it prevents the fertilized ovum
from implantation onto the uterus. Since the *shari'* pregnancy begins
at implantation, there is no problem in using IUD as a birth control
device irrespective of the above differences among the medical experts.

### 4. Barrier Devices

All barrier devices prevent the sperm from entering the uterus. This is
done by sheathing the penis with a condom, or by covering the cervix
with a diaphragm, cervical cap, or vaginal sponge. The use of
spermicidal substances which kill the sperm before reaching the ovum is
also a barrier device. There is absolutely no problem in using these
contraceptives either.

### 5. Abstinence During Fertile Period

There are three basic procedures to predict ovulation so that sexual
intercourse can be avoided during the approximately six days of a
woman's most fertile monthly phase. These three methods are as follows:

(a) Ovulation Method: A woman learns to recognize the fertile time by
checking the difference in the constitution of the cervical mucus
discharge. The cervical mucus discharge signals the highly fertile
period; and thus avoiding sex during the fertile days prevents
pregnancy.

(b) Rhythm Method: A method similar to the first, but it depends on
observing the monthly cycles for a whole year to determine the fertile
days.

(c) Temperature: In this method, besides keeping a calendar record of
her cycle, a woman also takes her temperature daily to detect ovulation.
She can know her ovulation whenever her basal body temperature
increases.

### 6. Withdrawal (Coitus Interruptus)

Coitus interruptus means withdrawing the penis just before ejaculation.
This was the most common method of birth control before the invention of
modern devices.

Muhammad bin Muslim and 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi 'Abdillah Maymun asked
Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq about withdrawal. The Imam said, "It is up to the
man; he may spill it wherever he wants."[^17] However, in another
*hadith*, Muhammad bin Muslim quotes the fifth or the sixth Imam as
follows: "In case of a slave-girl, it is allowed, however, in case of a
free woman, I dislike it unless it had been so stipulated at the time of
marriage."[^18]

Based on this *hadith*, the majority of our mujtahids believe that
coitus interruptus is allowed but *makruh* without the wife's
consent.[^19]

All methods mentioned above do not involve surgical operation and they
are also reversible. A woman (or man) using these methods can stop using
them at anytime in order to have a child.

### 7. Sterilization

Sterilization involves surgical operation.

Sterilization in men, known as vasectomy, means the severing or blocking
of the tube in the male reproductive tract. This tube or duct passes
sperm from the testes to the prostate and other reproductive organs.

Sterilization in women, known as tubal ligation, involves the blocking
or severing of the fallopian tubes which transport the ovum.

The permissibility of sterilization depends on whether or not it is
reversible. At present, the rate of reversibility (40%) is not good
enough to make sterilization permissible. Greater success may be
achieved with improved micro surgical techniques. And until we achieve
at least 80 percent reversibility, it is difficult to permit
sterilization.

### Can a woman practice birth control without the consent of her husband?

The wife has full right to the use of contraceptives even without the
approval of her husband. [^20] However, she should not use a method
which may come in the way of her husband's conjugal rights. For example,
she cannot force him to use condom or practice coitus interruptus.

This rule is based upon the principle that the extent of the husband's
conjugal rights over his wife is just that she should be sexually
available, responsive, and cooperative. This right does not extend to
that of bearing children for him. Bearing children or not is a personal
decision of the woman; and therefore, she may use contraceptives
provided they do not come in the way of her husband's conjugal rights.

This was the legal aspect of the *shari'ah*. But on a practical level,
such decisions are best made with mutual consultation between the
husband and the wife; otherwise, it could lead to misunderstanding and
mistrust. The legal aspect is to protect the basic rights of women; but
in the real world, man and woman must base their life on love, mercy and
cooperation as the Qur'an says,

***"And We have created between you love and mercy."(30:21)***

D. Abortion
-----------

Islam's approach to the issue of birth control and abortion is very
balanced. It allows women to prevent pregnancy but forbids them to
terminate it. Abortion after the implantation of the fertilized ovum in
the womb is absolutely forbidden and is considered a crime against the
law of God, and the fetus.

From the Islamic point of view, the illegitimacy of aborting a fetus
does not depend on the issue of whether the fetus has the status of a
human being or not. Although Islam does not recognize the fetus as a
human being, it still gives to it the right of a possible life.

Abortion has become common in the Western world for various reasons

1. sometimes it is a matter of choice between a child and a career;

2. sometimes it is a matter of choice between a child and a luxurious
life-style;

3. sometimes it is because of the child's illegitimacy;

4. sometimes it is because of the wrong sex of the child;

5. sometimes it is because of rape.

All these justifications are unacceptable from the Islamic point of
view. The first two excuses reflect the selfish nature of this
materialistic society. Allah says,

***"Do not kill your children because of (fear of) poverty. We will
provide for you and them."*** ***(6: 152)***

***"Do not kill your children for fear of poverty; We will provide for
them and you. Surely the killing (of children) is a great error."***
***(17:31)***

The third excuse is a by-product of illicit sexual relations which Islam
strongly condemns. The fourth reason is no less evil and cruel than the
pre-Islamic Arab custom of burying baby girls alive.

As for the fifth case involving rape, the lady should use the morning
after pill or RU486 immediately after the sexual assault in order to
prevent the possible implantation of a fertilized ovum. But if pregnancy
is established, then Islam does not allow abortion.

In such cases, Islam says that why abort the child for the crime of the
father? As for the reputation of the woman, Islam strongly condemns the
people who look down upon the rape victim; instead of reviling her, they
should be sympathetic to her.

Modern technology (like ultra sound scan) has made it possible to know
whether or not a child has a defect long before he is born. Some people
justify the abortion of a defective fetus. The present mujtahids do not
allow such abortions; they say that the parents should pray and hope for
a normal and healthy child.

There are many examples where the prediction of the doctors have been
proven wrong! In other words, what our mujtahids are saying is that take
preventative measures before going for pregnancy; but once pregnancy has
taken place, you are not allowed to abort a fetus even if it is
defective.

The *shari'ah* allows abortion only when doctors declare with reasonable
certainty that the continuation of pregnancy will endanger the woman's
life. This permission is based on the principle of the lesser of the two
evils known in Islamic legal terminology as the principle of *al-ahamm
wa 'l-muhimm* (the more important and the less important).

The Prophet said, "When two forbidden things come [upon a person]
together, then the lesser will be sacrificed for the greater." In the
present case, one is faced with two forbidden things: either abort the
unborn child or let a living woman die. Obviously, the latter is greater
than the former; therefore, abortion is allowed to save the live person.

[^1]: See Instruction on Respect for Human Life in Its Origin and the
Dignity of Procreation: Replies to Certain Questions of the Day, Vatican
City, 1987.

[^2]: See the footnote in al-Mizan, vol. 8 (English translation) p. 104.

[^3]: Nahju'l-Balaghah, saying No., 141; Tuhaf, p. 214.

[^4]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 105.

[^5]: I have used the terms "shar'i definition," "'urfi (common)
definition," and "'ilmi (scientific) definition" to simplify the matter
for the non-specialist readers, however, in the terminology of fiqh, the
three definitions or perceptives are known as "al-'urfu 'sh-shari',"
"al-'urfu 'l-'amm," and "al-'urfu 'l-khass" respectively. The specialist
reader may refer to Shaykh Murtaza al-Ansari's al-Makasib, p. 193 for
further details on definitions and perceptions in the shari'ah.

[^6]: This is based on the Qur'an, see 23: 12-14.

[^7]: Wasa'il, vol. 19, pp. 169, 237-240.

[^8]: Wasa'il, vol. 19, p. 240. Also see p. 238, 242

[^9]: Sharaya'u 'l-Islam, p. 1042; an-Nihayah, p. 778.

[^10]: Tabsirah, p. 216; Sharh Lum'a, vol. 2, p. 444; Tahrir, vol. 2. p.
597.

[^11]: After publication of the first edition of this book. it was my
great pleasure to see in the late Ayatullah al-Khu'i's lecture a
statement which completely concurs with my definition of pregnancy. He
said. "The criterion in applying the [word] 'pregnant' for a woman is
correct only after the settling down (istiqrar) of the sperm in her womb
because just the entering of the sperm in her womb does not make her
pregnant." See al-Gharawi, Mirza 'Ali, at-Tanqih fi Sharhi 'l-'Urwati
'l-Wuthqa (notes of the fiqh lectures of al-Khu'i), vol. 7 (Najaf:
al-Adab Press, 1988) p. 206.

[^12]: See the Qur'an, 19:22; 31:14; 46:15.

[^13]: A close physician friend of mine pointed out to me that pregnancy
in the fallopian tube (known as tubal pregnancy) is possible. However,
this information does not affect our argument because tubal pregnancy is
not a normal pregnancy. In the matter of definitions, abnormal
possibilities are not taken into consideration. More so in abnormalities
like tubal pregnancy: the fallopian tube is not big enough for
development of a fetus, and the tubal pregnancy has to be surgically
aborted otherwise the mother might end up losing her own life.

[^14]: Apparently, the expression 'istiqraru 'n-nutfa fi 'r-rahm' in the
writings of Islamic jurists refers to this implantation of the
fertilized ovum onto the wall of the uterus.) "By keeping in mind what
has been said above, is it permissible to use a medicine or a device
which prevents the fertilized ovum from implanting itself onto the wall
of the uterus?" Ayatullah al-Khu'i replied that: "What is forbidden is
to abort the sperm after its settling down, whereas [to prevent
pregnancy] before that is alright. However, to specify the minor and
major premises of both these issues is upon the individual himself.''
(Personal correspondence dated 24 Rabs' II, 1407 (1987).

[^15]: In light of the statement of the late Ayatullah al-Khu'i quoted
on p. 116 of this edition, he also believed that the settling down of
the sperm occurs after its return from the fallopian tube.

[^16]: Grobstein, Science and the Unborn, p. 58-9.

[^17]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 105.

[^18]: Wasa'il, vol. 14, p. 106.

[^19]: Sharh Lum'a, vol. 2, p. 28; al-'Urwah, p. 628; Minhaj, vol. 2, p.
267.

[^20]: Minhaj, vol. 2, p. 276.


