Appendix I: Sources of the Shari'ah
===================================

In Islamic system, the issue of sexual morality comes under the
*shari'ah*, the laws of Islam. Therefore it seems appropriate to explain
the sources of the *shari'ah* from our point of view. The primary
sources of the Islamic laws are two things: the Qur'an and the sunnah.
By the sunnah, we mean the sayings, actions and silent approval of the
Prophet and the Ahlu'l-bayt.

The Qur'an describes only the basic rules of the *shari'ah*, and the
*sunnah* elaborates upon them. The Qur'an introduces the Prophet of
Islam as follows:

***"He (Allah) raised up among the common people a Messenger from among
themselves to recite to them His revelations, to purify them, and to
teach them the Book and wisdom;"(62:2)***

***"And We have revealed to you (O Muhammad) the Reminder (i.e., the
Qur'an) so that you may clarify to the people what has been revealed to
them, and so that they may reflect."*** ***(16: 44)***

These two verses definitely prove that Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon
him) was not just a 'mail-man' whose only job was to deliver the Book to
us. He was a teacher and a commentator of the Qur'an. Even his actions
are a source of guidance for us:

*"**You have a good example in Allah 's Messenger for whosoever hopes
for God and the last day, and remembers God oft."*** ***(33:21)***

The obedience to the Prophet has been considers as the proof of loving
Allah:

***"Say (O Muhammad): 'If you love Allah, then follow me; (if you do
so,) Allah will love you and forgive you your sins.'"*** ***(3:31)***

To show the importance of obeying the Prophet, the Qur'an further says,

***"Whoever obeys the Messenger has surely obeyed Allah."***
***(4:80)***

The Muslims who lived during the Prophet's time had easy access to his
*sunnah*. What about use who were born hundreds of years after the
Prophet's death? Well, the Muslims of the early days realized the
importance of the Prophet's *sunnah* and started preserving his sayings
in books of *hadith*.

Even the actions of the Prophet, observed by the companions, were
preserved in writing. But this process of preserving the *sunnah* of the
Prophet was not immune from mistakes and even forgery. Many sayings were
invented and wrongfully attributed to the Prophet during the early
period of the Islamic history. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to
find an authentic and, at the same time, informed source for the
*sunnah* of the Prophet.

When you look at the Muslims of the Prophet's days, you can find no one
who might be more knowledgeable, informed, reliable and closer to the
Prophet than the Ahlu'l-bayt, the family of the Prophet. After all, it
is the Qur'an which testifies to their spiritual purity of highest
category by saying,

***"Verily Allah intends to purify you, O the Ahlu'l-bayt, a thorough
purification."*** ***(33:33)***

Combine this verse about Ahlu'l-bayt's purity with the following:

***"It is the holy Qur'an in a preserved tablet, none shall touch it but
the purified ones."*** ***(56:79)***

This shows that the Ahlu'l-bayt could understand the Qur'an better than
any other follower of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him). Allay says,

*"**Say (O Muhammad), 'I do not ask from you any reward (for bringing
the message to you) except to love my near ones.'**"* ***(42:23)***

See that it is Allah who is commanding His messenger to ask the people
to love his family. If they were not truthful, reliable, and worthy of
following, would Allah command us to love them?

These few verses are enough to show that the best commentators of the
Qur'an and the most authentic source for the Prophet's sunnah are the
Imams of Ahlu'l-bayt. The Prophet himself said, "I am leaving among you
two worthy things. As long as you hold on to them both, you will never
be led astray after me.

One of these two is greater than the other: the Book of Allah (which is
a rope hanging from the heaven to the earth) and my descendants, my
Ahlu'l-bayt. These two things will not separate from each other until
they come to me at the (fountain of) Kauthar (in the hereafter).
Therefore, see how you recompense me by the way you deal with them."

This is not the place to discuss about the authenticity of the above
hadith, but it will suffice to quote Ibn Hajar al-Makki, a famous
anti-Shi'ah polemicist. After recording this hadith from various
companions who had heard it from the Prophet at various places and
times, Ibn Hajar says, "

And there is no contradiction in this [numerous reports] since there was
nothing to prevent the Prophet from repeating [this statement] at those
various places because of the importance of the holy Book and the pure
Family."[^1]

We can conclude from these verses and the *hadith* mentioned above that
the Ahlu'l-bayt are the most authentic and the best source for the
*sunnah*, and therefore we prefer them to all other sources.

Whenever we quote a *hadith* from the Imams of Ahlu'l-bayt, it is not
actually from themselves, instead it is the *hadith* of the Prophet
which they have preserved as the true successors of the last messenger
of God. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

"My *hadith* is the *hadith* of my father, the *hadith* of my father is
that of my grandfather, the *hadith* of my grandfather is that of
al-Husayn [bin 'Ali], the *hadith* of al-Husayn is that of al-Hasan [bin
'Ali], the *hadith* of al-Hasan is that of Amiru 'l-mu'mimin ['Ali bin
Abi Talib] (a.s.), the *hadith* of Amiru'l-mu'minin is that of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), and the *hadith* of the Messenger is a
statement of Allah, the Almighty, the Great."[^2]

**Ijtihad & Taqlid:** After the twelfth Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) went into
occultation, the responsibility of guiding the Shi'ahs in the *shari'ah*
matters came upon the mujtahids, the religious scholars specializing in
Islamic laws. The mujtahids derive the Islamic laws from the two sources
mentioned above. This may sound very simple, but it is not so.

They do not just open the Qur'an and the books of *hadith*, and start
giving *fatwas* . They must first of all come up with a methodology of
*ijtihad* (discussed in a subject known as *usulu 'l-fiqh*).

In their methodology, the mujtahids decide how to study the Qur'anic
verses and the *ahadith*. Should they take the literal meanings only?
Have they to find out which verse came first and which came second on
the same issue? Will the latter verse abrogate the former, or will it
just put some limitations on it? Is every *hadith* to be considered
authentic?

If not, what are the means of verifying the authenticity of a given
*hadith*? If they come up on two authentic but contradictory *ahadith*
on a single issue, what recourse should be followed? All such problems
have to be solved while designing the methodology of *ijtihad*, and only
then can a mujtahid correctly and responsibly derive a law from the
Qur'an and the *sunnah*.

It is obvious that not all have the ability or the time to specialize in
the *shari'ah* laws; and therefore, for such people it is necessary to
follow a mujtahid in the matters of *shari'ah*. This "following" is
known as *taqlid*.

[^1]: Ibn Hajar al-Makki, as-Sawa'iqu 'l-Muhriqah, chapter 11 section 1.
Also see S. Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, Imamat, Sharafu 'd-Din al-Musawi, The
Right Path, and S.M.H. Jafri, The Origin and Early Development of Shi'a
Islam.

[^2]: In Shi'ah sources, see al-Kulayni, Usulu 'l-Kafi, book 2 chapter
17, hadith No. 14; in Sunni sources, see ash-Sha'rani, at-Tabaqatu
'l-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 28; Abu Nu'aym, Hilyatu 'l-Awliya', vol. 3. p. 193,
197.


