Chapter One
===========

As soon as we decided to marry, we found an alim to help Sarah become a
Muslim. One afternoon, we went to his house and on the way, I imagined
that he was an old man with white hair and a wrinkled face. We both
thought that we wouldn't understand his sermons. Sarah told me, "You
must understand what he tells us!"  
 "Why?" I asked.

"Because you are a Muslim, too", she replied.  
 I answered dryly, "Oh yes, I am a Muslim".  
 When we reached his home, Sarah confided in me, "I'm scared!"

I myself was a bit afraid of the important step that we were about to
take. It was the first time I had ever spoken with a religious man. I
feared that he would label me as a deviated young man. My friends had
often warned me about these religious men who oppose everything-youth,
beauty, education and wealth.

Because they do not enjoy such privileges, my friends told me that they
behave oddly. My head was filled with these pessimistic ideas, yet I
told Sarah, "Why be afraid? This is a very routine affair; within a few
minutes you will become a Muslim, the same as I am".

"How did you become Muslim?" Sarah asked.  
 "I didn't become one-I am Muslim due to inheritance."  
 I smiled, saying, "What I mean, is that I was born in a Muslim family,
hence I am a Muslim."

Sarah said thoughtfully, "It seems that you do not really know why you
are a Muslim."  
 I knocked at the door, which was opened by a young child who led us to
a room where the alim was. I was very surprised to see that he was young
and healthy looking. He welcomed us politely and I began to feel at
ease. I looked at Sarah and could see that she was no longer nervous or
afraid.

I told him the aim of our visit and that I wanted him to teach Sarah the
Shahada {testimony of God's Oneness and of the Prophethood of Muhammad
(SAW)}.  
 He quietly told me, "But that is not sufficient, my son". I was
surprised to hear him address me thus, since he was only a few years
older than me.

"What else do we need to do?" I asked.  
 He remained silent for a moment. I appreciated the silence, because I
dislike those who attempt to fill every space with words, yet I was
anxious for us to achieve our aim, so I said, " Well?"

He smiled and said, "I want to help you, but as a religious man, I
cannot offer Islam in the form of mere words. I have an obligation
towards my religion."  
 I told him that it was a private matter and that he didn't have any
responsibility towards us. He sighed and said, "I am not responsible for
people, but I have a great responsibility towards Almighty Allah and
towards Islam. Do you think religious men are free to act as they wish?
As a matter of fact, an alim has a serious duty. It is not easy to carry
such a burden."

His words affected me and I asked, "What do you expect of us?‚Äù  
 "I do not expect anything of you. You want me to witness the repetition
of a few words, but I will not agree to this unless Sarah becomes
acquainted with Islam and understands its precepts."

At this point, I realized how serious he was and how tolerant. Still, I
thought that it was best to do it my way, because I thought Sarah would
not be able to comprehend Islamic concepts, since I myself did not.
Sarah understood my intentions and told me, "Do not insist any longer. I
appreciate his devotion to his duties, and I think we should listen to
him. If I can understand my philosophy courses, why can't I understand
Islam?"

I turned to the alim and, feeling a bit embarrassed, said, "We want you
to do what is right, and we will pay you for your time."  
 He shook his head and stated, "We do not barter our religion. A
religious person only expects reward from Allah. We should offer our
services without expecting any compensation."

I regretted my words, and Sarah admonished me, "You have made another
mistake."  
 "I apologize, but one hears many rumours."  
 Our religious instructor answered, "One should be sure of the truth and
not believe everything that is said." He continued, "Man is in dire need
of religion. He cannot live without it."

"Why not?" I asked.

"Human nature is such that man seeks ease and comfort, which cannot be
obtained except through happiness. And happiness cannot be found unless
it encompasses all aspects of life. Religion is the only system which
offers happiness and satisfaction, and abounds with ideals and
educational values."

I said, "Are you saying that nothing can be substituted for religion?
But don't you believe that scientific progress can take the place of
religion and provide man with a comfortable life?"

"No, my son. Even if man replaces religion with science and seeks
happiness in it, he will not be able to appreciate the true meaning of
happiness. Scientific progress and technology may provide man with
material comfort. Man can travel far distances in a matter of hours,
listen to foreign broadcasts, view the surface of the moon on television
while sitting in his living room. Yet man cannot truly experience
happiness, since he cannot put an end to injustice and oppression, which
human nature opposes.

"He cannot uproot his inner instincts of hating hypocrisy, aggression
and the exploitation of the weak by the strong. He is powerless to end
the world's insane race for wealth and power. Everything science offers
man is controlled by two factors: good and evil. Man can direct
scientific progress according to his desires-a plane, for example, is a
device for a comfortable journey, yet it can also be the means of great
destruction. Television is a useful means of information, yet it also
spreads indecency and corruption in society.

"Explosives are used to build roads, but they also maim and kill
innocent people. Thus, man is constantly struggling between what he
likes and dislikes. There is no happiness in such a life."

I objected, "Can't an ideal morality replace religion? I mean to say, if
morality is highly developed and all-encompassing, then justice can be
achieved in society."

He replied, "Such idealism is not sufficient for a person's happiness.
It is the result of an emergency situation, not a sound foundation.
Compassion, for instance, is a feature of such idealism and a natural
inclination in humans. Yet it must be stimulated. A kindhearted man
cannot but help a poor man he meets.

Only such an incident can stir compassion in his heart. If he does not
come across this poor man, his compassion will be useless and society
won't benefit from it. Compassion here is just an example of idealism
and social sympathy. It is not the outcome of a solid foundation. Hence,
it cannot cause a man to feel at ease and happy; it's range is limited."
While I was listening approvingly, another question came to my mind.

"What do you think of mutual interests? Can this replace religion and
create happiness for man?" I asked. He said, "No, serving mutual
interests alone cannot bring happiness."  
 I asked, "Why not?"

He answered, "Because there are serious gaps due to the different
interests of individuals. Often a person's interest conflicts with
another's. One may benefit by the loss of another. How often palaces are
constructed on the ruins of others! How often towns emerge on the
remnants of others! How often someone feels happy at the misfortune of
others. Unhappiness won't be uprooted through any law of mutual
interests. Happiness won't be fulfilled by such means. Man will still
face what he does not like and will pursue his own comfort by all
means."

I asked, "Well, can't good breeding and enlightment achieve that for
man?"  
 He answered, "This good breeding that you visualize, in turn, needs
good teachers to supervise the learning process. They, in turn, need be
watched and so on, along an endless chain. Breeding does not start at
point zero. Zero cannot produce numbers. Hence, an individual remains
with an insistent need for religion; a need which can provide all
aspects of happiness and an easiness on a firm foundation that never
changes."

The alim stopped speaking and we remained silent, thinking about what he
was saying. After awhile I asked, "Why have you stopped master?! Have we
caused you trouble or taken too much of your time?"  
 He replied, "No, but I wanted you to have a rest and also to ponder
over what you have heard today."

I looked at Sarah, who whispered, "Oh, please ask him to continue. I am
quite satisfied and have no objection."  
 I told him, "Please continue."  
 He said, "Now you agree that a man is in need of religion, which means
he is in need of Prophets and Messengers. But we should know the nature
of this religion and that kind of message which brings man true peace."

I told him, "Yes, tell us the message of Islam."  
 He said, "First, it must be in total harmony with human instincts but
not contrary to it. Second, it must be reasonable and within the scope
of a human mind's comprehension.  
 "Third, it must present righteous values and morals with which the life
of a good individual can be constructed. It must use good examples and
illustrations that will acquaint us with its very essence and aim so
that we can follow its teachings. Islam can do this,"

I asked, "How do we know that Islam can do this?"  
 He said, "This is what I intend to explain, but it will take a long
time. Can you be patient?"

Though I was in the habit of glancing often at my watch, for some time,
I had forgotten to look. It was nearly ten p.m. We should have left an
hour earlier in order for Sarah to enter the boarding house where she
lived before the doors were locked. We stood up to leave and expressed
the hope that we would meet again soon. Our earlier thought had
completely changed, and we were anxious to come again.

As we left his house we noticed someone following us but we could not
see who he was in the darkness.  
 Sarah was afraid that it was her cousin, who loved her and was jealous,
as she had chosen to marry me. I tried to calm her as we walked hand in
hand along the streets to the boarding house, where we found the doors
already closed.

Sarah and I were at a loss as to what to do. Finally I said, "We must
decide now. We can't stand here all the night. I wish we had left
earlier."  
 She answered, "We have not been wasting our time! We need to listen to
the lecture. I feel that it was worth staying for. What I fear is that
my cousin was the one following us. I am sure he will put obstacles in
our way."

I agreed and had the same fear. At last, I suggested that she spend the
night in my small home and that I would sleep on the sofa in the living
room. She agreed, and when we reached my door, I had a feeling that
someone was watching us.  
 The next morning, while I was on my way to the lecture hall, a
first-year student handed me a sealed letter. I opened it and read:

'Do you think I'll let you enjoy life while I am brokenhearted? I will
do anything to make you leave my cousin. I shall tell her family about
your plans and how she spends her evenings in the homes of strangers and
visit Muslim soothsayers.‚Äô

The letter upset me greatly. I found an empty corner and sat down to
think. "I cannot give up my fianc√©e. She has become part of my life," I
told myself, "Yet I may be risking her life, which I care very much
about. I must find a way to keep her out of trouble. This cannot be
achieved but by marriage."

I decided that I would not tell Sarah about the letter and that I would
ask the alim to perform his job sooner. I reasoned that when we become
husband and wife, her family would not try to interfere. So I never told
Sarah about the letter but I found her a bit disturbed that day. I tried
to cheer her and told her of my plan to finish the matter quickly.

She said doubtly, "I don't think the matter will end soon."  
 I said, "I'll do everything to make him finish it."  
 She said, "No, please. Don't forget he has a responsibility for his
religion and will fulfill his duties completely."  
 "You are right Sarah. Anyway, we will see to it. At 5 o'clock I will be
ready to accompany you to his house."

At five, I found her waiting at the door of the boarding house. She
looked pale and worried. I asked her what the matter was but she smiled
and said,  
 "Nothing." Although I tried to find out why she was so worried, she
wouldn't tell me, but insisted on hurrying to the alim's house. I was
afraid that she had received a similar threatening letter. I tried to
talk about different matters to distract her attention.

We reached the house and were soon in the alim's presence. I begged him
to start and finish quickly so that we could avoid the previous day's
trouble. He felt sorry and apologized but I said,  
 "Oh, you need not apologize, we were really interested in your lecture,
but we forgot to note the time."

He said, "Without hardship, rest can't be appreciated. You do not
agree?"  
 I replied, "Perhaps."  
 "You are not sure. But haven't you ever drunk water after hours of
thirst and did the same at ordinary time? Haven't you noticed the
difference? Sometimes you walk for long hours in the sunlight and you
look for shade to escape the heat. Can that shade be the same as that in
your home ?‚Äù

"When one falls ill, deprived of movement and unable to enjoy life, and
finally he becomes well again, does he not feel more grateful for the
health he had previously? In times of sickness, he appreciates the great
treasure of health."  
 We listened to him attentively and I said, "It is exactly as you say."

He said, "That is why sometimes hardships or troubles can actually be to
our benefit. Thank God for His bounties. Without experiencing pain and
suffering, one cannot experience true happiness."  
 I repeated, "Thank God."

He continued, "We agree that man is in need of a religion which will
suit all aspects of life and must be in harmony with human instincts and
wisdom. A religion that can set examples and illustrations. Islam can do
so. Islamic theory is handed down to man through prophethood. It
contains all that a human being needs. The Qur'an says:

***Those who believe in the unseen and keep prayer and spend out of what
We have given them and who believe in that which has been revealed to
you and that which was revealed before you, they are sure of the
hereafter (Al-Baqara, 2: 3-5)***

"That belief in the unseen is in harmony with human nature. Despite
having different attitudes and opinions, man generally feels that there
is a great might outside his limited senses. He takes refuge in it in
times of hardship. He is similar to a man flying in a plane, when the
pilot suddenly announces some damage that may cause the plane to crash.

He warns the passengers to get ready and to use life belts or emergency
doors. Everyone tries his best to save himself. A crippled person cannot
move, even though he finds himself near death, he does not give up hope.
He thinks there is a merciful power somewhere that may help him. He
believes in the unseen power that exceeds the power of technology or
science. Until the last moment, this man hopes for mercy.‚Äù

"Another example is a mother whose child is seriously ill. Doctors give
up the hope of curing him, yet the mother still hopes he will recover.
She feels there is some mighty power that can do this. This is what is
meant by the belief in the Unseen, a belief that is in harmony with
mankind. Another example is a captain of a ship lost in the middle of
the ocean. How does he feel at such a time?

He appeals to the unseen, highest power that is beyond his materialistic
potentials. This is a real factor that man is in need of believing in
the unseen. Religion is an instinct that exists among all human races,
even the most primitive. Metaphysics and paranormal study, is an inner
human inclination. Such an instinct is found even among children who
continue to ask about such matters. A child's questions unintentionally
express the feeling of this unseen power that he wants to understand.‚Äù

"This belief in the unseen is essential in religion, as it naturally
leads to belief in Allah. Such belief is sometimes clear and sometimes
vague, depending on explanations. Another aspect of harmony in religion
with the human instinct is the unification of our great universe and the
accurate coordination in it."

I looked at my watch. Seeing that we still had some time, I said, "What
do you mean by the coordination of the universe?"  
 He said, "This is a lengthy discussion. I see you are in a hurry, so we
can discuss the matter in another lecture." I looked at Sarah, who
agreed, saying, "We'd better avoid yesterday's trouble, especially
since..."  
 "Especially since what?" I asked.

"Oh nothing", she told me, "Please schedule our next meeting after
Wednesday because I have an exam on that day."  
 I asked the alim to fix the date of our next meeting and he said he
could not see us until the next Saturday afternoon. I thought about the
many long days that would pass without achieving our goal. I begged him
saying,

"Please can't you spare one or two hours before Saturday?"  
 He said, "I am quite busy with teaching, studying and working on
various questions raised by others."  
 I said, "Can't you postpone some of your lessons?"

He smiled saying, "You are convinced that exam cause the delay of other
matters. Don't you think my lessons need my thorough attention?"  
 I was ashamed and remained silent for a moment, then said, "In fact, I
did not think that you were busy with studies."

"Knowledge is an ocean. One cannot reach its bottom except after long,
continuous efforts. It may take all of a man's life. When one gets some
knowledge one tries other doors for more."

I asked, "Oh, do you also do that?"  
 He smiled and said, "Are we a special group, different from others? We
are the same as any other researcher. We study religious sciences and
related things that may influence religion. One keeps on studying
looking for constructive opinions or better ideas as long as one lives."

I said, "Then you are not confined to the study of *Halal* and *Haram*
(the allowed and the forbidden) matters?"  
 He said, "This is the core of our study, but this knowledge has certain
dimensions that require the study of other matters."  
 "What are these dimensions?"

He told me, "It is necessary for one to know about logic, linguistics,
the narrations, the origins and the reasons behind Islamic precepts. One
who guides others must first of all know that Allah, the Almighty, is
the source of all guidance. It needs great efforts and serious research
and investigation."

"I never thought of that," I admitted. "I used to think that a religious
man has less trouble, less responsibility and an easier life than most."

"It is a pity. Such feelings are enough to create a gap between
religious men and intellectuals. Yet each one needs the other to
understand and spread the message of life completely. Perhaps you will
understand in the future what you have been ignorant of until now."

I said, "Surely, I will."  
 He said, "Until we meet again, I want you to read these two books about
religion."  
 I accepted the books, and we left with the promise to meet again the
following week.


