Chapter Three
=============

As soon as we sat down, the alim asked us if we had read the book he
gave us. I felt embarrassed because I had not finished it. Moreover, I
felt shy when Sarah answered that she had read it and had written some
notes for explanation. She handed him the notebook. He looked pleased
and said, "This is a good sign. I will have a look again later."

He turned towards me, and seeing that I had not answered, he began his
lecture, saying, "We previously said the best religion is the one which
is in harmony with human instinct. We also discussed belief in the
unseen and the unity of the universe.”

"Religion is a matter of choice. Man is free to choose his own religion.
It is a doctrine firmly implanted in the deep inner recesses of the
mind. If not, then it will be mere rituals and habits. Thus religion is
an individual choice that cannot be made through compulsion. One cannot
be compelled to practice his religion correctly.

As for belief, there is no use in compulsion. Man can choose the best
religion and can be convinced through discussion. Choosing the right
religion with a profound knowledge of truth and perfect awareness is a
matter concerning the individual himself. Hence, religion is a choice
based on thought and reasoning. The Holy Qur'an calls for thinking and
reasoning, as in these verses:

***Say: Consider what is it that is in heavens and earth; and signs and
warners do not avail a people who would not believe. (Yunus, 10: 101)***

***Do they not then look up to heaven above them, how We have made it
and adorned it and it has no gaps! (Qaf, 50: 16)***

"Throughout the Qur'an, the verses encourage man to think wisely and
give the mind freedom of choice after presenting facts and evidence. In
order to make one believe you, you must have sound evidence as a proof.
Islam comprises all these aspects in the Qur'an. It is safe to say that
Islam is the only religion that has such a quality.

Every religion has been in need of a miracle to prove its authenticity.
The miracle of Islam is embodied in the Qur'an's miraculous eloquence.
The best, most literate men failed to produce anything equal to it. The
Qur'an challenged them to produce its like, as in this verse:

***Say, if men and jinn should combine together, to bring the like of
the Qur'an, they could not bring the like of it, though some of them
were aiders of others. (Chapter Al-Isra’, 17: 88)***

"Then, when they failed, the Qur'an challenged them to produce a few
chapters themselves:

***Or, do they say: He has forged it. Say: Then bring ten forged
chapters like it and call upon whom you can besides Allah, if you are
truthful.*** ***(Hud, 11: 13)***

"When again they failed, they were challenged to produce one more
chapter of its like, as in this verse:

***And if you are in doubt as to what We have revealed to Our servant,
then produce one chapter of its like, and call your witnesses besides
Allah if you are truthful.*** ***(Al-Baqarah,*** ***2:23)***

"They failed, despite being masters of language and literature.”

"Every religion is in need of a message and proof of that message. Islam
has both in the Holy Qur'an. All kinds of sciences, whether social,
economic, natural or related to man's biological construction, can be
found in the Qur'an. Many a scientific fact has been recently proved in
science, though the Holy Qur'an referred to it fourteen centuries ago.

Still other facts have not yet been discovered by science but were
revealed to the Prophet,  
 who had been illiterate. Islam elaborated various social topics
centuries ago. Some have been recognized only recently by the world,
such as the ‘Human Rights Charter’, which states: ‘Abolition of slavery,
and economic solutions to prevent monopoly and exploitation.'

"You can find many similar facts in recently written books on Islam.
Islam's message is independent except regarding its own concepts. In
Islam, man is free to choose with dignity. The mind is not imprisoned in
ignorance, nor in feelings of humiliation and regret of a sin (referring
to the first disobedience of Prophet Adam). Islam does not call for
ritual worship only, but also calls man to pay attention to his everyday
affairs. In the Holy Qur'an you can see legislations and good foundation
for life. All aspects have been tackled and solutions are applicable
anytime and anywhere. Clear evidence of this is found in the Holy
Qur'an. Some Chapters are named after animals, such as:

The Cow, the Bee, the Ant and the Spider. Some refer to natural
phenomena and elements such as: The Thunder, The Smoke, The Moon, The
Sun, and The Iron; Some refer to political and social stances such as:
The Parties, The Faithful, The Counsel and Women.

"There are also Chapters that refer to historical events such as
Alay-Imran, The Prophets, Yunus, Hud, Yousuf, Ibrahim, Muhammad, Al-Rum
(The Romans), Maryam, and Noah. Others refer to the Hereafter and the
Day of Judgment, such as: Al-Haqqa, Waqiah, and Al-Qariah. Some Chapters
refer to economic matters, including: The Spoils (Anfal) and the Food
(Maidah).

There are Chapters that refer to morals and good conduct, such as: Abasa
(He Frowned), Humazah (The Slanderer) and Al-Mutaffifin (The
Defrauders). Other Chapters refer to religious rituals, such as: Al-Hajj
and Al-Sajda. In conclusion, we see that 32 Chapters concern living
creatures, and natural phenomena, 29 Chapters concern belief and
ideologies, 27 refer to social and political stances and 17 concern
history and philosophy.

Four Chapters concern behaviour and morals and four concern
materialistic and economic subjects, while two only concern religious
rituals. Thus we see that Islam is a complete religion that covers all
aspects of life. It does not merely link man to his Creator.

On the contrary, it links man to the Almighty by linking him to all of
humanity. So religion's scope is wide enough to cover all aspects of
feelings and behaviour be it struggle for the sake of Allah or a smile
in the face of a brother believer.

"Islam can meet the physical and spiritual needs of an individual and it
is a perfect religion when it is performed correctly. Islam is in
conformity with life and does not neglect the other side."

The alim ended his lecture, and we fixed a date for the next morning. We
bid him farewell and left. Outside the door, I implored Sarah to allow
me to accompany her, but she refused. I told her, "But I have something
to tell you. You know, my dear, that I cannot tolerate this unfriendly
behaviour. Please, tell me what is the matter. I am sure there is
something very wrong."

Sarah replied, "I am going to the boarding house, and I do not want to
stay here one more minute."  
 "Then, let me walk with you to your home.” I told her.  
 "No, I can walk by myself, as I came by myself," was her response.  
 Then I asked, "But why do you still come to the lectures?"

She said, "I am interested in the subject. Now I am a person in search
of truth for my own benefit. What about you? Why do you come? The Truth
is clear to you!"  
 I said, "It has never been clear to me. I knew nothing about Islam;
perhaps even less than what you know."

"Then let us continue together for the sake of knowledge," she
replied.  
 I said, "And for my sake, dear Sarah."  
 "For your sake!", she exclaimed.  
 "Yes, don't I deserve it?"  
 She slowly answered, "You did deserve such a thing in the past."

"And now, what has happened to make you change your mind? You know how
important you are to me. Life is meaningless without you. At least
please take this letter from me. Perhaps it will clear up the matter.
Please, take it, it won't do you any harm. A small lie should not
destroy our whole future together."

She said, "What small lie? A lie that is proved by evidence?”  
 "If one is quite sure of something, one's confidence cannot be easily
shaken", I said, surprised by her allegation.  
 She said, "But one sometimes doubts one's feeling."

"Then one must be frank and reconsider the matter in order to be
certain. Why don't you be frank and tell me the source of your anger?"  
 She said, "Give me more time to think."  
 "Please at least promise that you will read the letter."  
 "I will do that", she told me. "Good-bye for now."

I returned home a bit calmer than before. I picked up the book to finish
it, but I put it down again to look among my papers for poem I
previously copied from a book of poetry. I had in tended to give it to
Sarah, but I could not find it. Moreover, I could not find a photo Sarah
had given me at the beginning of our friendship. My own photograph was
also missing. I used to keep all these in the drawer near my bed.

The next morning, I went to college but I didn't see Sarah that day, or
the next day. After three days, I met her at the door of the alim's
house. Upon seeing me, she knocked on the door and gave me no time to
even offer a word of greeting. We entered and were asked to wait for the
alim. I was about to speak when she said," Mohsen, can you tell me what
you saw yesterday?"

This question of hers was the first line of the missing poem. I wanted
to be sure, so I said, "What do you mean?"  
 "I mean, whom did you see?" she asked. I said,

"Whom could refer to many, but I am sure I saw no one but you, though I
did not actually see you."  
 She interrupted me angrily, saying, "Please, that's enough. This is not
the first time you are saying it."

I said, "But I have not said it to you except now!"  
 She answered, "Yes, but you have said it to someone else."  
 "But you know I don't talk to any girls except you!" I protested.  
 "Yes, but you can write," she answered.

I said, "Can writing be enough?"  
 She said, "Yes, if it is well composed."  
 "Sarah, why don't you be frank and tell me what you are talking
about."  
 She said, "I wish I could be brave enough to speak. In fact, I am
afraid, so you should be the one to speak."  
 I said. "But, I do not know what is the matter yet."  
 She said. "Oh, it can't be! You certainly know what is bothering me."

"Call me stupid or anything, yet I do not know the reason for your
anger. I am ready to die in order to know it." I replied earnestly.  
 She asked, "Then you have not guessed?"

I said, "No, but there is a certain incident I thought of, then put it
aside!"  
 "What is this particular incident?" she asked.

I started to tell her about the strange girl, but our teacher entered
the room at that moment. I stood up and welcomed him absent-mindedly. I
decided to tell Sarah about that girl when the lecture ended. I was not
ready to lose her on account of a promise to a stranger. The alim
apologized for the delay. He asked about our reading and gave Sarah her
notebook with some explanations written in it. Then he began his
lecture.


