Sura Al-baqarah N0. 2 (part Two) (1)section 19 Trials: the Necessity of Patience & Steadfastness
================================================================================================

17

(153) يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ اسْتَعِينُواْ بِالصَّبْرِ
وَالصَّلوةِ إِنَّ اللّهَ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ 153. " O' you who have
Faith! seek you help (from Allah) through patience and prayer, verily
Allah is with the patient ones (in the time of adversity) ."

**Commentary :**

The phrase / ya'ayyuhalladina'amanu/ " O' you who have Faith! "
addresses all those who have Faith entirely, foremost of whom Hadrat
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) and the rest of the immaculate Imams are
distinguished. This idea is expressed in many Islamic narrations; for
instance, it is quoted from Ibn Abbas narrating from the holy Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) who said: " No revelation containing ' O' you who have faith'
was sent down except that Ali is at its top and is its chief." (2)

Again, it is narrated from 'Akramah who narrates from Ibn-Abbas that
has said: " Allah has sent down no verse in the Qur'an consisting of 'O'
you who have faith ' but Ali-ibn-Abitalib (a.s.) is the leader of it and
the chief of it ".(3) Of course, the more complete and the higher the
degree of Faith is,

(1) Tafsir-i-Furat-ul-Kufi,p.49, Tradition 7
(2) Al-Burhan fi Tafsir-il-Quran , vol.1,p.167
(3) Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 68, p.113, Tradition 48

18

the content of the verse about it is more clear and more apparent.
(This phrase has also been discussed more comprehensively when
commenting on Sura No, 2 verse 104 on pages 250 and 251 in the current
volume.) The phrase / wasta'inu / " seek you help from Allah " is a
guiding imperative phrase because at every moment and in all affairs a
mortal is in need of Allah's help, whether it is something which is
inside his free will, because he is not an absolutely independent
subject, though he is created free in will; or it is something which is
outside of his will. Man is in complete need of Him (s.w.t.) and he
should constantly invocate for everything and seek help from the Lord.

A person most naturally and reasonably can be qualified for the special
blessings from God. If this verse is to be taken as referring to the
conquest of Mecca, even then it holds good, if it means to say that the
people must prove their worthiness or value to the Truth in Islam by
bearing the hardest trials with constant prayers to the Lord; for prayer
suggests the praying individual's acknowledgment of God's Omnipotence
and the individual's confidence in God being the All-Merciful one, as
the only One who can grant the prayers of the sincere supplicants.

Real Faith can never be mere empty words. It must express or manifest
itself through patience or endurance in all that befalls the individual
to show his faithfulness to God, and the help from God must be sought
through prayers or supplications to the Lord.

The aid of Allah requires eligibility. This eligibility is confirmed by
two things:

The first is having patience in worldly hardships and perseverance in
bearing its bitter circumstances. And also having patience in tolerating
the hardship of performing Divine services, and obtaining knowledge and
good ethics, patience in withholding one's self from lusts and the
fleeting pleasure of committing sins and yeilding to low desires, is
necessary. This bitterness of hardship, which is short in time, finally
results in a sweet fruit which lasts a long time. Concerning the
epithets of the true believers, Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) has said: "
The short

19

period of patience resulted in a long period of tranquility for them."
(1)

The term / sabr / ' patience ', in this verse, is rendered into '
fasting ' and 'holy war '. The second thing is ' prayer ' which is the
highest means of turning towards and approaching Allah by which we may
seek help and aid from that Origin of favour and Grace.

Some commentators have rendered the term / salat / into ' supplication
' whose explanation demands a separate chapter.

Some others, based on some Islamic traditions, have interpreted it into
the ' obligatory prayers ' and ' supererogatory prayers' . For example:
it is cited in Tafsir 'Ayyashi narrated from Fudayl from Imam Baqir
(a.s.) who said: " O' Fudayl, convey our salam (regards) to our
followers whom you visit and tell them I say that I avail you aught (in
keeping you far) from the punishment of Allah save by piety. Then, they
must control their tongues and be careful of their hands. They should be
attentive to patience and prayer. Verily Allah is with the patient
ones."

The first part of the verse has also occurred in verse 45, the
explanation of which can be referred to on pages 169 and 170. The
objective meaning of the phrase " Allah is with the patient ones" is
that His help, assistance, guidance, success, favours, the protection
from pests, the perfection of intentions, as well as His other blessings
are showered upon the patient by Him.

Above all of the aforementioned bounties, there is the reward of Allah
granted to the patient believers in the Hereafter about whom He says: "
Those who patiently persevere will truly receive a reward without
measure! ", (Sura Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 13) .

(1) Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 82, p. 232

20

**(154) وَلاَ تَقُولُواْ لِمَنْ يُقْتَلُ فِي سَبيلِ اللّهِ أَمْوَاتٌ
بَلْ أَحْيَاءٌ وَلَكِن لاَّ تَشْعُرُونَ**

154. " And do not say of those who are slain in Allah's way: ' They are
dead.' Nay (they are) alive, but you perceive (it) not."

**Commentary :**

The Qur'anic phrase ' of those who are slain in Allah's way ' refers to
those who are slain (i.e. martyred) in the battles led by the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) or Imams (a.s.) or one of their specific deputies, as well as
anyone who is martyred on the path of Islam and propagation of the
religion of Allah. The content of the verse is inclusive of not only all
who are slain in the path of Allah such as: the immaculate Imams (a.s.)
their ministers, Muslim scholars and believers, although the occasion of
revelation of the verse is reported that it was revealed about the
Muslims who were martyred in the battle of Badr, but also any one other
than them.

" And do not say of those who are slain in Allah's way:

' They are dead.'..."

The phenomenon of martyrdom is more clearly described in Sura
'Ali-'Imran, No. 3, verses 169,170 which gives further information about
the truth that those who surrender or sacrifice their lives in the way
of Allah (i.e. the martyrs) are alive receiving their sustenance from
their Lord. " And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way as
dead; nay they are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their Lord;"
" Rejoicing in what Allah has given them out of His grace, ..."

The term /sahid/ ' martyred ' used in many occurrences in the Qur'an
refers to this blissful state of realization.

Therefore, this stage of life, i.e. the life immediately after death,
i.e. the purgatory life, is not allocated to martyrs alone, though the
verse

21

is about them, but it envelops all people, because stating something
does not mean that the unstated, but applicable, instances are not
involved. For example, when we say ' this man is just ', it does not
mean that justice belongs to him exclusively and there is not any other
just person; while there may be thousands of people who are just.

Thus, this verse, here, confirms the purgatorial life for the martyrs.
This life, the intermediate state, according to many verses of the
Qur'an and abundant Islamic traditions, exists for all believers and
nonbelievers both, with a distinction. The soul of a believer, after
departuring from its physical body, will settle in a body similar to
this one and will be sustained in that world until when the Hereafter
comes forth; while the soul of a nonbeliever, during the time when
passing this course, will be in torment, as the Qur'an says: " (In
falsehood will they be) until when death comes to one of them, he says:
' O' my Lord! send me back (to life) , " " In order that I may work
righteousness in the things I neglected. ' By no means! It is but a word
he says, Before them is a partition till the Day they are raised up."
(Sura Al-Mu'min, No. 23, verses 99 and 100) .

It is narrated from Yunus-ibn-Thibyan who said he was sitting with Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) when he was explaining about the believers' souls and he
(a.s.) said: " O' Yunus! when Allah gets the soul of a believer taken,
He puts his soul in a setting like his body that was in this world. So,
they eat and drink and when a comer enters he recognizes them in the
same form as they were in the world." (1)

Also, Abu-Basir narrates from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) who, about the
believers' souls, said: " (They will be) in Heaven with the same
features as their (worldly) bodies were so that if you see him (one of
them) you will surely recognize him and say who he is." (2)

Then the Qur'an continues saying:

"...Nay, (they are) alive, ..."

Life is divided into four sorts: the plant-life, the animal-life, the
human-life, and the Faith-life.

(1) Majma'- ul-Bayan,vol. 1,p.236
(2) Ibid

22

Plant-life is the power of growth which is common among plants and
animals including human beings. The death of this particular life is
when that power stops.

Animal-life is the power by which feeling and conscious movement come
to being. Human beings and animals have this life in common. It dies
when this power ceases. Human-life is the faculty of general reasoning
and perceiving by which Man is distinguished from animal. This
phenomenon emerges because of that abstract and rational soul which
administrates this body.

Its death causes the interruption of this administration and breaking
off its connection with the body but there is no destruction for it and
it remains to return to the body again when the Resurrection occurs. So,
this purgatorial state exists not only for martyrs or Muslims, but for
the soul of every conscious being.

Faith-life is the peace of mind, assurance of self, and clearness of
heart all of which come into existence for a believer through Faith and
knowing Allah. It is in this state that he can live in rest and
tranquility with joy and pleasure because the toils, hardships, and
miseries of this world would not create any awe, worry, anxiety or
instability for him. This very condition originates from his relianace
and belief in Providence, Who gives only goodness.

This life is the same as the ' good life ', about which the Lord says:
" Whoever works righteousness, man or woman, and has Faith, verily, to
him will We give a new life, a life that is good and pure, and We will
bestow on such their reward according to the best of their actions."
(Sura An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 97) . And, the Qur'an also says: " O' you
who have Faith! give your response to Allah and His Apostle, when He
calleth you to that which will give you life; ..." (Sura Al-Anfal, No.
8, verse 24) .

It is said that the utterances in a language indicate meanings so that
letter and spirit correspond with each other. For example, the term
'light or lamp ' is applied to any means which is used in darkness to
get brightness from. Then, whatever has this function, the application
of that term for it is correct, although the substance is different from
the point of material, form and other qualities.

23

Life is a general sense which is recognized by the appearance of the
effects which are expected from it. In this sense, the term ' life ' is
used for the Essence of Allah, too. The example of this idea is recited
in Sura 'Al-i-'Imran, No. 3, verse 2 which says: " Allah! there is no
god but He, the Living, the Self-Subsisting, Eternal." That is, the
Essence from Whom the effects of knowledge and power are clear and
manifest.

That is why some sholars said that Allah's life is His very Knowledge
and Power. Of course, the Essence of the Knower and the Mighty is alive.
Therefore, wherever the effects of this meaning exist, the application
of this utterance is correct, but it is not necessary that its kind and
its characteristics and properties, which are appropriate to those
particular situations, be the same everywhere and in all circumstances.
Hence, the life in Purgatory, from the point of quality for martyrs and
other people, is of the quality of the same world. It is for this reason
that the people of this world with their senses, the quality of the
nature of which is of the quality of this world, can not perceive that
which is of the quality of the nature of that world.

"...but you perceive (it) not."

By the way, this verse clears the doubt of materialist and pagans who
believe that with death, man's life becomes extinct, i.e. there is no
life after death. Here, the Qur'an warns all, Muslim or non-Muslim, that
MAN'S LIFE DOES NOT PERISH AFTER DEATH, BUT IT DOES REMAIN. So, with
this in mind, we realize that there is nothing more valuable or
worthwhile than the time spent striving for the perfection of such a
life. May Allah help us all to follow His Ordinances that He so
graciously made available to us by way of the Qur'an in order that we
might experience success in this life and in the Hereafter.

24


**Verses 155 - 157 (1)**

(155) وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ بِشَيْءٍ مِّنَ الْخَوفْ وَالْجُوعِ وَنَقْصٍ
مِّنَ الأَمَوَالِ وَالأنفُسِ وَالثَّمَرَاتِ وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ

(156) الَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَتْهُم مُّصِيبَةٌ قَالُواْ إِنَّا لِلّهِ
وَإِنَّا إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعونَ

(157) أُولَئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ
وَأُولَئِكَ هُمُ الْمُهْتَدُونَ

155. "And We will surely test you (all) with something of fear and
hunger and loss of property, lives and fruits; but give glad tidings to
the (steadfast) patient."

156. "Who, when a calamity befalls them, (by showing perseverance) ,
say: ' Verily we belong to Allah, and certainly unto Him shall we
return'."

157. " Those are they on whom are blessings and Mercy from their Lord,
and they are the ones that are guided (aright) ." Commentary:


**Trial, an Indisputable Divine Rule**

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) said: "Even though Allah, the
Glorious, knows them more than they know themselves, yet He does so to
let them perform actions with which they earn reward or punishment."
(1)

Concerning the sense of rial, in a sermon, he (a.s.) also has
remarked:

"...Certainly, Allah tries His servants in respect of evil actions by
decreasing (1) Nahjul Balaqah, Saying No. 93

25

fruits, holding back blessings and closing treasures of good, so that
he who wishes to repent may repent, he who wishes to recall (forgotten
good) may recall, and he who wishes to abstain (from evil) may abstain.
..." (1)

\* \* \* \*

Allah (s.w.t.) tests all human beings, but with varieties. All the
different sites of the world are the testing-places, and all the members
of humanity, even the prophets, are under trial, and all the pleasant
and unpleasant things are the means of trial. We ought to know that the
Divine examinations are not done in order to clear out the ambiguity,
but they are to evoke and train the capacities and abilities of
humankind.

The means of this trial are all bitter and sweet happenings of Man,
including: fear, hunger, loss of property, lives, agricultural products,
fear from enemies, economic siege, and taking part in Holy War himself,
or by sending children and dear ones to the battle of war. These trials
were experienced in the first war of Islam (battle of Badr) , and will
also come forth at the time of the reappearance of the Expected Mahdi,
the twelfth Imam (May allah hasten his glad advent) , for which Muslims
should be prepared.

The inflictions, which human beings encounter with, are usually
concerned with wealth, life, children, or the fear of the loss of either
of them. The secret of mentioning ' fear ', among the means of trials,
first, may be that the purpose is the fear for the lack of either of
those three things. It is always before the loss of the very things that
one fears of losing them.

Then, next to fear, hunger is pointed out, which comes into being as a
result of poverty. Yet, in this respect, fasting is counted one of the
examples of hunger.

Loss of property has been situated in the third degree. The loss of
wealth, of course, is very bitter, especially for a rich person when
he

(1) Nahjul-Balaq­ah, Sermon 143

26

becomes poor.

Then there comes the loss of life, which often occurs because of
different ailments or after being wounded: in a battle-field and Holy
War in the way of Allah, and so on. And, finally, the loss of fruits
comes forth. Some of the commentators have rendered this loss into the
death of one's child, which is the heaviest calamity.

"...but give glad tidings to the (steadfast) patient." It addresses the
prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) that he gives glad tidings to those people
who persevere with patience in their calamities and difficulties.

Some commentators have said that this ' glad tidings' points to the
reward of Heaven and the merit of Divine forgiveness for them, as Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) has said: "Allah, Mighty and Glorious, said: '...but give
glad tidings to the (steadfast) patient', or, (that is) , with Paradise
and forgiveness." (1)

But in another tradition, Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has rendered the concept of
' glad tidings ' into the reappearance of Imam Al-Mahdi (a.s.) , where
he says:

" Before the rise of Gha'im (Al-Mahdi) (May Allah hasten his auspicious
reappearance) there will appear some signs by which Allah tries the
Muslim believers. " Muhammad-ibn-Muslim, (who was one of the special
followers of the Imam) , said that he required to know what those signs
were; and he (a.s.) answered:" Those are the same that Allah, the
Glorious, has expressed in the Qur'an, thus: ' And We will surely test
you (all) with something of fear and hunger and loss of property, lives
and fruits;'

So far as he (a.s.) recited: '...but give glad tidings to the
(steadfast) patient', and continued to say: ' This means to give glad
tidings to the believers who show patience and perseverance in these
calamities for the advent of the Gha'im (a.s.) , (viz., Hadrat Mahdi,
May Allah (s.w.t.) hasten his glad advent." (2)

Yes, the world is anxiously awaiting the advent of this great

(1) Al-Burhan fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an, vol. 1, p. 169
(2) Al-Burhan fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an, vol. 1, p.197

27

reformer (a.s.) . When he comes, he will fill the world full of
justice. Then, there will be no inequity, no cruelty, and no
transgression. Allah will open the doors of blessings out of the earth
and heaven because of his auspicious appearance. At that time, the
believing people can continue to live peacefully and easily under his
esteemed government, to prove their worship and servitude to Allah.

Concerning this meaning, in a tradition, the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
has said:" Al-Mahdi is mine. His luminous forehead is high and wide,
while over whose nose there is a little projection. He will fill the
earth with justice, just as it is filled up with aggression and
cruelty." (1)

\* \* \* \*

"Who, when a calamity befalls them, (by showing perseverance) , say: '
Verily we belong to Allah, and certainly unto Him shall we return'."
After recounting different calamities, and giving glad tidings to the
patient, it introduces this group of patient who, with this competency,
rightfully deserve to be given glad tidings. It is clear that every
ordinary person is not fit to be rewarded with all these excellences and
dignities. Hence, that reward, i.e. the glad tidings, is specialized to
the ones whose patience originates from a firm foundation. This
particular glad tidings is qualified by a special blessing and Mercy
from the side of Allah. These kind of people are those ones whose hearts
turn to their Lord at the moment of meeting with a calamity when, they
say:

"... Verily we belong to Allah, and certainly unto Him shall we
return'." They treat such because they have realized, through knowledge
of certainty or by visual certainty, that whatever exists belongs to
Allah and is under His Will. So, whatsoever He has given to human-kind
in this world, such as: soul, property, children, and all other similar
respects, are ficticious.

They also know that whatever Allah has bestowed upon them

(5) Tara'if, by sayyid-ibn-Tawus, p. 177; & Sunan Abi-Dawud, vol. 4, p.
152

28

has been based upon His Wisdom, and when He takes it from them, it is
not taken because of miserliness, but it is for His good that He takes a
blessing from a person to mercifully impart a better one. They have
found out that their return, their destination, as well as the return of
every thing, is undoubtedly unto Him.

\* \* \* \*

However, he who, based on these foundations, knows and remembers that
his soul, wealth, and whatever he possesses belongs to Allah and is
under His Authority, surrenders to His divine decrees. The one, with
this awareness, will be patient and thankful properly and reasonably.
Such a person, of course, is one of those eligible believers for whom
Allah says: " Those are they on whom are blessings and Mercy from their
Lord,...", and they are prosperous.

Some of the commentators have said that / salawat/ (blessings and
peace) , which comes from Allah (s.w.t.) , is the same as ' fogiveness',
while some others believe that it is 'praise'. The term /salawat/
(blessings) is said in the plural form because it refers to the abundant
mercy of Allah. It may mean that there are many frequent blessings for
these steadfast patient from Allah which do not cease.

It is narrated from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) who said:" The person who
receives a calamity and thereafter, whenever the one remembers it,
utters the phrase ' Verily we belong to Allah, and certainly unto Him
shall we return ', Allah gives the believer once again the reward of the
day when the one received that calamity". (Even though there has passed
a long time after that calamity) . (1)

He (p.b.u.h.) has also said in another tradition that, for such a
person, Allah will amend that calamity with a better quality than before
and his destiny will conclude well.(2)

"...and they are the ones that are guided (aright) ."


(1) Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 82, p. 142
(2) Makhzan-ul-'Irfan, vol. 2, p. 143

29

This group of the patient, as was mentioned in the above, when they
entangle with a calamity, are patiently steadfast, since they have known
that they themselves and what they have are all Allah's, and in His
possession. They also know that their return is unto Him, and they
express this fact, too, by their tongue and with uttering the above holy
phrase. Such people have attained the rank and position of nearness to
Allah. Their march is gain after gain, i.e. an ever progressive gain.
They are, in fact, guided aright.

30

(158) إِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِن شَعَآئِرِ اللّهِ فَمَنْ حَجَّ
الْبَيْتَ أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ أَن يَطَّوَّفَ بِهِمَا
وَمَن تَطَوَّعَ خَيْرًا فَإِنَّ اللّهَ شَاكِرٌ عَلِيمٌ

158. " Behold, Safa and Marwah are among the Symbols (appointed by)
Allah; so whoever makes the pilgrimage (Hajj) to the House, or performs
'Umrah, therefore it is no blame on him to go round them both. And for
whoever (obeys Him and) initiates good, then verily Allah is Grateful,
All-Knowing." Occasion of Revelation:

Running between Safa and Marwah, is obligatory with the Shi'ah, the
followers of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s.) , and it is one of the main actions in
both greater pilgrimage (Hajj) and lesser pilgrimage ('Umrah) . But, at
the beginning of Islam, those Muslims were not willing to perform it
because they had imagined that there had been something wrong in it,
for, at the Age of ignorance, there had been an idol in Safa called:
'Usaf, and another in Marwah named: Na'ilah, which pagans used to touch
both while running therein. So, this very verse was revealed to make the
Muslims free from that false imagination. This very meaning is cited in
At-Tibyan fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an, narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
and Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.) .(1) The idea is also cited with more
details in Majma'-ul-Bayan, narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) . It begins
thus:

" Muslims had usually seen some signs of innovation from the pagans of
pre Islamic era of Ignorance, (so they disliked to circumambulate them)
. Then, Allah sent this verse down (to remove that aversion) ." (2)

(1) At-Tibyan fi-Tafsir-il-Qur'an, vol. 2, p.44
(2) Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 240 31

The expansion of this description is thus that before the advent of
Islam and also at the time of revelation some pagans and
idol-worshippers used to go to Mecca to make Hajj pilgrimage with a
particular form which was common at that time. Their fulfilment of Hajj
pilgrimage was principally originated from Prophet Ebrahim (Abraham)
(a.s.) but with a mixture of superstitions and polytheism. Some of their
ritual actions were: halt at 'Arafat, sacrifice, circumambulation, and
run between Safa and Marwah, which were done in a special state. Islam,
clearing out that noble performance from superstitions, accepted Hajj
pilgrimage as a great worship and approved all of its correct and pure
ceremonies.

One of the deeds which was to be done then was /Sa'y/, i.e., running
between two hillocks called Safa and Marwah, over which the
aforementioned idols were kept and pagans touched them when climbing
those two hillocks. Hence, Muslims were averse to going to these
hillocks and thought that in that circumstance it was not right for them
to perform running between Safa and Marwah.

Then, it was at the time of 'Umrat-ul-Ghad¤a (in seventh A.H.) that the
above verse was revealed and announced that Safa and Marwah are among
the Symbols of Allah and, although some ignorant people have polluted
them with idols, it is not right that Muslims abandon the obligatory
running between them.

**Commentary:
Acts Done Ignorantly**

This verse, regarding the particular psychological conditions that was
mentioned in the occasion of revelation, preliminarily informs Muslims
that Safa and Marwah are among the symbols of Allah: " Behold, Safa and
Marwah are among the Symbols (appointed by) Allah;..." After this
introductory sentence, it subsequently comes to the meaning that:

32

"...so, whoever makes the pilgrimage (Hajj) to the House, or performs
'Umrah, therefore it is no blame on him to go round them both. ..." The
wrong behaviour of pagans, that had polluted the symbols of Allah with
those idols, should never decrease anything of the importance of those
two sacred sites.

At the end of the verse, it says:

"... And for whoever (obeys Him and) initiates good, then verily Allah
is Grateful, All-Knowing." Therefore, the Lord, by giving good rewards
bountifully, thanks the servants for their obedience and doing right
actions; while He is completely aware of their intentions and knows who
is interested in the idols and who is averse to them. Explanation:

It may be worthy to say that the terms Safa and Marwah are referred to
in the Qur'an only once. These two hillocks stand nearly 420 meters
opposite each other. This distance is now set up as a covered hall under
whose ceiling the pilgrims perform the running, /sa'y/. The height of
Safa Mount is 15 meters, and that of Marwah is 8 meters.

These two terms, used now as proper names for those two hillocks, are
philologically meaningful, too. The term /safa/ means a hard smooth
stone, while /marwah/ means a hard rough stone.

The Qur'anic term /sha'a'ir/ is the plural form of /sha'irah/ which
means ' ritual sign'. Therefore, the phrase /sha'a'irillah/ means
anything which reminds a person of Allah, and revives a sacred
remembrance in one's mind which, itself, would be an act of virtue or
devotion to Allah.

The term /'i'tamara/, derived from /'umrah/, originally means the
additional parts that are added to a building in order to complete it.
This word, used in religious terminology, is applied for special deeds
added to the performances of Hajj Pilgrimage. (When 'Umrah is done
separate from Hajj pilgrimage, it is called / 'umrah mufradah/, a single
'Umrah) . This minor pilgrimage to Mecca is very much similar to Hajj
pilgrimage in many aspects, but its difference is not so minute, of
course.


