Section 26, Rejection of the Signs and the Apostles From Allah
==============================================================

(211) سَلْ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ كَمْ آتَيْنَاهُم مِّنْ آيَةٍ بَيِّنَةٍ
وَمَن يُبَدِّلْ نِعْمَةَ اللّهِ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءتْهُ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ
شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ

211. " Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We gave them;
and whosoever changes Allah's blessing after it has come unto him, then,
verily Allah is severe in retribution. "

**Commentary:**

This verse points to the manner of the Children of Israel that how they
were entangled with the punishment of Allah when they changed the
blessings of Allah and showed ingratitude after having those clear signs
and divine favours. " Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We
gave them; and whosoever changes Allah's blessing after it has come unto
him,..." The purpose of 'change of blessing' is that one misuses the
blessings, favours, and material and spiritual sources of authority,
potentialities and talents that the one naturally has in his possession
on the path of destruction, deviation, transgression, and vicious
actions. Allah gave the Children of Israel both spiritual trainees and
powerful leaders. He (s.w.t.) bestowed upon them all sorts of material
and spiritual facilities and possibilities, but they changed those
bounties. That behaviour they had, not only ruined their lives in this
world, but also causes that there will be waiting a painful chastisement
for them in the world to come.

"... then, verily Allah is severe in retribution."

The problem of 'change of blessing' and its painful resulting fate is

165

not conclusive to the Israelites. At this very present Age, the
industrial world is also entangled with this great adversity. The human
race of today has so much abundant and different bounties and facilities
that no period in the history has recorded the like of them for human
kind. Yet, as a result of being distant from the heavenly instructions
of prophets and because of 'change of blessing' , human beings of this
Age have applied those bounties terribly alongside the way of their own
destruction. They have produced the most dangerous destructive weapons
out of them (those bounties) to ruin the world. Or, they have gained
profits by misusing their own material natural potentialities for the
spread of transgression, oppression, exploitation, and have changed the
world into an insecure and unpeaceful site in all respects.

The initial phrase of the verse: "Ask the Children of Israel" is, in
fact, for the reason that the blessing of Allah be confessed by them,
and then, it be remarked why they were faced with that adversity: that
they scattered wandering in the world.

166

(212) زُيِّنَ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ الْحَيوةُ الدُّنْيَا وَيَسْخَرُونَ
مِنَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَالَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ فَوْقَهُمْ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ وَاللّهُ يَرْزُقُ مَن يَشَاء بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ

212. " The life of this world has been made to seem fair to those who
disbeleive, and they mock those who beleive, but those who guard
(against evil) shall be above them on the Day of Judgement and Allah
provides with sustenance for whomever He wills without measure. "

**Occasion of Revelation:**

Ibn-Abbas, the famous commentator, says that this holy verse was
revealed about the chief leaders of Quraysh, a minority of wealthy
people in their disbelieving tribe, who were living in easy
circumstances. They used to mock a group of steadfast Muslim believers,
who were poor from the point of finances. These disbelievers said: if
the Prophet Muhammad (p.b.u.h.) had really been appointed from the side
of God and was a noble prophet, the rich and authoritative ones would
have followed him. Then, this verse was revealed and answered their vain
statements.

**Commentary:**

The occasion of revelation of the verse does not hinder us from taking
the verse as a general and common rule, or consider it as the perfecter
of the previous verse about the Jews. The verse says:

" The life of this world has been made to seem fair to those who
disbelieve, ... " Thus, they were so proud that they ridiculed those
believers who were rather poor: " ... and they mock those who believe,
... "

167

Yet, in the meantime, the attention should also be paid to this
condition that: " ... but those who guard (against evil) shall be above
them on the Day of Judgement ... " The reason for that condition lies in
the coming world where the spiritual ranks will be illustrated in their
objective forms and believers will be positioned in such elevated high
ranks that these miserable people, comparing them to as if the believers
are in high sky of honour, feel themselves in the lowest and deepest
earthly abode of disgrace. This is not surprising, of course, because
the foregoing detailed condition is the fruit of their own deeds:

" ... and Allah provides with sustenance for whomever He wills without
measure. " These facts are, indeed, some gladtidings for the poor
believers and also a severe warning to the rich who are proud and
faithless unto the Truth.
And the phrase stating that 'Allah provides with sustenance for
whomever (here, the believers) He wills without measure' may point to
this idea that Divine rewards, from the view of quantity and quality,
are never equivalent to our good deeds. They are bestowed according to
His Grace and Generosity, and, also, we know that there is no limit to
the Grace and Generosity of Allah.

168

(213) كَانَ النَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً فَبَعَثَ اللّهُ النَّبِيِّينَ
مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنذِرِينَ وَأَنزَلَ مَعَهُمُ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ
لِيَحْكُمَ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ فِيمَا اخْتَلَفُواْ فِيهِ وَمَا اخْتَلَفَ
فِيهِ إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوهُ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءتْهُمُ الْبَيِّنَاتُ
بَغْيًا بَيْنَهُمْ فَهَدَى اللّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لِمَا اخْتَلَفُواْ
فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ بِإِذْنِهِ وَاللّهُ يَهْدِي مَن يَشَاء إِلَى صِرَاطٍ
مُّسْتَقِيمٍ

213. " (All) Mankind was but a single nation, then Allah raised
Prophets as bearers of good tidings and warners, and He sent down with
them the Book with the Truth that it might judge between people on that
wherein they differed. And none were at odds over it, except those very
(people) whom it was given unto, after clear arguments had come to them,
revolting among themselves. So Allah guided by His Will, those who
believed regarding that which people had differed about the truth. And
Allah guides whomever He wills to the Straight Path. "

**Commentary:**

It is understood from this verse that human race had a simple and plain
life at the beginning. Then, later, after the increase of population and
the appearance of a variety of tastes among them, little by little,
diversities and oppositions arose. " (All) Mankind was but a single
nation, ... " As some Islamic traditions indicate, this period has been
adapted to an Age before the time of Noah (a.s.) when people, with
little information, used to live a simple limited life. But, sometime
later there appeared some conflicts between individuals when they wanted
to gain more and more interests especially

169

by employing others for reaching the foregoing purposes via them. This
caused that the classes of people and social levels came into existence.
" ... then Allah raised Prophets as bearers of good tidings and warners,
..." The necessity of a social life is the existence of a firm and just
law in that society. This law should be able to solve the problems of
people. Allah appointed the prophets for solving the problems and
removing the opposition created thereby. He (s.w.t.) sent some heavenly
Books down to them, but some arrogant groups consciously stood against
the invitation of the prophets and produced a new conflict, added to
their former ones.

" ... and He sent down with them the Book with the Truth ... "
In this way, of course, Allah led some receptive people to His guidance
with His grace and favour, and left those who, as a result of envy,
jealousy, force, or oppression, resisted against the truth alone to
themselves until they recieve their retribution. " ... that it might
judge between people on that wherein they differed. ..."

Explanations: 1- The larger the number of contemporary people in one
region is, the more variety of demands will arise; and, when the life is
simpler and the number of people is smaller, the less the contradictions
will be.

2- Wherever there lies a dispute, there needs a judge. Human made laws
and civilizations are not able to solve the discords of mankind, because
all human groups or individuals usually look for their own personal
needs or demands. The solution of the human problems should be made up
via the path of Divine prophets and through the revealed laws which are
free from any fault and falsification because they are sent down from
the side of Allah (s.w.t.) and by an infallible figure, i.e. a godly
prophet.

" ... And none were at odds over it, except those very (people) whom it
was given unto, ... " 3- The best way of solution to contradictions is
Faith in the Resurrection. This doctrine utilizes the subject of glad
tidings to prevent the appearance of contradictions, and uses the
subject of warning as its remedy.

170

4- The worst kind of contradiction is the intentional one which comes
forth with the aim of jealousy and oppression while there are clear
evidences available.

" ... after clear arguments had come to them, revolting among
themselves. ..." 5- The path to the solution of contradiction,
therefore, is belief in Truth and obeying the law of prophets:

" ... So Allah guided by His Will, those who believed ... " 6- The
critical statement of the Qur'an is targeted to that pertinacious
contradiction in which a person does not accept the judgement of
prophets appointed by Allah based on the Divine Law, else the
contradictions and disputes that finally surrender to justice are not
objected. This kind of diversity is similar to the two pans or scales of
a balance which move up and down until one finally parallels with the
other.

" ... regarding that which people had differed about the truth. ..." 7-
There sometimes appear disputes between the believers, too, but they
will be led under the guardianship of Allah; while disbelievers will be
wandering in darkness forever.

" ... And Allah guides whomever He wills to the Straight Path. " 8-
Rescue from contradiction is, surely, counted "the Straight Path."

171

(214) أَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَن تَدْخُلُواْ الْجَنَّةَ وَلَمَّا يَأْتِكُم
مَّثَلُ الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِن قَبْلِكُم مَّسَّتْهُمُ الْبَأْسَاء
وَالضَّرَّاء وَزُلْزِلُواْ حَتَّى يَقُولَ الرَّسُولُ وَالَّذِينَ
آمَنُواْ مَعَهُ مَتَى نَصْرُ اللّهِ أَلا إِنَّ نَصْرَ اللّهِ قَرِيبٌ

214. " Or did you suppose you would enter Paradise untouched by the
suffering which was endured by those before you? They were afflicted by
distress and adversity and were so shakened that the Messenger and those
who believed with him said, 'When will Allah's help (come) ?' Surely
Allah's help is (always) nigh! "

**Occasion of Revelation:**

Some of the commentators say that this verse was revealed on the
occasion of the battle of Ahzab, or the Confederate, when the Muslims
got impatient and terribly terrified in the battle. So, they, being
surrounded by the enemy, began asking about the help of Allah, the
Almighty. Therefore, the revelation of this verse invited them to
patience and perseverance and made them hopeful of triumph through the
help of Allah.

It is also reported that when Muslims were defeated in the battle of
'Uhud, 'Abdillah-ibn-'Ubayy, reproaching them, inquired that until when
those Muslims were going to give themselves in death and he added that
if Muhammad (p.b.u.h.) was really the Messenger of Allah, then He
(s.w.t.) would not let his companions be captured or killed. At that
moment the above verse was revealed.

\* \* \* \*

172

**Commentary:
Intense Adversities as a Divine Practice:**

The above verse indicates that some of the believers thought that the
main factor of arriving in Heaven was only the expression of Faith ƒto
Allah and, thereafter, no trouble or pain they might tolerate. Hence,
Allah would arrange their affairs, they imagined, and destroy their
enemies without any effort and endeavour that they themselves might
suffer.

Against this kind of wrong thinking, the Qur'an points to the true and
usual method of Allah. It says that the believers must be ready to
devote themselves and to face with troubles and difficulties along the
path of Faith and its influence. These difficulties are, in fact, some
trials which make the real Faith from the unreal one manifest. The
Qur'an also explains that these trials and difficulties exist as a
general law, and that is why they had afflicted the former nations and
all previous sects, too.

" Or did you suppose you would enter Paradise untouched by the
suffering which was endured by those before you? ..." The Israelites,
for example entangled with many sufferings in order to be rescued from
the oppressive grips of the Pharaoh. When they were amazed and did not
know what to do, the grace and favour of Allah came and helped them to
win their enemy. This situation was not exclusive to the Children of
Israel alone, but, as the above verse points out in the phrase: " by
those before you ", all earlier nations had a common status from this
point of view, too. It seems that this is a Divine practice which is the
secret of training and spiritual development in human kind.

" ... They were afflicted by distress and adversity ..." All dynasties
should be involved in the current of adversities and calamities so that
they be prepared for some more important and graver adventures, and
also, by this way, the efficient and experienced ones be recognized and
with repelling the unworthy persons, the society be filtered.

173

" ... and were so shakened that the Messenger and those who believed
with him said, ..." Another point that we must be aware of in commenting
on this verse is that, at the end, it proclaims that afflictions and
adversities had so intensely encompassed the former nations that even
the believing people and prophets, all together, said: " ... 'When will
Allah's help (come) ?' ... " It is evident that the purpose, here, is
not a protest against the Providence, but this manner of statement is
itself a kind of invocation and a plea for help. So, the Qur'an says:

" ... Surely Allah's help is (always) nigh! "
\* \* \* \*

174

(215) يَسْأَلُونَكَ مَاذَا يُنفِقُونَ قُلْ مَا أَنفَقْتُم مِّنْ خَيْرٍ
فَلِلْوَالِدَيْنِ وَالأَقْرَبِينَ وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَابْنِ
السَّبِيلِ وَمَا تَفْعَلُواْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ بِهِ عَلِيمٌ

215. " They ask you (O' Muhammad) what they should spend; say:
'Whatever you spend that is good, (from your material and spiritual
wealth to avail) for parents, relatives, the orphans, the needy, and the
traveller; and whatever you do that is good, verily Allah is All-Knowing
of it '."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

'Amr-ubn-i-Jamuh was an old man who was rich, too. Once he asked the
Prophet Muhammad (p.b.u.h.) what he would spend as charity and to whom
he could give the charity. Concerning this matter, the above verse was
revealed.

**Commentary:**

There are many verses in the Qur'an which speak about charity in the
way of Allah. The Lord of the world has variously encouraged Muslims to
spend in charity and help the indigent, but the status of the verse
under discussion is different. At the time of revelation, some people
wanted to know what kind of property they should spend from. So, it
says: " They ask you (O' MUhammad) what they should spend; ..." The
verse, in answer to this question, besides explaining what should be
spent, points to another problem, too. It adds the situations and
persons that charity might be spent on. And, as it was mentioned in the
above, the occasion of revelation also shows that both problems (the
material which should be spent, and the persons whom charity should be
given to) had been questioned about. In reply to the first subject, i.e.
the matter that should be

175

dispensed with by the way of charity in the way of Allah, applying the
term 'khayr' (good) , there has been given a complete, expressive and
inclusive answer to the question. The answer simply is whatsoever good
that may benefit the others. Thus, it concludes all beneficial capital,
irrespective of material or spiritual.

" ... say, ' Whatever you spend that is good, (from your material and
spiritual wealth to avail) ... " In reply to the second subject, i.e.
the person and the order in which charity should proceed, a logical
series is given. The claim of the parents and of the nearest relatives
is made the first concern of the charitable. Then, it refers to the
orphans and the indigents before paying to the needy travellers.

" ... for parents, relatives, the orphans, the needy, and the
traveller; ..." It is self-evident that making provision for relatives,
besides the ordinary effects that any charity has, contains a profound
result in firmness of their relationship.

" ... and whatever you do that is good, verily Allah is All-Knowing of
it ." The dispensers of charity should not persist on the matter so that
others understand their benevolence, and their good actions should be
done for obtaining more sincerity. It seems that the secret of that fact
lies in this sense that the One Who gives reward knows everything
including whatever deed we do. So, the Exalted One in Whose possession
is the recompense of all deeds, with Him are the accounts of all human
beings, too.

176

(216) كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْقِتَالُ وَهُوَ كُرْهٌ لَّكُمْ وَعَسَى أَن
تَكْرَهُواْ شَيْئًا وَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ وَعَسَى أَن تُحِبُّواْ شَيْئًا
وَهُوَ شَرٌّ لَّكُمْ وَاللّهُ يَعْلَمُ وَأَنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ

216. " Fighting (in the cause of Allah) is prescribed for you, although
you dislike it. Yet it may happen that you dislike a thing while it is
good for you; and it may happen that you love a thing while it is evil
for you; surely Allah knows, and you know not. "

Commentary:

The previous verse was about charity while this verse is about donating
soul and blood, both of which run in the field of devotion, both
together in one rank.

This verse states that, it is necessary for you to fight against the
enemy. This command has surely been legislated and is incumbent upon
Muslims, while human kind naturally is inconvenient with suffering toils
and pains. " Fighting (in the cause of Allah) is prescribed for you,
although you dislike it. ..." The next part of the verse points to the
fact that fighting and struggling with the enemy is basically hard and
disagreeable, because it causes the death of some people, together with
pain and loss of limbs and properties in an environment of terror and
insecurity for some others. Yet, there are always some devoted persons
who never withhold of any self-sacrifice in the way of their own sacred
aims. But, the majority of ordinary people are those who, as was
reasoned in the above, tend not to take part in the holy struggle and
self-sacrificing practically.

The Lord of the world, with a sharp tone, condemns this kind of
thinking of theirs, but He opens a new doorway to them. The Qur'an,
addressing Muslims, says that you are not aware of the expediencies of

177

affairs. How do you know? There may be something good behind what you
suppose is inconvenient, and there may be something evil at the back of
what you like. It is only Allah Who knows the whole secret of affairs.
Yet, it is certain that those who are studious and clever (not the
inattentive people) can find a way to the solution of a part of the
secrets of some qualifications.

" ... Yet it may happen that you dislike a thing while it is good for
you; and it may happen that you love a thing while it is evil for you"
This verse points to a fundamental principle in the Divine laws of
creation and legislation. It develops the spirit of regulation and
resignation in man unto these laws. It is so that human members,
concerning the Divine laws, should not take their own distinction and
concept as a criterion of judgement, because surely their knowledge is
limited in all aspects and, comparing with their unknown quantities, it
is naught, or as if it were a drop of water in the face of a sea.

" ... surely Allah knows, and you know not." Therefore, they must never
frown at such laws which originate from the knowledge of Allah, the
knowledge that is infinite from any points of view. But, they ought to
know that all of these laws are totally alongside the benefit of the
human race whether they are the laws of legislation such as: Holy War,
alms tax, and the like of them, or the laws of creation and the
incidents that occasionally occur in life and are never avoidable. They
are like death and grievous inflictions unto our friends and relatives
which come forth unexpectedly and unavoidably; or like the future
secrets which are concealed from Man, and the similar subjects.

However, Holy War is one of the important applications of Islam. There
are many verses of the Qur'an as well as Islamic traditions from Prophet
Muhammad (p.b.u.h.) and Ahlul-Bayt (a.s.) found upon the importance and
virtue of Holy War.
It is narrated in a tradition from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) who said:
Good deeds comparing with Holy War in the way of Allah are not but a

178

corpse in an unfathomable sea." (1) It is also narrated from Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) who said: " Holy War (in Islam) is the best (of all) things next
to the obligatory duties (such as: prayers, fasting, Hajj and alms tax)
." (2) Again, the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) is narrated who has
said: " Heaven has a door which is called the Door of Strivers." (3)
Holy War has not been allocated only to Islam. Other Divine religions
before Islam had also had it, as the current Torah has narrated the
injunctions of Moses (a.s) about fighting with several tribes other than
the Israelites. Some definite references among them are: DEUTERONOMY,
Chapters 7, 13, and Chapter 20; EXODUS, Chapter 32; and NUMBERS, Chapter
31.

The prophet Jesus (a.s.) also has been commissioned to Holy War as it
is recognized from MATTHEW, Chapter 10, No. 34 and LUKE, Chapter 19,
No.27 and Chapter 22, No.36.

Some stories of a few other former prophets who fought against
disbelievers are referred to in the Qur'an, too. A few examples are:
Sura 'Al-i-'Imran, No. 3, verse 47; Sura Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 246;
and Sura Al-Ma'idah, No.5, verse 27. (4) A. Referential texts from the
Book of the Old Testament, referred to in the above, are as follows:

The fifth book of Moses called DEUTERONOMY; Chapter 7, p. 219 No.2 to 5
say: 2 And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee; thou
shalt smite them, and utterly destory them; thou shalt make no covenant
with them, nor shew mercy unto them:

3 Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt
not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Jami'-us-Sa'adat & Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 100, p.89

(2) Al-Kafi, vol. 5,p. 3

(3) Al-Tahthib, vol. 6, p. 123

(4) Atyab-ul-Bayan, Commentary, vol. 2, p. 414

179

4 For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may
serve other gods: so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you,
and destroy thee suddenly.

5 But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and
break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their
graven images with fire. And, Deuteronomy, Chapter 13, pp. 227 & 228,
No.9 and 15 say:

9 But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be irst upon him to
put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.

10 And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath
sought to thrust thee away from the LORD thy God, which brought thee out
of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

11 And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness as this is among you.

12 If thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the LORD thy God
hath given thee to dwell there, saying,

13 Certain men, the children of Belial, are gone out from among you,
and have withdrawn the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and
serve other gods, which ye have not known;

14 Then shalt thou enquire, and make search, and ask diligently; and,
behold, if it be truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is
wrought among you;

15 Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge
of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the
cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword. Again, Deuteronomy,
Chapter20, p.234, No.1-4 say:

1 WHEN thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest
horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of
them: for the LORD thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of
the land of Egypt.

2 And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the
priest shall approach and speak unto the people,

3 And shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto
battle against your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do
not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them;

180

4 For the LORD your God is he that goeth with you, to fight for you
against your enemies, to save you.

Also, in the second book of Moses, called: EXODUS; Chapter 32, pp. 106,
107, No. 27-29, it says:

27 And he said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Put every
man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbour.

28 And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and
there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.

29 For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves to day to the LORD, even
every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon
you a blessing this day.

However, in the fourth book of Moses called: NUMBERS, Chapter 31,
p.201, No. 1-12 says thus:

1 AND the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,

2 Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou
be gathered unto thy people.

3 And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves unto
the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the LORD of
Midian.

4 Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel, shall
ye send to the war.

5 So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of
every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.

6 And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them and
Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy
instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand.

7 And they warred against the Midianites, as the LORD commanded Moses;
and they slew all the males.

8 And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were
slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of
Midian: Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword.

9 And the children of Israel took all the women of Midian captives, and
their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and

181

all their flocks, and all their goods.

10 And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all their
goodly castles, with fire.

11 And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and of
beasts.

12 And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto
Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the children
of Israel, unto the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by Jordan near
Jericho.

B. The referential texts from the Book of New Testament are as
follows:

a. The Gospel according to St.Matthew, Chapter 10, P.902, No.34: such
is recorded:

34 Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send
peace, but a sword.

b. The Gospel according to St. Luke, Chapter 19, p.1076, No.27
reports:

27 But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

c. And, St. Luke, Chapter 22, p. 1080, No.36 explains thus:

36 Then said he unto them, But now, he that hath a purse, let him take
it, and likewise his scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him sell his
garment, and buy one.


