Section 27,questions About Various Important Topics
===================================================

182

Persecution during the sacred month - Mischief graver than carnage -
Pardon and Mercy for the emigrants and those who strive and struggle in
the way of the Lord - Question about intoxicants and gambling, Alms -
Orphans - Matrimony with believer men and women.

(217) يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ قِتَالٍ فِيهِ قُلْ
قِتَالٌ فِيهِ كَبِيرٌ وَصَدٌّ عَن سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَكُفْرٌ بِهِ
وَالْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ وَإِخْرَاجُ أَهْلِهِ مِنْهُ أَكْبَرُ عِندَ
اللّهِ وَالْفِتْنَةُ أَكْبَرُ مِنَ الْقَتْلِ وَلاَ يَزَالُونَ
يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ حَتَّىَ يَرُدُّوكُمْ عَن دِينِكُمْ إِنِ اسْتَطَاعُواْ
وَمَن يَرْتَدِدْ مِنكُمْ عَن دِينِهِ فَيَمُتْ وَهُوَ كَافِرٌ
فَأُوْلَئِكَ حَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ
وَأُوْلَئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ

(218) إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَالَّذِينَ هَاجَرُواْ وَجَاهَدُواْ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللّهِ أُوْلَئِكَ يَرْجُونَ رَحْمَتَ اللّهِ وَاللّهُ غَفُورٌ
رَّحِيمٌ

217. " They ask you (O' Muhammad) concerning the sacred month about
fighting in it. Say: 'Fighting in it is a grave (sin) ; but to bar
(people ) from Allah's way,

183

and to deny Him (to prevent access) to the Sacred Mosque, and to drive
its people therefrom is, a graver (crime) with Allah. Sedition is more
gravous than slaughter. They will not cease fighting against you until
they turn you back from your religion, if they can. But whoever of you
turns back from his religion, and dies disbelieving ِ such are they
whose deeds shall be of no avail in this world and Hereafter; those are
the inhabitants of the Fire, wherein they shall dwell forever."

218. " Those who believed and those who migrated (suffered exile) and
struggled in the way of Allah - these are they who hope for Allah's
Mercy; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. "

**Occasion of Revelation:**

It is said that this verse was revealed about the struggle of
'Abd-il-lah-ibn-Jahsh. The event was as follows: Before the occurrence
of the battle of Badr, the Messenger of Islam (p.b.u.h.) sent for
'Abdillah-ibn-i-Jahsh. When he came, the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) ,
accompanying him eight men from among the Emigrants, gave him a letter
and told him to start on a journey immediately, and after two days of
paving the way, then he would open the letter to read and follow what it
said. So, after two days of travelling, 'Abdillah opened the letter and
found thus: "When you opened the letter, you go forward to 'Nakhlah' ,
(a land between Mecca and Ta'if) , and from there watch the situation of
Quraysh. Then report to us the circumstances.

'Abdillah told his companions the matter and added that the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) had commanded him not to force them on that way. So, those
who would be ready to be killed might follow him, and the rest could
return. All the members decidedly started to go forward with him. When
they reached Nakhlah, they encountered a caravan from Quraysh wherein
was 'Amr-ubn-i-Hadrami. That day was the last day of Rajab (one of the
Sacred Months) , so, they began consulting whether they could attack
that group or not.

A few of them said if they left the caravan to continue their way,

184

they would enter the limits of the sacred town, Mecca, where it was
forbidden to attack them. Hence, finally, the Prophet's agents invaded
them bravely. They succeeded to kill 'Amr-ubn-i-Hadrami and brought the
caravan with two captives to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) . The Messenger of
Allah (p.b.u.h.) said he had not ordered them to fight in a sacred
month. Therefore, he did not mix himself with the booties and the
captives. The victorious warriors felt annoyed and Muslims thereby began
scolding them. Infidels also sarcastically stated that the Prophet
Muhammad (p.b.u.h.) made fighting, bloodshedding, and capturing in the
Sacred Months lawful. At that time the first verse of the above verses
was revealed. After the revelation of this verse, 'Abdillah-ibn-i-Jahsh
and his companions stated that they had strived on that way to obtain
the reward concerning the Holy War. They also asked the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) whether they had got the reward of the strivers. Then, the
second verse in the above was sent down. (1)

**Commentary:**

As the occasion of revelation denotes, the verse intends to answer the
questions about fighting in Sacred Months. It clearly proclaims the
prohibition of fighting in Sacred Months and counts such a fighting a
great sin. " They ask you (O' Muhammad) concerning the sacred month
about fighting in it. Say: 'Fighting in it is a grave (sin) ; ... " Yet,
it emphasizes that the infidels who have committed great sins such as
infidelity to Allah, banning people from being lead to the straight
path, expelling the inhabitants of Mecca from their home, trampling on
the divine sanctuary and security of the sacred premises of Mecca, where
the birds, beasts and plants should be secured, are not rightful to
object to a group of Muslims who took action in fighting by mistake
during a Sacred Month.

" ... but to bar (people) from Allah's way,

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Sirah Ibn-i-Husham, vol. 2, p. 252

185

and to deny Him (to prevent access) to the Sacred Mosque, and to drive
its people therefrom is, a graver (crime) with Allah. ... " In addition
to that, pagans have made mischief, because any subversive move against
truthful people and barring them from embracing the theistic creed is a
movement to creating a mischievous environment full of infidelity and
idolatry. This crime is graver than fighting in a Sacred Month. " ...
Sedition is more gravous than slaughter. ... " Thus, these Qur'anic
words addresses Muslims and warns them to be careful not to be affected
by the evil propagations of infidels. It informs them to have insight
and be conscious for pagans who always try to convert them from Islam.
It says:

" ... They will not cease fighting against you until they turn you back
from your religion, if they can. ... " To prevent this situation, the
Qur'an warns that whoever of Muslims turns back from the Truth and dies
in that status while the one is an infidel, this infidelity nullifies
all his good deeds of this world and the next world totally. " ... But
whoever of you turns back from his religion, and dies disbelieving ِ
such are they whose deeds shall be of no avail in this world and
Hereafter' ... " When a person, with such a condition of disbelief, has
no valid good deeds in Hereafter, reasonably the one will be permanently
involved in the torment of Allah.

" ... those are the inhabitants of the Fire, wherein they shall dwell
forever. " There is a discription about the Arabic term /habt/
(forfeiture) in Almizan, Commentary, a part of which is as follows:

In short, 'habt of deeds' means their coming to nothing and their being
of no effect. It has been said that it is derived from / habata / which
is used when an animal over-eats and its stomach distends, often
resulting in its death. The gist of the verse under discussion, like
other verses of forfeiture, is that disbelief and apostasy make the
deeds ineffective, i.e., such deeds lose their power to make life
blissful. On the other hand,

186

true faith and belief give life to the deeds and they create felicity,
bliss and happiness in life. If someone acquires true faith after
disbelief, his deeds are given a new life and they become effective in
making life blessed and happy (although they were forfeited and
ineffective before) . Likewise, if he apostatizes after having been a
believer, all his deeds become dead, null and void; they cannot make
life in this world or in the Hereafter happy. Thereafter, if he leaves
his apostasy and comes back to the fold of Islam, it is hoped that his
deeds will be revived; but if he dies in the apostasy, the forfeiture
will have been confirmed and misery unhappiness will be written down for
him. (1)

\* \* \* \*

The Arabic term /jihad/ literally means striving that can be with
wealth i.e. spending money in the way of Allah, or with life which means
giving away life or getting killed in Allah's way i.e. for Allah's
cause.

" Those who believed and those who migrated (suffered exile) and
struggled in the way of Allah - these are they who hope for Allah's
Mercy; ... " This point is also remarked in the second verse that some
warriors in the cause of Allah (s.w.t.) , as a result of being unaware
or being insufficiently cautious, may make some errors, (the foregoing
story of 'Abdillah-ibn-i-Jahsh was an example of this meaning) , but
Allah will forgive them for their greater services that they usually do
faithfully and sincerely. " ... and Allah is Forgiving Merciful. "

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Almizan, Commentary, vol. 3, pp. 245, 247, (English version)

187

(219) يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ قُلْ فِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ
كَبِيرٌ وَمَنَافِعُ لِلنَّاسِ وَإِثْمُهُمَآ أَكْبَرُ مِن نَّفْعِهِمَا
وَيَسْأَلُونَكَ مَاذَا يُنفِقُونَ قُلِ الْعَفْوَ كَذَلِكَ يُبيِّنُ
اللّهُ لَكُمُ الآيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَفَكَّرُونَ

219. " They ask you concerning wine and gambling. Say: 'There is a
great sin in both of them, and (some) profits for people; but their sin
is greater than their profit'. They ask you as to what they should
spend. Say: 'Whatsoever can be spared'. Thus does Allah make the Signs
clear to you, in order that you may ponder."

**Commentary:**

The statement in this verse is about two questions and their divine
answers. The first question is about 'wine' and 'gambling', thus: "They
ask you concerning wine and gambling. ..."
The term 'Khamr' in Arabic lexicon means 'a cover' , hence the veil
that women wear to cover their heads to observe ' Hijab ' , it is called
' khimar '. Since the alcoholic beverages often delude the ability of
the distinction of the person who drinks and, in fact, it covers the
wisdom, in Arabic language that kind of liquor is called 'khamr'.

The term 'Maysir' is derived from the Arabic word /yusr/ which means:
'ease, easiness, and facility', as if, in gambling, each of the two
parties wants to take the wealth of the other easily.

In answer to the question of some believers about wine and gambling,
the verse, addressing the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) , says: " ... Say: 'There
is a great sin in both of them, and (some) profits for people; ..." This
profit maybe refers to those interests that the producers of wine obtain
through planting vineyards or preparing raisins for wine, or

188

selling wine; or the money taken as taxes, charges, and custom-duties;
or the profit some gain by establishing game-houses. But the sin and
interior loss of these two is graver than their exterior profits.

Here are a few disadvantages resulting in drinking wine and gambling
listed in some commentary books:

1. Shortening the lifetime

2. The negative effects on the procreation of babies specially if the
intercourse of the couple happens when the person is intoxicated.

3. The spread of immorality and the increase in the number of crimes
such as: theft, combat, murder, sexual offenses, and dangerous driving
accidents.

One of the scholars expert in natural science has said: " If
governments in the drunkard nations close half of the vintneries, we
will be able to close half of the hospitals and psychiatric asylums."

Gambling is also known among the causes of: disturbance, neurasthenic
diseases, apoplexies ِ cerebral and hemacardiorrhagia, the increase of
heartbeats, inappetence, paleness, and so on. Those who deal with the
factors of crimes (in some societies) have formally issued that about
thirty percent of the number of crimes are related to gambling.

By the way, gambling surely has a destructive function in the
development of economics, because it wastes the mirth of the useful
work. Gambling has been announced forbidden and illegal in some of
non-Islamic countries during the recent years. In England, for instance,
that law passed to be executed in 1853, in America in 1855 (where it is
again now practiced in some states) , in Russia in 1854, and in Germany
it passed in 1873.

The second question is regarding to the quality of /'afw/ 'charity',
when the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) is asked about: " ...They ask you as to what
they should spend. Say: ' Whatsoever can be spared.' Thus does Allah
make the Signs clear to you, in order that you may ponder." In the
Arabic dictionary, the term /'afw/ , in addition to the sense

189

of 'pardon' and 'forgiveness', means: 'moderation, superfluous goods,
and the best thing of the wealth'. Each of these meanings is fitting in
the verse; and the purpose of the term /'afw/, here, may conclude all of
these senses. That is, if you desire to spend, you should observe both
moderation, and do not disburse all your property as charity so that
thereafter you yourself become needy, and when you give something to
someone, give that of your most beloved things; for the Qur'an says: "
By no means shall you attain to righteousness until you spend
(benevolently) out of what you love; ... " , (Sura 'Al-i-'Imran, No.3,
verse 92) .

**Explanations:**

1- When dealing a thing, we must be just. The verse does not connive
the profits of wine and gambling, but it propounds the subject so that
it animates the power and faculty of contemplation and meditation in
us.

2- Both wine and gambling are the means of destruction of body and
soul. They are both causes of failure, so, they have come together in
the Qur'an.

3- Protect both wisdom and peace. With the prohibition of wine, wisdom
and contemplation has been protected; and by the prohibition of
gambling, the safety of peace and spiritual and economical security have
been guarded.

4- As the commentary books indicate, at the advent of Islam, the
prohibition of wine had been introduced step by step until when it was
fully performed throughout the Islamic society.

At the call of Islam, people habitually used to drink wine although it
had been forbidden in the former religions. The Divine Messages
gradually made them ready to accept its prohibition. In Sura An-Nahl,
No.16, verse 67 the revelation says: "And of the fruits of the palms and
the grapes ِ you obtain from them intoxication and goodly provision;
...", which means you may obtain both spirituous liquor and good
provision from grapes, i.e., spirituous liquor is not a good
provision.

190

After that, concerning wine and gambling, the verse under discussion
was sent down, saying that their harm, in comparison, is more than their
profits:

" ... There is a great sin in both of them, and (some) profits for
people; but their sin is greater ..." Then, in another occurrence, a
different verse of the Holy Qur'an was revealed, (Sura An-Nisa', No.4,
verse 43) , and commanded Muslim believers:

" ... do not go near prayer when you are intoxicated." And, finally,
the prohibition of wine was completely made manifest and perpetual when
the word of Allah announced in Sura Al-Ma'idah, No. 5, verse 90, thus:

"... intoxications and gambling ... are only an uncleanness, the
Satan's work; ..." There are so many traditions and narrations from the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and also from the holy Imams (a.s.) condemning the
use of wine and as to what a miserable fate awaites the individual on
the Day of Judgement. The holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) , for example, is
narrated to have said: " All intoxicants are prohibited; and, curse of
Allah is on liquor, on him who manufactures it, on him who helps its
manufactures, on its seller, its purchaser, its distributor, the user of
its money, its loader, its bearer, and its consumer." (1)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 398


**Verse 220**

191

(220) فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ وَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْيَتَامَى قُلْ
إِصْلاَحٌ لَّهُمْ خَيْرٌ وَإِنْ تُخَالِطُوهُمْ فَإِخْوَانُكُمْ وَاللّهُ
يَعْلَمُ الْمُفْسِدَ مِنَ الْمُصْلِحِ وَلَوْ شَاء اللّهُ لأعْنَتَكُمْ
إِنَّ اللّهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ

220. " (Ponder) over this world and the Hereafter. And they ask you
concerning orphans. Say: ' To set right for them (their affairs) is
best; and if you become co-partner with them, they are your brethren.
Allah knows well the mischief-maker from the peace-maker; and had He
willed, He would have surely made, it hard for you. Verily Allah is the
Mighty, the Wise."

**Commentary:**

The initial phrase of the verse: 'over this world and the Hereafter'
refers either to the subject of charity, which was mentioned at the end
of the previous verse, meaning that your charity is for your happiness
in this world and the next. This act of spending should, of course, be
neither in a manner that you donate your whole wealth so that you fall
into trouble in your life, nor in a form of stinginess that causes your
deprivation of the divine rewards in Hereafter. (1)

Or, it refers to pondering over that which was mentioned in the former
verse. If so, it means that everybody should think about the affairs of
this world and the next, because we have to obtain the spiritual rewards
of the next world only in this very world. This pondering can simply be
contemplating over the problems such as Unity of Allah, Resurrection,
the secrets of creation, and the dominating laws of nature in order to
understand them and to accept them, although the acceptance of the creed
is not conditioned to the recognition of all

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) 'Ilahi-Qumshih-'ie, translation of the Qur'an, Persian version

192
secrets perfectly. So, the verse says:

" (Ponder) over this world and the Hereafter. ..." Concerning the
question about orphans, the commentary books denote that: when the tenth
verse of Sura An-Nisa' No. 4, was revealed announcing that those who
swallow the property of the orphans unjustly, swallow fire into their
bellies, the families who had orphans in their houses felt anxious so
that some of them even exiled the orphans from their houses and some
others separated the dishes of the orphans' food from those of theirs.
In that situation both the orphans and the householders encountered
several annexing difficulties.

Therefore, they went to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and asked him about the
quality of their manner towards the orphans. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
replied to them that if they tried to improve the affairs of orphans it
would be better for them. They should not dismiss the orphans and shirk
the responsibility of managing them for that their wealth could be mixed
with that of theirs while the orphans are religiously their brethren.
So, it did not matter that they might mix their properties with each
other in the case that their intention in living with orphans was not to
swallow their wealth.

"...And they ask you concerning orphans. Say: ' To set right for them
(their affairs) is best; and if you become co-partner with them, they
are your brethren. ..." They should also be aware that Allah recognizes
good doers from evil doers; and His Will is not to ordain hardship for
the believers; and He is, of course, Almighty and All-Wise.

"...Allah knows well the mischief-maker from the peace-maker; and had
He willed, He would have surely made, it hard for you. Verily Allah is
the Mighty, the Wise."

**Explanations:**

1- Orphans are neither our sons nor our servants, but they are our
younger brothers and are counted with us in number: " They are your
brethren "; so, they must live with us and be inside our lives.
2- To shirk the affairs of orphans is not right, but public interest
is

193

that we, as a custom, endeavour justly for them with a good intention
and brotherly.

3- It is not important that some individuals claim for improvement,
because Allah knows who is a peace-maker and who is a mischief- maker.
So, beware not to swallow the wealth of orphans under the pretext of
improvement, nor to evade it for the fear of mischief.

4- There is no unbearable duty in Islam, (considering the occasion of
revelation of the verse cited in the above) .

5- Any improvement given in the life of orphans is valuable. The term '
improvement ', mentioned in the verse, has come in an absolute form to
encompass all sorts of improvement including: scientific, financial,
practical, educational and theological aspects.

194

(221) وَلاَ تَنكِحُواْ الْمُشْرِكَاتِ حَتَّى يُؤْمِنَّ وَلأَمَةٌ
مُّؤْمِنَةٌ خَيْرٌ مِّن مُّشْرِكَةٍ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَتْكُمْ وَلاَ
تُنكِحُواْ الْمُشِرِكِينَ حَتَّى يُؤْمِنُواْ وَلَعَبْدٌ مُّؤْمِنٌ خَيْرٌ
مِّن مُّشْرِكٍ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَكُمْ أُوْلَئِكَ يَدْعُونَ إِلَى النَّارِ
وَاللّهُ يَدْعُو إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ وَالْمَغْفِرَةِ بِإِذْنِهِ وَيُبَيِّنُ
آيَاتِهِ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ

221. " And do not marry idolater women until they believe, and a
believing maid is definitely preferable to an idolater (free) woman even
though she may please you. Nor give (your women) in marriage to idolater
men until they believe; and certainly a believing servant is preferable
to an idolater (free man) , though he may please you. Those invite to
the Fire while Allah invites to paradise and forgiveness by His Will,
and He makes clear His Signs to people, so that they may take heed."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

Once there came a man into Mecca by the name of Marthad. He was a brave
man who had converted to Islam. He occasionally met " 'Anagh ", the
beautiful woman whom he was acquainted with formerly, at the time of
Ignorance. She invited him to sinful actions as before, but Marthad, who
had become a Muslim, did not accept her wish. Hence, the woman asked him
to marry her. Marthad replied that it was contingent on the permission
of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) . Then, after performing his affairs, he
returned to Medina and told the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) about the matter. So,
this verse was revealed and stated that the idol-worshippers and pagan
women are not eligible to be married by Muslim men.

195

**Commentary:**

The term /nikah/ in Arabic philology means: ' matrimony, wedlock, and
marriage '. Islam has considered a number of conditions for the wife
that a man wants to select. These conditions are identified in Islam
because this religion takes the matrimonial life important for the sake
of the assured heritable effects upon offspring, and, also, for the sake
of the training issues of the family environment over the fate of the
children. It says, for example, that a pagan woman is not suitable to be
married by a Muslim. Supposing that such a woman be chosen for marriage,
the resulting children will naturally obtain her spiritualities and
qualities under the principle of heritage, and after birth, if they
trained by that mother, (whereas it is often thus) , these children may
have an abominable end. That is why the Holy Qur'an, in this verse, has
explicitly prohibited marriage with the women who are infidel or
idol-worshippers.

" And do not marry idolater women until they believe, and a believing
maid is definitely preferable to an idolater (free) woman even though
she may please you. ... "

In addition to that, if pagans, who are counted foreigners in an
Islamic society, penetrate into the houses of Muslims by means of
marriage, that society will be inflicted with disorder and interior
enemies. In such a situation the different rows and categories therein
are not recognized from each other. Hence, the Qur'an, hereby, tells
them not to marry with that group of women. However, Islam has not
closed all the doors absolutely to them. Therefore, in order to use
their sexual tendency towards their felicity, the Qur'an says:

" ... Nor give (your women) in marriage to idolater men until they
believe; and certainly a believing servant is preferable to an idolater
(free man) , though he may please you. ..." Similar to the statement at
the threshold of the verse that prohibits men from marrying idolatress
or infidel women, in this part of the verse, giving girls and women in
marriage to infidels and idolater men is prohibited, too. And, similar
to the idea that the believing maids

196

are more eligible to marry with than the free idolater women even with
admirable beauty or wealth, the believing servants and slaves are more
eligible to marry with than the handsome men who are apparently of
dignity but disbelieving. In fact, the wedlock of believing women with
disbelieving men is forbidden while they are infidels; but there is no
sin in marrying them when they accept the truth and believe. This is the
very way of return which was also pointed out at the beginning of the
verse. In the subsequent sentence, the reason of the prohibition for the
wedlock of believing ones with idolaters and infidels, men and women, is
expressed:

" ... Those invite to the Fire while Allah invites to Paradise and
forgiveness by His Will, ... " The prohibition of marriage with an
idolater is for the reason that they call their companions towards
idolatry and some disgraceful manners. Their behaviour, of course,
originates from idolism especially when this companionship is via
matrimony whose intensity of mutual effect is deeper and more
impressive. The fruit of this conduct is the blazing Fire of Hell.

Briefly speaking, acquaintance with them, particularly through the way
of marriage, is inacquaintance with Allah; and approaching them is,
indeed, keeping aloof from the Lord.

The believers, unlike that group, because of belief and high human
qualities resulting from their true Faith, call their companions to the
Truth and excellence. The fate of this manner is Paradise and the
forgiveness of Allah. In this occasion, regarding the close and sincere
relation that the true believers have with Allah, He has applied His own
appellation instead of using 'believers' and has said: " ... Allah
invites to Paradise and forgiveness by His Will, ... " Commenting on the
last part of this holy verse, the author of Atyab-ul-Bayan says: (1) "
Allah (s.w.t) makes His Signs clear to people to be guided and

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Atyab-ul-Bayan, vol. 2, p. 441

197

consequently, they haply take heed. When they recognize the difference
between obedience and disobedience, they may avoid sin and follow
worship. These Signs are irrespective of revealed prescripts, applicable
duties, and ethical instructions; or the verses of macrocosm and
microcosm which lead the servants towards the path of felicity and
salvation so that they are rescued from the calamities of this world and
those of the next world." "... and He makes clear His signs to people,
so that they may take heed."


198

