Section 27,questions About Various Important Topics
===================================================

211

(226) لِّلَّذِينَ يُؤْلُونَ مِن نِّسَآئِهِمْ تَرَبُّصُ أَرْبَعَةِ
أَشْهُرٍ فَإِنْ فَآؤُوا فَإِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ

(227) وَإِنْ عَزَمُواْ الطَّلاَقَ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ

226. " For those who swear to abstain from their wives, there shall be
a waiting of four months; so if then they revert, surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful."

227. " And if they have resolved on divorce, then surely Allah is
All-Hearing, All-Knowing. Commentary:

One of the methods that was customary in the Age of Ignorance for the
separation of a husband from his wife was /'ila'/ ' forswear '. This
method was also followed by those Muslims who had newly embraced Islam.
The word means: ' oath of sexual abstention '. At the Age of Ignorance,
when a man displeased his wife, he sometimes took oath to abstain from
associating with her, and by this unmanly way, he created a straitened
circumstance for her. He neither divorced her legally to make her free
to marry with her desired husband and obtain her own wishes, nor he
himself was ready to make peace with her and continue to live with her
as a spouse.

" For those who swear to abstain from their wives, ..." So, the verse
under discussion speaks about the design that Islam has planned for that
problem to put an end to it. It says that husband has a respite of four
months to make the woman free from this captivity and entanglement. He
may either renounce his oath, and continue to live with his wife, or
legally divorces her and lets her be free.

"...there shall be a waiting of four months; ..." Choosing the first
way, and not to disturb the assembly of the family, is undoubtedly
reasonable and also pleases Allah. Therefore, at the end of the verse,
it says:

"...so if then they revert, surely Allah is Fogiving, Merciful."

212

The concluding sentence: "...surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful"
denotes that renouncing this oath will not be counted a sin, (though it
is understood from the statement that the essence of taking oath is not
an agreeable action) .

\* \* \* \*

If the man decides to become separate from her and divorces her,
forgiveness and mercy is not assured for his action, and Allah, Who is
aware of all secrets, knows whether his sensuality has forced the
husband to misuse the law of divorce, or his situation and conditions
have really required that. The Lord is All-Hearing unto the apparent
execution of divorce and is All-Knowing about the motive of it, as well.
So, the Qur'an says:

" And if they have resolved on divorce, then surely Allah is
All-Hearing, All-Knowing. But it should be noted that, although Islam
has not absolutely nullified the proposition of forswear, but it has,
indeed, wiped out its effects, because, it does not allow any man to
separate from his wife and abandon sexual intercourse by forswearing and
taking oath. If we see that the verse has given this kind of man a
respite of four months' time to decide, it is not for showing that it is
really possible to reject any right of the matrimonial rights by
forswearing, but it is for the sake that sexual intercourse, as a
religious obligation, is necessary at least once every four months. (It
is, of course, so that the woman might not commit sin because of this
length of time, otherwise, especially for the young ladies that may
commit sin as a result of that long time, the length of time between the
sexual intercourses should be shortened as much as that her sexual need
be provided for.)

**Messages:**

1 - To wipe out the social customs and old traditions treated
superstitiously and ignorantly has been a principle among the duties of
prophets.
2- Being attentive to the rights and spiritual and instinctive needs

213

of one's wife is a principle for the husband.

3- Sometimes, Man uses the most sacred appellations for the worst
aims.

4- For the return of some individuals to the right path and that they
make a wise decision, giving a respite is necessary.

5- Islam is the advocator of the oppressed. Women have always been
oppressed and their rights have been transgressed all along the length
of the history. Therefore, the Qur'an has frequently supported them.

6- People should be encouraged to lead safe and sound lives. The
statement: "...so if then they revert, sruely Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful " has occurred in the verse to make man aware of the fact that
reverting to the course of life is the secret of receiving the
forgiveness and mercy of Allah.

7- Islam accepts divorce, with all its bitterness and ugliness, but it
does not bear that a wife be suspended and her situation unclear.

8- Be careful of sensuality and be in awe of a decision that destroys
the livelihood of a woman, because:

" Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing ".

205

(223) نِسَآؤُكُمْ حَرْثٌ لَّكُمْ فَأْتُواْ حَرْثَكُمْ أَنَّى شِئْتُمْ
وَقَدِّمُواْ لأَنفُسِكُمْ وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّكُم
مُّلاَقُوهُ وَبَشِّرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

223. " Your women are a tilth for you, so come into your tilth as you
will, and forward (good deeds) beforehand for yourselves, and be careful
(of your duty) to Allah, and know that you shall meet Him. And give
gladtidings to the believers (O' Muhammad) ." Commentary:


**A Means of Protection for the Human Race**

In this verse wives are likened to a tillage. This metaphor about women
may seem heavy in the eyes of some people because Islam has stated such
a speech upon half of the population of the world. But there is a thin
and delicate meaning in this comparison. By this statement, in fact, the
Qur'an intends to illustrate the necessity of the existence of women in
the human crowd as an essential means of protection and maintenace of
humankind, not as a means of quenching the lust and venereal desire.

" Your women are a tilth for you, so come into your tilth as you will,
..." Similar to the need of man for nourishment for the continuance of
his life, that without farming and producing food stuff this aim cannot
be obtained, the same is for the maintenance of human race wherefore,
and as one of the reasons that, the existence of women is needed. This
meaning is counted as warning to those who consider women as a toy and a
means of sensuality.

"...and forward (good deeds) beforehand for yourselves, ..." This
phrase again is, indeed, a hint to this matter that the ideal of sexual
intercourse is not a mere pleasure and seeking of enjoyment. Believing
persons should utilize the gift of conjugal relations for producing and
training good and eligible children which is itself a sacred service as
a spiritual supply forwarded beforehand for their own coming

206

life in the Hereafter.

Hence, the Qur'an attracts the attentions to this important fact that,
in choosing a wife, observe some principles that lead to developing
righteous offsprings and supplying this great social and manly treasure.
It is narrated in a tradition from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) who has said :
"When a person dies, (the continuity of) his deeds ceases except for
three (things) : the current charity, the knowledge that be benefited
from, and the righteous child who prays for him."

This means that after death there is no deed for a person, so the one
can provide no more supply for himself except by means of three things
that if the person possesses them, they will be helpful for the mortal
after death. These three things are: The first is ' the current charity
', that is the benevolent effects which are always used along the path
of social benefits, such as: mosque, hospital, library and the like of
them. The second is providing some scientific work, like: compiling a
useful book, educating some righteous pupils, and so on. And the third
is training some righteous children who, by their tongues and good
actions, seek forgiveness for their parents who have passed away.

"...and be careful (of your duty) to Allah, and know that you shall
meet Him. And give gladtidings to the believers (O' Muhammad) ." Since
the subject under discussion (sexual intercourse) is very important and
connects with the most attractive instincts of mankind, that is the very
sexual instinct, the Lord has invited them to being careful of the
problem of venereal association and being attentive to His commandments;
so, He says:

"...and be careful (of your duty) to Allah, ..." Then, it attracts
their attention to the Resurrection that they will meet their Lord and
they will see the fruit of their deeds: "...and know that you will meet
Him. ..." Finally, it gives gladtidings to those believing ones who obey
these orders, which are useful for both the material and spiritual
lives; saying thus:

"...And give gladtidings to the believers (O' Muhammad) ."

207

Another commentator has rendered the phrase: /qaddimu li anfusikum/
'and forward (good deeds) beforehand for yourselves' into a rather
different dimension of its meaning. This commentary says the phrase
mentioned here clearly indicates in every manner or behaviour man should
be mindful to see that this move advances something good for him for his
future (or the life after death) and that it does not displease God, and
a mortal should always remember that his ultimate object is meeting
Allah, and this idea contains a good tidings to the believers and a
warning to the unbelievers.

208

(224) وَلاَ تَجْعَلُواْ اللّهَ عُرْضَةً لِّأَيْمَانِكُمْ أَن تَبَرُّواْ
وَتَتَّقُواْ وَتُصْلِحُواْ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ وَاللّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ

224. " And do not make Allah, because of your swearing (by Him) , an
obstacle to your doing good and guarding (against evil) and making peace
among people; and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

In many commentary books of the Qur'an including Majma'-ul- Bayan and
Ruh-ul-Bayan, the occasion of revelation of this verse shortly is
narrated thus: There appeared a dispute between the bridegroom and the
daughter of one of the companions of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) by the name
of Abdullah-ibn-Rawaheh. He had sworn not to interfere in their affairs
and not to make peace between them. The revelation was sent down and
prohibited such oaths.

**Commentary:**

The Arabic term / 'ayman/ is the plural form of /yamin/ in the sense of
'oath'; and the word: / 'urdah/ means: ' liable to, object, or
impediment ', according to different renderings. The following messages
and points can be taken from the above verse:

1- Do not appeal to swearing as a barrier for doing good:

" And do not make Allah, because of your swearing (by Him) , an
obstacle to your doing good..." 2- Use no oath as a means for adjusting
your escape from your own responsibility; and do not miss good and
benevolent actions and, consequently, their rewards thereby.

"...and guarding (against evil) and making peace among people; ..." 3-
Do not misuse Allah and His Holy Name in any occasion. This manner is a
kind of boldness and impoliteness.

209

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) who has said:

" Take no oath by Allah whether you are right or wrong ..."(1)

4- High values and benevolence should not be abandoned.

5- Beware that Allah hears all statements and He also knows even what
have not been uttered, (but they have been thought of) . Then take into
account every word and thought of yours.

"... and Allah is All-Hearing, All-knowing." 6. Distributing goodness
and benevolence amongst people under the light of piety and virtue, are
valuable. Hence, these actions should not be abandoned with the pretext
of swearing by His Holy Name. And, basically, being mindful of the value
of these good things, such oaths ought not to be taken.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 2, p. 322

210

(225) لاَّ يُؤَاخِذُكُمُ اللّهُ بِاللَّغْوِ فِيَ أَيْمَانِكُمْ وَلَكِن
يُؤَاخِذُكُم بِمَا كَسَبَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ وَاللّهُ غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ

225. " Allah will not hold you liable for thoughtlessness in your
oaths, but He will hold you liable for what your hearts have incurred;
and Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing."

**Commentary:**

The oaths which have been taken thoughtlessly, carelessly, or at the
time of anger and with no intention or will; or the oaths taken because
of loquaciousness and in hurry-scurry speakings, are not legally
valuable. " Allah will not hold you liable for thoughtlessness in your
oaths, ..." The liability to an oath is payable only when it is taken
deliberately, in a normal situation, and by the Holy Name of Allah for a
useful affair. This sort of oath is religiously obligatory to be
executed. Therefore, breaking it is unlawful and the atonement of which
is detailed in Sura Al-Ma'idah.(1) So, the expiation of it is the
feeding of ten indigents, or a suitable clothing given to them, or the
freeing of a slave; but if the one finds the possibility of none of them
then, he/she should observe the fast for three days.

"...but He will hold you liable for what your hearts have incurred; and
Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing."

**Messages:**

The responsibility of man depends on his will and decisions for what he
elects. Allah forgives the faults of His servants which have been issued
from them in some abnormal conditions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Sura Al-Ma'idah, No. 5, verse 89

211

(226) لِّلَّذِينَ يُؤْلُونَ مِن نِّسَآئِهِمْ تَرَبُّصُ أَرْبَعَةِ
أَشْهُرٍ فَإِنْ فَآؤُوا فَإِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ

(227) وَإِنْ عَزَمُواْ الطَّلاَقَ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ

226. " For those who swear to abstain from their wives, there shall be
a waiting of four months; so if then they revert, surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful."

227. " And if they have resolved on divorce, then surely Allah is
All-Hearing, All-Knowing.

**Commentary:**

One of the methods that was customary in the Age of Ignorance for the
separation of a husband from his wife was /'ila'/ ' forswear '. This
method was also followed by those Muslims who had newly embraced Islam.
The word means: ' oath of sexual abstention '. At the Age of Ignorance,
when a man displeased his wife, he sometimes took oath to abstain from
associating with her, and by this unmanly way, he created a straitened
circumstance for her. He neither divorced her legally to make her free
to marry with her desired husband and obtain her own wishes, nor he
himself was ready to make peace with her and continue to live with her
as a spouse.

" For those who swear to abstain from their wives, ..." So, the verse
under discussion speaks about the design that Islam has planned for that
problem to put an end to it. It says that husband has a respite of four
months to make the woman free from this captivity and entanglement. He
may either renounce his oath, and continue to live with his wife, or
legally divorces her and lets her be free. "...there shall be a waiting
of four months; ..." Choosing the first way, and not to disturb the
assembly of the family, is undoubtedly reasonable and also pleases
Allah. Therefore, at the end of the verse, it says:

"...so if then they revert, surely Allah is Fogiving, Merciful."

212

The concluding sentence: "...surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful"
denotes that renouncing this oath will not be counted a sin, (though it
is understood from the statement that the essence of taking oath is not
an agreeable action) .

\* \* \* \*

If the man decides to become separate from her and divorces her,
forgiveness and mercy is not assured for his action, and Allah, Who is
aware of all secrets, knows whether his sensuality has forced the
husband to misuse the law of divorce, or his situation and conditions
have really required that. The Lord is All-Hearing unto the apparent
execution of divorce and is All-Knowing about the motive of it, as well.
So, the Qur'an says:

" And if they have resolved on divorce, then surely Allah is
All-Hearing, All-Knowing. But it should be noted that, although Islam
has not absolutely nullified the proposition of forswear, but it has,
indeed, wiped out its effects, because, it does not allow any man to
separate from his wife and abandon sexual intercourse by forswearing and
taking oath. If we see that the verse has given this kind of man a
respite of four months' time to decide, it is not for showing that it is
really possible to reject any right of the matrimonial rights by
forswearing, but it is for the sake that sexual intercourse, as a
religious obligation, is necessary at least once every four months. (It
is, of course, so that the woman might not commit sin because of this
length of time, otherwise, especially for the young ladies that may
commit sin as a result of that long time, the length of time between the
sexual intercourses should be shortened as much as that her sexual need
be provided for.)

**Messages:**

1 - To wipe out the social customs and old traditions treated
superstitiously and ignorantly has been a principle among the duties of
prophets.
2- Being attentive to the rights and spiritual and instinctive needs

213

of one's wife is a principle for the husband.

3- Sometimes, Man uses the most sacred appellations for the worst
aims.

4- For the return of some individuals to the right path and that they
make a wise decision, giving a respite is necessary.

5- Islam is the advocator of the oppressed. Women have always been
oppressed and their rights have been transgressed all along the length
of the history. Therefore, the Qur'an has frequently supported them.

6- People should be encouraged to lead safe and sound lives. The
statement: "...so if then they revert, sruely Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful " has occurred in the verse to make man aware of the fact that
reverting to the course of life is the secret of receiving the
forgiveness and mercy of Allah.

7- Islam accepts divorce, with all its bitterness and ugliness, but it
does not bear that a wife be suspended and her situation unclear.

8- Be careful of sensuality and be in awe of a decision that destroys
the livelihood of a woman, because:

" Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing ".

214

(228) وَالْمُطَلَّقَاتُ يَتَرَبَّصْنَ بِأَنفُسِهِنَّ ثَلاَثَةَ قُرُوءٍ
وَلاَ يَحِلُّ لَهُنَّ أَن يَكْتُمْنَ مَا خَلَقَ اللّهُ فِي
أَرْحَامِهِنَّ إِن كُنَّ يُؤْمِنَّ بِاللّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ
وَبُعُولَتُهُنَّ أَحَقُّ بِرَدِّهِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ إِنْ أَرَادُواْ
إِصْلاَحًا وَلَهُنَّ مِثْلُ الَّذِي عَلَيْهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
وَلِلرِّجَالِ عَلَيْهِنَّ دَرَجَةٌ وَاللّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكُيمٌ

228. " And the divorced women should wait (not wedding anyone else)
concerning themselves for three (monthly) courses; and it is not lawful
for them to conceal what Allah has created in their wombs, if they
believe in Allah and (in) the Last Day. And their husbands have a
greater right (than others) to take them back in the meanwhile, if they
wish for reconciliation (indeed) . And they (women) have rights similar
to those against them in a fair manner, but men have precedence above
them; and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise."

**Commentary :**

In the previous verse the words were about divorce, and then, in this
verse, a part of the ordinances of divorce and some of its concerning
details are stated. There are five ordinances mentioned in it. At first,
it speaks about ' waiting period ', saying: " And the divorced women
should wait (not wedding anyone else) concerning themselves for three
(monthly) courses; ..." The Qur'anic term /quru'/, mentioned in the
above verse, is applied in the sense of the period of cleanliness of a
woman. And, since the accomplishment of divorce should be performed at
the time that the woman is clean and has not had sexual intercourse with
her husband, this cleanliness is counted once, and when, afterward, she
passes two

215

menstruations and becomes clean, one after another, as soon as the
third cleanliness finishes and at the moment that mestruation is seen,
the waiting period has passed and, at that very status, her marriage is
permissible.

The second ordinance is:

"...and it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah has created in
their wombs, if they believe in Allah and in the Last Day. ..." It is
noteworthy that the problem of the beginning and ending of the waiting
period, that usually a woman understands herself rather than anyone
else, has been trusted to the statement of the woman and it is accepted
as a document. The third ordinance understood from the verse is that the
husband can revoke during the waiting period of a revocable divorce. It
says:

"...And their husbands have a greater right (than others) to take them
back in the meanwhile, if they wish for reconciliation (indeed) . ... "
In fact, when the woman is passing the waiting period of the revocable
divorce, the husband can begin the conjugal relation again without any
ceremonies. This meaning may happen with any word or action which is
with the intention of revocation.

Then the verse pays to the fourth ordinance, stating:

"...And they (women) have rights similar to those against them in a
fair manner, but men have precedence above them;..." Thus, as there are
some rights for men upon the wives, there are also some rights for women
upon husbands who are charged to observe them. Regarding to the clear
difference between the physical and spiritual powers of woman and man,
the administration of the family is up to man and its assistance has
been given to the woman. This difference cannot be an obstacle that some
women, from the point of spiritual offices, knowledge, and piety be in a
higher degree than many of men. The Arabic term /ma'ruf/ which means a
benevolent, logical and reasonable action, has been repeated 12 times in
these verses to be

216

counted as a warning against men and women in order that they do not
abuse their rights, but, by respecting the mutual rights of each other,
they should try to fix their conjugal relations and obtain the pleasure
of Allah. Finally, at the conclusion of the verse, it says:

"...and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise." This concluding phrase of the
verse points to the fact that the Wisdom and Prudence of Allah requires
that in the society every person undertakes the very duties that the law
of creation has assigned for the one and they are adapted to the
structure of his body and spirit. The Wisdom of Allah also requires that
similar to the duties that have been given over to women, there would be
settled some certain rights for them, too, in order that there appears
an equality and justice between duty and right.

The significance of this meaning, and the difference between the sexes
and their responsibilities, will be explained later when the occasion
applies.


