Section 29 : Divorce and the Respect For the Law
================================================

217

(229) الطَّلاَقُ مَرَّتَانِ فَإِمْسَاكٌ بِمَعْرُوفٍ أَوْ تَسْرِيحٌ
بِإِحْسَانٍ وَلاَ يَحِلُّ لَكُمْ أَن تَأْخُذُواْ مِمَّا آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ
شَيْئًا إِلاَّ أَن يَخَافَا أَلاَّ يُقِيمَا حُدُودَ اللّهِ فَإِنْ
خِفْتُمْ أَلاَّ يُقِيمَا حُدُودَ اللّهِ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِمَا فِيمَا
افْتَدَتْ بِهِ تِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللّهِ فَلاَ تَعْتَدُوهَا وَمَن يَتَعَدَّ
حُدُودَ اللّهِ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُون

229. " Divorce (is permissible) only twice, then either maintain (them)
in honor or let (them) go in kindness. And it is not lawful for you to
take anything of what you have given them, unless both fear that they
can not keep (themselves) within Allah's bounds; and if you fear that
they cannot keep (themselves) within Allah's bounds, it is no sin on
either of them about what she gives up to get herself freed (from the
wedlock) . Those are Allah's limits; so do not transgress them. And,
whoever transgresses Allah's limits ِ then these are they that are the
(willful) wrongdoers."

**Occasion of Ravelation:**

Once there came a woman to one of the Prophet's wives and complained
about her husband that he repeatedly divorced her and then revoked again
to create damages for her thereby. And, it was customary among pagan
Arabs that a man could divorce his wife thousands of times and revoke
it, while there was no limit in this regard. When this grievance was
reported to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) , the above verse was revealed and
limited the divorce to three times.

218

**Commentary:**

It was pointed out in the commentary of the former verse that the
regulations of ' waiting period ' and 'revocation ' are for the
improvement of the conditions of family status and preventing from
separation and dispersion. But, some of the new converted believers
acted according to the old paganism and abused this regulation. To hurt
their wives, they divorced them and revoked it again and again. So, this
verse was sent down and prevented that ugly and unmanly action. It
says:

" Divorce (is permissible) only twice, ..."
This kind of divorce (revocable divorce) , of course, should be
accomplished in different meetings, not in one session alone.

Then, the Qur'an adds that in each of these two meetings the husband
should either keep his wife honourably with him and make peace with her,
or kindly let her go and separate with her for ever.

"...then either maintain (them) in honor or let (them) go in kindness.
..." Therefore, the third divorce has not any revocation, because when
they had two occasions of dispute and divorce and then peace and
revocation were fulfilled, they must put an end to it.

The purpose of the phrase: ' let (them) go in kindness ' is that the
husband ought to pay that woman her rights fully and does not let
himself say unsuitable words behind her back after he separates from
her. He must not make the attitude of other people bad against her and
lets her retain the possibility of marriage. Hence, separation should
also be accompanied with kindness and benevolence. That is why the verse
continues saying:

"...It is not lawful for you to take anything of what you have given
them, ..." It is not lawful for the husband to take or withhold anything
out of what he has given or promised to give i.e. ' Mahr ' or dower to
the wife. The dower amount is usually large and much of it usually
remains unpaid by the husband, the payment of the dower amount,
particularly when the divorce is pronounced, is another check upon the
husband resorting to an indiscriminate and unnecessary divorce of his
wife.

219

So, at the time of separation and divorce, the husband is not allowed
to take back from the woman forcefully what he has given her as a
marriage-portion.

In the next part of the verse, it points to the divorce of khul', and
says that it is only in one phase that taking the dower is possible. It
is in the case that the woman does not want to continue the conjugal
life and they both fear that they are not able to observe the limits of
Allah in that kind of life.

"...unless both fear that they can not keep (themselves) within Allah's
bounds; ..." Under this law the wife may seek to get freed of the
wedlock by returning the dower to husband, if she has already received
it, or to forgo it, if it be still due to her and take the divorce of
khul' from Hakim-i-Shar', viz. the Islamic judge. Then it says:

"...and if you fear that they cannot keep (themselves) within Allah's
bounds, it is no sin on either of them about what she gives up to get
herself freed (from the wedlock) ."

In this phase, the origin of separation is, in fact, the wife. So, she
must pay the indemnity of this action and let the man, who is willing to
live with her, marry another lady with the same marriage-portion.

At the end of the verse, it points to the whole of the ordinances that
are stated in this verse, and says: "...Those are Allah's limits; so do
not transgress them. And, whoever transgresses Allah's limits - then
these are they that are the (willful) wrongdoers."

**Messages**

1- Plurality of divorce is based on plurality of marriage, i.e. there
should be a marriage before a divorce. When a man, in one session, tells
his wife: ' I divorced you thrice ', there has occurred, indeed one
divorce, because he has not ceased more than one marriage. For this
reason, in the jurisprudence of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s.) it is cited that a
number of divorces should be fulfilled in a number of stages; and before
every

220

divorce there should also be a wedlock. This plurality, besides the
apparent indication of the verse, is for a closer common good, too. It
is not convenient that the relation of a family be disturbed in one
gathering and by one decision for ever.

2- Earning the life by the husband and obedience of the wife unto her
husband are the limits of Allah.
3- The breaker of the law is unjust.
"...And, Whoever transgresses Allah's limits - then these are they that
are the (willful) wrongdoers."

221

(230) فَإِن طَلَّقَهَا فَلاَ تَحِلُّ لَهُ مِن بَعْدُ حَتَّىَ تَنكِحَ
زَوْجًا غَيْرَهُ فَإِن طَلَّقَهَا فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِمَا أَن
يَتَرَاجَعَا إِن ظَنَّا أَن يُقِيمَا حُدُودَ اللّهِ وَتِلْكَ حُدُودُ
اللّهِ يُبَيِّنُهَا لِقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ

230. "If he divorces her (for the third time) , she shall not be lawful
to him thereafter, until she marries another husband; and if he (the
latter) divorces her, then it is no sin on (either of) them to return to
each other (by marriage) , if they think that they can keep Allah's
bounds. Those are Allah's limits; He makes them clear to a people who
know.

**Occasion of Revelation**

Once, at the time of Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) , a woman came to him
and said she had been the spouse of her cousin by the name of Rifa'ah,
who divorced her thrice. After that, she married a man named
'Abd-ur-Rahman, but he, before any sexual relations with her, divorced
her, too. Then, she asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) whether she could
return to her first husband.

The Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) did not agree and said that her
marriage with that first husband was right if she had sexual intercourse
with her new husband. The above verse was revealed.

**Commentary:**

In the commentary of the previous verse this fact was briefly referred
to that: after the second divorce, the couple should either follow the
path of peace and kindness, or separate from each other for ever.
The verse under discussion is counted as a note, indeed, added to that
ordinance. It says: " If he divorces her (for the third time) , she
shall not be lawful to him thereafter, until she marries another
husband; and if he (the latter) divorces her, then it is no sin on
(either of) them

222

to return to each other (by marriage) , if they think that they can
keep Allah's bounds.

**Messages**

1- Men should not misuse their conjugal rights. They ought to know that
they are not free and authoritative upon their wives forever in this
regard.

It is narrated from Imam Rida (a.s.) who said: " Do not take divorce
light, and do not cause your wives to incur a loss." (1)

2- Not every one knows the secrets and the Wisdom of the Divine laws,
therefore some people, maybe, look at these instructions surprisingly,
while the secrets of them are clear for those who have insight. Common
people often see the apparent of these instructions, but the cognizant
recognize the spirit and the depth of them.

3- Muslims should know that the limits of Allah are not liable only to
prayers, alms, Hajj, and Holy War. Observing the family affairs are the
limits of Allah, too.

"...Those are Allah's limits; He makes them clear to a people who
know."
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Manlayahduruhul-Faqeeh, vol. 3, p. 502

223

(231) وَإِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ النَّسَاء فَبَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ
فَأَمْسِكُوهُنَّ بِمَعْرُوفٍ أَوْ سَرِّحُوهُنَّ بِمَعْرُوفٍ وَلاَ
تُمْسِكُوهُنَّ ضِرَارًا لَّتَعْتَدُواْ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ فَقَدْ
ظَلَمَ نَفْسَهُ وَلاَ تَتَّخِذُوَاْ آيَاتِ اللّهِ هُزُوًا وَاذْكُرُواْ
نِعْمَتَ اللّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَمَا أَنزَلَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِّنَ الْكِتَابِ
وَالْحِكْمَةِ يَعِظُكُم بِهِ وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ
اللّهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ

231. " When you divorce women, and they have reached their
waiting-period, then either retain them in a fair manner or set them
free in a fair manner; and do not retain them for injury, so that you
transgress (the limits) ; and whoever does that he indeed is unjust to
his (own) self. And do not take Allah's Signs in mockery, and remember
Allah's blessing upon you and what He has sent down unto you of the Book
and Wisdom to admonish you thereby, and be in awe of Allah and know that
Allah is All-Knowing of all things."

**Commentary:**

This verse, following the subject of the previous verse, states some
limits that Islam has legislated upon divorce in order to prevent some
disregards unto the rights and honour of women.

The verse indicates that during the waiting-period, even if there is
only one day remained from that term, man is allowed to return to his
wife and retain her with the purpose of living together sincerely. But,
if the circumstances are not favourable, he can set her free. At any
rate, whatever his decision is: either revocation or separation, it
should be fulfilled in a fair manner and with goodness and,
consequently, far from any revengefulness.

" When you divorce women, and they have reached their waiting-period,
then either retain them in a fair manner or

224

set them free in a fair manner; ..." Then the verse interprets the
Qur'anic term /ma'ruf/ (a fair manner) saying that the revocation should
be based on serenity and sincerity.

"...do not retain them for injury, so that you transgress (the limits)
; and whoever does that he indeed is unjust to his (own) self. ..."
Since, at the Age of Ignorance, divorce and revocation had often been
used as a means of injury and avengefulness, the verse, with a severe
tone, says that retaining a woman as one's wife should not be performed
with the aim of hurting her or transgressing her, because this manner is
not only unjust against her but also unjust to his own self. This
meaning may be for the sake that:

1- The revocation which is based on the purpose of transgression
contains no tranquility and peace with it.

2- From the view point of the Qur'an, in the system of creation, man
and woman are complementary parts of one unit. So, for a husband
treading the rights of his wife is a transgression and injustice to his
own self.

3- The one who acts unjustly against another person he, indeed, goes
forward unto the punishment of Allah and, thus, he has done cruelty to
himself, in fact.

**Mock not Allah's Laws:**

Some people usually commit thousands of offences, but, to fly from the
pressure of their inner sense or, as they imagine, to fly from the
chastisement of Allah, they seek protection of some legal devices and
cling to the apparent meaning of verses or ordinances.
The Qur'an considers this style a kind of mockery to the revealed
verses and the Divine laws. This swerve, unfortunately, is seen applied
upon many of the ordinances, one of which is this very one of divorce.
As it was said before, the right of revocation is up to husband for the
sake that the wedlock remains steadily all the longer. But some people
move exactly opposite to this direction, ie., abusing the right of

225

revocation, they try to take revenge and hurt the woman. They cover
their real cruel feature under the veil of acting upon Law. This is the
same as mockery unto the Qur'an and the Law. The verse under discussion
remarks that we beware not to mock the Messages of Allah (s.w.t.) and
remember the Divine great blessing of the religion of truth and the
heavenly Book, too, which has come for our happiness.

"... And do not take Allah's Signs in mockery, and remember Allah's
blessing upon you and what He has sent down unto you of the Book and
Wisdom to admonish you thereby, ..."

Religion and its collection of regulations has originated from the firm
system of this very world, and has been legislated based upon the real
interests of men. Therefore, it is not right that, by neglecting the
requirements, we clasp to the apparent of some ordinances and make up
some spiritless frames which put our interests in danger. They are also
counted as heedlessness to Allah's Signs.

At the end of the verse, in order to defend from the rights of women
and to prevent from the divine ordinances probably being abused, it
reminds of this fact that to be careful of your duties to Allah and know
that He is aware of all your activities and all the secrects of this
world. "...and be in awe of Allah and know that Allah is All-Knowing of
all things."


