Section 32 : Fight in the Cause of Allah
========================================

249

References to the Conduct of the Ancient People.

Death caused by Allah against those who refused to fight when they were
ordained - Muslims enjoined to sacrifice their lives and their wealth in
the cause of Allah - Saul's kingdom over Israel and their demur against
Saul being chosen as their king.

(243) أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُواْ مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَهُمْ
أُلُوفٌ حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ فَقَالَ لَهُمُ اللّهُ مُوتُواْ ثُمَّ
أَحْيَاهُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ لَذُو فَضْلٍ عَلَى النَّاسِ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ
النَّاسِ لاَ يَشْكُرُونَ

243. " Have you not considered those (of old) who fled their homes,
though they were thousands (in number) , for fear of death? Then Allah
said to them: ' Die! ' (and they died) ; then He restored them to life.
Truly Allah is gracious to people, but most people are not thankful. "

**Occasion of Revelation**

Once, one of the cities of Syria became smitten with a plague and
people passed away one after another. At that time, some people, hoping
that they might flee from the grips of death, abandoned their homeland.
After leaving their environment and escaping from death, they felt
powerful and independent in them. They, neglecting the Will of Allah and
expecting the natural phenomena to help them, became proud and haughty.
Therefore, the Lord destroyed them in that desert by the same
sickness.

\* \* \* \*

250

**Commentary:**

This verse indirectly and also instructively points to the awesome fate
of one of the old nations. They encountered with a terrible infectious
disease in their environment where thousands of them fled from.

" Have you not considered those (of old) who fled their homes, though
they were thousands (in number) , for fear of death? ..."

Then it refers to their fate, saying:

"...Then Allah said to them: ' Die! ' (and they died) ;

They died by the same sickness that they had used as the pretext of
their flight.

Then Allah brought them back to life, maybe, in order that the story of
their lives might serve as a warning for others who can take an example
from it.

"...then He restored them to life. ..." This creative command is
similar to the command cited in Sura Yasin No. 96, verse 82, where it
says: " His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it: '
Be ', so it is."

The phrase: / qumma 'ahyahum / (then He restored them to life) ,
mentioned in the verse, hints to the story of those people who, after
death, were quickened by the invocation of Ezekiel, the Prophet, (a.s.)
. Since their coming back to life was one of the clear blessings of
Allah both from their points of view and from the point of warning other
people, the verse finally says:

"...Truly Allah is gracious to people, ..." Not only this group of
people received, but also all humankind always receive the grace,
kindness, and blessings of Allah, while they are usually not grateful.

"...but most people are not thankful."

The Late Saduq, a great famous scholar from Shi'ah school of thought,
reasoning on this verse for the possibility of resurrection, says: " One
of our convictions is belief in resurrection (that some former people

251

return to life again in this very world) ." (1) This holy verse can
also be a document for the problem of the Resurrection and raising the
dead in the Hereafter.

\* \* \* \*

The explanation of Ezekiel's invocation, as has been cited upon the
description of the concept of the Qur'anic phrase: " Then He restored
them to life ", is as follows:

Owing to the repeated visits of the plague, the children of Israel
numbering several thousands left their homes for fear of death. It
happened so that the disease once again pested the town and the people
in a huge number of thousands got out of the town being confident of
their escape from death which evidently indicated lack of faith in
God.

Allah commanded all of them to die and they were all dead and reduced
to dust, only their bones were lying on the earth. One of the Israelite
prophets, Ezekiel, passed that way and prayed to the Lord to raise the
people to life. Ezekiel, was inspired by Allah to pray to Him reciting a
particular name and to sprinkle water on the rotten bones of the dead,
which ' Ezekiel ' did and the people were once again quickened. Thus it
was manifested for the knowledge of the faithless people that Allah does
whatsoever He pleases and they could never go their own way against the
Will of the Lord.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Tafsir-Nimunah, vol. 2, p. 159

252

(244) وَقَاتِلُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ سَمِيعٌ
عَلِيمٌ
(245) مَّن ذَا الَّذِي يُقْرِضُ اللّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا فَيُضَاعِفَهُ
لَهُ أَضْعَافًا كَثِيرَةً وَاللّهُ يَقْبِضُ وَيَبْسُطُ وَإِلَيْهِ
تُرْجَعُونَ

244. " And fight in the way of Allah, and know that Allah is
All-Hearing, All-Knowing."

245. " Who is he that will lend to Allah a goodly loan, so He will
multiply it for him manifold? And Allah straitens and extends and unto
Him you will be rerurned."

**Commentary:**

From here on the verses of Holy War come forth. It begins with the
command of fighting in the path of Allah, and warns us to beware that He
hears what we say and knows what we have in our hearts, from our motives
and intentions, regarding the Holy War in the way of Allah. It says: "
And fight in the way of Allah, and know that Allah is All-Hearing,
All-Knowing."

Inspite of all that has been said that Islam prefers peaceful methods
of preaching the truth, and that it never took any initiative in waging
war against its opponents, the fact is that Islam recognizes the right
of taking even the initiative in using force against those who persist
in ungodly activities causing human degradation or social or moral
deterioration. But this measure can not be adopted save by the Prophet
of Allah or his Vicegerent authorized by him and none else. As the fifth
Holy Imam Muhammad Ibne-Ali Al-Baqir says ' A war may be termed as holy
or godly (Jihad) ' if the object be to make people give up submission to
any one besides Allah, and to submit only to God's authority and the
Divine Will. But if the object be to make them give up submission to one
creature in order to submit to any other, it is the usual war waged for
selfish and some worldly gain. Hence it is unholy and thus condemned by
Islam.

253

However, Islam enjoins on Muslims to be always ready, well prepared and
well equipped to meet all exigencies or an eventuality which may
unexpectedly develop against them, then they should gather strength as
much as they can so that their opponents, the opponents of the divine
cause may refrain from any unprovoked aggression.

\* \* \* \*

**Occasion of Revelation**

It is narrated that the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) once said that whoever
gives any alms will receive it twice in Heaven. Abud-Dahdah Ansari,
addressing the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) , said that: he had two
gardens and questioned if he donated one of them as alms, would he have
it twice in Heaven? Then the Prophet replied him positively. After that
he donated his more priviledged garden to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) before
when the revelation was sent down making his alms two thousand
thousandfold for him. This is the interpretation of /'ad'afan kaqirah/ '
manifold '.

**Commentary:**

This verse inquires who is it that offers to Allah a goodly gift and
donates from the wealth He has given to him on the path of Holy War and
alongside the way of helping the needy, so that Allah would multiply it
to him manifold? It says: " Who is he that will lend to Allah a goodly
loan, so He will multiply it for him manifold? ..." Thus, according to
this verse, lending Allah is also rendered into the donations which are
performed in the way of Holy War.

So, at the end of the verse, it says that it is Allah (s.w.t.) Who both
withholds and amplifies the sustenance of the servants. This statement
points to the idea that: do not think that donation and giving alms
causes your wealth to be diminished. The increase and decrease of your
sustenance depend on Allah.

254

"... And Allah straitens and extends and unto Him you will be
returned." Why Is Donation Rendered To Loan?

In several verses of the Qur'an donating in the path of Allah has been
rendered into giving a loan to Allah. It shows the ultimate grace of
Allah unto His servants, on one hand, and the utmost importance of the
subject of donation, on the other hand. In Nahjul-Balaq­ah, Imam
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) says:
" Allah asks you for a loan while the treasures of heavens and the
earth belong to Him and He is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy. (It is not
because of His want) , but that He may try you for which of you is the
best in action." (1)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Nahjul-Balaq­ah, sermon 183, p. 268

255

**Verses 246-247-248**

(246) أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الْمَلإِ مِن بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ مِن بَعْدِ
مُوسَى إِذْ قَالُواْ لِنَبِيٍّ لَّهُمُ ابْعَثْ لَنَا مَلِكًا نُّقَاتِلْ
فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ قَالَ هَلْ عَسَيْتُمْ إِن كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ
الْقِتَالُ أَلاَّ تُقَاتِلُواْ قَالُواْ وَمَا لَنَا أَلاَّ نُقَاتِلَ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَقَدْ أُخْرِجْنَا مِن دِيَارِنَا وَأَبْنَآئِنَا فَلَمَّا
كُتِبَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقِتَالُ تَوَلَّوْاْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً مِّنْهُمْ
وَاللّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِالظَّالِمِينَ

(247) وَقَالَ لَهُمْ نَبِيُّهُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ قَدْ بَعَثَ لَكُمْ
طَالُوتَ مَلِكًا قَالُوا أَنَّى يَكُونُ لَهُ الْمُلْكُ عَلَيْنَا
وَنَحْنُ أَحَقُّ بِالْمُلْكِ مِنْهُ وَلَمْ يُؤْتَ سَعَةً مِّنَ الْمَالِ
قَالَ إِنَّ اللّهَ اصْطَفَاهُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَزَادَهُ بَسْطَةً فِي
الْعِلْمِ وَالْجِسْمِ وَاللّهُ يُؤْتِي مُلْكَهُ مَن يَشَاءُ وَاللّهُ
وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ

(248) وَقَالَ لَهُمْ نِبِيُّهُمْ إِنَّ آيَةَ مُلْكِهِ أَن يَأْتِيَكُمُ
التَّابُوتُ فِيهِ سَكِينَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَبَقِيَّةٌ مِّمَّا تَرَكَ
آلُ مُوسَى وَآلُ هَارُونَ تَحْمِلُهُ الْمَلآئِكَةُ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ
لآيَةً لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ

250

(249) فَلَمَّا فَصَلَ طَالُوتُ بِالْجُنُودِ قَالَ إِنَّ اللّهَ
مُبْتَلِيكُم بِنَهَرٍ فَمَن شَرِبَ مِنْهُ فَلَيْسَ مِنِّي وَمَن لَّمْ
يَطْعَمْهُ فَإِنَّهُ مِنِّي إِلاَّ مَنِ اغْتَرَفَ غُرْفَةً بِيَدِهِ
فَشَرِبُواْ مِنْهُ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً مِّنْهُمْ فَلَمَّا جَاوَزَهُ هُوَ
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ مَعَهُ قَالُواْ لاَ طَاقَةَ لَنَا الْيَوْمَ
بِجَالُوتَ وَجُنودِهِ قَالَ الَّذِينَ يَظُنُّونَ أَنَّهُم مُّلاَقُوا
اللهِ كَم مِّن فِئَةٍ قَلِيلَةٍ غَلَبَتْ فِئَةً كَثِيرَةً بِإِذْنِ
اللّهِ وَاللّهُ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ

(250) وَلَمَّا بَرَزُواْ لِجَالُوتَ وَجُنُودِهِ قَالُواْ رَبَّنَا
أَفْرِغْ عَلَيْنَا صَبْرًا وَثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَنَا وَانصُرْنَا عَلَى
الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ

(251) فَهَزَمُوهُم بِإِذْنِ اللّهِ وَقَتَلَ دَاوُدُ جَالُوتَ وَآتَاهُ
اللّهُ الْمُلْكَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَعَلَّمَهُ مِمَّا يَشَاء وَلَوْلاَ
دَفْعُ اللّهِ النَّاسَ بَعْضَهُمْ بِبَعْضٍ لَّفَسَدَتِ الأَرْضُ
وَلَكِنَّ اللّهَ ذُو فَضْلٍ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ

(252) تِلْكَ آيَاتُ اللّهِ نَتْلُوهَا عَلَيْكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّكَ
لَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

257

246. " Have you not seen the chiefs of the Children of Israel, after
Moses, when they said to a Prophet of theirs: 'Raise up for us a king,
that we will fight in Allah's way'. He said: ' Might it be that, if
fighting is written for you, then you will not fight? ' They said: ' Why
should we not fight in the way of Allah, while we have been expelled
from our dwellings and our children? ' But when fighting was written for
them, they turned back save a few of them, and Allah is All-Knowing of
the unjust. " \* \* \* \*

247. " And their Prophet said to them: ' Verily Allah has raised up
Saul for you as a king.' They said: ' How can he hold kingship over us,
while we are more rightful to kingship than he, and he has not been
given abundance of wealth? ' He said: ' Verily Allah has chosen him over
you, and He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and stature. Allah
gives His kingdom unto whomso He wills; and Allah is All-Embracing,
All-Knowing ',"

\* \* \* \* 248. " And their Prophet said to them: ' Verily the sign of
his kingship is that the Ark of the Covenant will come to you, wherein
shall be a tranquility from your Lord, and the Relics of what the family
of Moses and the family of Aaron have left behind, the angels bearing
it. Surely in that shall be a sign for you, if you are (truly)
faithful."

\* \* \* \* 249. " So when Saul marched out with the troops he said:'
Verily Allah will try you by a river, whoever drinks from it he is not
of me,

258

and whoever tastes it not, he is surely of me, including the one who
tastes but a single handful.' But they all drank of it, except a few of
them. And when he (Saul) crossed it (the river) , those who believed
with him said: ' We have no power today against Goliath and his troops.'
Those who knew that they would meet Allah said: ' How often a small
party has overcome a numerous host by Allah's leave! And Allah is with
the (steadfast) patient ones '."

\* \* \* \*

250. " So when they encountered Goliath and his troops, they said: '
Our Lord! pour down upon us patience, and make our steps firm, and help
us against the disbelieving people '."

\* \* \* \*

251. " Thus they routed them by Allah's leave, and David slew Goliath;
and Allah gave him the kingship and wisdom and taught him of what He
willed. And were Allah not to repel some people by means of other
people, the earth would certainly be full of mischief; but Allah is
Gracious to all (His) creatures."

\* \* \* \*

252. " These are the Signs of Allah; We recite them to you (Muhammad)
in truth, and verily, you are (one) of the Messengers."

\* \* \* \*

259

**Explanation
An Introduction to the above Group of Verses**

In these verses Providence, the Great, points to one of the wonderful
adventures of a group of the Israelites that happened after the time of
Moses (a.s.) . The statement of this happening, of course, is following
the statement of Holy War and the defence from the limits of the
religion of Allah, which is, in fact, the same as the limits of
humanity. It is stated, indeed, for the Muslims to take lesson from that
marvellous incident.

**A Marvellous Incident!**

The Israelites who had become weak and poor under the domination of
Pharaoh, gained great power and splendour under the wise leadership of
Moses (a.s.) .

Allah showered many blessings upon them with the sanctity of this Great
Prophet, including the Ark of the Covenant. The Jews, by carrying the
Ark before the troops, got a kind of confidence and spiritual
capability. This power and glory continued a length of time after Moses
(a.s.) . But the same victorious capacity and blessful bounties they
had, gradually made them proud and, thereby, they became disobedient.

Finally, they were defeated with a great slaughter by Philistines when
they lost their power and authority accompanied with loosing the Ark.
After that, they became so weak and inflicted with dispersion that they
were not able to defend themselves even against the smallest enemies. It
was so that their enemies expelled a great many of them from their own
land and captured their children, too.

That status continued for years. At last, their prayer was heard and
Allah raised a prophet for them called Samuel, to save them and guide
them. Those people, who had become tired and worn from the cruelty and
transgressions of their enemies, were seeking for a shelter to take

260

refuge in. Therefore, they gathered around him and asked him to appoint
a king for them. They all had decided to follow the command and
leadership of such a king to fight unitedly against their enemy with
heart and soul in order to regain their last honour and glory.

Prophet Samuel, who was well acquainted with their spirituality and
knew their disloyal characteristics from before, told them he was afraid
that they might disobey their commander, as to face with their enemy,
when the order of Holy War in the way of Allah would be prescribed for
them. They objected that how they could disobey their commander and do
not do their own duty in the case that the torturous enemy had expelled
them from their home and had occupied their land and captured their
children.

When Prophet Samuel found that those people had recognized their
ailment and were seeking for the remedy, as if they had realized the
secret of their state of being retarded, he prayed and asked the Lord
what those people wanted. It was revealed to him to introduce Saul as
their king. Samuel invoked Allah that he had not seen Saul yet and he
did not know him. The revelation came down indicating that he would be
sent to him. Samuel was commanded that when Saul came to him, he
(Samuel) would give him (Saul) the commandership of the troops and Holy
War.

261

(246) أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الْمَلإِ مِن بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ مِن بَعْدِ
مُوسَى إِذْ قَالُواْ لِنَبِيٍّ لَّهُمُ ابْعَثْ لَنَا مَلِكًا نُّقَاتِلْ
فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ قَالَ هَلْ عَسَيْتُمْ إِن كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ
الْقِتَالُ أَلاَّ تُقَاتِلُواْ قَالُواْ وَمَا لَنَا أَلاَّ نُقَاتِلَ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَقَدْ أُخْرِجْنَا مِن دِيَارِنَا وَأَبْنَآئِنَا فَلَمَّا
كُتِبَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقِتَالُ تَوَلَّوْاْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً مِّنْهُمْ
وَاللّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِالظَّالِمِينَ

246. " Have you not seen the chiefs of the Children of Israel, after
Moses, when they said to a Prophet of theirs: 'Raise up for us a king,
that we will fight in Allah's way'. He said: 'Might it be that, if
fighting is written for you, then you will not fight? ' They said: ' Why
should we not fight in the way of Allah, while we have been expelled
from our dwellings and our children? ' But when fighting was written for
them, they turned back save a few of them, and Allah is All-Knowing of
the unjust. "

**Commentary :**

After Prophet Moses (a.s.) , the Israelites lost their power as a
result of their self-indulgence and being desirous in welfare and
laziness. So they became involved again in the domination and oppression
of the tyrants when they lost both their freedom and home. In order to
be free from vagrancy and come out of the yoke of servitude of those
tyrants, they decided to fight. Therefore, they went to their Prophet
and asked him to appoint a king, a commander, for them so that they
could struggle by Holy War against the tyrannical ruler of their time. "
Have you not seen the chiefs of the Children of Israel, after Moses,
when they said to a Prophet of theirs: 'Raise up for us a king, that we
will fight in Allah's way. ..."

262

The Prophet (a.s.) , regarding their notorious background, questioning
them said: was it not probable that, after prescribing the command of
war to them, they would disobey and would not be ready to fight? "... He
said: ' Might it be that, if fighting is written for you, then you will
not fight? They did not agree with that idea and said that they would
fight, for they had been expelled from their home and had been made
vagrant for a long time, because their cities had been occupied by the
enemy and their children were captured:

"... They said: ' Why should we not fight in the way of Allah, while we
have been expelled from our dwellings and our children? '..." But, with
all these claims, when the command was issued, all of them, except a
few, did not attend the battle-field and disobeyed that command.

"... But when fighting was written for them, they turned back save a
few of them, and Allah is All-Knowing of the unjust. "

\* \* \* \*

**Explanations: (1)**

Vr. 246 (279) The event alluded to in this verse has a reference also
in the Bible. (1 Samuel 8: 19, 20) .

19. " Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and
they said, Nay! but we will have a king over us;

20. " That we also may be like all the nations, and that our kind may
judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles."

After 'Moses,' prophets after prophets were appointed to succeed him
and to maintain the Law ('Torah') . 'Moses' was succeeded by 'Usha bin
Noon,' 'Kalib.' 'Ezekiel' and 'Ilyas' and 'Elisha' and as time passed
the people neglected and ultimately gave up the Law and became

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) This detail is narrated exactly from the footnote of the
translation of the Holy Quran, by S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali, P. 217

263

idolatrous. And in the time of the prophet 'Yasa' there appeared an
enemy for the Israelites who were the people of the land of 'Shalisha,'
from the tribe of Goliath ('Jaloot') who had captured all the land on
the shores of the Mediterranean including Palestine and Egypt. They
subdued the Israelites, killed 440 Israelite princes and noblemen and
had taken the Israelites as their subjects and taken away their lands.
(1 Sam. 17: 1) . Now the Israelites had no prophet to guide them out of
the calamitous state. They prayed to God for a prophet. At last their
prayer was heard and God sent a prophet to them in Samuel. When Samuel
appeared and claimed apostleship of God, the Israelites asked him to
appoint a king for them to lead them in the battle for freedom from the
subjection and servitude they had been suffering under the enemy. In
those days battles were fought only under kings and the Prophet was only
the adviser or the administrative adviser or a director of the affairs.
Prophet Samuel warned them before hand that they might disobey after it
gets prescribed for them to fight in the way of God. Here was the
question of fighting for the freedom of the people against the torturous
subjection and it has been termed as the fight in the way of God. It is
evident that the fight for right means the fight for God.

264

(247) وَقَالَ لَهُمْ نَبِيُّهُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ قَدْ بَعَثَ لَكُمْ
طَالُوتَ مَلِكًا قَالُوا أَنَّى يَكُونُ لَهُ الْمُلْكُ عَلَيْنَا
وَنَحْنُ أَحَقُّ بِالْمُلْكِ مِنْهُ وَلَمْ يُؤْتَ سَعَةً مِّنَ الْمَالِ
قَالَ إِنَّ اللّهَ اصْطَفَاهُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَزَادَهُ بَسْطَةً فِي
الْعِلْمِ وَالْجِسْمِ وَاللّهُ يُؤْتِي مُلْكَهُ مَن يَشَاءُ وَاللّهُ
وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ

247. " And their Prophet said to them: ' Verily Allah has raised up
Saul for you as a king.' They said: ' How can he hold kingship over us,
while we are more rightful to kingship than he, and he has not been
given abundance of wealth? ' He said: ' Verily Allah has chosen him over
you, and He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and stature. Allah
gives His kingdom unto whomso He wills; and Allah is All-Embracing,
All-Knowing '."

**Commentary :**

This group of oppressed Israelites, though they had asked their prophet
to appoint a chief for them to guide them to be able to escape from the
torturous subjection of the tyrant rulers, failed in the field of
trial.

" And their Prophet said to them: ' Verily Allah has raised up Saul for
you as a king.'..." It is appropriate to note that their Prophet was
Samuel. Talut, who is the same as Saul, was called ' Talut ' (according
to the Bible) on account of his height and the strength of his stature,
for he was the tallest of his people (Sam. 10: 23) . The proper names
used in Arabic are different from their Hebrew originals.

So, when their prophet, Samuel, appointed Saul (Talut) , who was

265

an unknown poor shepherd, as their chief, they, being affected by their
proud and vain consideration that they had from their own leader and
leadership, despised Saul's kingship for the lack of wealth and
reputation. Those people, who had wealth in abundance, said that they
were worthier than him for the position because of the gross great
wealth they had.

"... They said: ' How can he hold kingship over us, while we are more
rightful to kingship than he, and he has not been given abundance of
wealth? ' ..."

When the prophet heard their pretexts about the poverty and lack of
wealth of Saul, he told them that undoubtedly Allah had appointed him as
a king for them, and, instead of wealth, he had ability in knowledge and
in body. Besides that, he had the necessary authority and ability of
command of an army in fight.

"... He said: ' Verily Allah has chosen him over you, and He has
increased him abundantly in knowledge and stature. So, Allah selects
whosoever He wills for leadership due to his efficiency and his inner
faculties.

"... Allah gives His kingdom unto whom so He wills; and Allah is
All-Embracing, All-knowing '."

\* \* \* \*

**Conclusion :**

Whatever be the details of the Israelites' history referred to here,
the instructions to be inferred from it regarding the religious
authority who can wage war in the way of God is as follows:ِ

1. Besides the presence of a divine legislator and a religious judge
sometimes an excutor is also needed. It should be borne in mind that all
the three aspects of government (Aamiriyat) ... i.e. legislation,
justice and execution are included in the sovereignty of God. He may
delegate all the aspects to any one man as His Vicegerent and He may
distribute the various functions to different persons. In any case the
appointment rests with God and none else. Here the Prophet represents
the Divine

266

Authority in law and justice. When the people asked him to appoint a
king as an executor, he said that God has appointed 'Talut' as their
king, indicating that he (the Prophet) had no right to do it. This
refutes the tendency now developing among the people that in the
establishment of the legislative and the judicial bodies the 'Kitab',
i.e., the Book and the 'Sunnat', i.e., the Tradition to be the final
authorities, and the people should have no voice in the matter. But in
the establishment of the final executive authority people may have voice
and call it the Theodemocratic form of government.

The sovereignty ('Aamiriyat') is exclusively God's. To allow the public
to have any say in it, means return to the age of ignorance and not
Islam.

2. 'Jehad', i.e. war in the way of God was prescribed and practiced by
the previous prophets also, and the reaction favourable or unfavourable,
to this precept had been the same as in Islam.

3. The unfavourable reaction of the people to the divine appointment as
based on temporal consideration which are known to the limited and
narrow views, as was the case with the angels regarding the vicegerency
of Adam. The answer to this criticism is almost the same that it was
God's selection and the selection is based on the extensity and the
intensity of knowledge, strength and character and that the Kingdom is
God's and He alone has the right to give to any one whom He likes, but
His liking is not arbitrary or unreasonable. It is based on the
superiority and the excellence of the person, known only to Him as He
alone is the all-Pervading and the Omniscient. This discards the
importance of the temporal consideration as wealth, seniority in age,
racial or parochial. Therefore whenever the question of the authority
succeeding the Holy Prophet in regard to legislation, justice and
execution, is dealt with, the implication of this exemplary passage
should be taken into consideration, as the method of the succession to
the Holy Prophet has continued to be the same as before (See the Qur'an,
24: 55) .

267

(248) وَقَالَ لَهُمْ نِبِيُّهُمْ إِنَّ آيَةَ مُلْكِهِ أَن يَأْتِيَكُمُ
التَّابُوتُ فِيهِ سَكِينَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَبَقِيَّةٌ مِّمَّا تَرَكَ
آلُ مُوسَى وَآلُ هَارُونَ تَحْمِلُهُ الْمَلآئِكَةُ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ
لآيَةً لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ

248. " And their Prophet said to them: ' Verily the sign of his
kingship is that the Ark of the Covenant will come to you, wherein shall
be a tranquility from your Lord, and the Relics of what the family of
Moses and the family of Aaron have left behind, the angels bearing it.
Surely in that shall be a sign for you, if you are (truly) faithful."

**Commentary :**

To make that group of Israelites sure about the kingship of Saul, their
prophet told them that the Ark of the Covenant, /tabut/, the sacred
Chest of the Children of Israel, will be returned to them as a sign that
Saul was appointed by Allah. " And their Prophet said to them: ' Verily
the sign of his kingship is that the Ark of the Covenant will come to
you, ..." The purpose of /tabut/ is the wooden Chest wherein Moses's
mother put her baby and, by the commandment of Allah, set it afloat in
the water, of the Nile. Then, the men of Pharoah took it and brought the
baby unto Pharoah.

The Chest remained safe in the Court of Pharoah. When Moses (a.s.) was
appointed to prophethood, he (a.s.) put the Tablets of the Torah in it
and gave it to his vicegerent, Yusha'-ibn-Nun (Joshua) , and when he
died, his armour and some of his belongings were put in it, too. That
Chest, which had been known among the Children of Israel as 'the Ark of
the Covenant ', remained in the hand of the very Children of Israel as a
Sacred Chest, and they used to carry it before their forces in the
battles.

268

But, little by little, its sacredness wretched and the Chest was taken
away. But, according to the verse under discussion, their prophet,
Samuel, promissed them that the Ark of the Covenant would be returned to
them soon as a sign of truthfulness of his statement. That glad tidings
naturally was considered very magnificent for the Children of Israel,
because by seeing that Sacred Chest, which they knew as a token of their
ancient independence and glory, they thought they could regain their
lost tranquivility and splendour. There are some statements about this
Chest mentioned in the Torah, a part of which will be cited at the end
of this commentary under the title of explanation.

Finally, at the time of the kingship of Saul, Allah returned that
Sacred Chest, which was taken away, unto them through angels. That Chest
brought them tranquility and peace.

"... wherein shall be a tranquility from your Lord, and the Relics of
what the family of Moses and the family of Aaron have left behind, the
angels bearing it. Surely in that shall be a sign for you, if you are
(truly) faithful."

\* \* \* \*

**Explanation**

The term ' Tabut ' in this verse stands for the Holy Ark of Chest 3
yards long and 2 yards broad with divine signs in it decipherable only
by the Apostles of God. This Ark had divine blessings that whenever it
was presented by the Israelites against their enemy in the midst of a
battle, the enemy forces had no other choice but to take to their heels
for their lives. The Israelites used to always keep the Chest in front
of their forces whenever any occasion of their proceeding against any
enemy had occurred and they used to come out victorious. This Ark passed
from one apostle to another apostle of God. It is reported to contain
the shoes, the rod and clothes of Moses, the turban of Aaron and some
other sacred relics. This Ark had been certainly endowed with miraculous
effects. It was this Ark that was brought out from Shiloh to help the
Israelites in the war with Philistines. ...

" And when she (mother of Moses) could not longer hide him, she took
for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with

269

pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the
river's brink." (OT Ex. 2: 3)

The following verse of the Holy Qur'an clears the meaning of 'Tabut '.
The address in the following verse is to Moses:

38. " And when We revealed unto thy mother what was revealed."

39. " That; Put him into a chest, then cast it down into the river."
(20: 38,39)


