Verse 166
=========

45 (166) إِذْ تَبَرَّأَ الَّذِينَ اتُّبِعُواْ مِنَ الَّذِينَ
اتَّبَعُواْ وَرَأَوُاْ الْعَذَابَ وَتَقَطَّعَتْ بِهِمُ الأَسْبَابُ

166." When would those that were followed disown those who followed and
they would see the torment and their ties (between them) are cut
asunder."

**Commentary:**

Beware who your leader is and whose love you carry in your heart! Those
of you who love these tyrants and pay your affections to other than
Allah, should know that they (the tyrants) want you for their own
interests in this world. Therefore, they abuse your abilities and
sincerity to obtain their own wishes, power and authority. But, on the
Resurrection Day, they will avoid you and, hating you, will leave you
alone.

This meaning should also be noted that in Tafsir-ul-Burhan and in the
book ' Ikhtisas ', by Shaykh Mufid, there are some traditions cited
about the meaning of the phrase: " when would those that were followed
disown those who followed...". Among them, there is a tradition from
Imam Baqir (a.s) who said: " By Allah, O' jabir, these are the leaders
of transgressors and their means for injustice." (1)

Therefore, in contrast with this group, as was referred in the previous
verse, are the truly faithful ones, who bear the intensive love in their
heart for Allah. They love not only the genuine leaders of the religion
but also everything that Allah loves. The basic reason for this is that
every thing they love is only for gaining Allah's pleasure. Even when
they love their own family and issues, they love because it is their
duty to do so as prescribed by Allah.

\* \* \* \*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Tafsir-ul-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 172

46


**Verse 167**

(167) وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُواْ لَوْ أَنَّ لَنَا كَرَّةً
فَنَتَبَرَّأَ مِنْهُمْ كَمَا تَبَرَّؤُواْ مِنَّا كَذَلِكَ يُرِيهِمُ
اللّهُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ حَسَرَاتٍ عَلَيْهِمْ وَمَا هُم بِخَارِجِينَ مِنَ
النَّارِ

167." And those who followed shall say: ' Had there been for us a
return (to the world) , then we would disown them even as they have
(now) disowned us. Thus Allah will show them their deeds; bitter regrets
will be upon them. And never shall they get out of the Fire."

**Commentary:**

These mislead followers, who see the unfaithfulness of their leaders so
evident, console themselves by saying:

" Had there been for us a return (to the world) , then we would disown
them even as they have (now) disowned us. ..."

But, what a pity! It is too late, because there is no possibility for
them to return to life again. Then, at the end of the verse, it says:

"... Thus Allah will show them their deeds; bitter regrets will be upon
them. And never shall they get out of the Fire." Yes, they can afford
nothing but sigh and regret bitterly. A regret for the wealth they
gathered but others took the benefit of it. A regret for the
extraordinary opportunities that they had had for attaining prosperity
and being saved, but they missed them all easily. A regret for adoring
some incapable worthless leaders instead of adoring Allah, the
Almighty.

But, it is a vain regret, because it is neither the time of action nor
the occasion for making up for the past. Nay! it is only the time of
punishment and receiving the results of one's own deeds.

According to some traditions, there are some different halts in the
Hereafter. In a few of these halts people cannot speak anything and
silence dominates lips, where they can merely look at others regretfully
and shed tears. In some other of these halts, there are people who ask

47

each other for help, while some others curse and hate each other for
their former deeds. This verse indicates that at this time when the
cruel leaders, who were adored, loved, and followed formerly, here,
disown their followers and accept no responsibility for them. So, the
followers disown them, too, and regret very much why they loved them,
supported them, and followed them. But they gained naught. They regret
in heart and express their regret by tongue in this manner that if they
could return to life once more, they would never follow them. They say
that these people who are so disloyal that they denounce their followers
here on this Day (the Reckoning Day) , they (the followers) , too, would
denounce them if they could return to the world again. They regret, but
what is the use of this regret? It is of no use, and they cannot come
out from the blazing Fire of Hell.

48


**Section 21.Only lawful and clean food should be taken**

Injunction about the use of food-stuff - Blind following disallowed.
Concealing of truth and corrupting the Word of God and bartering it for
worldly gains amounts to the eating of Fire.

(168) يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ كُلُواْ مِمَّا فِي الأَرْضِ حَلاَلاً
طَيِّباً وَلاَ تَتَّبِعُواْ خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ
عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ

(169) إِنَّمَا يَأْمُرُكُمْ بِالسُّوءِ وَالْفَحْشَاء وَأَن تَقُولُواْ
عَلَى اللّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ

168." O' mankind! eat of what is in the earth lawful and good; and do
not follow the footsteps of Satan. Surely he is a manifest foe for
you."

169. " Verily, he (Satan) enjoins you evil acts and indecency and that
you should speak against Allah what you know not."

**Commentary:**

One of the signs of a complete religion is that it considers the usage
of the unlawful food-stuffs a Satanic deed (as the Qur'an says:
"...intoxicants and games of chance... are an abomination of Satan's
work...") (1) , and the inappropriate avoidance of eating the lawful
ones originated from the temptations of Satan, (as the Qur'an says:
"...eat of what Allah has given you and do not follow the footsteps of
Satan...") . (2)

Therefore, in the current verse, too, it says:

" O' mankind! eat of what is in the earth lawful and good; and do not
follow the footsteps of Satan. ..."

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Sura Al-Ma'idah, No. 5, verse 90
(2) Sura Al-'An'am, No. 6. verse 142

49

In some of the historical narrations it is cited that a few of the Arab
tribes had unreasonably forbidden a part of their crops and their
animals for themselves, where they used to sometimes attribute those
prohibitions to Allah. Then, the above verse was revealed to dismiss
that ambiguity. Islam pays also specific attention to the material life
of people. At the top of these things is the food necessities about
which there are found tens of Qur'anic verses and hundreds of traditions
in Islamic literature.

One of the duties of prophets has been to define the lawful and
unlawful edible materials and drinks beside the introduction of the
advantages and disadvantages of each of them. This verse emphasizes that
we have to consume from what is religiously lawful and pure /h¤alal/ on
the earth: " O' mankind! eat of what is in the earth lawful and
good;..."

And that we must not prohibit ourselves from some things under the
effect of the Satan's temptation, because it is certain that Satan is
our open enemy:

"...and do not follow the footsteps of Satan. Surely he is a manifest
foe for you." Imam Baqir (a.s.) has narrated a tradition from the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) who said: " Worship of Allah is divided into seventy
divisions, the best of which is earning a living lawfully."(1)

Again, in another tradition, the very holy Imam, the fifth Imam, (a.s)
has said: " He who seeks for sustenance in this world in order to be
independent of people for his needs, to provide for his family members,
and to stretch affection unto his neighbours, will meet Allah, Almighty
and Glorious, on the Day of Judgement while his face will be as bright
as the full moon." (2)

\* \* \* \*

It is cited in Tafsir-i-Rouh-ul-Bayan that Satan has some different
stages in his invitations unto temptations. At first, he invites to

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Tafsir Al-Burhan, vol.1p. 173
(2) Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p.78

50

infidelity. If he fails in this phase, he invites to innovation. If he
does not succeed, he invites to lesser sins. Failing in these stages,
Satan invites to doing good and lawful deeds instead of worshipping
Allah. When he fails in this phase, too, he invites to performing
worships with lower qualities than the noble ones in order to stop a
person from promoting to higher degrees.(1) Thus, the statement of the
verse is a warning against what Satan does and how he leads men astray
by his different forms of evil whispers when the Qur'an says:

" Verily, he (Satan) enjoins you evil acts and indecency and that you
should speak against Allah what you know not."

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Tafsir-i-Rouh-ul-BaYan, vol. 1, p. 272

51

(170) وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ اتَّبِعُوا مَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ قَالُواْ بَلْ
نَتَّبِعُ مَا أَلْفَيْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءنَا أَوَلَوْ كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ
لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ شَيْئاً وَلاَ يَهْتَدُونَ

(171) وَمَثَلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ كَمَثَلِ الَّذِي يَنْعِقُ بِمَا لاَ
يَسْمَعُ إِلاَّ دُعَاء وَنِدَاء صُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْيٌ فَهُمْ لاَ
يَعْقِلُونَ

170. " And when they are told: ' Follow what Allah has sent down,' they
say: ' Nay! We follow what we found our fathers upon,' even though their
fathers had no understanding of anything nor were they guided aright."

171. " And the parable of those who reject Faith is as the likeness of
the one who shouts to that which hears no more than a call and a cry;
deaf, dumb, and blind (are they) wherefore they do not understand.

**Commentary:**


**Blind following of the ancestors is condemned**

The previous verse warned us to avoid following the whispers and
footsteps of Satan. Now, in this verse, one of the examples of those
footsteps, which is the blind following of others, is pointed out. It
says:

" And when they are told: ' Follow what Allah has sent down,' they say:
' Nay! We follow what we found our fathers upon,'..." They mean that
they do not care what the verses of Allah say or the Messenger of Allah
invites to. So, in answer to them, the Qur'an says: ...even though their
fathers had no understanding of anything nor were they guided aright."

This statement refers to the fact that: if their fathers had no wisdom
and understanding by themselves nor had they accepted the godly guidance
of the prophets, then, would they follow their fathers

52

yet? If their ancestors or the infidels themselves had wisdom or were
guided, it would not matter, but it is not so.

\* \* \* \*

There are two comparisons in this verse: 1) the likening of the caller
of Truth to a shepherd; 2) the likening of infidels to some beasts that
understand nothing from the speech of the shepherd save a call and a
cry. This simile has been confirmed in a tradition by Imam Baqir (a.s.)
, too. The parable means that the invitation of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
from that faithless crowd to Truth and breaking the dam-like barrier of
blindly imitation, is similar to the person who shouts to a cattle of
sheep or some animals in order to save them from danger but they do not
understand this message.

" And the parable of those who reject Faith is as the likeness of the
one who shouts to that which hears no more than a call and a cry; ..."
Then, at the end of the verse, to emphasize more and to explain it more
clearly, it adds: "... deaf, dumb, and blind (are they) wherefore they
do not understand."

53

(172) يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ كُلُواْ مِن طَيِّبَاتِ مَا
رَزَقْنَاكُمْ وَاشْكُرُواْ لِلّهِ إِن كُنتُمْ إِيَّاهُ تَعْبُدُونَ

172. " O' you who have Faith! eat of the good things We have provided
youwith, and be grateful to Allah, if Him it is you worship."
Commentary:

In this verse, too, Allah advises us to be grateful for using the
blessings and bounties, and thank Him. There is a tradition from the
holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) , cited in Tafsir-us¤-Safi, stating that Allah
says that He creates people, but they worship other than Him; and, He
provides (them) sustenance, but they thank others save Allah.(1)

It is made clear in this verse that we ought to eat from the good
wholesome foods that Allah has provided us sustenance and be thankful to
Him. " O' you who have Faith! eat of the good things We have provided
you with, and be grateful to Allah, ..." Intellect necessiates the act
of thankfulness to the giver of a bounty, too.

"... if Him it is you worship."
However, being thankful to Allah is a means of continuity and abundancy
of bounties. And, to be grateful to Allah is a sign of sincerity and the
purity of one's Faith.

It is narrated from Imam Hadi (a.s.) who said that the wrath of Allah
encompasses those who prohibit or deprive themselves from the godly
lawful things and permissible deeds. (2)

\* \* \* \*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Tafsir-us-Safi, vol. 1, p. 193
(2) Tafsir-i-Nur, vol. 1, p. 329

54

(173) إِنَّمَا حَرَّمَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْمَيْتَةَ وَالدَّمَ وَلَحْمَ
الْخِنزِيرِ وَمَا أُهِلَّ بِهِ لِغَيْرِ اللّهِ فَمَنِ اضْطُرَّ غَيْرَ
بَاغٍ وَلاَ عَادٍ فَلا إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ

173. " Verily, He has forbidden you only carrion, blood, swineflesh,
and whatever has other (name) than Allah's been invoked upon it. But
whoever is forced (by necessity) , not desiring nor transgressing, no
sin shall be on him; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."

**Commentary:**

Following the previous subject, this verse states that certain edible
things are lawful to eat, and we should not prohibit the lawful things
of Allah to ourselves opinionatedly and because of some vain
imaginations. Yet, Allah has forbidden us carrion, blood, swineflesh or
the flesh of any animal slaughtered invoking the name of anybody else
other than God, as it says:

" Verily, He has forbidden you only carrion, blood, swineflesh, and
whatever has other (name) than Allah's been invoked upon it. ..." There
are some logical and acceptable reasons cited for this Divine law of
prohibition, of course. For example, it is narrated from Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) who said:

" No one obtains anything from carrion but weakness of his body,
decrease of his strength, and cease of his offspring. And, the consumer
of carrion dies not but by a sudden death. Those who consume blood (as
food stuff) become hard-hearted. ..." (1) According to some hygienical
advice, the flesh of swine is the carrier of two kinds of microbes
called tapeworms and trichina. (The latter is a very small nematode worm
trichinella, whose larvae infest the intestines and voluntary muscles of
man, pigs etc., causing trichinosis).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 16, p. 310

55

Today, it is forbidden to use swineflesh even in some Eastern
countries. In former divine religions, such as the religion of the Jews,
the flesh of swine has been held in great detestation. In the Bible, the
sinners are also likened to swine. There is an exception, of course,
where the term /q­ayrabaq­in/ denotes not for enjoyment but forced by
unavoidable necessity, and term / 'adin / means without any intention to
revolt against the prescribed laws of Allah or not exceeding the bare
limits of the actual want or the bare necessity. If anybody under
circumstances beyond his control or forced by necessity, to save his
life, takes such things, it will not be a sin upon him.

"...But whoever is forced (by necessity) , not desiring nor
transgressing, no sin shall be on him; ..." This permission is because
of the Mercy and Grace of Allah, as the verse itself says:

"...surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."

It is cited in Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn in an expressive tradition
from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) who said: " Whoever is forced (to eat) carrion or
blood, or swineflesh and he avoids eating something of it until he dies,
then he is an infidel." (1)

**Explanations:**

1. Islam has paid full attention to the problem of food-stuffs. It has
frequently warned Muslims against the putrid, harmful, and unlawful
food. The prohibition of swineflesh, carrion and blood is found in four
occurrences in the Qur'an. The Messages of this prohibition were
preached two times in Medina and two times in Mecca.

2. Considering Allah, and invoking His name at the time of slaughtering
animals, is necessary. This is to warn us to know and be aware that
everything belongs to Allah and therefore, none of our deeds should be
done out of the circle of theism. 3. Islam is a complete and an easy
religion. It stops in no

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 155

56

circumstance. Every ritual duty or religious prohibition can be changed
when there is emergency.

4. No one must misuse the necessary circumstances in this respect.

**General Conclusion:**

Here in this verse, and in the similar other verses of the Qur'an, is
laid down the principle of the Islamic law to be observed under normal
conditions and the law of exception for the state of emergency. The
things forbidden under normal conditions may be permissible in the
emergency. The spirit of the law to be observed in both the cases is the
sense of obedience, and sticking to the prescribed limits. Under no
circumstances any revolt against any law is allowed.


