Verse 194
=========

123

(194) الشَّهْرُ الْحَرَامُ بِالشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ وَالْحُرُمَاتُ
قِصَاصٌ فَمَنِ اعْتَدَى عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُواْ عَلَيْهِ بِمِثْلِ مَا
اعْتَدَى عَلَيْكُمْ وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ مَعَ
الْمُتَّقِينَ

194. " The sacred month for the sacred month; and all sacred things are
(under the law of) retaliation. Whoever then commits aggression (by
fighting) against you, attack him in like manner as he attacked you; and
have awe for Allah, and know that Allah is with the pious ones."

**Commentary:**

According to the Islamic calendar, there are four lunar months in every
year which are specifically respected, and fighting is unlawful and
forbidden therein. One month of these four months, i.e., Rajab, is
separate while the rest, i.e., Zilqa'dah, Zil-Hajjah, and Muharram, are
consecutive. One of the reasons that the month Zil-Qa'dah is so called
is that in this month it is necessary to have a halt of fighting. This
is the law of Islam that enjoins the adherents not to fight during four
particular months of the year, but non-Muslim enemies always lie in
ambush to misuse the opportunities. So, they may think that since
Muslims are obliged to observe this law, they had better attack. This
verse says that if your opponents rush upon you during these four
months, you can stand against them, too, and fight in the same months.
So, you may apply the sacred month for the sacred month, because the
sanctity of the blood and protection of the system of Islam is much more
than the sanctity of these months.

The sacred month for the sacred month, ..."

Then, whosoever did not regard with reverences should be treated under
the law of retaliation.


"and all sacred things are (under the law of) retaliation."

Hence, as a general rule, it says:

Whoever then commits aggression (by fighting) against you, attack him
in like manner as he attacked you;

124

Islam is not a religion of aggression and transgression, but it does
not accept the aggression of others. Yet, the style of action should be
in a manner that piety be always observed, and in retaliation, limits
would not be violated when we do know and ought to be aware that Allah
is with the pious ones.

"...and have awe for Allah, and know that Allah is with the pious
ones."

**Explanations:**

1- No path is blind in Islam. The protection of the unity of Islam and
the souls of Muslims are preferred to the sanctity of places and
times.

2- We must be equitable even in contact with enemies.

" Whoever then commits aggression (by fighting) against you, attack him
in like manner as he attacked you; ..."

3- The necessity of piety, even at the time of fighting, is another one
of the Islamic training principles.

4- The order of legislation should not be in a manner that it becomes a
means of despair for Muslims and boldness in disbelievers. The principle
of similar reciprocation stands for this very sake.

5- At the time of fighting in similar reciprocation, if you do not
violate the limits of justice and be of the pious ones, you will enjoy
of the Divine help.

125

(195) وَأَنفِقُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَلاَ تُلْقُواْ بِأَيْدِيكُمْ
إِلَى التَّهْلُكَةِ وَأَحْسِنُوَاْ إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ

195. " And spend in the way of Allah; and cast not yourselves by your
own hands into perdition: and do good (to others) , for verily Allah
loves the doers of good."

**Commentary:**

Holy War needs as much money and property as it needs the sincere,
strong experienced battle men, because in Holy War, the existence of
both the spiritual and physical preparation, and suitable weapons,
artillery and other fighting equipments for troops are necessary. True
it is that the most important effective factor of the fate of a war is
the involving soldiers, but a soldier needs to be equipped. Hence, the
verse emphasizes that the lack of spending wealth in this way is to
bring themselves and other Muslims to destruction. " And spend in the
way of Allah; and cast not yourselves by your own hands into
perdition:..."

At the time of revelation, in particular, a great deal of Muslims were
full of ardor and emotions for Holy War, but they were so poor that they
could not prepare the artillery. As the Qur'an states, they used to come
to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and ask him to supply the necessary means in
order to send them to the battle-field. But they usually came back with
sorrow and grief while their eyes were shedding tears because the
required means could not be supplied. The statement of the Qur'an in
Sura At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 92 is thus; "...they went back while their
eyes overflowed with tears on account of grief for not finding that
which they should spend."


**Spending, a Prevention of Destruction**

A general fact and a social rite can be taken from this holy verse in
account of disbursing, although the subject is mentioned next to the

126

verses of Holy War. The idea is that spending, in general, causes the
members of a society to be delivered from perdition. And, on the
contrary, when the custom of donation be neglected and the properties be
compiled in one pole of the society, there will come forth a majority of
the poor and deprived. So, very soon, a great burst happens in the
society in which the selves and wealth of capitalists will be burnt by
the fire of that revolution. Here, thereby, the relation of 'donation'
and 'prevention of destruction ' is made clear. Therefore, disbursement
is useful for capitalist, before it would be beneficial to the state of
the deprived; that is, the justification of wealth is a protector of
wealth. Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) has pointed to this very fact
where he says:

"...guard your properties by paying alms tax..." (1)

Next to the stage of Holy War and donation, it leads to benevolence
and, at the end of the verse, it commands to doing good because the
stage of doing good is the highest stage in the course of human
development which Islam regards to fully. It says: "...and do good (to
others) , for verily Allah loves the doers of good."

The occurrence of this phrase at the end of the verse on donation
points to this meaning that the act of donation must be fulfilled with
an absolute sincerity and affection: far from any term of reproach or
what annoys or hurts the person whom the favour is done to.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Nahjul-Balaqah, saying No. 146

127

(196) وَأَتِمُّواْ الْحَجَّ وَالْعُمْرَةَ لِلّهِ فَإِنْ أُحْصِرْتُمْ
فَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ وَلاَ تَحْلِقُواْ رُؤُوسَكُمْ حَتَّى
يَبْلُغَ الْهَدْيُ مَحِلَّهُ فَمَن كَانَ مِنكُم مَّرِيضاً أَوْ بِهِ
أَذًى مِّن رَّأْسِهِ فَفِدْيَةٌ مِّن صِيَامٍ أَوْ صَدَقَةٍ أَوْ نُسُكٍ
فَإِذَا أَمِنتُمْ فَمَن تَمَتَّعَ بِالْعُمْرَةِ إِلَى الْحَجِّ فَمَا
اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ فَمَن لَّمْ يَجِدْ فَصِيَامُ ثَلاثَةِ
أَيَّامٍ فِي الْحَجِّ وَسَبْعَةٍ إِذَا رَجَعْتُمْ تِلْكَ عَشَرَةٌ
كَامِلَةٌ ذَلِكَ لِمَن لَّمْ يَكُنْ أَهْلُهُ حَاضِرِي الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ شَدِيدُ
الْعِقَابِ

196. " And complete the Hajj (Pilgrimage) nad the 'Umrah for the sake
of Allah; but if you are prevented (to complete it) , then (send)
whatever offering (sacrificial animal) as may be obtained with ease; and
do not shave your heads till the offering reaches its place (of
sacrifice) ; but whoever among you is sick, or has an ailment in his
head, then he (should) make redemption by fasting, or alms-giving or
sacrificing. And when you are secure, then whoever enjoys from the
'Umrah to the Hajj (he should offer) of whatever offering is easily
available (for him) . But whoever finds none (to give) , should fast
three days during the Hajj (Pilgrimage) , and seven days when you have
returned; these (make) ten (days) complete. That is for the one whose
family members do not dwell near the sacred Mosque. Have awe of Allah,
and know that verily Allah is severe in penalty."

**The Rites of Pilgrimage**

The visitors of the holy shrine of Mecca usualy perform the ceremonies
of minor pilgrimage first. The rites are as follows: They put on
pilgrim's garb ('ihram) from some definite sites

128

known as ' Trysting Place '. It means that they undertake to abandon
doing a series of deeds which are unlawful for the person in a pilgrim
state. They cover themselves with pilgrim's garb which consists of two
pieces of unsewn cloth, and they continually say 'labbaika' while going
towards Ka'bah. When they reach Mecca, at first, they circumambulate
Ka'bah in seven rounds. Then, they keep up a two-rak'at-prayer in a
place called Maqam-i-Ebrahim (Station of Abraham) . After that, they ply
to and fro between two mountains named Safa and Marwah for seven times.
Finally, they, having cut a piece of a nail or some hair of theirs, take
off the pilgrim's garb.

Then, again for the ceremonies of Pilgrimage, they put on pilgrim's
garb and go unto 'Arafat, which is a land 24 kilometers far from
original city of Mecca, in order to stay therein on the ninth of
Zil-Hajjah, from noon until sunset, busy praying with invocation. After
sunset, they move to Mash'ar-ul-Haram (Sacred Monument) , which is
located at a distance of 15 kilometers from Mecca, where they must
remain until morning. When the sun rises, they move into Mina, a land
nearby there, and, on the same day, which is known as Feast of
Sacrifice, they throw seven pebbles at a special Pillar called: '
Jamarah 'uqba ', and then they sacrifice before shaving their heads
(while women cut off a piece of hair from their heads) . When they did
their hair cut (Taqsir) , they take off their pilgrim's garb at last.

They return to Mecca the same day or after that and perform the ritual
circumambulation of the Ka'bah, circumambulation prayer, running between
Safa and Marwah, Nisa' circumambulation and Nisa' circumambulation
prayer. On the eleventh and twelfth of the month, they throw pebbles at
three special pillars in Mina which are called 'Jamarat ', one after
another seven times at each pillar each day while, during the nights
before these days, they have to remain in Mina.

Thus, they accomplish the rites of the formal Pilgrimage (Hajj) each of
which is the survival of one historical event and that they are some
effective hints and implicit declarations to the matters of refinement
of character and social philosophies. (The description of each
philosophy will be delivered when commenting on the concerning verses)
.

129

**Commentary:**

Now it is necessary to notify that the verse indicates that all these
actions should be fulfilled for the sake of Allah and according to His
commandments, not for making display and pretence nor for the sake of
idols. Therefore, the first clause of the verse proclaims that in the
deeds of Pilgrimage, both the formal Pilgrimage (Hajj) and the lesser
formal one ('Umrah) , no motive should interfere but seeking to be
nearer to Allah. " And complete the Hajj (Pilgrimage) and the 'Umrah for
the sake of Allah; ..."

Then it adds that if something like sickness and fear of enemy happens
that hinders you from performing the ritual rites of Hajj and 'Umrah
after you are clothed in pilgrim's garb you must sacrifice an animal as
it is possible for you.

"... but if you are prevented (to complete it) , then (send) whatever
offering (sacrificial animal) as may be obtained with ease; ..." It
should be noted, of curse, that if the prevetion is as a result of
sickness and the like and the pilgrim's garb is done for the lesser
formal Pilgrimage ('Umrah Mufradah) , the sacrifice should be sent to
Mecca, but if it has happened from the side of an enemy, the duty of
sacrifice must be done at the same place where the prevention has
occurred. The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) behaved in the same manner in
Hudaybiyah, too. But, if the person is in the pilgrim's garb of Hajj and
becomes sick, the one must send the sacrifice to Mina.

"... and do not shave your heads till the offering reaches its place
(of sacrifice) ; ..."

One of the rites that should be done in Hajj (Pilgrimage) is shaving
the head (for men, and cutting some hair of the head for women) . But
they must be careful that they are not allowed to do this duty before
sacrificing the offering in the place of sacrifice. "...but whoever
among you is sick, or has an ailment in his head, then he (should) make
redemption by fasting, or alms-giving or sacrificing. ..." The exception
is for the person who has an ailment or a difficulty

130

that has to shave before the appointed time. If the person did so,
(i.e. shaved his head because of ailment and the like) , it is necessary
for the one to give ransom. This ransom can be three days of fasting, or
feeding six indigents, or slaughtering a lamb. "...And when you are
secure, then whoever enjoys from the 'Umrah to the Hajj (he should
offer) of whatever offering is easily available (for him) . But whoever
finds none (to give) , should fast three days during the Hajj
(Pilgrimage) , and seven days when you have returned;..." When you are
free from sickness and enemy and you want to perform the 'greater
Pilgrimage ', you must sacrifice whatever you can from animals such as a
camel, cow, or lamb. But if any of you cannot find the animal, or
financially is not able to afford it, he must fast three days during the
days of pilgrimage (the seventh, eighth, and ninth days) and seven days
after returning from Hajj so that it makes ten days.

"...these (make) ten (days) complete. ..."

It is evident that three days and seven days make ten days, yet the
Qur'an says that they are totally ten days complete. This meaning may
point to the idea that the ten days can be substituted for the sacrifice
completely. This greater Pilgrimage with these orders is for those who
are not dwelling nearby the Sacred Mosque. (The known state among Muslim
jurisprudents is that everyone who is sixteen kilometers far from Mecca
his duty is to follow the rites of the ' greater Pilgrimage ', but those
who are not far from Mecca by this distance, their duty is the
'separation Pilgrimge' (Hajj-i-Qir'an) . This subject is detailed in
books of jurisprudence furnished with its concerning evidences.)

"...That is for the one whose family members do not dwell near the
sacred Mosque,..." Finally, at the end of the verse, the command is due
to piety and that believers be aware not to have any shortcoming about
the divine instructions in order to protect themselves from the severe
punishment of Allah.

"...Have awe of Allah, and know that verily Allah is severe in
penalty." This emphasis may be for this that Pilgrimage (Hajj) is a
great Islamic worship so that if the rites of it be not carefully
observed and its spirit be neglected, there will be a large loss for
Muslims.

131

This worship (Hajj) is the very one that Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali
(a.s.) has considered it the 'flag' and 'magnificent motto' of Islam. At
the last moments of his life, he (a.s.) has remarked in his will, thus:
" Fear Allah (and) keep Allah in view in the matter of your Lord's House
(Ka'bah) . Do not forsake it so long as you live, because if it is
abandoned, you will not be spared." (1)

Some enemies of Islam have also said that while Pilgrimage is in
process they cannot gain victory. One of the great believing men says:
woe unto Muslims if they do not comprehend the meaning of Hajj, and woe
unto others if they do not catch its meaning!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Nahjul-Balaqah, Letter No. 4

132


