Section 25,no Warfare During the Pilgrimage Months - Warning Against the Hypocrites
===================================================================================

No warfare during the Pilgrimage Months - Warning against the
hypocrites Further instructions regarding Hajj - Invitation to complete
submission to God (i.e. Islam) ;

(197) الْحَجُّ أَشْهُرٌ مَّعْلُومَاتٌ فَمَن فَرَضَ فِيهِنَّ الْحَجَّ
فَلاَ رَفَثَ وَلاَ فُسُوقَ وَلاَ جِدَالَ فِي الْحَجِّ وَمَا تَفْعَلُواْ
مِنْ خَيْرٍ يَعْلَمْهُ اللّهُ وَتَزَوَّدُواْ فَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ
التَّقْوَى وَاتَّقُونِ يَا أُوْلِي الأَلْبَابِ

197. " (The performance of) the Hajj (Pilgrimage) is in months
well-known, whosoever then undertakes (to perform) the Hajj therein,
then let there be no intercourse, nor indulge in ungodliness, nor
disputing in the Hajj. And whatever good you do, Allah knows it. And
make provision, but surely the best provision is the piety. So, have awe
of Me, O' people of understanding."

**Commentary:**

" (The performance of) the Hajj (Pilgrimage) is in months well-known,
..." In this verse, the Qur'an remarks that the rites of Pilgrimage
(Hajj) should be fulfilled in certain months of the year not throughout
it. The books of tradition, Qur'an commentary, and jurisprudence say
that this great worship can be fulfilled only in Shawwal, Zil-Qa'dah,
and during the first ten days of Zil-Hajjah, (a part of which relates
exclusively to the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth days of the
month

133

and another part of it can be performed during this whole length of
time) . " ... whosoever then undertakes (to perform) the Hajj therein,
then let there be no intercourse, nor indulge in ungodliness, nor
disputing in the Hajj. ..."

This part of the verse indicates that those who have made the
performance of Pilgrimage (Hajj) obligatory for themselves, by putting
on pilgrim's garb and engaging in the rites of Pilgrimage, should
restrain themselves from enjoying even lawful sexual association and
committing wickedness. They must avoid obscene and vain debates or foul
speech and all that appertains thereto, because the place is the site of
worship, sincerity, and abandoning the material worldly pleasures. It is
an environment from where the spirit must gain strength and, separating
from the world of material entirely, find way into the world of super
material. This status should be in a manner that the relation of
brotherhood and alliance can be tightened.

Then, it adds:

" ... And whatever good you do, Allah knows it. ... " This is the first
reward which is given to a good doer, because the happiness of a true
believer is, in the first stage, to know that his Lord is aware of the
good action that the one has done for His sake. This, by itself, is very
delightful and delectable. " ... And make provision, but surely the best
provision is the piety. ... " In this part of the verse the command unto
the believers is due to making provision.

It is said that at the advent of Islam some people, particularly from
Yemen, used to journey to Mecca on pilgrimage without sufficient
provisions for their sustenance on the pretence that they trusted in
Allah's help. But Allah gives sustenance through natural ways and by
ordinary means. So, in this section of the verse, the Qur'an enjoins
upon the pilgrims to first make the necessary provisions for the whole
journey and then, taking it with them, proceed.

By the way, the term 'making provision' may point to a spiritual
aspect, meaning that besides this material provision there is another
necessary provision which should be made and that is the provision of

134

'piety' and 'righteousness' .

This phrase contains a narrow hint to this fact that in the journey of
Pilgrimage there are many instances for making spiritual provision which
should not be neglected. In Mecca, the illustration of Islam, the lively
scenes of the self-sacrifices of Abraham, the hero of theism, and some
specific manifestation of the splendour of Allah are seen, the which
that can be comprehended in no other place. Those who have a vigil
spirit can gain spiritual provisions from this unique journey for their
life in this world as well as the coming one. Then, it concludes the
verse by saying:

" ... So, have awe of Me, O' people of understanding." This final
phrase addresses the possessors of mind and intellect telling them that
they should be pious, because it is they who enjoy the utmost merits of
this excellent educational process, while others only share a small
portion of it.

135

(198) لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَبْتَغُواْ فَضْلاً مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ
فَإِذَا أَفَضْتُم مِّنْ عَرَفَاتٍ فَاذْكُرُواْ اللّهَ عِندَ الْمَشْعَرِ
الْحَرَامِ وَاذْكُرُوهُ كَمَا هَدَاكُمْ وَإِن كُنتُم مِّن قَبْلِهِ
لَمِنَ الضَّآلِّينَ

(199) ثُمَّ أَفِيضُواْ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَفَاضَ النَّاسُ وَاسْتَغْفِرُواْ
اللّهَ إِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ

198. " There shall be no sin for you to seek bounty from your Lord.
Then when you hasten on (in multitude) from 'Arafat, remember Allah by
the sacred Monument (Muzdalifah) , remember Him as He has guided you,
although before that you were surely of those who went astray." 199. "
Then hasten on from where the people hasten on, and seek forgiveness of
Allah; verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. "

**Commentary:
Economic Activities in Hajj Season**

At the Age of Ignorance, people considered trading and taking
passengers or baggages to different destinations during the Hajj season
unlawful (haram) and a sin. They counted the Hajj performances of those
who did such activities invalid. At the season of Hajj, Muslims were
naturally expecting to know whether the ordinances of that Age were
still valid or they were worthless from the view of Islam. Then, the
above verse was revealed telling them:

" There shall be no sin for you to seek bounty from your Lord ..." The
verse under discussion announces the aforementioned ordinance of the
time of ignorance, which counted bargain at the time of Hajj a sin, is
incorrent. It proclaims that trade and the like activities are no
problem during the season of Hajj, and it does not matter that people
enjoy of the blessings of Allah and gain profit from their work

136

and activities.

As Islamic literature indicates about the philosophies of Hajj, in
addition to the ethical, political and cultural philosophies, this verse
points to the philosophy of economics, too. This idea says that the
transportation of Muslims from different points of the world toward the
Ka'bah and the formation of that great Islamic congress can be a good
basis for a common movement due to economics in Islamic societies. In
this great meeting, before or after the rites of Hajj, the thoughtful
Muslim minds in economics can assemble, and, with cooperation and
association of each other, establish a firm foundation for the economics
of the Islamic societies. They can produce, by the help of correct
commercial exchanges, for example, such a strong and fixed economy that
they become independent and free from want from enemies and
non-Muslims.

Therefore, these trades and commercial exchanges, themselves, are among
the means of strengthening the Islamic nations against the enemies of
Islam. The reason is that no nation will have complete independence
without having a powerful economy. Yet, it is evident, of course, that
the commercial activities should be set in a position after the ethical
and worshipping aspects of Hajj, not prior and dominative to it.
Fortunately, pilgrims have enough time for this job both before and
after the rites of Hajj.

Husham-ibn-Hakam said that he asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.) about the reason
that Allah enjoined people to circumambulate the House (Ka'bah) and
perform Hajj.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied:

" Verily Allah has created human beings ... and has enjoined them to do
an action (Hajj) which contains the obedience of religion and is good
for the affairs of their world. He assigned that (at the time of Hajj) ,
Muslims assemble from the east and west of the world in order to be
acquainted with each other, and in order that every nation makes use (of
the productions and) trades of other nations, and that the muleteers and
cameleers make profit (in this journey by hiring out their vehicles to
others) , and that they become familiar with the effects (traditions) of
the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) (so that those traditions continue to survive
by)

137

remembering and not to be forgotten. If it were so that every nation
spoke about only their own environment, and whatever there was therein,
they would be destroyed and the cities would turn to ruin, and
commercial profits would be wasted, and the traditions and signs of the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) would be vanished. This is the philosophy of Hajj."
(1)

" ... Then when you hasten on (in multitude) from 'Arafat, remember
Allah by the Sacred Monument (Muzdalifah) , ... " In this section of the
verse, the Qur'an's command is due to this subject that after performing
the rites that should be fulfilled in 'Arafat, they must move to
Mash'ar-ul-Haram (the Sacred Monument) , which is located between Mina
and 'Arafat, and remember Him therein.

" ... remember Him as He has guided you, Here, the speech of the verse
remarks that for thanksgiving and being grateful for the guidance of
Allah, remember Him (s.w.t.) in Mash'ar-ul-Haram, a remembrance
appropriate to the guidance that He has given you.

At that time, Muslims could realize well the value of this great
blessing, viz. guidance, because they were not so far from the time that
the inhabitants of Arabian Peninsula had gone astray totally, and could
see how Allah had saved them from all those aberrations and misfortunes
by leading them to the blessing of this pure divine religion, Islam.

" ... although before that you were surely of those who went astray."
Why 'Arafat' ? It is said that 'Arafat is a land about 24 kilometers
away from the center of Mecca where pilgrims halt from noon until
evening on the ninth of Zil-hajjah. The origin of this appellation has
been differently described. One of them is that when the harbinger of
revelation, Gabriel, showed Abraham (a.s.) the rites of Hajj therein, he
(a.s.) responded: "I recognized," , " I recognized"('Araftu) . But it is
probable that this appellation points to another fact, too. That land,
from which

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 11, p. 14

138

the first steps of the performance of Hajj begins, is a very fitting
place for the recognition of the Pure Essence of Allah. Verily, that
spiritual attraction that man finds in him at the arrival of that
indescribable land, is not comparable with that of any desert.

In 'Arafat, originally everywhere is the same, everything contains a
harmony, all pilgrims behave alike in that desert. They have relieved
themselves from the noise of the cities and from the tumult and dazzling
glare of the material world, busy contemplating therein, under the blue
sky, in the clean fresh air clear from sin, where the harbinger of
revelation has stretched wings, where accompanied with its breeze the
murmur of Gabriel and the manly sound of Abraham (a.s.) strengthened
with the delightful voice of the Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) and the
true believers of early Islam, are spiritually heard. In this remindful
land where as if a window had been opened to the supernatural world, not
only man can be drowned in the emanation of gnosis of Allah and may
follow the common praising murmur of the whole creation but also he
might find himself indise his own ego, the which he has lost for a
lifetime and has been looking for. If so, he will also become gnostic to
his own rank and will comprehend that he is not the one who works hard
day and night and greedily pokes about here and there to earn a living
and whatever more he obtains the less his thirst of greed is quenched.
He finds out that there is another diamond-like nobility in his soul
that he is, in fact, the same worthy existence.

Yes, this very land is called 'Arafat, the site of recognition. What an
interesting and appropriate appellation!

**Mash'ar-ul-Haram**

The statements cited about the appellation used for Sacred Monument as
'Mash'ar-ul-Haram ' denote that the place is a center for the 'mottoes
of Hajj', and it is a sign for its great glorious divine concerning
rites. However, it must not be neglected that the Arabic term / mash'ar
/ is derived from / shu'ur / which means : 'sense, consciousness or
awareness '.

139

In that exciting unique night, i.e., the night before the tenth of
Zil-hajjah, when the pilgrims, after passing their training course in
'Arafat, have moved into Muzdalifah to spend a night long until after
sunrise there, lying over the smooth sands under the starry sky, find
themselves among a crowd which seems as a small pattern of the Great
Resurrection in the Hereafter. This shakening scene, with that pure
serenity that the surroundings has, makes the pilgrims, being covered in
those innocently plain clothes of 'Ihram, feel a special new spring of
thought, understanding and awareness inside their own entity, so that,
if they contemplate, they can clearly hear the fall of that
consciousness in the depth of their hearts. That is why that venerable
place is called 'Mash'ar'.

\* \* \* \*

" Then hasten on from where the people hasten on, ..." By this verse,
the Providence has notified the privileges that the Quraish had
considered for themselves. The Quraish used to call themselves 'Humus'
(those who are firm in religion) and, counting themselves the offsprings
of Abraham and custodians of Ka'bah, imagined themselves superior to the
people of other Arab tribes. Hence, they stayed to avoid joining the
other pilgrims in proceeding to the plain of 'Arafat under the pretext
that it was out of the limits of Mecca, though they knew that it was
among the rites of Hajj and a part of the creed of Abraham.

In the above verse, the Qur'an tells Muslims that they all must halt in
one place ('Arafat) and from there all should go towards Mash'ar from
which they totally move to Mina. Thus, that wrong privilege of the
Quraish passed off. " ... and seek forgiveness of Allah; verily Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful."

It adds that they ought to avoid those wrong ideas of the age of
ignorance and seek forgiveness of Allah because Hajj, or Islam, does not
recognize any such distinctions and had already levelled every such
difference and distinction. Then, it remarks that Allah is forgiving and
merciful.

140

**Explanations:**

In addition to the aforementioned descriptions about the Pilgrimage,
cited in the commentary upon verse No. 196 under the title of ' The
Rites of Pilgrimage ', there are some detailed explanations given at the
beginning of an English translation of the Qur'an, by S. V. Mir Ahmed
Ali, which are exactly adopted here, as follows:

" It is incumbent on every Muslim who has the necessary means to do it,
to visit, on Pilgrimage, the Holy Mosque, the Ka'bah, in Mecca once in
his life. The carrying out of this ordinance is subject to the condition
that the individual has the means to do it. The main conditions are:

1. The individual must be a major and not a minor.

2. He must have the means to meet the expense of the journey, without
detriment to his ability to continue his business or the means of his
living.

3. The health of the individual should permit the journey.

4. There should be no risk of life in the journey. (For exact details
refer to 'Fiqh')

The essential formality of Hajj is the Ehram, i.e., the male should
remove his stitched clothes and get himself wrapped with two pieces of
unstitched, clean cloth, one covering his body from his neck to his
loins and another from his waist to his feet. A female should wrap these
two pieces over and above her usual clothes.

The Ehram cloth should have been lawfully acquired and it should not be
silken or transparent. The moment the individual puts on the Ehram,
i.e., the garb of a Pilgrim, (i.e., a Haji) , he becomes responding
exclusively to the call of the Lord which was issued to mankind through
the great Prophet Abraham:-

" And (remember O' Our Apostle Muhammad!) when We fixed for Abraham the
place for the House, (saying) : ' Associate thou not with Me aught, and
cleanse My House for those who make the circuits and stand in prayer,
and bow and prostrate themselves (unto Me) ." " And proclaim thou unto
the people the Pilgrimage (Hajj) ! They will come

141

unto thee on foot and on lean camel, coming from every remote (high)
way! " 22:26, 27

Putting on the Ehram, the pilgrim in response to the call of the Lord
issued through Abraham, calls:-

' Labbaik, Allahomma Labbaik! ' ' La Sharika laka Labbaik '

Yes, here I am O' Lord, here I am. There is no partner for thee. Yes,
here I am.

' Innal-Hamd laka wan-Ne'mata laka ' ' Wal Mulka laka Labbaik '

Verily, the Praise and the bounties are Thine. And the Dominion is
Thine. Yes, I am here, O Lord! "

**Note:**

The above mentioned response of Haji is cited in the aforementioned
book. But the exact words that they actually recite now is as follows:
Labbayk, Allahumma Labbayk! Labbayka la Sharika Laka Labbayk!
Innal-Hamda wan-Ni'mata Laka wal-Mulk, la Sharika Laka Labbayk! It is
worth noting that the call of the Lord to mankind, issued through
Abraham thousands of years ago has been made to ring and resound into
the ears of men through Islam and today the Holy House of the Lord, the
Ka'bah, is visited regularly and punctually every year on the fixed
dates in the month of Zilhaj, the last month of the Islamic Calendar
year.

After putting on the Ehram, the Haji or the pilgrim has to do the
following:-

1. 'Tawaf', i.e., circumambulation, i.e., going seven times round the
Ka'bah.

2. After the ' Tawaf ' is completed, a prayer (salat) of two Rak'ats,
like that of the Morning Prayers, must be performed.

3. After the prayer, the pilgrim has to cut the nails (or the hair) .
These formalities are performed immediately as the pilgrim arrives in
the city of Mecca for the pilgrimage and this is called 'Umrah and the
cutting of the nails (or the hair) is called 'Taqseer'. This could be
performed from the first of the lunar month Shawwal to the 8th of
Zilhaj.

142

On the 8th Zilhaj the pilgrim should put on the Ehram.

On the 9th Zilhaj the pilgrim should go to the plain of Arafat and stay
there until sunset.

After the sunset the pilgrim should proceed to the place called Mash'ar
and stay there at night.

On the morning of 10th Zilhaj the pilgrim should go to the plain of
Mina, offer sacrifice and effect the 'Taqseer' (shaving his head clean)
.

After this, the pilgrim should put off the Ehram but must remain in
Mina for two or three nights.

During the day the pilgrim goes to Mecca to perform 'Tawaf' and offer
two Rak'at prayer.

After completing the 'Tawaf' the pilgrim should perform the Sa'i
between the two hillocks Safa and Marwa.

After completing the Sa'i, the pilgrim should conclude the performace
by repeating the 'Tawaf' called the 'Tawaf-i-Nisa'.

(Caution: ِ Be it known’ِ the above note about the performace of Hajj,
is only a bare skeleton just to give an idea of pilgrimage in Shia'ism ِ
For the exact details one should refer to ' Fiqh ') .

This completes the pilgrimage and the Haji now returns to Mecca. After
the Hajj, the pilgrim proceeds to Medina to visit the shrine of the Holy
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and the graves of the Four Holy Imams (a.s.) in the
Cemetry 'Jannatul-Baqi' viz.

1. The Second Holy Imam Hasan Ibne Ali Al-Mujtaba.

2. The Fourth Holy Imam Ali ibnul Husain Az-Zainul'abideen.

3. The Fifth Holy Imam Muhammad ibne Ali Al-Baqir.

4. The Sixth Holy Imam Ja'far ibne Muhammad As-Sadiq.

The Mausoleums over graves of the above Holy ones have been demolished
and the pilgrims are not allowed by the Saudi Rule to offer any prayers
like Fatiha or the recitation of any salutation to the Holy Souls. Every
sincere Muslim loyal to the Holy family of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) ;
the Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) , particularly the Shi'as, feel for the ruined
condition of the holy graves and the unwarranted and unreasonable ban on
the recitation of either the Holy Qur'an or offering any salutation to
the Holy Souls, and earnestly prays to God for the restoration of the
freedom to offer the Salutation etc., on the Holy

143

Shrines as it was before, and for the removal of the Un-Islamic ban.

**A Few of the Qur'anic Verses on Hajj**

" Verily, the First House made for mankind is the one at Mecca, Blessed
and a Guidance for the worlds." " In it are clear signs; the standing
place of Abraham; and whoever entereth it is secure; and (purely) for
God, is incumbent upon mankind, the pilgrimage to the House, for those
who can afford to journey thither; And whosoever denieth then Verily,
God is Self-sufficiently independent of the Worlds." 3: 95,96

**The Time for the Pilgrimage and the Discipline Therein**

' The pilgrimage ' is performed in the known months; so whosoever
determines the performance of the pilgrimage therein, there shall be
then no foul speech nor abusing nor disputing in the pilgrimage, and
whatever good you do, God knoweth it and maketh provision. 'Verily the
best of provision is the piety of oneself and fear Me, O' men of
understanding '.

There is no blame on you in seeking bounty from your Lord, so when ye
hasten on from 'Arafat then remember God near the Holy Mash'ar,
Monument, and remember Him as He hath guided you, though before that ye
were certainly of those gone astray. " Then hasten on from where the
people hasten on, and seek forgiveness of Allah; Verily, God is
Forgiving, Merciful." So when ye have performed your devotions, then
laud God as ye lauded your fathers, rather a greater lauding. But there
are some people who say, ' Our Lord give us in this world, and they
shall have no portion in the hereafter.

" Hajj is the months well-known, whosoever then undertaketh the
pilgrimage therein, then let there be no intercourse, nor bad language,
nor quarrelling during the pilgrimage; and whatever of good ye do, God
knoweth it; so make provision (for your journey) and verily the best
provision is piety; and fear Me O' ye people of understanding."

" It shall be no guilt on your part if ye seek bounty from your Lord
(in trade during pilgrimage) ; then when ye march from 'Arafat remember
God

144

near the Holy Monument, and remember Him as He hath guided you,
although ye were surely before this, of those who had gone astray. "
Then march ye on from whence the other people march on and seek pardon
of God; verily God is Forgiving, Merciful. " And among them there are
some who say Our Lord! give us good in this world and good in the
hereafter and save us from the torment of the (Hell) Fire.

" These shall have a portion of what they have earned; verily, God is
quick in reckoning. " And remember ye God on the numbered days; and
whosoever hasteneth off in two days it will be no sin on him, and whoso
tarrieth (there) , on him (also) there will be no sin and this is for
him who guardeth (against evil) so take ye shelter in God and know ye
(that) unto Him ye shall (all) be gathered." 2: 197-203

**Disciplinary Restrictions of Amnesty during the Hajj Period**

" O' ye who believe! kill ye not (any) game while ye are in the pilgrim
garb; and whoever among you killeth it intentionally, the compensation
(of it) is the like of what he killed from the cattle, as adjudged by
two just men from among you, as an offering to be brought to the Ka'bah
or the expiation (of it) is the feeding of the poor or the equivalent of
it in fasting, that he may taste the heinousness of his deed; God hath
pardoned what is gone by; and whoever returneth (to it) ; then will God
exact penalty from him, and God is Mighty, Lord of Retribution." 5: 95

**The Lawful Game during the Pilgrimage**

" Allowed unto you is the game of the sea and eating thereof a
provision for you and for the travellers; and forbidden unto you is the
game of the land so long as ye are in the pilgrim garb; and fear ye God
unto Whom ye shall be gathered." 5: 96 The Sanctity of the Holy Ka'bah
and the Month and the Offerings " God hath made the Ka'bah, the Sacred
House, a Sanctuary (Place

145

of stay in peace) for mankind and the Sacred Month and the Offerings
and the (animals with the) garlands; this is that ye may know that God
knoweth whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and
that God is the Knower of all things." 5: 97 (For details refer to
'Fiqh') .

**The Disciplinary Conduct to be followed during the Pilgrimage**

In the case of Ehram for Hajj, the repetition of the Talbiah should
stop at noon on the day of 'Arafa. The Haji during Ehram should abstain
from the following:-

1. Hunting or helping in any form and utilizing a hunted animal.

2. All sexual enjoyments, even witnessing a marriage contract.

3. Any deliberate action causing discharge of sperm.

4. Use of any incense or perfume.

5. Any kind of mischief or uttering a lie, or falsehood.

6. Any kind of dispute or quarrel, particularly it is associated with
any kind of swearing by God.

7. Killing even any insect on the body.

8. Removal of hair on the body, by any means.

9. Covering the head and the top of the foot. The head should not be
even submerged in the water.

10. Sheltering under moving shelters, like umbrellas, hooded cars or
carts or aeroplanes. No harm in remaining inside stationary shelters
like rooms etc. 11. Cutting of nails, trees, plants and herbs.

12. Use of cosmetics decorations and ornaments.

13. Wearing of weapons unless necessary.

14. Rubbing or scratching the body. (RF.)

After entering Mecca, one should not leave it before Hajj is over

Wear the Ehram after one of the daily compulsory prayers.

Recite Talbiah when wearing the Ehram.

Take off the Ehram when the 'Umrah is over, but no shaving to be
done.

Remove hair before wearing the Ehram.

Take the Gusle Ehram and Wudu for prayers.

146

After completing the Sa'y of 'Umrah cut hair or nails.

There are two Tawafs:-

(a) For 'Umrah.

(b) In Zilhaj.

At Mina on the 10th.

Stone the three Satans.

Shave head and offer the sacrifice.

After giving the sacrifice come out of Ehram.

On the 11th and 12th also perform the other rites and stoning at
Mina.

For the exact details do consult ' Fiqh '.

147

(200) فَإِذَا قَضَيْتُم مَّنَاسِكَكُمْ فَاذْكُرُواْ اللّهَ كَذِكْرِكُمْ
آبَاءكُمْ أَوْ أَشَدَّ ذِكْرًا فَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَقُولُ رَبَّنَا
آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَمَا لَهُ فِي الآخِرَةِ مِنْ خَلاَقٍ

(201) وِمِنْهُم مَّن يَقُولُ رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً
وَفِي الآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ

(202) أُولَئِكَ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِّمَّا كَسَبُواْ وَاللّهُ سَرِيعُ
الْحِسَابِ

200. " When you have performed your (holy) rites, then remember Allah,
as you remember your forefathers or even with more intense remembrance.
And there are some men who say: ' Our Lord! give us in this world ',
they shall have no portion in the world to come."

201. " But there are some who say: ' Our Lord! grant us good in this
world and good in the world to come, and save us from the torment of the
Fire '."

202. " These shall have a portion of what they have earned; and Allah
is quick in reckoning."

**Commentary:**

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that in the Age of Ignorance when
the performance of Hajj ended there usually formed a meeting of people
where they used to boast about the fanciful honours that they had owned
from their ancestors. They used to explain their stories in detail. The
Qur'an says that after finishing the rites of Hajj remember Allah, and
speak about Him and His endless blessings in that large gathering. This
remembrance of the Lord might be, at least, with the same enthusiasm and
affection that you had in your boastings and glory towards your
ancestors in the Age of Ignorance, though this one should be even more
intense than the former one.

148

" When you have performed your (holy) rites, then remember Allah, as
you remember your forefathers or even with more intense remembrance.
..." This verse also teaches us that greatness and honour is true under
the shadow of relation with Allah, not boasting for the vain honours of
forefathers.

"... And there are some men who say: ..." After that, the Qur'an makes
the situation of people clear, and points out the standard of thought
and understanding of people. There are some groups of people who do not
look for anything but the material interest for themselves, and do not
seek from Allah but for the same. They say: "...' Our Lord! give us in
this world ', ..."

These people do not seek for any share of spiritualities, here in this
life. They will not have any share of them in Hereafter, either. In the
coming eternal world, where all need everything of that kind, they will
have nought, and no portion of the good things of the next world will be
given them.

"...They shall have no portion in the world to come."

\* \* \* \*

The second group are those whose thoughts are not limited to the
material life alone. They seek for both the good things of the life of
this world, as the primary stage of the spiritual developement towards
perfection, and the felicity of the next world. So, this verse defines,
in fact, the logic of Islam due to the material subjects and spiritual
subjects. It condemns those who are drowned only in materialities as
well as those who have no regard and attention to the worldly life.

" But there are some who say: ' Our Lord! grant us good in this world
and good in the world to come, ..."

They also ask Him to save them from the painful chastisement of the
coming world, saying thus: "...and save us from the torment of the
Fire." It is obvious that the term /hasanah/, which means ' goodness
',

149

has a vast meaning in the verse so that it includes all the material
and spiritual merits. But, in some traditions, it is narrated that the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) , in answer to the question that what the goodness of
this world and the world to come was, said: " He who has been bestowed a
thankful heart, a busy praising tongue, and a pious wife who helps him
in his affairs of this world and the next, then, surely, he has been
given the good of this world and the good of the coming world, and will
be kept off from the torment of Fire." (1) Evidently, this meaning is
among the kind of commenting on a general concept upon a specific one,
and pointing to the clear examples rather than to be exclusive to these
particular ones.

\* \* \* \*

" These shall have a portion of what they have earned; and Allah is
quick in reckoning." Following the foregoing ideas, in this verse it
says that these two groups of people will enjoy of what they have
obtained, both those who seek Allah for only the things of this life and
those who demand Him the good of this life and the next. Neither of them
are deprived from what they seek for, but each group will be confined to
their own demands.

Allah will reckon the account of all people in the Hereafter in a short
time without interfering one person's account with that of another
person. It has been narrated from Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (a.s.) who
said:

" Verily Allah will reckon the human beings in a single whole time
similar to (the way) that He provides them sustenance wholly in a time."
(2) So, the Qur'an says:

"...and Allah is quick in reckoning." In this verse, the question of
speediness of reckoning from the side of Allah has been pointed out.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 2, p. 298

(2) Ibid

150

(203) وَاذْكُرُواْ اللّهَ فِي أَيَّامٍ مَّعْدُودَاتٍ فَمَن تَعَجَّلَ
فِي يَوْمَيْنِ فَلاَ إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ وَمَن تَأَخَّرَ فَلا إِثْمَ
عَلَيْهِ لِمَنِ اتَّقَى وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّكُمْ
إِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ

203. " Celebrate the praise of Allah during the appointed days
(Dhul-Hijjah 11,12,13) , but whoever hastens off within two days, it
will be no sin on him, and whoso tarries (there) , on him (also) there
will be no sin, (this is) for him who guards (against evil) . Then be in
awe of Allah, and know that unto Him you shall be (all) gathered."

**Commentary:**

This verse, following to the explanation of the remembrance of Allah at
the conclusion of the performance of the rites of Pilgrimage, defines
the process of it and that they, instead of vain boastings of the Age of
Ignorance, must specifically remember Allah in a few days the minimum of
which is two days. These days, based on the frame of reference of the
former verses, are the days after the Feast of Sacrifice which naturally
are the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth of the month. In the
terminology of traditions, these days are called 'the days of Tashriq '.
As this appellation denotes, these days are the time when the mind and
spirit of a person can be delighted under the light of the performance
of those splendid religious rites.

" Celebrate the praise of Allah during the appointed days (Dhul-Hijjah
11,12,13) , but whoever hastens off within two days, it will be no sin
on him, and whoso tarries (there) , on him (also) there will be no sin,
..." In the Islamic literature, it is recommended that after the fifteen
daily prayers, (the first of which is the noon prayer on the Feast of
Sacrifice and its final one is the morning prayer on the thirteenth day
of the month) , the following inspiring phrases be recited; the Arabic
transliteration of which are pronounced thus:

151

" Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar, la 'ilaha 'illallahu wallahu akbar,
Allahu akbar, wa lillahil hamd, Allahu akbaru 'ala ma hadana, Allahu
akbaru 'ala ma razaqna min bahimatil-'an'am, wal-hamdu lillahi 'ala ma
'ablana "

" Allah is great, Allah is great. There is no God save Allah. Allah is
great. Allah is great and all praise is due to Allah. Allah is great in
that He has guided us. Allah is great in that He has granted us animals
for sustenance, and all praise is due to Allah for what He has destined
for us."

This part of the verse which says: " it will be no sin on him " may
point to the choice of either two or three days in remembrance of Allah.
Then, this clause means that there is no sin upon the one who chooses
either of them. (And, the primary apparent meaning of the phrase is this
very one.) Also, these words may be rendered to the negation of sin
absolutely for the pilgrims of the Sacred House. According to this
interpretation, after the performance of the rites of Hajj, having been
done faithfully and with full attention and sincerity, which ends with
the above mentioned holy phrases, all the signs of former sins and their
evil remaining consequences upon the heart and soul of pilgrims will be
wiped out. It is at this time that the pilgrims, with clean souls and
free from the burden of sins, leave that great site, i.e., that moral
training land. The commentators have taken the term /li-man-it-taqa/, "
(this is) for him who guards (against evil) ", as an attestation to this
recent mentioned meaning.

At the end of the verse, it advises us that we mortals should be in awe
of Allah and be aware that our path is unto Him and we all will be
mustered when our deeds, whether good or evil, will be reckoned and we
will be rewarded for them.

" Then be in awe of Allah, and know that unto Him you shall be (all)
gathered."


