Author's Foreword
=================

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful***

Blessed and praised is the best of His (SwT) creation, Muhammad (S), and
so are the elites from among his progeny and the selected ones from
among his companions.

The need of public and private Islamic circles, I mean those interested
in knowledge and sciences, for editing the principles-related
requirements on which the Islamic creed is based and for purifying them
from impurities, after views about them had spread here and there
according to the diversity of inclinations and desires.

The truth in issues relevant to the creed's beliefs has almost been
buried and its candles put out, except in the chests of special ones
from among those who bear it, who are its bastions, those who purged
their souls of their own unholy desires, cleansing their hands of the
dirhams (cash) of the men of authority.

In order to fill this terrifying vacuum, His Holiness the *allama*, our
mentor, Professor Jafar Subhani Tabrizi, may Allah (SwT) protect him and
elevate him to a high station, undertook a serious task, drawing a
curtain on his comfort and rest, so he was equipped for lofty
undertakings. He labored for years, actually decades, during which he
abandoned his soul's desires and pursuits till he achieved what is
recorded in psalmsâ€™ verses, diving deeply in pursuit of everything that
is veiled till he reached it.

Then he over-poured the gist of what he inhaled of the fountain of the
Book of Allah, the Sunnah of His Prophet (S) and his guiding progeny, as
well as the sublime rules of philosophy and wisdom. Through the grace of
Allah (SwT), Praise belongs only to Him, and His boon on myself, I
received it with full awareness, exerting in controlling its pursuits my
very best efforts, so much so that it came out in your hands a tablet
shining like Venus in the sky as high as Capricorn. It is a book in
which the roots of pursuits related to the creed and its branches are
compiled. It solves problems and dispels doubts. It is deep in thought,
solid and clear in statements, precise in classification and definition.

Allah (SwT), Praise belongs to Him, is the One to Whom we plead to
accept this deed, to enable the offspring of our generation and of those
of the coming ones to benefit from it, to make it a lantern leading to
what is right, a lighthouse for guidance, through His boons, favors and
greatness; Allah (SwT) blesses Muhammad (S) and the pure progeny of
Muhammad (S).

**Hassan Muhammad Makki**
Holy Qum on the 4th of Holy Month of Shawwal, 1408 (May 21, 1988)


