Hearing and Seeing
==================

One of the Attributes of the Praised One is hearing and seeing, and
among His Names are: the Hearing, the Seeing. These two descriptions
exist in the true Islamic Sharia. Describing the most Praised One as
being Hearing and Seeing in the Quran and Sunnah is *mutawatir*,
consecutively reported. But there have been differences in the reality
of both of these descriptions according to statements the most
significant of which are the following.

1. His (attributes of) hearing and vision, Praise belongs to Him, are
not different from our describing Him as having knowledge. Rather, they
are among the branches of His knowledge of what is heard and seen. Due
to His knowledge of both of them, He is said to be Hearing, Seeing.

2. Both descriptions are senses-related that are different from the
absolute comprehension of knowledge, but they are proper nouns that are
relevant to what is beyond His absolute knowledge without a plurality of
the self or a requirement for embodiment. This is so because He knows
everything/every-one that hears and sees. Being aware of what can be
heard is hearing, seeing what can be seen is vision, yet this is
different from His absolute knowledge of general things that are not
heard and not seen.[^1]

If you become familiar with the statements, let us indicate an
introduction here.

Hearing in the case of man takes place through natural equipment and
tools. Voice waves reach the head, and from there to the material brain,
then one realizes it.

Yet there must be an emphasis on something interesting here. Is the
presence of these material tools a requirement for achieving vision and
hearing in a special status such as for animal or man, or is it an
intruder into their reality in the general sense? There is no doubt that
these equipment and tools, which science explains in its own way, are
only particularities relevant to material man who cannot hear or see
without them.

If we suppose there is an existent that reaches the same thing which man
reaches without these tools, it would be more appropriate for him to be
hearing and seeing because the goal anticipated from hearing and seeing
is the arrival of the waves and images at the one that realizes them.
Had the waves and images been present with an existent without a
physical or chemical action, he, too, would be hearing and seeing
because the goal is reached in a more perfect and in a higher way.

When researching the levels of His knowledge, it is proven that all
worlds are present with Him, Praise belongs to Him. All things, what is
heard and seen in particular, are absolutely His own actions and, at the
same time, His own knowledge, the most Exalted One that He is. The
world, in all its essences and manifestations, is present with Him.
Thereupon, His knowledge of what is heard suffices to describe Him as
Hearing. Likewise, His knowledge of what is seen suffices to describe
Him as Seeing.

Yes, it is true, His knowledge of what is heard or seen is not the same
like His knowledge, Praise belongs to Him, of totalities. Thus do you
become familiar with the difference between the first statement and the
second.

Answering a Question
--------------------

If the presence of what is heard and seen with Him, Praise belongs to
Him, serves as correctly describing Him as Hearing and Seeing, can this
by itself be correctly describe Him as having the ability to touch,
taste, smell?

The answer to this question is clear after we become familiar with the
fact that His Names, Praise belongs to Him, are subject to one’s own
*ijtihad*. This is so because what is smelled, tasted, touched, etc. are
all present with Him, Praise belongs to Him, similarly to the presence
of what is heard and seen. Since He is the Living, the self-Sustaining,
i.e. the One Who needs nothing/nobody to sustain Him, while He sustains
others, what can be existent, in all its levels, stands through Him,
Praise belongs to Him.

Thereupon, there is no difference in as far as labeling something as
belonging to Him or describing a statement as being correct. But, since
it is said that His Names, the most Exalted One, hinge on closing the
door of all this commotion and hoopla in defining Him, Praise belongs to
Him, it is absolutely wrong to apply touching, tasting, smelling, etc.
to Him.

“The Hearing” and “The Seeing” in the Quran and Sunnah
------------------------------------------------------

He, the most Praised One, has described Himself as being the Hearing,
the Seeing. The first is repeated 41 times and the second is repeated 42
times in the Holy Quran.

Among the objectives to which the Holy Quran guides us by way of His
being described by these two names is to acquaint man with the fact that
His Lord is all-Hearing; He hears whatever speech man utters; He sees
whatever actions he does, so He will one Day hold him accountable for
what He heard and saw. The most Praised One says,

***“And in your oaths, do not make God's (name) an excuse for not doing
good or acting rightly or making peace among others, for Allah is the
all-Hearing, all-Knowing” (Qur’an, 2:224);***

***“Then fight in the cause of Allah and be informed that Allah hears
and knows all things” (Qur’an, 2:244);***

***“And He is with you wherever you may be. And Allah sees well all that
you do” (Qur’an, 57:4),***

and

***“Allah (always) hears the arguments between both sides among you, for
Allah hears and sees (all things)” (Qur’an, 58:1).***

Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib, peace with him, has said, “And He is the Seeing
but not through the distinguishing of a tool, the Witness but not
through coming in contact with things.”[^2]

He, peace with him, has also said, “One who speaks hears his
articulation, and one who remains silent knows what he conceals.”[^3]

Imam Ali ibn Mousa al-Ridha, peace with him, has said, “Allah is and has
always been, the most Exalted One, Able, Living, Timeless, Hearing and
Seeing.”[^4]

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq, peace with him, has said, “He, the most Exalted
One, is Hearing and Seeing. He hears without a faculty, sees without a
tool. Rather, He hears by Himself, sees by Himself.”[^5]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, peace with him, has said, “He is Hearing,
Seeing; He hears through what He sees, sees through what He hears.”[^6]

The previous tradition points out to the unity of His Attributes, Praise
belongs to Him, with His own Self, and the unity of each with the other
in the position of the Self. The fact of hearing in Himself, Praise
belongs to Him, is not different from the fact of seeing. Rather, He
hears through what He sees, sees through what He hears. His essence is
all hearing and seeing.

[^1]: Al-Asfar, Vol. 6, pp. 421-23.

[^2]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 155.

[^3]: Ibid., Sermon 182.

[^4]: Al-Saduq, Tawhid, pp. 140, 144.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Ibid.


