Freewill
========

Freewill is one of His characteristics/attributes, Glory to Him, and is
one of the meanings of His Names, there is no doubt among the
theologians at all about it. But they have differed about the reality of
His freewill, the most Exalted One that He is. Therefore, we have to
delve into two situations:

**One:** We must review the opinions submitted about explaining freewill
in the absolute sense.

**Second:** We must explain the distinctions of the Divine Freewill.

What is the Reality of Freewill?
--------------------------------

One being willing or unwilling reflects two psychological statuses, as
is the case with all psychological statuses which man finds by himself
without any intermediary like pleasure, pain, and such feelings. But the
goal is to analyze this sentimental matter scientifically and coin it
also scientifically. Here are the views submitted in this regard:

A. The Mutazilites have explained freewill to be the “belief in
benefiting” and hating as “belief in harm,” saying that the ratio of the
ability at both ends of the action and inaction is even. If the belief
of benefiting happens in one of the ends, it is preferred and the doer
becomes effective in its regard. One can notice that this explanation is
quite incomplete. The mere belief of benefit is not the start of an
effect, of an action, for quite often one’s belief in benefit exists in
many actions, yet he does not want those actions. He may believe in its
existence in them. Actually, he believes in the presence of harm, yet he
seeks it in agreement with some carnal forces.

B. Another group has interpreted freewill as a psychological yearning
that takes place in man after he believes in its benefit. One can notice
that explaining the will to mean yearning is quite deficient, for there
may be a will, but there is no yearning, as is the case when one takes
bitter medicines for treatment. Confirmed yearning may be realized, yet
there is no freewill that creates the deed, as is the case with a pious
man facing prohibitions and banned inclinations. For this reason, the
ratio is between the freewill and yearning in general.

C. Freewill is a psychological status that intervenes between positive
knowledge and action, and it is described once as objective and as a
determination, and once as resolve and a decision. This is not the
objective behind yearning in both its sections, what is confirmed and
what is not. Also, this cannot apply to knowledge despite its presence
in the individual, as is the case with all other methodologies.

In short, the truth of the freewill is “an objective, a sure inclination
towards carrying out a deed.”

These are some various explanations of the reality of the freewill, and
there are other theories that we have preferred to ignore.

At any rate, the Divine Freewill cannot be explained through the use of
any of the above. As for the first, you have already come to know that
explaining freewill as belief in a benefit requires the denial of the
absolute freewill in the possible existents in addition to Allah, Glory
to Him. This is so because they are rendered to knowledge of a benefit,
although we find in ourselves something beyond knowledge and belief in a
benefit.

One who advocates this theory proves science while denying freewill. If
it is wrong to interpret freewill as belief in something beneficial in
possible existents, it will likewise be wrong to interpret His freewill,
the most Praised One, too. You will come to know that one who explains
the freewill of Allah, Praised is He, as being knowledge of what is the
best, is influenced by this explanation. But he substitutes knowledge of
what is apparently beneficial to the individual with knowledge of what
is the best which suits His status, Praise belongs to Him, which aims at
looking after the interests of His servants, so consider.

As regarding the second explanation, I mean eagerness or anxiety, the
sure yearning, had it been applicable to man, it would have been
non-applicable to Allah, Glory to Him, because He, the most Praised One,
is above sentimental yearning, anxiety. Yearning for something is the
doing of a doer who is deficient and who wants to come out of his
deficiency towards perfection, so he definitely yearns for something.

As regarding the third explanation, whether it is explained as an
objective and determination, or resolve and decision-making, its reality
is something that comes into existence after having been non-existent.
In this sense, it is impossible for it to describe Him because doing so
requires His being subject to eventualities.[^1]

Since these definitions do not fit Him, Praise belongs to Him, the
theologians have been divided into two groups: One group tries to make
them among the attributes of the self but in a different meaning. The
other group makes them attributes of an action, concluding that the
freewill, such as creating, sustaining, etc., are derived from His
action, Praise belongs to Him, from the impacts of His might. This group
has relieved itself of the burden of confusion about their being
self-attributes. Let us now talk about the theories of both of these
groups.

Explaining Particularity of Divine Freewill
-------------------------------------------

Since freewill in the previously stated meanings does not suit Him,
Praise belongs to Him, while, on the other hand, freewill and the doer
comprise a willing one, in contrast to being non-willing, is His
perfection, whereas its absence is a shortcoming. Men of wisdom and
critics have tried to describe Him, Praise belongs to Him, in a meaning
that properly suits Him, and here is an explanation of this attempt in a
different way:

### His Freewill, Praise Belongs to Him, is His Knowledge of the Best System.

His freewill, Praise belongs to Him, is His knowledge of the most
suitable, the most perfect and the most complete system. They have
explained it through the above descriptions because they fled away from
describing the most Praised One by something that is incidental and
sequential, descriptions that require action and sentiment, as is the
case with the human freewill.

Mulla Sadra has said, “The meaning of His having a freewill is that He,
Praise to Him, is wise, knowing the system of goodness that is present
everywhere through Him, and how each system came to be. System is
undoubtedly present and overwhelming.”[^2]

He has also said, “His freewill, Praise belongs to Him, by itself is His
knowledge of the most perfect system; He Himself is the One Who bids
(and forbids) while nobody else does.”[^3]

The critic al-Tusi has said, “His freewill, Praise belongs to Him, is
the knowledge of the system of everything in the most perfect way. If
ability and knowledge are the same thing, requiring the existence of
what is likely to exist according to the most perfect system, ability,
knowledge and freewill would be the same thing in His Essence, varying
according to rational considerations.”[^4]

#### Discussing Theory

Undoubtedly, the most Praised One knows by Himself, is knowledgeable of
the most perfect, complete and suitable system. But to interpret His
freewill reverts to denying the freewill reality in Him, Praise belongs
to Him. Denying it, when it comes to (discussing) Him, leads to denying
His perfection.

There is no doubt that a willing doer is more perfect than a doer who is
motivated by his own desire. If we interpret His freewill, Praise
belongs to Him, as being His knowledge of the system (of all systems),
we will have denied His perfection and identified Him as a doer similar
to one who is obligated to do what he does. Thus, looking into the
statement by al-Tusi the critic, we see that he imagined that ability
and knowledge are one and the same when applied to Him while being
different according to rational considerations.

Due to the inaccuracy of this explanation, we see that the Imams from
among the Ahl al-Bayt, peace with them, deny interpreting it as being
knowledge. Bukair ibn Ayan has said, “I said to Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq
(as), ‘Are His knowledge and freewill different from each other or are
they the same?’ He (as) said, ‘Knowledge is not freewill. Do you not see
how you say that you will do something *if* Allah wills, whereas you do
not say that you will do it IF Allah *knows*?!’”[^5]

If you will, you can say that freewill is a characteristic applied to
one of two options: doing or not doing something. This applies to all
times, all aspects of an action, whether it is to be done or not. So, it
is not the same as freewill that opts for one, treating ability as being
equally applicable to both options.

As regarding knowledge, it is one of the principles that are distant
from freewill. Freewill is a principle that is close to an action. It
does not make sense to regard both of them as being one and the same.

Yes, His knowledge of what is good and bad applies to one of the
options. Although this can be regarded as being rational, it cannot be
called freewill even if it has something in common with freewill in the
outcome which is the following. The doer applies his might to undertake
one of two options. Sharing the result does not necessitate knowledge to
be regarded as freewill, and it suffices to apply perfection to it, that
is, the freewill.

#### Question and Answer

It may be asked, “Why should the reality of freewill be the same as His
knowledge, the most Praised One? Had the reality of the first been
different from that of the other, this would have required plurality
within Him, Praise belongs to Him. And plurality is the tool of
composition, while composition depends on probability because each part
needs the other parts, and the Almighty is above all of this.”

The answer is this. It means that the attributes are united with one
another, and the whole is united with the self. He, Praise belongs to
Him, is all knowledge, all might, all life. These attributes, in their
realities, are present in the Self by way of simplicity. It is wrong to
say that some of them are life and others are knowledge, whereas a third
is might because this requires composition in the Self. This is not
meant to render the reality of one of the attributes to the other by
saying, for example, that His knowledge is His might. This will end up
denying all attributes and proving only one.

Briefly, there is only one pure and simple fact that incorporates
knowledge, life and ability in its reality without creating plurality
and composition in the Self. This is not to say that the reality of His
will is the reality of His knowledge because it will require a denial of
the reality of freewill and resolve. This will end up denying the
freewill (altogether). Also, to say that the reality of His might is
rendered to His knowledge ends up denying the might rather than proving
the unity. In order to explain what we mean, let us say the following.

We can derive many concepts from the simple thing, and each concept can
be a reality without multiplying or composing. Take the outside man as
related to Allah, Praise belongs to Him. All of man is the doing of the
might of Allah, all of him is known by Allah. It is wrong to say that
some of him came to be through His might, while some of him came to be
through His knowledge. All (beings and inanimate objects) are there
through His might while being, at the same time, known by Him. It is
wrong to say that some of them are there due to His might while others
are there due to His knowledge. All are decreed by Him and, at the same
time, are known to Him. Despite all of this, the reality of what is
known is not the same like that of what is decreed.

With this much can you find His essence, Praise belongs to Him, to be
all-Knowing, all-Might, and every description has its reality without
plurality or composition.[^6]

### His Freewill, Praise Belongs to Him, Is His Pleasure With What He Does

His freewill, the most Praised One that He is, is the pleasure of His
Holy Self with His deeds, His acceptance of them. Since He disseminates
and perfects what is good, He is fully pleased. From this self-pleasure
comes pleasure in the phase of the deed. When one loves something, he
loves its effects and requirements, and this actual love is the freewill
in the phase of the action, and it is the one to which reports have
rendered freewill as being one of His deeds.

Freewill has two phases: a freewill in the status of the self, and a
freewill in the status of the action. His self-pleasure is an innate
will. His pleasure with His deeds is freewill taking the form of action.

What one can resign about the above is that it is a theory similar to
the one that preceded it, and it does not produce a conclusion. The
reality of the freewill is not the same like that of acceptance, and it
is not the same like the reality of pleasure. To explain one through the
other is denial of this perfection in His Holy Self, Praise belongs to
Him.

It has already been stated that a willing doer is better and more
perfect than his opposite: one who has to do something out of necessity.
Such perfection in Him can never be denied. Rather, He must be described
as such according to the particular development that we reviewed in
describing life, and its details will reach you in the proper place.

### His Freewill, Praise Belongs to Him, Affects Might and Authority

When a group of logicians found out that the most Praised One could not
be described as having “freewill”, and it cannot be counted among His
attributes, because there are confusions about it which you have already
come to know, they made it one of the characteristics of action, such as
His being the Creator, Sustainer, etc. They have said, “We cannot
imagine a meaning for His freewill, the most Exalted One that He is,
other than affecting might and authority.”

Since the might of the Almighty is perfect from all aspects and
directions, and no shortcoming can ever be imagined in it at all,
naturally, the action is actualized in the outside. It is then that
might is affected without relying on another introduction, as we
understand from this verse:

***“His command is, “Be,” and it is!” (Qur’an, 36:82).***

There are indications about it. Affecting might and authority, be it
voluntarily as in His case, Praise belongs to Him, or involuntary, and
there is no way for the second because it requires the Almighty to be
forced to do something, and in this case He cannot be described as being
Omni-Potent, Able.

Regarding the first, is it the role of His being a volunteer doer? Prior
to affecting might and implementing authority, there has to be something
that affects Him, since He is a voluntary doer. So, it is not sufficient
to simply affect authority.

Briefly, simply affecting authority without proving that He has somehow
chosen it by Himself is to no avail.

### His Freewill, Praise Belongs to Him, is Equal Cause: Action Ratio

Allama Tabatabai has regarded this attribute of the Almighty as being
one of the descriptions of His actions. The conclusion of his theory is
this: The only attribute from among the self’s, which man finds within
him and which can be labeled as freewill, is that of “purpose”. This
“purpose”, which is a mediator between knowledge and the actualization
of an action is the doer’s psychological inclination to undertake the
action.

Freewill can never be described correctly as knowledge because we
realize, with our conscience, that our will intervenes between our
knowledge of the action and our actually doing it, not of the same
knowledge.

Thereupon, if we want to describe the Almighty as having freewill, after
stripping it of shortcomings, we cannot apply it to His knowledge
because the essence and truth of knowledge is different from that of
freewill. Stripping freewill of shortcomings does not, in fact, make it
united with knowledge.

Also, once stripped of shortcomings, freewill becomes an actual
attribute of Allah Almighty, similarly to the attributes of creating,
bringing into being, granting mercy, etc.

Explanation: When all introductions and causes for creating an action
are completed, the characteristics of the freewill will then be
stripped, so the Almighty becomes “willing” and the action “willed”
without the existence, in that case, of any description for the freewill
other than the status of completing the causes behind it.

In other words, freewill, in as far as the Almighty is concerned, is an
adjective derived from the combination of causes and requirements for
bringing a thing into being. At that juncture, the perfecting of the
action’s introductions and their perfection is attributed once to the
action and once to Allah Almighty. So, if it is attributed to the
action, this status of “perfecting the introductions” is called “the
will of the action” and the action itself as “the will of Allah”. If it
is attributed to Allah Almighty, this status is called “Allah’s
freewill” and Allah Almighty is called “the One Who wills it”.

The *allama*, may Allah sanctify him, says, “The evidences which the men
of wisdom have produced to prove that freewill is one of the attributes
of the self do not prove more than this: All manifestations of existence
rely on the might and knowledge of the Almighty of the best system. They
do not prove that His will, the Almighty that He is, is the same as his
knowledge or might.”[^7]

One may resign that had the factor for the absolution of freewill been
the completion of the action, in as far as the cause is concerned, it
would require the soundness of its absolution in case the doer is
completely forced with regard to the action’s cause, which you will come
to see.

Moreover, the perfection of the cause, whether the doer is knowledgeable
and aware, is a reality, while freewill is another reality. We have
already said that the descriptions must be applied to Allah, Praise
belongs to Him, after stripping them of the impurities of possibility
and material nature while having reservations about its meaning, not
stripping it of its truth and reality.

### The Truth in the Matter

The truth is that freewill is one of the entitative attributes, and it
applies to Him, the most Praised One, according to the progress which we
mention in “life”. In order to explain our objective, we would like to
make a useful statement about all His Attributes, Praise belongs to Him.

Every theologian, in the process of applying His Attributes to Him,
Praise belongs to Him, must strip these Attributes of the impurities of
shortcomings, space, etc., and must understand them in the sense that
suits Him while being reserved about their facts and realities even
after such stripping.

For example, we describe Him, Praise belongs to Him, as being
all-Knowledgeable, and we apply it stripped of particularities, probable
limits, but while being reserved about its reality which is: the
presence of knowledge with the all-Knowledgeable One. As regarding His
knowledge being entitative or an addition between the Knowledgeable One
and what He knows, He is above such particularities.

The case with freewill is similar. Undoubtedly, it describes His
perfection, Praise belongs to Him, and it is applied to Him stripped of
the characteristics of taking place, eventuality, progression and
termination once the objective is achieved, for all of these are
characteristics of potential freewill. Rather, what is meant by
describing Him as having freewill is that He is a doer by choice versus
being a doer who has no choice. This is the basis followed in applying
His Attributes, Praise belongs to Him, and here is its explanation for
you in the freewill process.

The doer may either be effective by nature, not knowing his action,
which is the natural doer, such as the fire when burning. Or he may know
his action but not desiring it, becoming a doer without a freewill such
as one’s shiver. Or he may be knowing, reluctant in doing his deed that
he does because it is the lesser evil and the lighter harm, as is the
case with a reluctant doer. Or he may be knowledgeable and willing, not
hating his deed yet is pleased with it.

The last two types, though having in common a willing doer, but since
the doer in the first division is overcome by an external factor, his
deed is not regarded as a manifestation of perfect choice. Contrarily to
the second, the doer has perfect choice and his deed is a manifestation
of his choice.

This true restriction, which revolves between negation and affirmation,
drags us to say that His action, Praise belongs to Him, is according to
one of the following norms:

He may be a doer lacking knowledge, or knowledgeable lacking freewill,
or willing knowledgeable but hating his action because of the existence
of a might subduing him, or he is knowledgeable, willing and is pleased
with his action. The action of the Creator, Praise to Him, is not one of
these norms. The first three do not suit Him, Praise belongs to Him.
Therefore, He has to be a doer who is willing, holding the reins of his
deed and action, not being forced to create and bring into existence.
This is on the one hand.

On the other hand, the freewill in the levels of probability never stops
taking place, progressing and terminating after the goal is reached. It
is known that applying it in this way to Allah, Praise belongs to Him,
is impossible because it requires Him to be the object of His deed. So,
if we apply it to Him, Praise belongs to Him, we must remove these
impurities. The objective behind His freewill will then be His own
choice, that He is not forced to do what He does, not falling under the
pressure of a higher force.

If it is accurate to label this choice as “freewill”, it is a good
objective. Otherwise, we have to say that it is one of the
characteristics of action.

In other words, freewill is an attribute of perfection not because it is
casual, and it terminates after the objective is reached. Rather, it is
an attribute of perfection. This is so because it symbolizes choosing
and is a characteristic of non-obligation, so much so that the reluctant
doer has a share in making a choice. He chooses one of the ends of an
action over that of the other following rational computations, so he
prefers doing a deed over the expected harm it will bring.

If the goal and objective behind describing the doer as having the
freewill is to prove his having the might to choose, that he is not
forced, this describes Him, Glory to Him, as enjoying the ability to
choose. He is not being overcome in His might. He is not being obligated
to affect His might. Suffices to apply freewill to Him because He is the
One Who chooses, who creates the perfect freewill in the most perfect
way.

It has already been stated that there is a requirement when applying the
attributes to abandon the principles and to stick to the direction of
perfection. The perfection of freewill is not in being coincidental,
fleeting after the objective is achieved, or due to the doer taking it
out of might to the action, or from defect to perfection.

Actually, its perfection lies in its doer having the option, being in
control of his action, holding the reins of his deeds. If such is the
perfection of freewill, Allah, Praise belongs to Him, is apt to it in
the most perfect way. He is the choosing doer, the One Who is not
subdued in His domain:

***“Allah has full might and control over His affairs” (Qur’an,
12:21).***

Freewill in the Sunnah
----------------------

It appears from precious narrations of the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (as)
that His command and freewill are among the attributes of His actions,
such as His being the One Who sustains, creates, etc. Here are excerpts
from these narratives.

1. Asim ibn Humayd quotes Imam Abu Abdullah (al-Sadiq) (as) as saying,
“… I (Asim) said, ‘Does Allah ever cease to be willing (enjoying
freewill)?’ He said, ‘Nobody who is willing is without an objective
present with him. Allah never ceases to be Knowing, Able, then He
wills.’”[^8]

It seems that the freewill the narrator had in mind and about which he
inquired is the freewill in the sense of determination to undertake an
action, something that is never separated from a deed. So, the Imam (as)
wanted to guide him to the freewill that has such a meaning, that it
cannot be one of His entitative attributes because this would require
what is anticipated to be timeless or the one who anticipates it to be
temporal.

So that the narrator may receive an accurate meaning for freewill that
suits his level of thinking, the Imam (as) explained freewill in the
sense that applies to Him, Praise belongs to Him, in the station of the
action. He said, “Allah never ceases to be Knowing, Able, then He
wills,” that is, then He creates. But the context of the narrative does
not negate the freewill as being one of His entitative attributes in a
way which does not require the objective to be timeless which is: He,
the most Praised One, chooses by self, He is neither obliged nor
obligated.

Thus, it is obvious there are two phases for His freewill just like His
knowledge, and each has its own particular explanation.

2. Safwan ibn Yahya has narrated saying, “I said to the father of
al-Hassan (as), “Tell me about the freewill from (the side of) Allah and
from creation.”

The Imam (as) said, “The creation’s freewill is the conscience. The
action that appears to them comes from the deed. As regarding it’s being
from Allah Almighty, His freewill is His creating and nothing else
because He does not premeditates, nor does He intends nor contemplates.
These actions are negated about Him, they belong to His creation.
Allah’s freewill is His action and is nothing else. He says, ‘Be!’ and
it is without articulating or speaking or determining or contemplating,
nor is there a ‘how’ for it. Also, there is no ‘how’ for His
actions.”[^9]

This narrative is united with its predecessor in explaining and
analyzing. The freewill that was discussed by both Imam (as) and
narrator is the freewill in the sense of the “conscience” and what
appears to the anticipator to be the event. It is known that the
freewill in this meaning is the norm of happening, the indicator of a
probability, and the most Praised One cannot be described as such. For
this reason, the Imam (as) focused on negating it in this sense, in as
far as the Creator is concerned, saying, “He does not premeditate, nor
does He intend or contemplate.”

But, so that the narrator could receive a sound concept of the freewill
that suits the level of his mentality, the Imam (as) explained the
freewill as the will to do an action. He (as) said, “Allah’s freewill is
His action and nothing else. He says, ‘Be!’ and it is…” While observing
these aspects, it is not right for us to say that the Imam (as) was in
the process of negating freewill as being one of the entitative
attributes, not even in the sense that suits the most Holy One.

3. Muhammad ibn Muslim has quoted Abu Abdullah (as) as saying, “Freewill
brings about an action.”[^10]

The goal behind describing His freewill, the most Praised One that He
is, as bringing about an action is to distance the narrator’s mind from
interpreting it as the determination to undertake an action and making
it a description of the Self. Interpreting freewill in this sense is not
without faults, including the willing doer being timeless.

For this purpose, the Imam (as) explained freewill through one of its
two meanings: freewill substituting the action. He said, “Freewill is
His action,” an indication that His action takes place and is not
timeless.

Thus, you can explain the narratives about the freewill. These
narratives focus on its being a description of His action, Praise
belongs to Him.[^11]

There are questions here about His freewill, Praise belongs to Him,
being an entitative attribute. You have already become familiar with
what we have stated about it, so you can answer these questions. Here
are some of those questions.

1. The scales in distinguishing the entitative attributes from the
operative attributes, as stated by mentor al-Kulayni at the conclusion
to the chapter about freewill, is that the first is not categorized
within the frame of negation and affirmation; rather it is singly
relevant. It is not said that Allah knows and does not know. This is
contrary to the second which falls under the cycle of negation and
affirmation, so it is said that Allah grants and does not grant. In the
light of this, the freewill must be one of the operative attributes. It
is the object of negation and affirmation. The most Praised One says,

***“Allah desires ease for you, and He does not desire hardship for you”
(Qur’an, 2:185).***

The answer to this question follows two paths:

**One:** The freewill that is subject to negation and affirmation stands
in the position of action. As for the freewill that stands in the
position of the self, which we interpreted as the perfection of
freewill, i.e. option, it does not fall within the frame of negation and
affirmation.

**Two:** This question is also answered by Mulla Sadra who believes that
Allah, Praise belongs to Him, has a simple freewill the essence of which
is unknown, and that the object of negation and affirmation is the
numerical particle will which undertakes the function of an action. As
for the origin of the simple freewill, the most Praised One being a doer
having freewill, is neither obligated nor forced, Allah, Praise belongs
to Him, cannot be robbed of it.

The origin of confusion is mixing the simple will that undertakes the
position of the self, which cannot be made plural or dual, with the
numerical freewill which undertakes the position of action which can be
plural, dual, etc., and it can be negated or affirmed.

Sadra said, “The difference between the detailed numerical will, which
is relevant to a portion of natural numbers, or to one of two ends of a
probability, as is the case with able animals, and between the truly
simple Divine freewill the comprehension of which wears out the minds of
the greatest men of wisdom and others.”[^12]

2. Had freewill been the same as His Essence, Praise belongs to Him, the
world would have had a beginning because it is united with the Self, and
the Self is described by it, and it is inseparable from the objective.

The above can be criticized as follows:

**First:** The confusion is not restricted to those who made the
freewill, in its true sense, as a description of His Essence, Praise
belongs to Him. Rather, the confusion also reaches those who explained
His freewill as meaning knowledge of what is the most fitting based on
the existence of things to the knowledge of the most perfect system
which is His own Self. It is impossible to separate the effect from the
cause.

It is quite clear without any distinction between calling this knowledge
freewill or something else. Had the most perfect system been rendered to
His knowledge, with the supposition that His knowledge is timeless, the
system itself would have been timeless, too, due to the timelessness of
its causality.

**Second:** If we say that His freewill, Praise belongs to Him, means
His being choosing, not obligated by either side, the world would then
have to be timeless if He chooses to create the world at a later time.

Mulla Sadra and those who follow in his footsteps believe our ignorance
of the reality of this simple unknown entitative freewill and how it
functions deters us from knowing how His action comes up, and why He
created an incident instead of doing so before then.

There is something very interesting here that needs to be brought up as
a comment about this research after having drawn attention to time being
a connected whole extracted from something’s movement and change from
one status to another, from one place to another, as well as from one
quantum image to another. The sum of movement is time. Had it not been
for the matter and its movement, time would have had no true meaning; it
would have been a thing of the imagination.

The above has been proven by in-depth researches in time and motion. The
ancients used to claim that time is born of the movement of the stars,
the sun and the moon and other planets, but the fact is that every
movement is tied to time that draws and generates it.

In a more precise statement, the alterations, be they elemental or
ethereal, contain two matters. The first is the status of moving from
the start to the end, whether this movement is in the description or in
the self. The other is that this movement takes place gradually, it
flows rather than thrusts.

According to the first matter according to which movement is described,
and according to the other in which time is described. It is as though
one thing that is named change, alteration, movement, becomes the start
of our extracting two concepts from it, each having its own
consideration. This is on the one hand.

On the other hand, matter is realized gradually, in stages, and it does
not take place as a whole because its reality is fluid, gradual,
similarly to the flow of water. Every material phenomenon takes place
following a particular cause. Anything such as this is impossible to
materialize as a whole, or a portion of it advances or lags behind.
Rather, each part has to materialize within its own condition and place.

Accordingly, numbers and figures are similar. The number 5, for example,
has no place to come to exist except between 4 and 6. It is impossible
for it to advance before its position or to lag behind it. Thereupon,
the causes and causations that result from a particular system are
impossible to permit any of its portions to depart from its position and
place.

If you come to know this matter, let us return now to explaining this
interesting thing which is: What does one mean when he says that the
entitative attribute of Allah, Glory to Him, requires the world being
timeless? If he means that the world has to materialize in a time that
precedes it and in a past period, this (theory) fails due to the first
requirement. This is so because it is presupposed that there is no time
before the world of matter since you have come to know that the matter’s
movement draws time and generates it.

If he means that some of its portions have to precede others, or that
they precede the whole world, you know that this is impossible, and that
getting each portion out of its frame is impossible due to its
nonexistence.

In this regard, Mulla Sadra has made a statement that has a deep
meaning. So, one who wishes to review it has to refer to him.[^13]

[^1]: You will come to know, in the discussion of the negative
attributes, that His Essence, the most Exalted One, is not subject to
events/incidents.

[^2]: Al-Asfar al-Arbaa, Vol. 6, p. 316.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 333.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 331.

[^5]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 109 in a chapter on freewill.

[^6]: In his comments about sufficiency, the critic-mentor al-Isfahani
makes statements in this regard which are very useful for you; so, refer
to the conclusion of Al-Diraya, Vol. 1, pp. 116-17 (Tehran edition).

[^7]: Our objective is to provide a clear report of what this holy
person indicated as cited in Taaleeq al-Asfar, Vol. 6, pp. 315-16 and in
Nihayat al-Hikma, p. 300.

[^8]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 109, in a chapter about freewill,
first tradition.

[^9]: Ibid., tradition 3.

[^10]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, in a chapter about freewill, tradition 7.

[^11]: Refer to Al-Kafi by thiqatul-Islam al-Kulayni, Vol. 1, pp.
109-11.

[^12]: Al-Asfar, Vol. 6, p. 324.

[^13]: Al-Asfar, Vol. 6, p. 368.


