Speech
======

Following the Quran and Sunnah, Muslims are unanimous that the most
Praised One speaks. It seems that discussing this description is the
first issue submitted for debates in the history of the science of
logic, although this is not definitive. Divine speech issue, what it is,
whether it is incidental or timeless, has occupied the minds of Muslim
scholars and thinkers during the time of the first caliphs. Because of
it, squabbles took place and even bloody clashes the details of which
are recorded in history books. They were described as “**محنة خلق
القرآن**” “trial of creating the Quran”, and we can point out two main
factors behind it.

**First:** The Islamic invasions, in which the Muslims had to mix with
others, became a principle for both Islamic and foreign cultures rubbing
with each other. Within the tumult charged with contradictory
ideologies, the issue of the speech of the most Praised One was
submitted in Islamic circles.

**Second:** The caliphs disseminated the discussion of this issue and
others like it so the thinkers would be thus diverted from criticizing
the actions and deviations of these caliphs.

We have to point out the source of disseminating this idea in particular
and say that discussing the truth about His speech, the most Praised
One, first and, second, its being created or not, incidental or
timeless, was raised by the Christians who were present in the entourage
of the Umayyad dynasty headed by **يوحنا الدمشقي** John of Damascus.
John used to cast doubt into the hearts of the Muslims about their
creed.

Since the Quran indicated that Jesus son of Mary was “the word of Allah
cast to Maryam,” this became a way for this man to spread the concept
that this “word of Allah” was timeless. He did so in a particular way.
He used to ask them, “Is the word of Allah timeless or not?” If they
said it was timeless, he would say, “In this case, you are proving that
Jesus is timeless, too.” But if they answered negatively, he would say,
“But you have already claimed that His speech is created!”

For this reason, the Mutazilites rose to settle the material of the
disputes, saying that the Quran was incidental, created, not timeless;
it was created (by whom?) for Allah, Praise belongs to Him.

Since the issue was never submitted in past Islamic centuries, views in
its regard branched out and contradicted one another, so much so that
some very weak theories came out of it as will be stated later. But the
theory of the Mutazilites was well received during the time period from
the Abbasid ruler al-Mamun to that of al-Mutawakkil. But the matter
turned upside down starting from the time of al-Mutawakkil till the
period of the Mutazilites came to an end in favor of the people of
*hadith* and of the Hanbalis.

During both periods, unfortunate incidents took place and innocent blood
was shed. This distracted the Muslims from thinking about matters of the
world and of the creed. This issue has many ones like throughout the
Muslims’ history!

Before delving into the objective, we have to first submit these
matters:

**First:** The Asharis and Kilabis, who fixed for Allah timeless speech,
have described speech as one of the entitative attributes (of the
Almighty), unlike the Mutazilites and Imamites. According to the latter,
it describes His actions, and you will see how this is justified. This
dispute rose after noticing two contradictory measures. The Asharis
followed the principle of *qiyas* (analogy):

His speech, the speech of the Almighty, describes Him, and everything
that describes Him is timeless. Therefore, His speech, the Almighty that
He is, is timeless. Others have followed a different analogy. The
Almighty’s speech is comprised of organized, different parts that are
successive when it comes to existence, and anything such as this is
eventual. Therefore, His speech is eventual, incidental.

The Asharis, in order to correct His being timeless, interpreted it as a
meaning standing by itself called the self-speech. The Mutazilites and
Imamites have adopted the second *qiyas* and said that His speech means
that He is the One Who created letters and sounds in the outside.
Therefore, it so occurred.

Some Hanbalis (or Hanbalites) issued a statement in this regard that
combines both contradictory analogies. They have said that His speech is
comprised of letters and sounds that stand through Him and, at the same
time, are timeless. This is one of the odd statements and ideas.

**Second:** Explaining His speech, Praise belongs to Him, is not
restricted to the three opinions quoted from the Asharis and Adlis
(Mutazilis and Imamis) as well as from the Hanbalis. Rather, there is a
fourth opinion that is supported by philosophical evidences and is
explained by Quranic texts, and it is also indicated in traditions of
the Imams from among the Ahl al-Bayt (as). Its summary is this: What
informs of His essence and manifestations is His actions and, at the
same time, His speech, and you will come to know how this theory is
explained.

**Third:** The path towards the Asharis fixing this attribute is reason
and towards the Adlis is hearing, and you will be acquainted with the
evidence provided by the Asharis in this regard when we discuss their
theory. As regarded citations, Quranic verses have collaborated it to
describe Him with it. The Almighty has said,

***“Among them are those to whom Allah spoke” (2:253);***

***“Allah spoke directly to Moses” (4:164);***

***“When Moses came to the place appointed by Us, his Lord addressed
him…” (7:143)***

and

***“It is not fitting for a man that Allah should speak to him except by
inspiration, or from behind a veil or by sending a messenger to reveal,
with God's permission, what Allah wills, for He is the Most High, the
Most Wise” (42:51).***

Allah Almighty has explained that His speech to the prophets is no more
than fitting in the following categories:

1. “… other than inspiration (*wahi*),”

2. “… or from behind a veil”,

3. “… or He sends a messenger (angel).”

The Almighty refers to the speech that is cast into the souls of
prophets swiftly and secretly as “inspiration.”

He has also pointed out saying “… or from behind a veil” about His
speech which Moses, peace with him, which was heard at the blessed spot.
The Almighty said,

***“But when he came to the (fire), a voice was heard from the right
bank of the valley, in the blessed spot of the bush (saying): ‘O Moses!
Truly I am Allah, the Lord of the worlds...’” (Qur’an, 28:30).***

He also pointed out saying, “… or He sends a messenger (angel)” in
reference to the instruction in which the angel of revelation plays a
role. The most Praised One has said,

***“With it came down the Spirit of Faith and Truth to your heart and
mind, so that you may admonish” (Qur’an, 26:193-94).***

In reality, the One Who is inspiring in all these three categories is
Allah, Praise belongs to Him, once without a mediator by casting into
one’s soul, or speaking from behind a veil so only voice is heard but
nobody is seen, and once through messengers (of revelation, angels).
These three categories exist in sacred verses.

**Fourth:** The truth about the speech of the most Praised One. You have
already come to know that there is no dispute among Muslims in
describing the most Praised One as speaking, but the dispute is about
its reality first, and from that there are branches of its taking place
and whether it is timeless. So, the research must revolve within two
situations:

First Situation: Truth of His Speech, the Most Exalted One
----------------------------------------------------------

Following are the views submitted about the reality of His speech, that
of the Almighty:

### Theory of the Mutazilis

The Mutazilis have said that the speech of the Almighty is comprised of
sounds and letters not standing by Him, the most High, but He creates
them in others such as the Preserved Tablet, Gabriel, or the Prophet
(S). This has been sated by Abdul-Jabbar, the judge, who said, “The
reality of the speech (is) the organized letters and separated sounds,
and this is similar to His vesting a blessing on someone else, bestowing
sustenance on someone. Thus, He speaks by creating speech in others. It
is not necessary that the doer is affected by the deed.”[^1]

Apparently, His being the speaker in this sense is not disputed, the
dispute is about restricting His speech to this meaning. The author has
said the following in his book *Sharh al-Mawaqif*: “What the Mutazilis
have said is not denied. Rather, we, too, say it, and we call it
articulated speech. We admit that it takes place and that it does not
stand by Him, the most High, but we firm a matter beyond this.”[^2]

It is noted about this theory that what is indicated about explaining
the speech of the most Praised One being letters and sounds in things
correctly applies to the speech with which the most Praised One
addresses someone or some nation. Its way is what the Mutazilis have
stated. The verses that we have indicated, about how the most Praised
One addressed Moses or others, take this into consideration.[^3] But if
there is no specific person or nation to address, His speech, the most
Praised One, will be by way of absolution, which is His action, one that
reflects His goodness, shows His perfection.

The Mutazilis contend themselves with the explanation which they had
stated and which fits in the first category. As regarding the second
category, it does not apply to it. His action by way of absolution is
not similar to sounds and pronouncements. Rather, it is outside
particularities, essences and occurrences. The most Praised One has
called His actions “speech” in more than one verse, and this is the
theory about which we indicate the following:

### Theory of the Men of Wisdom

Undoubtedly, speech in the view of most people is comprised of letters
and sounds produced by the speaker, the one through whom they stand, and
it takes place when there are air waves and vibration, so much so that
if these waves are gone, so is speech. But social man expands in the use
of this term. He calls “speech” a quoted sermon or poetry cited from
someone, saying that this is the speech of the Prophet or the
composition of Imriul Qais although their speech is gone because its
waves and vibrations have gone. It only expands the application of the
term, the witnessing of the impact on what is narrated or cited.

Thereupon, any action by the speaker that produces the same impact that
his speech indicates, without manifesting the meanings and facts the
doer hides within, is accurately labeled as speech by way of expanding
and developing. You have come to know that the lamp was called as such
even when its connotation was as simple as a twig burning. But since its
effect, giving light, exists in the oil-fed, gas and electrical fixture,
it is used for all.

Similarly is life the way we have explained it. So, if the label is
right and such an expansion in both terms is sound, it applies to the
term “speech”, too. It was applied for sounds and successive letters and
sounds that reveal the meanings within the speaker’s conscience. Yet had
there been something that described successive sounds and letters in a
higher and more perfect way, it would have been correct to call it
speech or statement.

This thing that stands in the place of articulated speech is the deed of
a doer, and it is fit to be called actual speech, for every doer reveals
the extent of knowledge, ability, greatness and perfection that he has.
Yet the connotation of articulations of the innermost and the conscience
is juridical, while the indication of magnanimity of actions and
impacts, in as far as the doer and impacting factor are concerned, is
formative.

For this reason, we see that the most Praised One describes Jesus son of
Mary as “the world of Allah which He cast to Virgin Mary,” saying,

***“Christ Jesus, the son of Mary, was (no more than) a Messenger of
Allah, and His Word which He bestowed on Mary” (Qur’an, 4:171).***

How can our master Jesus not be the word of Allah as He reveals His
might, Glory to Him, how He creates a human in the womb of a woman
without cohabitation between a male and a female? It is for this reason
that the very existence of Jesus is regarded as a Divine Sign, a
Miracle.

In the light of this basis, the most Praised One regards everything that
exists in the cosmos as His words saying,

***“Say: ‘If the ocean were ink (to write) my Lord's words, the ocean
would be exhausted before my Lord's words are, even if We add another
ocean like it for its aid’” (Qur’an, 18:109).***

The most Praised One also says,

***“And if all trees on earth were pens and the ocean (were ink), with
seven oceans behind it to add to its (supply), God's words would still
not be exhausted (in the writing)” (Qur’an, 31:27).***

Imam Ali (as) says, “He (the Almighty) says ‘Be!’ to whatever He wants
to be, and it is, neither with an articulated voice, nor with a call
that is heard. Rather, His speech, the most Praised One, is His action,
He initiates and forms it, a thing which had never been before. Had it
been timeless, it would have been another god.”[^4]

The Imam (as) is quoted as having explained the greatness of creating
mankind in these verses of poetry:

*Do you claim that you are a small planet,*
*While the cosmos is summed up in you?!*
*And while you are the clear book wherein*
*What is hidden in its letters is manifest?!*

Everything in the tablet of the universe, anything that is or that can
be, is His word. It tells us of the perfection, goodness, knowledge and
might that exist from the very start.

*Allama* Tabatabai has made a statement in this regard which we would
like to sum up thus:

“What people call speech, statement, sentence, is a speaker
demonstrating a meaning which he has in his mind through composed sounds
put forth to express a meaning. Once it is articulated, the addressed
person or listener hears him, so the meaning of what is contained in the
speaker’s mind moves to the mind of the listener or addressed person,
achieving the purpose of that speech which is: getting someone to
understand, to comprehend.

There is something interesting in this regard to which men of wisdom
attracted attention. The truth of speech stands through a hidden and
implied meaning. As regarding the rest of particularities, such as its
being produced through sound which takes place in man’s chest, its
passage through the throat and reliance on the mouth’s sectors and
position, so as it can be heard, these particularities follow the
confirmations and are not intruders into the truth of the meaning
through which speech stands.

Articulated presented speech, which indicates what one has in mind, is
speech. So is the signal that suffices to express a meaning; it, too, is
speech. Also, your own making a signal with your hand to someone to sit,
stand, etc. is an order and a statement. The same applies to outside
existents. Since they indicate their presence by virtue of causation,
through their particularities inherent within them, they become external
existents. Since their existence is an example of completion of their
cause, it is speech.

Thereupon, the whole of the world that occupies a space is the speech of
Allah, Praise belongs to Him. He speaks it by bringing it into
existence, creating it. Thus, what is hidden of the perfection of His
Names and Attributes manifests itself. Also, the Almighty is the Creator
of the world, and the world is His creation. Likewise, the Exalted One
speaks through this world, manifesting the secrets of the Names, the
Attributes; the whole world is His speech.”[^5]

The Commander of the Faithful and Master of those who believe in the
Unity of Allah, peace with him, says the following in *Nahjul-Balagha*:
“He informs but not through a tongue and palate; He hears but not
through cracks and instruments. He says but does not pronounce, He
preserves but does not take precaution. He wills and does not hide. He
loves and is pleased without gentleness. He hates and is angered without
an effort. He says to what He wants to be: ‘Be!’ and it is, not through
a voice that hits ears, nor is it through a call that is heard; rather,
His speech, the most Glorified One that He is, is an action which He
initiates and for which He gives a form. It was not before, then it came
to exist; had it been timeless, it would have been another god.”[^6]

It is to this (meaning) that Sabzawari the critic points out in his poem
saying,

*Your tongue is the path of eloquence tread,*
*Speech of the most Praised One is actions enacted,*
*If you know this much, you will know how to praise*
*Things, how His words to these things are appended.*[^7]

Up to here, you have come to know the theory of the men of wisdom with
regard to His speech, the most Praised One, and it is now time to look
into the theory of the Asharis in this regard.

### Theory of the Asharis

The Asharis have made speech one of the entitative attributes. They have
described His speech, Praise belongs to Him, as the self speech. They
say that self-speech is different from knowledge, self-will or
unwillingness (the absence of will). They have been artistic about
explaining what they term as “different arts”.

Before we quote their texts, we would like to draw a useful introduction
in this regard. Undoubtedly, when the speaker tells something, there are
many images and testimonies in doing so, all spelling out knowledge. As
regarding imagination, it is bringing about the subject, the connotation
and the mental relationship between them.

As regarding credibility, it is surrender in the same rate according to
what is already known. Undoubtedly, imagining and believing are two
branches of knowledge. Knowledge is divided into them. They have said:
If knowledge is surrender by ratio, it is either belief or imagination.
This is relevant to telling about something.

As for initiating, when it comes to bidding, it is a will in the mind,
and when it comes to forbidding, there is disliking for it. When it
comes to questioning, wishing, pleading, each has its own suitable case.

The Asharis say that in the informative statements, i.e. what is beyond
knowledge, and in initiating, such as bidding and forbidding, beyond the
will and the disliking, it is a thing in the mind of the speaker called
self-speech, which is the true speech. As for articulated speech, it
expresses it. This self-speech in man is incidental, its taking place
follows the self. In Him, the most Praised One, it is timeless. In order
to explain the status, let us quote pillar Ashari men in this regard:

1. Al-Fadl al-Qawshaji has said this in his book *Sharh al-Tajreed*
(explaining abstractions): “One who brings about the form of bidding,
forbidding, calling, informing, inquiring about something or something
else, finds in himself meanings which he expresses and which we call
‘sensed speech’. The meaning which he finds within himself and circles
in his mind is not different according to the difference in situations
and terms, and the speaker means it takes place on the listener
accordingly, and this is what we call speech.”[^8]

It is not hidden that what he stated in general does not express
something clear. But al-Fadl ibn Rozbahan has stated something that is
more clear.

2. In *Nahj al-Haqq*, al-Fadl has said, “Speech according to them has
more than one meaning which they apply to combinations of heard letters
once, and once they apply it to the meaning that stands by itself and is
expressed by pronouncements. They say that it is speech in truth, which
it stands on its own and is timeless. This speech has to be proven,
since people in general do not understand speech to be anything but
combined letters and sounds, so let us say the following:

Let one go back to himself if he wants to say something. Does he
understand on his own that he organizes and fakes meanings that he
intends to articulate? One who seeks audience of a ruler or a man of
knowledge organizes inwardly meanings and things and tells himself that
he is going to say this and that. A fair-minded person would not argue
against it. Such is the self-speech.

Then we say by way of producing evidence that the pronouncements which
we articulate carry connotations that stand by themselves, so we say
that these connotations connote one’s own self speaking.”[^9]

One may resign saying that what he (al-Fadl) says is accurate, but what
is important is to prove that these meanings in conveying something are
not akin to knowledge. This is not confirmed, rather, the opposite is.
The meanings that circle in the speaker’s mind are nothing but
envisioning individual or compounded meanings, or they represent a
relative surrender (to one’s own intuition). So, the self-speech is
rendered to envisioning and to testimonies.

Is here anything beyond knowledge so we may call it self-speech? Also,
when a speaker organizes composed meanings, he does not organize
anything but his own likes and dislikes, or what serves as an
introduction to them, such as imagining a thing or believing in its
benefit. Thus, the self-speech is rendered, in its composition, to
liking and disliking. Is there anything else other than them, other than
envisioning, that we may call self-speech?

In that case, speaking will not be describing what is beyond knowledge
in informing and what is beyond it with the freewill in composing. Yet
the Asharis insist on proving that a speaker describes what is beyond
knowledge and will. For this reason, they say, “Since he is speaking on
his own, it is not the same as his being knowledgeable and having a
self-freewill.” It is better, then, to review what the Asharis have
brought forth in order to prove that self-speech is something beyond
knowledge. Here is the explanation:

**First:** Self-speech is not knowledge because one may tell about what
he does not know, or even knows its opposite, or something that he
doubts. So, informing about a thing is not knowledge of it. Sayyid
al-Shareef has said the following in his book *Sharh al-Mawaqif*: “What
is meant by referring everything on one’s mind in the condition of
knowing to knowledge is referring to knowledge which combines
envisioning and believing. One who informs about something that he
doubts, or one who knows the opposite, imagines the subject, the
connotation and the judgmental ratio, then he informs of it.

What his mind contains of these three visions does not get out of the
frame of knowledge, which is: envisioning. Yes, there is nothing in his
mind of the other portion of knowledge, which is: believing. The source
of confusion is explaining knowledge as being believing, so they claim
that it is not present when notifying about what is on the mind of the
doubtful informer or of that who knows its opposite. What is being
overlooked is that the absence of knowledge in the sense of believing
does not prove the absence of the other portion of knowledge, which is
envisioning.”

**Second:** In the field of composition, they say that there is, during
the period of composing, something else other than liking and disliking
which is self-speech (intuition). This is so because one may order
something which he does not want, such as one who tests his slave to see
if he obeys him or not. The objective here is to test, not to undertake,
the actions.[^10]

One may produce the following resigns regarding the above:

1. Testing commands are of two types: One in which the freewill is
relevant to the same introduction and has nothing to do with the action
itself, as is the case when the Almighty, Praise belongs to Him, ordered
His Friend, (Abraham) peace with him, to slaughter his son Ishamel. This
is why, when the Friend performed the introductions (to undertaking the
actions), he was addressed thus:

***“O Abraham! You have fulfilled the vision” (Qur’an, 37:105).***

In the other part, freewill is relevant to the introduction and its
conclusion. The whole matter is that one who commands something has an
interest based on undertaking that action, not in the action itself,
such as a ruler ordering one of his ministers to bring water in order to
let the attendants understand that he is obedient, not rebellious, to
him.

In this case, as in the previous one, the situation is not without a
freewill. The whole matter is that in the first part, the freewill is
relevant only to the introduction, whereas here both introduction and
conclusion are relevant to the freewill. So, their saying that there is
no will in the testing orders is not accurate.

2. What is obvious for one who produces a conclusion is imagining that
the freewill of the one issuing the command is relevant to others, such
as those whom he orders, doing something. For this reason, it is judged
that there is no freewill relevant to others doing something when they
are put to test.

One may deduct that there is something else in them other than the
freewill that may be called “request”, or it may be self-speech. But the
truth is something else. Desiring an action is not relevant to others
doing something because doing it is outside the frame of the choice of
the one issuing the order. A thing such as this is not connected to
freewill. For this reason, what is known is that the will in bidding and
forbidding is relevant to the action of the one being ordered. It is
visionary speech, it is not relevant to the optional action.

What others do is not optional. So, there is no avoiding saying that the
order’s freewill is relevant to the action itself that is: bidding and
forbidding. If you will, you can say that an action is either ordered or
prohibited. Both fall within the frame of choosing a matter; both are
regarded among freewill-relevant actions.

Yes, the goal behind bidding and forbidding is the ordered person
carrying out orders, or he must stop doing what he was ordered not to
do. The person under obligation knows that his disobedience implies
worldly or deferred consequences.

Thereupon, the freewill in bidding is relevant to serious and testing
orders according to a criterion that is: One’s will is relevant to
bidding or forbidding someone who receives his order. It is not relevant
to the ordered person himself or to his abstention from doing something,
for it is the goal of the ordering individual that is irreversible. The
person above confuses what is relevant to freewill with what is meant as
bidding and forbidding.

It may come to mind that an objection may be raised against what we have
stated, that the one issuing the order is a human whose will is not
connected to what others do because this is outside his option. As for
what is obligatory, the most Praised One is the One Who orders and
subdues: His will is affected in everything:

***“Not one of the beings in the heavens and the earth but must come to
(Allah), the Most Gracious, as His servant” (Qur’an, 19:93).***

Yet the response to this objection is obvious. What is meant by freewill
here is the legislative, not formative, freewill, the one that subdues
the servants, the one that gets them out of their ability to choose,
rendering them without freewill, such is outside the scope of this
research.

The Praised One has said,

***“Had it been your Lord's will, all people on earth would have
believed!” (Qur’an, 10:99).***

This verse shows that the will of the most Praised One does not hinge on
all people on earth believing (in Him). On the other hand, His freewill
hinges on *iman* (conviction, certitude) of every aware adult person.
The Praised One has said,

***“Allah tells (you) the truth, and He shows (you) the (right) way”
(Qur’an, 10:99).***

“The truth” in this verse is general. Likewise, His guidance to the
right way is for all people.

The most Praised One has said,

***“Allah wishes to make clear to you and to show you the ordinances of
those before you” (Qur’an, 4:26),***

in addition to other verses that indicate the generality of His
legislative guidance.[^11]

3. Unrepentant sinners and unbelievers are required what people of
obedience to the Almighty and belief in Him are required to do,
according to the text of the Holy Quran. Their holding them responsible
is not initiated by a will from Allah, Praise belongs to Him. Otherwise
His freewill will have to be separated from His objective. There has to
be another source for obligation that we once call self-talk
(intuition), and once request. The outcome is that there is something
else in mutability other than freewill.

The Mutazilites have answered by saying that had His freewill, Praise
belongs to Him, hinged on an action by itself, and it is not separated
from the objective. But if it hinges on others’ actions, since it hinged
through the actions of a servant’s freedom and choice, there is no
avoiding actions being preceded by the servant’s choice. If this servant
wills and chooses, the action materializes. If he does not, no action
takes place.

In other words, the freewill of the most Praised One does not hinge on
an action by one of His servants at best, whether he wanted it or did
not. Rather, it hinges on his doing it provided premeditation had
preceded his will. If it is preceded, the action takes place; otherwise,
it does not.

It is better said that His freewill, Praise belongs to Him, never lags
behind His objective without a difference between the formative and the
legislative freewill. As for the first, if His formative freewill hinges
on directly creating a thing, or through one of the causes, it
imminently takes place. The most Praised One has said,

***“Truly when He intends to create a thing, His order is: ‘Be,’ and it
is!” (Qur’an, 36:82).***

As for the second, it is related to the same mutability and the starting
of an action, or the same desisting and alienating himself, which
undoubtedly materializes in all His orders and prohibitions, whether His
servant obeyed or disobeyed.

As regarding a servant’s actions or abstention from an action, they both
are irrelevant to the legislative will in His orders and prohibitions.
Their lagging behind is not regarded as violating the principle. This is
so because others’ actions are not related to anyone’s freewill, others’
orders do not fall within a desiring person’s option.[^12] For this
reason, we said in its place that the legislative freewill is relevant
to the self’s actions, that is, initiating a start (of doing something)
or prohibiting it, not to others’ actions.

We arrive at this result: The legislative freewill is present in the
case of unrepentant sinners and unbelievers. What is relevant
materializes even if a servant does not comply.

4. What al-Fadl ibn Rozbahan has stated is that every rational person
knows that the speaker is one who enjoys the attribute of speaking. If
the meaning of the most Praised One speaking is His creating of speech,
this description does not stand through Him. It is not said about one
who creates speech to be a speaker. Likewise, it is not said about one
who creates taste that he does taste.[^13]

One may resign about the above that the principle standing through the
doer is not one section, that is, the start section. Rather, it has
sections. An action may be done by an individual, such as killing,
striking the killer, beating someone, etc. And a section may be
incidental, such as acquiring knowledge, the might in the one who knows,
his potence, etc. Speaking, like beating, is not a start principle in
the doer; rather, it is a mutability principle.

For this reason, the most Praised One created speech, so He is described
as speaker. He is described with the attribute of conveying statements.
Actually, it may be right through absolution even if the principle
stands always through the doer, neither initiated nor started, but
suffices to touch on the principle, such as one who sells dates and milk
described as such. As for not applying the term “taster” for the One Who
creates tasting, it is because the accuracy of derivation after one of
the functions is not standard, so the most Praised One could be termed
as “taster”, “smeller”, etc., because He creates (the faculty of)
tasting, smelling, etc. Perhaps theologians are too cautious to describe
Him with them in order to distance themselves from what can be
misunderstood as giving Him a body and the requirements of doing so.

5. Just as the term “speech” is applied to articulated statements, it
also is applied to what exists by itself. The most Praised One has said,

***“Whether you hide your word or manifest it, He certainly has (full)
knowledge of the secrets of (all) hearts” (Qur’an, 67:13).***

One may surrender, regarding the above, by applying “speech” in the
absolute sense to what exists by itself when it is done by some way, or
by caring about something, arguing about it. The “speech” is what is
articulated by the tongue. So, it is not applied to what exists in one’s
mind, something for which there is no reality other than the known image
except by way of interest.

### Research’s Conclusion

The Asharis claimed that what is inside the speaker’s mind when he makes
an informative or initiated sentence, is an image that testifies to the
first. And there is behind the freewill in the second something that
they call “self’s speech” (intuition). They may have specifically
applied the term “request” to self-speech in the mutability section.
Thus, they corrected (the concept of) His being Speaker, the most
Praised One that He is, just as He is Knowledgeable and Omni-Potent, and
that all (these adjectives) are self-attributes.

But research and analysis, as you have already come to know, provided us
with the opposite of their conclusion. This is due to what you have
witnessed, that is, there is nothing behind knowledge in the informative
sentences, nor is there behind the freewill and hatred, etc. in the
mutability sentences, anything which we label as self-speech. You have
already come to know that request is also the same as freewill.

Had they meant by self-speech as the meaning of the articulated speech
or its informing image that applies to its term, its essence is rendered
to knowledge and nothing more. And if they meant it to be a meaning
beyond that, we do not know it within ourselves if we would refer to it.

As regarding the Ashari rendering his conclusions to this verse of
poetry:

*Speech is in the heart but,*
*The tongue identifies what the heart has,*

Logical researches occupy a higher status than using poetry as a
mechanism to lead to them.[^14]

Thus, you come to know that what the critic al-Tusi says, i.e. that
“self-speech is not rational”, is sound, there is nothing wrong with it.

Up to here, the three theories have been made clear, those of the
Mutazilites, those of the wise men, and those of the Asharis.[^15] With
it, talk in the discussion of the first situation is completed, and it
is time now to discuss in the second: whether the speech of the most
Exalted One is incidental or timeless.

Second Situation: Is It Incidental or Timeless?
-----------------------------------------------

When philosophy came to exist, and when issues about the attributes of
Allah Almighty were discussed by men of logic, the most important issue
submitted for discussion was that of the speech of Allah Almighty and
that of the creation of the Quran. The Mutazilites adopted the argument
that the Quran was created. They defended it through various means.

Since the Abbaside government during the time of al-Mamoon and those
after him up to the time of al-Wathiq Billah supported the Mutazilites’
movement and views, the latter benefited from this clout. They tested
the scholars of Islamic lands in this issue. The result of this test was
that all *faqihs* in that century responded with (in favor of) the
creation theory. Only very few abstained from doing so, and imam Ahmed
ibn Hanbal stood as the head of this group.

The issue of the speech of Allah Almighty being non-created can be
rendered to the second century. It remained hidden till the time of
al-Mamoon. Although the people of *hadith* stick to not saying anything
about which statement was made by the Messenger of Allah (peace with him
and his progeny) or by the period of the *sahaba*, they violated their
principle in this issue, so much so that they were dragged into
announcing it publicly from the tops of their mosque pulpits.

The main reason for that is due to Ahmed ibn Hanbal and his stance. He
propagated the notion that the Quran was neither created nor timeless,
defending it enthusiastically and bearing for its sake hardships
recorded in history’s annals. You have come to know how he refused to
surrender to the theory of the creating of the Qur’an when the *faqihs*
questioned him, so he was jailed, tortured and whipped. Despite all of
this, he demonstrated firmness and steadfastness, and this was the most
important factor that led to his fame throughout the Islamic lands
thereafter. History has recorded a number of debates that went on
between him and thinkers from among scholars of logic.

In order to explain the status in the situation, we would like to bring
about what Ahmed ibn Hanbal and Abul-Hassan al-Ashari had brought forth
in this regard.

Ahmed ibn Hanbal has said, “The Quran, the speech of Allah, is not
created. One who claims that the Quran is created is a Jahmi apostate.
One who claims that the Quran is the speech of Allah, the most Exalted
and the most Great, then he stops without saying that it is created or
not created is worse than the first. One who claims that our own
pronouncing of the Quran and reciting it is created, while the Quran is
Allah’s speech, is Jahmi. And one who does not label these folks as
apostates is just like them. Allah spoke to Moses manifestly. It was
from Allah that Moses heard for sure. And He *handed him over the Torah
with* ***His hand***. Allah has always been a speaker, knowledgeable,
praise be to Allah, the best of creators.”[^16]

Abul-Hassan al-Ashari has said, “We say that the Quran, the speech of
Allah, is not created, and that one who says that the Quran is created
is *kafir*, apostate.”[^17]

It has been cited about the imam of the Hanbalis that he said, “There
are people who say that the Quran is neither created not uncreated.” He
added saying, “These are more harmful to people than the Jahmis. Woe
unto you! If you say that it is not created, say that it is!” Ahmed (ibn
Hanbal) said, “These are evil people.” It was said to him, “What do you
yourself say?” He said, “What I think, and what I conclude, and it is
something in which there is no doubt, is that the Qur’an is not
created.” Then he added saying, “Praise belongs to Allah! Who can doubt
this?!”[^18]

Such are the arguments of the people of *hadith*, the Hanbalis and the
Asharis. As for the Mutazilites, Judge Abdul-Jabbar says, “As regarding
our sect in this regard, the Quran is the speech of Allah Almighty and
His inspiration. It is created, something new that Allah revealed to His
Prophet so it may be a flag post, a guide, towards his being a prophet.
He made it a guide for us to the rulings so we may refer to it to
determine what is permissible and what is prohibitive, and for this we
are obligated to praise and to thank Him.

So, what we nowadays hear and recite, if what we read is not created
anew by Allah Almighty, it is added to Him by way of reality just as you
now add when you recite a poem by Imriul-Qais to its reality, even
though Imriul-Qais has not this moment composed it.”[^19]

Before we analyze the issue, we have to state the following
introductions:

1. If the issue of the Quran being created or timeless brought about two
groups each of which calls the other *kafir*, apostate, such as the imam
of the Hanbalis says, “One who claims that the Quran is created is a
*kafir* Jahmi,” while the Mutazilites say, “To say that the Quran is not
created, is timeless, is to utter *shirk* (association) with Allah,
Praise belongs to Him,” this issue must be analyzed in the light of
reason, Quran and Sunnah by avoiding any excitement or fuss.

Undoubtedly, this issue was submitted during certain atmospheres where
understanding was rare, when there were disputes. Otherwise, what is the
sense in thus becoming divided about a matter one of the two groups
claims that it is the factor of apostasy and that *Tawhid* is its
opposite, while the other group claims the opposite?

Had the issue of the creation of the Quran occupied such a status,
revelation should have clearly supported one of these two theories and
thus removed the curtain from the face of reality. Yet we are of the
opinion that there is no text in the Islamic Sharia about this issue. It
rather surfaced in the beginning of the second (Hijri) century.

Yes, both groups have cited Quranic verses, but the indications (of
these verses) are ambiguous and, if one supposes they serve as
indications, they are not fully comprehended except by al-Awhadi.
Anything regarded as an indication of *Tawhid* or *shirk* requires a
Quranic verse that accepts no interpretation and is obvious to everyone
now and always.

In his book titled *Al-Ibana*, al-Ashari has quoted reports about how
Abu Haneefa was an apostate (*mushrik*, one committing *shirk*,
associating others with Allah), that others dissociated themselves from
him, and that the son of Abu Layla required him to regret and repent.

The reason was Abu Haneefa advocating the Quran having been created. Abu
Haneefa, therefore, repented by way of *taqiyya* for fear he would be
killed as he himself stated.[^20] Yet al-Tahawi indicated in his work
*Aqaid* the opposite of the above and advocated the Quran as having been
uncreated, although he was a follower of Abu Haneefa in his taste and
conduct.

2. Some members of the posterity used to feel too embarrassed to
describe the Quran as being timeless. They only said that it was not
created. Yet they gradually elaborated on their statement till they
described the speech of Allah as being timeless. It is known that
describing something as being uncreated or timeless is something a man
of knowledge does not dare to delve into because both of these
descriptions are among His own characteristics.

Had His speech been something different from Himself, how can it be
described as being uncreated or timeless? If we suppose that this
doctrine, which only al-Awhadi tackles in the science of logic, how can
this obscure issue be something in which every Muslim should believe
despite the fact that the simple individual, even one who enjoys merits,
cannot analyze and realize a thing other than Allah, Praise belongs to
Him, while being at the same time uncreated?

The ease of the doctrine and its easy following is one of the
characteristics of the Islamic Sharia. This distinguishes it from all
other sects prevailing throughout the world. Yet believing in something
being other than what Allah Almighty has stated, which differs from His
own Self, whether created or timeless, is something so difficult for
elite men, what would you say about commoners?

3. What appears to be the case with regard to the people of hadith is
that the recited Quran is timeless, something which commonsense and
reason, and even the Quran itself, denies. This belief has been rendered
void, so much so that Sheikh Muhammad Abdoh assaulted it saying, “One
who says that the recited Quran is timeless is much worse and more
misleading in his belief than every creed the Quran itself testified to
its being misled, calling for following its opposite.”[^21]

When Ibn Taymiyyah, who installed himself as proponent of the doctrine
of the men of hadith, noticed that it was a trivial belief, he openly
advocated that the recited Quran is incidental and that verses such as
these:

***“O you wrapped up in garments!” (Qur’an, 73:1),***

***“O you draped (in a mantle)!” (Qur’an, 74:1)***

and

***“Allah has indeed heard (and accepted) the statement of the woman who
pleads with you concerning her husband…” (Qur’an, 58:1)***

and others prove that a call, hearing it, etc., took place at a certain
time, not since eternity.[^22]

What is amazing is that he seeks evidence from the Mutazilites about the
recited Quran being incidental, saying that the order of the words’
letters and of the sentences requires them to be incidental because the
way the statement “Bismillah”, for e.g., depends on the “Bi” taking
place then its vanishing through the “s”, etc., succeeding it. So,
something taking place and vanishing that happens to the letters
individually never separates from them, otherwise, there can be no word
created. So, how can something like this be timeless, eternal, when
applied to Allah Almighty?

4. Since the notion that the Quran is not created, or to say that it is
timeless, has been the slogan of the folks of *hadith* and their
distinguishing sign while, on the other hand, it is said that the
recited and pronounced Quran is timeless, something which sound reason
cannot accept, the Asharis came up with a new theory with which they
corrected the statement that the Quran is not created, that it is
timeless. They sought a safe haven with saying that what is sought from
the speech of Allah Almighty is not the recited Quran but the
self-speech, and you have already come to know the extent of soundness
of advocating (the theory of) the self-speech.[^23]

At any rate, advocating the timeliness of the self-speech is not
isolated from saying that the recited Quran is timeless.

5. How can the statement about the creation of the Quran and its being
an event be a factor for *kufr*, apostasy, while the most Praised One
describes it as being brought forth, that is, something new?

The most Praised One has said,

***“Mankind's reckoning comes closer and closer: Yet they do not heed
and they turn away. (Nothing) ever comes to them of a renewed message
from their Lord except that they listen to it in jest” (Qur’an,
21:1-2).***

What is meant by the “message from their Lord” is the Holy Quran by
virtue of this verse:

***“We have, without doubt, sent down the message, and We will assuredly
guard it (from corruption)” (Qur’an, 15:9),***

and also this verse:

***“The (Qur'an) is indeed the message, for you and for your people, and
you shall (all) soon be brought to account” (Qur’an, 43:44).***

What is meant by “created” is something new which describes the Quran.
The meaning of its being new is that it was revealed after the Bible.
The Bible, too, was new because it was revealed after the Torah. The
same applies to some chapters and verses of the Quran. They came to them
some after others. It is not meant that it was new from the standpoint
of its revelation. Rather, it is meant to be new by itself by the token
it was described as the “remembrance/mention”. The remembrance by itself
is something new. This does not apply to its revelation, for there is no
sense in describing what takes place on its own as being revealed.[^24]

How can it be said that the Quran is timeless while the most Praised One
says the following about it:

***“If it were Our will, We could take away what We have sent you by
inspiration: Then you would find none to plead your affair in that
matter against Us” (Qur’an, 17:86).***

So, is it correct to apply taking away what is timeless and rendering it
nonexistent?

6. What is amazing is that the topic of dispute was never clearly
defined so one may be able to issue a judgment in its regard. There are
here possibilities into which the folks of hadith as well as the Asharis
may look when describing His speech, the most Praised One, as being
timely. We would like to submit them on the carpet of research, and we
ask a judgment be issued in their regard derived from reason and the
Quran:

a. The pronouncements and wise statements, the like of which humans in
all centuries have been unable to produce, were brought by the custodian
of revelation (Gabriel) to the Honored Prophet [Muhammad (S)]. The
Messenger of Allah (S) recited them, the ears grabbed them and the pens
wrote them down on sacred tablets. So, they are not at all created,
neither to Him, Praise belongs to Him, nor to others.

b. The lofty meanings and sublime concepts in the fields of genesis,
legislation, events, manners, etiquettes, etc.

c. The Praised One’s own Self, the Attributes of knowledge, ability,
life-giving which the Quran discusses and to which it points out with
its pronouncements and statements.

d. The knowledge of the most Praised One as recorded in the Holy Quran.

e. The Quran is not created for humans even though it was created by
Allah.

These probabilities do not only apply to the Holy Quran but are repeated
in all divinely revealed books that descended to His prophets and
messengers.

Here is an explanation of judging them from the standpoint of taking
place or from that of timelessness.

As for the first, I do not think that anyone who has a measure of
rationality and intellect would believe that they are not created, or
that they are timeless. How so while they are things, existents among
many others, things that can come to exist but not necessarily have to
exist? If they were *not* created, then they have to be a must by
themselves, which is nothing but committing *shirk* in Allah, the most
Praised One. Even if it is supposed that the most Praised One speaks
these pronouncements and statements, His speaking is not outside the
scope of His actions. So, can it be said that His action is not created
or is timeless?

As for the second, it is close to the first with regard to commonsense.
The Quran, as well as all sacred books, contains events which took place
during the Prophet’s lifetime, the debates with the People of the Book
and with the polytheists, what happened during his invasions and wars,
the painful incidents or the happy ones. So, can we describe as being
“timeless” the incident that these verses narrate:

***“Allah has indeed heard (and accepted) the statement of the woman who
pleads with you concerning her husband and carries her complaint (in
prayer) to Allah, and Allah (always) hears the arguments between both
sides among you, for Allah hears and sees (all things)” (Qur’an,
58:1).***

The most Blessed and Exalted One informed, in the Quran and divinely
revealed books, the incidents that happened to His prophets and to all
nations and the norms of torment with which they were tormented. He also
informed about the genesis, how He created and managed. So, these facts
that are stated in the Holy Quran undoubtedly imply time periods, they
are not timeless.

As for the third, there is no doubt that His own Self, His attributes of
knowledge, ability, life-giving, etc., as well as what relates to them,
such as His being the One and Only God, Timeless without any doubt, not
created by virtue of commonsense. But the Quran is not the only book
that talks about these things, everything humans say point out to these
facts. The meaning referred to by pronouncements and sounds are timeless
and, at the same time, so are the speeches and sentences, all relate to
time.

As regarding the fourth, that is, His knowledge, Praise belongs to Him,
of what these books contain and of what they do not, undoubtedly it is
as timeless as He Himself is. None from among the theological logicians,
with the exception of the Karamis, has said that His knowledge is
incidental.

As for the fifth, I mean His being, Praise belongs to Him, speaking
eternal, timeless self speech, not with letters or sounds, it
contradicts knowledge and freewill. You have already come to know that
what the Asharis term a self-speech does not come out of the frame of
knowledge and freewill, and there is no doubt that His knowledge and
simple freewill are timeless.

As for the sixth, that is, the objective behind negating its being
non-created, since the Quran is not created for humans while at the same
time it is created by Allah, Praise is due to Him, this matter is denied
by any Muslim. The Quran is created by Allah, the Praised One, and
people in their entirety cannot bring about something like it. The
Praised One has said,

***“Say: ‘If all mankind and jinns were to gather together to produce
the like of this Qur'an, they would not be able to produce the like of
it, even if they back each other up with help and support’” (Qur’an,
17:88).***

This analysis connotes the issue was submitted in disturbed atmospheres,
and people were in disarray. The topic of discussion was not presented
clearly so a distinction could be made between what is positive and what
is negative, so right might be distinguished from wrong. Despite this
confusion in presenting the subject of the dispute, we see that the
folks of *hadith* and the Asharis seek evidences from Quranic verses to
prove the timelessness of His speech and its being non-created. Here are
the evidences for you one by one.

Al-Ashari has sought evidences in different ways:

**First Evidence:** It is this verse:

***“For to anything which We have willed, We merely say to it, ‘Be,’ and
it is” (Qur’an, 16:40).***

Al-Ashari says, “What proves from Allah’s Book that His speech is not
created is His own saying,

***‘For to anything which We have willed, We merely say to it, ‘Be,’ and
it is” (Qur’an, 16:40).***

Had the Quran been created, it should have been said to it: “Be!” and it
becomes. Had Allah, the most Exalted and the most Great, said to the
speech “Be!”, such speech would have had a speech of its own! This
requires one of two matters: The matter must either be rendered to
saying that Allah’s speech is not created, or every speech becomes a
reality by saying “No!” to a purpose, which is impossible. When this
becomes impossible, it becomes accurate and confirmed that Allah, the
most Exalted One and the most Great, has speech that is not
created.[^25]

One may submit the following about the above:

**One:** The deduction is based on the order in the said verse and its
likes being a pronounced order. It is composed of letters and sounds.
The most Praised One is like a commanding ruler. Just as he communicates
when he orders his ministers and aides through pronouncements, thus does
the most Praised One seek assistance during His creation of the heavens
and earth with pronouncement and speech, addressing the absolute
nonexistent with the order “Be!”

There is no doubt that this probability is quite false, for there is no
sense in addressing something that does not exist! In order to correct
it, it is said that what is “non-existent” is known by Allah Almighty
Who knows the thing before it comes into being, and that it will become
a being at some time.

This is of no use because knowledge of a thing is not right through an
address. If you have doubt about that, notice the carpenter who wants to
make a chair with the use of tools and equipment. Is it right that he
addresses them with this pronouncement, although there is a difference
or differences between this example and that?

But what is meant about the order in the said verse, as most Muslims
have understood it, is the forming order which expresses the definitive
freewill being attached to finding the thing. What is meant by the verse
is that the freewill of the most Praised One is followed by something
that comes into being, into existence, and that nothing stands in its
way. The thing that He ordered and wanted is formed, and it enters into
the world of existence without objection or a stop like the obedient
subject who is ordered and who obeys. He does not stop or refuse or
oppose.

Thus, you become familiar with the difference between the legislative
obligatory order, which exists in the Quran and Sunnah, and the
formative order. The first is directed to the mature adult rather than
to others, let alone those that do not exist. And this differs from the
formative order, it is the symbol for the definitive freewill hinging on
bringing about what is yet to exist.

Here is the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) explaining
the formative order: “He says to what He wants ‘Be!’ and it is, without
a thundering voice or a heard call. Rather, His speech, Glory to Him, is
His action; He creates it and forms it, and it was never before
existing. Had it been timeless, it would have been a second deity.”[^26]

**Two:** We choose the second portion and sequence as being non-binding.
We commit to a speech that precedes the Quran that is not created.
Through it the most Praised One brought about the whole of the Quran,
creating it, including the word “Be” which exists in that verse and its
likes. The result is that the Quran and all divinely revealed books as
well as all His speeches and statements form one single speech that
precedes them all. Thus, the sequence is severed when adhering to the
principle of a single pronouncement, it is never created.

**Three:** How can the word “Be” which exists in the said verse and its
likes be timeless whereas it connotes the future? So, it has to be
time-relevant. This is by token of the most Praised One informing about
the future thus: “Our speech when We want something is to say to it
‘Be!’ and it is.” For this reason, late Asharis resorted to the
pronouncement “Be!” as an incident, whereas what is timeless implies an
eternal, self-relevant meaning.[^27]

**Second Evidence:** It is His saying:

***“Your Guardian-Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in
six days and is firmly established on the throne (of authority): He
draws the night over the day like a veil, each seeking the other in
rapid succession. He created the sun, the moon and the stars, (all)
governed by laws under His command. Is it not His [sole privilege] to
create and to govern? Blessed be Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of
the worlds!” (Qur’an, 7:54).***

Al-Ashari has said, “The creating includes everything which He has
created. When He says ‘command’, He made a reference to something else
other than all creations. He, thus, pointed out to what we have
described as being a command of Allah that is yet to be made. As
regarding Allah’s command, it is His speech. Briefly: The most Praised
One made a distinction between His order and His creation. Allah’s order
is His speech, and this requires Allah’s speech to be uncreated.[^28]

One may conclude with the following about the above. The deduction is
based on the “command” in that verse meaning Allah’s speech, and this is
not proven. Rather, the evidence indicates that it means something else.
How so since the most Praised One has already said this in the same
verse:

***“… And the stars are subject to His command: Truly (there) are Signs
in this for men who are wise” (Qur’an, 16:12)***

and

***“Is it not His to create and to govern?” (Qur’an, 7:54).***

What is meant by both words (creating and governing) is the same, the
first leads to the other. This verse’s goal is to convey the meaning
that creating, in the sense of bringing into existence, and His
management (of what He creates) are both from Allah, the Praised One. It
is not His affair to just create the world and the things then leave
them alone and let someone else manage their affairs, so that creating
will come from Him while management comes from someone else
independently. Rather, all come from Him.

What is meant by creating is finding exact things. And what is meant by
governing is the order that prevails on them. It is as though creating
is relevant to them and governing is to the conditions that take place
in them and the order that rules among them. The evidence to this fact
comes from some verses that refer to “governing” or administering after
creating.

The most Praised One says,

***“Truly your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in
six days and is firmly established on the throne (of authority),
regulating and governing all things. No intercessor (can plead with Him)
except with His leave” (Qur’an, 10:3).***

The Almighty has also said,

***“Allah is He Who raised the heavens with no pillars that you can see;
He is firmly established on the throne (of authority); He has subjected
the sun and the moon (to His law)! Each runs (its course) for an
appointed term. He regulates affairs, explaining the Signs in detail, so
that you may believe with certainty in the meeting with your Lord”
(Qur’an, 13:2).***

So, what “regulating the affairs” means is the opposite of prohibiting
them. Rather, what is meant by the affairs is relevant to creating.
Thus, the meaning becomes: creating first then dealing with and
administering all coming from the most Praised One, for He is the
Creator, the Owner, there is no partner with Him in creating, bringing
into being or in managing and administering all affairs.

**Third Evidence:** It is this verse: “This is nothing but the word of
mortals!”

Al-Ashari says, “Whoever claims that the Quran is created makes it the
word of mortals, and this is what Allah has objected against the
polytheists.”[^29]

One can make this conclusion about it: One who says that the Quran is
created means only that it is created for Allah, the most Praised One.
Allah created it, inspired it to the Prophet and sent it to him in
installments during a period of twenty-three years, making it beyond the
might of humans to produce its like even if each of them supports the
other for the task.

Yes, the Quran being a creation for Allah, Praise belongs to Him, does
not negate that what people recite is created for them. It is
commonsense that the letters and sounds which people articulate are
created for them. For example, the poem by Imriul-Qais and others:
Originally, they were created for their poets, but when recited, their
recitation becomes a creation for the readers (or hearers).

What is amazing is that al-Ashari and those who were before and after
him did not edit the topic of the dispute. They claimed that if it is
said that the “Quran is created,” it is meant that the Quran is made for
humans. But necessity rules the opposite of this deduction: How can a
Muslim who embraces the Quran and recites this verse by the Creator,
Praise belongs to Him,

***“This is a Book which We have revealed as a blessing” (Qur’an,
6:155)***

say that the Quran is created for humans? Rather, all Muslims say about
the Quran the same: It is what is said by the most Praised One about it.
Yet what is recited on their tongues is created for them, so something
similar to what Allah revealed becomes created for people. The similar
thing created for them is not evidence that the original was created for
them. All people combined are unable to create the like of the Quran,
but they are able to create (duplicate) its similitude. So, notice and
think about it.

Thus, we become aware of the majority of evidences brought about by
al-Ashari in his book *Al-Ibana* are incomplete from the standpoint of
proof. We do not wish to elaborate and to critique it, and what we have
stated suffices.

Something interesting needs to be pointed out here. It is well known
about the imam of the Hanbalis that he did not wish to delve into
matters in which the “righteous posterity” did not delve because he did
not see any knowledge was there other than that of this posterity. So,
what they discussed he, too, would discuss, and what they did not
discuss of religious matters, he would see it as an innovation that must
be shunned.

Since this issue was not discussed by the posterity, he felt he had no
right to discuss it. Innovators are the ones who talk about it. He would
not have followed in the latter’s footsteps, and it was his duty,
according to his principles, to stop and not say a word. Yes, he has
been quoted as saying what agrees with stopping, although what we have
quoted about him is the opposite, that is, he said, “Whoever claims that
the Quran is created is Jahmi, and whoever claims that it is not created
is an innovator.”

Critics see that this imam of the Hanbali used in his early life to see
that researching whether the Quran was created or not as an innovation,
*bida* **بدعة** . But once the ordeal was over, the Abbasid caliph
al-Mutawakkil, who supported him, asked him to state his own view, so he
chose to say that the Quran was not created! Despite this, he is never
quoted as saying that the Quran is timeless.[^30]

Position of Ahl al-Bayt (as)
----------------------------

The history of the research and of the ordeals through which both
parties passed testifies that being extremist in its regard was not for
the sake of supporting what is right, for dispelling doubts. Rather,
each sect took advantage of that issue to harm its opponents. For this
reason, we see the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (as) prohibiting their followers
from delving into this issue.

Al-Rayyan ibn al-Salt asked Imam al-Ridha (as): “What do you say about
the Quran?” The Imam (as) said, “It is the speech of Allah. Do not
bypass it, and do not seek guidance anywhere lest you should
stray.”[^31]

Ali ibn Salim narrated about his father saying, “I asked as-Sadiq, Jafar
ibn Muhammad (as), ‘O son of the Messenger of Allah! What would you say
about the Quran?’ He said, ‘It is the speech of Allah, what He has said,
the Book of Allah, what He inspired and revealed. It is the Holy Book
which falsehood does not approach from before its hands or from behind,
the revelation of a Wise, Praiseworthy God’.”[^32]

Sulayman ibn Jafar al-Jafari has said, “I asked Abul-Hassan, Mousa ibn
Jafar (as), ‘O son of the Messenger of Allah (S)! What do you say about
the Quran? Those before us have differed about it. Some folks say it is
created, whereas others say it is not.’” He (as) said, “As for me, I do
not say in this regard what they say; I only say: It is the speech of
Allah.”[^33]

We see how the Imam (as) distanced himself from delving into this matter
due to having seen that delving into it was not in the interest of
Islam, and that contending with saying that it is the speech of Allah
was better to resolve the subject of the dispute. But when they [Ahl
al-Bayt (as)] realized the safest situation in this regard was to state
their opinion about it, they said that the Creator is Allah, and all
others are created (by Him), that the Quran is not the same as the most
Praised One, otherwise, a fusion should be forged between the Revealer
and what He reveals. The Quran is not He, so the Quran is unavoidably
created.

Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd al-Yaqtini has narrated saying that Ali ibn
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Mousa al-Ridha (as) wrote some of his followers
(Shias) in Baghdad saying, “In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the
most Merciful. May Allah protect us and your own selves from sedition.
If He does, what a great blessing it will be! But if He does not, it is
sure perdition. We see that arguing about the Quran is an innovation
**بدعة** in which both inquirer and respondent have participated. So,
the questioner undertakes what does not belong to him, whereas the one
answering him exerts himself while he does not have to. The Creator is
none other than Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great. Everything
else is created (by Him). The Quran is the speech of Allah. Do not
create a name for it from your own self lest you should be among those
who stray. May Allah count us and your own selves among those who fear
their Lord in the unknown, and they are apprehensive about the
Hour.”[^34]

In reported narratives, there is a reference to the ordeal that the
historians recorded. Ahmed ibn Abu Duad wrote saying that during the
time of al-Mamoon, the latter wrote about the issue of creating the
Quran to the provincial governors of Islamic metropolises. He did so in
order to test the *faqihs* and narrators of *hadith* in the issue of the
creation of the Quran, to impose on them to penalize anyone who espoused
an opinion differently from that of the Mutazilites in this regard.

Al-Mutasim and al-Wathiq succeeded him and implemented his way and
policy towards the opponents of the Mutazilites. The ordeal reached its
peak against the narrators of *hadith*. Ahmed remained for twenty-eight
months under torture but never abandoned his view[^35].

When Abbasid ruler al-Mutawakkil came to power, he supported the sect of
the Hanbalis, keeping his distance from their opponents. It is then that
the narrators of *hadith* felt elated, and the ordeal now surrounded
those who were in the near past imposing their views through the
authority of the sultan.

So, can we regard this debate as being Islamic, as being in agreement
with the Quran in commanding to know the truth and to examine it, or was
there something else behind all of this? Surely Allah is the One Who
knows all facts and what the hearts conceal.

[^1]: Judge Abdul-Jabbar (d. 415 A.H.), Sharh al-Usool al-Khamsa, p.
528; Sayyid al-Shareef, Sharh al-Mawaqif, p. 495.

[^2]: Sharh al-Mawaqif, Vol. 1, p. 77. You will come across what the
Asharis confirm.

[^3]: The most Praised One has said, “…and Allah spoke directly to
Moses” (Qur’an, 4:164. The most Praised One has also said, “It is not
fitting for a man that Allah should speak to him except by inspiration”
(Qur’an, 42:51).

[^4]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon 179, Vol. 2, p. 122 (Abdoh edition).

[^5]: Tabatabai, Tafsir al-Mizan, Vol. 2, p. 325 (Beirut edition).

[^6]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 179, Vol. 2, p. 122 (Abdoh edition).

[^7]: Sabzawari, Sharh Sabzawari’s poem, p. 190.

[^8]: Al-Qawshaji, Sharh al-Tajreed, p. 420.

[^9]: Nahj al-Haqq which is incorporated into Dalail al-Sidq, p. 146
(Najaf edition).

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: We will provide you in detail a discussion of the generality of
His guidance, Praise to Him, at the conclusion of this book’s sixth
chapter.

[^12]: This is so even if the One desiring it is Allah Almighty,
although this is possible; otherwise, it is by way of coercing and
obligating, which is negated in His regard, Praise to Him, as you will
see in the sixth chapter.

[^13]: Dalaail al-Sidq, Vol. 1, p. 147 (Najaf’s edition).

[^14]: Tabatabai, Tafsir Al-Mizan, Vol. 14, p. 250.

[^15]: As regarding the Hanbalis’ theory, we will discuss it in the
second situation in order to avoid being repetitive.

[^16]: Ahmed ibn Hanbal, Kitab al-Sunnah, p. 49.

[^17]: Al-Ash\`ari, Al-Ibana, p. 21. Also refer to Maqalat
al-Islamiyyeen (Islamists’ articles), p. 321.

[^18]: Al-Ibana, p. 69. On p. 76, he mentioned the names of the people
of traditions who advocate that the Quran is not created.

[^19]: Sharh al-Usool al-Khamsa, p. 528.

[^20]: Al-Ibana, pp. 71-72.

[^21]: Risalat al-Tawhid (first edition. About one page of this risala
was omitted in later editions. Notice p. 49 of the edition published by
the Arab Culture Library.

[^22]: Majmuat al-Rasaail al-Kubra, Vol. 3, p. 97.

[^23]: This is not the first place in which the Asharis attempt to
correct the belief of the folks of hadith. Rather, they did so on
several occasions in order to produce it in a way accepted by reason.

[^24]: This is due to what takes place by itself having precedence over
what is brought about.

[^25]: Al-Ibana, pp. 52-53.

[^26]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon 186.

[^27]: Dalaail al-Sidq quoting al-Fadl ibn Rozbahan al-Ashari’s p. 153,
Vol. 1.

[^28]: Al-Ibana, pp. 51-52.

[^29]: Al-Ibana, p. 56.

[^30]: Tarikh al-Mathahib al-Islamiyya (history of Islamic sects), p.
300.

[^31]: Al-Saduq, At-Tawhid, the Book of the Quran: What it is, hadith 2,
p. 223.

[^32]: Ibid., Chapter of the Quran, hadith 3, p. 224.

[^33]: Ibid., hadith 5, p. 224.

[^34]: Ibid., hadith 4.

[^35]: Refer to p. 252, Vol. 11 of Siyar Alam al-Nubala. A chapter in
this book details what imam Ahmed [ibn Hanbal] went through.


