Truthfulness
============

Muslims (in general) and theologians (in particular) have agreed that
“as-Sadiq”, the Truthful One, is one of His Attributes although they
have differed about how to prove it. What is meant by His being Truthful
is that His speech is above the stain of falsehood. Since we have opted
to regard “speech” as an operative attribute, truthfulness in speech
will be similar to it. But if describing someone as being truthful, it
means applying an operative attribute, actually standing through Allah,
the Praised One; describing Him is best done likewise.

One can produce the evidence about His truthfulness by saying that lying
is abominable by reason, and the most Praised One is above anything
which reason regards as an abomination. The evidence is based on
goodness and ugliness, this is a matter realized by reason. Regardless
of incidents and obstacles, a thing is likewise judged as being good or
ugly. This principle is the important matter that divided logicians into
two groups.

If we take the positive aspect in that principle, where the truth is, it
proves that the most Praised One is truthful. But the Asharis, who deny
both what is rationally good or ugly, describe the most Praised One as
being truthful. They once seek evidence from falsehood being a
deficiency, while it is impossible for Allah to be deficient, and once
by saying that the Sharia has told us that He is truthful, yet both
evidences are scratched off!

As for the First, had we advocated rational goodness and ugliness, it
will be impossible to attribute a shortcoming to Allah, Praised is He,
in the aspect of the Self and the action. His own Self is above
shortcomings, and so is His action, such as speaking. But if we deny
that principle, there is no evidence of the impossibility in finding
fault with Allah, Praise belongs to Him, with regard to His actions
although applying shortcomings to His own Self is absolutely impossible.

For this reason, the Asharis say that He, Praise belongs to Him, can be
unfair, an oppressor, and the same applies to the rest of abominable
things, although these things are not done by Him by token of His
telling us so.

As for the Second, since proving His truthfulness legitimately depends
on the truth in what the Prophet says, and his truthfulness is proven
only if Allah, Praise belongs to Him, testifies to his being truthful.
If the most Praised One stopped testifying for the truthfulness of the
Prophet (peace with him and his progeny), the reversal would then be
binding.

For this reason, there has to be a definitive evidence behind the Sharia
and the revelation testifying to His being truthful and does not lie,
the most Praised One that He is.

There is another evidence to which some Mutazilites pointed out. It is
summed up by saying that His lying contradicts the interest of the world
because if lies become possible in the speech of the most Exalted One,
there will be a removal of faith in His telling us about the conditions
of the life hereafter, and this means abandoning countless benefits.

What is the most fitting is obligatory on Him, the most Exalted One, and
He cannot violate it. What is meant by its being obligatory is that
reason realizes that His position, the most Praised One, in this regard
necessitates choosing what is best and leaving everything else.[^1]

But the evidence is based on the principle set by the fairness criterion
of realizing what is good and what is ugly while discarding all things
that are incidental or obstacles. It is then that what is best and most
fit is realized, or what is suitable and what is not, and it will be
realized that what is best and what is good must be preferred over
others. For this reason, there can be no other evidence.

All this applies if we say that His speech is one of the operative
attributes. But if we interpret it as being self-speech, as the Asharis
have advocated, as you have already come to know, it is not outside the
frame of knowledge, freewill, hatred, etc. At that juncture, the truth
of His speech will mean that His knowledge is true, and the truth of
knowledge cannot be interpreted by any way other than agreeing with the
reality. As for the truthfulness of the freewill and of hatred, he does
not provide a reason for them. At any rate, truthfulness according to
the Asharis will then be one of the self-attributes, not the operative
ones.

[^1]: Sharh al-Qawshaji, p. 320.


