Wisdom
======

Wisdom (Al-Hakeem): Above Doing What Should Not Be
--------------------------------------------------

The second meaning of wisdom is being above doing what should not be
done. In this sense, it is more general than the justice we know of not
oppressing and being unfair, etc. The Wise One, in other words, is the
One Who does not do what is ugly.

Belief in fixing this attribute for the Creator, the most Exalted One,
is based on what is rationally accepted as being good or ugly. The gist
of this issue is that there are actions which reason realizes whether
they are good or ugly, and it senses that one who is independent by
himself is above being characterized by ugliness and by doing what
should not be done.

This is the basis for judging His being characterized by wisdom and
justice, that He does not oppress or deal unfairly with anyone. From
here, we must discuss this issue in the light of reason and the Holy
Quran.

What is Rationally Good or Ugly
-------------------------------

Those who believe in the Justice of God say that there are actions which
reason innately realizes, without seeking assistance from the Sharia, as
being good which must be done or ugly above which one should rise. Had
the One Who brought the Sharia commanded to do the first and prohibited
the doing of the second, He would be revealing what reason understands
and to which it guides. The Sharia is not supposed to reverse the issue
by labeling as good what reason deems to be ugly or regards as ugly what
it rules as being good.

The Asharis have said that reason is not to judge about things being
good or ugly, and a thing is not characterized as being good or ugly by
itself before a text from the Sharia saying so. For this reason, nothing
is good except what the Shria regards as good, and nothing is ugly
except what it labels as such. Injustice is ugly because the Sharia
prohibits it. Justice is good because the Sharia commands its doing. Had
this been reversed and justice been made ugly while injustice is made
good, it should have been as it has decreed.

Those who advocate what is rationally good or ugly divided actions, in
as far as being characterized by them, into three types:

**First:** Actions that by themselves completely justify goodness or
ugliness, and this is called self-goodness and ugliness, such as justice
and injustice. Justice, due to being so, can only be good always.
Whenever it is found, its doer is praised and is regarded as doing
something good. Likewise, injustice, as such, can only be ugly, and
whenever one who commits it is found, he is held in contempt and is
labeled as being a wrongdoer. It is impossible for justice to be ugly
and injustice to be good.

**Second:** Actions do not form a complete reason behind it either.
Rather, it requires being characterized by them, so much so that had an
action and its doer been separated from each other, it may either be
good, such as highly respecting a friend for being as such, or ugly,
such as humiliating him. But there is no objection to glorifying being
held in contempt because a label fits it, such as its being the cause
for oppressing a third person, or disrespect becoming laudable when the
label applies to it, such as its being a cause for salvation.

The example is not confined to both of them. Truthfulness and telling
lies are also the same. Truthfulness that results in harming the society
is ugly, and telling lies that saves an innocent human being is good.
Here, contrarily to justice and injustice, justice, as such, must not be
described as being ugly, while injustice, due to being oppressive, is
described as being good.

**Third:** One wherein there is neither cause for it by itself nor a
need to be characterized by either. Rather, it follows the eventual
entities and labels that apply to it, and it is like beating: It is good
for disciplining but bad for hurting.

This is common in circulation among them. The desired objective behind
this research is that it has been made clear that there are actions
which reason comprehends, if it reviews them, regardless of the entities
that affect them. They are good and their doers are praised, or they are
ugly and their doers must be held in contempt. And we do not claim that
every action falls within this framework.

In other words, the dispute between both groups swings between partial
positive and total negative. Those who believe in the concept of Justice
of God advocate the first, whereas the Asharis advocate the other.

About Applying Labels of Goodness and Ugliness
----------------------------------------------

There is no doubt that what is good and what is ugly carries one
meaning. The talk revolves round whether a thing is good or ugly, and it
varies according to the sources. The criteria for what is good and what
is ugly have been stated, and we here state some of them.

1. What agrees or disagrees with nature. The good scene, since it suits
nature, is regarded as being good. The frightening scene, since nature
rejects it, is regarded as being ugly. Similar to it is tasty food and
soft voice, they both are good. The bitter medicine and the braying of
the donkey are ugly. Goodness and ugliness in this criterion is not the
subject of research and dispute. Moreover, they cannot withstand and be
sustained due to the differences in nature.

2. What agrees or disagrees with personal interests and norms. One
killing his enemy is something good, since it agrees with the killer’s
personal goals. But it is ugly for the friends and family of the killed
person because it opposes their personal objectives and interests. This
is with regard to personal objectives and interests.

As regarding the sort/quality field, justice safeguards the society’s
system and the type’s interests, so it is good. Since injustice
undermines order and opposes the type’s interest, it is ugly. This, too,
is outside the field of research between the Adlis (those who believe in
the Justice of God) and the Asharis, for personal interests are not
always right in describing an action as being good or ugly due to the
differences in personal objectives and interests, as you have already
come to know.

An action, such as killing someone, may be good according to an
individual or a group while being ugly according to others. The research
is about what is good or ugly by itself that does not change from some
people to others when they are attributed, or from one generation to
another. Rather, it is an absolutely fixed judgment for an action.

3. As regarding type interests, such as a system being kept or
undermined, although they always portray an action as being good or
ugly, it is not right to apply the terms of good or ugly in both of
these situations. This is so because what is meant by the “self” is the
same action, regardless of looking at others, obligates reason to
recognize it as being good or ugly.

The matter is not the same when describing an action as being good or
ugly for the quality pros and cons. These objectives, which are outside
the truth of the actions, have something to do with reason rationalizing
or describing. For this reason, such a matter must be outside the scope
of dispute. If the Asharis admit the goodness of justice and the
ugliness of injustice from this standpoint, they still cannot be
regarded as being in agreement with the Adlis.

A thing that brings perfection or causes a shortcoming to one’s self,
such as knowledge or ignorance, the first beautifies it while the second
shames it. But there is nothing wrong with judging something as being
good or ugly in this sense, and it is not a point of discussion. I do
not think that there is anyone on the face of earth who denies
knowledge, courage and eloquence as being good, whereas ignorance,
cowardice and ineloquence are an indication of a shortcoming and
ugliness.

These three criteria, if we suppose they are criteria for being adorned
with goodness or damned with ugliness, are outside the precincts of this
research. Rather, the research is between the Adlis and others in the
next fourth criterion.

4. Actions that obligate praise for one who acts upon them are regarded
by people of reason as being good, and if they incur denunciation, they
are regarded by them as being ugly. This is done by observing the deed
itself as it is without adding anything else to it and without noticing
that it contains a personal or quality benefit, so reason is independent
in judging its goodness and in the need for it, or it deems it ugly and
that it must be abandoned.

If you will, you may say that if actions falls within the frame of the
human reason without difference among individuals, and regardless of
anything else other than the action itself, reason will find it
described as good and a candidate for praise, or vice versa. For
example, if goodness is rewarded with goodness, it is deemed to be good,
but if it is rewarded with abuse, it rules that it is ugly.

In issuing a ruling such as this, reason does not observe anything other
than the topic itself without imagining its being reform or corruption.
The discussion of what is good and what is ugly by itself aims only at
this category.

The three earlier categories are outside the scope of this research.
Also, ordinary judgment of what is good or ugly, such as lauding a
soldier who comes out wearing his military uniform, while deeming a
scholar coming out wearing unsuitable outfit as being ugly. These, too,
are outside the scope of this research.

One may misunderstand that judging something as being good or ugly is
done according to a fifth criterion which is: What is good is something
which deserves rewards from Allah, whereas what is ugly deserves His
punishment. But this, too, is outside the scope of this research.
Brahmans, who follow no legislative code, let alone believing in reward
and punishment in the Hereafter, have discussed the roots of judging
something as being good or ugly. So, how can this be the criterion of
the research?

Yes, it has assumed this feature based on those who want to deny what is
good and what is ugly. This is done in the excuse that the reward and
penalty for an action is outside the scope of reason and is inside that
of a legislative code.

From the above, one can understand what it implies. Yet in order to
provide more explanations in identifying the point of dispute between
the Asharis and the Adlis, we would like to produce the following
explanation.

Many of those who look for rational labeling of what is good and what is
ugly render the goodness, justice, benevolence, ugliness of injustice
and aggression, by saying that the first contains a public interest,
whereas the second also contains abuse. Because of these results, a
generalization has been made of recognizing the beauty of the first and
the ugliness of the second for everything.

But you have already come to know that the criterion of the research is
broader than that, that the matter focuses on noticing the deed itself
while overlooking its consequences and outcomes, does reason realize its
goodness or ugliness? Does reason praise the benevolence of a benevolent
person while denouncing rewarding a benevolent person with abuse? Does
reason label as ugly the over-burdening of someone? Does reason label as
good the work of a worker according to an agreement?
The discussion is on this level. It is not by looking at objectives and
interests, be they individual or social.

Those who advocate rational labels of what is good and what is bad say
that every rational person has the ability to make a distinction. He
inwardly finds some actions as being good and others as being ugly, and
these rulings stem from the essence of the rationalizing force and the
exemplary human identity.

The first person who liberated the point of dispute according to the way
which we have decided is the critic (Abdul-Razzaq) al-Lahiji in his
works of logic. The most clear evidence of the accuracy of his research
is that the goal behind submitting this issue (for discussion) is to
come to know His actions, the most Praised One, and whether or not
reason can explore a description of His actions, that what is good
according to reason, or what is ugly, is as such according to Allah
Almighty. Such an exploration cannot take place except when the
criterion in labeling as good or as ugly by observing the same action as
it is.

For example, there is no sense in researching what is good and what is
ugly through the previous criterion of suitability or contradiction to
nature, or whether it agrees or disagrees with an objective, or whether
it safeguards or undermines system and society. Otherwise, the objective
for which this issue was submitted, which is getting to know His
actions, Praise belongs to Him, will be nil and void.

Are Rational Good and Ugly Things Common?
-----------------------------------------

It may seem that some men of wisdom as well as logicians give the
impression that judging something, as being good or ugly through reason
is something that is commonly agreed upon according to the views of
rational people, and it is called “commendable”.

Our chief mentor says the following in his *Ishaaraat* book: “As for the
celebrate, they include views labeled as commendable, and we may
specifically apply the term ‘common’ to them because they stand on
something other than fame. These are opinions if a man who is left with
his abstract mind, whim and sense, without being disciplined by
accepting their issues and recognizing them. His strong thinking did not
incline to judge due to many particularities. If he did not seek in
their regard the human nature of mercy, timidity, pride, dignity, etc,
he would not rule that his reason, whim or sense would judge according
to them.

For example, we rule that robbing a man of his money is ugly, lying is
ugly, so one must not do it. From this same type, there are many which
people can consider. The Sharia has classified many things as being
ugly, such as killing an animal (not for food or to avoid harm) due to
the instinct of kindness, and most people are kind.

None of these are obligated by naive thinking. Were one created with a
perfect mind but did not hear anyone disciplining him, nor does he
surrender to a psychological or moral impulse, he will not issue a
ruling about any of these issues. Rather, he can ignore it and stop at a
limit. He will not rule that the whole is greater than the portion.”

He adds saying, “What is common knowledge is either an obligation or a
reformatory disciplining, and it is that with which the divine
legislations agree. As for manners and tempers, be they inductions or
terms, they are either absolute or according to folks who have mastered
a profession or followed a creed.”[^1]

Here you can see that the main mentor regards it a common issue to
consider robbing someone of his money as being ugly, and that only
rational men realize it. Had man been left alone to follow his reason
and was not disciplined about accepting rational issues; he would not
deem it as ugly.

The critic al-Tusi agrees with him when he explains the signs.

One can resign that *qiyas*, analogy, is divided into five types:

1. Evidential

2. Polemic

3. Oratorical

4. Poetic

5. Sophistical

The first among them is comprised of certain propositions the principles
of which are six:

1. First Principles

2. Contemplations

3. Empirical

4. Intuitive

5. Recurrences

6. Innate Things

As for the second, I mean the dialectical syllogism, it is comprised of
what is common and what is taken for granted, whether they are regarded
as such by everyone or by a specific group.

Thereupon, the celebrate from among the principles of debate are
contrasted by demonstrative syllogism. If rational criteria of good and
ugly are among the celebrate, they are listed under the polemic
syllogism and are known to be realized only on account of fame.

Had man been left alone for his abstract reason, whim and senses,
without being disciplined about accepting their issues, he would not
rule based on them. Denial of the criteria of rational good and ugly
must be rejected and so must rational evidences in their regard, and
those who advocate acceptance of reason do not adopt this.

Moreover, making them celebrate, getting them out of the demonstrative
syllogism and into the dialectic syllogism nullifies all rulings and
consequences that are based on advocating reason, as we explained. Based
on this, judging something as being good or ugly is not evidential, what
results from it cannot be used as evidence. Rather, it is regarded to be
among the celebrate about which views of the men of wisdom agree. It is
quite possible the men of wisdom agree against them. In that case, what
is good becomes ugly and vice versa.

So, if you say that the chief mentor made the celebrate more general
among the principles of debate, incorporating into them the first
principles. He says at the beginning of his statement, “As for the
celebrate, they include views labeled as commendable, and we may
specifically apply the term ‘common’ to them because they stand on
things other than fame.” I would like to say this:

What you have stated is accurate. For him, the celebrate are more
general than certitudes and others, so much so that even the first
principles have two considerations: They are generally recognized by
people, so they are regarded as being celebrate. In contrast to this
category, there is another category for the celebrate which is:
certitude. Mere reason hesitates to judge them, but most people
recognize them, and they are labeled as “commendable opinions.” This
category may be set aside under the celebrate label.

The celebrate are said to share the meaning according to people’s
recognition of them, and they are of two types: certitudes and
non-certitudes. But the mentor and those who follow him have regarded
labeling what is good and what is ugly to be under the second category,
and this requires denial of the rational categorization of what is
rationally good and what is ugly as well as the rulings built on it, so
consider.

What Criterion for Judging Actions as Being Good or Ugly?
---------------------------------------------------------

If the object of dispute is what we have stated, i.e. the mind realizes
an action as being good or ugly by looking at it while overlooking its
consequences, one would wonder: How can reason judge goodness and
ugliness, and what is the criterion for the judgment? The criterion for
reason to judge is that it finds some actions as being in agreement with
man’s higher side and exemplary facet in human existence, and that they
do not agree with each other.

If you will, you may say that he realizes that some actions vest
perfection on a chosen living being, whereas some others see shortage in
him, so it judges the first to be good, and that one should be adorned
by it, deeming the other as being ugly and must be abandoned. If natural
instinct, as we stated about criteria, generalizes this meaning, i.e.
the higher nature in man, this meaning would be incorporated into the
first category.

Explanation: Men of wisdom have divided reason into theoretical and
practical. The second teacher has said, “The theoretical ones are those
about which man may get to know that which man may do, whereas the
practical ones are those that inform us what man can do with his own
freewill.”

Wise Sabzawari said this in explaining it: “Theoretical reason and the
practical one can rationalize, but the theoretical is concerned about
pure sciences not related to actions such as: Allah is One existent, His
Attributes are the same as He is, and the like.

The practical one is concerned about sciences relevant to actions such
as: ‘Relying on God is good,’ ‘Acceptance, surrender and perseverance
are commendable.’ This reasoning is the one used in the science of
ethics. Both methods of reasoning are not contradictory, nor do they
represent hidden meanings. Rather, they are two faces for one and the
same coin: articulate people.”[^2]

Just as there are theoretical issues in theoretical wisdom that end at
commonsense issues, analogies would otherwise have become infertile and
unproductive, so is the case with practical wisdom. Unknown issues
cannot be known except when they end at necessary issues; otherwise, man
would not know anything about issues of practical wisdom. Just as reason
innately realizes commonsense issues in theoretical wisdom, it thus
realizes commonsense issues in practical wisdom innately without the
need for any other imagery.

For example, belief in all theoretical issues must end at a case where
antitheses are not present; they are removed, so much so that if belief
in them is removed, no issue can be believed at all. It is, therefore,
called the “mother issue,” such as certitude: It is the belief that the
angles of a triangle equal two right angles.

This does not happen unless it is preceded by the impossibility in
believing in the opposite of this issue, that is, it does not equal
them. Otherwise, if the opposite can be believed, relative certitude
will not take place. For this reason, the word of the men of wisdom has
agreed about applying evidence to theoretical issues is done if the
evidence reaches the “mother issue” referred to above.

In the light of this explanation, we say this: Just as theoretical
issues in the theoretical mind are commonsense, preliminary, which it
grasps, so is the case with the issues that are not clear in the
practical mind. They must end at preliminary and clear issues according
to reason, so as if belief in these issues is removed in the practical
wisdom, there can be no belief in any of their issues.

Among the commonsense issues in the practical mind is the one about
rationally fixed issues of what is clearly good and what is ugly for a
host of issues, such as our saying that “Justice is good”, “Injustice is
ugly”, “Rewarding goodness with goodness is good” and “Rewarding
goodness with evil is ugly.”

These are preliminary issues in practical wisdom, and practical reason
realizes them innately and while observing the issues themselves. In the
light of believing in them, it is easy to believe what is based on them
in the field of practical mind from rulings that are not commonsense,
whether they are connected to manners first, or to home management
second, or to urban policies third, which are discussed in the practical
wisdom.

In order to bring an example for it, the ethical scholar rules that it
is mandatory to honor parents, teachers and those who do us favors. This
is so because honoring is an issue of rewarding goodness with goodness,
something which is good by itself, while insulting them is one of the
issues of rewarding goodness with ugliness, which by itself is ugly.

One who researches home management will rule that marital duties must be
carried out by both sides, and that falling short of so doing is ugly.
This is so because carrying them out is acting upon the marriage
covenant, whereas lagging behind them violates this covenant. The first
is good by itself and the second is ugly by itself.

The sociologist who looks into the rights of the ruler and government on
the society rules that the taxes must be equivalent to individuals’
incomes. This is so because abandoning this restriction means doing the
subjects injustice, which is ugly by itself.

You can measure on this whatever researches reach you in practical
wisdom, whether they are due to the individual (ethics), or to the small
society (the home), or to the big society (the corps politique).
Everything that is said about them and researched by researchers, since
it is one of the practical mind’s affairs, must be ruled as being either
positive or negative, right or wrong, based on the obvious issues in the
field of that mind.

Up to here, we have come to conclude that the unclear rulings must end,
starting from the field of both minds (the theoretical and the
practical) up to commonsense rulings that are realized without any
difficulty. This is so in order to avoid the turn and the sequences on
which scholars of logic and wisdom relied in the first section, that is,
theoretical wisdom, and the evidence is one and applies to all.

If you come to know all of what we have stated, the talk will fall in
another matter: determining the criterion for reason realizes the
soundness of commonsense issues or their being false in the field of
both minds. So let us say the following.

The criterion in the field of theoretical mind is the issue being in
agreement with or without its formation. The mind realizes innately that
the presence of two antitheses cannot take place on the outside, and
that it cannot be judged that something is present while at the same
time it cannot be judged that it does not exist. Such is realized
without the need for an experiment or induction.

The criterion in the practical mind is realizing the agreement between
the issue and its suitability for the exemplary side of man, not the
animal one, or its opposition thereto.

Man has an exemplary instinct with which he is distinguished from
animals. He finds some issues suitable for or contradictory to that high
side, so he describes what is suitable as good and that it must be done,
describing its opposite as being ugly and must be avoided. He does not
realize the issues with these two descriptions only for his own person
or for a particular type of humans or for all humans; rather, he
realizes the goodness or ugliness for every rational existent having the
freedom to choose, whether he falls under the umbrella of humanity or is
outside it.

This is so because the basis for his judgment of one of these two
descriptions of the same issue is as it is, without any particularity
for the realizing individual. He realizes that justice is good with
everyone and from everyone, that injustice is likewise ugly. He does not
apply his judgment with either of them to a particular time or century.

Up to now, the two matters that play a role in rationally judging
something as good or as ugly have been made clear, and either of them
must not be confused with the other because the first is an introduction
to the other; these are:

A. All issues in the field of reason are rendered to commonsense in
order to avoid what must be avoided.

B. Clarifying that reason criterion identifies such issues as being
commonsense when it comes to reason.

It has become clear that one who advocates rational goodness and
ugliness for their own selves needs not prove what he adopts. Also, one
advocates that antitheses do not meet, and that they are out of place.
What is amazing is that the men of wisdom and the logicians have agreed
that theoretical issues in the theoretical mind must end to be
commonsense issues. Otherwise, the criteria would be useless, and
sequence will replace deduction.

But they overlooked applying this principle to the practical mind’s
aspect and did not divide the practical issue into ideological and
commonsense, or theoretical and necessary. How so since deduction and
definitiveness in unclear issues in the field of practical mind cannot
be done except when the mind arrives at issues that are clear in this
field?

You have already come to know that the issues submitted in home and
family environments, which are labeled home management, or the issues
discussed in the world of politics and urban management, are not equally
clear? Rather, they have degrees and levels (of clarity). Mind cannot
reach definitiveness in all practical issues unless there are clearly
commonsense issues on which unknown practical issues are based, so that
definitiveness is applied to them and ambiguity is removed from them.
For this reason, we do not have to expand in submitting evidences for
those who advocate what is good and what is ugly, and we do not mention
except few of them.

Just as they have overlooked dividing the issues in the practical wisdom
into both parts, they thus overlooked explaining what the criterion is
for the mind to realize the accuracy of some issues or their being false
in that field. In the statements of logicians, they explain the
criterion and the standard in incomplete matters to which one who
reviews books of logic can refer.

Evidences of Advocates of Rational Judgments of What is Good and What is Ugly
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**First Evidence:** It is referred to by the critic al-Tusi when he
said, “… It is due to their absence if they are legitimately fixed.”[^3]
In other words, if we say that what is good and what is ugly are proven
through the Sharia, this will necessitate their being not proven by the
Sharia, too.

Explanation: If goodness and ugliness are judged by the mind, when the
mind is independent in realizing that truthfulness is good while lying
is ugly, there is no confusion about what the Legislator bids and
forbids being good and ugly respectively. This is due to reason judging
that lying is ugly, and the Legislator does not commit what is ugly, nor
can it be imagined that he commits it.

But if the mind is not independent in doing so, when the Legislator
commands something or prohibits it, or if he tells us that being
truthful is good while telling lies is ugly, it does not befit us to be
definite that he is truthful in his speech till we believe in its
contexts. This is so because there is a possibility the legislator is
not telling the truth in its regard, or in telling it.

Telling lies, according to the presumption, is yet to be proven to be
ugly. Even if the legislator says that he does not lie, we are not sure
that he is truthful even while conveying such information. So, it is
mandatory, as al-Ashari should have advocated, that one cannot rule
something as being good, neither according to reason nor to the Sharia.

If you may, you can say that had reason not been independent about some
actions being good and others being ugly, such as telling the truth and
lying, and if Allah, the most Praised One, tells us through His prophets
that such an action is good or ugly, we would not have been definitive
about His speech to say that there is likelihood He is not telling us
the truth.

The man of virtue, al-Qawshaji al-Ashari, responded to this reasoning by
saying, “We do not make bidding and forbidding as two evidences for what
is good and what is ugly (respectively) so what has been said above
would be stated. Rather, we judge something as being good when the
action is connected to bidding and to praise, whereas ugliness is when
it is connected to forbidding and denunciation.”[^4]

One may resign that the topic falls once in the name and in the term, so
it is not right to say that what took place is connected to bidding and
praise is good, and what is prohibited and denounced is ugly. Knowing
this does not hinge except on hearing them from the legislator.

The other issue is that labeling what is actually good or ugly also
falls with the legislator. This is not explored from mere hearing that
the bidding and forbidding are relevant to something for it is possible
the legislator may be sporting in bidding and forbidding. If he says
that he is not sporting, this does not prove the negation of the
possibility of his sporting in his actions and speech due to the
probability of his being jesting or lying in his speech.

For this reason, there must be something among the rational realization
the realizing of goodness and ugliness of which does not hinge on
anything, and that reason will be independent in grasping it, which is:
Justice is good and injustice is ugly, truthfulness is good and lying is
ugly, so the mind may be independent in it, that what the legislator
judged is true in his words.

It will then be fixed that what is relevant to the matter is good
according to the Sharia, and what is connected to prohibition is held by
the Sharia as ugly. This is the objective of the critic al-Tusi, that
is, had it not been for the independence of the mind in some actions,
nothing at all would have been fixed as good or ugly.

**Second Evidence**: It is referred to also by the critic al-Tusi when
he said, “… The counteracting would have then been valid,”[^5] that is,
in determining what is good and what is ugly.

Explanation: When determining what is good and what is ugly, the
legislator has the right to deem as good or as ugly whatever reason
judges as being as such. Therefore, this is obligatory to deem
benevolence as ugly and abuse as good to be by necessity false. Man’s
conscience judges that it is not right for a doer of good to be
denounced or a doer of evil to be praised.

The Commander of the Faithful (peace with him) has said, “The doer of
good and the doer of bad should not have the same status with you.”[^6]
In this statement, the Imam aims at waking up the conscience of his
governor, and he does not say it as something new about which the
governor was heedless.

**Third Evidence**: Had goodness and ugliness been legislated, the
Brahmans and atheists, who reject divinely revealed legislations, would
not have judged through them. They pass a judgment based on reason.
Materialists and atheists who spread in broad countries from the east of
the earth to its west reject such legislation and religion from its very
foundation, recognizing the goodness of some actions and the ugliness of
others.

For this reason, they tempt world nations to submit deceptive concepts
through their vile propaganda, such as support for reconciliation and
world peace, preserving human rights, caring for the prisoners and
detainees, renouncing racial discrimination, up to the list of what the
human taste and reason appreciate in all circles.

They submit these concepts so they may reach through them their personal
goals and interests. Had these concepts been unacceptable by humans in
general, the advocates of materialism and atheism in the world would not
have used them.

The conclusion is that there are actions in the goodness of which nobody
doubts, whether the Sharia states their goodness or not. Also, there are
actions that everyone finds as being ugly, whether their ugliness is
mentioned by the Sharia or not. For this reason, if a rational person,
who has never heard of divinely revealed legislations, nor does he know
anything about rulings, grew up in the deserts, his mind being empty of
all doctrines, is given the option to either be truthful and thus be
given one dinar, or to lie and will be given a dinar, while there is no
harm on him in either case, he will prefer to tell the truth over lying.
Had instinct not judged truthfulness as being good and lying as being
ugly, he would not have distinguished one from the other, and he would
have always chosen truthfulness.

This shows that reason has the ability to judge and decide matters that
are rendered to the individual and to the society, so it judges that
obedience to a benevolent guardian is good and disobedience of him is
ugly, that the doer of goodness and that of evil do not occupy the same
status, and the like.

**Fourth Evidence**: Had what is good and what is ugly been judged
according to hearing (about them), Allah Almighty would not have deemed
anything as being ugly. Had it been so, He would not have deemed it ugly
that miraculous acts are performed by liars. Judging this as being
permissible closes the door of the prophet’s knowledge. Any prophet who
brought a miracle shortly after claiming Prophetic mission could not be
believed while saying it was permissible for a miracle to be performed
by a liar in his claim.

This false result is one of the most important and prominent outcomes of
denying the principle. Thus did they close the door of knowing a
Prophetic mission.

What is amazing is that al-Fadl ibn Rozbahan tried to respond to this
evidence by saying, “A miracle is not done by liars not only because
this is rationally ugly, it is due to Allah not doing things like that;
it is normally impossible. So, the door of knowing the prophets will not
be closed because ordinary knowledge judges it impossible to come
up.”[^7]

One may resign that: Where did he have this knowledge from, that is,
that Allah does not let a miracle be performed by a liar? Had belief
hinged on bringing it about, those who belied the Prophetic mission of
Noah, or those before or after him, would have been excused for having
denied the prophet’s mission. This is so because this habit is not fixed
with them. Knowledge of it takes place when seeing a miracle being
performed at the hands of the truthful person rather than those of the
liars is a repeated occurrence.

It can be said that the conclusion that Allah does not permit a liar to
produce a miracle must be based on a reference. If the reference is
reason, the Asharis regard it as being detached. If it is due to
hearing, it is presumed that the legislator may be lying in his claim.
Rather, there is no hearing prior to a proof for a prophet’s message.

The conclusion of the research is: One who denies what is good and what
is ugly denies commonsense, and there is no need to speak to him because
the dispute cuts off when it reaches necessary introductions, and such
folks dispute about them.

I wonder, if reason does not judge that there is no obligation to do
what is beyond one’s capacity, and that it deems it permissible that
Allah, Glory to Him, prohibits His servant from doing something, creates
in it a necessity then He punishes him for it, so, say: Ha! What matter
is realized by reason?!

It has been said that a poet and a carpenter got together for a debate.
The carpenter said, “Why do you advocate that Allah commands His
servants to do what is beyond their ability?” The poet kept silent. He
was asked, “Why are you silent?” He said, “I intended by debating with
him to obligate him to say that He commands what is beyond one’s
ability; but if he adheres to it without feeling ashamed of it, what
should I obligate him about?”

Thus you come to know about the weakness of what Abul-Hassan al-Ashari
mentions in his *Lama* book, and here is its text:

“If someone says: ‘Should Allah cause the children pain in the
Hereafter?’ it will be said to him, ‘He, the most Exalted One, has the
right to do so, and He will be fair if He does it.’” He goes on to add,
“And His letting the believers suffer is not seen as an ugly deed which
He does, while He permits the unbelievers to enter the Gardens of Bliss.
Rather, we say that He does not do that because He has already informed
us that He punishes the unbeliever, and it is not possible that He lies
when He tells us something.”[^8]

Asharis’ Evidences for Denying Rational Goodness and Ugliness
-------------------------------------------------------------

**First Evidence:** Allah is the Owner of everything, He does in His
kingdom whatever He pleases.

In his argument, al-Ashari sought evidence saying, “The proof that
everything He does He has the right to do is: He is the Owner, the
Subduer Who is not owned; none is above Him; none is there to command or
prohibit Him, nor is there anyone present with Him who draws drawings
for Him, signing orders for Him. If all of this is as such, nothing ugly
comes out of Him. If there is anything ugly, it comes out of us because
we violate the limit that He drew for us; we do what we are not supposed
to. Since the Creator is not a slave or one who works for someone else,
nothing ugly comes of Him. If He says that telling lies is ugly because
He finds it as such, it will be said to him: Yes. Had He found it to be
good, it would have been good, and if He commanded it, nobody would
object to Him.

“If they say that it is possible that He lies, just as you find it
possible that He commands the telling of lies, it will be said to them:
Not everything that is possible is liable for Him to command or that He
is described by it.”[^9]

The resigns about the above are as follows:

Firstly, we would like to ask the Ashari mentor this question: If the
most Praised One tormented in the hereafter al-Ashari’s child, although
a child is innocent and has committed no sin, and if the Ashari himself
sees it in the hereafter with his own eyes, will he see it as justice
and as a good deed? Or will he find that particular actions, out of his
own conscience, to be repugnant?

Likewise, if al-Ashari is dealt with in the same way his child was dealt
with, although he is a believer, will he accept it in the depths of his
soul and see it as fairness, that he is not being wronged, in the
pretext that Allah, Praise belongs to Him, is the Owner of the domain
and He fares with His domain as He pleases? Or would al-Ashari judge
otherwise?

Secondly, there is no doubt that the most Praised One is the King of the
domain, and He can do anything, as you have come to know, be it good or
ugly. His ability, in general, covers anything, and there is no doubt
about it. But the rational judgment says that such an action is ugly,
yet it is done by someone who is wise; this is not to limit His kingdom
and ability.

This is what counts in untying the knot of the Asharis who claim that
the judgment of reason, its judging the actions of the most Praised One,
is a sort of intrusion into the affairs of the Lord of the Worlds, but
the truth is something else.

Explanation: Due to experience, or due to rational evidences, reason
unveils the laws that prevail over nature. It also unveils the
mathematical laws. If reason says that every pair is divided into two
equal parts, is there a possibility that by doing so reason or nature
should impose its own judgment? Or will it be said that nature carried
that law, that reason discovered and explained it?

If this is the difference between imposing a judgment and discovering it
in the natural world, let the difference be between realizing it as a
good deed or as an ugly one, between any action it undertakes and that
which it does not. Its imposition of a judgment on Allah, Praise belongs
to Him, is an imposition that limits the expanse of His ability, will
and action.

Reason here is not a judge, and it does not impose anything on Allah,
Praise belongs to Him. Rather, by looking at Allah Almighty and His
Attributes, which include perfection and independence, this reveals that
one who has such attributes, especially wisdom, cannot do anything ugly,
nor does he undermine anything that is good.

In other words, reason reveals that one who is characterized with all
perfection, who is independent of anything, cannot do anything ugly.
This is so because there is deterrence, he has no reason. This
abstention from doing what is ugly does not mean that it is unable to do
it, nor does it negate the most Exalted One being able to do it, nor
does it negate his option in doing what is good and abandoning what is
ugly. His doing something is by choice, and so is the case with not
doing it.

This is the conclusion arrived at by those who believe in the Justice of
Allah, who say that ugliness does not apply to Him. This does not mean
restricting what He does by reason. Rather, because Allah is wise, He
has mandated it on Himself neither to violate what is good, nor to do
what is ugly. The role of reason here is only to disclose, to clarify,
by looking at His attributes and wisdom.

Briefly, His actions, Praise belongs to Him, while keeping in mind that
His Might is general, is not chaotic and free of everything negative or
positive, nor is it restrictively imposed on Him, Praise belongs to Him,
by the reason factor. Rather, it is a reality, a fact discovered by
reason just as reason discovered the laws prevailing over nature and the
cosmos.

Imagine that His action, Praise belongs to Him, is free of every
restriction and limit in the pretext of safeguarding the Honor of Allah,
Praise belongs to Him, and due to the expanse of His omnipotence. This
is almost the same as false entrapment, for safeguarding His omnipotence
is not the same as His actions being above any restriction and
condition.

Contemplating on what we have already stated, it becomes obvious how
weak the argument of all those who advocate the negation of what is
rationally good or bad is. There is no harm in pointing out to some of
their evidences which their scholars who succeeded Abul-Hassan al-Ashari
have indicated.

**Second Evidence:** Had there been a need for determining what is good
and what is ugly, there would have been no dispute.

They have said: Had knowledge of the goodness of what is good and the
ugliness of what is ugly been necessary, there would have been no
dispute about the difference between it and the knowledge that the one
is half the two, but the latter is false according to conscience.

Critic al-Tusi responded saying, “Variations in sciences is possible due
to variations in visions.”[^10]

Explanation: Necessary sciences may vary because of the variations in
imagining their ends. In the logic industry, it is decided that truisms
have levels. The preliminaries have a higher level than the
observations, the latter have a higher level than experimental things,
the latter have a higher level than intuitionism, the latter has a
higher level than *traditionalia permissa*, and the latter has a higher
level than instincts. The restriction in this regard is: If something
cannot be believed except through imagining both its ends, it has a
higher level than others, such as the preliminaries[^11], and so on.

Had what the Asharis stated, with regard to consistency, become a must,
what is relevant to the senses cannot be among what is positive.

Briefly, positive sciences, despite their abundance, are not on one
style. Rather, they have levels and degrees. This is sensed by man if he
applies his sciences and convictions. Therefore, there is no objection
to differences in some necessary sciences due to certain motivations.
They are on the level of imagining that judging something as being good
or ugly restricts His authority, the most Praised One. For this reason,
the Asharis rejected this science which is necessary to maintain the
generality of His authority, that of the most Exalted One.

**Third Evidence**: Had goodness and ugliness been rational, they would
not have changed.

Had goodness and ugliness been rational, they would not have changed,
that is, what is good cannot become ugly, and what is ugly cannot become
good, and the latter is false. Telling a lie can be good, while telling
the truth can cause something ugly, such as if the lie results in saving
a prophet from annihilation while telling the truth can cause him to
perish.

Had lying been ugly due to its own ugliness, it cannot be a must, nor
can it be good if it serves the interest of protecting the blood of a
prophet from the oppression of an oppressor who seeks to kill him.[^12]

Al-Tusi the critic has responded by saying, “… And it is the committing
of the lesser ugly thing while there is the possibility of saving
someone.”[^13]

Its explanation is this: As ugly as telling a lie is in this picture,
abandoning the saving of the prophet’s life is much uglier. Thus, reason
judges that the lesser ugly thing should be committed in order to avoid
the committing of what is the ugliest. Yet one can get rid of telling a
lie through insinuation.

Briefly, saving the prophet’s life is better than the goodness of the
truth, while abandoning doing it is uglier than lying. Therefore, it is
better to commit the lesser ugly thing, which is lying, because it
serves a great interest, rather than tell the truth.

Add to the above is that the evidence is based on lying being ugly and
truthfulness being good, similarly to oppression being ugly and justice
being good, is entitative; these do not change. As regarding what has
already been said about the actions, in as far as goodness and ugliness
are concerned, they are of various types.

Some of them are those where the action is a complete cause behind one
of them. So, its goodness or ugliness is not changed by eventualities
such as the goodness of benevolence and the ugliness of wrongdoing. And
some of them are those in which one of them requires the doing of
another. It mandates goodness as long as no other label is subjected to
it, and so is the case with the aspect of ugliness.

It has already been indicated that the goodness of truthfulness and the
ugliness of lying are of this type. And there are others that cannot be
a cause, nor do they mandate either of them, such as beating, whether it
is a penalty or (deliberate) inflicting of harm.

Up to here, we have come up with this outcome: There are actions where
reason independently judges as being good or ugly, judging them with
help from the Sharia. It sees their goodness and ugliness in the
absolute sense in all doers, without being exclusively belonging to the
Creator or to the creature. We have already indicated the criterion of
its judgment, which is: the suitability or aversion of an action for or
to the supreme One according to which He created man.

To say that something is rationally good or ugly takes place by saying
that man is a doer enjoying the power to choose. As regarding saying
that he is forced in his actions, researching them is negated due to the
negation of its subject because no forced actions can be described as
being good or ugly according to reason.

Since the Asharis depict man as being a forced doer, their statement
mandates the negation of rational goodness and ugliness. You will come
to know how man is a selective doer, he is not forced. You will be
familiar with the evidences produced by the Asharis for their compulsion
claim.[^14]

Goodness and Ugliness According to the Holy Quran
-------------------------------------------------

Contemplation on the verses of the Holy Quran provides that it takes it
for granted that reason judges things as being good or ugly outside the
frame of inspiration, then it commends to do what is good and prohibits
the doing of what is ugly.

The most Praised One says,

***“Allah commands justice, good deeds and liberality to kith and kin,
and He forbids all shameful deeds, injustice and rebellion: He instructs
you so that you may receive admonishment.” 16:90***

***“Say: The things that my Lord has truly forbidden are: shameful
deeds, whether open or secret; sins and trespasses against truth or
reason (and) the assigning of partners to Allah, something for which He
has given no authority, and saying things about Allah of which you have
no knowledge.” 7:33***

***“…He allows them as lawful what is good (and pure) and prohibits them
from doing what is bad (and impure).” 7:157***

***“When they do anything that is shameful, they say, ‘We found our
fathers doing so,’ and ‘God commanded us thus.’ Say: ‘No, Allah never
commands what is shameful: Do you say about Allah what you do not
know?’” 7:28***

These verses clearly indicate that there are matters that are described
as being good, shameful, repugnant, unjust as well as things that are
described as commendable. They do so before the matter in their regard
hinges on a command to bid or forbid them, and that man finds
attribution by one of them as stemming from his own depths, just as he
knows the rest of described things such as water, dust, etc.

Man’s knowledge of them is not confined to the Sharia being connected to
them. Rather, the role of the Sharia is to emphasize that reason
realizes and commends the doing of what is good and prohibits the doing
of what is ugly.

Moreover, the most Praised One uses man’s conscience as a basis for His
decree due to the independence of man’s rational might.

The Almighty says,

***“Shall We treat those who believe and do deeds of righteousness the
way we treat those who do mischief on earth? Shall We treat those who
guard themselves against evil the same way as those who turn aside from
the right?” 38:28***

The most Praised One also says,

***“Shall We then treat the people of faith like the people of sin? What
is the matter with you? How do you judge?” 68:35-36***

The most Praised One also says,

***“Is there any reward for goodness (benevolence) other than goodness?”
60:55***

Contemplation on these verses leaves no room to doubt that things that
are good and those that are ugly are rational matters which man realizes
through innate evidence without the need for an outside proof.

Outcomes of What Reason Deems to be Good or Ugly
------------------------------------------------

The issue of what reason deems as good or ugly occupies a prominent
status in log researches because the most important of what this matter
proves is the wisdom of the Creator, the Almighty, and that He is above
doing what should not be done, thus resolving many logical and other
problems. Here is the explanation for some of them.

### Knowledge as a Must

Logicians, with the exception of the Asharis, have agreed about knowing
Allah, Praise belongs to Him, being a must on every human being, an
obligation mandated by reason. It means that reason judges the goodness
of such knowledge and the ugliness of abandoning it due to such
knowledge leading to thanking the One Who grants blessings, which is
good, whereas abandoning it means falling into possible harm, which is
ugly.

This stands if we advocate the independence of reason. Otherwise, such
knowledge would not be a must, nor would it be rational, according to
the supposition that such knowledge is isolated from its judgment, nor
would it be according to the Sharia because such Sharia is not proven
yet.

### Necessity of His Actions, Praise Belongs to Him, Being Above Sporting

What this issue mandates is that His actions, Praise belongs to Him, are
above foul play, that they must be associated with objectives and
purposes. This issue is one of those about which those who advocate His
justice and the Asharis disputed. The first group judged it to be
positive and the second to be negative. Men of wisdom have their own
special opinion in its regard, too. Therefore, we are setting aside a
research just for it after presenting these results.

### Servants Must Bear Obligations

If His action, Praise belongs to Him, is above foul play, reason
independently judges that every responsible person has to reach the
goals for which he was created. This happens by commissioning these
persons to do what gets them to reach perfection and turns them away
from anything that prevents them from reaching such perfection, so they
may not be left alone, so in the light of obligation, their spiritual
energies may open.

Man’s knowledge of what is good and what is ugly is not enough for him
to reach perfection. There are matters that prevent him from reaching
this goal, or they get him to reach them, while he is ignorant of them,
and they are not known except through the path of inspiration (*wahi*)
and of the Sharia.

### Necessity of Sending Prophets

The issue of the need to send messengers, too, is based on this same
matter. Reason, which realizes that man was not created randomly but for
a purpose, also realizes that it cannot reach it except through divinely
legislated guidance. So, it is independent in ruling that callers must
be sent by Allah Almighty in order to guide humans.[^15]

### Necessity of Looking into Evidence of One Claiming to be a Prophet

There is no doubt that true prophets are sent with miracles and
evidences. If someone claims ambassadorship from Allah Almighty to
people, should people look into his claim and proof? Despite reason’s
independence in the field of ruling something to be good or ugly, there
must be looking into and listening to such a claim in order to avoid a
possible harm. As regarding the claim that there is no such need, this
is not mandated by reason because, according to the isolated
supposition, this is neither rational, nor is it supported by the
Sharia, because it is yet to be proven. As a result, one who does not
look into the matter is excused because he is not guided to the truth of
the matter!

### Knowledge of the Truth of the Claim of Prophetic Mission

If the claim put forth by the one who claims to be a prophet is linked
to miracles and clear evidences, and if we say that reason is
independent in the field of deeming something as being good or ugly, we
will judge that he is truthful. We do so because it is ugly to grant
evidences to a lying claimant since doing so misleads people. But if we
isolate reason from ruling in this situation, there is no evidence that
such an individual is a truthful prophet, and the Sharia is yet to judge
his truthfulness.

### Conclusiveness, Perpetuation of Islam’s Rulings

Reason’s independence in ruling what is good and what is ugly, in the
sense which you have come to know, that is, agreeability or
disagreeability with high intellect, is the basis of conclusiveness and
the perpetuation of Islam’s rulings, their being sustained till the
Judgment Day. This is so because instinct is common among all humans,
and it does not change as civilizations change. The latter’s change does
not affect man’s instinct. It does not alter its mold. Thus, what
instinct sees as good or ugly becomes immortal till the Judgment Day,
change and alteration never affect it.[^16]

### Ethics Remain Unaltered

The issue of ethics remaining unaltered in all ages and civilizations,
or their change according to the latter’s change, has been one of the
issues submitted lately by the Westerners for discussion, and views in
its regard have been expressed. Some say that their roots are fixed,
some say that they change according to the changes in systems and
civilizations.

But the issue is not resolved except in the light of what reason deems
as being good or ugly, and this stems from the dictates of the high
human nature and the fixed nature. It is then that the bases of ethics
are characterized with firmness and eternity. What changes as
civilizations change are the customs and traditions.

For example, honoring a benevolent person is something that reason
judges as being good, and this rational judgment never changes at all.
Rather, what change, as time passes by, are the ways of expressing such
honoring, how it is done. So, the bases are firm, while the customs and
traditions, which are nothing but outfits of bases, are the ones that
change.

### Wisdom During Hard Times of Trials and Tribulations

Among the famous issues in Divine wisdom is that of trials and ills. The
existence of these incidents created confusions about His wisdom, even
about His knowledge, the Almighty that He is! Superficially, they, on
the one hand, indicate the absence of command in the universe while, on
the other, they contradict His wisdom in the sense His actions are
perfect. They contradict His wisdom, in the absolute sense, that is, His
action is above what must not be done, on the third hand. They
contradict His wisdom, in particular, that is, His justice, the most
Exalted One, His upholding justice, on the fourth hand. Since it is one
of the quite lengthy matters that have so much been researched and
discussed, whether in the science of logic, philosophy or divine wisdom,
we here dedicate the discussion of them after presenting an overall
review of these conclusions.

### Allah is Just, Does Not Wrong Anyone

One of the most obvious testimonies to His wisdom, the wisdom of the
most Exalted One, which is fixed through rationally judging what is good
and what is ugly, is His justice, that is, His upholding fairness. He
does not wrong anyone, does not oppress anyone, and we will discuss this
while explaining its status in the Islamic legislative system. It
results in outcomes among which are the following:

#### Ugliness of Penalizing Without Explaining

If Allah Almighty is fair, He does not punish His servants without
explaining to them what their obligations are, for the latter would be
unfair, and reason judges that it is ugly, and one must rise above
committing it. There is no difference between the absence of an
explanation or the explanation not reaching these servants due to
certain causes and factors. This basis is agreed on by fundamentalists
on which they have based the originality of clearance from doubts that
are not connected to overall knowledge.

Yes, the matter is based on what reason judges as being good or ugly if
it is not proven from the Sharia through the Quran and the Sunnah, and
it is supposed to be consulted after both latter sources.

#### Ugliness of Vesting Responsibility for What is Beyond Ability

One of the results of rational judgment of His justice, the Almighty
that He is, is that His judgment obligates the presence of ability and
might in the servant to do what He obligates him to do. Obligating and
forcing them to do what is beyond their ability is unfair, it is ugly
and the Wise One does not do it. Due to the importance of this research,
we will also set aside an independent research after presenting these
results.

#### Extent of Impact of Destiny on Man’s Fate

One of the issues that result from His justice, the most Exalted One, is
that decree and destiny bear an impact on man’s fate. This issue, though
fundamental in the Islamic faith, has been argued and discussed to the
extent that some people were excommunicated from it and the blood of
some other Muslims was shed even during Islam’s early centuries.

From this issue, the *bada* or altering destiny, due to good or bad
deeds, branches out. Familiarity with both of them requires detailing
their researches. We, therefore, have set aside for each of them a
chapter of its own in this book.

#### Man’s Freedom of Choice

Among the issues that are based on the Almighty’s justice is man’s
freedom of choice in his actions. Being forced to do what he does is
unjust and oppressive. Since this matter, too, has been greatly
discussed, and views about it have varied from one extreme to another,
we have set aside a separate chapter to discuss it in this book in
addition to discussing the researches that branch out of it about what
is good and what is bad, guidance and misguidance, etc.

#### Justifying Hereafter Punishment

One of the queries that have been submitted about His justice, the most
Praised One, is: What justifies the hereafter penalty? This is
approached from two angles.

First: Why should there be punishment in the hereafter? Is it to cool
one’s outrage, or is it to satisfy one’s lust for seeking revenge, while
both of them would be regarded as shortcomings above which Allah
Almighty rises high?

Second: The requirement of the rational canon is that the penalty should
be according to the extent of the crime. Anything less than that is
unfair and unjust above which Allah rises high. So, why should the
unbelievers and criminals be kept in the fire of hell without an end?

We will answer these questions after we discuss the Almighty’s
justice.[^17]

Fruits of Determining What is Rationally Good or Ugly
-----------------------------------------------------

### Objectives Justify Actions of the Most Praised One

The Asharis say that the actions of the most Praised One are not
justified by objectives, that He is not obligated to do anything, while
He does nothing ugly, using the following norms of arguments:

#### First Argument

Had the Almighty’s actions been for purposes, they would be by
themselves incomplete, in need of achieving those purposes in order to
be complete. This is so because a doer’s purpose is not good unless it
is proven that doing it is better for him than otherwise, and this is
the meaning of perfection.[^18]

Those who believe in His Adl, justice, i.e. the “Adlis”, respond by
saying that the actions of the most Exalted One are justified by the
criterion of meeting His servants’ interests. The condition of what is
perfect or what is best is irrelevant here. This is endorsed by the
author of *Al-Maqasid* and he is followed by the Matridis.[^19]

Explaining the answer:

##### Is the Objective that of the Doer or of the Deed?

Al-Ashari confused the purpose as deemed to be the best by the doer and
the purpose is rendered to his deed. The complementing exists in the
first, not the second. One who says that His deeds are justified by
purposes, objectives, incentives and interests means the second, not the
first. The objective in the first sense contradicts His being
Independent in Himself and in His attributes as well as in His actions.

The objective in the second sense requires His deed getting out of being
in vain and meaninglessness and out of His being, the most Praised One,
toying and sporting. Combining His being Independent, needing nothing,
with His being wise above toying and sporting, is saying that His
actions cover interests, i.e. that they are wise, they are needed by His
servants, by the command which He has set, not to His existence, to His
own self, as is quite obvious.

##### Explaining the Purposeful Objective

The purposeful objective is one of the portions of the complete
objective. It is meant according to the terms used by men of wisdom as
getting the doer out of the ability to do a deed, out of the probability
to the necessity, and it is present as an image, an idea, and is absent
as an existence and a reality. It is the reason why the doer gets out of
being a doer by force to a doer by action.

For example, the carpenter does not make a chair except for a required
goal. Had it not been for imagining that goal, he would not have gotten
out of being a doer by force to the field of being a doer by action.
Thus, the purposeful objective has a role in achieving what is
justified, in its getting out of the probability to actuality in order
to move the doer in the direction of the deed, driving him to action.

We do not conceive the purposeful objective in this sense as applies to
Him because He is absolutely independent when it comes to the status of
His own self, to being described, to His actions. Just as He is perfect
in the status of existence, perfect in the action status, He does not
need anything beyond Himself to bring about something. Otherwise, had
the doing of the Almighty been similar to what humans do, He would not
have brought about, created, anything except for the purpose it serves.
Thus, He would be incomplete in the status of action, being in need of
something beyond His own self, and this contradicts His being absolutely
Independent.

This is what the men of wisdom have stated, and it is undoubtedly right.
The Asharis have taken advantage of it out of context, using it as a
pretext to describe His actions as being without any purpose or goal.
They made His actions akin to those who toy and sport. He (we seek
refuge with Allah when saying this) does things without a goal, without
a purpose. But seeking evidence from what the men of wisdom have stated,
in order to prove what the Asharis have stated, is obviously untrue.

This is so because denying the unseen objective in this sense does not
require His actions to stand behind interests and benefits for His
servants whereby His command stands, even if they do not affect His
ability to do, to justify. This is so because the most Praised One is a
wise doer. A wise doer does not choose from among doable actions except
what is suitable, and he does not do anything that is against his
nature, in contradiction to it.

In other words, this is not meant that He is able to do one action
rather than another, and that when He does something, He completes the
objective, doing this rather than that. Instead, He, the most Praised
One, can do both deeds, and He does not choose from them except what
agrees with His goal and suits His wisdom.

This is the same like saying that the most Praised One is just and does
not oppress. By saying so, we do not mean that His deed is perfect with
regard to justice rather than injustice. Rather, we mean that He is
perfectly capable of both. But His justice and wisdom, kindness and
mercy, require that He chooses this rather than that while He is
perfectly capable of doing both of them.

This is the truth behind saying that the actions of Allah Almighty are
not justified by purposes, goals and interests despite His actions being
free of interests and wisdom without complementing.

#### Second Argument

When the Ashari imams dealt with the logic of the Adlis in this regard,
that the interests and wisdoms are not the doer’s goals but those of the
actions, that they are not rendered to the doer but to the servant and
to the command, they submitted it for discussion, answering it as
follows:

If they say, “We do not admit the link, the purpose may be rendered to
someone else,” the following can be said (in rebuttal): “If benefiting
others and being benevolent to them is more worthy of being His actions,
the most Exalted One, rather than their absence, necessitate that they
should be there. The reason is: The Almighty will then create benefit
from helping and being benevolent to His servants by doing what is most
suitable to do and what is most fitting. If it is not better but is
equivalent or preferable, it will not be right to be His objective.[^20]

Responding to *Nahj al-Haqq* of the Hilli *allama*, al-Fadl ibn Rozbahan
produced the same argument saying, “A doer’s goal is not right for him
except what is best for him, something the existence of which is better
than nonexistence. This is so because if the presence of something is
equal to its absence, in as far as the doer is concerned, or if its
presence is preferred with regard to him, it is not an incentive to
undertake the deed and to be a cause for his doing it by necessity.

Anything that becomes a goal necessitates its presence with regard to
the doer and more suitable for him rather than the opposite, such is the
meaning of perfection. So, the doer would achieve his perfection by
doing it, and he would be imperfect without it.”[^21]

One would make the following resign on the above. What is meant by what
is most necessary and suitable is what suits one’s affairs. A wise man
does not undertake anything except what suits his affair. Also, any doer
other than him undertakes what suits the principles that are present in
him.

So, the explanation of what is most suitable and fit is in the sense
that there is an outside factor beyond the doer, one that determines his
ability and freewill. It imposes on him to find what is best and what is
most suitable, rather than acting according to the requirement of his
perfection and wisdom. This means that He does not create except what is
most suitable and what is most necessary, leaving nonsense and toying
aside.

Since He, the most Praised One, combines in Him all the qualities of
perfection, the most prominent of which is His being wise, He would be,
according to such a description, required to find what suits Him and
would abandon what is opposite. So, where does He stand with regard to
the talk about completing perfection, deriving benefit, obligation and
imposition? All this indicates that the logical issues were presented
within a turbulent atmosphere, and that the opponent did not familiarize
himself with the other side’s logic.

The sum-up is that He, Praise belongs to Him, is perfect in what He does
with regard to both actions: the deed that is linked to wisdom and the
one that is without it. This is so due to the generality of His ability,
Praise belongs to Him, to do what is beautiful and what is not, but His
being wise deters Him from doing the latter, restricting His actions to
the first. His being Wise deters Him from choosing the second option,
restricting His actions to the first.

This holds true with regard to every deed that has two parts: one good
and one ugly. For example, Allah is able to bless a believer, and He is
able to torment him, too. He is perfect in His deed with regard to
everyone. But nothing comes out of Him except what is good, not ugly.

Just as it cannot be said that an action is not done without serving a
purpose, not being stripped of a purpose, and since blessing a believer
is neither preferred nor is it equivalent to tormenting him, rather it
is better and more fitting, the meaning of its being good and of its
priority does not aim at rendering Him perfect, or that He derives a
benefit from it. Rather, it aims at being suitable for Him, which
incorporates all attributes of perfection, being above contradicting
them.

So, His beauty and perfection, His being above doing what is ugly,
requires His deed to be suitable for Him, the deed that is conjoint to
wisdom, and to avoidance of the contrary.

#### Third Argument

There is a third evidence presented by the Asharis the sum up of which
is that a deed’s purpose is outside it. It takes place after one deed
and before another. Since the most Exalted One is the doer of all things
to start with, nothing is there in existence except being a deed of His,
not an objective of another which does not take place without it so it
would become the purpose of that deed, and that some deeds are not made
as goals, one having more priority over another.[^22]

He should have determined the evidence fully and said: Had some deeds
been the purpose of the whole, this would end up either at a deed having
no purpose, since what is sought has already been fixed, or it is not,
so it becomes sequential, which is impossible.

One may have the following resign in its regard:

Nobody who casts a look at the cosmos would doubt that some things,
which include relics, were created for other things. The purpose behind
creating the low existents is that they serve higher ones. As for the
purpose behind creating the high ones, it is to get them to reach a
limit that becomes a manifestation of the attributes of their Lord and
the perfection of the One Who initiated their creation.

If we cast a look at this cosmos fragmentally, by piecemeal, we will see
that there are firsts, seconds, and thirds of actions. So, the most
recent serves the one above it and becomes the purpose behind it, all in
order to get to reach its possible perfection, which by itself is
something beautiful. Creating beauty does not require a purpose other
than its existence because the purpose lies in its own existence.

The above is valid if we look at the cosmos through a fragmented,
piece-by-piece, method.

But if we cast a general look at the cosmos, the purpose behind the
overall cosmic order is not outside the existence of the order so one
would inquire about it by requiring evidence. Rather, it is a
particularity that exists in it, and it is the order, in its pieces and
particles, reaching possible perfection.

The anticipated perfection is a particularity that exists within the
system, the order, itself and is regarded as an actual image of it.
Allah, Praise belongs to Him, created the order, bringing about His
absolute action, so that what He does, in part or as a whole, may reach
the perfection that is attainable. The purpose is not separated from the
order so one may be justified in asking about the purpose behind it, so
that one may gradually reach the conclusion that something is there that
has no purpose beyond it.

Since getting every possible thing to reach its perfection is a
self-purpose, because it by itself is a good deed, the question is
dropped about why someone did it. When He enabled every existent to
reach its perfection, the question drops when the question about the
good thing is raised.

If we ask about the goal behind creating and perfecting order, we would
say that the purpose behind creating it is to get a thing that exists to
reach its possible perfection. Then, once the question is made about the
goal behind getting every possible thing to reach its possible
perfection, this question would be irrelevant, out of place, because a
good deed is by itself good and is liable to be done; the deed and the
goal are one and the same.

Creation flows from what should be done to what can be done, and its
reaching perfection is another abundance that perfects the first. The
sum is abundance of the bliss of the Almighty for one who needs it. It
des not deplete any of His treasures. What perfection is better and more
magnificent than that? What goal is more obvious than that so another
objective would be needed?

This is similar to one asking why Allah does one of the deeds that is
good by itself, for the answer is hidden in the same question which is:
He did it because it by itself is good, and what is good by itself does
not need another objective to be done.

In order to bring the matter closer to comprehension, we would like to
provide an example: If you ask a young man who exerts an effort to learn
and ask him: Why do you exert such efforts in order to earn your degree?
He would answer you by saying that it is for the sake of earning a
scientific degree. If we repeat the question to him thus: What is the
goal behind earning it?

He would answer by saying that it is to work at an industrial,
scientific or administrative center. If we repeat the question to him
and ask about the goal behind working there, he would say that it is to
secure a means of earning a living for the family and dependents. If we
ask him after all of this what the goal behind seeking prosperity and
securing the means of making a living is, we will find out that the
question is unnecessary because of the objectives which he has already
provided and answered, that these are incidental goals for the objective
which is particularly sought. If the speech reaches the latter, the
question drops.

### Quran and the Wise Deeds of the Most Praised One

What is amazing about the inattention of the Asharis about texts that
are quite clear in this field such as this by the most Praised One:

***“… Did you think that We had created you in jest, and that you would
not be brought back to Us (for account)?” (Qur’an, 23:115)***

as well as these:

***“We did not create the heavens, the earth and all between them merely
in (idle) sport” (Qur’an, 44:38).***

***“We did not create heavens and the earth and all between them in
vain! That is the thought of unbelievers! But woe unto the unbelievers
because of the fire (of hell)!” (Qur’an, 38:27).***

***“I have only created jinns and men so that they may worship Me”
(Qur’an, 51:56).***

There are other such verses that negate idle sporting from what He does
and clearly indicate that such doing is coupled with wisdom and
objectiveness.

Hadith people, followed by the Asharis who are famed for sticking to
literal meanings of texts, not rendering their gist to Allah, the most
Praised One, nor interpreting them, have no option except to ignore the
previous verses or to interpret them. They flee from doing so while
attributing the same (flight) to those who differ from them.

Followers of the “men of wisdom” sympathize with the Asharis’ way.

An error that is quite obvious is to say that those who follow the way
of the “men of wisdom” sympathize with the beliefs of the Asharis and
the depicting of both groups as saying that the actions of Allah, the
most Praised One, are not justified by purposes. This is a pure error.
How can this be while we have Mulla Sadra finding fault with the Asharis
and saying, “Among the Negationists[^23] are folks who say that the
actions of Allah Almighty are empty of wisdom and interest although you
already know that nature has its purposes.”[^24] He has also said, “Men
of wisdom do not negate purpose and objective from any of His actions at
all.

Rather, they deny it in His absolute deeds if the probable existence is
observed as a whole unit as being a superfluous to Him, the most Exalted
One. As regarding other specific and restricted actions, they proved
that each of them has its own objective. How so while their books are
fraught with pursuits of objectives of existents and of their benefits
as any researcher in cosmetology, the sciences of compositions and
ingredients, autopsy, medicine, etc. would testify?”[^25]

The theory of the men of wisdom, therefore, is summarized in two
matters:

1. His actions are not characterized by sporting or nonsense, and there
are interests, and there is wisdom, that both necessitate His deeds that
benefit His servants. It is through them that the (cosmic) system
stands.

2. If the probable existence is observed by way of absolution, His
actions have no purpose outside Him because what is supposed is to
observe the probable existence as a whole. Had the purpose, which is
outside the Self, been present, it is incorporated into the probable
existence, not beyond it.

They say that the goal is something outside the Self, whereas the goal
is the same Self, so it may not lack effect. This is so because the need
for something outside Himself in undertaking the deed is the essence of
its lacking effectiveness. But what is supposed is that the most Praised
One is perfect in His effect, Independent by Himself, and in His actions
from anything other than Himself.[^26]

Moreover, they have a philosophical argument that is mixed with Gnostic
proof. This argument aims at the purpose behind creation being His own
Self, the most Praised One. Through it have they interpreted this verse:

***“I have not created the jinns and mankind except so they may worship
Me” (Qur’an, 51:56)***

as well as His statement in a Qudsi *hadith* saying: “I was a hidden
treasure, so I liked to be known; therefore, I brought creation into
being so I may be known.” Allah, Glory to Him, is the ultimate goal of
all goals. If someone would like to become familiar with their proof,
let him refer to their books.[^27]

Afflictions, Calamities, Ills and God as Being Wise
---------------------------------------------------

The issue of afflictions, calamities and ills is one of the famous
issues when it comes to divine wisdom, and it is relevant to the
following topics:

1. If the evidence of the existence of the managing Creator is the order
that prevails in the cosmos, how do you explain some unbalanced
phenomena that violate it, such as earthquakes, torrential rains and
floods, for they are among the best proofs that there is no such order?

2. Had the Exalted Maker been wise in what He does, precise in His
actions, placing everything where it belongs, His actions being above
what should not be, how do you explain these occurrences which do not
agree with wisdom, whether they are interpreted as being done by the One
Who does precise things or the One Whose actions are above what they
should not be done?

3. If the Creator is just and equitable, how can His justice, Praise
belongs to Him, coexist with these occurrences that swallow innocent
lives simultaneously, damaging and destroying homes?

Thereupon, the research about calamities, afflictions and ills is linked
to the afore-mentioned matters, and we submit this issue after having
provided the evidence that He is wise.

Discussing ills is not a new issue. It was uncovered by Western
philosophers, including the British philosopher (David) Hume. Some of
those who are not versed in Islamic philosophy, even the Greek
philosophy, may have imagined him to be as such. This issue was
submitted for discussion by ancient Greek philosophers as well as
philosophers of later times.

Aristotle is famous for saying that probable existents, according to
rational classifications, are divided at the onset of probability into
five categories:

1. What is all goodness and has no evil at all

2. What has plenty of goodness and little evil

3. What has plenty of evil and little goodness

4. Where goodness and evil are equal

5. What is absolute evil where there is nothing good at all

Then they stated that the last three categories do not exist in the
world. Rather, what exist are two of the five mentioned categories.[^28]

Muslim philosopher Sadr ad-Din al-Shirazi (979 - 1050 A.H./1572 – 1640
A.D.) [Mulla Sadra or Sadr al-Mutaalliheen, chief of Gnostics]
scientifically discussed the issue of goodness and evil, calamities and
afflictions, in his valuable work titled *Al-Asfar al-Arbaa* (the Four
Books) in eight chapters. They were also discussed by the philosopher
Sabzawari in the philosophy section of *Sharh al-Manzuma* in a medium
research.

Before them, many dignitaries had preceded them, and they were followed
by another group of Muslim thinkers. We are here quoting what these
critics have stated, providing our own particular analysis and critique.
So, let us say the following:

The issue of evils and afflictions prompted some groups throughout
history, and even nowadays, to believe that there are more creators, a
trend known as dualism. They envisioned the god of goodness to be
someone else other than that of evil in order to escape the said
confusion, thus they were known as dualists. Since they believe that two
gods are created for the one and single must God, they are in this
regard Trinitarian.

The answer, anyhow, about the problem of evils is created in two facets:

First: It must be totally analyzed philosophically

Second: It must be analyzed in an educative way that bears an impact on
the perfecting of the souls.

So, whoever wishes to go into detail in this research must enter through
both doors, and here is the proof:

### Philosophical Analysis of the Issue of Evil

The outcome of this analysis is that some people think that there are
disorderly, harmful or destructive incidents stemming from their narrow
limited outlook to these matters. Had they looked at these incidents
within the frame of the “general cosmic order”, they would have
surrendered that they are all goodness, and that the issue’s position
would be similar to what Sabzawari the wise had said:

*What appears to some as unbalanced rhyme,*
*In the order of all, everything does rhyme.*

This is the answer in a nutshell. As for detailing it, this depends on
explaining two matters:

#### First: The narrow Outlook to Phenomena

Describing the said phenomena as being disorderly, evils that do not fit
first in the prevalent world order and second in His wisdom, the most
Praised One, as a whole, and, thirdly, they do not agree with His
justice and equity, stems from man’s outlook to the cosmos through his
own self and its interests, making the latter the axis and the criterion
for evaluating these matters.

When he looks at the incidents and sees that they harm his personal
interests and those of his relatives, he immediately describes them as
evils and lesions. This is only because he looks at these phenomena
through a particular outlook, ignoring those in the world besides
himself, be they those generations that passed by or those presently
living in world areas or those that will come and live in this world.

In the first outlook, these incidents manifest themselves as ills and
calamities. But these incidents, at the same time and through a piercing
outlook, turn into goodness and righteousness, outfitted with attires of
wisdom, justice and order. In order to explain this, we would like to
analyze some incidents that are regarded on the surface as ills and say
the following:

One sees a torrential flood sweeping away his farm, an avalanche
demolishing his home, a violent earthquake shaking its structure, but he
does not see the positive results these incidents and phenomena carry in
other fields of the human life.

This limited outlook of man is similar to a passerby seeing a bulldozer
digging the ground or demolishing a building, causing a lot of noise,
stirring dust in the air, so he immediately judges that this is harmful
and bad. He does not know that all this is done in order to pave the way
for building a big hospital that will receive patients, treat the
injured and prepares for those who need treatment the means for such
treatment and nursing.

Had he become familiar with these noble objectives, he would not have
thus judged, and he would have described the demolition as being good,
that there is no harm in the noise and billowing dust.

Similar to this individual in his limited outlook is the bat that is
harmed by light because it harms its vision, whereas this light enables
millions of eyes to see the horizons of the cosmos, facilitating for man
the ways for earning a living and leading a life. Should the bat’s
judgment about light as being evil be the criterion for evaluating these
useful natural phenomena? No, not at all.

#### Second: Phenomena are Episodes in a Long Series

Looking at an isolated natural phenomenon is a deficient and lame look.
This is so because events are episodes that are connected to each other
in an extended chain. Whatever takes place now is linked to the depths
of the past and to what will take place in the future in a chain of
reasons, causes and causations.

From this onset, nobody should judge a phenomenon while overlooking its
precedent and successor. Rather, the sound judgment is achieved when it
is evaluated as a whole and when it is looked at wholly rather than
partially. Every incident on earth or in the air is strongly linked to
the incidents that precede or follow it. Even when the wind blows and
plays havoc with the sheets of paper that are stacked before you is
strongly linked to what happened or what will happen in world areas.

So, a critic must observe all incidents with a hue of connection and
formation. It is only then that his judgment will change and his ruling
will be altered. He will not describe anything as being out of the
ordinary, and he will not label anything as being evil.

If you have come to know both of these matters, let us bring some
examples that are relevant to them:

1. If a storm hits shores, uprooting trees, destroying huts, turning
furniture upside-down, it will then be described by those who live on
those shores as being evil and as an affliction. But it, at the same
time, implies vital results for another area.

It, for example, gets mast ships in the breadth of the sea to move, they
are still when the wind is still. Thus, it saves hundreds of those who
board them from losing their lives, getting them to reach the shores of
safety. So, it is described by the passengers of such ships as being
good.

2. Perhaps the winds may destroy some homes, but they at the same time
are regarded as an effective means for flower pollination, moving the
clouds that cause the rain and scatter smokes billowing from chimneys of
factories and plants. Had these smokes remained and thickened, residents
of the cities around these plants would have found it difficult or
impossible to breathe. And there are other good results from winds
before which some bad effects minimize or completely disappear.

3. Although earthquakes cause some partial or whole losses in properties
and lives, they are described as being good if we understand the reason
behind them, such as some suggestions, like the lunar gravitation
pulling the earth crust to it, so the seabed rises, and it causes
earthquakes in various areas of dry lands. This, at the same time,
causes sea and river waters to rise and pour into surrounding lands,
watering farms and valleys, bringing life back to them and a great deal
of goodness.

Other useful benefits accrue from earthquakes with which one who
examines these fields becomes familiar. So, while taking note of both of
these matters, is there room for a hasty judgment that these incidents
cause evils and calamities without any benefit?

Man’s limited knowledge is the one that prompts him to issue such odd
judgments on these incidents. Had he familiarized himself with his
little knowledge compared to the knowledge with which he is not
familiar, he would have retracted and repeated the recitation of this
verse:

***“Lord! You have not created (all) this for nothing! Glory to You!”
(Qur’an, 3:191).***

And he would have admitted the truth of this statement by the Almighty:

***“Only little knowledge is communicated to you (O mankind! )” (Qur’an,
17:85)***

and this other statement by the most Glorified One:

***“They know only the outer (things) in the life of this world”
(Qur’an, 30:7).***

For this reason, we find the subjective scientists who were not dazzled
by the scientific achievements, nor were they beguiled by the progress
that took place to them, admitting the limitation of human knowledge,
warning against passing a hasty judgment on things. Why not, while here
is Professor William Kroksh, who discovered matter’s radiation and
invented many chemical experiment equipment, saying, “Among all
qualities that assisted me in my psychological researches and paved for
me the way to make natural discoveries, when those discoveries were
sometimes unexpected, is my deeply rooted conviction of my
ignorance.”[^29]

And there are other weighty statements by senior thinkers and great
philosophers and those who are interested in analyzing natural
phenomena. You find them all admitting their ignorance and inability to
familiarize themselves with the secrets of nature. The great mind in the
world of mankind, the main mentor, says, “My knowledge reached the limit
that I came to know that I am not knowledgeable.”

### Another Philosophical Analysis of Evils

You have come to know the previous philosophical analysis, and there is
another philosophical analysis for the problem of afflictions and
calamities that may be more precise, and it is summed up as follows.

Evil is a relative matter that does not have an existence by itself.
Rather it manifests itself with one when some events are compared with
each other, and here is its explanation:

Those who advocate dualism say that Allah, Glory to Him, is all
goodness. So, how did He create poisonous scorpions and lethal snakes as
well as wild beasts? They ignored the fact that to describe these
phenomena as being evil is relative. As it is, a scorpion is not evil.
Rather, it is described as such if it is compared to man who is hurt by
its sting.

So, evil has no reality on the page of existence. Rather, it is an
extractive matter to which the souls end when they compare. Without such
a comparison, evil would not have had a concept, a reality. Here is an
explanation for this answer:

Adjectives are of two types: Some of them have a reality similar to the
thing by which they are described, such as someone being in existence,
or each meter equals one hundred centimeters, etc. to describe someone
as existing and to say that the meter is as such, are two fixed facts
for things that exist, whether the mind contemplated on them or not. Had
there been only a single human on the face of earth or one meter, both
descriptions are fixed for them.

There are those that have no reality because man shifts to such a
description or, better put, the mind extracts it through comparing, such
as what is big and what is small, etc. Bigness is not a reality for what
it is applied, it is realized through comparing it with what is smaller.

For example, if you come to know that adjectives are of two types, you
have to analyze the concept of evil in the light of such a statement and
say this: The scorpion being in existence and it has poison is a fact.
As for its being evil, this is not part of its existence. Rather, it
describes the scorpion’s poison when compared with man who is harmed by
it or who loses his life because of it. Otherwise, it is regarded as
perfection for the scorpion the survival of which depends on it. If it
is as such, it will be easy for you to resolve the evil complex from its
various aspects.

As regarding the aspect of *Tawhid* when it comes to the Creator, that
is, there is no Creator in existence other than Allah, Praise belongs to
Him, who is all goodness, One Whom evil cannot reach, so how could He
create existents characterized by evil? The answer is that the creature
is the essence of these things that have no true attributes. Rather,
they are described as evil which is not a reality but is in need for a
cause. Actually, it is a relative matter to which one directs his
attention when he makes a comparison.

It is to this meaning that statements by ancient philosophers have
referred when they said the following:

1. Evil is nihilistic, not an existing matter in need for a
justification.

2. Evil is not as such by itself but is incidental.

3. If you review all things in existence in this world that are labeled
by people as being evil, you will not find them to be evil by
themselves. Rather, they are incidentally evil, essentially good.

The same applies to abhorred manners: They complement beastly and
brutish psyches and are not evils in the eyes of wrathful and carnal
forces. Evil are these lowly manners compared to the weak psyches that
are incapable of contain their forces and check them against going to
extremes or to do away with things rather than directing them towards
the path of obedience which guarantees lasting happiness.

So is the case with pains, ailments, distresses and worries: from the
standpoint of their being realizations, due to their existence or to
resulting from the affecting factor, are luxurious good things, yet they
are ills compared to what is attached to them.

From the aspect of His being described, the most Praised One, as being
wise and as perfecting his deeds and actions, there is nothing in the
creation of these incidents and existents that contradicts this wisdom.
He, all Praise is due to Him, created scorpions, snakes, wild animals
and beasts in the best of creation, giving them a measure of life that
suffices them:

***“He (it is) Who gave everything He created its form and nature and
further gave it guidance” (Qur’an, 20:50).***

These incidents and existents are described as being evil, and this
seems to be contrary to wisdom when it comes to comparison; it is an
external mental matter.

Till now, we have come up with this result: There are two factors that
prompted man to imagine that evil is a certain external thing. Finding
it is regarded as being contrary to wisdom and justice, it is a
rebellion against orders. These two factors are:

1. The attitude towards things from the perspective of egotism and the
ignoring of all other existents.

2. The notion that evil has an external certitude similar to that to
which it is attributed while one is being unaware of its being a
nihilistic thing towards which the mind directs its attention when a
comparison is made.

It is time to look for an educative analysis of evils that facilitates
the belief in the fact that these evils are not created as educative
external things that contradict wisdom and justice.

### Educative Analysis of the Evils Issue

These incidents have important educative effects once in the material
life of humans, and once on removing conceit and unawareness from minds
and consciences. For the sake of these benefits, creating them is sound,
whether we say that evil exists by itself, as those who oppose say, or
it exists incidentally, as we have proven.

#### Calamities: A method to Release Energies

Trials and tribulations are the best means for releasing energies, for
the sciences to advance and human life to be elevated. Scholars of
civilization state that most civilizations did not flourish except in
atmospheres of wars, disputes and competitions when people resorted to
invent defensive means while facing attacking foes or to repair the
damage and destruction wrought by wars.

During such conditions, capabilities move to rejoin what is disjointed,
complete what is incomplete and prepare what is required. The common
axiom says, “Necessity is the mother of invention.”

In a clear statement, if man is not exposed to problems in his life, his
energies will remain frozen, motionless, neither growing nor opening.
Instead, such talents and the release of energies from potential to
actuality is all pawned to man falling into the path of calamities and
hardships.

Yes, we do not claim that all major results are found in catastrophes,
but we do claim that their occurrence prepares suitable grounds for man
to get out of laziness. For this reason, we find the parents who keep
their children away from difficulties and hardships do not push into the
society except children who shake under any blowing wind just like a
fresh plant whenever a breeze blows.

As for those who raise their children in life’s atmospheres that are
surrounded with problems and calamities, push into the society children
who are firmer than mountains when the storm blasts.

Imam Ali bin Abu Talib (as) has said, “The tree in the wild is stronger
in stem, pleasing magnificent things have thinner skins, Bedouin plants
make a stronger firewood, and their fire is slower in dying out.”[^30]

It is to this fact that the most Praised One points out when He says,

***“… It may be that you dislike something while Allah brings about a
great deal of good out of it” (Qur’an, 4:19),***

***“So, truly, with every difficulty, there is relief: Truly with every
difficulty, there is relief” (Qur’an, 94:5-6)***

and

***“Therefore, when you are free (from your immediate task), still labor
hard, and turn (all) your attention to your Lord” (Qur’an, 94:7-8).***

That is, expose yourself to exhaustion and fatigue by laboring,
endeavoring and exerting effort after you complete your adoration, as if
victory and affliction are inseparable allies and brothers.

#### Afflictions and Calamities are Warning Bells

Enjoying material talents, immerse in pleasures and desires necessitate
a great deal of unawareness of moral values. The more one is immersed in
pleasures and blessings, the more distant he becomes from moral aspects.
This is a fact that everyone realizes in his life and in the lives of
others, and he finds it in the pages of history. So, one must abandon
this heedlessness when shaken and awakened by a warning bell that
reminds him, awakens his nature and gets him out of his inattention.

There is nothing more useful in this field than some incidents that
interrupt the luxurious way of living with some disturbances so one may
realize his inability, abandon his conceit and allay his oppression. We
find in the Holy Quran clear statements about the link between
oppression and the sense of independence. The most Exalted and Great One
says,

***“Man transgresses all bounds in that he looks upon himself as being
self-sufficient” (Qur’an, 6-7).***

For this reason, the Holy Quran justifies some calamities and
tribulations as descending in order to remind one, to take him back to
Allah. The most Praised One says,

***“Whenever We sent a Prophet to a town, We took up its people in
suffering and adversity, in order for them to learn humility” (Qur’an,
7:94).***

He also says,

***“We punished the people of Pharaoh with years (of drought) and
shortness of crops (so) that they might receive admonition” (Qur’an,
7:130).***

Thus, afflictions and calamities become a cause for awakening man, for
admonishing him, similarly to a physician slapping the face of a
tranquilized patient in order to wake him up. Without that slap, the
patient would perish.

We have come up with this result: Moral perfection is pawned by trials
and tribulations. Likewise, mental openness is pawned by afflictions and
calamities.

An aware individual uses them as means to abandon conceit just as he
uses them as a ladder for ascending the steps of scientific perfection,
and he may not derive any benefit from them, so he regards them as
afflictions and catastrophes in life.

#### Afflictions Cause a Return to Righteousness

There is a goal behind the cosmos, and there is also a goal behind man’s
creation. The goal behind the creation of man is to reach perfection and
arrive at whatever he can reach. The goal behind sending prophets and
holy books is only to achieve this sublime objective.

Since the transgressions and sins are the greatest causes that distance
one from the goal behind his creation, obstructing the march of his
perfection, afflictions and calamities serve as the best means to
familiarize a transgressor with the results of his extreme tyranny and
transgression so he may return to the truth and take a step back to the
middle path. It is to this gist that the most Praised One points out
saying,

***“Mischief has appeared on land and in sea because of (the mischief)
which the hands of*** ***men have committed so that (Allah) may grant
them a taste of some of (the results of) their deeds, so they may turn
back (from evil)” (Qur’an, 30:41).***

In another verse, the most Praised One says,

***“If people of the towns had only believed (in) and feared Allah, We
would certainly have released to them (all kinds of) blessings from the
heavens and earth, but they rejected (the truth), and We brought them to
account for their misdeeds” (Qur’an, 7:96).***

#### Afflictions are a Cause for Realizing and Appreciating Blessings

If life keeps one single style, this mandates that life will not
manifest itself as being enjoyable, lovely, contrarily to the case if it
alternates between what is bitter and what is sweet, what is beautiful
and what is ugly. Safety’s true value cannot be realized except when it
is lost. Health cannot be appreciated except when one is sick. Ease
cannot be appreciated except when affliction befalls, nor do we realize
the sweetness of life except when we taste its bitterness.

Life’s beauty and the value of nature stem from diversity and the shift
from one status to another, one condition to another. For this reason,
we sense how the Creator of nature placed valleys beside mountains,
thorns beside roses, bitter fruits beside sweet ones, saline water
beside sweet water, up to the end of manifestations of variations as
well as opposites that vest on nature magnificence and beauty,
perfection and greatness.

These are the educative impacts of calamities and afflictions. They
suffice for their taking place, justifying their happening in the human
life.

### Artificial Calamities of Tyrannical Systems

There are calamities that an ignorant person attributes to the Creator
of the cosmos. The truth of the matter is that they are of his own
making, the result of his own ways. Actually, the tyrannical systems are
the ones that caused those calamities and brought those catastrophes
into being. Had there been systems based on divine values, humans would
not have been exposed to such calamities.

The unjust distribution of wealth has been the cause for wealth being
accumulated with the few and its departure from many. It has been a
cause for the first group enjoying all means of prevention and
protection from diseases, incidents and deprivations of the second
group. These artificial calamities are outside the framework of this
research. They do not wake up the intellect, nor do they purify the
souls. Instead, they make grounds suitable for uprisings and
revolutions.

Up to here, we have come up with this result: The phenomena that are
unbalanced, according to the superficial outlook, are actually balanced
compared to the overall system. They have social and educative impacts
that are indispensable to human life. So, they are not regarded as
contradicting the prevailing systems, nor do they contradict the wisdom
of the Creator, nor to His justice and fairness, Praise and Exaltation
belong to Him.

### Allah is Just and Does Not Oppress

As you have come to know, the requirements of rational judgment of
something, as being good or bad is that reason, as it is, realizes this
thing, that is, whether it is good or bad. One of these descriptions is
fixed for a thing, as it is, without the interference of a circumstance
or restriction, without the intervention of a special realization
faculty.

Therefore, as it deems something as being good or bad, reason becomes
aware of a general reality that is equal with all those who realize, who
do anything, without distinction between what can be done or what should
be. Justice is good, its doer is lauded by everyone, whereas injustice
is ugly, its doer is looked down on by everyone.

On this basis, how can the Praised Almighty, the One Who realizes an
action and its description, I mean the doer of an action being lauded or
held in contempt, regardless of who this doer is, do anything which He
deems as being too lowly above which one must rise?

Thereupon, Allah, the most Praised One, is just because injustice is
ugly and one must rise above it. An ugly deed is never done by the Wise
One. Justice is good and one must be adorned by it. Hence, being
characterized with justice is one of the matters that are relevant to
His wisdom, above doing what should not be done.

If you will, you can say that man realizes that doing what is equitable
is anyone's perfection, whereas committing inequity is anyone's
shortcoming. According to what reason judges, it also is the same with
the most Praised One. How can He permit the doing of what is the
antithesis of perfection, what brings about shortcomings?[^31]

### Avoiding Confusion

It may be said that something regarded by man as being good or bad does
not mean it is so with Allah, Praise belongs to Him; so, how can it be
found out that one does not abandon his obligation, nor does he commit
what is ugly?

The answer is clear: The gist of the former principle is that man
realizes the goodness of justice and the ugliness of injustice. This
applies to anyone who has realization, who senses things, and to
everyone who is rational, wise, without distinction among circumstances
and factors.

This is similar to realizing that four means a couple of pairs.
Everyone’s reason realizes that they are pairs without any particular
possibility (to the contrary). The situation is not akin to man’s
probable judgment of what the most High One should do. Rather, it is
akin to discovering a general, necessary and commonsense principle
sensed by all those who have realization without making a distinction
between their Creator and what they create. This matter is not confined
to this principle. Rather, all general principles in theoretical wisdom
are like that.

Based on the above, it is proven that the most Praised One is above
anything that is ugly, that He is characterized by all perfection when
it comes to doing anything. It is, then, proven that due to His wisdom,
He does not commit what makes no sense. Therefore, He is just, He does
not commit injustice, oppression or aggression.

### Justice in the Holy Quran

Sacred verses have one after the other focused on the most Praised One
doing what is fair. Some of them are:

***“There is no god but He: It is witnessed by Allah, His angels and
those endowed with knowledge, standing firm on justice.” (Qur’an,
3:18)***

Just as He has testified to His justice, He has defined the goal behind
sending prophets. So they may uphold justice among people.

The most Praised One has also said,

***“We sent Our Messengers with clear Signs and sent down with them the
Book and the balance (of right and wrong) so that men may stand for
justice” (Qur’an, 21:47).***

He has also stated that justice is the main basis in holding His
servants to account on the Judgment Day. The most Praised One says,

***“We shall set up scales of justice on the Day of Judgment, so that
not a soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least” (Qur’an, 21:47).***

These and other verses contain guidance to what reason realizes from its
own depth, that is, justice is the perfection of every living existent
that realizes and has the power to choose, that the actions of Allah
Almighty in this life and in the hereafter have to thus be
characterized, and so must His ambassadors.

### Justice in Islamic Legislation

This status is enjoyed by justice. Without it, His promise and warning
would not have been trusted, as you have come to know. Many Islamic
beliefs would have fallen apart. It is the one that made Him, the most
Praised One that He is, define His rulings and describe His legislations
as being just, that He does not legislate anything unless it fully
agrees with justice, *adl*; He is the *Adl*.

The most Praised One says,

***“We do not place a burden on any soul greater than it can bear:
Before Us is a record which clearly shows the truth: They will never be
wronged” (Qur’an, 23:62).***

The first portion of this verse sheds light on His justice, the most
Praised One that He is, among His servants as He legislates His rulings.
The second portion highlights His justice on the Day when awards are
distributed.

### Justice in Narratives of Ahl al-Bayt Imams (as)

Imam Ali, peace with him, and his offspring are famous for being just.
It is him do the Mutazilites cite, so much so that it is said, “*Tawhid*
and *Adl* (Unity and Justice of God) are Alawis (related to Imam Ali),
whereas anthropomorphism and fatalism are Umayyad.” Here we provide you
with some of the legacy of members of Ahl al-Bayt, peace with them:

1. Ali, peace with him, was asked about *Tawhid* and *Adl*, so he said,
“*Tawhid* means that you should not have any doubts about Him, while Adl
means you should not accuse Him (of whatever does not suit Him).”[^32]
It was already presupposed that the most Praised One is just, so a
meaning for His justice was sought.

Ibn Abul-Hadid has said, “Both of these foundations are cornerstones of
the science of logic, the slogan of our Mutazilite fellows who rejected
the old meanings which al-Ashari and his fellows had fixed, and it is
due to their deeming the Creator, Praise is due to Him, as being above
doing anything ugly.”

The meaning of his phrase “you should not have any doubts about Him” is:
You should not think that He has a body or an image or that He is in a
particular place or filling all directions, as some people have claimed,
nor should you conceive Him as being a light or a force penetrating the
whole world, as some have said, nor should you regard Him as the product
of a casual incident that takes place or happens somewhere, nor is He
accidental, as the Christians have said, or that meanings and causes can
explain Him. If any of these whims is entertained, the entertainer will
have violated *Tawhid*.

As for the other foundation, you must not “accuse Him,” i.e. you must
not charge Him of having forced you to do what is ugly and that He would
then punish you for it. He is above any of this. And do not charge Him
of enabling liars to perform miracles through which they mislead people.
Do not charge Him of having commissioned you to do what is beyond your
ability or charge Him of any justice-related issue which our fellows
have detailed in their books, such as compensation for pain, for this is
not an option, or for rewarding for good deeds, for this is a must. He
is truthful to His promise and to His warning; there is no way around
it.

The whole matter is that the way our fellows have conceived justice and
the Unity of the Creator are both derived from statements made by the
Commander of the Faithful, peace with him. This is one of the areas
where our fellows have made specific statements. Statements of this type
that the Imam (as) has made are numerous.[^33]

2. As-Saduq has quoted Imam as-Sadiq, peace with him, as saying that a
man said this to him: “The foundation of the creed is built on *Tawhid*
and *Adl*. The knowledge relevant to this foundation is abundant, but a
wise person cannot avoid learning it; so, please state something which
is easy to comprehend, something which can be memorized.” The Imam,
peace with him, said, “As regarding *Tawhid*, it means you do not permit
yourself to attribute to your God what can be attributed to you. As for
*Adl*, you must not attribute to your Creator anything about which He
would blame you.”[^34]

3. Imam Ali, peace with him, has said, “And I further testify that He is
just, truly just, and His judgment is final.”[^35]

4. He, peace with him, has also said, “He is the One Who is truthful to
what He promises, Who rises above dealing wrongfully with His servants,
Who is equitable with regard to His creatures, just when He judges
them.”[^36]

5. He, peace of the Almighty with him, has also said, “He is the One Who
is so clement, He forgives; He is so just in His judgment.”[^37]

6. He, peace with him, has also said, “Lord! Include me in Your
forgiveness, not in Your justice.”[^38]

There are other such cherished statements by the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt
(as) some of which we will quote for you when we discuss fate and
destiny and when we research fatalism and free choice.

### Who Correctly Justifies a Servant’s Penalty?

Divine texts have supported each other with regard to the punishment of
criminals and denunciation of oppressors. The discussion falls into two
categories:

**First:** What is the purpose behind the punishment? Is it to satisfy
one’s urge for revenge? The most Praised One has said,

***“… If anyone is killed wrongfully, We have given his heir authority
(to demand qisas, retribution, or to forgive): But do not let him exceed
the bounds in the matter of taking life away, for he is helped (by the
Divine Law)” (Qur’an, 17:33).***

But this purpose does not suit the most Praised One because He is
greater than having such a motive. It would have required Him to be
sentimental. Should it be for admonishing others? But this applies in
the temporal abode, not in the abode of rewards (or penalties). The most
Praised One says,

***“The woman and the man who is guilty of adultery or fornication, flog
each with a hundred lashes; do not let compassion move you in their
case, in a matter prescribed by Allah, if you believe in Allah and the
Last Day, and let some believers witness their punishment” (Qur’an,
24:2).***

So, when He says, “… Let some believers witness their punishment”, this
proves that the purpose behind whipping the adulterer and adulteress is
to admonish others, or it is one of such objectives.

**Second:** One of the established rational norms of conduct is that the
punishment must equal the crime in its method and extent. But this
equation is negated when it comes to penalties in the hereafter. Some
criminals remain in the fire forever although the period of their
transgression was much shorter than that of their penalty.

The most Praised One has said,

***“But those who reject faith and belie Our signs shall be the
companions of the Fire; there shall they dwell (forever)” (Qur’an,
2:29).***

He has also said,

***“Allah has promised the hypocrites, men and women, and the rejecters
of faith, the fire of Hell: They shall dwell in it: It suffices them:
God's curse and an enduring punishment is (in store) for them” (Qur’an,
9:68).***

Al-Mufid has said, “The Imamites are of the consensus that the warning
about eternity in the fire of hell is particularly addressed to the
unbelievers in particular rather than to those who commit sins and who
have knowledge about Allah, the most Exalted One, those who surrender to
His obligations from among the ones who observe the prayers, etc.”[^39]

In his *Aqaid* book, al-Saduq says, “It is our belief that only those
who commit apostasy and who associate partners with Allah will remain in
the fire of hell forever. As for the sinners from among those who
believe in *Tawhid*, they will get out of it through mercy that will
come to their rescue.”[^40]

As regarding the answer for the first question, we would like to say:
Asking about the purpose behind the punishment, whether it is for
satisfying one’s desire for revenge, or for providing admonishment for
those other than the punished person, this covers the penalties that are
legislated through law making and legislating. Punishing in this field
is to meet two goals: to seek revenge, or to teach a moral lesson.

But if the punishment is the result of acting on both following
viewpoints, the question becomes out of place because there is an
existing link between the existence of the criminal and of the
punishment that involves his presence in the life to come. It is then
that the question about why the punishment takes place is out of place.
Rather, the question is directed at the possibility of separating one
from the other, at putting something up and another down, such as
suitable penalties.

The external link between man and penalty is viewed in two ways:

**First:** Each of the criminal or righteous action of man in the world
of nature creates in the soul an aptitude that suits it because of
repeating that particular action, practicing it. These psychological
aptitudes are not separated from man’s existence. Rather, they form his
very existence, the depth of his essence. A righteous or a sinning
person is resurrected with these aptitudes that he accumulated in this
short life through his obedience or disobedience of the Almighty, and
each aptitude has its particular impact from which it is not separated.

You may say that every soul, with the aptitudes that surround it,
creates the images that suit it: either Paradise where there is spirit
and fragrance, or hell and its flames and torment. Thereupon, either
reward or punishment, which is created for the soul, maintains it in a
way that is incapable of abandoning such creating.

Thus, a man of righteousness, in whose soul the righteous aptitudes
became firm in this life, never ceases thinking about what is right, and
his soul never settles or calms down except through such thinking. His
antithesis is a sinner in whose soul malicious aptitudes became deeply
rooted by way of the satanic actions that he does in this short life. He
never ceases thinking about evil and lowly matters. Even if he tries to
distance himself from thinking about what suits his soul, he will not be
able to do so.

It becomes obvious from reading what *allama* Tabatabai writes that the
rewards and penalties of the hereafter are among the realities which one
gains through his either righteous or vicious actions, and they both are
present in this temporal life. But the veils act as a barrier between
him and what he has already prepared for himself: either Paradise or the
Fire.

He has said, “What is clear from the verses (of the Holy Quran) is that
there is for man in this life what is beyond it: another life where he
will live either happily or miserably, a life that has beginnings and
roots. In it will he live, and with it he will be familiar. He will see
it for sure when causes come to an end, when barriers are removed.”

He goes on to say, “Actions prepare by themselves, or by their
requirements and impacts, matters that are sought or not sought, that
is, goodness or evilness. It is the one with which one will become
familiar when the veils are removed.”[^41]

What he states will become clear in many verses that he stated in his
book.

In the light of what we have indicated, one who approaches the new life
does so with either good or vile aptitudes. This life has requirements
that necessitate it, whether he likes it or not. These requirements are
manifested in the shape of either blessings or condemnations for either
group.

It is then that the question about the purpose behind tormenting drops.
This is similar to one who drinks poison, so he is killed by it, or one
who drinks medicine, so he is healed by it. The question here about the
purpose behind killing or healing makes no sense.

**Second:** What is determined in place is that man’s actions have two
forms: one in this life and another in the life to come. Man’s action
manifests itself in every circumstance as it suits it. Performing the
prayers has its own form in this life, its movements and pronouncements,
but it also has another form in the life hereafter.

Fast, too, has a special presence in this circumstance expressed by
abstention from whatever breaks it, and it has another presence in the
higher world expressed as protection from the Fire. Such is the case
with all actions, be they good or bad. This is what the Book of the most
Exalted One tells us:

***“Those who unjustly eat up the property of orphans eat up a Fire into
their own bodies: They will soon be enduring a blazing Fire!” (Qur’an,
4:10).***

The most Praised One has also said,

***“Those who covetously withhold the gifts which Allah has given them
of His grace must not think that it is good for them: Nay, it will be
the worst for them: Soon the things they covetously withheld shall be
tied to their necks like a twisted collar on the Judgment Day” (Qur’an,
3:180).***

He, Praise belongs to Him, has also said,

***“On the Day when heat will be produced out of that (wealth) in the
Fire of Hell, and their foreheads, flanks and backs branded with it, [it
will be said to them:] ‘This is the (treasure) you hoarded up for
yourselves: Then taste the (treasures) you hoarded!’” (Qur’an, 9:35).***

There are other verses that prove that the same actions will be present
on the Judgment Day but in a hereafter form. This shows that there is a
reality for man’s actions that shall be manifested in another form in
the life to come.

These actions stick to his presence and never part with him. If the deed
of everyone is regarded as one required for his existence, for the
intricacies of his essence, the question about why the torment drops,
the question will be directed towards whether the separation is
possible.

The difference between the two is obvious: In the first, the soul of the
righteous or impious individual creates his reward or punishment,
Paradise or Hell, according to the aptitudes which it had acquired in
this life so as the one who has this aptitude cannot quieten himself and
be calm except by doing what suits it. In the second, work will manifest
itself in the hereafter without the soul having any role in that life in
manifesting these deeds as they appear. Rather, it is one of the
requirements of the presence of the individual who is lodged for
judgment.

So, man is not resurrected alone. Rather, he is resurrected with
whatever attaches to himself, to his existence. Whatever accompanies him
becomes part of him and is never separated from him. Briefly, the reward
connection of man in the first category is productive: The soul is
productive; it generates the good or the bad outcome. As regarding the
second, it is one of the requirements of man’s presence and
complications but without production.

The most Exalted One has said,

***“We have fastened every man's fate to his own neck: On the Day of
Judgment We shall bring a scroll out for him which he will see spread
open” (Qur’an, 17:13).***

Perhaps if you look at the verses that talk about the presence of the
same deed in the hereafter, and if you add to them “the possibility that
the hereafter form of these actions is among the requirements of man’s
goodness or evilness,” it will be easy for you to answer the question
about why there is punishment. The most Praised One has said,

***“… On the Day when every soul will be confronted with all the good it
has done and all the evil it has done” (Qur’an, 3:30),***

***“They will find all that they did, placed before them, and your Lord
will not treat a single one of them unjustly” (Qur’an, 18:49),***

and

***“Each soul will then come to know what it has put forth” (Qur’an,
81:14).***

The most Praised One tells us about Luqman who said,

***““O son!” (said Luqman,) “If there may be the weight of a
mustard-seed, and if it were (hidden) in a rock, or (anywhere) in the
heavens or on earth, Allah will bring it forth” (Qur’an, 31:16).***

So, what will be present on the Day of Rewards are the same deeds
described as actions personified, their realization in the form that
suits those circumstances.

Perhaps what is indicated in the verses and traditions, that is, the act
of righteousness is the tilling for the Hereafter, or the absolute
labeling of deeds, is also a hint to this answer. The same deed, be it
an act of obedience or disobedience (of the Almighty), is like a seed
which man sows in his worldly life. This seed grows, perfects itself and
becomes a harvest for him in the hereafter which he reaps as he had
sowed it. The most Praised One has said,

***“To anyone who desires the tilth of the hereafter, We grant an
increase in his tilth, and to any who desires the tilth of this world,
We grant him some of it, but he has neither share nor lot in the
hereafter” (Qur’an, 42:20).***

The Commander of the Faithful, peace with him, has said, “A good deed is
harvested in the hereafter.”[^42]

All of this shows that the reward link with man is one of cause and
causation.

Man, in his existence, is a cause for his reward either through his
creating, bringing about, or his being a planter in this life of that
which he shall reap in the hereafter. There is no separation between him
and his tilth. If the link is as such, i.e. of a cause and causation,
there will be no room to raise such a question.

Yes, a legislator who is familiar with the Quran and Sunnah ought not
restrict bliss and wrath to these two categories, denying a separate
Paradise or torment also from man’s existence and whatever he does.
Obviously, for each of Paradise and the Fire there is a separate
presence to which one renders his deeds.

Despite all of this, there is no objection to tormenting or blessing
through one of the past meanings. Since the confusion is rational,
suffices it to be submitted from the two ways that we have stated above.

As regarding our answer to the second question, we would like to say the
following:

What has already been stated about the rational way of a crime fitting
its punishment, in extent and in method, is connected to the resulting
penalties. But if the penalty is the impact of an action, we do not see
it fitting its extent and method:

A driver who for one second is inattentive may bear psychological and
financial losses that will last for the rest of his life. One who hides
thorns under the ground, or who plants roses, will reap thorns or roses
as long as he lives. The deed was instantaneous, whereas its outcome is
lasting. So, the equation between the effort and its fruit is not
maintained here.

If man’s endeavor in this life is a seed the fruit of which he will
harvest in the hereafter, there is no objection to the result being
lasting while the labor is instantaneous or short-lived. This by itself
suffices to remove the confusion. The most Praised One has already
acquainted him with the hereafter result of his actions in this life,
and that his short-lived deeds will bring about a lengthy or perpetual
sigh, that his deed in this life will produce for him in the hereafter
either thorns that will hurt him or roses that will perfume him. He has
done his deed with his knowledge and free choice. Had there been blame,
it should be directed at him. The most Praised One has told us this
about Satan:

***“And when the matter is decided, Satan will say: ‘It was Allah Who
gave you a promise of the truth: I, too, promised you, but I failed in
my promise to you. I had no authority over you except to call you and
you listened to me: So, do not reproach me but reproach your own souls.
I cannot listen to your cries, nor can you listen to mine. I reject your
former act in associating me with Allah. There must be a grievous
penalty for the wrongdoers’” (Qur’an, 14:22).***

The previous verses regard the hereafter rewards as man’s tilth, and
they support this viewpoint.

Yet it is possible that remaining forever in the penalty is relevant to
whether there is no room for (Divine) mercy, when it is not possible for
an outpour (of His forgiveness). The Almighty has said,

***“Surely those who seek gain in evil and are engulfed in their sins
are the companions of the Fire: They shall dwell in it forever” (Qur’an,
2:81).***

Perhaps the phrase “…engulfed (or immersed) in their sins means their
sins overwhelm them in a way which necessitates the disappearance of any
ability or readiness for mercy to descend on them, for them to get out
of the realm of His wrath, indignation.”[^43]

Whatever it may be, it appears that what we have stated is accurate if
you keenly consider the past answer for the first question which is: The
reward may be created for the soul, or it may always accompany man;
likewise, the rational way is the same as is quite obvious.

### Mandating Beyond One’s Tolerance

A sound conscience and commonsense rule that one must not be ordered to
do beyond his ability. If the one thus ordering is a human being who
already knows that the individual whom he orders is unable to perform
what he is ordering him to do, serious willpower is not sparked within
him, between himself and his conscience, with his soul. For this reason,
ordering the doing of what is intolerable renders the same order
impossible.

But if the One Who is issuing the order is Allah, the most Praised One,
the matter in this case is obvious from two standpoints:

**First:** Commanding what is unbearable is rationally ugly. It is
impossible to be attributed to the most Praised One due to His wisdom.
He never requires His servant to do what he is incapable or unable to
do, such as requiring a terminally ill person to fly to the sky, or
getting a camel to go through a needle’s hole.

There is no difference between the same order being possible but is
beyond the frame of the ability of the ordered individual, such as
requiring the latter to fly in the sky, or the same order being
impossible by itself without a distinction between one individual and
another, such as requiring one to get a large body in a small one
without the small one being enlarged or the big one being reduced in
size.

**Second:** Quranic verses clearly indicate that the most Praised One
does not require man to do anything beyond his ability:

***“Allah does not place a burden on any soul greater than it can bear”
(Qur’an, 2:286).***

The most Exalted One has also said,

***“Your Lord is never unjust (in the least) to His servants” (Qur’an,
41:46),***

and

***“Your Lord will never treat a single one of them unjustly” (Qur’an,
18:49).***

Injustice is causing harm without a justification. What injustice is
there greater than that? Allah Almighty is greatly above being as such.

This is the summary of what has been stated. Scholars of *usool*
(principles of the faith) and others have simplified it in their own
books through their own craftsmanship.

With all these glaring proofs, we see the Asharis treading a different
path, permitting the ordering of what is unbearable. They thus
demonstrated that the Islamic creed opposes conscience, sound reason and
nature. It is regrettable that the Orientalists derived the tenets of
Islam from Ashari logicians, so they describe them as being contrary to
reason and nature because the Asharis permit the commanding of what is
unbearable.

What is important is to analyze the verses that they have cited as their
evidences:

#### Asharis’ Proofs for Commanding What is Unbearable

Instead of referring to reason in this field, the Asharis have cited
verses which they imagine as proving their viewpoint although they are
distant from what they adopt in this regard. Here are these verses with
their own using them as evidence, as well as our analysis of them:

The first is this verse:

***“In no way will they frustrate (His design) on earth, nor do they
have protectors besides Allah! Their penalty will be doubled! They lost
the power to hear, and they did not see!” (Qur’an, 11:20).***

The reason for saying that this is evidence is that they were commanded
to listen to the truth, and they were commissioned to act upon it
although “They lost the power to hear, and they did not see”. This
proves that mandating what is beyond one’s ability is permissible. It is
proven by the token that anyone who does not accept the truth and who
does not listen to it by way of accepting it will not be able to do so.

One may resign thus: The evidence here is very weak. Its weakness
appears from interpreting the verse’s statements, one by one.

a. When the Almighty says, “In no way will they frustrate (His
design) on earth,” He means they cannot frustrate Allah Almighty in
their worldly life, that they came out of the realm of adoration. So,
their ability (to do so) did not surpass that of Allah Almighty.

b. His saying, “…nor do they have protectors besides Allah” means
even if they take for masters their own idols, although they are not in
reality masters, they have no masters besides Allah.

c. His saying, “Their penalty will be doubled” means they will be
punished twice as a result for their misguidance, injustice and evil
deeds.

d. His saying, “They lost the power to hear, and they did not see”
is an explanatory statement. It means they did not disbelieve, nor did
they disobey Allah’s command because their will supersedes Allah’s will,
nor is it because they have masters other than Allah, but because they
were unable to hear or see His Signs, so they would believe in them.

But their inability does not mean that they are primarily incapacitated.
Rather, it means that they deprived themselves of these blessings on
account of the sins that they committed. So, the sins became a way for
their having hearts that did not comprehend, eyes with which they could
not see, ears with which they could not hear, so much so that they
became like animals or even more so.

The most Praised One has said,

***“They have hearts with which they do not understand, eyes with which
they do not see, and ears with which they do not hear. They are like
cattle! Nay, they are more misguided, for they are heedless (of
warning)” (Qur’an, 7:179).***

Briefly, there is a difference between their inability at the start of
the obligation and their inability to believe, to list and to see the
Signs. The inability is due to their going to extremes in sinning and
erring, to the sins enshrouding their hearts, eyes, visions and hearing.
The verse was revealed about the second field and the first topic. Texts
of verses and traditions have supported each other regarding the fact
that disobedience and oppression make hearts blind and hearing deaf. The
most Praised One has said,

***“When they deviated, Allah then let their hearts deviate” (Qur’an,
61:5).***

Narrating to us about the criminals, the most Praised One has quoted
them as saying,

***“They will also say, ‘Had we only listened or used our intelligence,
we would not have been among the companions of the blazing Fire.’ They
will then admit their sins, but (forgiveness) will be far from the
fellows of the blazing Fire” (Qur’an, 67:10-11).***

The statement that is known to scholars of logic and of wisdom is that
willful avoidance, which does not negate free choice, is derived from
these verses and from commonsense.

The second verse is this:

***“And He taught Adam the nature of all things; then He placed them
before the angels and said, “Tell Me the nature of these (things) if you
are right.” They said, “Glory to You: We have no knowledge except what
You have taught us: In truth, You are perfect in knowledge and wisdom”
(Qur’an, 2:31-32).***

The similarity is this: The most Praised One commanded them to pronounce
the names although they were not familiar with them.

Here are our resigns about the above: The command in the statement “Tell
Me the nature of these (things)” was done for the purpose of proving
their inability, not to require them to actually do it in reality. It is
similar to this verse of the most Praised One:

***“And if you are in doubt as to what We have revealed from time to
time to Our servant, produce a Sura such as this, and call on your
witnesses or helpers (if there are any) besides Allah, if your (doubts)
are true” (Qur’an, 2:23).***

Explanation: The command formula carries one meaning: driving towards a
thing. But the goals vary according to situations. Once the goal behind
a command is to seriously direct the attention of the adult individual
to a certain act. This is the true command the doer of which is
rewarded, while one who disobeys it is punished, and it has to meet the
criterion of the adult person being able to do it. The other is that the
goal would be other matters, so it is not labeled as the “serious
command”, similarly to the incapacitating implied in the previous verse
and the subjecting in the next:

***“Be you apes, despised and rejected” (Qur’an, 2:65).***

There are other goals that prompt a speaker to express his goals in the
form of a command. This is clear for anyone who is familiar with the
speech of men of wisdom.

The third verse of the most Exalted One is:

***“On the Day when the shin will be laid bare, they will be summoned to
bow in adoration, but they surely will not be able to do so; their eyes
will be cast down, ignominy will cover them, seeing that they had been
summoned previously to bow in adoration, while they were safe (and they
refused)” (Qur’an, 42-43).***

The indication of evidence: If it is alright to command them in the
hereafter to do what is beyond their ability, the same is alright in the
life of this world.

One may resign the following about the above: The call to prostrate in
that circumstance is not serious and does not lie behind a reality.
Rather, the purpose behind resurrection is to let the polytheists, who
were able to prostrate in the life of this world and who did not, sigh a
sigh of regret. The verse tells us that when they were safe, they
refused to obey and surrender. After the veil had been removed from
their eyes and they saw the torment, they attempted to obey and
prostrate, but how could they do that in the hereafter? Here is the
explanation of the verse’s statements one by one:

a. His statement saying “… On the Day when the shin will be laid
bare” is indicative of the matter becoming very serious because when one
wants to cross tumultuous waters, he bares his legs then wades the
torrent. This imagery is used in order to explain the seriousness of the
matter although there is no water, shin/leg or baring to do. It is like
a miser being described as having a “paralyzed hand” although the talk
is neither about a hand nor about paralysis.

b. His statement saying “… They will be summoned to bow in
adoration” does not imply a request or a serious command. Rather, it is
to intensify their sigh for their having abandoned prostrations in the
life of this world despite their physical fitness for it. It is like a
teacher who is examining his student whom he knows would fail the exam:
“Study, review and stay awake during the nights” in order to create a
sigh in his heart although there is really no room for any of these
matters.

c. His statement saying “… But they surely will not be able to
do so” is due to depriving them of safety as a result of their criminal
worldly deeds. Or it may be due to the aptitude of arrogance which rests
deeply in their innermost—on the Day when innermost thoughts become
manifest—or due to His will, the most Praised One, being linked to deeds
confined to this world while the outcomes and rewards are confined to
the hereafter.

The Commander of the Faithful (peace with him) has said, “This day is a
course, tomorrow is the race; those who win (the race) will be lodged in
Paradise, while the wrongdoers will be in Hell. So, is there anyone who
repents his sin before his demise? Is there anyone who labors for his
own benefit before the Day of his misery? You surely are living days of
labor behind which there is a term that is already set.”[^44]

Perhaps the first of these three viewpoints is closer to the meaning of
the verse due to its end saying: “… They had been summoned previously to
bow in adoration while they were safe”, apparently they now are not safe
because the circumstance is different.

d. His statement saying, “… Their eyes will be cast down,
ignominy will cover them” clearly indicates that they will on that Day
cast their eyes down, being covered with ignominy.

e. His statement saying, “… They had been summoned previously to
bow in adoration, while they were safe” means when they were in the life
of this world and were called on to prostrate, they refused although
they were safe and their bodies were healthy. And when they will be
called on to prostrate in the hereafter, they will not be able to do so.
The goal behind this call is to intensify their sigh and regret having
wasted their lives while they were safe and healthy.

On the whole, the verse clearly says that the call to prostrate in the
circumstance will not be serious but for other goals where ability is
not preconditioned.

The fourth verse is this:

***“You can never be fair and just to women, even if it is your ardent
desire, but do not turn completely away (from a woman) so as to leave
her hanging (in the air). If you come to a friendly understanding and
practice self-restraint, Allah is oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful” (Qur’an,
4:129).***

They reason saying that it indicates that the most Praised One commands
justice when He says,

***“… But if you fear that you will not be able to deal justly (with
them), then (marry) only one” (Qur’an, 4:3).***

Nevertheless, He tells us that justice cannot be established (if one
marries more than one wife).

One can resign that the most Praised One has commanded one who marries
more than one wife, as the above verse indicates, to be just and fair.
At the same time, He tells us in the same verse that those who marry
more than one wife cannot be just. Also at the same time, He has
prohibited total attachment to the one who is loved the most from among
them while turning away from the others in a way that leaves the latter
hanging out in a status which is neither marriage nor divorce.

If you contemplate on the statements in both verses, you will clearly
see that justice, which He has enjoined, is not the same justice which
He says a married man cannot shoulder.

What can be done is what anyone who marries more than wife can. Justice
with regard to clothing, food, housing and other rights of the wife
which the husband carries out with his faculties under his command, not
with his desires and hidden wishes over which he has no control.

As regarding what is beyond one's ability, it is equality in treatment,
sharing a smile and companionship, two things which one does not own,
nor can he choose or control.

Up to here, it becomes clear that requiring what is beyond one's
ability, whether one can do it or not, is something which reason rejects
and nature denies. People of wisdom do not recognize it in their social
life. Clear Quranic verses deny it.

As regarding the evidence produced by the Ashari mentor, it really
contains no proof. It is simply interpreting these verses according to
his own advance personal opinion. When he chose the servant's inability
to affect his actions, that in all his general and particular portions
belongs to Allah, the most Praised One. The servant has no role to play
save being the doer of a deed, that the creation comes from Allah,
Praise belongs to Him, compared to the willpower of the servant. He
builds it on two matters:

**First:** It is possible to commission the doing of what is unbearable.

**Second:** Ability is relevant to actions.

As for the first, if a servant of the Almighty does not have the ability
to play a role in the same deed, it makes no difference whether the
commissioning is doable or not, and you have already come to know the
fallacy of this argument.

As for the second, he thus concluded, due to his misconceptions, that
the presence of ability and capability prior to the deed may not be
combined with advocating that creating and bringing into being are not
done by Him, the most Praised One. He (the Ashari), therefore, advocated
the ability as taking precedence, and that it must be compared with the
presence of actions. This is what we have discussed under a separate
heading in our next research.

The important problem in the arguments of the Asharis, the folks of the
hadith and the Hanbalis, is their rejection of reason, their exclusion
of it in the fields where a judgment needs to be made. One who excludes
reason and its essence cannot be expected to produce views other than
these.

### Pre-Actions Ability

Do both ability and capability in man precede action, or do they
accompany it?

Those who advocate the principle of Justice of God are in favor of the
first, whereas the Asharis support the second. What reveals what is
right is to provide detail, and perhaps this is what everyone seeks.

To explain, capability is released, and it means one of two matters:

**First:** The soundness of doing or not doing an action. You may say,
the doer being what he is; so, if he wills, he does that action, and if
he does not, he will not do it. If capability is meant to be as such,
there is no doubt that it precedes the deed instinctively and
consciously. One who sits is capable of standing. One who is silent is
capable of speaking during the time when he is silent. But the meaning
is in the collective sense.

**Second:** That with which an action becomes necessary when all factors
on which the deed's existence depends are available, when the complete
cause that is not separated from the causation is present. Capability in
this sense is relevant to the deed. It does not precede it time-wise
even if it is ahead of it in its level.

In all truth, the issue is very simple, and the doubts raised about it,
especially what is stated by the Ashari mentor in his Al-Lama (book), is
akin to sophistry.[^45] Similarly is the case with Nizam ad-Din
al-Qawshaji in Sharh al-Tajrid.[^46] The details which we have stated
are decisive in this research. Its gist is clear from the writings of
Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi as transmitted by al-Sayyid al-Jurjani in Sharh
al-Mawaqif.[^47]

Thus, it seems that the proofs set up by the Mutazilites about
capability preceding the actions provide resigns about this issue, and
the matter does not need such a detailed explanation. But what should be
researched is to show the incentive that prompted al-Ashari mentor to
choose that doctrine (comparing capability with actions) although
precedence and comparison, as related to the contents of the Quran and
Sunnah, are equal. So, the topic is determining the reason for one to
opt to advocate making such a comparison, even focusing on it.

It is strongly possible that the incentive is his talk about the issue
of the creation of the servants' actions, that they are created for
Allah, not for the servants, neither originally nor thereafter. Even the
capability that takes place to the servant, when a deed happens, does
not bear an impact on bringing him into being, but it is compared to
him.

So, what suits this doctrine is to deny the afore-mentioned capability
over the deed and to be satisfied with that with which it is compared.
It is as if the mentor imagined that the capability that precedes the
actions competes with the power of Allah Almighty. So, for this reason,
he found in himself a spiritual motive to prove the fallacy of such
precedence and to proof the comparison.

Yes, the comparison can be advocated and the precedence is denied. This
is not confined to the Ashari mentor and to his students. Rather, some
Mutazilites have agreed with them such as al-Najjar, Muhammad ibn Isa,
Ibn al-Rawandi and others.[^48]

Everyone is of the consensus that the power of Allah Almighty precedes
actions. This is known according to our *usool* because the power in
those other than the most Praised One is the same as ability and
capability. And in what should be done, in as far as the most Praised
One is concerned, is that what He does and what is needed is the same.
His presence is self-sustaining and so is each of His attributes. Each
does not have power on its own, capability or readiness (independently
of Him).

Mulla Sadra wrote extensively in this regard in his books, removing some
confusion, rebutting the saying that His ability and actions are
timeless.[^49]

#### Capability in Traditions by the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (as)

Narratives from the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (as) have supported each other
regarding capability-preceding actions. Here are some narratives
reported in this regard for you:

1. Al-Saduq has quoted Hisham ibn Salim quoting Abu Abdullah (Imam
al-Sadiq, peace with him) as saying, “Allah has never imposed anything
on His servants to do or not to do something before making it possible
for them to do it. Then He commanded them and prohibited them. So, no
servant does or abstains from doing something except being in advance
capable of doing so prior to being commanded or prohibited, before he
does or does not, before he gives or withholds."[^50]

2. It has also been reported that Abu Busayr quotes Imam Abu Abdullah
(as) as saying in the company of people who were debating verbs and
intonations, “Capability precedes actions. Allah, the most Exalted, the
most Great, never commanded His servant to withhold anything or to
release it if such servant is unable to do it.”[^51]

3. It is also narrated from Sulayman ibn Khalid saying that he heard
Imam Abu Abdullah (as) as saying, "A servant of Allah does not withhold
or release anything except if he is already able to do so."[^52]

4. It is also narrated from Muhammad ibn Abu Omayr quoting those who
cited our fellows quoting Imam Abu Abdullah (as) as saying, "A servant
of Allah does not do anything except what He enables him to do. He may
be able but inactive. He can never be active without being able."[^53]
There are many other narratives that deal with the subject of such
capability in the *Tawhid* book to which you may refer.

It is interesting that the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (as) produced proofs for
capability preceding actions such as this verse:

***"… Pilgrimage to this place [Ka\`ba] is a duty which men owe God,
those who can afford the journey" (Qur'an, 3:97).***

Hisham ibn al-Hakam asked Imam as-Sadiq (as) about the meaning of the
afore-cited verse. The Imam (as) said, "It refers to one who is healthy
of body, not being held back (from performing the pilgrimage) by any
obligation, who has rations and a camel to carry him."[^54]

Abu Busayr has also said that he heard Imam Abu Abdullah, peace with
him, as saying, "One who has the opportunity to perform the pilgrimage
even if it may be on a donkey the ears and tail of which are cut off and
who refuses is counted among those who are capable of performing the
pilgrimage."[^55]

[^1]: Al-Ishaaraat wal Tanbihaat, Vol. 1, pp. 219-220. As regarding his
reference to “terms”, he means things known by everyone, such as our
saying: “The knowledge of opposites is one and the same.” Knowledge of
Zaid being the father of Amr equals knowledge of Amr being the son of
Zaid. Or, if you talk about a profession, “Sequence is impossible,”
which is common in debates. Or you may talk about a creed and say, “The
God is One, usury is prohibitive,” etc.

[^2]: Commentaries of wise Sabzawari on Sharh al-Manzouma, p. 310.

[^3]: Kashf al-Murad, p. 186.

[^4]: Al-Qawshaji, Sharh al-Tajreed, p. 442.

[^5]: Kashf al-Murad, p. 186.

[^6]: Nahjul-Balagha, Book 53.

[^7]: Dalaail al-Sidq, Vol. 1, p. 369.

[^8]: Al-Ashari, Al-Lama, p. 116.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 117.

[^10]: Kashf al-Murad, p. 186.

[^11]: The restriction point is that the preliminary issues may either
be imagined in both their ends with a sufficient rate in judgment and
absolution, or it may not. The first probability covers first matters.
The second may either depend on means other than outer and inner senses,
or it may not. The first may either be the means that is never absent
from the mind when imagining the ends or it may not be so. The first
covers instinctive things, and these are called issues the measures of
which are with them. The second may either apply the senses, which is
the propping intellect moving from principles to requirements, or it may
not be used in them. The first is identified by the senses. As for the
second, if the judgment in it takes place by a group of people telling
about it, it will be up to reason to imagine that they were all in
cohort to lie, so it is among matters that are consecutively reported.
If it is not so, and if it takes place due to many experiments, it is
experimental, and the limits of each are already known.

[^12]: Al-Amidi, Al-Ihkam, Vol. 1, p. 121.

[^13]: Kashf al-Murad, p. 187.

[^14]: Refer to p. 329 of Sharh Tajrid al-Itiqad by the virtuous
al-Qawshaji, where they say that man is forced in his actions. We will
provide you with a detailed discussion in al-Ashari’s compulsion
[theory] when we discuss divine justice in a subject titled “Divine
action and man’s deeds.”

[^15]: We will discuss in detail the necessity for sending prophets when
we discuss general Prophetic mission.

[^16]: We will discuss Islam’s conclusiveness in the researches relevant
to Prophetic mission.

[^17]: There is a host of questions about the most Exalted One’s wisdom
and justice which our mentor, may his shade prolong, answered in his
encyclopedia titled Allah: Creator of the Cosmos; so, refer to pp. 97 –
99 and pp. 269 – 281 of it.

[^18]: Al-Mawaqif, p. 231.

[^19]: Isharat al-Maram, p. 54.

[^20]: Al-Mawaqif, p. 333. Sharh al-Mawaqif, Vol. 8, p. 204.

[^21]: Dalail Sidq, Vol. 1, p. 233.

[^22]: Al-Mawaqif, p. 322. Sharh al-Mawaqif, Vol. 8, p. 204.

[^23]: The Negationists المعطلة are Mutazilis المعتزلة who do not
believe in resurrection and in the return of souls to bodies.

[^24]: Al-Asfar, Vol. 2, p. 280.

[^25]: Ibid., Vol. 7, p. 84.

[^26]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 263.

[^27]: Ibid.

[^28]: Al-Asfar, Vol. 7, p. 68.

[^29]: Muhammad Farid Wajdi, Ala Atlal al-Madhhab al-Maddi, Vol. 1, p.
136.

[^30]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon 45.

[^31]: The aspect of the most Exalted One not doing what is ugly may be
determined by the fact that one does such an ugly thing either because
he needs to or he relishes it or due to his own ignorance. All of these
do not apply to the most Praised One: The first is discarded due to His
absolute independence. The second is due to wisdom dictating its
opposite. As for the third, it is due to His absolute knowledge. This
evidence is based on the fact that doing what is inequitable is already
proven to be unfit for Him: He is perfect in what He does. He does not
need anything beyond Himself. This is endorsed by the allama on pp.
187-88 of his work Sharh al-Tajrid and by the man of virtue, al-Miqdad,
on p. 260 of Sharh Nahj al-Mustarshidin and to other books dealing with
logic.

[^32]: Nahjul-Balagha, Axioms Section, No. 470.

[^33]: Al-Tawhid, in a chapter about the meaning of Tawhid and Adl,
first hadith, p. 96.

[^34]: Ibid., p. 91.

[^35]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon 214.

[^36]: Ibid., sermon 185.

[^37]: Ibid., sermon 191.

[^38]: Ibid., sermon 227.

[^39]: al-Mufid, Awaail al-Maqalat, p. 14.

[^40]: al-Saduq, Aqaid, p. 90, old edition having an appendix containing
explanations in its 11th chapter.

[^41]: Tabatabai, Al-Mizan, Vol. 1, pp. 91-93.

[^42]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon 22 (Abdoh edition).

[^43]: Tabatabai, Al-Mizan, Vol. 12, p. 86.

[^44]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon 28.

[^45]: Refer to Al-Lam, pp. 93-94.

[^46]: Sharh al-Maqasid, Vol. 1, p. 240; al-Qawshaji, Sharh al-Tajrid,
p. 392.

[^47]: Sharh al-Mawaqif, Vol. 6, p. 154. The mentor, may he be
safeguarded, has stated all the rational proofs produced by the Asharis
in his book titled Al-Milal wal Nihal; so, refer to Vo. 2, pp. 172-193.

[^48]: Sharh al-Mawaqif, Vol. 6, p. 92.

[^49]: Al-Asfar al-Arba\`a, Vol. 6, p. 312.

[^50]: Al-Saduq, At-Tawhid, a chapter on capability, hadith 19, p. 352.

[^51]: Ibid., hadith 21, p. 352.

[^52]: Ibid., hadith 20, p. 352.

[^53]: Ibid., hadith 13, p. 350.

[^54]: Al-Saduq, Tawhid, hadith 14, p. 350.

[^55]: Ibid., hadith 11, p. 350.


