Chapter 6: Descriptive Attributes
=================================

Some logicians have classified the attributes of the most Praised One
into entitative and descriptive. The first implies His well known
descriptions: knowledge, power, life, etc. The second indicates what
obvious verses and traditions have confirmed, such as loftiness,
countenance, hands, etc. The logicians’ theory has differed in
explaining this part of attributes:

Confirming with “How” and “Like”
--------------------------------

There are those who claim that Allah, the most Praised One, has physical
things such as two eyes and hands similarly to what humans have.
Al-Shahristani says, “As for the anthropomorphists (those who attribute
human characteristics to nonhuman objects), who are Hashwis (those who
prattle about things which they themselves do not understand, i.e.
sophistries), these have permitted the concept that their Lord is
touched and is hand-shaken, that sincere Muslims embrace Him, Praise
belongs to Him, in the life of this world and in the hereafter if they
reach a degree of self-discipline and struggle to the extent of
sincerity.”[^1]

Since likening and personifying the Almighty is false according to
reason and reliable texts, we do not want to waste our time discussing
this theory.

Confirming without “How” and “Like”
-----------------------------------

The Ashari mentor and those who follow him apply these characteristics
to Allah, Glory to Him, in the meaning with which we all are familiar.
But in order to run away from likening Him to humans, they say “without
like”, “without how”.

In his book titled Al-Ibana, al-Ashari says, “Allah, Glory to Him, has a
face without a likeness as He has said,

***‘But the Face of your Lord shall abide (forever) full of majesty,
bounty and honor” (Qur’an, 55:27).***

He has hands without a likeness as He has said,

***‘… one whom I have created with My hands’ (Qur’an, 38:75).”***[^2]

This theory is not exclusively advocated by al-Ashari. Abu Hanifah is
quoted as having said, “References in the Holy Quran to Allah Almighty
having a face, a hand, a self, are His characteristics without a
likeness.”

Ibn Kathir has said, “We follow the path of the righteous ancestors
which is: believing in them as they have come without how or like.”[^3]

This theory’s summary is that these facts belong to Him, the most
Praised One that He is, but they are not similar to what exist in
humans. He has a hand and an eye but not similarly to our hands and
eyes. Thus, they, according to their own claim, combined the apparent
meanings of these verses with the requirement of raising the status of
the Almighty above that of humans.

### Theory Analyzed

Undoubtedly, everyone must believe in what Allah has described Himself,
and nobody knows Him better than Himself. The most Praised One says,

***“Do you know better than Allah?” (Qur’an, 2:140).***

Also, nobody has the right to speak about the statements of the most
Praised One in any topic superficially without definitive evidence that
requires it. What is said by those who interpret Quranic verses, who try
to explain what appears to them to be the meanings embedded in the Quran
and Sunnah in the pretext their apparent meanings do not agree with
reason is rejected, rebutted.

What the Quran and authentic Sunnah contain does not contradict reason.
What they imagine superficially and make it look irrational is not the
apparent meaning of the Quran but what they themselves imagine it to be,
as will be clarified.

The statements made by the Asharis in this theory, their saying that
Allah has a real hand without how, for example, is not based on a sound
meaning. This is so because the Islamic faith is characterized by
precision and discretion and, at the same time, by being free of
complexity and ambiguity. It seems to be clear, in agreement with nature
and sound reason.

Thereupon, portraying it in a likening and personifying way that is
known to belong to Judaism and Christianity, as is the case in the first
theory, or in a way similarly to ambiguity and riddles, as in this case,
does not agree with the stance of Islam and with that of the Quran in
presenting the beliefs to the Islamic society.

To say that Allah has a hand that is not similar to ours, or a face that
is not like our faces, and so on with the rest of descriptive
characteristics, is similar to uttering riddles. Their repeating that
these attributes are applied to Allah, the most Praised One, in their
same real meanings, but the method is unknown, is akin to a farce. Had
they been applied to Allah Almighty in their same real meanings, the
method should have been known, so the application would have been real.
This is so because the one who used these expressions applied the same
method to their “how”. So, using them in the same meanings, fixing their
meanings to Allah, the most Praised One, without “how”, is similar to an
animal which is a real lion but without a tail, claws, fangs, etc., etc.

Briefly, their saying that Allah has a real hand but not similar to
(human) hands is a statement the front of which contradicts the rear. A
true hand is an organ that has the well known “how”. Eliminating the
“how” is eliminating its reality; they cannot be combined.

Add to the above the fact that there are no texts in the Quran or Sunnah
like this “without how” at all. Rather, this is something invented by
ideologies to shield themselves in the stance for deterring an opponent
from attacking them, accusing them of the charge of personification. For
this reason, allama al-Zamakhshari has composed this verse of poetry:

*They likened Him to His creation, then they were apprehensive*
*Of people, so they hid themselves behind this “without how”.*

I wonder, had this phrase sufficed to rebut the charge of personifying
and likening, if it suffices in other fields as well such as He, the
most Praised One, is said to have a body but not like all other bodies,
blood but not like other blood, flesh but not like other flesh, etc.
Even one of those who dared to liken Him has said, “I am too shy to
confirm that He has sexual organs and a beard, so excuse me from having
to do so and ask what is beyond that.”[^4]

Thus, it is quite clear that the Ashari’s belief in the area of
descriptive attributes is not out of the framework of one of two
following matters:

1. Personifying and likening if applied to Allah, Glory to Him, in their
common meanings in minds while preserving their reality,

2. Complication and ambiguity if applied to Allah, Glory to Him, in the
common meanings without interpretation and explanation. People either
liken or complicate, personify or blabber!

In conclusion, we say that the “proving without how”, though widely
spread during, before and after al-Ashari’s time, was later deserted
until Ibn Taymiyyah al-Harrani came. He brought it back to life, revived
and called it the doctrine of the ancestry, making their faith one of
idling and likening.

In a statement he said, “They do not represent the attributes of Allah
Almighty similarly to His creation, nor do they deny what He has
described Himself or His Messenger described Him lest they should
nullify His Beautiful Names and Supreme Attributes.” He goes on to say,
“Nobody from among the nation’s ancestors, from among the *sahaba* and
*tabiin*, ever said that Allah is not in the heavens, nor is He not on
the *Arsh*, or that He is not everywhere, nor that all places with Him
are the same, nor is He inside or outside the world, connected with or
separated from it, nor that it is not permissible to point at Him with
fingers and the like.”[^5]

Thereupon, Abu Zuhrah says, “Ibn Taymiyyah determines that the creed of
the ancestors is to confirm whatever the Quran contains, what is high
and what is low, the Almighty firming Himself on the Throne, His face,
hand, love and hate and whatever the Sunnah contains of the same without
interpretation and with literal appearance. Is this truly the creed of
the ancestors?!

We answer by saying: The Hanbalis of the fourth Hijri century, as we
explained, had preceded him in saying so. Scholars of the time debated
with them and proved that the likening and personifying to which they
were leading were impossible. So, how can they not lead to Him while it
is permissible to point at him with the senses?! For this reason, the
Hanbali faqih and imam, al-Khatib ibn al-Jawzi, confronted them and
denied that this had anything to do with the ancestors’ creed.”[^6]

Ibn al-Jawzi has made a detailed statement criticizing this theory,
attacking one of the Hanbalis who propagated it, namely Abu Yali, the
famous judge who died in 457 A.H./1065 A.D. He said, “Abu Yali attached
a stigma to the Hanbalis which cannot be washed away by sea water.” For
this reason, this sect went underground till it was made public by Ibn
Taymiyyah in his own special daring way.

Contemporary Abu Zuhrah moved to what we stated about criticizing that
theory saying, “We have to cast another look from the linguistic
standpoint. The most Praised One has said, ‘Allah’s hand is above their
hands.’ He also said, ‘Everything perishes save His face.’ Do these
statements convey physical meanings, or do they convey to us the sense
that there are other matters that appropriately fit Allah Almighty? It
is right to interpret the hand as meaning power (literally or
metaphorically), and it is right to say that reference to the face
connotes the Self.

“It is right to interpret His descent to the lower heavens as meaning
that His account is approaching, that He, the most Praised and Exalted
One, is close to His servants. Language makes room for such
interpretations; pronouncements accept such meanings. This undoubtedly
is better than interpreting them through their literal apparent meanings
while being ignorant of how, such as saying, ‘Allah has a hand but we do
not know it,’ or ‘Allah descends but not as we descend,’ etc.

These refer to the unknown; we do not understand their ultimate end or
goal. But if we interpret them with meanings which language accepts and
they are not strange to language, we will arrive at matters that are
close to them and which contain elevation of His status rather than
misleading.”[^7]

Al-Ghazali has strongly criticized this theory. Summed up, he says the
following:

“These expressions in the Quranic statements and Prophet’s traditions
have apparent meanings which are related to the senses we know, and they
are impossible to apply to Allah Almighty. They have other metaphoric
meanings known by an Arab without interpretation or an attempt to
interpret them.

If he hears a reference to the hand in a statement by the Prophet, peace
and blessings with him and his progeny, that ‘Allah outfitted Adam with
His hand’ and ‘A believer’s heart is between two of the Merciful One’s
fingers,’ he should know that these expressions convey two meanings. One
of them is the original condition: an organ comprised of flesh, bone and
nerves.

This expression, the hand, may be used metaphorically for another
meaning that differs from this physical meaning such as someone saying
that ‘The town is in the hand of the governor.’ This conveys an
understanding even if the governor’s hand is cut off. A commoner and
anyone else must make sure that the Messenger of Allah (S) did not mean
a physical body, which this is impossible to apply to Allah. If he
imagines that Allah is a body comprised of parts, he will be worshipping
an idol, for every body is created, and one who worships a created thing
commits apostasy. Idol worship was apostasy because idols are created
things.”[^8]

Al-Ghazali did well when he interpreted the hand in a verse such as
this: “Allah’s hand is above their hands” to mean ability, a meaning for
the verse without interpreting it, an explanation for it without
attempting to explain it. This will be our focus after we discuss the
faith of those who interpret.

We say that what must be done is to follow the appearance of the verse
and of the Sunnah without deviating from it, whether or not it agrees
with literal meanings or with individual meanings, and this is the great
slippage of the Hanbalis and of Imam al-Ashari himself. They claimed
that their literal meanings must be adopted whether they agree with what
is apparent or not.

Rendering
---------

A group of Asharis and others applied these characteristics to Allah,
Glory to Him, while rendering their meanings to Him.

Al-Shahristani has said,

“A large group from among the ancestors confirm descriptive attributes,
such as the hands and face, without interpreting them. They say, ‘We do
not know the meaning of the expression such as in the verse saying: The
most Merciful One is firmly seated on the *Arsh*, and like: … to what I
have created with My hand. We are not obligated to know the explanation
of these verses, but we have already been required to believe that He
has no partner, something which we have already proven.”[^9]

To this viewpoint did ar-Razi incline when he said,

“These similarities must definitely be seen as having meanings other
than what they apparently convey (on the surface). We must also render
their meaning to Allah Almighty, and their interpretation must not be
discussed.”[^10]

### Analyzing Rendering Theory

Rendering is the slogan of one who does not want to undertake the
hardship of conducting serious researches and who sees that suffices him
to attain salvation is the statement of the Messenger of Allah (Allah’s
peace and blessings with him and his progeny) in which he said, ‘Islam
is based on five things: The testimony that: There is no god save Allah
and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, the upholding of the (daily)
prayers, the paying of zakat, the performing of the hajj and the fasting
of the month of Ramadan.”[^11]

Because he sees rendering as safer than confirming, which may end up at
either making a similitude or a personification, both being false, or to
complication and ambiguity which both do not agree with the attribute of
the ease of the faith.

But the folks of confirmation, I mean those who advocate the two
previous theories, have criticized the rendering theory saying that its
goal is mere belief in the expressions of the Quran and hadith without
an in-depth research or the comprehending of what Allah and His
Messenger mean by them.

To believe in pronouncements while rendering their meanings to Allah,
the most Glorified One, is the same as saying that Allah Almighty
addressed us arbitrarily because He addressed us with things which we do
not understand. But Allah says,

***“We did not send a Messenger except (to teach) in the language of his
own people” (Qur’an, 14:4).”***[^12]

I say that those who advocate such rendering have a clear excuse in this
regard. They imagine that the verses containing descriptive attributes
are among the “like” verses the interpretation of which is prohibited by
the most Praised One Who commanded His servants to just believe in them.
He says,

***“But those with perversity in their hearts follow its allegorical
parts, seeking discord and searching for their hidden meanings, but no
one knows its hidden meanings except Allah and those who are firmly
grounded in knowledge. Say, ‘We believe in the Book; the whole of it is
from our Lord’.” None will grasp the message except men of
understanding” (Qur’an, 3:7).***

They are not to be blamed when they refuse to interpret them, so they
rendered their meanings to Him, the most Praised One. Yes, there is
confusion about these verses actually not being allegorical. They are
not meant to be allegorical. If one who is free of any prior notion
discerns them, he will find them non-allegorical, as you will come to
know later.

What is strange is that their criticism of those who advocate rendering
applies also to them. Firming the descriptive attributes in their
literal meanings that come to one’s mind when he reads them
individually, while still believing that the Almighty is above being
physical, empties their words of clear meanings. This is so because the
impression these attributes give makes up the basis for their meanings.

Trying to firm their literal meanings, while robbing them of their ways,
is like confirming something by negating it. Then, the verses that
convey the best and greatest meanings turn into incomprehensible and
illogical ones, as if Allah Almighty addressed them while they are
illiterate knowing nothing of the Book other than their wishful
thinking.

Interpretation
--------------

The Mutazilites are the ones who are famous for this theory. They
interpret the “hand” as blessing and power, and they interpret His
seating Himself firmly on the *Arsh* (Throne) as taking control and
demonstrating ability. The truth about interpreting this verse will
become clear when we quote statements in Al-Kashaf exegesis which was
written in a Mutazilite style.

One may resign in their regard by saying that interpreting the verses’
texts and apparent meanings, while not looking into the sources of the
descriptive attributes, is no less dangerous than the confirmation
theory, for interpretation may reach the extent of atheism and a denial
of the Sharia.[^13]

How ugly it is to say that “The apparent meaning of the Quran violates
sound reason, so quotation must be abandoned for the sake of clear
reason”!

Or one may say, “Upholding the principles of beliefs through mere
superficial meanings of the Quran and Sunnah without applying discretion
is the root of misguidance, so they advocated likening, personifying and
the like, acting on the superficial meaning of the verse that says ‘The
most Merciful One is firmly seated on the *Arsh’*.”[^14]

This is so because there is no verse in the Holy Quran the apparent
meaning of which contradicts sound reason. What they imagine to be
apparent is not so. Rather, the verse conveys a meaning that differs
from what they imagined. They mixed the literal apparent meaning with
the meaning of the verse as a whole.

The hand is obvious in the special part, but it is not so when evidences
are attached to it, making it appear in another meaning. One may praise
someone by saying, “He is open-handed”, or he may speak ill of him by
saying that he withholds his hand. Apparently, it is not a reference to
the hand, the bodily part, which we literally call as such. Rather, it
obviously connotes giving, generosity, or the opposite: miserliness and
stinginess even if one’s hand may actually be lopped off. If the
sentence is given a meaning differently from this, it will be giving it
a different connotation.

Thereupon, what those who interpret say must be examined. If their
interpretations are similar to what we have already stated, that is,
making a distinction between the meaning conveyed by the entire sentence
and the individual meaning, these do not interpret. Rather, they follow
the appearance of the Quran and Sunnah.

It is not right to name the explanation of the Holy Quran, in the light
of the evidences that exist in it, as interpretation. Rather, it is
following the texts and the appearances. But if their interpreting is
done by inventing meanings for the verses without such verses containing
evidences connected and leading to them, they indeed interpret.
Interpreting is no less serious in firming conclusions by either
personifying or complicating or confusing.

Briefly, what must be emphasized is that on the whole (adherence to the
Quran and Sunnah) is taken for granted. So, everyone must follow the
Holy Quran without making any adjustments or alterations, without
behaving on his own or interpreting. As regarding the smaller issue,
that is, identifying what is apparent and what is not, all bad
consequences are removed through it.

Had the leaders of the Islamic sects and intellectuals abandoned their
advance views and inherited ideologies and instead focused on diagnosing
what is apparent and what is not according to sound criteria, an end
would have been put to people’s arguments and to debates about the
attributes which went on for hundreds of years. Those debates originated
from nothing other than preferring inclinations to the truth.

Procedure According to the Testifying Concept
---------------------------------------------

The truth about this theory is a verse’s meaning, objective and
testifying (not depicting) gist then describing the most Praised One
through the overall concept that we understand without firming the
literal meaning of attributes or their interpretation.

Explanation: Vocabulary words are judged and used by individuals. Words
in sentences have another appearance. Both appearances may unite with or
contrast each other. Undoubtedly, if you say “lion”, it will be
understood as a reference to a beast. Also, if you say, “I saw a lion in
the woods,” the same meaning will come to mind as that from the single
word.

But if you say, “I saw a lion shooting (darts),” your statement will
convey a different literal and individual meaning from the word, which
is the predatory beast. Rather, it will be understood contrarily to the
outer appearance. Conveying it’s meaning and interpreting it as a hero
shooting (arrows) during a fighting is explaining the appearance of the
sentence without interpretation.

If a genuine Arab hears this verse of poetry spoken by a poet:

*… With a lion toting its weapon, experienced, having pads, its nails
unclipped…*

He will not doubt that by “lion” a valiant hero is meant who forces
himself through the fighting fronts, not the predatory beast. The same
happens if he hears someone saying,

*A lion against me, while in the wars he is an ostrich that is easy to
scare, it jumps out of fear if it hears a while.*

He will not hesitate to think that the sought meaning of the above verse
is a man who pretends to be brave before the weak, who is scared and who
turns on his heels on meeting heroes. We are not right if we accuse one
who interprets both verses as referring to a brave one or one who
pretends to be brave that he interprets. Rather, he confirms the meaning
without interpretation or alteration.

We have to be acquainted with confirming the meaning and fixing it for
Allah, Glory belongs to Him, rather than sticking to the literal
imagined meaning, confirming or denying it as having anything to do with
Allah, Praise belongs to Him. Had these folks looked for the meaning of
the verses stripped of prior notions, they would have come to know the
confirming appearance and fixed it for Allah, Praise belongs to Him,
without any stigma of interpretation or mishandling or the dire
consequence of personifying and likening Him.

In order to show you an example of this type of research, we will focus
on the sources of whatever falls in the field of discussion between
those who firm and those who interpret. We will keep doing so until it
becomes clear that confirming the meaning adopted by those who confirm,
and interpreting and dealing with this norm that the interpreters have
committed, is neither sound nor complete. Rather, there is only
confirmation that He cannot be personified, seen as ambiguous or
interpreted.

His Arsh, Praise Belongs to Him, and How He firmly Seats Himself on It
----------------------------------------------------------------------

One of His Attributes, Praise belongs to Him, is that He firmly seats
Himself on His *Arsh* (Throne). This description occurs in many verses.
It is repeated in the Holy Quran twenty-two times. The word “*Arsh*”
exists once, and the rest of verses refer (indirectly) to His *Arsh*,
Praise belongs to Him, save in two verses:

***“… (She is) provided with every requisite, and she has a magnificent
throne” (Qur’an, 27:23)***

and:

***“He raised his parents high on the throne” (Qur’an, 12:100).***

His being “firmly seated” occurs twelve times. With the exception of
three verses, they all refer to the most Praised One firmly seating
Himself on the *Arsh*.

People of hadith, supported by al-Ashari, have claimed that the verses
are clear in their indication that the most Praised One has a Throne and
that He firmly seats Himself on it but it is not known how. Those who
advocate anthropomorphism endorsed the theory of the hadith folks of
accepting the superficial meaning without saying that the “how” is
unknown.

This matter stirred in Islamic circles a great deal of fuss and a
dispute between the attributers and the interpreters. We say: Had the
researchers carefully discerned these verses stripped of their inherited
beliefs, they would have understood their implications. They do not
support those who describe His attributes and who say that He, Praise
belongs to Him, has a throne, a seat having legs placed in the heavens
on which Allah sits, while “how” is either known or unknown.

And they would not have supported the interpreters who explain the verse
as meaning that it needs another verse to prove that it means something
else other than its apparent meaning. Rather, the evidences that exist
in some of these verses vest on the verse an appearance that conveys the
desired meaning without violating the dignity of the revelation, nor
does it refer to or employ interpretation. The verses do not need
interpretation, that is, understanding them as having meanings that the
appearances of the verses do not convey.

There is no doubt that the literal meaning of the *Arsh* is known to
everyone without any confusion.

Ibn Faris has said, “The *Arsh* is one term that indicates the loftiness
of something built, then it is used metaphorically. Al-Khalil (ibn Ahmed
al-Farahidi, the renown linguist) has used the term ‘the king’s seat’
which is correct. Allah Almighty has said,

***“… He raised his parents high on the throne” (Qur’an, 12:100).***

Then it was used metaphorically: One’s command and caretaking is labeled
as an *arsh*. If he is deposed, it is said that his *arsh* collapsed.
Zuhair has composed this verse of poetry:

*You went to the rescue of the coalitions whose arsh collapsed,*
*And did so to Thubyan whose feet slipped away from the sandal.”*[^15]

“Firmly seating” is known in the language; it is empowering and
enabling. Al-Raghib has said the following in his Mufradat: “Firmly
seated is seen in two ways: One of them is rendered to two doers and
more such as: Zaid and Amr are equal in such-and-such a thing. The
Almighty has said, ‘They are not equal with Allah’. The second is that a
thing being straight by itself, as in the verse:

***“Endowed with wisdom, he appeared (in a stately form)” (Qur’an,
53:6),***

‘When you are seated stately…’, ‘… so you may seat yourselves on their
backs’ and ‘… when it is firm on its stem…’ All convey the meaning of
control such as in this verse:

***“(Allah) the Most Gracious is firmly established on the throne (of
authority)” (Qur’an, 20:5).”***[^16]

Our focus is that the firm establishment in the verse cited above does
not indicate an apparent sense of sitting, on depending on something.
Rather, it means control, full ability, a connotation for the expanse of
His ability and management. The establishment is used in this sense in
many verses of poetry. Al-Akhtal said the following verses in praise of
Bishr, brother of Abdul-Malik ibn Marwan, when the latter took charge of
Iraq:

*Then Bishr seized control of Iraq*
*Without a sword or blood to shed.*[^17]

Another poet said,

*When we rose and took control of them,*
*We left them prey to eagles and to beasts.*

What is meant by the first verse is Bishr taking control of Iraq, and in
the second verse there is a reference to vanquishing the foe. Height
here is not physical; it is an abstract.

If all this is known, we say that if we adopt the literal meaning of the
*Arsh*, as one would have done when he reads this verse by the most
Praised One:

***“… and she has a magnificent throne” (Qur’an, 27:23),***

we must say that Allah, Praise is due to Him, has a throne like that of
kings and sultans. It is then that the meaning of His seating Himself on
it becomes possible.

But if we abandon this meaning and say that the apparent meaning is
truly believing in the verse literally, which comes to mind from the
verse as a whole after discerning the evidences that surround the
sentence, the verse will connote His taking control of His domain in the
life of this world and in the Hereafter and His management without help
from anyone at all.

The sentences that occur in many verses talking about His firming
Himself on the *Arsh* indicate that the sought meaning is the second,
not the first. They confirm that the objective is His management in a
way which overwhelms everything, be it minutely small or magnanimous,
and that the most Praised One is the Creator and also the Administrator.

In order to explain the extent of His administration, the truth of which
nobody can grasp, He made a comparison between what is conceived and
what is felt. This is the management of kings and sultans of their
kingdoms as they recline on their thrones surrounded by their ministers.
But their management is legislated, canonized, whereas His management is
creative.

Two matters provide evidence to the above:

**First:** The most Praised One refers in many verses to management
after stating His seating Himself on the *Arsh*. He once provides the
word “management” and once His testimony and another reality. As
regarding the reference to managing per se, the most Praised One says,

***“Truly your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in
six days and is firmly established on the throne (of authority),
regulating and governing all things. No intercessor (can plead with Him)
except with His leave. This is Allah your Lord; therefore, worship Him:
Will you not celebrate His praises?” (Qur’an, 10:3)***

***“Allah is He Who raised the heavens with no pillars that you can see;
He is firmly established on the throne (of authority); He has subjected
the sun and the moon (to His law)! Each runs (its course) for an
appointed term. He regulates affairs, explaining the Signs in detail, so
that you may believe with certainty in the meeting with your Lord”
(Qur’an, 13:2).***

***It is Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth, and all
between them, in six days, and He is firmly established on the throne
(of authority): You have none, besides Him, to protect or intercede (for
you): will you then not receive admonishment? He regulates (all) affairs
from the heavens to the earth” (Qur’an, 32:4-5).***

In the first verse, the most Praised One arranges His phrase “firmly
established on the throne” so the meaning may be “established (Himself)
on the throne of management.” In the second verse, after mentioning some
(aspects) of management, getting the sun and the moon to do as He
instructs them…, He provides a total command for His management when He
says “regulating and governing all things”, similarly to the case with
the third verse.

As regarding reference to the truth of His management without naming it,
it is like this statement of the most Praised One:

***“Your Guardian-Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth
in six Days and is firmly established on the throne (of authority): He
draws the night over the day like a veil, each seeking the other in a
rapid succession: He created the sun, the moon and the stars, (all)
governed by laws under His command. Is it not His to create and to
govern? Blessed be Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds!”
(Qur’an, 7:54).***

He says, “He draws the night over the day like a veil” to refer to the
reality of His management, to provide us with examples for it, then He
explains for us a total principle when He says: “Is it not His to create
and to govern?”, that is, it is to Him that both creating and governing
are rendered.

You may measure on both of these groups the rest of verses. In all of
them, there is a hint to the management matter either with a word or a
testimony to it, even His saying, the most Praised One that He is,

***“Then, when one blast is sounded on the trumpet, the earth is moved,
and its mountains*** ***are crushed to powder in one stroke. On that
Day, the (great) event shall come to pass, and the sky will be rent
asunder, for it will be flimsy that Day, and the angels will be on its
sides, and that Day, eight [angels] will bear your Lord's throne above
them all. That Day you will be brought to Judgment: Not a single one of
your acts that you hide will remain concealed” (Qur’an, 69:13-18).***

The *Arsh* in this verse is one of management, of administering the
affairs of the domain on a Day when none judges save He. The most
Exalted One has said,

***“...Whose dominion will it be that Day? God's, the One, the Supreme!”
(Qur’an, 40:16).***

The most Praised One has also said,

***“(On) the Day the trumpet is blown, the dominion will be His”
(Qur’an, 6:73).***

These verses indicate one meaning: depicting the control of the
Almighty’s judge on that horrific day. The most Praised One has said,

***“Is not the command His? And He is the swiftest in taking account”
(Qur’an, 6:62),***

and

***“There, the (only) protection comes from Allah, the True One. He is
the best to reward, and the best to grant success” (Qur’an, 18:44).***

One who ponders on these verses will find out that they aim at one fact:
The creation of the heavens and earth did not render their Creator too
weak to administer and manage the affairs. As for His “seating” Himself
on the throne, in its literal sense, it is not what these verses mean at
all.

**Second:** The expression of firm sitting on the throne occurs in seven
verses jointly with the mention of one of His deeds, which is the
raising of the heavens without pillars, or the creating of the heavens
and earth and what is in-between them in six days, or the like. This
proves that what is meant by it is not a place to sit but seizing and
controlling the whole world. Just as there is no partner with Him in
creating and bringing into being, there is also no partner with Him in
ruling and controlling. For this reason, He restricts management to His
own self just as creating exclusively belongs to Him:

***“Indeed, it is He Who creates and Who governs. Blessed be Allah, the
Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds!” (Qur’an, 7:54).***

Remaining stagnant at the meanings of individual words, abandoning
contemplating and delving deeply into their meanings, is an innovation
that leads to obvious apostasy. Even one who interprets this verse,
falls into the dire consequence of *shirk* and its traps:

***“There is nothing whatever like Him” (Qur’an, 42:11).***

Relying on the traditions narrated by Ibn Khuzaymah and those who follow
him is relying on roots that are traced to the Jews and Christians.
Ar-Razi has said the following about Ibn Khuzaymah and his book, which
is known as *Tawhid*: “Be informed that Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Khuzaymah
cited our fellows’ argument through this verse: ‘There is nothing
whatever like Him’ in the book which he called *Tawhid* which, in fact,
is a book about *shirk*, objecting to them. I remember the gist of his
statement after deleting the verbosity because he was a man who used to
stumble in his speech, of a limited comprehension and a feeble
mind.”[^18]

Due to the countless references to likening and personifying, the
discussions about fate and fatalism, which it contains, Dr. Ahmed Amin
has said,

“In my opinion, had the teachings of the Mutazilites prevailed till this
day, the Muslims would have had a different stance in history from their
present one, and they would have been incapacitated by surrender;
fatalism would have paralyzed them and complacency would have
immobilized them.”[^19]

In my opinion, had the freedom of thought prevailed among the Muslims,
had the Muslims risen above any prior notion which they inherited from
the hadith advocates, had they looked at the Almighty’s Book and upheld
the authentic Sunnah narrated about the Prophet (peace and blessings of
Allah with him and his progeny) through the venue of his Household
(peace with them), whom the Messenger identified in his consecutively
reported tradition known as hadith al-thaqalayn (hadith of the two
weighty things, i.e. the Holy Quran and the Ahl al-Bayt)…, the Muslims
would have had a status in history which is different from the present
one.

In the light of the above determined criterion and balance can you
interpret the text of the Holy Quran when it refers to the countenance,
eye, hands, side (of the Almighty), when He comes and goes, ascends and
descends and the like without violating its dignity and without arriving
at cold, inaccurate and superficial interpretations of its verses. You
will then follow the norm of believing in these verses but not literally
or as some people imagine.

Countenance of the Most Praised One
-----------------------------------

You have already come to know that al-Ashari has said the following in
his book titled Al-Ibana: “Allah has a face without how just as He has
said,

***‘But the Face of your Lord shall abide (forever) full of majesty,
bounty and honor’ (Qur’an, 55:27).”***

He means to prove that Allah, all Praise is due to Him, has a face in
the literal meaning of the word. Running away from coining a similitude
for it, he appends to his statement the phrase “without how”.

Those who interpret believe that this verse must be interpreted. They
say that it has to be interpreted through itself. But what those who
interpret have said, though accurate in its outcome, the verse needs no
interpretation. Rather, it needs it if we suppose that the face appears
as the specific organ. If it appears, because of the evidence that we
will mention, in the same thing, in its person, it does not need
interpretation, and the apparent meaning will be applied.

The evidence for the above is that the face, as we will discuss, comes
in the sense of a special physical part; it comes to mean the self. Ibn
Faris has said, “One may be referred to by pointing out to his face as
has been said (in poetry):

*I seek Allah’s forgiveness for sins beyond my count indeed,*
*Lord of the servants, His is the face and the deed.”*[^20]

Perhaps the face expression connotes the self. Man’s face, or anything’s
“face”, is his/its full reality in the eyes of the beholder. For this
reason, if one sees someone else’s face, he says that he saw him, as if
by seeing the face he sees the whole self. Thereupon, the expression
needs to be understood by one of the two meanings to its likeness
because the second meaning, due to so much usage, has reached the extent
of reality.

The evidence points to the second meaning: The Almighty has described
the face as being “full of majesty, bounty and honor”, attributes which
belong to the Lord, that is, His own Self, not attributes of the face, I
mean a portion of a whole. Had the face here meant the specific part,
the “majesty, bounty and honor” should describe the Lord (to Whom they
are added).

For this reason, we see that the most Praised One has made it
descriptive of what is added to it, in this case the Lord. In another
verse, the most Praised One says, “Blessed is the Name of your Lord, the
One with majesty, bounty and honor”. It is known that the “Name” is not
the one to which this description applies but to the One to Whose Face
the verse refers, that is, the same Lord. You will get an extensive
explanation when the most Praised One is discussed and that He is not a
body in the category of negative attributes.

There is a statement narrated about the greatest Messenger of Allah (S)
which is: “Allah created Adam in his form.” This is seen by some as
proving through similitude that Allah, the most Praised One, has a form
in the likeness of which He created Adam. But had these folks referred
to the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (as), they would have found out that this
hadith is chopped off. Al-Saduq, through his *isnad* to Imam Ali (as),
has said that the Prophet (S) heard a man saying this to another man:
“May Allah turn your face and that of anyone who looks like you ugly.”
The Prophet (S) said to the man, “Wait! Do not say it! Allah created
Adam looking like this man.”[^21]

That is to say, the Prophet (S) meant to say to the man, “You are
taunting this man as well as the man who looks like him: Adam (as).”

He has also quoted al-Hussain ibn Khalid as saying that he said the
following to Imam al-Ridha (peace with him): “O son of the Messenger of
Allah! People narrate saying that the Messenger of Allah said that Allah
created Adam according to His own image.” The Imam (as) said, “May Allah
wage war on them! They chopped off the beginning of the hadith. The
Messenger of Allah passed by two men taunting each other. He heard one
of them saying to the other, ‘May Allah turn your face and that of
anyone who looks like you ugly’, so he, peace and blessings of Allah
with him and his progeny, said to him, ‘O servant of Allah! Do not say
this to your brother. Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Praised,
created Adam similarly to his own creation.’”[^22]

Hands of the Most Praised One
-----------------------------

Imam al-Ashari has said, “Allah, Praise belongs to Him, has two hands
without how as He has said:

***“… whom I created with both My hands’ (Qur’an, 38:75).”***

He means to refer to the hand in its literal sense, individually, but in
order to avoid making a similitude for it, he goes on to say “without
how”.

Undoubtedly, if the hand or hands is/are referred to individually, one
will immediately conceive them as a physical body part. But this is an
individual appearance, and it is not followed except if it appears in a
way where it is correctly applied. But if both the term and what it
describes disagree with each other, what is followed is the second
option, for it may appear to be something else. Here is an explanation
for you:

It may appear as connoting power. The most Praised One says,

***“Remember Our servant David, the man of strength, for he always
turned (to Allah)” (Qur’an, 38:17)***

(where the original Arabic text of the phrase “the man of strength”
literally reads: “the man with the hand”). Undoubtedly, it is not meant
to refer to the particular body part but connotes strength. It is
similar to saying, “So-and-so has a hand over such-and-such” or “What
should I do with such a hand?” A poet has said,

*For what would you do, when attempting to reach what is high*
*One who has no hands at all to reach it by?!*

With such a meaning, the poet regards time and the wind as having hands.
It is said, “the hand of destiny”. A poet refers to strength by saying,
“In its left hand is its rein" due to its strength.

It may be obvious in the bliss such as one may say, "One has with me
many hands," that is, favors and acts of benevolence. Or he may say, "He
has with me a white hand," that is, a bliss. A poet has said, "He has
with me a hand and a blessing." So, is it right to interpret the hand in
both of these places as referring to this bodily part while charging
those who interpret it as connoting strength in the first place and a
bliss in the second of interpreting and distorting the verse? No, not at
all.

Thus, the accuracy of what we have said becomes obvious, that is, what
is followed is not the individual appearance but the connotation. Do you
not see how the most Praised One attributes “trickery”, “plotting” and
“forgetfulness” to Himself, Praise belongs to Him, in many verses
including this one:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَمْكُرُونَ وَيَمْكُرُ اللَّهُ، وَاللَّهُ خَيْرُ الْمَاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They plot and plan, and Allah also plans, but Allah is the best of
planners (Qur’an, 8:30)***

The individual and literal meaning of this word, i.e. مكر, is trickery.
It is known that tricking is the method of the incapacitated person,
Allah is High above it. But the obvious connotation prevents the
individual meaning because the verse and its likes serve the function of
describing causing problems, something which the Arabs and non-Arabs use
in their language a good deal.

We cannot apply the literal meaning in the pretext it must bear Allah's
speech as it shows and we must not interpret or alter it. We also say
that we must understand what appears to be the meaning of what Allah
says, but what they claim to be the appearance is not that of the verse
but of one word in the verse. What is followed is the connotation, the
meaning within the sentence, which is strength in the first place and
blessing in the second.

If you absorb what we have stated, this (phrase in the) verse must be
discerned: “… to what I have created in my own hands” since the scholars
of exegesis have opinions about it:

a) The hand as meaning ability

b) The hand as meaning a blessing

He gave them the meaning that Allah's power is one. So, what is the need
to follow it with the phrase “with My own hand”, especially since the
blessings of Allah, Praise belongs to Him, are countless, so why did He
refer to His hand?

c) The hands as connoting ability and bliss; through this meaning does
the previous confusion disappear.

I say that had evidences indicated that the verse shows that its
apparent meaning must be taken, it would have been so, and you would not
have come to know that the appearance is the connotation, rather than
the individual meaning. But such evidences are not there according to
us.

d) Accepting the linguistic meaning, but it indicates that the most
Praised One, rather than anyone else, is the Master of His creatures.
Most actions done by those who have two hands are thus done, so doing
things with the hands has prevailed on all other actions that are done
through other ways, so much so that even what the heart does is referred
to as “It is what your hands have done”. If someone reviles someone
else, so he is dealt with accordingly, it will be said to him: “This is
what your hands have offered.” Even one who has lost his hands is told
that his hands have committed harm and his mouth had blown (into ashes
to spark fire). An example is this verse by the most Praised One:

***“Do they not see that it is We Who have created with Our hands for
them cattle which We have placed under their command?” (Qur'an,
36:71).***

If you come to know all of this, the verse's objective becomes clear
which is: The most Praised One denounces Satan saying: "Since you did
not prostrate to Adam, although I created him and brought him into
existence, and I know about his status and the reasons why I ordered you
and the angels to prostrate to him, did you feel haughty before Me, or
do you regard yourself to be among those whose status is higher than
his?"

The proof that creating with the hands connotes the most Praised One
undertaking the process of creation by Himself, not creating him and His
other creatures through bodily organs called “hands”, is that the reason
behind Satan refusing to prostrate to what the most Praise One had made
had nothing to do with His creating him (Adam) with the special bodily
part, the hand, so as if He had created him by something else, Satan
would not have objected and refused to prostrate to him.

The criterion is objection to prostrating to what the most Praised One
created without paying attention to the “tool” with which He created
him.

If it was said, “If He is the Initiator and the One Who creates all
humans, why did He specify Adam by saying that He created him by
Himself?”, we would say this:

Adding and specifying are done to demonstrate his (Adam's) honor and
distinction as well as how awful Satan’s deed was. It is similar to what
the most Praised One says in this verse:

***“Once I have fashioned him (in due proportion) and breathed into him
of My spirit, fall down in obeisance to him” (Qur'an, 29:15).***

Specifying the connection is to show how the most Praised One is
honoring him. It is also like this verse:

***“… sanctify My House for those who compass it around, or use it as a
retreat, or bow, or prostrate themselves (in it in prayer)” (Qur'an,
2:125).***

Similarly to what is stated above is the verse that says,

***“Truly those who pledge their fealty to you do no less than pledging
their fealty to Allah: God's hand is above their hands: Then anyone who
violates his oath does so to the harm of his own soul, and anyone who
fulfills what he has promised God, He will soon grant him a great
reward” (Qur'an, 48:10).***

So, when this sacred verse was revealed, did those “good ancestors” to
whom Ibn Taymiyyah attributes the linguistic meaning understand that the
Almighty was referring to His hand as being similar to that of His
creatures and that it was above the hands of the sahaba? Or did they
understand that He was referring to His power for the token of the
threat it contains against anyone who reneges, that he will be facing
dire consequences?

Had efforts collaborated to identify outer appearances, be they true
meanings or metaphorical ones, there would have been no need for making
any similitude or setting up any example, nor would have been any
confusing, interpreting or getting out of what is apparent. Rather, the
appearances would have been adopted in the senses through which all
linguists comprehend.

The same would have taken place had they only pondered on this sacred
verse of the most Praised One:

***“The Jews say, ‘God's hands are tied.’ Let their hands be tied up and
let them be cursed for the (blasphemy) they utter. Nay! His hands are
widely outstretched: He gives and spends (of His bounty) as He pleases”
(Qur'an, 5:67).***

They would have admitted that the purpose behind Allah spreading His
hands is not in the physical sense but as a reference to His generosity
and open-handedness. They would also have admitted the same if they
ponder on this verse of the most Praised One:

***“Do not (like a stingy person) make your hand tied to your neck, nor
stretch it forth to its utmost reach, so that you become blameworthy and
destitute” (Qur'an, 17:29).***

It is then that we would wonder: What difference is there between both
verses so that those who assert the attributes understand the first
verse as ordinary individuals would readily do then, in order to run
away from personifying Him, they follow their statements by saying
"without how"? At the same time, do these folks not doubt that the
meaning of the second verse is generosity and outgiving versus
stinginess and miserliness?

Up to here, it appears that the views held by the Hanbalis and Asharis,
in the field of fixing the descriptive attributes of Allah, the most
Praised One, are based on sticking to literal appearances and individual
meanings, being unaware of the fact that one who discerns the dialogues
will understand the confirming appearance through paying attention to
the evidences connected to the speech as understood by the Arabs,
whether they agree with individual meanings or not.

Had they followed this restriction, they would have held the most
Praised One as being above these bodily parts and these meanings that
they attribute to Him. We have contended ourselves in this regard to
explaining the three expressions: the *Arsh* (throne) and His seating
Himself firmly on it, the countenance (face) and the "hand". In the
light of what we have explained about the restriction, we can explain
all other expressions in the Holy Quran and authentic Sunnah.

[^1]: Al-Shahristani, Al-Milal wal Nihal, Vol. 1, p. 105. Notice the
rest of his statement in this regard, for it will familiarize you with
the extent of “awareness” of these anthropomorphists (who set up a
similitude with the Almighty).

[^2]: Al-Ashari, Al-Ibana, p. 18.

[^3]: Notice our quotation about Abu Hanifah, al-Shafii and Ibn Kathir
in the chapter on “the connection of confirming and rendering”, pp.
46-49 [of the reference cited above].

[^4]: Al-Shahristani, Al-Milal wal Nihal, Vol. 1, p. 105.

[^5]: Ibn Taymiyyah, Largest collection of major dissertations المجموعة
الكبرى في مجموعة الرسائل الكبرى, p. 489.

[^6]: Abu Zuhrah, Tarikh al-Madhahib al-Islamiyya (history of Islamic
sects), Vol. 1, p. 218.

[^7]: Ibid., pp. 219-220.

[^8]: Iljaa al-Awamm.

[^9]: Al-Shahristani, Al-Milal wal Nihal, Vol. 1, pp. 92-93; this an
abridged text.

[^10]: Ar-Razi, Asas at-Taqdis, p. 223.

[^11]: Al-bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 1, p. 7, in a chapter about iman
(conviction).

[^12]: Al-Futuhat al-Makkiyya, Vol. 4, p. 928. He is followed by Ibn
Taymiyyah in making such a critique as he transmitted it while
discussing the relationship between confirming and rendering, p. 60.

[^13]: The mentor professor, may his shade prolong, has accomplished the
task when he discussed interpretation in the Introduction to the 5th
Volume of his Quranic encyclopedia titled Mafahim al-Quran, pp. 12-16.

[^14]: Sharh Umm al-Barahin, p. 82. Similarly is p. 68 of Alaqat
al-Ithbat wal Tafwidh (the relationship between confirming and
rendering).

[^15]: Ibn Faris, Mujam Maqayees al-Lugha, Vol. 4, p. 264.

[^16]: Al-Raghib, Mufradat, while discussing the “sawa” word.

[^17]: Al-Bidaya wal Niyaha, Vol. 9, p. 7.

[^18]: Imam ar-Razi, Tafsir, Vol. 27, p. 150.

[^19]: Ahmed Amin, Dhuha al-Islam, Vol. 3, p. 70.

[^20]: Ibn Faris, Al-Maqayees, Vol. 6, p. 88, in discussing the “face”
item.

[^21]: Al-Saduq, Al-Tawhid, Chapter 12, hadith 10, p. 152.

[^22]: Ibid., Chapter 12, hadith 11, p. 153.


