Author's Foreword For The New Edition
=====================================

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful***

Thanks are due to Allah for His care.

Since seeing the light, the book titled *Al-Ilahiyyat* was met with a
great deal of acceptance and circulation by scholarly assemblies due to
the attributes it enjoys the most significant of which are the
following:

1. Methodology of Submission
----------------------------

We have submitted researches of the principles (of the creed) in the
form of a series according to a method that agrees with rational and
logical sequences of topics of logic, referring each research to its
suitable place. We started with general discussions about knowing the
creed and its principles, then we looked into the evidences that point
out to the Maker, and then to His Attributes. In them, we listed
researches of justice, mutability, destiny, fate, determinism and the
freedom to choose. Then we discussed the general Prophetic mission, the
specific Prophetic mission, imamate and the Return.

2. Research’s Progression
-------------------------

In our discussion of each principle, we reviewed its linguistic
definitions, then its idioms. If it has necessary logical precepts, we
submitted them, such as the issue of mentally judging what is good and
what is ugly with regard to researches in wisdom. Then we delved into
the root of the research, stating the branches of its fruits, the most
important questions about it, the questions that may be raised about it,
answering them all.

An example is the conclusion of the research of the message's
universality and the conclusion from among general researches relevant
to the Prophetic mission, the questions about the Imamate of al-Mahdi,
peace be with him, after discussing them, and questions about the Return
after submitting its researches, in addition to many others. This has
granted the researches flexibility, coloring them with practicality and
getting them out of the dry status of comparison.

An example for this sort is the submitting of samples and of analyzing
them as is quite often noticed in the research about the Holy Quran
being a miracle, in addition to submitting questions to the researcher
so he may contemplate on answering them. In this process, we noticed in
some places that the branches of some researches are elaborated on in a
way the listing of which falls within the main researches, mandating the
divergence among their parts and the loss of the title and the main idea
in them.

For this reason, we have had to list them separately in a research in
special chapters as we have done with the topic of *al-badaa*
(mutability) and that of decree and destiny, as well as the research of
obligation versus freedom of choice. These are regarded as branches of
the divine wisdom. We, therefore, listed each of them in a special
chapter.

3. Comprehensive Deduction
--------------------------

This is clear from the title of the book. We reviewed the evidences in
the light of the guidance of reason, of the Holy Book and of the
purified Sunnah. We also reviewed the evidences of the scholars of logic
and of philosophers. We have discussed whatever needs a discussion,
making this book unique.

There are other characteristics that the kind researcher can notice,
such as the ease of expression, the pursuit of the simplest meaning, and
the avoiding of complication and ambiguity.

When the book was printed, all its copies were sold out immediately, so
it was reprinted twice in its original form, and all of this took place
in only a couple of years. During this time period, it has been
facilitated for us through a favor of the Almighty to correct and
explain many of its statements. We have fully edited the book by setting
up Indices for its Quranic verses, Prophet's traditions, verses of
poetry, renown personalities, references, etc.

Due to the book’s large size, we were of the view to divide it into four
volumes instead of two large ones so it could be easier to handle and to
benefit from.

Here, we have to remind you that we prepared the book titled *Nadariyyat
al-Marifa* (Theory of Knowledge), which we compiled from the lectures of
*allama* Professor Subhani, may his shade prolong, to be a prelude for
this book; therefore, it ought to be regarded as paving the way for
studying this group of beliefs and it must not be overlooked.

In conclusion, I find it incumbent on me to thank my spiritual son,
Sheikh Rashad Shuman al-Amili, may Allah look after him, for the effort
which he exerted in extracting and organizing the book's Indices, and to
thank the International Center for Islamic Studies for its effort to
present the book in its new outfit.

Praise is due to Allah, Lord of the Worlds.

**Hassan Makki al-Amili**
Holy Shawwal 1411 A.H./April 1991


