Chapter 1: General Principle Precepts
=====================================

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful***

We would like to preface our logical researches by stating a number of
useful precepts which are indispensable for realizing the reality of
religion and its concept, its roots in the human nature, its role in
man's life, in addition to recognized knowledge in Islam.

1. Man's Life and Moral Values
------------------------------

We cannot imagine anyone who has some power of reasoning and who still
violates and opposes industrial progress; rather, such power leads him
to support the technology that brings him comfort and prosperity.

But the problem in this era of mankind’s life stems from another
position, which is: the West's use of this technology for the benefit of
production and distribution while sacrificing ethics and human feelings
in order to achieve this goal.

### A Call Heard from Afar

During these critical circumstances with regard to any idealistic
individual, people who have living consciences and enlightened hearts
have started complaining about this status that surrounds man,
dismissing the artificial life of the machine. They have felt that man
has reached the lowest rung of moral values and that the life of the
machine "has made the human energies and values a victim of production
and distribution" and does not let him reach happiness at all.

Rather, it leads him to earning money and wealth quickly while, at the
same time, it destroys values and principles, rendering them to loss.
From this onset, these folks have tried to vest a spiritual outlook on
man's life so the material life may be balanced with the moral one.

While blessing the step of these scholars, we would like to remind them
that the Holy Quran has described the material life which is empty of
spirituality and values as a vision that revolves between sports,
diversion, decoration and boasting and ends up in the multiplication of
wealth and offspring. The most Praised One has said,

***"Know (all of) you that the life of this world is only play and
amusement, pomp, mutual boasting and multiplying, (in rivalry) among
yourselves, riches and children. Here is a similitude: Rain and the
growth which it brings forth delight (the hearts of) the tillers; soon
it withers; you will see it grow yellow; then it becomes dry, and it
crumbles away. But there is, in the hereafter, a severe penalty (for the
wrongdoers), and [there is also] God's forgiveness and (His) good
pleasure (for His devotees). And what is the life of this world but
goods and chattels of deception?" (Qur'an, 57:20)***

You can see that He, the Praised One, divides material life into five
parts as if the latter revolve round these steps:

1. Sporting

2. Diversion

3. Adornment and Beautification

4. Boasting

5. Accumulation of Wealth and Offspring

Scholars believe that each of these parts occupies a measure of man's
lifetime then thrusts to the next part according to the completion of
his age and the strengthening of his energies. Perhaps each one of them
consumes eight years of one's lifetime; the fifth part continues with
him thereafter up to the conclusion of his life and does not part with
him till death.

This sacred verse, moreover, compares the life which is empty of values
to a green plant the greenness and goodness of which do not last: Soon,
the green plant turns yellow from which one is repelled.

The similitude of one who is drowned in the quagmire of matter is like
this same plant: One starts his life with greenness and goodness, then
he settles in the end as a stench in a deep pit of the earth save one
who conjoined his material life with a spiritual life which does not
come to a conclusion by his death and the departure of his soul from his
body.

The Holy Quran also portrays the material life in another way: It says,

***"The unbelievers' deeds are like a mirage in sandy deserts which are
parched with thirst [and which he] mistakes for water; until when he
comes to it, he finds it to be nothing. But he finds Allah (ever) with
him, and Allah will pay him his account, and Allah is swift in
reckoning" (Qur'an, 24:39).***

Material life, in its freshness, manifests itself as a realistic thing
that has elegance and goodness. It lures one just like a thirsty person
is lured by a mirage. When he reaches the end of his lifetime, he comes
to know that it was nothing realistic with which his heart would feel
comfortable.

Human life undertakes the sound path if it interacts with the spiritual
side so that religion, values and ethics may assume a lofty status in
his life just as his material life has this anticipated status. This
reality, that is, one's attitude towards religion, manifests itself if
we familiarize ourselves with two matters:

1. What is religion? What is its reality?

2. What is its role in man's life?

2. What is Religion? What are its Roots in the Human Nature?
------------------------------------------------------------

Religion does not attempt to take humans back to ignorance and
backwardness. Rather, it is an intellectual revolution that leads man to
perfection and elevation in all fields. These fields are nothing but its
own four dimensions:

A. Correcting and cultivating ideologies and beliefs from whims and
superstitions

B. Improving social relationships

C. Abolishing racial and ethnic differences

Man reaches these four goals in the shade of belief in Allah. Such a
belief never stops being aware of responsibility, below is the
explanation of this statement.

In the first field, I mean reforming ideologies and the creed, we say: A
rationalizing individual cannot live without a creed. Not even those who
vest upon their method the stamp of apostasy and raise their voices with
slogans of atheism can live without a creed as they explain the cosmos
and life. Here below, religion's theory about the reality of the cosmos
and life is presented for you:

Religion interprets the cosmic reality and all material systems as the
masterpieces of a High Existing One Who created matter, formed it and
defined it with laws and limits, subjecting it to a system of precision.
The Maker is not similar to what He makes; the Giver is not the same as
the taker.

It also interprets human life as having come on the cosmic page not
randomly, and mankind was not created for nothing. Rather, there is a
higher goal for having been created on this planet; a goal arrived at in
the shade of the teachings of the prophets and guides who were all sent
by the Creator in order to guide His creation.

This is religion's interpretation of the reality of the cosmos, the
secret of life. But a materialist tries to interpret the cosmos
differently saying:

"The first matter is innately ancient, and it is the one that granted
itself systems; it has no purpose, nor does man who lives therein."

In other words, according to the theory of the religious individual, the
cosmos has a beginning and an end; its existence came from Allah, Praise
to Him, just as its end, under the label of the Return, is also up to
Allah Almighty.

But the cosmos, according to the theory of the materialist, lacks the
"beginning and the end", that is, he is unable to sketch its beginning
or answer these questions: How did it become a reality? How was it made
and brought into being? Rather, whenever you ask him, he answers you
with "I do not know". He also cannot explain its end and purpose. If you
ask him about that, he will answer by saying, "I do not know".

Moreover, this world according to the materialist philosopher is like a
pierced manuscript. Leaflets fell from its beginning to its end, tossing
it into the frame of ambiguity; therefore, man does not know its
beginning or its end. The materialist philosopher is ignorant of the
world's beginning and conclusion, and no answer comes out of him save "I
do not know".

In order to rephrase the above in a third statement, the three following
questions have lingered in man’s mind since he distinguished his right
hand from the left; and these are:

1. Where did it come from?

2. Where is it going?

3. Why was it created?

These three questions are answered by the religious philosopher with
solid answers which will become quite clear in this dissertation, and
they are summed up thus. The beginning came from Allah, and the end of
the course is Allah, the most Praised One:

***"We belong to Allah, and to Him shall we return" (Qur'an, 2:156).***

The goal is to be adorned with values and ethical principles, and to be
characterized by His Names and Attributes, Praise to Him. But the
materialist is unable to answer these questions and does not bring forth
anything convincing.

Based on this, we have said that religion has a role in correcting
ideologies and doctrines. While making a comparison between the
religious ideology and the materialistic system in answering these three
questions, one comes to know that intellectual perfection is achieved in
the shade of religion because it unveils broad horizons before his
mentality and way of thinking, whereas the materialist fills one’s mind
with ignorance and ambiguity, even leads him to superstitions.

How can the matter grant its own self-systems? Is it possible that a
union can be made between the cause and the causation, the doer and the
deed, the one who causes and whatever he causes?

This much is relevant to religion's role in the field of correcting
ideology and belief.

In the second field, what is relevant to religion nurturing lofty
principles for ethics, we say that religious beliefs are regarded as the
balance of ethical principles. Adherence to values and to their
cultivation never stops being one of the difficulties and pains which
man finds difficult to bear except when the spiritual factor facilitates
them and removes their difficulty for him, such as sacrificing along the
path of righteousness and justice, the safeguarding of trusts and the
assisting of the downtrodden.

These are some of the ethical principles the authenticity of which
cannot be denied, but embodying them in the society requires pains and
faces difficulties, and it follows deprivation of some pleasures. So,
what guarantee is there to achieve these principles?

To believe in Allah, the Praised One, and that the implementation of
each ethical principle yields a great reward which man earns in the life
hereafter, is the best factor for attracting man and making him eager to
carry it out and thus be its embodiment during his short life (on
earth). Without such a belief, ethics would become shreds of advice and
dry admonishments: There is no guarantee that they will be acted upon.

In this regard, Will Durant, the contemporary historian[^1], says, "Had
it not been for religion, ethics would have manifested themselves more
like economic exchanges, and the goal behind them would have been
winning temporal success, so much so that had success and winning been
the antitheses of values, they would have swerved from them due to the
goal behind them being on the side of non-values. Instead, it is the
religious belief that leaves the sense of responsibility in the spirit
of man."[^2]

In the third field, which is relevant to firming social relationships,
we would like to state in it what we stated in support of lofty ethics.
The religious doctrine supports the social principles because the
religious person regards them as obligations, and man will by himself be
obligated to function according to them and to implement them.

But such principles among those who are not religious are not adhered to
except through the imposition of a material force. At that time, the
social principles do not enjoy any executive guarantee, and this is
observed by those who have witnessed the way of life of materialistic
nations that do not commit themselves to a beginning or to an end.

As regarding the fourth field, I mean the abolishment of excessive
racial and ethnic differences imposed on the shoulders of the
downtrodden through force, authority, enticement, ignorance and the
distortion of facts, we say that religion regards all humans as having
been created for one purpose. Everyone, as far as the materialist is
concerned, is innately and essentially like all other teeth of the comb,
and he does not see any sense in discriminating or distinguishing or
looking high at some while looking down at others. Moreover, he sees no
sense in the presence of people who are bloated as others perish due to
starvation and deprivation.

These are the four fields in which religion plays a role and where it
has a clear impact. Is it right, having halted at these amazing impacts,
that we should neglect searching for it, placing it in a corner of
oblivion?

But there is something quite interesting to which we would like to
attract the reader's attention. Not every doctrine using the label of
religion is able to create these legacies and be innovative. Rather,
these can be handled by any religious doctrine based on reason, one that
reaches us through truthful prophets.

It is in such a doctrine that we find motion and life, and it is in an
image other than itself that religion becomes superstitious beliefs
manifesting themselves in the form of monasticism, negative inclinations
and other bad influences which we sense in religious doctrines that have
nothing to do with inspiration or with men of a true creed.

When the Western thinker accuses religion of being a factor of
backwardness and degeneration, one that opposes progress and ascendance,
he aims at such religious doctrines.

There is something else, which is interesting, too. A true creed
abolishes the negative differences that are not relevant to logical
foundations. As regarding the positive distinctions which are not
separate from members of mankind, these are not abolished at all. Just
as the fingers of the same hand differ from each other, humans likewise
differ with regard to the power of reason, intellect, movement and
activity.

The differences that stem from man's own nature are incapable of
deletion and alteration, and what religion rejects and deletes from
life's sphere are the distinctions that stem out of power and authority.

Up to here, we have come to know religion’s true aspects, and it is time
now to get to know its roots in man's innate nature.

### Religion and Disposition

Believing in the principle and going beyond nature is one of the
instinctive matters in which man's creation was kneaded just as were
many inclinations and instincts.

I can say that in general, man's realizations are divided into two
kinds:

1. Realizations that are born out of external factors about man's
existence. Without these realizations, mankind would never have become
familiar with factors such as physical, chemical and engineering laws.

2. Realizations that stem from within man and his disposition without an
external factor interfering to inspire them, such as man's
self-knowledge, his sense of hunger and thirst, desire to get married at
a certain age and the desire for money and position during periods of
his lifetime. These types of knowledge, if you wish you could call them
senses, stem out of man's inner self and the depths of his existence.
Psychologists claim that the inclination towards a principle falls under
this sort of knowledge.

Psychologists believe that the human psyche has four dimensions each of
which represents a principle for certain effects:

A. The spirit of exploration and fact-finding: This dimension of the
human spirit creates sciences and branches of knowledge. Without it,
since it was discovered on this planet, mankind would not have
progressed the distance of one inch in sciences and in the exploration
of facts.

B. Love for goodness, the trend towards doing good deeds and for being
righteous: For this reason, man finds in himself an inclination towards
goodness and righteousness as well as deterrence from evil and
corruption. Justice and equity are sought for everyone in general
atmospheres and circumstances, whereas injustice and inequity are
likewise abhorred. Add to these other actions that everyone describes as
either good or evil, finding within the depths of his nature an
inclination towards the first and a distancing from the other. This sort
of sense is the principle behind values and human ethics.

C. Man's passion for and relationship with goodness in fields of nature
and industry: Precision and good things, artistic paintings and
magnificent sculptures, all derive their elegance and goodness from this
dimension. Everyone finds within himself a sure love for great gardens
crowded with fragrant flowers and tall trees. He also finds in himself
an inclination towards nice handicrafts and love for a good-looking
human being. All these stem from this spirit with which man’s nature is
kneaded. At the same time, it creates arts in various fields.

D. The religious feeling, which is ignited among the youths, at the age
of adolescence: It calls man to believe that there is another world
beyond this world from which this world derives its existence, and that
man, in all his details, is attached to that world and is derived from
it. This fourth dimension, which sciences of psychology discovered in
the recent century and supported with various tests, is the focus of the
Holy Quran even centuries ago. It refers to it in its sacred verses some
of which are these:

***"So set your face steadily and truly towards the faith: (Establish)
God's handiwork according to the pattern on which He has made mankind"
(Qur'an, 30:30).***

The phrase "God's handiwork" is an explanation for the word "faith"
which precedes it, and it clearly indicates that faith, in the sense
believing in the Creator of the world and of mankind and that mankind's
fate is in His hand, is something upon the acceptance of which mankind
is created, and that man is created and made to have within him many
inclinations and instincts.

***"And [have We not] shown him the two ways [of right and wrong]?"
(Qur'an, 90:10).***

That is, the Almighty has familiarized man with the path of goodness and
with that of evil. It does not mean that such familiarizing is done
through prophets; rather, it is done by the Praised One Himself even if
it does not fall within the frame of prophets' teachings. This is so
because the Praised One says prior to that verse:

***"Have We not made a pair of eyes for him and a tongue, and a pair of
lips?" (Qur'an,*** ***90:8-9).***

Everything originated from His boons, the most Praised One, when He
created man and excelled in doing so.

If this proves anything, it proves that the theory which psychologists
discovered is the focus of the inspiration in a very clear way, its
conclusion is that religion, as a whole, is something instinctive: It
grows as man grows and attains guidance, and it is subject to
cultivation and nurturing as is the case with all inclinations and
instincts.

3. Role of Religion in Life
---------------------------

It has become clear from what we have started about the reality of
religion and its concept that it is something innate within man's
nature, but we have to know its role in life, and that it has a
significant impact on man's scientific and social life. So that the
reader may be familiar with the impact of religion in these vital
fields, we would like to point out some of them.

### A. Religion: Innovator of Sciences

We are reviewing in this research the extent of impact of both opposing
theories (theism versus atheism) about how the world came to be in the
discovering of facts and in the examining of the systems prevalent in
it, without actually demonstrating bias towards the accuracy of either
theory.

Undoubtedly, there are two juxtaposed theories in interpreting and
explaining the world, which can never agree with each other on anything,
and we will later explain which one of them is accurate. But our focus
here is on determining the impact of each of the theories on the
perfection and elevation of sciences:

**First Theory:** It depends on the world, from the atom to the
constellation, on the innovation of a great mind, a good existent, an
endless might and knowledge; He, in His knowledge and might, invented
the world and granted it life.

**Second Theory:** The world's matter is perpetual. Neither knowledge
nor might outside it has any making or influencing on it. Had there been
systems, they are the outcome of coincident or such scientific
suppositions which all share the statement that a blind and solid matter
outpours on itself systems and laws.

We do not want to focus on either of these proposed theories because the
truth will be manifested in the coming researches. Instead, we focus on
knowing which of these theories urges mankind to investigate, stirring
in his soul the spirit to look into himself.

Should we say that the world of the matter is an endlessly existing
thing in its knowledge and power, having invented the matter and applied
to it the systems and the laws due to His knowledge and the expanse of
His might?

Or should we say that matter remains perpetual and has nothing to do
with science and might. Had it had systems and laws, these are the
outcomes of chance or of the antitheses that rule over it (over matter)?
Is this not the hypothesis of materialist Marxists or something close to
it?

Which of these theories bears an impact on the progress and perfection
of sciences?

There is no doubt that if one who researches the cosmos is armed with
the first theory, he will not find in himself any impetus to investigate
or any sense that the world is not separated from systems and orders,
and that he has to examine them.

This is the opposite of the researcher who embraces the second theory
because chance or the antithesis among the parts of the matter does not
produce for sciences the imminent taking place of systems and orders
inside the matter so man could look for them. One Who researches the
world's systems and examines the facts that prevail in it cannot lean on
the study podium unless he believes in the first theory rather than in
the other.

This is what we have advocated in the beginning of the research, that
is, the religious doctrine creates sciences and encourages
investigation.

We have come to this result: Religion, in the sense belief in the world
results from knowledge and power (and knowledge *is* power), is a major
factor in the progress of human sciences. It stirs in the investigating
individual the spirit of diving deeply and in contemplating.

Yes, there is a question which may entertain the reader's mind: There
are many groups of advocates of materialism, such as those who
discovered the secrets and systems of nature; had atheism hindered the
steps of investigation and progress, how could these have reached their
discoveries and facts?

**The answer is this:** The slogans of these individuals, even though
they bear the mark of atheism, are only on their tongues; as for their
hearts, these beat differently. In other words, they believe deep in
heart in the world being subjected to a greater force that applies to it
systems and laws, the force that they are about to discover and with
which about to become familiar. Had it not been for such certitude and
belief in the world being subjected to this force, they would never have
believed that matter has systems and orders, and so have the earth and
the heavens (sky), what is near and what is far, even the stars and
constellations that are deeply located in the cosmos.

Their insistence on discovering the systems stems from the belief in
their existence. Both belief and submission do not take place except in
the case of one who thinks that the world is subject to a great force,
the one (force) with the knowledge and might. This “force” has created
the systems; otherwise, belief in the eternity of the matter and in the
wise systems being the product of chance does not mandate any surrender
to the existence of the systems in all parts of the world, the near and
the far.

In a more clear statement, every discoverer, prior to his discovery, has
this particular belief: Every atom in this world, be it living or dead,
near or far, contains a law which he wants to discover and to empty into
the mold of science. It is then that we ask: Where did this discoverer
get such submission and belief that this knowledge has a starting point
and a source? What is this starting point?

He may say, "I believe that the whole world is the innovation of a great
might that has tremendous knowledge and power and has created the world
through its knowledge, ability and wisdom." If he does, he will be
accurate in believing that each part of this world has a system because
the deed of the one, who has the knowledge, might and wisdom is not
separated from the systems where there is no imbalance or disorder.

But he may say, "I believe in the perpetuation of matter, and that solid
matter came to have a system in the shade of chance during very ancient
times." If so, he will be told that the belief in chance never
accompanies surrendering to a system one hundred percent. It is always
possible if either there is a system or there is none.

Interpreting 100% surrender to the existence of a system by believing in
chance is quite wrong because it is similar to interpreting definite
knowledge with something that does not cause sure knowledge but rather
mandates only a probability. This is so because belief in chance
initiates the probability that there is a system, not surrendering to
its existence. Therefore, there has to be surrendering to a cause other
than chance, and this is nothing but believing in a feeling and in a
power that has interfered to create the world and to bring it into
existence.

If you wish, you can pour this statement into a logical mold and say:
Every discoverer, before being busy discovering, surrenders to the
existence of orders and systems in this world which he wants to
discover. This is on the one hand.

On the other hand, the materialist sees the only factor for the
appearance of systems is chance. But it is not a factor that brings
about submission. Rather, the utmost that it produces is probability,
whereas the discoverer bears knowledge with systems: He does not think
of the probability that there is a system and an order.

Such submission must be interpreted as a second factor, which is nothing
but the world coming to be and is perpetuated due to eternal knowledge
and power.

### B. Religion: Pillar of Ethics

You have come to know about religion's role in sparking the spirit of
investigation in man. But it has another role in firming ethics and
fixing their roots in the society. Here is how:

There is no doubt that upholding ethics and adhering to moral values is
not separated from deprivation sometimes and from the abandonment of
one's pleasures in other times. It is then that we have to look for the
success factor on this battleground.

On the one hand, man is subjected to inclinations and aggressive
instincts that do not know a limit, and they want to sin and to attain
everything that is pleasurable and suitable, whether it agrees with or
opposes ethical values. This is something that is sensed by everyone
during many periods of his life.

On the other hand, the human nature inspires the safeguarding of values
and the acting upon ethics. This is what educators advocate. It is then
that one finds within himself a violent struggle against his
inclinations. Therefore, in order for him to succeed in this battle, he
needs a factor that tips the scales of the human nature, the nature that
inspires the safeguarding of ethics and the acting upon values. So, what
is this factor especially during the periods where no one is there to
watch over him, when the eyes are asleep, and when one is not asked
about what he is doing?

It is here that the religion manifests itself in the form of a strong
factor that tips the scales of ethics down and inspires one to act
according to values and to curb the reins of instincts. This is so
because one who has a religion believes that everything he does in this
life, be it good or bad, he will be held accountable for it by Allah
Almighty with the strictest and most precise judgment:

***"Nor is there (as much as) the weight of an atom on the earth or in
the heavens that is hidden from the knowledge of your Lord" (Qur'an,
10:61).***

The above case is the opposite of one who is an atheist and who does not
believe in any divine book or in accountability, whether in the life of
this world or in the hereafter. He does not see in the battle, where the
instincts fight and dispute within his own being, any deterrent for
violating the limits and ignoring the values other than an element the
impact of which is weak. This is called the human nature, which will
quickly be defeated by the flood of desires and fantasies. This is
tangible, and we need not prolong our discussion of it.

### C. Religion: Invincible Fortress in World's Fluctuations

Life on this planet is an ally of labor and exhaustion. One goes through
times of happiness and of pain. He loses loved ones and faces trials and
tribulations, in addition to other painful experiences of life that
split one's back. So, what solace is there as one faces the bitterness
of life?

I say that religion is the major solace that turns one into a firm
mountain in the face of painful events, unshakeable during afflictions,
immovable during calamities. Why is this so? It is due to two aspects.

**First:** He believes that what happens in the cosmos of good and evil
is a manifestation of the will of the Wise Creator Who does not do
anything except with wisdom, and Who does not act except upon an
interest: These calamities are bitter outwardly and sweet inwardly, even
if one does not sense it as such during the conditions of a tragedy and
an affliction, but he will become familiar with it after the covering is
removed and the facts become quite clear.

**Second:** If one perseveres as he faces calamities and welcomes them
with an open heart and a shining face, he will be rewarded by the
Praised One for his patience, firmness and straightforwardness and for
his acceptance of His judgment and destiny:

***"Convey glad tidings to those who patiently persevere, those who,
when afflicted with calamity, say, 'To Allah do we belong, and to Him do
we return.' They are the ones on whom God's blessings and mercy
(descend), and they are the ones who receive guidance" (Qur'an,
2:155-157).***

It is then that religion manifests itself as a medicine that soothes the
pains and alleviates the status of calamities, or perhaps these are even
welcomed with a smile and are wholeheartedly accepted. But the
materialist in the same situation has no balsam for his life's wounds,
has no cure for his disturbances, because he does not believe that
beyond the matter there is a world in which all people are gathered, a
place where one is rewarded for his perseverance and be awarded prizes
for his good deeds.

He believes that the cycle of the cosmos is limited by matter. It starts
from it and ends at it. So, he has no choice except to return to it, the
solid and blind that it is, one incapable of dressing man's wounds or
cheering his spirits.

For this reason, we see how suicide is quite common among such a group
of folks during calamities. As for the group that believes in the life
to come, in the hereafter, it thinks little of the pain of calamities
when they take place. Its members find solace with patience. They
anticipate rewards, contrarily to the materialists who think too much of
them and who bend before them.

Had it been accurate for us to compare what is rational with what is
tangible, emptying the lofty meanings in narrow molds of the senses, we
must not be blamed if we say that religion, when one faces painful
torrents that split the back and cause an explosion, is like a safety
valve in steam furnaces. Their steam increases more and more.

So, had it not been for the safety valve that lets excess steam out, the
furnace would explode in the factory and terribly kill and awfully burn
people. Our excuse for bringing about an example such as this is that it
falls in the category of comparing what is sensible with what is
tangible.

4. Recognized Knowledge
-----------------------

The first step towards understanding religion is to be familiar with the
recognized knowledge in it. Realistic religion does not regard every
piece of knowledge as sound and reliable. Rather, it requires it to meet
the following conditions:

a. The definite knowledge that never ceases to be emphatic, rejecting
knowledge which comes through presumption, whim or doubt. The most
Praised One says,

***"…Do not follow that of which you have no knowledge, for (on the Day
of Reckoning) inquiries will be made into every act of hearing or seeing
or (feeling in) the heart" (Quran, 17:36).***

You can see that this verse rejects all types of knowledge that are
outside the frame of sure knowledge. For this reason, many verses
condemn the following in the footsteps of fathers and forefathers
without seeking a clear proof and without knowledge about it’s being
sound and effective. The Almighty says,

***"Nay! They say, 'We found our fathers following a certain religion,
and we follow in their footsteps'. Likewise, whenever We sent someone to
warn before you to any nation, the wealthy ones among them said, 'We
found our fathers following a certain religion, and we will certainly
follow in their footsteps'" (Quran, 43:23).***

The Quran transmits reports of many of those who advocate misguidance
and who will on the Judgment Day bite their fingers out of regret
saying,

***"On the Day that their faces are turned upside down in the Fire, they
will say, 'Woe unto us! Would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the
Apostle!' And they would say, 'Lord! We obeyed our chiefs and our great
men, and they misled us from the (right) path. Lord! Grant them double
the penalty and curse them with a very great curse!'” (Qur'an,
33:66-68).***

Knowledge, if it originates from tools of the senses, the heart or the
mind, is considered as recognized. The most Praised One says,

***"It is He Who brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers, when
you knew nothing, and He made for you hearing and vision and hearts (so)
that you may offer thanks (to Allah)" (Qur'an, 16:78).***

Both hearing and vision symbolize tools of the senses. The hearts denote
reason and sound intellectual realization. Any realization outside the
frame of these tools is not to be relied on.

The reason for relying on these two tools, the senses and the mind, as
being among the tools of knowledge is due to their being more accurate
and to the result they produce being greater. Other tools on which
people who are sick in the heart rely are not to be relied on. For these
tools of knowledge there are divisions and branches that are all
explained in the science of "theory of knowledge".

Yes, there is a question that forces itself here: If following in the
footsteps of the fathers and forefathers as well as their traditions is
contemptible, why has Islam permitted it in the field of knowing the
practical branch rulings? Every Muslim is entitled to derive his sect in
the branches and rulings from an imam and a scholar of jurisprudence. Is
this not imitating these imams and scholars as the unbelievers used to
do to their forefathers?

The answer to this question is clear. If one derives the rules from the
skilled jurist who specializes in his field, he does not do so through
contemptible imitation, that is, referring to someone else and imitating
him without evidence. This is so because when a person who does not have
certain knowledge refers to a man of knowledge and follows in his
footsteps, he does so through evidence.

Such is the tradition of all men of wisdom in all fields. If one is
ignorant about a craft, he refers to a craftsman who is familiar with
it. If one is ignorant of medicine, he will refer to an experienced
doctor, and so on. All this applies to branch matters.

As for principle matters, they are root matters, and the issue in their
regard revolves round either absolute confirmation, as is the case with
theologians, or absolute denial, as is the case with materialists.
Following does not apply to them, for there is too little shared amount
of knowledge to be relied on, and what is superfluous is rendered to the
specialist. Each theologian or materialist claims to be a specialist in
his science.

Because of what we have indicated, man has to delve deeply into
principle issues without making an ideology as support and evidence.

5. Higher Branches of Knowledge in Islam
----------------------------------------

Islam urges familiarity with three matters from among various topics,
considering them to be important for a seeker of reality.

### Knowledge of the Cosmos and of Nature

The Holy Quran enthusiastically emphasizes this knowledge that it should
be attained; the Almighty says,

***"Say: 'Behold all that is in the heavens and on earth'" (Qur'an,
10:101).***

He also says,

***"Behold! In the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of night and day there are, indeed, Signs for men of
understanding" (Qur'an, 3:190).***

A religious person has no option other than studying nature and delving
into its depths according to his background and ability.

### Man's Knowledge of His own Self

It is one of the necessities of knowledge which the Almighty stresses
just as He stresses its precedent. He, the most Praised One, has said,

***"We will soon show them Our Signs in the (furthest) regions (of the
earth) and in their own souls, until it becomes manifest to them that
this is the truth. Is it not enough that your Lord witnesses all
things?" (Qur'an, 41:53).***

Traditions have supported each other with regard to the importance of
knowing the *nafs*, the self, and that through getting to know it and
knowing all nature in which he lives, man gets to know his Lord.

### Knowledge of History

The Quran emphasizes knowledge of history since such knowledge provides
morals and admonishments. The most Praised One says,

***"In their stories there is instruction for men endowed with
understanding" (Qur'an, 12:111)***

and

***"… so relate the tales [to them], perhaps they may reflect" (Qur'an,
7:176).***

These are the topics that Islam recommends to anyone who wishes to sense
the facts and reach the reality in order to become familiar with it. One
Who shuns these branches of knowledge is obstructed from knowing Him,
the most Praised One, and from knowing His cosmic orders.

6. Why do we look for the existence of Allah, Praise to Him?
------------------------------------------------------------

Before we focus on the causes of knowing Him, the most Praised One, and
the evidences for His existence, we would like to answer a question that
quite often is made by the youths, and it is derived from the plots of
the materialists, especially the Marxists, in Islamic circles.

The outcome of the question is this: The research in what is beyond the
matter (metaphysics) has no connection to life, and it is not one of the
topics that fall within the frame of life which man lives during various
phases of his lifetime, from his adolescence to youth to the age of
maturity then to old age.

Looking into what is beyond the matter, there are higher existents
stripped of matter and of its rules, such as the angels, the minds and
the souls, etc. Above them all is the One Who created them and created
all worlds, what is material and what is immaterial. This question is of
no practical use in life even if it is proven with a thousand proofs.
So, spending time on these researches hinders a youth from carrying out
his necessary functions.

The answer to this question becomes obvious after reviewing what we have
already stated. You have come to know that religion has a strong role
and a great influence on the perfection of sciences. It also secures
manners and is their best pillar, even a security for carrying out the
proper laws. It is an invincible fortress on fluctuating occasions.

If it has such a great impact on our scientific, moral and social life,
turning away from it and staying busy with something else is a great
loss for humanity. What the materialist individual prattles about, that
is, looking for religion and for metaphysics has nothing to do with
life, is a lie told about the religion and a statement which lacks
verification.

Yes, what we have stated about the role of religion and its impact on
vital aspects of man is one of the concerns of the true religion that
goes along with science and with ethics and does not oppose them. As
regarding the various creeds that are attributed to inspiration and to
the heavens with lies and falsehood, they are outside the fold of our
research.

### Avoiding Possible Harm

There is a spiritual factor that urges us to research these issues which
are outside the frame of matter as well as material things. There is a
large group of reformers, men of ethics, who have sacrificed themselves
along the path to reform and cultivate the society, becoming the victims
of the process of elevating it (morally and spiritually). They followed
each other during the span of centuries and epochs. They invited the
human communities to believe in Allah, Praise to Him, and in His
attributes of perfection.

They claimed that He has imposed roles on His servants, that life does
not stop at death, and that death is not its end or the last phase of
it. It is, rather, a bridge on which man crosses from one abode to
another, from an incomplete life to a complete one. Anyone who performs
his roles and obligations will receive the most generous rewards. As for
those who oppose and who are haughty, they will receive the greatest
retribution.

This has been heard by people in this life from men of inspiration and
reform. These were not accused of being liars or fabricators. Rather,
the marks of truthfulness were visible throughout their lives, actions
and statements. At this juncture, the thinking human mind prompts one to
look into the truth of these men’s statements in order to avoid any
probable or perceived harm to which their statements refer.

The statements of these men are no less than telling an ordinary person
about the swift harm or the defrayed one in the temporal life. So, you
find the rational individual demonstrating interest when he is told so,
examining its existence so he may avoid the harm about which he is
warned.

This has been relied on by scholars of logic in proving the need to look
for the knowledge about Allah, Praise to Him, necessitating this
research in order to avoid probable or perceived harm.

### Knowing Allah and Thanking the Originator of Blessings

Undoubtedly, man is drowned in his life in blessings. These blessings
surround him since his early childhood up to the end of his life. Nobody
can deny it.

On the other hand, reason sees it as too little to just thank the One
Who grants the blessings. Such thanking is not true except after knowing
Him.

Both these matters necessitate looking for the Grantor of blessings who
has overwhelmed man with blessings, flooding him with them. Getting to
know Him through research is a response to the call of reason and to its
admonishment to thank this Grantor. Such thanking branches out of
knowing Him.

These are the three aspects (religion’s role in life, avoiding a
probable harm and the necessity to thank the Grantor of blessings after
knowing Him) to which we referred as a whole and which stimulate man to
research the knowledge about Allah, and to be interested in it more than
in anything that intrudes on his material life.

Those who shun these issues do so for spiritual reasons with which the
researcher is familiar, for there is no doubt that knowing Allah and
believing in Him are matters that are not separated from commitment to
restrictions and limits in life, as well as adherence to the ethical and
social rules, and to carrying out individual functions.

All this does not oppose the absolute freedom and licentiousness sought
by the materialists and those who follow their tracks. Denying religions
and principles is not self-denial. Rather, it is a flight from the
securities, commitments, restrictions and limits. The latter oppose
man's licentious inclination that sees nothing in life essentially other
than pleasure.

Here we come to the conclusion of the precepts which we wanted to bring
about in order to explain the concept of religion and its roots in the
human nature, its role in man's life and the need to know Allah, the
most Blessed, the most Exalted One. Statements chase them about proofs
for the existence of the Creator who created this existence.

[^1]: Actually, Will Durant was born on November 5, 1885 and died on
November 7, 1981. He was contemporary of the compiler. – Tr.

[^2]: Will Durant, Pleasures of Philosophy, p. 478.


