Knowledge
=========

Theologians are unanimous about knowledge being one of the perfect
self-attributes of Allah, and that “al-Aalim العالم” is one of His
Supreme Names (Attributes). No two persons contest it, so in order to
explain, we have to prepare for the topic with a precept.

What is Knowledge?
------------------

Knowledge is defined as an image resulting from a thing on the mind’s
page. Or it is a reflection coming out on the mind when one is in
contact with the outside. Men of wisdom have derived this definition
from the sciences in circulation among people.

But this definition is incomplete because it does not cover some
sections of knowledge. Knowledge is categorized as either incidental or
ever-present. The said definition suits the first rather than the
second. Let us explain both categories for you.

When man casts a look at the outside and observes the cosmos that
surrounds him, the trees and the rocks, the sun and the moon, etc., he
earns a realization, and the outside thing is realized only through the
mediation of an image between the person who realizes and the thing
which he realizes. This image is extracted from the outside through
tools of knowledge, and then it moves to the centers of comprehension.

Trees are identified when they are exhibited, the image is known through
the self, whereas man is the one who knows. We have called the thing as
being in the outside known through exhibiting and the image as being
known through the self because the outside is known to us via this
image, without it, the link between man and reality is severed.

In other words, the outside reality is not present with us in this
feature because the outside thing has an outside effect such as heat
coming out of fire, wetness from water, weight from rocks and iron, etc.
It is known that the outside thing does not come to our minds with these
characteristics. For this reason, the outside thing has become known
through exhibiting and the image is known through the self due to man
always experiencing mental images.

Thus, you come to know the definition of incidental knowledge. It is the
knowledge in which the outside reality is known not by itself but
through the mediation of an exact image of it. All tools of the senses
are employed in the service of this knowledge. It depends on three
pillars: one who realizes, the outside, and the image. Do not think that
this is an admission of the originality of the image and of the outside
being a branch thereof.

There is no doubt that the matter is the opposite. The outside is the
origin and the image is extracted from it, telling us about it. But what
the mind practices and employs is the image that it has, not the same
outside. This mental image is its only means to realize the outside and
to be aware of it.

Up to here, you have come to know the definition of incidental
know-ledge. As regarding the ever-present knowledge, it is the realizing
person being aware of the presence of what he realizes without the
mediation of anything, and it has two parts:

1. There is no mediation between the realizing person and what he
realizes, while the first is not being aware of the reality. This
knowledge is reached through the same image that is extracted from the
outside. This is so because the outside is realized through the image.
As for the image itself, it is known by the self, and there is no
mediation between it and the realizing person. When one comes in contact
with the outside through the mental image, he will achieve two types of
knowledge: One is incidental in its capacity as knowledge of the outside
through the image method, and one is present by regarding his knowledge
as having been attained through the same image, its presence and reality
being realized by the individual.

Thus, you come to know an essential difference between both norms of
knowledge. What is known in the incidental knowledge is not present to
the one who realizes it in its reality, as you have come to know. With
the ever-present one, what is known is present with him in its reality,
and this is similar to the mental knowledge image. Through its reality,
which does not depart from being a mental existent thing, it is present
to man. Thus, the incidental knowledge has three branches, whereas what
is ever-present has two in as far as this part is concerned.

2. Knowledge in which there is no mediation at all between the
person who realizes it and what he realizes is united through the self
and is different according to noticing and considering. It is like man
knowing and realizing his own self. The reality of every human being is
present by itself with him, not absent from him. He sees himself
rationally, senses it through his senses and conscience, and sees it
present with him without any mediation between the realizing person and
the self that he realizes.

In this case, knowledge becomes unilateral, not bilateral and tripartite
as is the case in the first part (above). It is then that the one who
realizes and what he realizes are both united, and man’s self becomes
knowledge and a discovery. Among the present knowledge is man’s
awareness of his feelings, happiness and pain. They all are present
without any mediating image.

Thus, you come to know about the weakness of the conclusion about man’s
presence having taken place through his own thinking, so it is said, “I
think, therefore I exist.” It seeks evidence from the presence of
thinking to indicate the presence of the thinker.[^1] The aspects of
weakness are:

**First:** Man’s knowledge of himself is a necessity, it does not need a
proof. Man’s contemplation is not clearer than his self-awareness, his
being aware of his knowledge of his entity, of himself.

**Second:** The one seeking evidence has admitted the result at the
beginning of his evidence when he said “***I*** think.” He has taken his
presence as being pre-supposed, taken for granted, and then he has tried
to find evidence of it.

Inclusive Definition
--------------------

In the light of what we have stated, i.e. dividing knowledge to
incidental and present, it is accurate to say that knowledge, in the
absolute sense, is “the presence of what is known with the one who knows
it.” This definition covers knowledge in both its types.[^2] Yet what is
present in the first is the mental image rather than the outside
reality. In the second, it is the same reality of what is known without
any mediator between it and the one who knows it.

The mental image in the incidental knowledge is present with man, not
absent from him. Also, the same man in the present knowledge is present
with him, within him, since it is standing on its own. It is called
knowledgeable. Since it is exposed to itself, not absent from it, it is
regarded as being known. Since there is presence, not absence, this
presence is called knowledge.

This definition is comprehensive, inclusive of all types of resulting
knowledge in what is possible and what is a must. If you grasp this
precept, the research in His knowledge, Glory to Him, stands once on its
own and once due to His actions (the things that are outside His
entity).

His Knowledge, Glory to Him, of Himself
---------------------------------------

His knowledge, Praise is due to Him, of His entity is not incidental,
i.e. He takes the image from the Self and witnesses it through such a
way. The reason is that such type of knowledge cannot be known about
Him, as we will see later. Rather, it is ever-present, i.e. He is
present by Himself and for Himself. Two evidences prove it:

**First: One who grants perfection cannot lack it.**

He, Praise belongs to Him, created mankind and the world by Himself
through His ever-present knowledge. One Who grants such perfection has
to create it in the best of way, the most perfect, because one who lacks
perfection cannot grant it. He creates it the best that it can be.
Although we are not familiar, and we will never be familiar, with the
particularity of the ever-presence of His self with Himself, we refer to
this knowledge as “the presence of His entity is with Him, and His
knowledge of it without an intermediary is obvious.”

His knowledge, Glory to Him, of Himself
---------------------------------------

His knowledge of Himself, Glory belongs to Him, is not incidental, that
is, His takes the image from the self and witnesses it through this way.
This is not so because this type of knowledge does not apply to Him as
you will come to know. Rather, it is present, that is, He is present for
His own self. There are two matters that prove it:

**First:** **One who bestows perfection cannot be lacking it.**

He, Glory belongs to Him, created man, who is aware of his presence at
present. One Who grants this perfection has to be creating it in the
best and most perfect way because one who lacks perfection cannot be the
one who bestows it; He surely is the One Who creates it as best as can
be. Although we are not, and we will never be, familiar with the
particularity of His presence by Himself, we term this knowledge as “the
presence of His entity with Him and His knowledge of it without a
mediation in-between.”

Briefly, one who enjoys intellectual commonsense does not find it
rational to think that one who grants perfection can be without it,
lacking it; otherwise, the one who receives the boon will be better than
the one who grants it, and the one who is deriving the benefit is better
than the one who grants the benefit. Since all possibilities have been
proven to be rendered to Him, including the Knowledgeable entity itself,
it becomes a must that the One Who creates this perfection should be
knowledgeable by Himself, knowledge which is innate, not
superfluous.[^3]

**Second:** **Factors of absence and disappearance of the self are
non-existent.**

To explain, we say that since the material existent is present in
quantity, ratios and parts that have no collective presence, since its
parts do not gather in one (and the same) status, some of its parts are
absent from others. So, it is not right for the material existent, due
to its being a matter, to be aware of itself by itself due to the
absence that controls its own parts.

Absence contrasts the presence of the self. It prevents the attainment
of the self-knowing itself (by itself). So, if the one who is present is
above being absent, taken apart, his parts can be put together, a simple
existent, as a whole, rather than parts and particles, his entity is
ever-present, and it has an absolutely complete presence. Thus, we see
the presence of our selves by our own selves, but not in the sense of
some parts of our bodies being present, but in the sense we have the
presence of a human reality expressed by the term “I” which is above
quantity, parts and particles.

So, if we suppose there is an existent at a high level of abstraction
and simplicity, having no absence factors, which are among the features
of a material being, his entity is present with him. This is the meaning
of His knowledge, Glory to Him, of His own Self, that is, an innate
presence that stands by itself in the most perfect way because it is
above being material, a composition and a division as you will see the
proof for His simplicity when we discuss the negative attributes.

There are other proofs that we have avoided in order to be brief. Yet
some folks deny that He knows through His own self, and here is the
explanation of their belief.

### Self-Knowledge Requires Variation

Those who deny His knowledge, Glory to Him, of Himself by saying that
knowledge is a standing ratio between the one who knows and the thing
which he knows, and the ratio is usually between two different things,
and the ratio of the thing to itself is impossible, since there is no
variation here, nor is there duality. Briefly, the one thing, I mean the
Almighty, Glory to Him, is One, a ratio cannot be imagined as existing
in Him.

Critics have rebutted it with this gist: Multiplicity and variation
exist in incidental knowledge because it is the adding of the one who
knows to the outside through the mental image, so in it, the known image
is not the same as the outside identity. As regarding present knowledge,
there is no requirement in it to have external variation; rather,
multiplicity suffices for consideration.

For example, He, Glory to Him, has an entity that is never absent from
Himself. So, He knows, and since His entity is ever-present, it is
known.

In other words, the terms of: knowledge, one who knows, something known,
etc. are used for the sake of calculations and considerations.
Considering the self’s revelation to the self is called “knowledge”, and
the self is exposed to the self is called “a piece of knowledge.”
Considering its familiarity with itself is called “knowledgeable.” If
you consider how man gets to know himself, it may be easier for you to
believe in all of this.

What we have stated is due to the critics saying that differentiation
may be through the self, and it may be through a sort of consideration.
Here, the Self of the Almighty, since it is knowledgeable and is
different from it because it is known, this suffices for knowledge to be
attached to it.[^4]

His knowledge, the Glorified One, of Things before Creating Them
----------------------------------------------------------------

His knowledge, Glory belongs to Him, of things is of two types:
pre-creating knowledge, post-creating knowledge. The first is the one
that we see to be one of the most important issues in the science of
logic. Here is the proof for it:

### Knowledge through Causality is Knowledge of Causer

Knowing the cause, as a cause, is knowing the causer, the one that
caused it. Knowing the objective, as such, is knowing the existence of
its effect. What is meant by knowing the objective is knowing the method
which became a principle for the presence of the effect and for its
taking place. In order to explain this principle, we use the following
examples.

#### Knowing Causality is Knowing the Causer

Knowing the cause, as a cause, is knowing the causer, the one that
causes it. And knowing the reason, as a reason, is knowing the effect.
What is meant by the cause is knowing how it became a principle for
finding the effect, for making it happen. In order to explain this
principle, let us provide the following examples:

A. An astrologer who knows the astrological laws and cosmic computations
gets to know that the eclipse of the sun or of the moon or the like
takes place at a certain time or in a particular situation. His
knowledge of these eventualities is nothing but his knowing the cause
behind them.

B. The physician who knows the cases and types of the pulse as well as
the conditions and situations of the heart can predict what will happen
to a patient in the future. Such knowledge is nothing but his knowing
the cause as such.

C. A pharmacist who knows the particularity of poison when one drinks it
can inform us that the life of such a person will end at a certain
period of time.

If you come to know these examples, we say that the world, all of it, is
the effect of His Presence, Glory belongs to Him, and has no cause other
than Him, Praise belongs to Him. Knowing the self is knowing the way
that caused the world to come to be, the cause behind its existence.

In other words, knowledge the self, the indications of which you have
already come to know, is knowing the way the entire cosmos came to be,
and knowing this way is attached to knowing the effect. This evidence is
based on precepts taken for granted by the theologians to the summary of
which we would like to point out as follows:

**First:** The world, in all its parts, relies on Him, the most Praised
One that He is, and this is the requirement for the Unity of the
Creator, and that there is no creator other than Him.

**Second:** The causality of something is that it includes a
particularity that requires the effect producing it, and it definitely
positively requires the presence of the effect in the outside so as
without this particularity, the effect will not come to be. For this
reason, there is a special connecting link between the standing
particularity relevant to the cause and the existence of the effect that
requires the existence of the effect. Had it not been for that
particularity, the ratio of the effect to the cause, and to others than
lack it, would have been equal, although it by necessity is nil.

The particularity that exists in the fire, which brings about heat, is
not the same particularity that is present in the water, which brings
about wetness.

**Third:** His effect, the Almighty, on others is through His own Self,
not through an incidental particularity, an entity that is superfluous
to Him. He by Himself is the doer of everything, as is required by the
simplicity of His own Self and His lack of need for anything at all (the
superfluous particularity) beside Himself. The most Praised and Exalted
One by necessity is the doer on His own; He does not act through a
method attached to His own self.

**Fourth:** Knowing the entity that requires a thing is knowledge of the
thing itself.

This discussion results in concluding that the Knowledge of the
Almighty, by itself, is the knowledge of His particularity, entity, and
it is inseparable from Him, I mean His knowledge of things requires such
a connection, a link.

Great men of logic and philosophy have pointed out to the above. The
head of theologians, Mulla Sadra (Sadr ad-Deen), has said, “The Self of
the Praised One, as the cause behind all things, due to the latter’s
presence, and the knowledge of the cause requires knowing their effects;
realizing them from this standpoint requires their arrangement one after
the other.”[^5]

The wise Sabzawari refers to the same in a poem in which he says:

*One who knows things other than Him and who relies on Him*
*Testifies to the cause behind the knowledge as one*
*Of knowing the effect, an unavoidable must.*[^6]

### Precision and Perfection Prove His Knowledge of What He Makes.

Noticing any simple or complex set (an electronic pen or a computer)
tells us that its maker is one who knows the laws and relations that
govern it. A huge encyclopedia points out to the knowledge of those who
wrote and compiled its texts.

In other words, the existence of the effect indicates the existence of
the cause. Its details lead to its being particular to its own cause.
The precision of composition of the things that exist in the world, as a
creation of Allah, Glory to Him, prove that their Maker is knowledgeable
of what He creates, familiar with what He makes. The details that make
up a created thing lead us to the Attributes of the One Who has created
it.

This evidence has been of interest to thinkers. What is made indicates,
from the standpoint of arrangement of parts, that is, the parts are made
for each other in order to serve the purpose of what is made, that it
did not result from a maker who is not familiar with these details.
Rather, it was made by a maker who organized it for a purpose, so he has
to be knowledgeable of it. If man looks at a house, he will realize that
the foundations were made for the wall and the wall was made for the
ceiling, etc. He will conclude that the house was built by one who is
knowledgeable of the building industry.

The conclusion is that whatever is made, its precision, minute details,
marvelous system, certain and exact amounts tells us that its maker is
fully familiar with these laws and symbols, knowledgeable of the
measurements and systems the made item needs. From this onset, the
cosmos, starting from the infinite atom and ending at the gigantic
constellation, from the tiny cell to the largest planet, the systems and
the very precise plans, tells us that the Creator of the cosmos is fully
knowledgeable of all the secrets and laws it contains. It tells us that
it is impossible for Him to be ignorant of them.

The Holy Quran has referred to this evidence when it said:

***“Should He not know, the One Who created, the One Who understands the
finest mysteries (and) is well acquainted (with them all)?!” (Qur’an,
67:14).***

The Almighty has also said,

***“We have created man and We know what dark suggestions his soul makes
to him” (Qur’an, 50:16).***

Our Imam, the Commander of the Faithful (as), has said, “He knows what
shall be and what was; He created the beings with His knowledge,
initiated them with His wisdom.”[^7]

Imam Ali ibn Mousa al-Ridhah (as) has said, “Praise be to the One Who
created creation with His might, perfected what He created with His
wisdom and placed everything in its place with His knowledge.”[^8]

It is to this evidence that al-Tusi, the critic, pointed out in
abstracting belief saying, “… And precision is evidence of knowledge.”

So, you say that some animals may perform precise actions in organizing
their homes and ways of living, as is the case with the bees, ants and
many beasts and birds, although they are not masters of knowledge.

I say in response: The precision in action, which we have stated, proves
that the doer’s knowledge is a mental case not liable for specificity.
As for these animals, their work is the result of inspiration from their
Creator as Quranic texts have stated. The most Praised One has said,

***“And your Lord taught the bees to build their cells in hills, on
trees, and in (men's) habitations. So eat of all the produce (of the
earth), and find the spacious paths of your Lord with skill: From within
their bodies, a drink of varying colors comes out in which (there) is
healing for men: Truly (there) is a Sign in this for those who ponder”
(Qur’an, 16:68-69).***

Interpreting these wonderful actions, some people may render them to
animal instincts. This does not contradict what we have stated. Mute
instincts are no more than a blind matter that cannot find something
balanced except when there is a higher command that leads them to what
they are required to do. And this interpretation has room somewhere
else.

His Knowledge, Glory to Him, of Things After Creating Them
----------------------------------------------------------

You have come to know evidences about His knowledge of Himself and of
His actions before creating things, and it is time now to look into His
knowledge, Glory to Him, of His actions after creating and forming them.
In this regard, we contend ourselves with both following evidences:

### His Knowledge, Glory to Him, is Action

The external things end up in their status of existence at Allah, Glory
to Him, and everything ends up at Him. Every effect is present at its
cause, not being absent from it, nor is it obstructed from it. You have
come to know the fact that knowledge is the presence of what is known
with the one who knows it.

In other words, every existent thing other than Him is possible, be it
is an essence and is incidental, external or mental. All are colored
with the color of possibility, and there is no avoiding relying on it.
Reliance is only presence with Him, His being fully acquainted with it,
Glory to Him.[^9]

In order to explain this evidence, we say this: Every possible thing is
affected, in its coming into being, by Allah, the Glorified One. The
effect has no meaning other than being attached to its cause and its
standing for it in reality like the literal meaning of a noun. Just like
the literal meaning, in all its affairs, it stands through the meaning
of the noun, so is the effect. It stands through its cause. Just as the
literal meaning being cut off from the name ends its presence, so is the
effect when detached from the cause: It ends up at its being
non-existent.

If you say, “I started my course from Basra,” there are noun meanings:
course and Basra, and there is a literal meaning which is the starting
of the course from that city. But the second meaning stands on both
sides; without them, it cannot stand on its own. Similarly is the
effect, that is, the possible implementation of presence. It stands
through the one that implements it, not through its own actuality other
than its being attached to its cause.

Otherwise, it will be required to be independent, and this, if we
suppose it is possible, trails it. If there is such a thing, it will be
outside its own cause. Getting out of its limits requires independence
that cannot exist with something being probable. There must be caution
in its regard and never abandon such caution since all things are
present with Him. Presence is knowledge: You have come to know that
knowledge is the knower possessing what is known.

Thereupon, the world, just as it is His doing, so is His knowledge,
Glory to Him. In order to bring the picture closer to comprehension,
notice the mental images created by the soul on the mind’s stage. They
are the doing of the self and, at the same time, they are knowledge of
them. The self does not need, in order to know these images, other
images.

Likewise, the self encompasses these images, and they stand through the
One Who undertakes them, who creates them. Such is the world in its
precision and magnanimity: a creation of Allah, Glory to Him, which is
sustained by Him. He fully encompasses it.

### Expanse of His Presence is Evidence of His Knowledge

Irrefutable evidences have shown that His existence, Glory to Him, is
above having a body, a matter, time and place. It is above any time or
place restriction. Something like this has an unlimited and endless
presence. Limits and restrictions are outcomes of a thing being
restricted by time and place.

What exists in time and place does not go beyond the frame of its
environment. As for the thing that is above these two restrictions,
nothing limits it, nor is there anything that confines it. A thing the
condition of which is as such knows everything and is not confined to
anything. Rather, it encompasses everything.

In order to bring an example that brings the picture closer to
comprehension, let us say that one who sits in a room and looks to the
outside from a small opening in the wall does not see but a portion of
the passing train. He is the opposite of one who stands on the roof or
looks from a higher angle, such as from a plane.

Based on this principle, the more one is stripped of restrictions, the
more and more knowledge of things he will have. Allah is above time and
place, above each and every limit and restriction. Nothing encompasses
Him that is located within the frame of time and place. Rather, He
encompasses everything that takes place on the stage of existence.

Imam Ali (as) has pointed out to some of what we have stated saying,
“Allah, the most Exalted and the most Great, is the ‘where’ of the
‘where’; there is no ‘where’ for Him. He is too great to be confined to
a place, He is everywhere without getting in contact with a thing,
without neighboring a thing. His knowledge encompasses it; nothing is
empty of His management.”

We are going to recite some holy verses as we research His knowledge,
Glory to Him, of the details.

Levels of His Knowledge, Glory to Him
-------------------------------------

It has become obvious from the above that His knowledge of things, Glory
to Him, is of two levels:

**First:** He knows them before bringing them into existence, and you
have already come to know the evidence for it.

**Second:** His knows of them after getting them out of the status of
the self, and you have already come to know its evidence. All this is
based on philosophical proofs. But the Holy Quran reminds us of His
knowledge through manifestations which it sometimes expresses as the
Preserved Tablet, other times as the Unfolded Scroll, a third time as
the Clear Record, a fourth time as the Well-Guarded Book, a fifth time
as the Guarding Book, a sixth time as the Book of Destiny, a seventh
time as simply the Book, an eighth time as the Clear Imam, a ninth time
as the Mother Book and a tenth time as the Tablet that blots out and
confirms.

To the Preserved Tablet, the most Praised One refers saying,

***“Nay! This is a glorious Qur'an, (inscribed) in a preserved tablet”
(Qur’an, 85:21-22).***

To the Unfolded Scroll He refers saying,

***“By a decree inscribed in a scroll unfolded” (Qur’an, 52:2-3).***

Referring to the Clear Record, He says,

***“… nor anything fresh or dry (green or withered) but is (recorded) in
a clear record (for those who can read)” (Qur’an, 6:59).***

To the Well-Guarded Book He refers saying,

***“That this indeed is a most honorable Qur'an, in a well-guarded Book”
(Qur’an, 56:77-78).***

To the Guarding Book, the Almighty refers saying,

***“We already know how much of them the earth diminishes: With Us is a
record guarding (the full account)” (Qur’an, 50:4).***

To the Book of Destiny (term of death), He refers saying,

***“Nor can a soul die except by God's leave, the term being fixed in
writing” (Qur’an, 3:145).***

When He simply refers to the Book, He says,

***“We gave (clear) warning to the Children of Israel in the Book…”
(Qur’an, 17:4).***

The Holy Quran makes a reference to “the Clear Imam” in Surat Ya-Sin:

***“We have taken account of all things in a clear Imam” (Qur’an,
36:12).***

To the “Mother Book”, the Almighty refers saying,

***“And indeed it is in the Mother Book, in Our presence, high (in
dignity), full of wisdom” (Qur’an, 43:4).***

And to the Tablet that blots out and confirms, the Almighty refers
saying in His Book,

***“Allah blots out or confirms whatever He pleases: The mother of the
Book is with Him” (Qur’an, 13:39).***

We have contended ourselves with referring to each Book with one verse
although there are many.

Scholars of exegesis have differed among themselves about the truth of
these books and their details. Some say that they are stripped of matter
and material, so much so that it is right to regard them as
manifestations of His endless knowledge. And there are those who say
that they are material tablets and books in which things, their life
spans and periods are recorded by way of symbols. Both opinions cannot
be taken for granted. Rather, believing in them and looking into their
exegesis must be done through the Book (Quran) and the authentic Sunnah.

It is also regarded, among the manifestations of His knowledge, is
decree and destiny that we will discuss in a special chapter by His
leave.

Two interesting items have to be pointed out here:

### His Knowledge, Glory to Him, is Presential, not Incidental

You have come to know the difference between the incidental and the
presential types of knowledge, so we do not wish to repeat ourselves.
But what must be pointed out is that His knowledge, Glory to Him, of His
own self and of His action is presential. As for His knowledge of His
entity, it is due to such entity never being absent from Him, it is
always present with Him. As for His knowledge of things, you have come
to know that it is of two types.

**First:** Knowledge of the self is knowledge of the calculation that
results in things, and knowledge of such calculation is knowledge of
things. Thus, it becomes clear that His knowledge, Glory to Him, of
Himself reveals in detail the things in the way that is appropriate for
Him.

**Second:** The presence of probabilities whenever necessary. What is
probable stands through the presence of the Creator, Glory to Him, in
its taking place and in its sustenance. His being self-sustaining, Glory
to Him, is like the meaning of the letters composing a name. This type
of existence does not permit absence, for the latter spells its
non-existence and annihilation. So, if the possible existents have this
characteristic, how can one imagine that He is separate from them?

It is nothing but supposing their non-existence and non-presence.
Thereupon, the world, in all its particles, is the outcome of His own
action, Glory to Him, of His own bringing it into being. At the same
time, it is present with him. Such presence is His knowledge. Allah’s
knowledge and His action are two different concepts, but they are in
agreement on the outside.

As regarding whether or not He has beyond the present knowledge an
incidental knowledge, researching it is the task of detailed books.
Peripatetian philosophers have claimed that He, Glory to Him, has an
incidental knowledge that they label as painted images.

### His Knowledge, Glory to Him, of Details

It is amazing how some philosophers go as far as denying His knowledge,
Glory to Him, of details. They are influenced by some flimsy
misconceptions. You will be familiar with the answers to some of them.
Carefully discerning what we have stated about the probable existents,
you will find it obvious that His knowledge, Glory to Him, of the
details is quite clear. Its reality is clear if you understand how
creation is, how existence is only due to the outgiving of Allah, Glory
to Him, and here is its explanation:

The cosmos, with everything it incorporates, from the atom to the
constellation, regenerates; it is always changing, not only in its
incidental characteristics and outer shapes but also in its essence and
entity. What appears to the onlooker to be fixed, stable and immovable
in the natural world is actually the fault of the senses. The reality is
different. In all its atoms, matter is subject to alteration, change and
flow in every time and place.

The meaning of change in the world of the matter is the regeneration of
its existence, the flowing of its coming to be time and over again.
Every material phenomenon is preceded by a time void. The presence of
matter, which came to be through a gradual and flowing process, is like
a spring the water of which continuously gushes out. It does not have a
presence, firmness, immobility and stability.

If creation and existence are the outcome of a gradual and sequential
process, and the effect cannot come out of the limits of its cause, it
seems that the world, in its atoms and particles, as it was made by
Allah Almighty, is known to Him. Gradual outpouring and presence in the
form of a gradual process which He, Glory to Him, has set up,
necessitates His knowledge, Glory and Exaltation belong to Him, of the
outer details.

#### Deniers’ Misconceptions

You have already come to know that His knowledge of the particulars,
Glory to Him, and the rest of discussion in analyzing the misconceptions
raised in this field, and here are their explanations:

##### First Misconception: Knowledge of Details Inheres Change in His Knowledge

They have said that if He, Glory to Him, knows the details that go on in
the cosmos, it becomes mandatory for His knowledge to change according
to the change of what is known. Otherwise, conformity would have been
non-existent. Since time details change, and had they been known to
Allah Almighty, this would have necessitated change to His knowledge,
which is impossible.

This has been explained by *allama* Ibn Maytham al-Bahrani who says,
“Some of them have denied His being knowledgeable of the details
according to the changing partial variable; rather, He knows them as
things that are comprehensible essences. Their argument is that had He
known that Zaid was sitting in this house, after his departure, when His
first knowledge remains, becomes ignorance, and if is removed, change
becomes a must.”[^10]

<span id="misconception-analyzed">[Misconception
Analyzed](#misconception-analyzed)</span>
This misconception is extremely weak, and its rebuttal is:

**First:** The revocation might. If knowledge of details requires it to
change when what is known changes, it also becomes a must to change its
ability due to its being relevant to details, while the ability is one
of the characteristics of the self. So, what is the answer in the
ability aspect, and what is the answer in the knowledge aspect?

**Second:** Through resolution. Our knowledge of events that are in
various periods of time is knowledge of time, as for His knowledge, the
most Exalted One that He is, it is not conditioned by time at all. There
is no present, past and future here. These adverbs are relevant to time
when measured according to time-related existents, the time in which one
lives. When one does something, it is said that he is doing it during a
particular time. What he did is labeled as past. And what he will do is
called future.

As for what exists outside the frame of time, environment and place, it
cannot be imagined in His regard that there is any past, present and
future. Allah, Glory to Him, knows all fractional events as a whole, not
with regard to some of them taking place in the present, some in the
past and some in the future. Rather, He knows them through knowledge
that is inclusive, one that is above being subjected to time conditions.

In other words, since the Almighty dos not occupy a space (just as He is
never subject to time), relating Him to all places alike is not by
measuring them with Him so as one would say that it is near, distant,
medium. Thereupon, His relevance to all things, in all times, is one and
the same. What is present since time immemorial, and what remains
forever, is attributed to Him and there is nothing in His knowledge that
“was”, “is” and “will be”.

Rather, they all are present with Him in all their details but not with
regard to time having anything to do with them according to their three
characteristics. They cannot be applied to Him, the most High. Such
knowledge is not variable but continuous, such as the knowledge of
totalities.

In order to bring this closer to comprehension, we bring about this
example. If the street is full of cars that pass one after the other,
and if someone is looking at them from a narrow window, he sees each
moment a passing car. The cars will then, relevant to him, are of three
types: one has already passed, one is now passing and one is yet to
pass. This division is sound as related to him in this situation.

Based on this premise, the existent which is above the restrictions of
time and the limits of place is familiar with all things once, and the
changing existents are painted with the hue of stability in as far as He
is concerned.

Knowledge in the example brought while explaining the misconception,
that is, Zaid sitting for a while at home, then he came out of it at
another time, is relevant to sitting and coming out once and there is no
sense here for advancing and delaying.

<span id="another-way-resolve-misconception">[Another Way to Resolve
Misconception](#another-way-resolve-misconception)</span>
This misconception is based on the supposition that His knowledge of
things, Praised is He, is incidental through the drawn images that stand
through Him, Glory to Him, the change in what is known will then be
concurrent with the images that stand through Him. This will require His
essence being the place for change and alteration.

But if we say that His knowledge of the details, Glory to Him, is
presential, that is, the things, in their outer identities and self
realities, are the products of His own doing, Glory to Him, and at the
same time His knowledge, there is no objection, then, to say that a
change has taken place to His knowledge, Glory to Him, as a result of a
change that took place to the existent things.

This is so because the knowledge that depends on His knowledge is the
one described as being innate. As for the operative knowledge, that is,
the knowledge that stands in the position of an action, there is no
objection if it changes as His action changes. The knowledge that stands
in the position of the action is no more than the knowledge of the same
action and nothing else. It is to this conclusion that the critic
al-Tusi refers when he says, “The changes of additions is
possible.”[^11]

In other words, change is what is added, not in the entity itself. What
is meant by additions is His action, which is His knowledge. There is no
objection for a change to take place in the additions and attachments
while no change takes place to the entity itself.

##### Second Misconception: Realizing Details Needs a Mechanism

Realizing the details needs material tools and physical mechanisms,
while the most Glorified One is above having a body or physical
requirements.

The answer to this misconception is obvious. Knowledge of details
acquired through material tools is the affair of one who is not familiar
with how to perpetuate their maintenance, and things do not stand
through him but are present in his possession, such as humans. Man’s
knowledge is through extracting images through sense-related tools.
Therefore, realizing details depends on these tools and on their
functions.

When it comes to the Almighty, since His knowledge encompasses all
things, and since He truly sustains them, His knowledge does not depend
on tools and on their functions.

It is to this answer that the virtuous al-Qoshaji refers as he explains
abstraction saying, “Realizing details needs a physical mechanism if the
knowledge (of them) comes through extracting images. But if it is a pure
addition, without an image, there is no need for it.”[^12]

##### Third Misconception: Knowledge of Details Requires Plurality

Knowledge is an image that is equivalent to what is known and drawn to
the one who knows it. There is no doubt that things have various images.
The abundance of known things requires abundance of the single self from
all aspects.[^13]

The answer to this misconception, as you have already come to know, is
clear, too. It is based on His knowledge of things being drawn within
Him, Glory to Him, similarly to things drawn within the human self, so
this requires plurality in the single self. You have already come to
know that His knowledge of things is not like that. Rather, the outside
identities are present with Him, with His Self, without any images, and
this type of knowledge is stronger than that in which things produce
images.

##### Fourth Misconception: Knowledge of Details Requires Turning What is Probable into a Must

If knowledge of a variable takes place prior to its variation, such
knowledge becomes a must. Otherwise, it is possible there is no such
requirement. Hence, His knowledge, the most Exalted One, turns into
ignorance, which is impossible.[^14]

In other words, the knowledge of the most Exalted One is not relevant to
events prior to their taking place. Otherwise, this will require the
events being both possible and a must at the same time. As for the
first, it is due to their taking place. As for the second, without Him,
it would be possible that they would not have existed; thus, His
knowledge turns into ignorance.

The answer to this misconception is obvious. What is impossible is the
combination of what can by itself be and also what must by itself be. As
for the combination of what by itself is possible with what must be
(existent) as a must through others, there is no doubt about it. The
effect, in the full presence of the cause, is by itself probable and a
must through others.

Thereupon, if His knowledge, Praise belongs to Him, hinges on the
presence of an event at a particular time, His knowledge, Praise belongs
to Him, does not get Him out of the self probability. The ultimate
requirement for His knowledge (of something) being in agreement with the
reality is that something exists through something else, whether the
cause behind it is Allah, Glory to Him, or someone else, and it is in
agreement with what is probably by its own self.

Briefly, the event that takes place during a certain circumstance does
not get out of the limit of probability after being attached to His
knowledge, the most Exalted One, and the full cause for it takes place.
The creation, all of it, is possible by itself while, at the same time,
it is a must through someone else.

The Holy Quran and the Expanse of His Knowledge, the Most Exalted One
---------------------------------------------------------------------

From what we have already stated, we can grasp the greatness of the
(Quranic) phrase that says, “Allah’s knowledge encompasses everything.”
It means that the Almighty knows what has already passed, what will come
to pass, and what is in existence in the universe, the secrets and the
symbols.

The most Praised One says,

***“The keys of the unseen, the treasures that none but He knows, are
with Him. He knows whatever there is on the earth and in the sea. Not a
leaf falls but with His knowledge: There is no grain in the darkness
(depths) of the earth, nor anything fresh or dry (green or withered),
but is (recorded) in a clear record” (Qur’an, 6:59).***

The most Praised One also states,

***“Say: ‘Whether you hide what is in your hearts or reveal it, Allah
knows it all: He knows what is in the heavens and what is on earth. And
Allah has might over all things’” (Qur’an, 3:29);***

***“Allah knows what every female (womb) bears, and that of which the
wombs fall short (of term) or exceed. Every single thing is before His
sight in (due) proportion” (Qur’an, 13:8);***

***“We have created man and We know what dark suggestions his soul makes
to him, for We are nearer to him than his life-vein” (Qur’an, 50:16),***

and

***“The One Who knows the unseen and from Whom not the least tiny atom
in the heavens or on earth is hidden, nor is there anything less than
that, or greater, but is in a clear record” (Qur’an, 34:3).***

There are other verses that refer to the Almighty’s knowledge of all
details.

### Loftiness of the Quranic Expression About the Expanse of His Knowledge

One of the most complex concepts is imagining the concept of what is
infinite as a fact and a reality. Man is still dealing in his life with
limited matters. Therefore, imagining something infinite is a very
difficult problem for him. This system, the stars that it contains, is
only a portion of our expansive constellation. Despite that, the part
and the whole are endless in as far as the particles and compositions
are concerned. The largest figure an ordinary individual knows how to
use in his life is the billion: the number 1 before which nine zeros
line up.

Also, the human civilization, because of its coming to perfection
through mathematical sciences, has reached what is called astronomical
numbers/figures. Nevertheless, all numbers, including the “astronomical”
ones, which mankind has reached, cannot be described as infinite. When
the Holy Quran wants to explain His knowledge, Glory to Him, as being
infinite, it does not use numbers and mathematical figures or even the
“astronomical” ones because they all end up at a certain limit/point.

Instead, it brings about a superb example that shows the expanse of His
knowledge. He says,

***“And if all trees on earth were pens and ocean (were ink), with seven
oceans behind it to add to its (supply), God's words would still not be
exhausted (in the writing), for Allah is Exalted in might, full of
wisdom” (Qur’an, 31:27).***

Look at this magnificent expression which is superior to all others, and
see how you find no mathematical figure that depicts the expanse of His
knowledge, Glory to Him, equivalently to His saying “…God's words would
still not be exhausted”. If one were to say that the extent of His
knowledge is the figure one before which there are hundreds of zeros, he
will not convey the meaning of His statement: “…God's words would still
not be exhausted”. Thus, you come to know the truth of His statement,
Glory to Him,

***“Only little knowledge is communicated to you, (O mankind!)” (Qur’an,
17:85).***

It expresses the limitation of human measurements and criteria. It also
expresses how little, how minute, mankind’s knowledge is.

Statements by Imam Ali (as) About the Knowledge of the Most Exalted One of Details
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Commander of the Faithful Ali (as) has said, “The number of rain drops
is not beyond His knowledge, nor is it the number of the stars in the
sky, the particles of dust carried by the wind, the sound of ants on
soft rocks, or where particles fall in the dark night. He knows where
leaves fall, what visions conceal.”[^15]

He, peace with him, has also said, “Praise belongs to Allah Who knows
the dust raised by the beasts in the plains, the sins of His servants
which they commit in privacy, the places where sea creatures go, and the
tumultuous water stirred by storms.”[^16]

He (as) has also said, “He knows what the chests hide, what the
consciences conceal; His knowledge encompasses everything.”[^17]

Up to this point, talk comes to an end about the positive entitative
attribute that is knowledge. The following discussion covers the second
attribute which is potence, that is, His being Omni-Potent, Mighty,
Able, Powerful, if the most Praised One so wills.

**3. Self-Affirmative Attributes**

[^1]: The one who seeks such evidence is the French philosopher Rene
Descartes.

[^2]: The goal behind this definition is only to point out in a way to
the truth of the knowledge without observing the condition of a true
definition, so it must not be criticized as requiring a role so the one
who defines it may derive it in the definition.

[^3]: Refer to Al-Asfar, Vol. 6, p. 176. You will come to know in the
next researches that His Attributes are His own Self.

[^4]: Murad fi Tajrid al-Itiqad كشف المراد في تجريد الاعتقاد , p. 175
and Sharh al-Qawshaji شرح القوشجي, p. 313.

[^5]: Al-Asfarالأسفار, Vol. 6, p. 275. Refer also in this regard to
abstractions and its explanations.

[^6]: Sharh al-Manzouma شرح المنظومة, philosophy section, p. 164.

[^7]: Nahjul-Balagha, pieces of wisdom section, No. 191.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 4, p. 65.

[^9]: Kashf al-Murad, p. 175.

[^10]: Qawaid al-Maram, p. 98.

[^11]: Tajrid al-Itiqad, p. 176.

[^12]: Al-Qoshaji, Sharh al-Itiqad, p. 414.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Kashf al-Murad, p. 176.

[^15]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon 178.

[^16]: Ibid., sermon 198.

[^17]: Ibid., sermon 86.


