Potence
=======

Theologians have agreed that potence, might, is one of the perfect
entitative attributes similarly to knowledge. Therefore, the Omni-Potent
is regarded as one of His Names, Glory to Him.[^1]

Potence, as far as language is concerned, as defined by lexicographers,
connotes ownership, independence and plentitude. Ibn Manzour (author of
the lexicon *Lisan al-Arab*) has said, “It is said that one is able to
do something; he has the ability, the dominance; so he is able,
capable.”

The most Praised One says,

***“…in the presence of an omni-Potent Sovereign” (Qur’an, 54:55),***

that is, One Who is Able, Mighty. Ability is independence and abundance.

Al-Raghib has said, “If an individual is described as being able, it is
a characteristic through which he can do something. But if Allah
Almighty is described by it, it is denying that there is any
incapacitation in Him.” It is obvious the explanation provided by
al-Raghib of the might in Allah, Praise belongs to Him, by rendering it
to the negative attributes (denying incapacitation in Him), is an
obvious error by him. Might is perfection, and it does not depart from
His perfection.

Defining Potence
----------------

Philosophers and logicians have interpreted potence in many ways the
most significant of which are the following:

1. Potence means the ability to do or not to do. The Omni-Potent is the
One Who can do something, and He can abandon doing it.

2. Potence is action at will, and inaction in the absence of such a
will. The Omni-Potent is the One Who, if He pleases, does something, and
if He does not, He would not do it or, if He does not want, He would not
do something.

The first definition implies the soundness of doing or not doing, that
they both can be done by the Omni-Potent. This ability may be described
as being of a “what” nature, so one may say that man, as a human, may or
may not do something. As regarding the ability with readiness, it
describes the ready matter, that is, it is described with attributes of
perfection such as we say that a seed can become a tree.

According to both estimates, His Potence, Praise belongs to Him, cannot
be explained with the use of this statement because Allah, Praise
belongs to Him, is above “what” being applied to Him. Rather, He is
existence all of it; so, how can we describe Him with possibilities
which are among His own manifestations? Also, He, Praise is due to Him,
is above matter and “readiness”; so, how can His might be explained by
something based on matter, readiness, etc.?

The second definition is seen outwardly as the doer being the creator of
the deed through his will. It is conditional that the doer is not
perfect in his deed except when something else is added to him, which is
the “will”, something which is impossible to apply to Allah, Praise
belongs to Him, Who is Independent in His doing of anything besides His
own self, not even the “will” if added to Him.

### Defending Both Definitions

The objective behind describing the Almighty as having Potence, Might,
Ability, is to prove His perfection and goodness and to hold Him above
shortcomings or defects. Had some definitions required a shortcoming or
a misconception about Him, Glory to Him, it must be stripped of such
requirements and must be discerned in the (light of) absolute
perfection. This is not relevant to only Potence. Rather, all Attributes
applied to Him, Praise belongs to Him, enjoy the same.

For example, life is the starting point for perfection and goodness, the
source of feeling and knowing. The goal behind describing the most
Praised One as Living is only a reference to such perfection. What we
realize of life, extract from natural beings, cannot be used to describe
the most Exalted One because it would require the most Praised One to be
a natural existent ready for action and impression, in addition to other
characteristics of material life.

For this reason, we must describe Him, Glory to Him, as life stripped of
shortcomings. This is an overall restriction in all divine attributes,
none of the Attributes of the most Praised One can be described through
them except in this context. This is what the wise gnostic who knows
Allah, Praise belongs to Him, tries to do.

It is then that the interpretation of His Might, Glory to Him, becomes
accurate, according to both definitions stated above, but while
stripping each of them of the shortcomings which it requires, such as
the most Praised One having a “what” or a “ready” matter, as is the case
in the first definition, or that the most Praised One is the doer
through a will that is beyond the self, as is the case with the second
definition.

Based on the above, what can be said is that the ratio of the deed to
its doer cannot lack one of three divisions:

**First:** The doer is restricted by the deed; he cannot separate
himself from his deed. Such is the compelled doer like the fire as it
burns or the sun as it shines.

**Second:** The doer is restricted not to leave the deed. Thus, the deed
would be restricting him.

**Third:** The doer is not restricted by one of the ratios. The deed
would not be resistant until it is restricted to abandonment, nor is the
abandonment is resistant until it is restricted by the deed. The matter
with regard to interpreting the potence is rendered to the doer being
absolutely unrestricted by any deed or by the abandonment of it. [^2]

This is what we understand when He, the Praised One, is described as the
Omni-Potent, whether it is interpreted as the soundness of action or
inaction, or whether it is interpreted as “If He wills, He does, and if
He does not will, He does not.” We derive from both definitions the
perfection of His Might, leaving aside any shortcomings.

So, it is accurate to say that the Might in His regard, Praised is He,
is the soundness of action and inaction, that is, He is above being
restricted by action or inaction. It is also accurate to use the second
definition, not in the sense His action is done through a superfluous
will, but according to what you have known: His being above any
restriction regarding action or inaction.

Indications of His Might
------------------------

Evidences pointing out to His Might, Praise belongs to Him, are many. We
are going to explain their most obvious, the strongest.

### First: Instinct

Every human being finds it within himself that he is attracted towards a
lofty might when calamities take place, believing that there is a
Supreme Might which is the only resort for salvation during those hard
times. This is what he senses without being taught, without learning.
The existence of this instinct reveals the existence of such an absolute
might. Otherwise, its existence would have been regarded as nonsense.

What is meant by instinct here is not having an image of the Omni-Potent
when hard times reign so it may be said that imagining something is not
evidence of its existence. It is like imagining the Phoenix is not
regarded as evidence of its actual existence. Rather, it is the inner
inclination, one’s self-conscience is attracted to it, and the sense
that such an attraction is similar to the rest of his senses.

One who is deeply drowned into hard times, one who has lost all hope for
any material cause, finds it within the depths of his soul that there is
a feeling in which he does not doubt, the feeling that there is an
existent that knows about his problems, one who is capable of pushing
them away from him.

There is no contradiction to his instinct if he is distracted from such
existent when the hard times no longer are there, when calamities are no
more, for not every instinctive matter manifests itself in all
circumstances. The surfacing of instincts requires special conditions
and atmospheres, including even the instincts of a carnal desire, anger,
etc.

Briefly, just as instinct calls for the existence of the most Praised
One, it also calls for His Attributes: knowledge, might, etc. The most
Praised One says,

***“Say: ‘Think to yourselves, if God's Wrath were to come upon you, or
the Hour (that you dread)…, would you then call on someone other than
Allah? (Reply) if you are truthful! Nay! You would (certainly) call upon
Him, and if it is His Will, He would remove (the distress) which made
you call upon Him and you would forget (the false gods) which you
associate with Him’” (Qur’an, 6:40-41).***

### Second: Cosmic Order

The cosmic order, in all what is tiny and what is magnanimous in it, in
all the goodness and glory, the precision and the magnificence, the
mastership and the perfection, speaks of the might of the One Who
initiated all things, of His ability to create what is the most precise
and the most wonderful. Natural sciences have greatly helped in this
field, proving the might of the Maker. The more perfect these sciences
are, the more mankind becomes familiar with the cosmic systems, laws and
wonders, and the more this attribute manifests itself in the best and
most glorious way.

Thus, it becomes obvious that a doer’s deed, just as it reveals the
existence of the doer, also reveals his quality. A good book of poems
tells us about the existence of one who wrote it. Likewise, it tells us
about his artistic ability, superb taste and capability to soar in the
horizons of imagination in order to mold lofty meanings in good word
templates. Both books, the one titled *Canon*, which deals with
medicine, by Ibn Sina (Avicenna), and his other book titled *Al-Shifaa*
(healing) in philosophy, prove that their author was among those who
were genius in medicine and philosophy.

Therefore, we see that when He, the most Praised One, describes His
magnificent actions and creations in the verses of His Holy Qur’an, He
concludes them with the Attribute “the Omni-Potent”. He, the most
Praised One, says,

***“Allah is He Who created seven firmaments, and of the earth (He
created) a similar number; through the midst of them (all) His command
descends so you may know that Allah has might over all things, and that
Allah encompasses all things in (His) knowledge” (Qur’an, 65:12).***

Precision and mastership in a deed are signs of knowledge, indications
of might. We see in some statements of Imam Ali (as) how he relies in
proving His might, the most Exalted One, on the magnificence of His
deeds and the goodness of what He creates, the most Praised One that He
is.

He (as) has said, “He initiated creations through His Might, spread the
winds through His mercy and firmed with stones the field of His
earth.”[^3]

He (as) also says, “He showed us of His domain His Might and the wonders
that articulate signs of His wisdom.”[^4]

He (as) also says, “He straightened of things what is crooked thereof,
set a system for their limits and synchronized, through His might, their
antitheses.”[^5]

He (as) also says, “He established testifying evidences for things which
he created with His grace, and for His great might.”[^6]

And there are other such references in his sermons and statements, peace
with him.

Imam Jafar ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (as) answered a question by an atheist
thus: “How could One Who has showed you His might in your own creation
have veiled Himself from you?”[^7]

### Third: One Who Grants Perfection Does not Lack It

Among the evidences for His might, Praise belongs to Him, is that He
created mankind just as He created others, giving him the ability to
make what is wonderful, strange, huge and amazing things. It is known
that man, through his presence and ability, is the cause behind His
existence, Praise belongs to Him. So, how can One Who creates mankind
and bestowed things on him be lacking in what He gives?

Dominance of the Almighty’s Might Over Everything
-------------------------------------------------

The human nature rules that the absolute perfection towards which
mankind is sometimes attracted is capable of anything that is possible.
It does not entertain minds at all, had it not been for the doubts
raised by skeptics, that there are limits for His might, or that He can
do something but not something else. Muslims during the first era
embraced this belief which Allah’s Book inspired to them, the Book that
states the generality of Allah’s might, Praise belongs to Him.

The matter of logic reached mentors of the Mutazilites who recorded
details about the expanse of His might, Praise belongs to Him, to which
we would like to refer by way of generality:

1. Al-Nizam[^8] has said, “The Almighty cannot do what is ugly.”

2. Abbad ibn Sulayman al-Seemari[^9] has said, “He cannot do what is the
opposite of what He knows.”

3. Al-Balkhi[^10] has said, “He cannot do similarly to what His servants
do.”

4. The two Jubaais[^11] have said, “He cannot do exactly what His
servants can.”

It may have been attributed to men of wisdom that the most Praised One
*cannot* do but one thing, and that nothing comes out of Him other than
a lone thing: reason. There are beliefs espoused by the dualists that
are ambiguous. We shall set aside another place to explain the
latter.[^12]

This is a historic picture about the growth of this viewpoint, that is
to say, limiting Allah’s might! It seems that most of these individuals
were influenced by imported opinions that entered the Islam lands during
the period of the renaissance of translation. Their misconceptions and
the latter’s analyses will be presented to you after we review the
evidences of those who advocate that His might is general.

Evidences of Advocates of the Generality of Divine Might
--------------------------------------------------------

What is meant by the “generality of His might,” Praise belongs to Him,
is its absorption of anything that is possible. In others words, the
Almighty can create everything that He can, nothing is impossible for
Him to do. Critics have come to this conclusion based on their
statements such as these:

“The requirement is present, the obstacle is missing.” The first is due
to the fact that the Almighty is able through His own might. Its ratio
to the whole is equal to its being above time, place and direction.

“As for the second, the requirement for something to be destined is its
possibility. Possibility is common among all. So, the attribute of
ability is also common among the probabilities, which is the ultimate
pursuit.”

This can be explained through the following evidence.

The “obstacles” in the way of His general ability may be one of the
following matters:

**First:** Something is not possible on its own, such as the combination
of two opposites or antitheses.

**Second:** There may be an obstacle in the way of His will being
affected and of its inclusion of everyone. That is to say, as if there
is an equivalent might that contrasts and opposes His might.

**Third:** His own Self is not equal with regard to things.

These three factors are rejected in their entirety. As for the first,
what is meant by the generality of His might is its inclusion of any
matter that is possible without the existence of an innate objection.
Divine Might has nothing to do with this. The Doer is not at fault; the
fault is in the source.

As for the Second, the equivalent might, which opposes His, is rejected
on account of what has already been proven and fixed in its place, to
the unity of the One Who does things, to the lack of a similitude to Him
in existence. As regarding the probable might, it does not compete with
His might: It is His own creation.

As for the third, His being above any restriction, condition, direction,
place, makes Him equal relatively to anything that by itself is
possible. So, there is no sense that there are some things that are
possible while others are not. Selectivity with regard to His might,
Praise belongs to Him, is pawned to some things being close to Him
rather than others similarly to man who lives in a specific place and
time.

Past and future things are outside his control because he (man) is
chained by time and space. As for the Absolute Abstract Who created all
times and places, all essences and conditions, it does not make sense
that His essence is close to one and is distant from another.

This explains that evidence.

There is something else that is more glorious and magnificent than what
has been stated, and it is based on His infinitude in goodness,
perfection, etc. Its outcome is that His presence, Glory to Him, is
infinite, limitless. In other words, it is an absolute presence not
limited by any imaginable or external limits. He is infinite in
existence, infinite in perfection and goodness because the source of
perfection is existence.

The absence of infinitude in the aspect of existence is inherent to its
absence in the aspect of perfection. What perfection is there that is
more magnificent and wonderful than the Might that is infinite due to
His perfection being infinite? This proves the expanse of His Might that
encompasses anything that can be.

Expanse of His Might, Glory to Him, in Another Sense
----------------------------------------------------

The expanse of His Might, Glory to Him, has two meanings. One of them
you have already come to know. The second is submitted by men of wisdom
in their books. Its conclusion is that the cosmic phenomena, what is
abstract and what is material, what is innate and what they do, end up
at His Might, Praise belongs to Him.

Just since there is no partner with Him in His essence, there is no
partner with Him in His actions. Anything for which the word “existent”
is used is directly created by Allah, Praise belongs to Him, or through
causes and effects. Everyone relies on Him, there is no avoiding it.
This is the uniqueness of the Creator that we will explain when we
discuss the negative attributes.

Those who oppose this meaning of expanse of Might are the dualists who
have made a doer for goodness as being different from the doer of evil
and all Mutazilites who made man an independent doer in his actions. By
His leave, the most Exalted One, we will explain this in its place and
how both of these doctrines are wrong.[^13]

As regarding the statement of wise men, that is, what comes out of
Allah, Praise belongs to Him, is first reason from which the second
reason was issued, up to the end of the circle of existence at the
matter and the hyle[^14], apparently it is purely hypothetical and is
not different from all existents ending at Allah, Praise belongs to Him,
through causes and effects, and the details are in their proper place.

Religious Texts and the Expanse of His Might, Glory to Him
----------------------------------------------------------

Texts from the Quran and Sunnah have supported each other with regard to
the expanse of His Might and its absolution. We would like to quote some
of them here:

The most Praised One says,

***“…And Allah has might over all things” (Qur’an, 33:27).***

He has also said,

***“Allah (alone) prevails over all things” (Qur’an, 18:45).***

He has also said,

***“…Nor is Allah to be frustrated by anything whatever in the heavens
or on earth, for He is all-Knowing, all-Mighty” (Qur’an, 35:44).***

Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said, “All things are with him alike with regard
to His knowledge, potence, authority and might (over them).”[^15]

Imam Mousa ibn Jafar (as) has said, “He is the Omni-Potent Who is never
incapable.”[^16]

Questions and Answers
---------------------

Those who advocate the generality of His Might, Glory to Him, have been
faced by several questions which we are going to submit then analyze.
These questions are:

1. “Can the most Praised One create His likeness?” If this question is
answered in the affirmative, it will require the hypothesis that there
will thus be a partner with Him, Glory to Him. And if it is answered in
the negative, it will prove that His might is limited, not general.

2. “Is He capable of making the wide world fit into an egg without the
world’s size being minimized or the egg maximized?” If it is answered in
the affirmative, it will require the opposite of what is necessary, that
is, the thing to be contained is greater than the container. If it is
answered in the negative, it will indicate that His might is not
general.

3. “Can He, Praise belongs to Him, create something to which He cannot
put an end?” If it is answered in the affirmative, it will then indicate
that His might is not broad, since He cannot put an end to something.
And if it is answered in the negative, it will necessitate the
non-generality of His might. The answer to a question such as this, be
it positive or negative, will indicate the limitation of His might.

These are the questions. As regarding answering them, this is done once
through generalization and once through details.

As regarding generalizing, the claim is that His might is relevant to
what can be done by the Self. The contexts of these questions are not
matters that are innately possible. Rather, they all are either
impossible by themselves or something that requires such impossibility.
The inability to undertake them is not regarded as an indication of a
shortcoming in the doer. If a tailor cannot make a shirt out of bricks,
and if the painter cannot paint a painting of a peacock on water, it is
not regarded as a defect in the ability of either.

This is similar to our asking a skilled mathematician to let the result
of 2 X 2 be five. On this basis, the question is not restricted to what
is stated; rather, anything that is not possible by itself does not fall
within the frame of might because this thing itself is faulty, whereas
the might is not.

As regarding the detailed answer for these three questions, here is its
explanation for you.

As regarding the first, demanding someone to create someone else similar
to him is impossible to fit within the frame of one’s ability, and to
demand it is to demand what is impossible.

In other words, creating a peer requires the combination of two
opposites in one and the same thing. Since the hypothesis supposes the
existence of someone similar to Him, Glory to Him, this becomes a must,
not a probability, something timeless (that has already taken place)
rather than incidental, unlimited, not limited.

Since might is attached to him, which is not attached to something which
is non-existent, it must be incidental rather than timeless, probable
rather than a must, infinite rather than finite. This is what we have
said, that is, it requires the existence of two antitheses in one and
the same thing.

Thus, the answer to the second question becomes obvious. The might being
independent of making the big thing fit into the small thing is not from
the standpoint of its being improbable by itself. Commonsense rules that
the container must be greater than what it contains. This is on the one
hand. On the other hand, making a big thing fit in a small container
requires the doing of its opposite: the container is smaller than what
it contains. Attempting to do such a thing requires doing one thing, the
container or what it contains, being small and the same time big.

As regarding the third question, the supposition is impossible because
it requires an impossibility by itself. Supposing the most Praised One
is incapable of creating a thing which He Himself had created is not
separate from impossibility, and here is an explanation for it.

Since the indicated thing is doable, it is (likewise) perishable. Since
it is preconditioned to non-extinction, such condition is not possible.
The issue becomes one thing being probable and a must, perishable and
non-perishable, all at the same time.

In other words, its being created hinges on the ability of putting an
end to it because what is made is sustained by its Maker. If the tie
with the latter is severed, it will require its becoming non-existent.
Its being non-perishable requires its being not created in the first
place. What the question presupposes, if at all, is the presence of two
antitheses.

Thus, the answers to questions similar to these become possible such as
one may ask: Can Allah create a body which He cannot cause to move? This
falls into the category of combining two opposites. The supposition that
its having a beginning necessitates its having an end, that it can be
mobilized. Yet, at the same time, we claimed that the most Praised One
is supposedly unable to mobilize it!

These hypotheses and their likes do not harm the generality of His
might. Rather, they only fool simple-minded people. As for people of
distinction and perfection, they are greater than being ignorant of how
to respond to them.

Misconceptions of Those Who Deny Might’s Generality
---------------------------------------------------

You have come to know some details about this issue in the beginning of
the research. It is now time to look deeply into it and analyze it in a
way that suits the condition of this book.

### Allah, Glory to Him, “Cannot” Do What is Ugly

Al-Nizami seeks to argue that the Almighty cannot do what is ugly, that
had He been able to do it, He would have. Thus, He would be either
ignorant of its ugliness or is in need for so doing, and both matters
are impossible.

The answer to it is clear. What is meant by His ability to do something
ugly is that such an ability is the same, whether in doing what is ugly
or in doing what is good. Just as He is able to send one who obeys Him
to Paradise, He likewise is able to send him to hell. The issue here is
not what “incapacitates” Him from doing it. Since this action violates
His wisdom, Glory to Him, His justice and equity, He does not do it. An
ugly deed is committed by a doer who is either ignorant of its ugliness
or he is in need of doing it.

Both matters are not present with His sanctity. A big difference exists
between the inability to do something in the first place and not
actually doing it simply because there is no need to do it. A kind
father can slaughter his son, but the motive to doing such a thing does
not exist with him. Such an action is not done except by an ignorant
wretch or someone who [for some reason] needs to commit it.

A Nizami individual has confused “inability” with the absence of a
motive.

### Almighty’s “Inability” To Do the Opposite of What He Knows

Abbad ibn Sulayman al-Seemari claims that His might is not broad. He
says that if Allah knows that something will take place, it definitely
will, so its taking place is a must. What He knows that it will not take
place does not at all take place, so it is prohibited from taking place.
What is a must, or what cannot be, has nothing to do with might, since
might is relevant to something which may take place or which may not.
The thing, according to this man’s knowledge, which is unilateral,
having one definite status, does not fall within the scope of might.

Example: If He, the most Praised and Exalted One, knows that a man will
be born in a certain period of time, that man’s presence in that period
will be definite and known. So, His might is not relevant to its not
taking place, which is the opposite of what He knows. This is so because
the supposition is that this man’s presence became a must, while his
non-presence became impossible, since His knowledge reveals the reality
completely.

There are two ways to respond to this argument. First, the requirement
of what he states is that His might is not relevant to a thing in the
first place. This is so because a thing may either be known in His
knowledge, the most Praised One, as being coming into reality, or He may
know that it will not come to exist. The first must come to be, whereas
the second will not. Everything enters into one of these two frames.
This requires that His might must not be described as depending on
anything at all. The theory is false, that is for sure.

Second, this son of Abbad did not make a distinction between what by
itself is a must and what can be so by someone else. He also did not
differentiate between what by itself is impossible to come to be and one
which is made impossible to be by someone else. The objection to might
being attached to something is the innate presence or non-presence, not
the existence and non-existence as a result of others being attached to
a thing coming into existence or not.

Explanation: Anything relevant to might must by itself be possible and
in which the ratio of existence and non-existence is the same. Its
existence probability, when the cause is present, does not get it out of
possibility. Also, its being non-existent, in the absence of a cause,
does not get it out of that limit either.

Therefore, His knowledge, though ranging between causing existence or
non-existence, i.e. the necessity of existence compared to the presence
of its cause, and the necessity of non-existence relevant to the absence
of its cause, this necessity at both ends does not make a thing a must
by itself or the contrary. Rather, even after the attachment of
necessity or its absence, with regard to the existence or non-existence
of its cause, is described through possibility, it does not depart from
the limit of straight-forwardness.

In the supposed example, I mean the birth of someone at a particular
time, it is relevant to His knowledge and will, Praise belongs to Him,
that dominates His creation in that circumstance, and the opposite does
not take place. But if it does not take place, it is not due to His
being unable to cause it to happen.

Rather, it falls in the expanse of His knowledge, Praise belongs to Him,
whether He creates or does not create. Rather, it is due to being the
opposite of what He knows and wants. A big difference exists between not
doing something (not creating a particular thing/person) because it is
the opposite of what He knows to be good and His inability to do it.

### His “Inability” to Do Similarly to What His Servants Do

Al-Balkhi went as far as suggesting that Allah Almighty “cannot” do
similarly to what His servants can, because it is either obedience to
Him or disobedience or foolhardiness. Man’s actions cannot depart from
these three categories, and they are all impossible to apply to the most
Exalted One. Otherwise, His actions would have been categorized as
obedience, disobedience or foolhardiness.

The first two require that there should be someone who orders Allah
Almighty, which is impossible. The last enters under the category of
ugliness, which is (also) impossible to apply to Him, Praise belongs to
Him. An answer has been provided about His “inability” to do what is
ugly, so there is no need for repetition. As for the first two, we would
like to say the following:

Obedience and disobedience are not among the true matters that stand by
a thing itself. Rather, they are two matters which reason comprehends
when comparing the action of the ordered one with his violation of it.
It is then that we find no confusion about His ability, Glory to Him, to
do similarly to what His servant does by way of similarity, such as His
action, Praise belongs to Him, being united in essence and form with the
deed and form of His servant.

As regarding His action, Praise belongs to Him, not being described as
obedience or disobedience, in this case, it does not harm His ability,
the most Exalted One, to do similarly to what man does because the
criterion in similarity is the reality of the action, its outer truth,
not the labels, be they symbolic or extractive, which do not affect the
reality of the thing.

In support of what we have stated, *allama* al-Hilli says the following
as he explains abstraction: “Obedience and foolhardiness are two
characteristics which do not require the variation of the essence.”[^17]
Let us suppose that someone built a house in obedience of an order he
received from his boss. Allah, Praise belongs to Him, can create the
likeness of that house without a difference from it as much as one hair.

While the servant’s action is characterized as obedience, His action,
Praise belongs to Him, is not. But this does not cause an essential
difference between both actions; rather, both actions are united in
essence and in form.

Yes, there are actions made by man directly. They stand through him
similarly to an explanation provided for a topic, such as eating and
drinking. Their being not done by Allah, Praise belongs to Him, is due
to their being among the material actions that stand by the material
topic, and Allah, Praise belongs to Him, is above matter, so He is not
characterized by these actions.

Nevertheless, man and his direct actions are all due to His assistance,
Praise belongs to Him, to His might and means, so much so that if the
outpouring from the Lord stops, man and his actions would all become
things of the past.

### The Almighty’s “Inability” to Do Exactly What His Servant Does

Both Jubais have concluded that there is an absence of the expanse of
His ability, Glory to Him, just as others have, as we indicated above,
but they provide a different explanation. They say that the Almighty
*cannot* do exactly what His servant does. Otherwise, there would have
been a requirement for both antitheses to be present if Allah wills
something while His servant abhors it, or vice versa.

An explanation of inherence: What is decreed will come to pass on the
call of the One Who can make it happen, and it stays in the world of
nonexistence where it is kept from happening. Had there been two decrees
actualized by two able ones, and if we suppose that one of them has a
reason to bring it into being while the other, at the same time, does
not have such a reason, this will require looking into that cause. It
remains in the world of nonexistence in as far as the one that does not
want it to come into being is concerned. Hence, it becomes existent and
nonexistent; such are contradictions.

The answer is as follows.

**First:** Nonexistence is not relevant to only the way mentioned by
both Jubais, i.e. the one in which one of them (the able person) has a
cause to bring it into being, whereas the other keeps it from happening
in the world of nonexistence. Rather, the prevention (from it coming
into existence) takes place if the will of each one of them is relevant
to bringing into being the same decree, its exactness. This would
require two complete causes combined for the sake of one effect.

**Second:** His (supposed) “inability” to do exactly what His servant
does is due to the fact that it is relevant to what can be done through
possible means. If it becomes impossible, might is not relevant to it.
Its dissociation from what is impossible does not at all mean that it is
limited.

The images supposed by both Jubais, or what we have added to them, do
not prove anything more than an action coming up under those
circumstances being impossible. This is so because it requires the
combination of two antitheses, according to the supposition of the two
Jubais, or on the combination of two perfect causes into one effect,
according to our own supposition, which is impossible and out of the
frame of might; it is not even labeled as inability.

**Third:** What do both men mean when they say, “exactly what the
servant of Allah can do”? Do they mean the thing before its existence,
or do they mean after its existence? If they mean the first, there is no
specificity here, there is no particular circumstance. The thing in this
phase does not go beyond being a totally inclusive concept. If they mean
the second probability, the fact that might is not attached to it due to
being the likeness of bringing about what is already doing so, which is
impossible, and what is impossible is outside the framework of might.

**Fourth:** The reference they both (Jubais) stated about the will of
the servant of Allah hinging on first creating him, whereas the will of
the most Praised One hinges on its opposite, is a concept of dualists
which found its way to Islamic circles. It depicts the action of a
servant as his (own) creation rather than being a creation of Allah,
Glory to Him, through causation, and that there are two independent
doers (Allah and His servant). Each of these doers has his own
particular sphere. In this case, the will of the servant is not attached
to the will of Allah, Glory to Him, through any means.

But this is false, as we will explain when we discuss the Unity of Allah
in His creation. Every doer, be it a doer out of his own self-will or
not, does not do anything except when the most Praised One enables him
through His own will. If a servant wants something, he does so through
the will of Allah and His might in a way which does not require coercion
or out of a need, as we will explain with the permission of the Praised
One.

[^1]: The difference between an adjective and a name is that the first
is not understood as a subject: Nobody would say, “Zaid came to know.”
This is the opposite of the second: It is dealt with as such, so it is
said, “Zaid knows” (or he is a man of knowledge). Hence, this [rule] is
applied when dealing with His Names and Attributes, Glory to Him.
Knowledge, potence and life are [linguistically, according to Arabic]
adjectives, while “the all-Knowing”, the “Omni-Potent” and the “Living”
are His Names, the most Exalted One.

[^2]: Thus, you have come to know that describing Him, the most Praised
One, as being the Omni-Potent, which means stripping Him of being
restricted by either side, is in synch with describing how the option is
all His, Praise to Him, and you will come to know its discussion later
if the Praised One so permits.

[^3]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 1.

[^4]: Ibid., Sermon of Images No. 91.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 165.

[^7]: Al-Saduq, Al-Tawhid, p. 91.

[^8]: His name is Ibrahim ibn Sayyar ibn Hani al-Nizam. He died in 231
A.H./853 A.D. The century in which he lived was rich with foreign
translations of opinions that were imported into Islamic lands. It is
thought that he was influenced by those views and ideologies.

[^9]: He is quoted as having said that the evidence of pronouncements is
self entitative, not created. We could not find his biography in
lexicons. Allama al-Hilla mentioned his theory about the might of the
Almighty, Praise to Him, in his book titled Nahjul-Mustarshidin. Refer
to Irshad al-Talibin ila Nahj al-Mustarshidin, p. 189.

[^10]: His name is “Abul-Qasim” al-Kabi, and he died in 317 A.H./929
A.D.

[^11]: They are: Sheikh “Abu Ali” Muhammad ibn Abdul-Wahhab who died in
303 A.H./916 A.D. and his son, “Abu Hashim”, Abdul-Salam ibn Muhammad,
who died in 321 A.H./933 A.D. Both were among heads and pillars of the
Mutazilites, and they have opinions which contradict those of all their
mentors.

[^12]: The discussion of the beliefs of dualists will be stated in the
chapter on Tawhid in [the subject of] creation.

[^13]: We will state how the doctrine of the dualists is wrong when we
discuss the Oneness of Creator and the falsehood of the Mutazilites’
claim when we discuss determinism and empowerment.

[^14]: For the full meaning of this word, refer to the Oxford English
Dictionary (OED). –Tr.

[^15]: Al-Saduq, Al-Tawhid, pp 76, 131.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: Al-Hilli, Kashf al-Murad, p. 174 (Said edition).


