Chapter 5
=========

Description of The Holy Prophet In The School Of Sunnis
-------------------------------------------------------

Here, we shall set forth some traditions which would create a tarnished
image of the Prophet (S) in the mind of those who are to believe in
those traditions. In some of these traditions, the character of some
other people have been preferred over the character of the Holy Prophet
such that if any one accepts them, he would choose the opinion and views
of those people rather than the view of the Holy Prophet (especially
when they are contrary to each other) and would readily forsake the
sayings of his holiship.

A prominent example amongst them is a chain of traditions well known as
«Omar's Agreement».

These traditions can be found in the book of traditions belonging to the
Caliphate school of thought such as in the Shiahs, Musnads and Sunans.
Here, we shall narrate some of them from Sahih Bukhari and some other
reliable books of the Caliphate School.[^1]

Agreement of Caliph Omar With His Lord
--------------------------------------

It has been narrated that Caliph Omar said:

«I came to an agreement with my Lord on three matters:'

'Firstly that I told the Messenger of Allah as such: «O' Messenger of
Allah! What is the harm if we establish the standing-place of Ibrahim as
the place of prayer?»' Following my suggestion, this verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّخِذُواْ مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing - place of
Ibrahim! (Holy Quran, 2:125)***

The second matter was related to 'Hijab' (veil): I proposed as such: 'O
Messenger of Allah! You must order the females to cover themselves up
because at present, everyone from the good and evil mingles with them.
It was after this suggestion that the verse pertaining 'veil' was
revealed.'

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ قُل لِّأَزْوَاجِكَ وَبَنَاتِكَ وَنِسَاء
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ يُدْنِينَ عَلَيْهِنَّ مِن جَلَابِيبِهِنَّ ذَلِكَ
أَدْنَى أَن يُعْرَفْنَ فَلَا يُؤْذَيْنَ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُوراً
رَّحِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Prophet, tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the
believers to bring down over themselves [part] of their outer garments.
That is more suitable that they will be known and not be abused. And
ever is Allah Forgiving and Merciful. (Holy Quran 33: 59)***

The third matter too was related to the Prophet's wives: Due to jealousy
and envy, the Holy Prophet's wives reached an alliance against him. I
told them as such: If the Prophet overlooks your treason it maybe that
Allah will provide him with much better wives than you. Moments later, a
verse with similar contents was revealed:»

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَسَى رَبُّهُ إِن طَلَّقَكُنَّ أَن يُبْدِلَهُ أَزْوَاجاً خَيْراً
مِّنكُنَّ مُسْلِمَاتٍ مُّؤْمِنَاتٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Perhaps his Lord, if he divorced you [all], would substitute for him
wives better than you - submitting [to Allah], believing, devoutly
obedient,… (Holy Quran, 66: 5)***

Tayalesi in his 'Musnad' narrates Caliph Omar as saying: 'I came to an
understanding with my Lord on four matters. Then, after mentioning the
afore-said three agreements, he says: When the verse;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ مِن سُلَالَةٍ مِّن طِينٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly did We create man from an extract of clay. (Holy Quran,
23: 12)***

Was revealed and thereby portrayed man in his complete sense, I said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَارَكَ اللَّـهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Blessed be Allah, the best of the Creators. (Holy Quran, 23: 14)***

Later on, there came a revelation and this expression was added to the
afore-said verse.

The expositors of Sahih Bukhari - Ibn-Hajar (died in 852 A.H.) in
'Fathul-Baari' and Aini (died in 855 A.H.) in 'Omdatul-Qaari' have
explained and interpreted the afore-mentioned traditions as follows:-
[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) وافقت ربي من الموافقة) من باب المفاعلة التي تدل على مشاركة اثنين في
فعل ينسب إلى أحدهما متعلقا بالآخر والمعنى في الأصل وافقني ربي فأنزل
القرآن على وفق ما رأيت ولكنه راعى الأدب فأسند الموافقة إلى نفسه لا إلى
الرب جل وعز
  </p>
</blockquote>

The word [وافقت] bas been derived from the infinitive [موافقت] and this
infinitive belongs to the mode of [مفاعلة] which denotes cooperation and
reciprocity of two persons in one affair. Of course, the action is
attributed to one of the two who is also affiliated to the other and the
other in reality is called [مفعول الفعل]. Actually, the narrated
sentence of the Caliph implies as such:

«My Lord has come to an agreement with me with regards to my view and
has revealed His Quran as per my opinion.»

The commentator says: “'For the sake of observing politeness and
courtesy, the Caliph has attributed agreement to himself and not to his
Lord. In other words, he has said: “I came to an agreement with my Lord
and did not say: “Lord came to an agreement with me.'“

### The Number Of Agreements Rise!

The number of consents which Omar-ibn-Khattab himself has narrated are
not more than four. However, throughout the eras the number of such
consents have apparently undergone changes.

For example, Abu Bakr-ibn-Arabi a jurist of the sixth century (died in
543 A.H.) has mentioned eleven such consents.[^3]

After him, Ibn-Hajar an eminent commentator of Sahih Bukhari has gone a
step further and writes in his book 'Fathul-Baari' as such: The maximum
number of consents which we have collected in an explicit and evident
manner are fifteen in number.[^4]

The number of consents increase as such until they reach the figure
twenty. Suyuti, a renowned scholar of the twentieth century (died in 911
A.H.) has emphasized the same in his book 'Tarikh al-Khulafa'.[^5]

With regard to Omar's consents and agreements these traditionists and
scholars have cited the tradition of the Caliph's son, i.e.
Abdullah-ibn-Omar which on one occasion he says:

'No event took place where people had uttered some words about it and
Omar too had uttered the same except that Quran on that occasion was
being revealed as per the sayings of Omar.[^6]

### Quran - Following The Words Of Omar

Amongst the afore-mentioned consents, we see such examples which reveal
that the Quran has adhered to the words and sayings of the Caliph Omar.
As an example the Caliph himself narrates:

I said: 'O Messenger of Allah!  
 (A)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوِ اتَّخِذُواْ مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

'How good it would be to set the standing-place Of Ibrahim as the place
of prayer.»

And moments later the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و اتَّخِذُواْ مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing - place of
Ibrahim! (Holy Quran 2:125)***

(B) On another occasion, he has said:

The Prophet's wives revolted against him (Out of jealousy and hassle
with each other) and I addressed them as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَسَى رَبُّهُ إِن طَلَّقَكُنَّ أَن يُبْدِلَهُ أَزْوَاجاً خَيْراً
مِّنكُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«May be if the Holy Prophet divorces you then Allah will provide him
with wives much better than you.» (Holy Quran, 66:5)***

After this address, a verse with exactly the same contents was revealed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَسَى رَبُّهُ إِن طَلَّقَكُنَّ أَن يُبْدِلَهُ أَزْوَاجاً خَيْراً
مِّنكُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(C) Moreover, he has said:

After the description of man's creation in the Holy Quran, I said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then a verse with similar contents was revealed

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Blessed be Allah, the best of the Creators. (Holy Quran, 23: 14)***

(D) In another tradition it has come down that a Jew approached Omar and
said: 'Jibra'eel whom your helper (i.e. the Holy Prophet) remembers, is
our enemy.'

Omar said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كَانَ عَدُوّاً لِّلّهِ وَمَلآئِكَتِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَجِبْرِيلَ
وَمِيكَالَ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ عَدُوٌّ لِّلْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«'Whoever is the enemy of Allah and His angels and His apostles and
Jibra'eel and Meek'aeel, then surely Allah is the enemy of the
unbelievers'. (Holy Quran, 2: 98)***

After this event, a verse similar to Omar's phrase was revealed as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كَانَ عَدُوّاً لِّلّهِ وَمَلآئِكَتِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَجِبْرِيلَ
وَمِيكَالَ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ عَدُوٌّ لِّلْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever is an enemy to Allah and His angels and His messengers and
Gabriel and Michael - then indeed, Allah is an enemy to the
disbelievers. (Holy Quran, 2:98)***

These were some of the verses of the holy Quran which they say have been
revealed by adhering to Omar's statements.

### Agreement of Quran With The Caliph's Views

Similarly, we come across such instances where God commands His Prophet
to follow Caliph Omar's views and opinions.

For example, the Caliph himself narrates that he once told the Holy
Prophet (S) as such: 'O Messenger of Allah! Good and evil men happen to
converse with your wives. You should command them to cover themselves
with veil. Thereafter this verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ قُل لِّأَزْوَاجِكَ وَبَنَاتِكَ وَنِسَاء
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ يُدْنِينَ عَلَيْهِنَّ مِن جَلَابِيبِهِنَّ ذَلِكَ
أَدْنَى أَن يُعْرَفْنَ فَلَا يُؤْذَيْنَ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُوراً
رَّحِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Prophet, tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the
believers to bring down over themselves [part] of their outer garments.
That is more suitable that they will be known and not be abused. And
ever is Allah Forgiving and Merciful. (Holy Quran 33: 59)***

Another Instance: When Abdullah-ibn-Obayya (chief of the hypocrites)
died, the Holy Prophet was called upon to offer prayers for him. Omar
says: I got up and stood before the Holy Prophet and said: 'O the
Messenger of Allah! Will you offer pray for Ibne Obayya, the enemy of
Allah? Was it not he who on so and so a day said so and so a thing
against you and Islam? and ... I swear by Allah that at that very moment
this verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُصَلِّ عَلَىٰ أَحَدٍ مِّنْهُم مَّاتَ أَبَدًا وَلَا تَقُمْ
عَلَىٰ قَبْرِهِ إِنَّهُمْ كَفَرُوا بِاللَّـهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَمَاتُوا
وَهُمْ فَاسِقُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'And never offer prayer for any one of them who dies and do not stand
by his grave; surely they disbelieve in Allah and His Apostle and they
shall die in transgression.' (Holy Quran, 9: 84)***

These were some examples which show that verses were revealed in
agreement with Omar's views (as per what they say).

### Noteworthy Conclusion

The most important outcome of these traditions are as follows:

(A) The status and position of Omar has reached such high levels that
Almighty God accepts sometimes his words and views and reveals the
verses of His holy Book as per his words and expressions.

(B) The Holy Prophet's rank and position, moral considerations and
conceptual power have been reduced to such levels that he is placed
below Omar's disposition and intelligence!

Traditions Concerning 'Virtues'
-------------------------------

The afore-said conclusion can also he witnessed in the chapter
'Traditions about virtues'.

Amongst them is a tradition which is narrated from Abu Zar as stating:

«Allah has placed the truth upon Omar's tongue and he speaks the truth.»

In some of the manuscripts of this tradition it has come down as such:
«Allah has set the truth upon the tongue and the heart.»

This tradition has been narrated from Abu Sa'eed Khudri with three chain
of transmissions, from Abu Huraira with two chain of transmissions, from
Abdullah-ibn-Omar with thirteen chain of transmissions and from Abu Bakr
too with thirteen chain of transmissions.[^7]

Moreover, the following tradition has been narrated from
Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali (a.s.) with nineteen chain of transmissions:

«Composure and faith are spoken on Omar's tongue.» Some traditions have
it as «on Omar's tongue and heart». Yet, some of them mention as such:

«We, the companions of Muhammad (S) who were in great number never
denied that composure was prevalent on Omar's tongue.»

This expression has been narrated from Thareq-ibn -Shahab and Abu Saeed
Khudri with two chain of transmissions and from Abdullah-ibn-Omar with
thirteen chain of transmissions.

Again, a tradition has been narrated respectively in Sahih Bukhari,
Sahih Muslim, Sunan of Tirmidhi, Musnad of Ahmad and Musnad of Tayalesi.
Here, we shall narrate the tradition from Sahih Bukhari. As per this
tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) has said:

> "قَدْ كَانَ فِيمَا مَضَى قَبْلَكُمْ مِنَ الْأُمَمِ مُحَدَّثُونَ
> وَإِنَّهُ إِنْ كَانَ فِي أُمَّتِي هَذِهِ مِنْهُمْ فَإِنَّهُ عُمَرُ"8

«Amongst the nations before you, there were people with whom the Angels
used to converse. If, amongst my nation any one is to be found with such
a quality, he is none other than Omar.»

We may also present here the very tradition of Abdullah-ibn-Omar who
said:

“People have not spoken about anything so that Omar too has spoken (the
same) about them save the Quran being revealed in the very form which
Omar had spoken.”[^8]

It has been narrated from Mujahid, a famous exegetist of Quran belonging
to the School of Caliphate as such: 'Whenever Omar was giving his views
and opinions, Quran was being revealed accordingly.'[^9]

Also, they have narrated from Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali (a.s.) as saying: 'In
the holy Quran there exists the views. and opinions of Omar'. [^10]

From Bilal, it has been narrated as such: 'The Messenger of Allah said:
'If I had not been sent amongst you for the Messengership, then Omar
would have been appointed for the same.'[^11]

They have narrated a tradition from Uqaba-ibn-Aamer with nine chain of
transmissions as such:

'I heard the Holy Prophet (S) saying: 'If there was to be a Prophet
after me, he would have been Omar-ibn-Khattab.' [^12]

A similar tradition too has been narrated from Abdulla-ibn-Omar. [^13]

### Traditions Which Undermine The Position Of The Holy Prophet:

We see many traditions which, while promoting the position of others,
have lowered the position of the Holy Messenger. Amongst them is a
tradition whose narration they have claimed to he from the Holy Prophet
(S) and it is as follows:

'The sun has not risen on any man better than Omar.' [^14]

### They Claimed: The Prophet Urinated While Standing

From the same group, traditions have been narrated from the Caliph and
Mughaira who have said:

The Holy Prophet went near the garbage can of some particular tribe and
urinated there in a standing position! While in a standing position, he
put his legs wide apart from each other. [^15]

Another tradition claims that the Holy Prophet (S) went near a garbage
can which was placed behind a wall and urinated there in a standing
position.

Thereafter, he asked for water and performed ablution. [^16]

In another tradition, the narrator claims:

I wished to go away from that place but Hazrat called me towards him. I
went forward and stood behind him. [^17]

Lastly, the fourth tradition goes as follows:

The Holy Prophet and myself were walking when suddenly Hazrat went
towards a garbage can that was placed behind a wall and stood urinating
just like downgrades do. I wanted to go away from him but he signaled at
me to approach him. I went near Hazrat and stood behind him until he
finished urinating. [^18]

### They Would Claim: The Holy Prophet Used To Eat Meat Sacrificed And Presented For An Idol!

Now, we shall bring another tradition which has been fabricated and only
devised to vanquish the personality of the Holy Prophet (S) and raise
the rank and position of others and yet consider them to be more
superior than the Holy Prophet (S).

Bukhari narrates from Abdullah-ibn-Omar as such: 'The Messenger of Allah
met Zaid-ibn-Nufail at Baldah[^19] at the time when Hazrat had not yet
received any revelations nor had he been appointed as the Messenger. The
Holy Prophet was spreading the table-cloth and had invited Zaid to
accompany him in eating a piece of meat. Zaid refused to eat and said: I
do not eat from what you sacrifice for the idols and except for that
which is sacrificed in the name of Allah, I will not eat anything
else.[^20]

Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal narrates from Sa'eed-ibn-Zaid ibn-Amro-ibn-Nufail as
such:

One day, in the city of Mecca, Zaid-ibn-Amro-ibn Nufail passed near the
Holy Prophet and Zaid-ibnHarith. These two who were busy eating called
Zaid to join them. Zaid said: 'O my nephew, I do not eat from what is
sacrificed in the name of the idols.

Sa'eed says: Thereafter, the Holy Prophet was never seen to eat anything
which was sacrificed for the idols.[^21]

#### Conclusion Of This Tradition

By paying attention to this tradition we can draw two conclusions:

(1) The human and spiritual position of Zaid, the cousin of the second
Caliph, has been elevated and,

(2) The position of the Holy Prophet has been shattered and brought down
below Zaid.

#### Analysis Of The Tradition

Abdullah-ibn-Omar-ibn-Khattab had been born after the appointment of the
holy Prophet's Messengership and had not seen the period before the Holy
Prophet's appointment. Thus, how can his narration related to the period
before the Prophet's appointment true!? [^22]

Zaid-ibn-Amro-ibn-Nufail, father of Sa'eed was the cousin of the second
Caliph i.e. Omar-ibn-Khattab and had died before the Holy Prophet's
appointment. Historians narrate that Zaid had travelled to Syria in
search of the true religion and afterwards did not succeed in returning
to his homeland and died or was poisoned in Syria itself or on the way.
[^23]

Therefore, it was basically not possible for such a meeting to have
taken place. (while the afore-mentioned tradition claims so)

The word [نصب] which has been used in the context of this tradition is
the singular of [أنصاب] (Ans'aab».

[نصب] is the very stones which were placed around the Ka'aba and on
which they would make sacrifices for the idols. [^24]

Tarnishing The Image Of The Holy Prophet's Fore-Fathers
-------------------------------------------------------

In some of these traditions effort has also been made to shatter the
position of the Holy Prophet's (S) fore-fathers and ancestors. For
example, Muslim narrates from Anas-ibn-Malik as such:

'A person addressed the Holy Prophet as such: 'O the Messenger of Allah!
Where can my father be just now? (Who had already died).

The Holy Prophet replied: 'In the fire.'

When that man turned to go away, Hazrat called him back and said:

My father and your father are both in the fire. [^25]

In some of these traditions which have been fabricated to shatter the
position of the Holy Prophet, we see that precaution (so to speak) has
been observed to a certain extent. That is to say, equality has been
observed between the Holy Prophet and others as can be seen in the
foregoing traditions and also in the traditions of Erbaaz-ibn-Salim.

Abu Dawoud in his 'Sunan', Ibn-Maaja, Tirmidhi and Daarami in their
'Sunan' and Ahmad in his 'Musnad' have narrated from Erbaaz-ibn-Salim
who said:

«One day, the Holy Prophet (S) stood amongst us and delivered a speech.
He exhorted us so eloquently that the hearts of the listeners overflew
with fear and tears rolled down their eyes.» They said: 'O the Messenger
of Allah, perhaps this is your last exhortation. If it is so, then make
your will. He replied: Cling to piety and pay attention towards Allah.
Obey your ruler even though he may be al Habashi slave. After me, you
will witness severe controversies. Under such circumstances it will be
your duty to follow my 'Sunnah' (ways) and the 'Sunnah' of
Khulafa-e -Rashideen and Mahdiyeen. As far as possible, you should
strive to safeguard these 'Sunnahs'.[^26]

Analysis: If we wish to analyze these traditions just like the way we
examined the matter of commencement of descending of revelation and the
matter of 'Gharaniq', it would take a tremendous while. Nevertheless, we
shall examine in brief some of the more important ones from among them.

Examination Of Omar's Agreement
-------------------------------

Traditions (dealing with Omar's agreement with God) or (God's agreement
with Omar) reveal that either the Caliph used to set forth some matter
before the Holy Prophet and make suggestions to him or that he used to
forbid the Prophet from certain acts as a result of which special verses
of the Holy Quran were revealed and it commanded the Holy Prophet to
follow the sayings of the Caliph. First of all, we shall refer to those
very verses and see for ourselves whether they are true of these claims
or not:

### Agreement About The Standing-Place Of Ibrahim

In Sahih Bukhari, the first mentioned case about Omar's agreements with
God or vice-versa is as follows:

The Caliph told the Holy Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو اتّخذنا من مقام إبراهيم مصلى؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

What is the harm if we set the standing-place of Ibrahim as the place of
prayer?

Immediately after this, the Holy Prophet was addressed in the form of
revelation with exactly the same words as the saying of the Caliph.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّخِذُواْ مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing - place of
Ibrahim! (Holy Qur’an 2:125)***

#### Analysing This Agreement

This statement is a part of a verse which is connected to verses 124 to
132 in Sura Baqarah. All of these verses speak about Ibrahim and mention
the story of construction of Ka'aba and God's favour towards Ismail
especially so in verses 124 and 125 which say:

'And when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain words, he fulfilled them.
He said: Surely I will make you an Imam of men. Ibrahim said: And of my
offspring? My covenant does not include the unjust, said He.

And when We made the House a pilgrimage for men and a (place of)
security, and:

Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing-place of
Ibrahim. And We enjoined Ibrahim and Ismail saying: Purify My House for
those who visit (it) and those who abide (in it) for devotion and those
who bow down; (and) those who prostrate themselves.

In the above verse, the sentence «and appoint for yourselves a place of
prayer on the standing-place of Ibrahim» has not come by itself so that
it can be true of the tradition of God's agreement with the Caliph.
Rather, this sentence is a part of the verse 125 while this verse itself
is a part of the verses 124 - 132 where all of these verses speak about
three matters:

(i) About Ibrahim the intimate friend of the Merciful and his
construction of the Ka'aba along with his son Ismail - Especially verses
124 and 125 mention that God out of His Grace, made Ibrahim as an Imam
of the people as he had fulfilled the words of God.

(ii) He has made His House as the place of shelter and refuge for the
people and,

(iii) In this House, people should make the standing-place of Ibrahim as
the place of prayers.

From this description, it is clear that the sentence «Appoint for
yourselves a place of prayer on the standing-place of Ibrahim» has not
come by itself so that we can say: This sentence has been revealed as
per the agreement with Omar's opinion.

Moreover, the talk in Quran about Ibrahim's standing-place is not
confined to this particular instance only. Rather, in verses 95 - 97 of
Sura Al-Imran too, we read as such:

'Most surely the first 'House' appointed for men to the one at Mecca,
blessed and a guidance for the nations.

In it are clear signs, the standing-place of Ibrahim and whoever enters
it shall be secure.' In these verses too God has, first of all, reminded
us about the matter of Ibrahim's obedience. Thereafter, He has reminded
us about His House and its holiness and the fact that there are clear
signs from Him in this House especially the standing-place of Ibrahim.

This analysis obviously proves that especially the matter of his
standing-place and the reverence of the House of God have appeared in
succession in two sets of verses and in two places of the holy Quran
uniformly and the standing-place of Ibrahim has not come once or
separately by itself in one sentence so that we can say:

In this case, God has followed the words of the Caliph.'

### Agreement About The Prophet's Wives

Again, in the same tradition, the Caliph says:

Out of envy, the Holy Prophet's wives formed an alliance against him. I
told them: 'If the Prophet divorces you, may be Allah in return will
provide him with better wives than you'. Then a verse similar to this
utterance was revealed.

#### Analysing This Agreement

This sentence too has not come all by itself so that we can say: The
Caliph said this sentence and the verse was revealed in conformity with
his assent. Rather, this sentence is a part of the fifth verse of Sura
'Tahrim' and all the verses of the said Sura; especially the first six
verses have been revealed in connection with Ayesha and Hafsah, the two
wives of the Prophet. It is obvious that the entire verses have come
with regards to one matter (only) just as the same can be seen from the
following:

'O Prophet! Why do you forbid (yourself) that which Allah has made
lawful for you; you seek to please your wives; and Allah is forgiving,
Merciful.

Allah indeed has sanctioned for you the expiation of your oaths and
Allah is your Protector, and He is the Knowing, the Wise.

And when the Prophet secretly communicated a piece of information to one
of his wives (i.e. Hafsah) but when she informed (Ayesha) of it, and
Allah made him to know it he made known part of it and did not recount
the other part; so when he informed her of it, she said: Who informed
you of this? He said:

«The Knowing, the One Aware, informed me.»

If you both turn to Allah, then indeed your hearts are already inclined
(to this); and if you back up each other against him, then surely Allah
it is Who is his Guardian and Jibra'eel and the virtuous one amongst the
believers (as per the common and specific traditions the virtuous one
amongst the believers is said to be Ali (a.s.) and the Angels after that
are the aides.

Maybe, his Lord, if he divorces you, will give him in your place wives
better than you - submissive, faithful, obedient, penitent, adorers,
fasters, widows and virgins'.

It is self-evident that the afore said sentence (Maybe that Allah will
provide ...) is only a part of this incident and one cannot say that
this sentence has been solely revealed in conformity with the sayings of
Omar.

Agreement With Regards To The Sentence: 'Blessed Be Allah...
------------------------------------------------------------

Tayalesi in his 'Musnad' narrates from the Caliph as such: 'When the
verse ... [وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ مِن سُلَالَةٍ مِّن طِينٍ]
[^27] came to an end and it described the creation of men, I said:
[تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ]

After this, another revelation came as a result of which Omar's sentence
was added to the first verse.

Analysing This AgreementAnalysing This Agreement

The sentence: [[^28]فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ] too is a
part of 1 verse No. 14 of Sura Muminun and this verse itself alongwith
the previous and the following verses mention this matter as follows:

'And certainly We created man of an extract of clay,

Then We made him a small seed in a firm resting-place,

Then We made the seed a clot, then We made the clot a lump of flesh,
then We made (in) the lump of flesh bones, then We clothed the bones
with flesh, then We caused it to grow into another creation, so blessed
be Allah, the best of the creators.

Then after that you will most surely die. Then surely on the day of
resurrection you shall be raised.

It is very clear that the afore-mentioned verses are speaking about the
stages of man's creation until the time when man reaches perfection and
then dies and once again becomes alive on the day of resurrection. It is
also clear that this verse like the other afore-said verses speaks about
one topic and one matter. All these sets of verses have been revealed to
the Holy Prophet at one time while the tradition of agreement says:
Allah first revealed these sets of verses to the Holy Prophet without
the sentence [تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ][^29] and the
Prophet too read out these verses to the Muslims devoid of this
sentence.

By hearing these verses, Omar uttered the sentence [تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ
أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ]. God becoming pleased of this sentence added it
to His Book after taking it from Omar!

Astonighing indeed! We really don't know what to say in this regard!!

Whatever verses about Omar's agreement with God have been analysed are
adequate and we may say that all the (other) agreements of the Caliph
too are the same as these ones. Traditions concerning agreements of Omar
say: First, the Caliph would utter a sentence and then God liking that
sentence would include it in His Quran.

However, in our review, we saw that the related sentences are not
sentences which have come all alone so that we can say that the
traditions about Omar's agreements are in conformity with them. Rather
all those sentences are only a part related to some affair which has
been described by a number of verses.

Examining Omar's Agreement In The Light Of Traditions
-----------------------------------------------------

Over here, we shall review a few instances of Omar's agreement with God
or vice-versa from the view-point of traditions.

### About The Veil Of The Holy Prophet's Wives

Tradition about this particular agreement has come down in Sahih Bukhari
and the verse regarding the same has come in Sura Ahzab as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ قُل لِّأَزْوَاجِكَ وَبَنَاتِكَ وَنِسَاء
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ يُدْنِينَ عَلَيْهِنَّ مِن جَلَابِيبِهِنَّ ذَلِكَ
أَدْنَى أَن يُعْرَفْنَ فَلَا يُؤْذَيْنَ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُوراً
رَّحِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Prophet, tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the
believers to bring down over themselves [part] of their outer garments.
That is more suitable that they will be known and not be abused. And
ever is Allah Forgiving and Merciful. (Holy Quran 33: 59)***

If the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the
agitators in the city do not desist, We shall most certainly set you
over them, then they shall not be your neighbours in it but for a little
while;

Cursed: Wherever they are found they shall be seized and murdered, a
(horrible) murdering.

(Such has been) the course of Allah with respect to those who have gone
before; and you shall not find any change in the course of Allah,

#### Analysing This Agreement

In the first verse of this set of verses the Holy Prophet's wives and
other believing women have been commanded to cover themselves so that
they are not recognized and hence remain free from any trouble and
mischief.

The next verse talks about those who wish to create mischief against the
believing women and declares that if they do not desist from this act,
they would be either killed or banished from the city.

Thus, the verse about veil has been revealed on the occasion of an
incident. for perceiving this, one should refer to those traditions
which clarifies this matter.

Now, we shall set forth some of them.

### Occasion Of Revelation Of The Verse Of Veil From The View-Point Of Tradition

In this regard, traditions have come down from Ibn-Abbas, Anas-ibn-
Malik, Muhammad-ibn-Ka'ab Qurzi and others where all have come down in
one manner. For the sake of brevity, we shall mention here a few
traditions without mentioning the repetitive sentences.

Their sayings are as follow:

Since the Holy Prophet did not possess a house of his own in Medina
(after migration) he resided in the house of some of its local citizens.
Those houses were small and narrow. The Holy Prophet's wives and the
other Muslim women used to leave the house at night and go to the
surrounding areas for easing nature. Some of the lewd youths of Medina
who would stroll the street at night used to disturb and haress the
women with exception of those ladies wearing a veil as they thought them
to be noble. Those women who were veilless were considered by them to be
slave-girls and hence they would approach them.

In another tradition it has come down as such:

A person amongst the hypocrites used to trouble and haress the believing
women and when he was asked to refrain from this act he would say: 'I
thought she was a slave-girl.' For this reason, God commanded the women
to avoid dressing themselves like the slave-girls and instead to cover
themselves with the veil (except for one eye) so that they would be
recognized as the noble-women.

Ibn Abbass narrates:

God commanded the believing-women to cover themselves with the veil and
make an opening only for one eye whenever they wanted to leave the house
for the purpose of easing nature.[^30]

Umm-Salma narrates:

After the revelation of this verse whenever the Ansar women used to
depart from their houses, their heads would look black like a raven.
This was because of the black veils which they had put on their heads.

#### Another Tradition From Ayesha

They used to make their covering double-purpose and put over their heads
and then attend the congregation prayers led by the Holy Prophet. At t
hat moment, their heads were resembling the raven because of the black
veils.

The relation of these traditions with the afore-said verses are clear
and as per the above discussion, the command for wearing veil is not
meant for the Prophet's wives only, so that we can say: God while
agreeing with Omar, commanded the Prophet's wives to cover themselves.
Rather, the verses on veil were revealed because of the harassment
brought about by immoral and sickly youths of Medina against the
believing-women of that time. This trouble and harassment caused by the
immoral men is present even today and will continue till the end of
time. At that time too, the corrupt people used to bring such excuses
and other excuses too one after the other!

### About Envy Amongst The Prophet's Wives

In our examination of the verses of Quran with regards to this
agreement, we saw that the verses clearly stipulate that two of the
Prophet's wives joined hands against him. The verses of Sura Tahrim
where the sentence [عَسَى رَبُّهُ إِن طَلَّقَكُنَّ] is a part of it had
been revealed in this very regard. If we refer to the traditions, we
will find thirty more traditions which stipulate that these two women
were none other than Ayesha and Hafesah.[^31] Here, we will restrain
ourselves by bringing only one tradition:

In Sahih of Bukhari, Sahih of Muslim, Sunan of Tirmidhi and other books,
this tradition has been narrated from Ibn-Abbass who said:

«I was very eager to question the Caliph about the identity of those two
women with regards to whom the holy Quran says: 'If you both turn to
Allah then indeed your hearts are already inclined (to this).'» This
question remained until the Caliph left for the pilgrimage of Hajj and I
too accompanied him. On the way towards Mecca, he stepped on the
roadside for the purpose of easing nature. I too followed him. Moments
later he came back and began to take ablution. I was pouring water on
his hands and while doing so, I said: 'O Amir-ul-Mumineen! Who are these
two wives of the Holy Prophet about whom the Quran says: 'If you both
turn towards Allah, then indeed your hearts are already inclined (to
this).' He replied: 'Astonishing indeed 'O son of Abbass! Those two
women were Ayesha and Hafesah... [^32]

This tradition and tens of other traditions are unanimous that the said
verses have been revealed with regards to only two of the Prophet's
wives i.e. Ayesha and Hafesah. As such there is not any reason to
believe that all the Prophet's wives conspired against him and the
Caliph uttered the afore-said sentence and then God in agreement with
him revealed the same against the Prophet's wives.

### About The Commandment On Prohibition Of Wine

The examination of this agreement requires more than all the other
agreements and a reference to the traditions in order to know the
'occasion of revelation'. Here, we shall mention a few of those
traditions:

It has been narrated from Omar who said:- When the commandment of
reverence and prohibition of wine was revealed, I said: 'O Lord! with
regards to wine, send down for us a clear exposition.

Immediately after this utterance, a verse which is in Sura Baqarah was
revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ قُلْ فِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ
كَبِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«They ask you about Intoxicants and games of chance. Say: In both of
them there is a great sin.... (Holy Quran, 2: 219)***

Omar was called for and this verse was recited before him. However not
finding himself convinced, he once again said:

'O Lord! with regards to wine, give us a clear exposition.

Then, a verse from Sura Nisa was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَقْرَبُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَأَنتُمْ
سُكَارَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«O you who believe! do not go near prayer when you are intoxicated.»
(Holy Quran, 4: 43)***

Thereafter, a proclaimer on the Holy Prophet's side would cry out in
public gathering for prayers as such:

«Be aware! nobody who is in the state of intoxication should attempt to
perform prayers.»

Once again, Omar was called and this verse was recited for him. However,
he once more said:

'O Lord! send us a clear and manifest exposition concerning the subject
of drinking wine!

As such, this verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَن يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ
وَالْبَغْضَاء فِي الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ وَيَصُدَّكُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ
اللّهِ وَعَنِ الصَّلاَةِ فَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«The Satan only wishes to cause enmity and hatred to be sprung among
you by means of intoxicants and games of chance, and to keep you off
from the remembrance of Allah and from prayers. Will you then desist?
(or not? Quit it so that you will not fall prey to the conspiracy of
Satan)! … (Holy Quran, 5: 91)***

At this juncture, Omar said:

«We have quited! We have quited!»[^33]

Tabari has brought a detailed account of this incident in his Exegesis
as follows:

Abul-Qamus Zaid-ibn-Ali says: On three occasions God sent revelation
concerning wine drinking. The first verse was as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِۖ قُلْ فِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ
كَبِيرٌ وَمَنَافِعُ لِلنَّاسِ وَإِثْمُهُمَا أَكْبَرُ مِن نَّفْعِهِمَا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«They ask you about intoxicants and games of chance. Say: In both of
them there is a great sin and means of profit for men and their sin is
greater than their profit.» (Holy Quran, 2: 219)***

After the revelation of this verse some of the Muslims were yet drinking
wine so much so that two amongst them joined the congregation prayer in
the state of intoxication and while praying they began using obscene
words. For this reason God revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَقْرَبُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَأَنتُمْ
سُكَارَى حَتَّىَ تَعْلَمُواْ مَا تَقُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«O you who believe! do not go near prayer when you are intoxicated.»
(Holy Quran, 4: 43)***

However, there were still some people who used to drink wine but
definitely not at the time of prayers. This continued until according to
the narration of Abul-Qamus, a person who was in the state of
intoxication unknowingly began to recite an elegy in the battle of Badr
for the dead ones amongst the polytheists.

This news reached the Holy Prophet (S). In a state of anger and with his
cloak being dragged over the ground he approached that man. The man
thinking that the Prophet wanted to punish him with that which he had in
hand said: I seek refuge in Allah from His wrath and the wrath of His
Messenger. I swear by Allah that I will no more drink wine. After this,
God revealed an explicit order with regards to wine as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ إِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ
وَالأَنصَابُ وَالأَزْلاَمُ رِجْسٌ مِّنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ
فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ. إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ
أَن يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ وَالْبَغْضَاء فِي الْخَمْرِ
وَالْمَيْسِرِ وَيَصُدَّكُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ اللّهِ وَعَنِ الصَّلاَةِ فَهَلْ
أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«O you who believe! intoxicants and games of chance and (scarifying
in the name of) stones set up and (dividing by) arrows are only an
uncleanliness, the Satan's work; shun it.... Will you then desist? (Holy
Quran, 5: 90- 91)***

Over here, Omar-ibn-Khattab said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنتهينا! إنتهينا!
  </p>
</blockquote>

We have desisted, we have desisted![^34]

Tabari says: A person drank wine and then recited an elegy for the dead
polytheists of the battle of Badr. Tabari does not mention his name but
'Abshiyc', the author of «Al-Mustatraf» has mentioned so and in his
narration he says as follows:-

...so some of the Muslims continued to drink wine while some desisted
from doing so until Omar who was in the state of intoxication held a
piece of a camel's jaw-bone in his hand and struck it on Abdul Rahman's
head. Thereafter he sat down and while reciting the poem of
Aswad-ibn-Yafor began elegizing the dead polytheists of the battle of
Badr....

This news reached the Holy Prophet (S) who left the house in the state
of anger. His rage was so severe that his cloak was being dragged on the
ground and he started to beat him with what he had in hand. Omar said. I
seek refuge ill Allah from His wrath and from the wrath of His
Messenger.

At that moment, God revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَن يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ
وَالْبَغْضَاء فِي الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ وَيَصُدَّكُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ
اللّهِ وَعَنِ الصَّلاَةِ فَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«The Satan only wishes to cause enmity and hatred to be sprung among
you by means of intoxicants and games of chance, and to keep you off
from the remembrance of Allah and from prayers. Will you then desist?
(or not? Quit it so that you will not fall prey to the conspiracy of
Satan)! … (Holy Quran, 5: 91)***

Then Omar said: 'We have stoppedd, we have desisted!'[^35]

Qurtabi has brought another piece of this incident in his exegesis (of
Quran) and has narrated from Sa'eed-ibn-Jubair as follows:-

The people continued their ignorant customs and practices until God
continued issuing commands for the prohibition of the same. In the early
days of Islam, the Muslims were drinking wine until the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

was revealed.

The people said: We drink wine because of the advantages that it has and
not because of its harmful effects. This state continued until a ma n
drank wine and lead the people in prayers. While reciting a verse from
the holy Quran he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياأيها الذّين كفروا أعبد ما تعبدون
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O unbelievers! I worship that which you worship.

Thereafter this following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَقْرَبُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَأَنتُمْ
سُكَارَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Here, a group of Muslims said: 'We shall drink wine but not in the state
of prayers.... [^36]

A section of this incident can also he seen in a tradition narrated by
Hakim Naishaboouri from Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.)

Imam says: 'Before the revelation of the commandment on prohibition of
wine, a man from Ansar had invited us to his guests. We accepted his
invitation. We stayed in his house until the time for mid-night prayers
approached. Later a person stood forward and led the congregation
prayers. While reciting the sura 'Kafirun' he made an error in
recitation. For this reason the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَقْرَبُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَأَنتُمْ سُكَارَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

was revealed.

Thereafter Hakim Naishaboouri says:- Concerning the conditions of
authenticity from the view-point of Bukhari and Muslim this tradition is
an authentic one.

However, they have not narrated it. Thereafter, he adds: In this
tradition, there exists a great interest and it is this that the
Khawarij have attributed this intoxication and wrong recitation of
prayers to Amir-ul-Mumineen - Ali-ibn-Abi Talib and not anyone else!!
But, Almighty God has proved his innocence and purity through this very
tradition and just as mentioned before Imam himself has narrated the
incident with reference to someone else. [^37]

\* \* \*

Verily, such was the incident of Omar's agreement with his Lord. We have
brought these examples in brief and have described them as examples
which can lead us recognize the reality of all other consents so that
the readers realize that the reality of these consents are not something
outside the scope of these examples.

### Tradition About The Holy Prophet Urinating While Standing!?

The second incident in which we were able to do some sort of a research
is the matter of passing urine in a standing position God forbid -
attributed to the Holy Prophet (S) But, if we examine the books and
other sources, we will witness some facts fully contradictory to this
matter.

Ayesha says:

'Reject the saying of the one who narrates for you that the Messenger of
Allah (S) urinates in a standing position. He has never performed this
act but in a religiously recommended manner, i.e. in a sitting
position.[^38]

Mughaira-ibn-Shuaba narrates:

'Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) used to go to ease nature, he would keep
himself completely far away from the people.' [^39]

Abdur-Rahman-ibn- Abi Qarrad says:

'I went with the Holy Prophet to a far off spot for easing nature and in
fact, whenever Hazrat wanted to do this act, he would completely keep
himself away from all others.[^40]

Abu Musa narrates from the Messenger of Allah (S) who said:

'Whenever anyone amongst you wishes to ease nature he should search for
a suitable place for this act. [^41]

Omar says: 'When the Holy Prophet (S) saw me urinating in a standing
position, he said: 'O Omar, do not urinate while standing. Thereafter, I
never urinated in a standing position.[^42]

Jabir-ibn-Abdullah Ansari has said: 'The Holy Prophet (S) has prohibited
us from urinating in a standing position.' [^43]

In spite of such numerous sayings and commands why is there so much fuss
over making an issue of the Holy Prophet (God forbid) performing such an
act in the manner claimed? In this regard, we shall not say anything and
the clear-sighted readers can perhaps find the answer to this question
from the following points:

In 'Sunan' of Ibn-Maaja we find the following matter:

'It was the habit of some of the Arabs too urinate in a standing
position.'[^44]

Malik in his 'Muta' narrates from Amro-ibn -Maimun who said:

'I had witnessed Abdullah-ibn-Omar urinating while standing.'[^45]

The second Caliph, Omar-ibn-Khattab said:

'Urinating in a standing position is a better form of easing natural
need.'[^46]

### Eating Meat Sacrificed In The Name Of The Idols

The third tradition which we would like to briefly ponder over is the
matter of eating meat sacrificed for the idols and the blasphemy and
polytheism of the Holy Prophet's forefathers - God forbid !

In order to know the Holy Prophet's condition during the period of
ignorance, it would be most worthy to refer to his best companion and
his most intimate disciple i.e. Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali (a.s.) so that we
realize what he has to say about Hazrat's behaviour and conduct:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أمير المؤمنين (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولـقـد قرن اللّه به من لدن كان فطيما اعظم ملك من ملائكته , يسلك به
طريق المكارم ومحاسن اخلاق العالم ليله ونهاره
  </p>
</blockquote>

'From the time of his (i.e. Holy Prophet's) weaning, Allah had put a
great angel with him to take him along the path of high character and
good behaviour throughout the day and night. [^47]'

Imam Baqir (a.s.) too has specified the same fact in this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يوكل اللّه تـعـالـى بـانـبـيـائه ... ووكل بـمحمد ملكا عظيما منذ فصل
عن الرضاع يرشده الى الخيرات ومكارم الاخلاق ,ويصده عن الشر ومساوئ
الاخلاق 
  </p>
</blockquote>

'The Almighty Allah commissioned an angel for all His Prophets and right
from the time of Hazrat Muhammad's weaning, He sent His greatest angel
for him in order to protect and guide him on the path of goodness and
high character and dissuade him from evil nature. [^48]

With regards to the Holy Prophet's forefathers too we shall now refer to
the Ahlul Bayt school in order to see what they have said about them.

Imam Sadeq Jafar-ibn-Muhammad has narrated from his father who has
narrated from his grand-father who has narrated from Hazrat Amir-ul-
Mumineen (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ عبدالمطّلب كان لا يَستقسِم بالأزلام، ولا يَعبُد الأصنام، ولا يأكل
ما ذُبِح على النُّصُب، ويقول: أنا على دِينِ أبي إبراهيم عليه السلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O Ali! Abdul-Muttalib (my grandfather) never used to worship and gamble
with arrows called as «Azlam» which were objects of idol-worshipping and
gambling. [^49]

He never used to worship before the idols and never would he eat meat of
animals slaughtered on the fixture for the idols.

Asbagh-ibn-Nabatah says: I heard Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) say:

'I swear by Allah that neither my father (Abu Talib) nor my grand-father
Abdul-Muttalib nor (his  
 father) Hashim and nor (his father) Abd-Munaf ever worshipped any idol.

He was asked: Then what did they worship?

He replied: They used to recite 'Namaz' (prayers) on the path of the
upright religion of Ibrahim and they held on to his ways and customs.

These were some of the sayings of Ahlul Bayt about the Holy Prophet's
forefathers.

The Evil Consequences Of Such Traditions On The Beliefs Of Muslims

In the traditions of the Caliphate School we find the following
narrations:

A - It has been narrated that the Messenger of Allah, (S) before his
appointment had once invited Zaid-ibn-Amro-ibn-Nufail to accompany him
in eating. On the table-cloth, meat could be found. Zaid refused to eat
and said:]

'I do not eat that which you sacrifice for the idols. I only eat that
meat (of animals) which has been slaughtered in the name of Allah'.

B - It has been narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) after his appointment
had told someone as such: 'My father and your father will be in the fire
of hell.'

C - It has been narrated that the Holy Prophet while urinating in a
standing position called Huzaifa who came and stood behind Hazrat until
he finished passing urine.

D - It has been narrated that Hazrat being caught under the spell of the
magicians was thinking that the work which he had not (yet) performed
has been performed by him.

E - It has been narrated that on the day of 'Eid' two little girls were
singing in the presence of the Holy Prophet, then Abu Bakr entered and
said: 'Song and music of Satan!? Song and music of Satan!?'

The Holy Prophet said: Leave them, O Abu Bakr. Every nation has some
festival and today is our festival. (Eid-e-Fitr or Qurban)

F - It has been narrated that on the day of 'Eid', the Holy Prophet
carried Ayesha over his back such that her head rested on the Prophet's
shoulders and her cheek touched the Prophet's cheek in order that she
could see the Habashis (Ethiopians) performing in the mosque of the Holy
Prophet.

Omar entered the mosque and prevented the Habashis from their act. The
Holy Prophet said: Leave them alone O' Omar and then he told the
Habashis as such:

'O Habashis, be free and in peace.

G - It has been narrated that when the people who were witnessing the
Habashis singing and dancing saw Omar approaching, they began to
disperse. The Holy Prophet said: I am seeing the Satans of Jinn and men
fleeing from Omar'.

H - It has been narrated that Baridah was playing on a tambourine in the
presence of the Holy Prophet. As soon as Omar entered, he took away the
tambourine and sat over it. The Holy Prophet said: 'O Omar, Satan fears
you!'

Tradition On The Holy Prophet Cursing The Muslims

Traditions which reveal the Messenger of Allah cursing the Muslims are
numerous.

In reply to those who would ask him about this very matter, he would
say:

«I have made a pledge and covenant with my Lord that I am one
human-being - I become happy just one ordinary human-being becomes happy
and (at times) I become angry just as they become angry (due to various
material factors). So, O my Lord, whomsoever I have cursed from my
nation and he was not worthy of that curse, make him gain the favour and
closeness on the Day of Judgement!»

In another tradition he has said: 'O Lord whomsoever I have harmed or
used indecent words or cursed or lashed (with a whip) turn this deed of
mine into a source of mercy and purity for him and a means of proximity
in thee.

### The Holy Prophet Confessed His Ignorance In Some Of The Worldly Matters

Traditions of the Caliphate School of Thought:

Hazrat had forbidden the insemination (i.e. pollination of the female
date- palms) of the date palms. In that year, the palms did not bear
useful dates. Hazrat asked: Why have those date-palms become fruitless?

They replied: It was because of your so and so instruction.

He said: You are more acquainted than me in the worldly affairs.

### Forgetfulness Of The Holy Prophet In 'Namaz' (Prayers)

Traditions say. Once, the Holy Prophet had not finished more than two
rak'ats (units) of his night prayers that he arose from his place and
leaned himself over some wooden piece in the mosque. The people said:
Have you forgotten the remaining portion of the prayers or is it that
the rak'ats (units) of prayers have been reduced? He re plied: No, I
have forgotten and it is not that the prayers have been shortened.

However, when all reminded him together about the recitation of two
units of prayers, he returned back to the prayer - niche and finished
the remaining prayers in congregation with them!

The Holy Prophet Reciting Prayers In The State Of 'Janabat' (Unwashed
From A Sexual Intercourse)

Traditions say: One morning, when rows were formed for the
congregational prayers, the Messenger of Allah took his position at the
prayer-niche in order to lead the people in prayers. All of a sudden he
remembered that he had forgotten the major ritual ablution. He turned
towards the people and said: 'Remain in your places until I return.
Thereafter he went to his house, took the major ritual ablution and then
came back to the mosque while drops of water of ablution were still
dripping from his head. Moments later, he recited the 'Takbeer'
(inaugural phrase - God is Greatest ) and commenced his prayers.

### Conclusion

Whatever mentioned so far concerns the ethical personality of the
Messenger of Allah (S). There are (yet) other traditions which are
related to his prophetic mission, the divine revelation and the
propaganda of the same to the people which is the foundation of Hazrat's
missionary character.

Traditions say: As he had forgotten some verses of so and so chapter, he
would omit them at the time of recitation of the same. One day when he
heard a Muslim man reciting the same forgotten verses in the mosque he
said: 'May Allah bestow His Mercy on him. He has reminded me of what I
was omitting from the Quran.']

Traditions mention that when the Holy Prophet was receiving revelation
for the first time at Mount Hira, he doubted in the Angel carrying the
revelation least he may be a Satan or Jinn wanting to beguile him. In
that very matter of revelation too, he fell into doubt - least the words
of revelation are like the cadence of the soothsayers which the Satan or
Jinn inspires them and he too has become a soothsayer. Thus the
Messenger of Allah (S) doubted as such in the heavenly revelation and in
the divine emissary until a Christian scholar delivered him from the
state of wandering and perplexity and made him steadfast in his affairs.

Moreover, there are much greater tradicements than these, such as the
myths level led against the Holy Prophet that the Satan was able to
beguile him and make him utter some words of honour in praise of the
idols such that the Prophet failed to distinguish the truthfulness of
revelation from Satan and the true (divine) words from the cadence of
Satan. As such, he would recite the Satanic words thinking them to be a
part of heavenly revelation.

The calamity in some of the traditions can be seen reaching to such
pinnacle where God commands His Prophet to follow others in the matter
of legislation of laws. In traditions it has come down that Quran is
dependent on the views and opinions of some of the common people. For
example:

The Messenger of Allah was about to recite 'Namaz' (prayers) over the
dead body of Abdullah-ibn Abi Munafiq when Omar prevented him from doing
so and said:

'Has not Allah prohibited you from reciting Namaz over the hypocrites?'

The Messenger of Allah said: I have the option between two affairs that
Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ أَوْ لاَ تَسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ إِن تَسْتَغْفِرْ
لَهُمْ سَبْعِينَ مَرَّةً فَلَن يَغْفِرَ اللّهُ لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whether you seek forgiveness for them or not (is the same); even if
for seventy times you seek forgiveness for them, God will never forgive
them. (Holy Quran, 9: 80)***

In spite of this, the Prophet prayed over the dead body of Abdullah.

Thereafter, this verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تُصَلِّ عَلَى أَحَدٍ مِّنْهُم مَّاتَ أَبَداً وَلاَ تَقُمْ عَلَىَ
قَبْرِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'And never offer prayer for any one of them who dies and do not stand
by his grave!(Holy Quran, 9: 84)***

Similarly, their narration that a divine revelation commanded the
Muslims to appoint for themselves a place of prayer on the
standing-place of Ibrahim. This revelation came as per the suggestion of
Omar.

Likewise, the divine command ordering the Prophet's wives to cover
themselves in veil was in the same manner.

Besides, there are yet many more other examples which have been narrated
in books of hadith, exegesis (of Quran) and Manaqib (eulogistic
biographies) for the sake of brevity, we will avoid mentioning them.

These Traditions Create a Special Insight in the Caliphate School
-----------------------------------------------------------------

As per the afore-said traditions, the Holy Prophet's forefathers and
ancestors were unbelievers and idol worshippers while the others were
following the upright religion of Ibrahim. Likewise, the Holy Prophet
too was the same as he used to eat meat which was sacrificed for the
idols while those following the upright religion abstained from
consuming such meat.

As such, during the days of ignorancy, there were people who were more
superior (God forbid) than the Holy Prophet.

Later on, when the Prophet was appointed to the post of Messengership,
one Christian man was more discerning than the Prophet in the matter of
Messengership and if it was not for this Christian scholar, the Prophet
would have failed to perceive his own mission. Thus, this Christian man
possessed greater insight and clear-sightedness than the Prophet and
that too after the latter's appointment to the position of
Messengership!!!

The Holy Prophet's behaviour after appointment was such that he used to
urinate in public in a standing position and like the other he would
become influenced by sorcery as a result of which his common sense would
be affected. In some cases, others were better off than him like on the
occasion when he forgot one or two units of prayers and others reminded
him of his forgetfulness.

The Holy Prophet forgets his 'janabat' (unwashed from having had sexual
intercourse) and leads the people in prayers. At that moment he
remembers that he is in the state of 'janabat'.

The Holy Prophet curses, abuses and uses indecent words against the
believers whereas most of his followers are innocent of these affairs.

Out of blunder the Holy Prophet prohibits the people of Medina from
insemination of the date-palms and the dates in that year get spoiled.
The Prophet makes such a prohibition while (even) the children residing
in palm- lands are aware of this matter. As such, these children are
more clear-sighted than the Holy Prophet in worldly affairs.!!

The Holy Prophet carries his wife on his back in such manner that her
cheek rests on his cheek so that she can see the dance and play of the
Habashis (Ethiopians) in the mosque. This occurs at the time when
majority of Hazrat's followers refrain themselves from such an indecent
act. Thus, the common Muslims are more preferable to the Prophet.!!?

The Holy Prophet listens to music and in fact approves it. However his
companions like Abu Bakr and Omar abstain from it! Thus, these two are
more superior than the Prophet.!!?

The Holy Prophet drops some verses of Quran at the time of recitation as
he forgets them.!!.? He remembers them only when other reciters (of
Quran) recite them. Thus, they are better and more preferable than the
Prophet.?!!

### The Reasons Behind The Dissemination Of Such Traditions In The Caliphate School Of Thought

The materialistic life of the Caliphs which was full of sport and foul
play, debauchery, fornication and corruption and their plunge into the
sea of pleasures and passions was fully incompatible and inconsistent
with the position of Caliphate which they claimed: i.e. the succession
to the immaculate prophethood and pureness from such acts.

It is obvious that this contradiction has been instrumental in impairing
their dynastic rule.

Thus, it was necessary in this school of thought to attribute traditions
to the Holy Prophet and present his (wrong) deeds to be lawful in order
to justify the deeds of the Caliphs.

The story of these Caliphs is similar to the story of the
Governor-General of Baghdad who never used to accept bribe.

This story which was famous amongst the people of Iraq goes as follows:

One of the Governor-Generals of the Uthmani Kingdom who was nominated in
Baghdad was a simple and kind-hearted man. As such, he used to refuse to
accept bribes. For this reason, the officials and near ones became
deprived of accepting bribes and those who could fulfil their
aspirations through bribes were deprived of the same and they were
bought at bay.

One amongst them believed that if all acted upon his plan then they
could once again have access to bribes. Thus, as per his plans all
agreed to meet the Governor the next morning and prejust him as a sick
person and pray to God for his fast recovery. The next morning, when
they implemented their plan their sayings had its effect on the Governor
and he was led to error. He felt uneasy until he fell in bed.

At that moment, the main person who was behind this plan called cone of
the government officials and gave him some amount of money and
instructions to buy some sheep and then sacrifice them and give them in
charity for the fast recovery of the Governor.

After this, each of those who had designed this plan were taking
precedence over each other in paying the Governor a visit. They were
complimenting him for the disappearance of the signs of his illness and
were every now and then saying: Praised be God; mediation is very near;
for God has accepted our charity. In this way, the Governor arose from
the bed and returned back to the seat of governorship.

The next day, the designer of this plan brought a bag full of money for
the Governor and said: This bag has been given by so and so a person to
the Governor as a gift or bribe in order to win votes. The Governor
refused to accept the money. That man said: Didn't you see how God
accepted bribe from us and as a result saved you from this terrible
sickness!?

With this reasoning, the Governor fell into vain greed and accepted the
bribe. In this way, the door for bribe-taking was opened for one and
all....

The story of the Caliphs too was just the same. They wanted to have
sittings of joy, play tambourine, sing and make all the unlawful acts
(just as the same can be seen in the historical books like Al-Aagani
Abul Faraj Esfahani) permissible for themselves. The enigency of
rulership called for fabrication of traditions for the admissibility of
the deeds and actions of the Caliphs (by propagating that the Holy
Prophet of Islam was himself involved in such deeds).

Therefore it is quite obvious as to what was the basis and need for such
type of traditions. Unfortunately, the European orientalists and
Islamologists have relied more on such traditions and have clunged to
them in order to justify their personal motives.

Why do the orentalists set such types of traditions as a pretext!?

The Christian evangelists and the Jewish rabbis have strived in their
Eastern and Islamic research to present the Quran as the outcome of
human mind (negating the revelation) and Islam as a terrestrial
phenomenon.

For achieving this aim, what was better than presenting proofs from
Islamic documents.

However, as they could not find their aim and motive in the authentic
references and sources of Ahlul Bayt, they forsook them altogether and
referred to the Caliphate school. Of course in this school too, they
relied (only) on those traditions by means of which they could attain
their objectives and did not pay attention to those correct traditions
which could be seen here and there in this school which was found to be
contradictory to their motives.

For example, the orientalists disregard the following incident which has
been narrated from Amir-ul-Mumineen. In that tradition, Hazrat Ali
declares his presence at the outset of descension of revelation and
says: I heard at that moment a sound of shimpers and the Prophet said:
This is Satan who is groaning as he has become dejected with his
worship.

They have turned their face away from such types of traditions which can
be abundantly found in the school of Ahlul Bayt and have instead
referred to the Caliphate school. Moreover they have relied on those
traditions which help in fulfilling their sinister objectives and that
too such traditions whose narrators were not at all present so that they
could have a correct narration from them.

By relying on these traditions, the biased orientalists have narrated
that the Messenger of Allah became doubtful in the matter of revelation
and thought that whatever was being revealed upon him was in fact the
soothing words of the soothsayers which Satan has inspired to him. In
this manner, the Holy Prophet too is a soothsayer like the other
soothsayers.

However, they have not narrated the good and authentic traditions which
can he seen in the Caliphate school and if at all they have narrated
them, they have expressed their doubt. For example, the tradition that
the Christian scholars and Jewish rabbis have years before the Holy
Prophet's appointment, informed his near ones that he was the same
Prophet about whom the past Prophets have given glad-tidings....

\* \* \*

The orientalists have disregarded tens of other such traditions and
halve referred to traditions which portray an abominable and ugly
picture of the Holy Prophet so that under the light of these traditions,
they could wishfully create a blot on his heavenly visage.

Likewise, they have made an uproar out of the 'Charaniq' fable
narratives and set them as documents and have psychologically and
sociologically analysed them. However, they have never referred to what
the student of Imam Sadeq (a.s.) i.e. Hashim-ibn-Hakam al-Kalbi has
narrated and have never accepted his narrations which happen to be a
contradiction to the traditions belonging to the Caliphate school so
that they would realize that it was the Quraishite polytheists (and not
the Prophet) who used to utter these sentences in praise for the idols
and Sura Najm has been revealed to rebuff them.

That which was befitting their personal desires was mentioning the
following:

In the worldly affairs of the people, the Holy Prophet has given
commands contrary too science and knowledge like the command for
non-insemination of date-palms as a result of which he inflicted a heavy
economic loss upon the farmers of Medina. And when he realized his
mistake he said:

«You (all) are more aware and well-acquainted than me in the worldly
affairs.»

This attitude is in agreement with the insight of Christianity and the
like of them who say: Leave (alone) the affairs of Casear to Casear
himself and whatever is related to God leave it to Him!

Consequently, if the Muslims wish so, they can take from the East and
West the matters related to economical and social regulations. (This
case too is spawned by their material reflection. They say: 'Religion
appoints a person and regulates his relationship with God. However his
social connection should be defined by Eastern or Western systems and
regulations).'

### The Effect Of Such Traditions On Islamology (The Beliefs And Thoughts Of Muslims)

Apart from what we have said, there are yet other effects which are as
follows:

A - The previously mentioned traditions and numerous others like them
which can be found in the Islamic sources and references of the
Caliphate school create a special kind of belief for those believing in
them. (Which is commensurate with the traditions itself). For example,
the saying of some of the Islamic groups that the Holy Prophet possesses
no kind of privilege over the others. I once heard the same from one of
their learned scholars when I was on a journey. (He said:

«Like me, Muhammad too was an ordinary man because death befall him!!»)
This sect believes that the dignity of the Messenger of Allah from the
view-point of conveying the divine Messengership from God to the people
is like the dignity of the one despatching letters (or rather a
postman). Just as a postman does not possess any privilege over the
sender or receiver of a letter and only fulfills his duty of despatching
the letters, The Holy Prophet too in the same manner is regarded (only)
a conveyor of divine message and possesses no privilege over the others!

It is for this reason that this sect has not thought as necessary, the
respect due for Hazrat's grave or his remains, and have rejected the
matter of seeking benediction from his holy shrine and seeking
intercession for him. Rather, they consider all these to be acts of
polytheism. With regards to the holy verses of Quran and the traditions
which have come down in this connection and are found to be incompatible
with their aims and motives they have interpreted them esoterically.

B - Just as man is in need of system in his social life so that he is
aided in regulating his behaviour and relationship with others, he is
provided with guidance about the manner of his dealings and association
with the people and he derives the maximum benefit from nature and its
pleasures and therefore being kept away from the evils, in the same
manner, he is in need of one model and example where the (afore-said)
system has been incarnated in his existence. This is so that man by
observing him, can recognize his own way and path and will be able to
follow his manners easily.

This model or leader whether appointed by God or coming from man's
side[^50] - will leave a great effect on his followers.

This matter is in conformity with the saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الناس على دين ملوكهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The people follow the path and religion of their own rulers and kings.'

The rulers and kings are the very leaders of nations. It is obvious that
the ways of a leader who has been divinely appointed is having a greater
influence on his followers than other leaders on their followers!!

Based on the above rudiment, if man believes that the divine Prophets -
right from Adam to Noah, Abraham (Ibrahim), Jacob (Yaqub), Yusuf, Ayub,
Moses, David (Dawoud), Yunus, Jesus (Isa) and the last of the Prophets,
Hazrat Muhammad Mustapha (S) - were all sinners and for substantiating
his own views he relies and insists on the ambiguous verses of the Quran
and even interprets them esoterically (contrary to their external
outlook) in order to manifest them in accordance with his own views and
in this regard, he relies on those traditions which attribute sins to
some of the Prophets whereas they were in reality free from such sins
just as they have narrated in the case of (David) (a.s.) with Aurya's
wife[^51] or in the case of the Holy Prophet (S) with Zainab[^52] and if
he believes in the authenticity of these traditions, then such a person
with such beliefs with regards to the Prophets and that they are sinners
and not vanguards of their personal desires and do whatever they wish
while they hold the highest position of divine proximity, then how is it
possible for himself to avoid following his carnal desires and abstain
from committing sins!!?

In contrast to this school is the Ahlul Bayt school which insists
strongly that right from infancy, the Prophets have been under the
bounds and protection of divine immaculateness. This school refers to
the clear defined verses (instead of ambiguous verses) and derives their
correct meanings in addition to the fact that in this school, there
exists no traditions about the sinfulness of any of the Prophets.
Rather, the learned scholars and followers of this school believe in the
immaculateness of the Prophets and their legatees including the holy
Imams (a.s.).

In many of the traditions from these great divine leaders, one can see
their magnanimity, their aloofness from carnal desires throughout their
life and their invitation of the people towards chastity and purity. The
testimony to the above fact are the sermons of Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.)
and the invocations of Imam Sajjad (a.s.).

Moreover, numerous narrations have come about their unlimited piety,
their rampant weepings out of fear of God, their unilateral attachment
with God and their struggle in all dimensions of Islam in order to
achieve the satisfaction of God. Necessarily, the true Shi'ites
(friends) of such leaders will take lessons from their pure and sacred
life and from their precious and pleasant speeches and they will follow
them in all the spheres of their life.

### The Worst Effect Which These Traditions Have Left Behind

As mentioned before, the believers of these traditions tend to have a
special kind of belief with respect to the Holy Prophet (S) so far so
that they believe that the Messenger of Allah possesses no privilege or
superiority over the others. The greatest misfortune is this that some
of those very traditions create a mental groundwork for its believers to
believe that it is possible for one non-Prophet to have privilege over
the Prophet. Amongst them are traditions which have come down in the
chapter of 'Manaqib'. For example:

The Holy Prophet (S) said:-

«The sun has not dawned on any person better than Omar!» Therefore, he
is supposed to be more superior than all the noble Prophets and much
more than the Holy Prophet (S) of Islam.!?

Then the Holy Prophet (S) said:-

«Truth has been placed in Omar's tongue. He speaks the truth and his
heart too. has become acquainted with the truth. Faith is manifest on
Omar's tongue.»

Then the Holy Prophet (S) says:-

«In the past nations, there were men who used to converse with the
Angels. If amongst my nation there happens to be anyone like this, he is
none other than Omar.»

Again, the Holy Prophet (S) has said:

«If there was to be a Prophet after me, he would have been
Omar-ibn-Khattab».!!

Then, they have narrated various instances of Omar's agreement with God
or in effect God's agreement with Omar....

In these instances, Omar would present his views and then immediate to
this, Good would reveal the verses of Quran in accordance with his
views. In some cases, God even revealed the verses exactly in accordance
with Omar's words!

They have also narrated that in certain instances when differences would
arise between the Holy Prophet and Omar, God would reveal a verse in
favour of Omar and charge the Holy Prophet with the responsibility of
putting them into practice by following the Caliph's views.

It is for this reason that they have said:It is for this reason that
they have said:

«No event took place where people had uttered some words about it and
Omar too had uttered the same except that Quran was being revealed as
per Omar's sayings.

Also:

Verily, the views and opinions of Omar can be seen in the holy Quran.

The Effect And Result Of Such Traditions
----------------------------------------

When the Holy Prophet participates in gatherings of song, music and
dance;

When he forgets and consequently omits some verses of Quran and Satan
deceives him in uttering words of praise for the idols and he recites
them as part of the holy verses of Quran;

When he curses and uses indecent words against the believers without any
proper reason;

When he prevents the people from insemination of the date-palms while
this command appeared to be a great blunder; and numerous other blunders
of this kind.....'

And when Omar keeps himself aloof from music and dance and Satan flees
away from him.

When God has made the truth to spring from Omar's tongue and faith is
visible on his tongue and the angels converse with him.

When Omar forbids the Holy Prophet from performing a certain act but the
Prophet performs it disregardingly and consequently revelation comes and
commands the Prophet to follow Omar's sayings.

Such instances are repeated to such extent until the people say:

«People did not say anything (people over here refers to the Prophet) so
that Omar too has spoken about the same save that Quran was revealed in
accordance with Omar's views....!

It was for this reason that they said:It was for this reason that they
said:

In the Holy Quran, one can find the views and opinions of Omar!

Therefore, the effect of these traditions and numerous others like them
will be this that this belief (present among some of the Muslim sects)
will continue - even after the demise of the Holy Prophet.

For example if Omar, after the Holy Prophet's demise, had said anything
contrary to what the Prophet had said during his life-time, then they
would act as per Omar's views and sayings and abandon the Prophet's
sayings!

Their support for inclining towards such a belief is a tradition which
they narrate from the Holy Prophet as follows:

'If I had not been appointed (as a Prophet) amongst you, then Omar would
have been appointed'!  
 and

'If there was to be a Prophet after me he would have definitely been
Omar.[^53]

An Example Of Practice Of The Muslims With Regards To Omar's Ijtihad
(Independent Judgement)

the incident of ali's prohibition of «umrah tamatoo» (preliminary
pilgrimage)

Amongst the various practices of Omar's Ijtihad (independent reasoning)
and his opposition to the Prophet's 'Sunnah' (ways) was the matter of
«MUTAH HAJJ» (lesser pilgrimage)

During the journey of his last pilgrimage, Messenger of Allah (S)
propagated on Divine command the necessity of «Umrah Tamatto». The
Muslims, who were approximately one hundred thousand in number performed
the «Umrah Tamatto» according to the Holy Prophet's commands. Years
later, when Omar was on the seat of Caliphate, prohibited the Muslims
from performing this act. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متعتان كانتا على عهد رسول الله وأنا أُنهي عنهما أُعاقب عليهما و هما
متعة الحج و متعة النساء
  </p>
</blockquote>

«I prohibit the two 'Mutah' which was in vogue during the Holy Prophet's
time. I shall prevent anyone from performing the same and anyone found
guilty will be punished severely - One is the «Umrah Tamatto» and the
other the temporary marriage.» [^54]

After the issue of this commandment by Omar, the Muslims separated Hajj
from Umrah (preliminary pilgrimage) and performed Hajj without Umrah -
Of course for the sake of. acting upon Omar's commandment and
prohibition!!

This practice continued up to the time of Uthman's pledge. Uthman too
prohibited the performance of 'Umrah' but Hazrat Ali ordered against the
same.

In a journey, when these two met each other on the way to Hajj, Amir-ul-
Mumineen addressed Uthman as such:

«Why do you prohibit something which the Messenger of Allah had
commanded and acted upon?»

Uthman replied: «Leave us alone.»

Hazrat Ali said: «I cannot do so.»

When Hazrat Ali witnessed this situation, he made one intention for
'Umrah' (preliminary pilgrimage) and 'Tamatto' (greater pilgrimage) and
performed them and commenced the saying of 'Labbaik'. [^55]

In the pledge of Government of Abdullah-ibn-Zubair:

In the pledge of Ibn-Zubair, Abd ullah-ibn-Abbas would command the
people to perform the «Umrah Tamatto» while Abdullah-ibn-Zubair would
prohibit the same[^56] and say: Perform Hajj without the Umrah and
forsake whatever this blind man says.[^57]

In reply, Abdullah-ibn-Abbas said: «The one whom Allah has made blind is
you and you alone.» «Why don't you inquire this matter from your
mother!»

Then, Ibn-Zubair sent someone too his mother and inquired this matter
from her. His mother replied: «Ibn-Abbas has spoken the truth. We went
for Hajj along with the Prophet and in the beginning we performed the
Umrah Tamatto. Thereafter, we came out of 'Ehram' (pilgrims garb) and
became free from all the acts which are prohibited for one (clothed) in
a pilgrim state - even the prohibition of cohabitation.[^58] This
continued until the day approached for wearing 'Ehram' for the
Hajj-Tamatto.»

Urwah-ibn-Zubair, the brother of Abdullah-ibn-Zubair told Ibn-Abbas as
such:

«How far are you prepared to go into) deceiving and deviating the people
O' son of Abbass?»

He replied: 'O Urwah! What do you mean?' He said: During the period of
Hajj, you command us to perform the 'Umrah' (prelimanary pilgrimage)
whereas Abu Bakr and Omar have prohibited the same.

Ibn-Abbass said: «This act has been performed by the Prophet of
Allah.[^59] (and I am giving instructions on the basis of Holy Prophet's
deeds and commands).»

In another tradition it has come down as such: 'Ask your mother!'

Urwah said: But Abu Bakr and Omar have not performed this act!

Ibn-Abbass said: I am speaking from the Prophet's side and you are
replying on behalf of Abu Bakr and Omar.[^60]

It was very obvious that the passing of decrees as per the Holy
Prophet's 'Sunnah' but opposite to Omar's 'Sunnah' was reckoned by them
to be a deviation. This was because people like them had narrated that
God has placed the truth on Omar's tongue; that the faith speaks on his
tongue; that God has set his views and opinion - as the legal judgements
and revealed the verses of Quran one after the other on the basis of his
views and opinions to such extent that the Prophet is ordered to follow
Omar's views even if it differed with his own!

It was very obvious for the Muslims believing in the authenticity of
those traditions to act upon the independent judgements and views of
Omar and give them preference over the decrees of the Prophet (S) just
as we saw in the case of «Umrah Tamatto». There are yet many other
examples such as the matter of decree of 'Khums', (one fifth levy)[^61]
prevention of putting down the Prophet's traditions in writing,[^62] the
distribution of public - treasury on the basis of class - system, saying
three times the word of 'talaq» (divorce) in one sitting instead of
divorcing for three times, reciting the supererogatory (Nafila)prayers
in congregation in the month of Ramadhan and numerous other cases where
Imam Amir-ul- Mumineen (a.s.) mentions some of them in the end of one of
his sermons as follows:

'I swear by Allah that I commanded the people to recite only the
obligatory prayers in congregation in the month of Ramadhan and I
informed them that it is heresy to recite the supererogatory prayers in
congregation. I saw that some of my army men - those who were fighting
along my side - were crying out: 'O the people of. Islam, they have
altered the 'Sunnah' of Omar! They prevent us from offering the
recommended prayers in the month of Ramadhan! I feared that this group
would bring about unrest in certain sections of my army....

Similarly, they acted in accordance with the views of the Caliphs from
the 'Sahabah' (companions of the Holy Prophet) such as Abu Bakr, Uthman
and Muawiya by virtue of the numerous traditions narrated in their
favour.[^63] With regards to the 'Sahabah' (companions) too, they
believed some way or the other, in their immunity from sins although
they named this immunity as justice. They would say:

“The justice of all the companions has been proved and is something
indisputable» and «All the companions are just and one cannot say
anything (wrong) about them.”[^64]

In the book 'Introduction to Mer'aat-ul-Uqool, we have brought instances
of judgements of the companions (amongst the Caliphs) and also said: The
only person whom we have not found to express his own views and opinion
(i.e. pass judgements) against the 'Sunnah' and tradition of the
Messenger of Allah (S) is Imam Ali Amir-ul Mumineen (a.s.).

However, with regards to the other Caliphs who were not the companions
of the Holy Prophet, their views and opinions have not become the
'Sunnah' (way) even though the Caliphate school has strived with all its
power to uphold the position of Caliphate and degrade the position of
Prophethood and Messengership just as we shall see the same in the
following incidents:

A - Once Hajjaj in one of his sermons said: «Take heed of the Caliph of
Allah and obey him i.e. Abdul-Malik-ibn-Marwan the chosen one of Allah.»
While addressing the people he said:

«Tell me; whether your sent One is more worthy in your eyes or your
successor in your family?[^65] (by this, he meant to say that the Holy
Prophet is only a sent one from God towards the people while Abdul-Malik
is the Caliph and representative of God amongst His creatures).
Therefore, as this Prophet is only a carrier of message while the Caliph
is the eldest son of a father of a house who bears the responsibility of
running the affairs of the family in his father's absence, there exists
a vast difference between the two.»

Hajjaj too wrote a letter to Abdul Malik the Ummayad governor and
mentioned therein the lofty position of Caliphate. He stated that the
earth and the heavens are set up due to the value and credibility of the
position of Caliphate and Caliph. As a matter of fact, a Caliph is
nearest to Allah than even the angels and is more preferable and
superior to the Prophet and Messengers. This is because Allah created
Adam with the help of His own Hands and placed him in His Paradise.
Thereafter, He sent him to the earth and made him as His Caliph and
later sent the Angels as a Prophet towards him!

This letter and the reasonings mentioned therein in revealing the
exalted position of Caliphate ecstasized Abdul-Malik who said:

«I wish that the people from the Khawarij were present before me. I
would have argued and reasoned with them with the contents of this
letter.» [^66]

In one of those years Walid-ibn-Abdul-Malik ordered Abdullah-ibn-Khalid,
the Governor of Mecca to dig a well in that particular city. A well was
dug and fresh water was obtained from it. Abdullah, the governor of
Mecca ordered that the water of well should be brought out and amassed
in a pond next to the 'ZamZam' water so that the people would realize
the superiority of that particular well-water over the water of ZamZam.
Thereafter, Abdullah, the governor of Mecca said in his sermon as such:

«'O people! Who is greater and more superior in position? The
representative and successor of a person amongst his family or a
messenger and the message he carries for them? By Allah, if you do not
know the superiority of the position of Caliphate, then pay attention to
this incident:,

Ibrahim, the Friend of the All-Compassionate requested Allah to provide
him water and Allah too provided him some salty water. On the other
hand, the Caliph asked Allah for some water and Allah granted him fresh
water (the water from well which he had dug on the Caliph's order in
contrast to the water of ZamZam).»

After this story, the water of that well dried up and nobody knew what
actually happened.» [^67]

When Wahid, son of Yazid, son of the corrupt Abdul Malik assumed the
Caliphate, Marwan-ibnMuhammad, the governor of Armanistan wrote a letter
to him and congratulated and complimented him for his position of divine
Caliphate. [^68]

In one of the gatherings of Mahdi, the Abbassi Caliph, it was said that
Wahid-ibn-Yazid had been a dualist. Mahdi said: The position of divine
Caliphate is that it can be much higher than entrusted to a dualist.

\* \* \*

Those close to the Caliphate raised in this manner the status of
Caliphate from the Caliphate of the Messenger of Allah (S) to the Divine
Caliphate itself and took off from it, the condition of justice and the
duty of following the Islamic precepts. To prove this, they have brought
traditions like the one from Huzaifa which can be seen in Sahih Muslim
as follows:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: 'After me shall come the Imams who will
neither follow my ways and customs nor accept my 'Sunnah'. Amongst them
are men whose hearts are like the heart of Satan in a human body!

Husaifa says: I asked:- 'O the Messenger of Allah! If I live till that
time, then what should I do?

He said: «Pay heed and obey the leader even if he lashes you and seizes
your wealth.» [^69]

Also, they have forged on the words of Ibn-Abbass a tradition from the
Messenger of Allah (S) as such:

'Any one who sees anything abominable from his Imam (leader) should be
patient because, the one who keeps himself aloof from the society by
even one step or span and then dies, has died the death of ignorance.
[^70]

In another tradition, they narrate as follows: 'No one shall pull back
even by one step, from the bounds of obedience of the government and the
one who does so and then dies, has died the death of ignorance. [^71]

At the time of onslaught of Yazid's army on Medina and the massacre,
plunder and violation of the chastity of its people, Abdullah-ibn-Omar
narrated as such: 'I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) saying: 'The one
who breaks the link of obedience of the ruling government will meet his
Lord on the Day of Judgement in a state where he will not have any proof
or reasons for his affairs and the one who dies and does not have the
allegiance of the ruler on his neck, has died the death of ignorance.
[^72]

Nuwi, the leader of hadith narrators while commenting on this tradition
says:-

'All the Ahl-e-Sunnat i.e. the jurisprudents, traditionists and
theologians have said:-

'A Caliph is not ousted from the seat of Caliphate for the crime of
debauchery, injustice and suppression of the people's rights and one
cannot revolt against him simply for these reasons. Rather, it is
necessary to advise and admonish him and make him fear the divine
punishment because traditions in this regard command us to do the same.
[^73]

Elsewhere Nuwi says:

'As per the consensus of the Muslims, to rebel and fight against the
Caliphs even though they may be evil and unjust is forbidden. Numerous
traditions in this regard substantiate each other and the Ahl-e-Sunnat
unanimously believe that a ruler cannot be dethroned just because he is
an evil-doer[^74]. About the necessity of obeying the Caliph they set
forth the following verse of Quran as an evidence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you.' (Holy Quran, 4: 59)***

A Hanafi jurist who was a great leader of this sect living in the end of
the third century says in his book which he had written for the general
public as such:

The seventh matter. It is lawful to pray behind every ruler - whether a
tyrant or a just one - because to obey him is obligatory and to disobey
him is a sin and heresey. The one who does not obey his ruler is a
partisan since the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you.' (Holy Quran, 4: 59)***

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

«Cursing the rulers is hersy and said:

'O Lord, bestow goodness upon the rulers.

Do not allow the ignorant to dominate them!.... and you should not be
like the 'Rafezis' who disobey and stand against their ruler. Under no
circumstances you should rebel against the ruler. If he acts with
justice, he shall be rewarded and if he rules unjustly, he shall receive
chastisement. Thus, he should be obeyed under all the circumstances and
the one who does not do so, will be from the Khawarij'. [^75]

### Conclusion Of The Previous Discussions

The conclusion which we can draw from the aforementioned traditions is
as follows:-

The Muslims should obey whatever the Caliphs command!!?

Here we shall set forth some examples of the beliefs of the Muslims
about absolute obedience of Caliphs along with historical events:

Masoudi in his book 'Murawwij'-az-Zahab' writes as such:

Haseen-ibn-Numair along with the Syrian army who were under his command
put up their ballista and war engines over the mountains overlooking
Mecca. They fired their canons in the direction of the Holy Ka'aba until
the House of Allah got partially damaged and its building put on fire.
In this regard, the citizens of Mecca were reciting epic verses like:

'The son of Numair has taken an evil step

He has set on fire the standing-place of Ibrahim and the place for
prayers!'[^76]

Yaqubi says:

«Obaid-ibn-Umair Lisee, the orator and speaker of the government under
Abdullah-ibn-Zubair stood on the roof of Ka'aba at the time when the two
armies were holding back from their fight and cried in a loud voice: 'O
you Syrians! this is the sanctuary of Allah which had been the haven for
all the beasts, birds and reptiles during the period of ignorancy. 'O
the people of Syria, fear Allah! In reply the Syrians said:
Obedience....! Obedience of the Caliph's command..... Attack....! Attack
before evening..... ! [^77]

While accounting for their action, some of the Syrian army-men said:

“The reverence for the House of Allah and the matter of obedience of the
Caliph clashed with each other. Obedience and submission before the
Caliphs command prevailed over the matter of respect for the Ka'aba!!”
[^78]

In Tarikh-e-al Khamees and Tarikh-e-al Khulafa of Suyuti we read as
such:

'As a result of shelling by the Syrians in the direction of the House of
Allah, the curtain and roof of Ka'aba caught fire. The horns of the
sheep which Allah had sent to be sacrificed in place of Isma'eel and
which had till now been hanging over the Ka'aba was also destroyed in
the fire. [^79]

Tabarani and others too have said:

'They set the House of Allah as the target (of their ballista and set it
on fire and then recited the following epic:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خطارة مثل الفنيق المزبد  نرمي بِهَا أعواد هَذَا المسجد
  </p>
</blockquote>

We will shell this mosque with ballista which resembles a drunk camel
with foam collected over its mouth.

Another braggart recited:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كيف ترى صنيع أم فروة تأخذهم بين الصفا و المروة
  </p>
</blockquote>

How do you review the usage of ballista which fall over those who are
present between Safa and Marwa.

Battle between Hajjaj and Abdullah-ibn-Zubair:

Zahabi narrates that Hajjaj, the commander of the Syrian army set up
five ballistas over the hills surrounding Mecca. He made the House of
Allah its target and shelled it with stone and fire from all directions
until the curtains of Ka'aba caught fire. At that moment, dark clouds
covered the sky and it rained as a result of which the fire was put out.
Lightning too struck and destroyed the war-engines of the Syrian army
along with fifty of their men.

Hajjaj said: «This incident should not scare you. This is a place of
lightnings and thunderbolts and whatever has taken place has been the
doing of nature.! [^80]»

Thereafter he cried out: 'O the Syrian people! Remember Allah! Remember
Allah!.... and obey the Caliph! [^81]

He further said: Woe be upon you! Are you not aware that calamity and
heavenly lightnings used to descend upon the past nations and sacrifices
would lead them to the fire. This itself was the sign of acceptance of
their sacrifices by God and if it was not that your sacrifices (too) has
been accepted by God, calamity would not have befallen you. [^82]

After victory, Hajjaj severed the head of the Holy Prophet's companion,
Abddullah-ibn-Zubair and a group of other Muslims and sent them to
Medina. The severed heads were kept before the public eyes for a period
of time in this city. Thereafter, he sent them to Caliph Abdul-Malik in
Syria. The Caliph donated five hundred dinars to the Carriers of these
heads and then, as a thanksgiving gesture cut short his hair and his
children's hair. (like the custom practised during the Hajj ceremony).
[^83]

### What Did They Do To The Holy Prophet's Shrine

With regards to the House of Allah (Ka'aba), they acted according to the
Caliph's order in the manner which we have already described. Now let us
see how they have treated the Holy Prophet's shrine and grave.

In this regard, Tabari says:

'Yazid ordered the commander of his own army to permit his army-men to
kill, loot and violate the chastity of the citizens of Medina for a
period of three days. He in turn acted upon these instructions and
declared the city of Medina to be free and open for his army-men for a
period of three days. They killed the Muslims, plundered their wealth
and violated the chastity of their women so much so that they raped a
thousand virgin girls as a result of which they became pregnant. A
countless number of people were killed in this event. Amongst the dead
were approximately seven hundred great Muhajirs, Ansars and patrons and
ten thousand other Muslims. Moreover, seven hundred men who had
memorised the Quran by heart had also been killed.

After three days of killing and plunder, the Commander of the Syrian
army took allegiance from the people of Medina that they would be
Yazid's slaves. He addressed each one of them in this manner: 'Give
allegiance, because you will have the right to receive your special
share of war-booty from Amirul-Mumineen Yazid. He is having a right over
your wealth and children. If anyone desists from such an allegiance and
says that he would not give allegiance will be beheaded as per the
decree of the Book of Allah and the 'Sunnah' of His Messenger!

Thereafter, he sent the severed heads to Syria for Yazid. When the heads
were dropped on the ground before Yazid, he recited the poem of
Ibn-Zuba'air,[^84] a polytheist poet:

I wish that my fore-fathers who were killed in Badr were present today

And would witness the helplessness of this Khazraj tribe.

And would become overwhelmed with joy and would say: 'O Yazid, Bravo!

After exterminating the people of Medina, the Syrian army advanced
towards Mecca in order to quell the uprising of its people against
Caliph Yazid. On the way death was hanging over Muslim-ibn-Uqba, the
commander of the army and when he was just about to depart from this
world, he implored his Lord as such:

'O Lord, if after submission to thy Caliph Yazid-ibn Muawiya and the
massacre of the people of Medina. Thou punish me, I will be a very
wretched person! O Lord, after bearing witness to thy Oneness and
bearing witness the Prophethood of Muhammad (S), I do not know any act
more lovable and promising for my Hereafter than the killing of the
people of Medina (on the path of obedience of Caliph). If after
performing this deed, I am (still) put to Hell, I shall be the most
wretched one.[^85]

99- Ibn-Zubair was an apostate poet for the Quraish during the period of
ignorance and has recited the afore-mentioned poem with regards to the
Muslim martyrs of the battle or Uhud and expressed a feeling of
satisfaction from those killed in the battle of Badr.

### Treatment With The People Of Medina

After killing Abdullah-ibn-Zubair, Hajjaj went to Medina. He settled
there for three months and severely tormented and persecuted its
citizens and derided them. In particular, he humiliated the companions
of. the Holy Prophet and branded them with the seal of bondage.[^86] For
example, he sealed Jabir-ibn-Abdullah's hand and Anas-ibn-Malik's neck
with the seal of bondage and in this way he wanted to degrade them.

He summoned Sahl-ibn-Sa'ad and said:

Why didn't you help Amir-ul-Mumineen, Uthman?

He replied: I have done so!

Hajjaj said: You are telling a lie.

Thereafter, he gave orders too put a seal on his neck. [^87]

### The Killing Of The Prophet's Household And Taking As Captive His Daughters

It was for the sake of obedience to the Caliph that they obstructed the
Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet from receiving water at Karbala. They
massacred them so far as that they did not even spare their infants and
killed them too. They let loose their horses to gallop over their
respectable bodies and plundered and burnt down their tents.

They took as captives the female members of the Holy Prophet's
household. They severed the heads of Hazrat's sons and took them along
with the captives from one city to another and from one territory to
another and during the last days of captivity, they were presented
before the Caliph (Yazid) in such a manner that as if they were some
captives belonging to the groups of unbelievers.

### On The Path Of Obedience To The Caliph

Whatever has been told, has taken place for the sake of obedience to
Yazid. The Syrians who attached the House of Allah i.e. Kaaba with
ballistas, in reply to those who said: 'This is a divine sanctuary'
cried out:- Obedience! Obedience!!

They also said:

The reverence for the House of Allah and obedience of the Caliph came in
conjunction with each other. Obedience to the Caliph prevailed over
respect for the House of Allah.

During the period of leadership of Hajjaj, when lightning struck the
Syrian army and consequently they desisted from destroying the Holy
Ka'aba, Hajjaj cried out: Remember Allah! Remember Allah in order that
you show your obedience to the Caliph - i.e. Abdul Malik!

After gaining victory over the rebels of Medina and after killing,
looting and vislating the chastity of their women, the Commands of
Yazid's army, while moving towards Mecca with the intention of giving
them the same treatment as the people of Medina, was overtaken by death
and just as mentioned before, when he was on the verge of dying he said:
'O Lord, if after so much of. obedience to the Caliph and killing of the
people of Medina. Thou shall chastise me, I shall be the most wretched
person!

Amro-ibn-Hajjaj who was amongst the commanders of Yazid's army at
Karbala addressed the Kufian army on the day of AsHura as such:

'O Kufians, do not lag behind in obedience and do not keep distant from
the congregation. Do not hesitate even for a moment in killing the one
who has existed from the religion and has made opposition with Imam
Yazidl-ibn-Muawiya.

Ka'ab-ibn-Jabir who had fought against Hazrat Imam Hussein (a.s.) in
Karbala says in his supplications as such: 'O Lord, we have remained
loyal to our pledge (with the Caliph). Do not place us on equal footing
with those who have not been loyal to the Caliph and have not obeyed
him.

The killer of Hazrat Hussein (a.s.) i.e. Shimr-ibn-Zil-Jaushan after the
dawn prayers, supplicated until sunrise and in his supplication said: 'O
Lord, forgive me. The people said: How will Allah forgive you while you
have set out from your house with the intention of killing the son of
the Messenger of Allah and has had a hand in his killing! In reply, he
said:

Woe to you! Then what should have we done? Our leader gave us orders and
we did not disobey them. If we had disobeyed them we would have been
worse than these donkeys pointing to several standing there.[^88]

> The Second Factor In The Alteration Of Islamic Precepts

The caliphate school reckoned the obedience of God to be a vital Islamic
duty and believed that [Arabic text] in the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from among
you.' (Holy Quran, 4: 59)***

refer to those very official- Caliphs whose obedience has been made
obligatory by God. Also, they have supported themselves with a tradition
which they attribute to the Holy Prophet that obedience of the precepts
is necessary and obligatory in all the circumstances. They spread around
that all the official Caliphs are the Caliphs of God and whatever they
command must be obeyed.

What was mentioned was a powerful and effective factor in inducing the
followers of the caliphate school in accepting and putting into action
the views and opinion of the Caliph, even though they were contrary to
the decisive Islamic ordinances.

For example, the manner in which they treated the innocent people and
the sanctuary of God, the shrine of the Holy Prophet and his Ahlul Bayt,
the Prophet's followers and hundreds of others like them and celebrated
the day of AsHura as the day of 'Eid'.

However, in spite of the fact that the views of all the Caliph were
sacred for the followers of this school of thought yet none took the
shape of religious decree other than the views and opinion of
Khulafa-e-Rashideen (rightly - guided Caliphs). This is because whatever
the Umayyad Caliphs had left behind in the society as a 'Sunnah'
(practice) was so forgotten in the course of time especially so after
the setting up of the Abbassid Caliphate. However, the views of the
«Khulafa-e-Rashideen» (the rightly guided Calilphs) and their
independent judgements vis-a-vis the 'Sunnah' of the Messenger of Allah
has till now been accepted as the religious precepts by some of the
Muslim sects and is still put into practice by them!

This is only because of the fabricated traditions (mentioned in our
previous discussion) which strived to lower the position of the Holy
Prophet and raise the status of the rightly - guided Caliphs especially
Omar-ibn-Khattab. We believe that this has been the second vital factor
in creating distortion in some of the Islamic precepts and this is
exactly the reason why the orientalists have said that the Islamic
precepts, after the departure of the Holy Prophet have had a gradual
development and have expanded with the passage of time -. For example,
the famous Jewish and Zionist orientalist, Agnas Goldzihar has written
an important book in this regard called «Perfection of beliefs and
precepts in Islam.[^89]»

The Effect of Forsaking the Imams Of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
------------------------------------------------------

Whatever we have mentioned till now, is the result of one action and
that is the separation of the Muslims from the Imams of Ahlul Bayt and
their disinterest in referring to them. The Aimmas are those who in
reply to a questioner would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مهما أجبتك بشيء فهي عن رسول الله (صلى الله عليه وآله) لسنا نقول برأينا
من شيء
  </p>
</blockquote>

'Whatever I have said in reply is certainly from the Messenger of Allah.
We never say anything according to our own views and opinion! [^90]

They would also say:

«I narrate from my father who narrates from his father who narrates from
Hussein who narrates from Amir-ul-Mumineen who narrates from Messenger
of Allah (S) whose sayings are the sayings of Almighty God. [^91]

\* \* \*

If, after the departure of the Holy Prophet, the Muslims had referred to
the Imams of Ahlul Bayt, and had taken their religious beliefs and
precepts from them and learnt Islam from them, this beloved Islam would
not have faced such calamities as it has faced till today. Moreover, the
Messenger of Allah had made a will to his nation which is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّي مخلّف فيكم الثقلين كتاب الله وعترتي أهل بيتي, ما إن تمسكتم بهما
لم تضلوا بعدي أبداً, وقد أنبأني الخبير اللطيف أنهما لن يفترقا حتّى
يردا عليَّ الحوض
  </p>
</blockquote>

'I am leaving behind among you two most precious things - the Book of
Allah and my descendants and Ahlul Bayt. If you keep hold of these two
things, you will never go astray. The Wise and All-Aware God has
informed me that these two will never separate until they meet me at the
pool of «Kauthar». (in Paradise). [^92]

They are the ones who have been vested in authority [أولي الأمر] after
the Holy Prophet.

Rulers like Muawiya, Yazid, Walid, Haroon, Mutawwakil and the Uthmani
Caliphs cannot be the [أولي الأمر] amongst the Muslims.

Just as the case when the Holy Prophet (S) was the [ولي أمر] (Master of
the affairs) of the Muslims in Mecca but was not a ruler, in the same
manner the Imams of Ahlul Bayt too are the [Arabic text] of the Muslims
and God has commanded us in the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you.' (Holy Quran, 4: 59)***

to obey them, even though they have not been the rulers. Although the
true rulership is enclusively meant for them, yet this right will not.
reach its rightful owner until the people cooperate with him in this
regard.

### Description of the Holy Prophet (S) in the school of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)

In our previous discussions we had gone through many inadmissible cases
where the Caliphate school had inflicted a great blow and narrated
against the holy presence of the Prophet of Islam (S). Now, its worthy
enough to narrate a few traditions in this regard from the books of
Ahlul Bayt for the sake of happy conclusion of this discussions:

#### Hazrat's Portrait

In the authentic books of this school of thought, a tradition has been
narrated from Hazrat Imam Hassan (a.s.) as follows:

I asked my uncle Hind-ibn-Abu Halah Tamirmi[^93] about the Holy
Prophet's personality. While describing in beautiful words the Holy
Prophet, he said:

His look was pleasant and charming such that a viewer would be
completely overwhelmed by seeing him. The brightness of his face was
like the full moon visible on the fourteenth night. He was neither short
nor tall but had a medium height. His hair was neither curly nor smooth
and if he would set it backwards, he would part it in the center of his
head and if it was in a dishevelled state it would not fall below the
parotid cavity behind his ears.

He had a sparkling face, protracted forehead and broad eye-brows and in
between his eye-brows there existed a vein which would turn bloody and
become inflated when anger would overtake him.

A sparkling line could be seen on his protracted nose and any one seeing
it on the first glance would imagine it to be a swelling.

He possessed a silver-coloured neck and an average and medium limb with
intricate muscles. His blessed chest and stomach were well-balanced and
equal and not humpy. He had a stout built broad shoulders and wide
chest. The palm of his hands were wide. His calf till the elbow and his
legs which was having a shallow sole were very firm. He used to take big
strides as if he is pulling his leg out of the ground and moving forward
in a bending manner. He would walk in a very gentle and cool manner like
someone walking over a slope. His hands were filled with hair till the
elbows but his stomach and chest were devoid of any hair.

The spot above his chest had hair and since a direct line had been drawn
till the navel, he always had his eyes fixed below His look on the
ground and this was much more than his look on the sky. In order to
observe something he would turn along with his body. He would never
stare but look in a considerate manner. He was always taking precedence
over others in voicing greetings.

108- Hind-ibn-Abu Halah who was the son Of Khadijah from her first
husband before her marriage with the Holy Prophet and was Imam Hassan's
uncle through relation, was killed in the battle of Jamal. He has
belletristic and charming words for the Holy Prophet's appearance. He
would speak in such manner that as if he is reciting a poem or would
narrate in praise of the Holy Prophet a humourous poem. Ht was for this
reason that Imam Hassan (a.s.) was fond of his sayings. Refer to
'Makarem-ul-Akhtag' of-Tabarsi: 11-23.

#### His Style Of Speaking

Imam Hassan (a.s.) said: I asked him to describe for me, the style of
the Holy Prophet's speech.

He said: He was all the time in sorrow, deep ponder and deliberation. He
was not in peace. He would speak only when necessary. While speaking, he
would pronounce the letters right from the outlet of his mouth in a very
lucid manner. He would never chew his words, and he would refrain from
using vague words. He would give the right of speech its due right. His
speech was always soft and gentle and not harsh or insulting.

He always considered the bounty of Allah to be great. However small it
appeared and would not utter anything bad about it. He would neither
praise or blame too much a food for the sake of its taste and flavour.
He was never angered by this world or the things of this world. However,
(on account of the truth, there was nothing which could stand fast
against his anger until he would succeed in assisting the truth. When he
wished too make a signal, he would do so with his entire hand and at
times of wonder, he would turn his blessed hand the other way. While
speaking, he would bring the right hand near the left hand and strike
his pointing finger on the palm of his left hand.

In times of joy, he would cast his eyes down. His laughter was more in
the form of a smile. When he would speak, his teeth which were as white
as snow would become visible.

#### His Behaviour At Home

It has been narrated from Imam Hussein (a.s.) who said: «I asked my
father to describe the Holy Prophet's behaviour at home, outside the
house and in gatherings.» My father said:

«The Holy Prophet had divided his time in the house into three parts -
One part for Allah, another part for himself and the third part for his
family. He would even use that portion of his time which he had set
aside for himself in favour of God's creatures and for other common and
special affairs. When he was at home, he would openly welcome the needy
and would never withhold anything from them. Of course with regards to
those virtuous and needy people who had one, two or more wishes, he
would give priority in fulfilling to the extent of the excellence and
number of their needs.

He would assign them with affairs which were to the interest of the
nation and inquired from them about the state of other people. He would
acquaint them with whatever was appropriate for them. He would recommend
those present to deliver the Islamic gnosis (which they used to acquire
from him) to the absent ones and to report to him the need of the poor
people since anyone reporting the need of a helpless person to a ruler
would be assisted by Allah on the budge (Sirat) in the next world and
would not allow him to ship and fall.

People would hasten to meet him and would disperse from his holy
presence only after acquiring knowledge about their religious and
worldly affairs. Of course, there were not talks other than such type of
talks and no one other than these people would be accepted by him.

#### His Behaviour Outside The House

Imam Hussein (a.s.) says:

“I asked about the Holy Prophet's behaviour outside the house and my
father replied as such:,

'He would speak only when necessary. He used to remain silent save on
important issues so that the people's hearts would unite together and
also they would not get scared away from him and themselves too. He
would honour the chief of every tribe and would also give them the post
of governorship. He would warn the people of seditions. He was always
amongst them without withholding his own good nature and cheerfulness
from them and at the same time would abstain from them. (i.e. their
negative behaviour) He would show kindness and speak affably to his
companions and would inquire about the condition of the people from the
people themselves.'

'He would laud and encourage goodness and reproach and despise the evil
(acts). He was moderate and did not possess a double type of behaviour.
There was no kind of violation in his affairs. His near ones were the
most virtuous cones amongst the people who were the most benevolent for
the people. The highest place and position would be obtained (from
Hazrat's side) by the one who was the most benevolent and beneficial for
the people.' “

#### His Conduct And Behaviour In Social Gatherings

Imam Hussein (a.s.) also says: «I asked about the Holy Prophet's conduct
in gatherings and he replied:

«The Holy Prophet would not sit and stand but with the remembrance of
Allah - may His Name be glorified. He did not reserve any right for a
special place for sitting and also abstained other from doing so. In
every gathering, he would sit in a place which would extend in a
circular fashion and recommended others to observe the same attitude in
a gathering. He paid equal attention to the people present in the
gathering such that none would become suspicious of favorition.,

'With regards to the one who would sit or stand besides him for some
need, he would wait for such a long duration until that person would
depart on his own initiative.,

'If ever a person's need was not fulfilled due to some reason or the
other, he would satisfy them with a smiling face and some sweet words.,

'He was an affectionate father for the nations and as far as the truth
was concerned, all were equal before him.,

'The Holy Prophet's demanour comprised a nature of patience, modesty,
forbearance and trustworthiness. The elders would earn respect while the
youngers received mercy from him. One could not hear loud voice or
witness dishonour in his gatherings. Over there, offences were not made
public.

His associates were all equal and of the same worth. The only measure of
their superiority lied in piety and humility.

'However, he would give priority to the needy and would caress the
lonely ones.”

Again Imam (a.s.) says: “I asked my father about the Holy Prophet's
behaviour with the people of his gathering.” He replied:

“The Holy Prophet was cheerful, soft and gentle in his associations with
the people. He did not possess the quality of rudeness, nor imprecation,
or excoriation and panegyrisrm. If he did not like something, he would
engage himself with some other work. Those hopeful in him would never
return back dejected.,

He had kept three things far away from himself: dispute, excessive
talking and every thing which was not relevant to him. Also, he had
abandoned three other things in connection with the people: reproach,
reprove and faultfinding of the people.,

“He would not speak but only on a matter which had God's satisfaction.
His associates would remain silent in his gathering and it was only when
he would finish speaking that others would begin to speak.,

'In his presence, they would not dispute and quarrel with each other.
Rather, they would listen to the speaker until his speech would come to
an end. He would cooperate with the people of the gathering in joy,
laughter, wonder and other instances.,

'He would tolerate the rudeness and crooked talks of the poor. For this
reason, the companions would bring the poor to the gathering so that
they would ask questions from Hazrat.”

To his companions, he would say:

“When you see a needy person, show your favour to him. Try to become his
host and help him to the extent of fulfilling his wish.”

He would not accept an eulogist except in a case when the matter of
gratitude and thanksgiving arose. He would never interrupt anyone's talk
except when the concerned person would trespass and exceed the limits.
In such a case, he would get up from his place so that the speaker would
terminate his speech.

Imam says: I inquired about the Holy Prophet's silence and he replied:

“Hazrat's silence was four-fold and due to four reasons: (1) At the time
of forbearance, (2) At the time of fear (from corruption), (3) At the
time when he would adopt a calm and special attitude for the purpose of
listening and (4) for contemplation and reflection.”

In patience and forbearance he was such that nothing would anger him and
make him lose his temper.

His fear was due to four reasons: (1) He would opt to do virtuous acts
so that others would follow him and (2) he would renounce the evil so
that others too would do the same. (3) His effort and endeavour was in
the direction of those things which resulted in the rectification of the
condition of the people or their goodness of this world and their
Hereafter. (4) Hazrat's silence was to the extent of necessity. His
attention towards the people of the gathering was the same.

Sometimes, he would go into silence when thinking and reflecting in the
transient nature of this world and its affairs and on what might remain
and what may perish.

Moreover, it has been narrated from Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) about the
Holy Prophet's disposition as such:

The Messenger of Allah was never seen to stretch his legs before others.

As he was 'Rahmat-ul-Alameen' (mercy to the Universe), he would never
think of taking revenge in the face of any oppression committed against
him.

However, he would not remain restful against the forbidden acts and
would not revolt unless his anger and revolt were on the path of Allah.

At the time of eating, he would never make his body lean over something.
There was no request which was asked from him which he would reply in
the negative. His talks were decisive and were not such that would annoy
a listener. Any one who would listen to his talks would understand them
easily.

The Holy Prophet would say: The best amongst you is the one who is the
most good-natured one.... until Imam Ali says: My eyes never set con an
eye like his.[^94]

Also it has been narrated from the Holy Prophet who said:

I make a joke but do not say anything except the truth.

Ibn Abbass has narrated from the Holy Prophet who said:

I have been trained by my Lord and Ali has been trained by myself. My
Lord has ordered generosity and goodness and prohibited stinginess and
oppression (rudeness and harshness).

There is nothing which is more loathed before Allah than being stingy
and ill-natured. Ill-naturedness spoils a deed just as vinegar spoils
honey.

\* \* \*

The Messenger of Allah has been described in this manner in the school
of Ahlul Bayt and in the manner in the Caliphate school!

Sometimes it has occured that the scholars of the Caliphate school have
narrated a matter from the Ahlul Bayt school of thought. For example
«Halabi» (died in 1044 A.H.) has narrated the afore-mentioned two
traditions from Imam Hassan (a.s.) and Imam Hussein (a.s.) in his famous
book «Seeratul-Halabia». But the Ahlul Bayt school has never narrated
the inadmissible charges of the Caliphate school which has been examined
under the discussion «The second cause of diviation» and has appeared in
the books of the Caliphate school.

Is it true that the Holy Prophet was really like what has been described
in the reliable books of the Caliphate school!?

Did the Holy Prophet really curse the believers!? imprecated them!
harmed them! and would then ask God to convert his curse into a mercy
and blessing for the accused one!?

Was the Holy Prophet as such!?

And should not the Holy Prophet really be like what has been narrated in
the school of Ahlul Bayt: that he was soft, good-natured and tolerant in
social connection and relationship. Nothing would anger him and he would
not lose his temper. He would not speak anything but the truth and was
not the one to curse or find fault.

He would never say anything to anyone which he himself abominated let
along the matter that he cursed the believers for no particular reason.

Is this true that the Holy Prophet used to urinate in a standing
position and would ask someone to stand behind him (as mentioned in the
Caliphate school) or is it that he never (even) used to stretch his legs
before anyone? (just as mentioned in the school of Ahlul Bayt)

Is it true that music used to be played in the presence of the Holy
Prophet and that he used to see dancing (as mentioned in the Caliphate
school) or is this true that he would not sit nor stand but with the
remembrance of Allah? (just as the same has come down in the books of
the Ahlul Bayt school of thought).

Why is it that the Muslims do not acquire all their Islamic knowledge
from Ahlul Bayt so that these differences are done away with and the
true unity of the Muslims and their cling to the rope of Allah is
achieved in its true sense!?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هَـذِهِ سَبِيلِي أَدْعُو إِلَى اللّهِ عَلَى بَصِيرَةٍ أَنَاْ
وَمَنِ اتَّبَعَنِي وَسُبْحَانَ اللّهِ وَمَا أَنَاْ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say, "This is my way; I invite to Allah with insight, I and those who
follow me. And exalted is Allah; and I am not of those who associate
others with Him." (Holy Quran, 12: 108)***

[^1]: Bukhari - Book of Salat, Chapter – (ما جاء في القبلة) 1:809,
Printed in 1313 A.H. Also the interpretation of the first verse in the
same book 6:20; Tirmidhi 5:206 Egyptian print and Nesa'ee 2:323. (باب
الاشربة)

[^2]: 'Fathul - Baari' 2:51 and 'Omdatul-Qaari' 4:144

[^3]: Refer to 'Omdatul-Qaari' 4:144

[^4]: 'Fathul-Baari' 2:51

[^5]: Tarikh al-Khulafa - Suyuti 122 Cairo print - 1992 - in the section
of 'Omar's Agreement'.

[^6]: Tarikh-e-Ibn Asaker 13: 1,8,10.

[^7]: Tarikh-e-Madinat-ul-Dameshq - Ibn Asaker 13:7,8 & 9.

[^8]: Ibn - Asaker 13:8 & 10.

[^9]: Ibn-Asaker 13: \* & 10.

[^10]: Tarikh-e-Khulafa - Suyuti: 122 Chapter of Omar's Agreement.

[^11]: Tarikh-e-Ibn Asaker 13:11

[^12]: Tarikh-e-Ibn Asaker 10:11

[^13]: Tarikh-e-Ibn Asaker 110

[^14]: Tarikh-e-Ibn Asaker 11 and Sunan of Tirmidhi - chapter of
'Manaqib' of Omar.

[^15]: 'Musnad' of Ahmad 4:246

[^16]: Sahih Bukhari 1:37 [باب البول عند صاحبه] and 2:48 [باب البول عند
سباطة قوم]; Ibn- Maaja 305, 306; Al-Daarami 1:171; Sahih Muslim - Book
of cleanliness - 73; Musnad of Ahmad 5:394, 402; Nesa'ee [باب الرخصة في
البول قائما من كتاب الطهار]; Sunan of Abu Dawoud - Book of cleanliness
1:7 and Sunan of Tirmidhi 1:30

[^17]: Sahih Bukhari 1:37 [باب البول عند صاحبه] and 2:48 [باب البول عند
سباطة قوم]; Ibn- Maaja 305, 306; Al-Daarami 1:171; Sahih Muslim - Book
of cleanliness - 73; Musnad of Ahmad 5:394, 402; Nesa'ee [باب الرخصة في
البول قائما من كتاب الطهار]; Sunan of Abu Dawoud - Book of cleanliness
1:7 and Sunan of Tirmidhi 1:30

[^18]: Sahih Bukhari 1:37 [باب البول عند صاحبه] and 2:48 [باب البول عند
سباطة قوم]; Ibn- Maaja 305, 306; Al-Daarami 1:171; Sahih Muslim - Book
of cleanliness - 73; Musnad of Ahmad 5:394, 402; Nesa'ee [باب الرخصة في
البول قائما من كتاب الطهار]; Sunan of Abu Dawoud - Book of cleanliness
1:7 and Sunan of Tirmidhi 1:30

[^19]: Baldah is a land outside Mecca tying to the western side of the
city.

[^20]: Al-Bukhari-Book of sacrifices: 72 [Arabic text] 3:206, 207, and
the Book of 'Manaqib' (virtues) of Ansars: 2:210 chapter 24. and Musnad
of Ahmad 2:69,89,127

[^21]: Musnad of Ahmad 1:189/1648 and Majamuz-Zawa'ed 9:417

[^22]: Taqreeb al-Tahzeeb 1:435

[^23]: Al-Mahbar: 175 and Ibn-Hashim 1:232 print - Ibrahim al-Abyari,
Masoudi and Muruj az-Zahab 1:84 print Asad Dagher and Bulugh al-Arab
3:252

[^24]: Mufradat al-Quran-article of نصب; Al-Mesbah al-Munir Mukhtar
al-Sihah and Qamous al-Muheet - same article.

[^25]: Sahih Muslim 1:133 - Egyptian print Ibn-Maajah 1:501/1573 -
almost similar to the contents of the previous tradition.

[^26]: Abu Dawoud - Book of Sunnah. Chapter of 'Necessity of Sunnah'.
4:200, Ibn-Maajah 1:15-16/42 Darami 1:44 - chapter of 'Submission to
Sunnah'; Tirmidhi 5:44/2676 and Musnad of Ahmad 4:126

[^27]: And certainly did We create man from an extract of clay. Then We
placed him as a sperm-drop in a firm lodging. Then We made the
sperm-drop into a clinging clot, and We made the clot into a lump [of
flesh], and We made [from] the lump, bones, and We covered the bones
with flesh; then We developed him into another creation. So blessed is
Allah, the best of creators. Then indeed, after that you are to die.
Then indeed you, on the Day of Resurrection, will be resurrected. (Holy
Quran, 23: 12- 16) وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ مِن سُلَالَةٍ مِّن
طِينٍ . ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَاهُ نُطْفَةً فِي قَرَارٍ مَّكِينٍ . ثُمَّ
خَلَقْنَا النُّطْفَةَ عَلَقَةً فَخَلَقْنَا الْعَلَقَةَ مُضْغَةً
فَخَلَقْنَا الْمُضْغَةَ عِظَامًا فَكَسَوْنَا الْعِظَامَ لَحْمًا ثُمَّ
أَنشَأْنَاهُ خَلْقًا آخَرَ  فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّـهُ أَحْسَنُ
الْخَالِقِينَ . ثُمَّ إِنَّكُم بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ لَمَيِّتُون .  ثُمَّ
إِنَّكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تُبْعَثُونَ 

[^28]: ibid

[^29]: (Holy Quran, 23:14)

[^30]: Muhammad-ibn-Seerin says: I asked from Ubaidah the meaning of the
verse: [يُدْنِينَ عَلَيْهِنَّ مِن جَلَابِيبِهِنَّ] and he gave a
practical reply. He put over his head a covering which he had with
himself and concealed his entire head with it down to the eye-brows. He
covered himself in such a manner leaving only one opening on the left
side.

[^31]: In our very first review of the 'occasion of revelation' of Sura
Tahrim we found thirty-seven traditions which had mentioned the names of
these two women and all of these traditions can be found in the exegesis
of the said Sura in «Durrul-Mansur» of Suyuti.

[^32]: Refer to the enegesis of the Sura in «Durrul-Mansur» of Suyuti.

[^33]: Sunan' of Abu Dawoud - Book of 3:325 First chapter and Sunan' of
Tirmidhi - exegesis of Sura Maidah.

[^34]: Exegis of Tabari 2:211

[^35]: «Al-Mustatral-fi-kulle-fun-mustatraf» 2:26 Author - Muhammad-ibn-
Ahmad Abshiyi (850 A.H.)

[^36]: Exegesis (of Quran) of Qurtabi 5:200

[^37]: Mustadrak as-Sahihain - Hakim Naishabouri 2:307

[^38]: 'Book of Cleanliness' from: Sunan Nesa'ee 1:26; Tirmidhi 8th
chapter and Ibn-Maaja 14th chapter. 'Musnad' of Ahmad 6:192, 213.

[^39]: Sunan Nesa'ee - Book of Cleanliness 1:17-18

[^40]: Sunan Nesa'ee - book of cleanliness, 'Musnad-Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal
3:443 and 4:224,237; Sunan - Abu Dawoud - chapter of cleanliness and
Tirmidhi chapters of cleanliness - chapter 16.

[^41]: Sunan Tirmidhi - book of cleanliness, chapter 16; Sunan Ibn-Maaja
chapter 23 and Musnad of Ahmad 4:396,399 and 413

[^42]: 'Sunan' of Ibn-Maaja - book of cleanliness, chapter (41) [في
البول قائما] 1:112 and Tirmidhi, chapter 8.

[^43]: 'Sunan' of Ibn-Maaja - book of cleanliness, chapter 14.

[^44]: 'Sunan' of lbn-Maaja - book of cleanliness, chapter 14.

[^45]: 'Muta' of Malik - book of cleanliness, chapter 14.

[^46]: 'Fath-ul-Baari' 1:443, Irshad-us-Saari 1:277 and Shar-ul-Nuwia
3:165.

[^47]: 'Khutba-e-Qasea' (Sermon of disparagement) No. 192 Nahjul-
Balagha Research by Subhi Saleh: 300 and commentary of Abdah 1, 182.

[^48]: Sayed Hashim Al-Bahrani: Huliat-ul-Abrar 1:18 Printed in Qum.

[^49]: Akmaluddin or Kamaluddin: 104, Bihar-ul-Anwar 15:144 and Min-la-
Yahzarul-Faqih - Chapter on Anecdotes.

[^50]: In the holy Quran, two types of Imams (leaders) have been
introduced (I) the divine selected one (II) an Imam who invites towards
the fire.

[^51]: Taurah - Book two, Samuel - Chapter 11.

[^52]: Tabari -1:1460 - 1462

[^53]: 'Ijtihad' (independent judgement) in the race or 'Nas' (text)

[^54]: Sunan Baihaqi 7:206, Badayat-ul-Mujtahid 1:346, Zaad-ul-Ma'ad
2:205, Al-Mughni Labin - Qadama 7:527, Al-Muhli La'bin - Hazama 7:107
and Ibn-Abid Hadeed 3:167 First edition.

[^55]: Sahih Bukhari 1:190, Sunan Nesa'ee 2:15 For other sources refer
to Preface of Mer'at-ul Uqool 1:232

[^56]: Sahih Muslim 8851145

[^57]: Ibn Zubain attributed blindness to Ibn-Abbas because he had
become blind during the final stages of his life.

[^58]: Zaad al-Ma'ad 1:248; Az-zawa'ed - Samania 1:330/1108 and Al-
Musannaf from Ibn-Abi Shuaiba.

[^59]: 'Musnad' of Ahmad 1:252 and Zaad-ul-Ma'ad 1:257 [باب ما جاء في
المتعة من خلاف]

[^60]: 'Musnad' of Ahmad 1:337 and Zaad-ul-Ma'ad 1:257

[^61]: Refer to preface of Mera'at-ul-Uqool 1:76-99

[^62]: Same book 1:27-42

[^63]: Like the tradition: [إقتدوا بالذين بعدي أبى بكر و عمر] Musnad of
Ahmad 5:382, 385, 399 and 402 Tirmidhi 5:609/3669 and Ibn-Maaja 1:37/97

[^64]: Preface of the book 'Al-Estia'ab' and 'Asad-ul-Ghaba'

[^65]: 'Sunan' of Abu Dawoud 5:209; Aqd'ul-Fareed 5:52 and Murooj-uz-
Zahab 3:147

[^66]: Al-Aqd-ul-Farid 5:51

[^67]: Incident (89) in Tarikh-e-Tabari 5:67; Ibn-Athir 4:205 and
Ibn-Kathir 9:76

[^68]: Ibn-Kathir 10:8

[^69]: Sahih Muslim [باب الأمر بلزوم الجماعة] 6:21

[^70]: Sahih Muslim [باب الأمر بلزوم الجماعة] 6:20,21

[^71]: Sahih Muslim [باب الأمر بلزوم الجماعة] 6:20,21

[^72]: Sahih Muslim [باب الأمر بلزوم الجماعة] 6:20,21

[^73]: Shar-e-Nuwi of 'Sahih Muslim' 12:229

[^74]: Shar-e-Nuwi of 'Sahih Muslim' 12:229

[^75]: Abul-Qasim Ishaaq-ibn-Muhammad Hakim Samarqandi [Arabic text] -
Translation on the commands of Amir Nuh Saamani in the year 370 A.H. by
the endeavour of Abdul-Hai Habibi - Tehran, 1969.

[^76]: Masoudi: 'Murawwij'-az-Zahab' 3:71 - 72; Beirut Print

[^77]: Yakubi: 2:251 - 252 - Beirut Print 1990

[^78]: Yakubi: 2:251-252 - Beirut Print 1990

[^79]: Tarikh-e-al Khamees 2:303 and Tarikh-e-al Khulafa 209.

[^80]: summary of 'History of Islam' - Zahabi 3:114 Ibn-Kathir 8:329 and
Tabari 2:844-845 and History of the Caliphs (Tarikh-e-Khulafa) 212.

[^81]: History of Islam - Zahabi 3:114

[^82]: Tarikh-e-al Khamees 2:305

[^83]: Tarikh-e-Ibn-Kathir 8:332

[^84]: Ibn-Zubair was an apostate poet f or thc Quraish during the
period of ignorance and has recited the afore-mentioned poem wit h
regards to the Muslim martyrs of the battle or Uhud and expressed a
feeling of satisfaction from those killed in the battle of Badr.

[^85]: Condensation from the following references: Tabari 7:11-14, event
of the year 72 A.H.; Ibn-Athir 4:47-49, 146; Ibn-Kathir 8:220-225;
Tarikh- e-Yaqubi 2:251-252; Muwwarij-az Zahab 3:71;
At-Tanbiyah-wal-Eshraf: 264; Futouh A'asam 5:300; Al-Aqdul-Farid 4:390;
Tarikh-Islam Zuhbi 2:357 and its detached account in Summary of
Mera'at-ul-Uqool 2:336- 344.

[^86]: During the reign of the caliphs, they used to brand the neck and
hands of Hajjaj with leaden scal in order to show that that animal was
belonging to the Government. Branding the companions or their hands
(too) was to reveal that they were the special property of the
Government.

[^87]: Tabari: 7:206 - event of the year 74 A.H.; Ibn Athir 4:139 and
Yaqubi 2:272.

[^88]: Zuhbi - History of Islam 3:18-19 - First edition

[^89]: This book has been translated into Arabic under the title:
[العقيدة و الشريعة في الاسلام] and a part of it too has unfortunately
been translated into Persian.

[^90]: Basa'er-ul-Dareja'at: 301 - Muhammad Hassan Safaar

[^91]: Usul Kafi 1:53 - Research of Ali Akbar Ghaffari.

[^92]: Sahih Muslim - Chapter of «Virtue of the Companions» - 36/37 and
'Musnad' of Ahmad 4:366

[^93]: Hind-ibn-Abu Halah who was the son Of Khadijah from her first
husband before her marriage with the Holy Prophet and was Imam Hassan's
uncle through relation, was killed in the battle of Jamal. He has
belletristic and charming words for the Holy Prophet's appearance. He
would speak in such manner that as if he is reciting a poem or would
narrate in praise of the Holy Prophet a humourous poem. Ht was f or this
reason that Imam Hassan (a.s.) was fond of his sayings. Refer to
'Makarem-ul- Akhtag' of-Tabarsi: 11-23.

[^94]: Makarem-al Akhlaq Tabarsi 11:23


