Chapter 6
=========

In this discussion, it was decided to analyze the third factor in the
alteration of Islam i.e. fabrication of traditions. However, as the main
issues are bygone, only the balance has remained which perhaps without
them, the depth of the matter cannot be clarified the way it should be
done.

The noble verses which you have witnessed in the first part of our
discussion are an address to the Holy Prophet (S) which say:

«O Prophet! surely We have sent you as a witness (Someone can be called
a witness i.e. he can be a witness on behalf of God over all the good
and evil deeds of men only if he himself possesses such characteristics
as God wishes) and as a bearer of good news and as a warner, and as one
being invited to Allah by His permission, and as a light-giving torch.»

Also: «Certainly Allah conferred a benefit upon the believers when He
raised among them an Apostle from among themselves, reciting to them His
communications and purifying them, and teaching them the Book and
Wisdom, although before that they were surely in manifest error.»

Also: «Surely We have revealed to you as We revealed to Noah, and the
prophets after him, and We revealed to Abraham and Ishmaeel.... (We
sent) apostles as the givers of good news and as warners, so that people
should not have a plea against Allah after the (coming of) apostles.»

This is the scheme of creation of the Universe and this aim and
objective of the Lord of the Universe begins right from the appointment
of Prophets. However, as mentioned before, those people whose lust and
carnal desires did not match these heavenly teachings especially the
powerful and affluent ones whose outburst of desires, lust and anger was
met through exertion of force and who did not wish to go under the
burden of restrictions of the divine rules, rose in opposition to these
rules and teachings.

Factors Which Attributed To The Alteration Of Religions
-------------------------------------------------------

One of the ways of their opposition and campaign was to repress the
propagation of these teachings and commands. Thus, they brought under
their check the narration and propagation of the sayings and hadith of
the Holy Prophet (S). However, as they could not prevent the propagation
of all the sayings of the Holy Prophet and the Muslims could still hear
the Prophet's hadiths from some comer or the other which was possible to
rupture the policy and custom of those who were having a hand in this
campaign and make them lose their credibility in the eyes of the people,
they were forced to basically render null the traditions of the Holy
Prophet form the view-point of their value, sacredness and heavenly
credibility so that there would no longer remain much possibility of
perfect reliance on them.

In the past, adequate discussion took place on these two matters. The
remaining portion which we wish to mention here is that which concerns
the sayings of the Holy Prophet himself. Whatever has occurred for the
past nations will also occur for this nation. Therefore, a question
arises and that is whether such events had also taken place in the past
and whether the previous nations had committed oppression against their
respective Prophets or not?

The reply to this postulation is affirmative. Unfortunately, such lies
and accusations were prevalent in the past nations too!

Of course the details of this will be mentioned when we will be
discussing the manner and dimension of alteration in the contents of
Islam. However, at this stage, we shall set forth as an example an event
which reveals the reason and manner of such actions.

Just as it is true in all divine religions, in the case of Zoroastrian
religion too, it is believed that wedding with the intimate ones was not
permissible. However, for centuries now marriage with the intimate ones
like mother and sister is considered to be lawful[^1].

Undoubtedly, the Prophet of Zoroastrians was amongst the heavenly
Prophets just as the same is proved for us from the ways and behaviour
of the Holy Prophet with the people of the Book and the Zoroastrians.

It has been narrated from Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) that very far in the
past, Zoroastrian King slept with his own daughter when in a state of
intoxication. News spread amongst the people and when all gathered
around his palace, they said: 'O King! you have ruined our religion.
Give up yourself so that we can purify you by implementing the penal
law. The King replied: Come close together and listen to what I have to
say. If my words satisfies you all, let it be and if it doesn't, you may
do whatever you like.

The people gathered. He said: «Do you know that God has not created any
creature more beloved than our father Adam (a.s.) and our mother Eve
(a.s.)?»

They said: you have spoken the truth.

He said: has not Hazrat Adam (a.s.) given his daughters to his sons and
his sons to his daughters in marriage?

They said: «You have spoken the truth. This is truly the religion.»

All concluded a pact on this deed and forgot whatever knowledge they
possessed of their sacred laws. [^2]

In this way, matrimony with the intimate ones got recorded in the Magian
religion and the heavenly religion fell victim to distortions. Such
distortions have always existed in the past including this 'Ummah'
(nation) where those in power presented the sayings and behaviour of the
Prophets in such manner as to match them with their personal desires.

Previously too, I had mentioned to you the story of that Uthmani
governor of Baghdad who used to strictly refrain from accepting bribes.
You also realized how the corrupt bribe - takers set up a true
appearance in support of bribe - taking and presented a practical show
where they reckoned it to be a God-loving one until the simple - minded
governor too fell victim to their trap and the door of bribe-taking was
once again kept open for one and all.

In short, those possessing power and influence want to accept bribes
which is contrary to the Islamic certainties. Similarly, they want to
practice corruption, drink wine, listen to lustful songs and music, make
fun by playing with dogs and monkeys, gamble and easily plunder the
people's wealth in an easy and unthreatened manner. In order to achieve
these, it is necessary for them to produce some pretext and then give it
the shape and colour of Islamic laws and canons. It is here that the
launchers of traditions come of help.

The ignormus mercenaries attribute such type of behaviours to the
Prophets in the form of traditions and degrade the heavenly position of
these great characters to the level of one ordinary person and even much
below, so that the one who is a dog-fancier, gambler, wine - biber or
adulterer like Yazid and Walid can rule cover the Muslims as the Caliph
of the Religion without much opposition!! This was the second factor in
the alteration of Islam!

110- However in recent centuries since the Zoroastrians have lived in
thc Islamic societies, they have gradually and steadily given up this
practice and considered it to be an evil and ugly act. Refer to Sae'ed
Nafisi: «The social history of Iran» 2/35 and Christensen: «Iran at the
time of Sassanides» - translated by Rashid Yasemi Pg. 348 - 2nd edition.

Fabrication Of Traditions
-------------------------

The third factor in the alteration of Islam is the fabrication Of
traditions. As a matter of fact, all the alterations spring from here
and occur due to this very factor because, we are already aware that the
glorious Quran will remain immune under from all sorts of attack and
danger. Divine Protection However the area which is prone to attack and
as a result likely to he affected is the description and exegesis of
Quran i.e. the traditions and 'Sunnah' (ways) of the Holy Prophet. We
are also aware that Islam possess two fundamental pillars - the holy
Quran and the 'Sunnah'. As such, attack on the 'Sunnah' or traditions is
in fact an attack on Islam and distortion in them is a distortion in
Islam.

Therefore, our most fundamental discussion lies here even though in our
classification, we have mentioned it to be the third factor in
alteration after mentioning the first factor i.e. prevention of writing,
narration and propagation of traditions and the second factor i.e.
degrading the status of the Prophet.

Thus the third factor in alteration is the fabrication of traditions by
means of which the ultimate aim of the enemies of Islam were achieved
and the atheist and the dualists could distort the religion of Islam -
although the divine religion was revived and taken back to the
human-society by the help of the Imams of Ahlul Bayt and this was
nothing but the Grace of God. We shall, God-willing, mention the details
of this matter in the future. However, before that we must examine and
discuss its form and root under various sections.

Why Did They Fabricate Traditions?
----------------------------------

Abu Jafar Mansoor, the second Abbassid ruler called his son Muhammad by
the title of Mahdi so as to show off that that Mahdi which the Holy
Prophet has informed about his emergence in the future is this very son
of mine i.e. Muhammad Mahdi. In the gathering which was held for giving
allegiance to Mahdi so that he could become the official heir-apparent
to Mansoor, the poets were reciting poems and odes and every one strived
in some way or the other to bring themselves close to the Abbassid
Caliph and draw his attention towards themselves. One of the courtiers
by the name of Mu'teeh-ibn-Aiyas too forged and presented a tradition as
such:

The Holy Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المهدي منا: محمد بن عبد الله و أمّه من غيرنا يملأها عدلاً كما ملئت
جورا
  </p>
</blockquote>

«Mahdi is from us and he is Muhammad, the son of Abdullah but his mother
is not from our family. He will fill the earth with justice just as it
had been fraught with oppression.»

He strived to insert all the signs of Mahdi Abbassid in the tradition
and after narrating the tradition, he pointed to the Abbasid Caliph's
brother who was present in the gathering and said: «He too is aware of
this tradition. He knows its authenticity!»

Under extreme pressure he too said: «Yes, he is speaking the truth!»

Later on, he told his associates as such: «See how he has wrongfully
involved us. He compelled me to confirm his blatant lie.»

This was one example showing how and in what manner the matter of the
satisfaction of one powerful Caliph was effective enough in producing or
fabricating traditions.

In the special scheme which was a part of the policy of the Abbassids,
Mahdi Abbassid was supposed to behave in a very comely manner toward the
people and deal with them in justice and kindness. For example, Abu
Jafar Mansoor had confiscated an enormous amount of wealth which
belonged to the people. He did not do this for personal profit as such
but deposited them in the government treasury in the name of its owners
so that in the near future when his son would gain control of the
government succeeding him, he could return back these wealth to its
owners and in this way attract the attention and satisfaction of the
public and exhibit that the one who was to spread justice on earth is
none other than him and he is the same promised Mahdi of Islam.

In implementing this plan, Mahdi strived hard to give a superficial
arrangement to his affairs so that everyone would recognize him as a
pious and good person. But nevertheless, he was pathetically attracted
towards pigeons and was fond of playing and looking after them and he
just could not forsake them!!

One day, a traditionist connected to the court by the name of
Atab-ibn-Ibrahim Nakh'ee goes in the presence of the Abbassi a Caliph
and draws his attention towards his son who was busy playing with the
pigeons. Of course, this situation was not so much desirable, especially
if we take into account this matter that he wanted to manifest himself
as the Promised Mahdi of the nation. Anyhow, in order to attract the
satisfaction of the Caliph and diminish his annoyance, Atab-ibn-Ibrahim
narrated a tradition as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا فلان، عن فلان، عن أبي هريرة، أن النبي (ص) قال: لا سبق إلا في خف
أو نعل أو حافر
  </p>
</blockquote>

So and so a person narrated for me a tradition from Abu Huraira that the
Holy Prophet (S) said:

«No competition is lawful except in shooting, horse-race and
camel-race.»

Then, he himself added [أو جناح] and in flying pigeons!

Why did Atab-ibn-Ibrahim do such a thing? He was also not given such a
command by the Abbassid Caliph. But as he was fully aware of the
situation, he added something to a tradition which was authentically
true just for the sake of giving validity to the status of the Caliphate
and manifesting the Caliphs behaviour to be lawful and hence pleasing
him. The Caliph Mahdi Abbassid gifted him with ten thousand dirhams.
When this traditionist left the assembly. Mahdi Abbassid told his
associates as such: 'I swear by God that Atab has attributed a lie to
the Messenger of God.' [^3]

However, the reason why the Abbassid ruler said these words was that
despite being in pressing need of such a fabricated tradition. He only
wanted to pretend his (so called) piousness.

In both the afore-said traditions, Muteeh-ibn-Aiyas and Atab-ibn-Ibrahim
distorded the traditions in order to gain satisfaction of both the
Abbassid Caliphs i.e. Mansoor and his son Mahdi. In this act of
distortion they tampered with the tradition which was narrated from the
Holy Prophet and which was well-known amongst the people.

The first one simulated that the applicability of the numerous
traditions of the Holy Prophet with regards to the promised Mahdi is the
same Mahdi Abbassid, the heir-apparent to Mansour and he also called
those present to bear witness to his saying.

The second one added one word [جناح] to the tradition of the Holy
Prophet about horse-racing and shooting in order that the matter of
pigeon- playing by the Caliph becomes included alongside horse-racing
and shooting and hence earns an Islamic value.

Therefore, it is quite clear that in the matter of fabrication of
traditions, they used to sometimes make use of the famous traditions of
the Holy Prophet and by increasing or decreasing some portion of it,
they would achieve their aim.

From the above two examples, we clearly realized that the reason why the
traditions and hadiths were forged were mostly for the sake of pleasing
the Caliphs and those in power in the government even though at times,
the Caliph had not given any special instructions in this regard. Of
course, it is quite obvious that had the Caliph given such an
instruction then the matter of fabrication of tradition would have taken
a more disasterous turn.

Official Command For Forging Traditions
---------------------------------------

Mada'eni[^4] who is amongst the first and the most reliable historians
narrates in his book «Al Ehdas» as such: «In the year of
congregation,[^5] Muawiya wrote and despatched a common command for his
agents who were ruling in all the cities of the Islamic territory -
right from India to as far away as Africa. In that command, Muawiya
wrote: Anyone who narrates anything about the excellence of «Abu-Turab»
and his progeny will render his blood useless and his property
dishonourable and will bring about his expulsion from the domain of
protection of the government.

After the issuance of this declaration, the people of Kufa i.e. the
followers of the household of the descendants of Ali (a.s.) suffered
pain and persecution more than the others. These people were those who
had been trained in the school of Amirul-Mumineen Ali (AS.) and were
well acquainted with Hazrat's love and affection. Persons like Maitham
Tammar, Sa'asat-ibn-Suhan, Hur-ibn-Adi and Adi-ibn-Hatim had lived
amongst the people of this city. They were those who lived with the love
of Amir-ul- Mumineen (a.s.) and also departed this world with his love.
Therefore, they were willing to bear the severity and difficulty of this
declaration and resign themselves to prison, torture, plunder and death.

The Command Gains Severity
--------------------------

For the second time, Muawiya issued a command to all his agents
instructing them not to accept the testimony of any of the Shias of Ali
and his household. (until now too, the testimony of the Shias was not
being accepted in some of the countries. In the eyes of the ruling
government, they were invalid from the view-point of justice. If there
was anyone amongst them who would bear witness in the court, it would
not be accepted) Muawiya wrote: «All the friends and lovers of Uthman
and all those who narrate traditions about his excellence who live under
your rule should be identified and honoured. Write to me about whatever
they have narrated about Uthman's superiority and register their names
and the names of their household.»

For this reason anyone who would narrate a tradition from the Holy
Prophet (S) about the Virtues of Uthman would prove to be a sort of an
official document and would be sent to the Umayyad court. This order was
so implemented that the virtues of Uthman and the traditions which
comprised his virtues gained abundance. This was because Muawiya would
unsparingly employ on this path money, robe of honour, awards,
properties, lands and whatever he had at his disposal and would
distribute them amongst the Arabs.

Therefore, distortion of traditions spread far and wide in every Islamic
city and the mammonists competed with each other in gaining access to
them. There was no expelled person who would approach the official
agents and ruler of Muawiya's government and narrate a tradition about
Uthman's virtues and superiority but that his name would be registered
and would gain likeability of the ruling power. Moreover his
intercession on behalf of others would be accepted and would gain social
respect and prestige. Some time elapsed in this manner!

The Issue Of The Third Command
------------------------------

After this declaration, another command was issued from the central
Caliphate stating that the traditions about Uthman has excelled in
number and has spread in all the corners of the Islamic cities. «When my
letter reaches you, invite the people to narrate traditions about the
virtues of the initial companions (of the Prophet) and the Caliphs. Do
not keep with yourselves any tradition which has been narrated by the
people about 'Abu- Turab' save that you bring for me the opposite of
that about the companions. This is because, this kind of an affair is
more lovable to me and pleases me more and vanquishes more the
reasonings of Abu-Turab and his Shias and the matter of Uthman's virtues
and his superiority is more severe for them!

The instructions contained in Muawiya's letter was read out to the
people and what followed was fabricated traditions about the virtues of
the companions (of the Holy Prophet). In this regard, people narrated
traditions to a great extent such that they found their way on the
pulpits of the Islamic cities and the teachers of the school in every
house.

Moreover, they taught these forged traditions to the children and
youngsters and repeated them so often that they became accepted like the
holy Quran. Very soon these traditions spread amongst the women and
daughters in the house and the maid-servants and slaves. The male
members of the house would listen to such traditions from the official
pulpits and the sermons of Friday-prayers and after reaching home would
divulge them to their family members and servants. This state continued
for many years. Muawiya possessed Caliphate and ruled from 40 A.H. to 60
A.H..

During this lengthy period, the mammonists competed with each other and
took precedence over the other in fabricating traditions. In this
manner, numerous traditions appeared and a great deal of fabrications
circulated. The jurists, the judges and the governor - generals were all
involved in this affair and were preoccupied on this mission.

Those who were involved more than the others were the deceitful and
weak-faithed reciters of the Quran who used to outwardly manifest
themselves to be people of worship and humility. They used to forge
traditions just to derive some pleasure and favour from the governors,
gain nearness to the ruling-power and derive benefit in the form of
wealth and property. This state of affairs continued until the
religious - minded and those who abstained from the falsehood received
such false traditions. These people narrated the afore-said traditions
in its true form and if they knew it to be false, they would neither
divulge it nor have faith in it. [^6]

It is on the basis of such historical evidences that I always used to
say, 'most of the things which exist in the Caliphate school as a faith
and religion has in fact been fabricated during Muawiya's era,'

Abu Abdullah Ibrahim-ibn-Muhammad[^7] famous as “Naftovia” belonging to
the fourth century narrates in his “Tariq” a matter which, from the
view- point of purport is similar to the saying of Mada'eni. He has
written:-

«Most of the false traditions which they have recounted about the
virtues of the companions (of the Holy Prophet) have been fabricated
during the period of Bani-Ummayid. In this manner, the speaker and
fabricator of such traditions wanted to gain nearness to the ruling -
power and draw the attention of the ruling Ummayids. By this, the
Ummayids too wanted to degrade the Bani-Hashim.[^8]

Now, we shall examine a few examples of such traditions so that we
perceive more the truthfulness of the saying of Mada'eni and Naftovia.

Tradition of «Yaum-Ud-Dar» يوم الدار
------------------------------------

When the noble verse[^9] [**وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ**] was
revealed and the Holy Prophet was commissioned to invite his near
relatives - progeny of Abdul-Muttalib towards God and warn them, it was
for the first time that he was publicly announcing his invitation from
his private house. Up to that day i.e. a period of three years which
passed from his appointment to the mission of Messengership, his
prophetic message was enclosed in his house and only Ali (AS.) and
Khadija were then following it.[^10] The verse was revealed and the Holy
Prophet was given instructions to spread his invitation.

We have narrated the details of this incident in the previous lessons.
Hazrat Ali-ibn-Abi Talib was living in the Holy Prophet's house. From
the time when he passed the five years of age i.e. at the time of
famine, the Holy Prophet took Ali (a.s.) under his guardianship. The
Holy Prophet commanded Ali who was then a youth of thirteen to fifteen
to cook one leg of a sheep and prepare one big bowel of mixed yogurt and
water. The Bani-Hashim were invited. They were approximately forty in
number. The Holy Prophet addressed them as such: «Allah has sent me with
His Message in order that you recognize Him by His Oneness and recognize
me by my Prophethood.»

Thereafter, he added: 'Who amongst you is ready to help me in this
affair so that he would be my brother, legatee and Caliph amongst you?
All those present turned back. Only Imam Amir-ul- Mumineen who was the
youngest of all, rose and said: 'O Messenger of Allah, «I will be your
helper in this path.»

When this affair was thrice repeated the Holy Prophet said: 'He is my
brother, legatee and Caliph amongst you. Listen to him and obey his
commands. [^11]

This tradition has come down with authentic documents in the reliable
books of history and hadith belonging to the Caliphate school. However,
as mentioned before, Muawiya had given instructions not to narrate or
mention anything about the excellence of «Abu-Turab» and his
family-members and instead give accounts to the opposite effect. Thus,
this tradition which has been one of the most explicit proofs of
Hazra'ts outstanding position in accepting Islam revealing the explicit
wording and the decisive command of the Holy Prophet about his
Executorship and Caliphate should be shattered and something contrary to
this effect forged.

### A Contradiction To This Tradition

In the original copies of the books of the Caliphate school, they have
brought contradictions for this tradition from the first-hand
transmitters:

#### From The Words Of Ayesha

A tradition which has been attributed to Ayesha has been narrated from
her. We are unaware whether she has really said these words or that they
have falsely been attributed to her.

The tradition is as follows:

When the verse [**وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ**] was revealed,
the Holy Prophet summoned the sons of Abdul-Muttalib and said: 'O sons
of Abdul-Muttalib! O my kinsmen! O Safiah, daughter of Abdul-Muttalib! O
Fatemah daughter of Muhammad, fear Allah and serve Him. I cannot do
anything for you. I am not the owner of anything from God's side to you!
[^12]

These two traditions are contrary to each other. Now we should see which
one of them is true and which one of them is false and what reasons can
be set forth for the correctness of the first one or falsity of the
other.

In the Caliphate school, Ayesha enjoys such a lofty position that she is
placed as high as the fourth in rank after the Holy Prophet, Abu-Bakr
and Omar. One of the reasons being that by making use of the traditions
which they narrated in her name and the unalterable credibility which
they earned from her name, they wanted to give the necessary matters to
the Muslims.

Thus, a tradition narrated in the name of Ayesha but contrary to the
recounted tradition of Amir-ul-Mumineen would be given priority in the
Caliphate school of thought. For this reason, a tradition containing the
virtues of Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) has fallen from its worth and
credibility.

We will evaluate two traditions from the view-point of the rules of
'Science of traditions'. The points which are worthy of attention here
are as follows:-

Firstly, with regards to the consensus of all the Ulemas (scholars) of
Islam, the verse being discussed has been revealed in the third year of
the Holy Prophet's appointment. [^13]

Secondly, the narrator of the second tradition i.e. Ayesha was born in
the fourth year of the Holy Prophet's appointment[^14] and hence could
not have been a witness to the event of the tradition. Therefore the
narrated tradition from Ayesha being a loose [مرسل] tradition is
creditless. On the other hand, the narrated tradition from
Amir-ul-Mumineen is correct[^15] as far as its chain of transmission is
concerned and is devoid of any doubt. Moreover, at the time of the
occurance of the afore-said incident, he himself was fifteen years of
age.

Thirdly, Hazrat Fatemah (a.s.) whose name has appeared in the text of
the second tradition, stepped into this world as per the authentic
sources[^16] in the fifth year of the Holy Prophet's appointment. Even
if we accept the sayings of others (whose statements severely contradict
each other) Fatemah had not yet reached the age of puberty and was at
the most eight years old.

Thus under usual circumstances, she could not be the addressee to an
official and religious address especially when she had three elder
sisters living at that time and in case of necessity it was they who
should have been addressed and not the youngest one who, even if we
assume that she had been born at that time, could not have been more
than eight years old.

#### From The Words Of Abu-Huraira

In this regard, two lengthy traditions have come down from Abu-Huraira.

In the first tradition, Abu-Huraira says:-

«When the verse [**وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ**] was revealed,
the Holy Prophet invited the Quraish. All of them gathered. The Holy
Prophet addressed them as such”: 'O the sons of Ka'ab-ibn-Luvi, save
your near ones from the fire! 'O the sons of Murat-ibn-Ka'ab, deliver
yourselves from the fire of Hell! 'O the sons of Abd-Munaf, save
yourselves from the fire! 'O Bani-Hashim, save your near ones from the
fire! 'O the sons of Abdul-Muttalib, deliver yourselves from the Hell
and its fire!

Up to here, the Holy One speaks in a general tone (in the tradition of
Abu- Huraira) but later on, his speech is directed towards individuals.
He mentions special names and directs his message to them. In
continuation of his speech he says:

'O Fatemah, deliver yourself from the fire of Hell. I cannot do anything
for you. I am not the owner of anything before Allah for you. Deliver
yourself from the fire. Of course you are related to me and I will
observe the ties of Kinship with you. [^17]

Of course in this address, the Holy Prophet meant to say that he was
incapable of making intercession and powerless enough to save anyone
from the divine chastisement.

In another tradition which has come down from this companion in the
authentic books of the Caliphate school we read as such:

'When this verse [**وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ**] was
revealed, the Holy Prophet said: 'O the people of Quraish, redeem
yourselves from your Lord. I cannot do anything for you before Allah! O'
the sons of Abdul-Muttalib, I am incapable of doing anything for you! 'O
Abbass-ibn-Abdul-Muttalib, I am incapable of doing anything for you! 'O
Safiyan, the aunt of the Messenger of Allah, I am incapable of doing
anything for you! 'O Fatemah, the daughter of Muhammad, you may ask me
whatever you wish but I will not be able to do anything for you before
Allah. [^18]

As far as these two traditions are concerned, apart from what we have
said in the tradition attributed to Ayesha that in the year of
revelation of the verse, Hazrat Fatemah had not yet been born, so that
we could say that the Holy Prophet had possibly addressed her, there
also exists another matter and it is this that we want to know.
Abu-Huraira the initial narrator of the tradition was in the third year
of the Holy Prophet's appointment so as to see whether he could narrate
such an event? After the victory of 'Khaibar', he travelled to Medina
with the group of “Ashasis” and “Dusis” of Yemen.[^19]

Thus, if he narrates anything from time prior to this period he should
also mention the names of those from whom he is narrating the same.
Consequently, his two traditions like the traditions of Ayesha, involve
defect and flaws (discontinuity of chain of narrators)and hence makes
their status of creditability shaky.

#### Tradition Of 'Muslim'

The third tradition which we shall review is a tradition which Muslim
has narrated from Abu Uthman Nahdi. The latter says:
'Qabisah-ibn-Makhareq and Zuhair -ibn-Amro have narrated to me that at
the time of revelation of the afore-said verse, the Holy Prophet stood
over a heap of stones near a mountain and cried out: 'O the sons of
Abd-Munaf! I am a warner to you all. My example to you is like the
example of a man who witnessed his foe from a far distance and wished to
go much nearer to them so as to bring more news for his people and
tribe. However, he feared that he would fail and that his foe would get
to his own tribe much sooner than him. Thus he cried out due to fear and
warned his near ones and tribe. Like him, I too am sensing danger for
you and I warn you of the fire. [^20]

Abu Uthman narrates this tradition from two persons: (1)
Qabisa-ibn-Mukhareq and (2) Zubair-ibn-Amro.

A - It is only in this tradition that the name of Zubair-ibn-Amro has
been mentioned and in no other place his name or traces of him can be
seen. The researchers in the biographies of companions (of the Holy
Prophet) and traditionists say: «The first time when Zubair was
recognized in history was in Basra and before that, there was no other
trace of him. He had a home in this city which was established in the
fourteenth year of Hijra. The only sign through which he could be called
the companion (of the Holy Prophet) was this very tradition and
basically the men of 'Rijaal' (researchers in the biographies of
companions) say: 'Except for this tradition, we do not recognize any
other tradition from him.'

Moreover, Bukhari has not brought this tradition in his book since he
does not reckon it to be correct. He says: «The reason that this
tradition is incorrect and Zubair is not from the companions (of the
Holy Prophet) is this that he does not notify that he has heard the
tradition from the Holy Prophet.130»

Conslusion: If anyone has recognized Zubair as a companion, he has in
fact made use of this tradition and relied on it. Moreover, not only is
this tradition a proof of his contact with the Holy Prophet but, as per
the inference of the clear-sighted people, this itself is a source of
doubt of his contact with the Holy Prophet and it lacks authenticity and
credibility.

Qabisa-ibn-Mukhareq belonged to the tribe of Bani-Halak. He had not seen
the Holy Prophet at the time when the Muslims were in Mecca and it was
only after 'Hijrat' (migration) that he, for the first time came before
the Holy Prophet along with his tribe (in Medina) and accepted Islam.
[^21]Thereafter, he returned to his native hometown.[^22] Therefore,
Qabisa too had not been present at the time of revelation of this verse
and apparently, had not witnessed the event so that he could narrate it
without any channel and chain of transmitters.

Conclusion: We do not possess any reliable piece of information about
Zubair's meeting with the Prophet and Qabisa too had no such meeting and
acquaintance with the Holy Prophet at the time of revelation of the
afore- said verse (in the third year).

#### Tradition Of A'mash Quoted From Ibn-Abbass

This event has also been mentioned in another tradition where A'mash has
narrated it from Amro-ibn-Murrat who has narrated from Sa'eed-ibn-Jubair
who in turn has narrated from Ibn-Abbass. In this tradition, Ibn-Abbass
recites the verse as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأنذر عشيرتك الاقربين و رهطك منهم المخلصين
  </p>
</blockquote>

and says: «When this verse was revealed, the Holy Prophet came out and
climbed the mountain of 'Safa' and cried out in a warning tone. The
people said: 'Who is this man who is crying out in this manner and
warning us of some danger?' Some replied: 'He is Muhammad'!» People
gathered around him. The Holy Prophet said: 'O Bani so and so, 'O Bani
so and so, 'O Bani- Abd Munaf and 'O Bani-Abdul Muttalib! If I inform
you that your enemies are hiding behind this mountain and intend to
attack you, will you accept my words? They said: We have never heard you
utter a lie throughout our lives. The Holy Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إني نذير لكم بين يدي عذاب شديد
  </p>
</blockquote>

'I warn you (all) of the severe chastisement which lies ahead'.

Abu-Lahab said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تباً لك ألهذا جمعتنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

'May death befall you; have you gathered us over here (only) for this
talk?!

It was in this connection that the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَّتْ يَدَا أَبِي لَهَبٍ وَتَبَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(May the hands of Abu Lahab be ruined, and ruined is he. Holy Quran,
111:1)***

was revealed. [^23]

The first and biggest proof of falsehood of this tradition is the verse
[وأنذر عشيرتك الاقربين و رهطك منهم المخلصين] because such a verse cannot
be found in the Holy Quran in such a form.

Moreover, this tradition has been narrated from Ibu-Abbass whereas, as
per the specification of the researchers (in the biographies of the
companions) he was born in 'She'ab', which was exactly three years
before 'Hijrat' (migration)[^24] i.e. seven years after the revelation
of the verse. Therefore, the tradition of Ibn-Abbass too lacks
consistency in its chain of transmitters.

The traditions which we have examined so far were traditions which have
come in 'Sahih' and 'Musnad' of Ahmad. As far as the 'Tafseers'
(exegesis) are concerned, the most reliable and extensive of them in the
Caliphate school is the 'Tafseer' of Tabari and
'Tafseer-e-Durrul-MantHur' of Suyuti.

#### Traditions Of Tabari And Suyuti

The fifth tradition under our investigation is a tradition which Tabari
narrates from Abu Musa Ashari who says: «When the verse: [**وَأَنذِرْ
عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ**] was revealed, the Holy Prophet dipped his
hands in his ears and cried out:, 'O Bani Abdul-Muttalib, 'O Sabahah: 'O
sons of Abdul-Muttalib, I warn you of danger....»

Suyuti in 'Durrul-Manthir' has narrated this tradition from Ibn-Jurair,
Tahari, Tirmidhi and others.[^25]

However, this tradition too suffers the same fate as the other
traditions because the first narrator, Abu Musa came to Medina along
with Abu- Huraira in the seventh year after Hijrat.

Secondly, he has narrated the tradition without any medium. As such, his
tradition too, is entangled in viable transmission and lacks valency.

In interpretation of this verse, Suyuti has brought another tradition
from Anas-ibn-Malik which from the view-point of text is exactly the
same as the tradition of Abu-Huraira. However, as far as its chain of
transmitters is concerned, this tradition too is creditless because
Anas-ibn-Malik was born in Medina and basically did not meet the Holy
Prophet before Hijrat (migration) and till then, had not even been to
Mecca.

Moreover, at the time of the event i.e. in the third year, he was not
yet even born; since at the time of the Prophet's migration which
occured exactly ten years after the event, he was then ten years old.
[^26]Thus, Anas was born in Medina in the year of revelation of the
verse and was not present in Mecca and even if he was present, he could
not be counted amongst the eye-witnesses.

Moreover Suyuti narrates from Burah-ibn-Aazeb a tradition in this
regard. Burah-ibn-Aazeb belonged to the tribe of 'Aus' and the clan of
Ansar in Medina. In the second year of 'Hijrat' he wanted to participate
in the battle of 'Badr' but the Holy Prophet did not allow him since he
was only a youngster. This means that he was not even fifteen at that
time so as to be mature enough to participate in 'Jihad' (holy war).
Thus, at the time of revelation of the verse, he was approximately two
years old and was living in Medina and so could not be amongst the
direct eye-witnesses and narrators of the event. [^27]

These three traditions i.e. the traditions of Abu-Huraira, Anas and
Burah- ibn-Aazeb are one in wording and all the three of them were not
present at the time and place of revelation of the verse. Therefore,
this similarity of wording of the tradition can be a document to the
official directive of the Ummayid Government in the matter of
fabrication of traditions whether the initial narrators have themselves
done this in order to obey the command of the Ummayids or whether others
have forged the information and presented them in their names.

In 'Tafseer-e-Tabari' and 'Tafseer-e-Durrul-Manthir' there exists yet
other traditions which are attributed to persons like Muhammad-
ibn-Shahab Zuhri and Qatada.[^28] Just as we have mentioned before,
these two gentlemen belonged to the period very much after the Holy
Prophet's era and are reckoned to be amongst the group of 'disciples of
the companions'. Therfore, we shall no longer linger on their tradition
because the absence of the chain of transmitters in them is very clear
and obvious.

Other traditions too have been narrated and Suyuti narrates them from
the companions of the Holy Prophet such as Zubair. However, his chain of
transmitters is inconsistent up to the person of Zubair. In other words
Suyuti who was living in the 10th century narrates from Zubair with the
medium of one or two persons and it is clear that the gap of nine
centuries between Zubair-ibn-Awam and Suyuti cannot be filled by means
of one or two persons and this period is stretched out beyond twenty
generations.

Thus, these traditions too lack credit and we cannot assess Zubair's
remarks in this tradition to be from himself because there exists a
strong possibility that he has not narrated this tradition and others
have forged it in h is name. Unless and until we do not recognize the
continious chain of transmitters back to the first narrator, we cannot
attribute the tradition to him. Thus this tradition is far from the
reach of examination or analysis and devoid of creditability.

#### Two Reminders

It is necessary to mention here, two points:

Firstly, the tradition which had been attributed to Ibn-Abbass wherein
the expression[^29] [و رهطك منهم المخلصين] could be seen to be a part of
the Quranic verse unfolds a place of big skepticism because it gives
hint of distortion of Quran in it. I presume that this tradition is the
outcome of fabrication of the beginning of the second century after
'Hijrat' because in analysing the Islamic history, I have come to this
conclusion that the main endeavours of the dualists in tearing down the
Islamic thought and beliefs had occured in the beginning of this
century. Whether they attribute the tradition to Sa'eed- ibn-Jubair
followed by Ibn-Abbass or to others makes no difference since all have
treaded the same path i.e. their campaign against Islam.

Secondly, what I infer from these forged traditions is as such: Except
for the above tradition, all the existing traditions have been forged
during Muawiya's era. For example, Abu Uthman Nahdi who would narrate
tradition from two persons, was existing at the time when Muawiya was
issuing commands for the fabrication of traditions.[^30] All the
traditions too would finally get to those persons who were living during
that period - whether they were reckoned to be companions or disciples
of companions. However, intentionally or unintentionally they have been
ascribed to be the companions.

#### One Corneous Lie

In interpretation of this verse, Suyuti narrates a big and corneous lie
from Tabarani and Ibn-Murdowiya who narrate from Abu-Imamah Baheli who
said: 'When this verse was revealed, the Holy Prophet gathered his
relatives and family-members. First of all he turned towards Bani-Hashim
and said: Save your lives from the fire.... I will not be able to do
anything for you before Allah. Thereafter, he turned towards his
family-members and said: 'O Ayesha, the daughter of Abu Bakr 'O Hafseh,
the daughter of Omar, 'O Umm-Salma and 'O Fatemah ... buy-back your
lives from Allah and strive until you deliver yourselves from the fire,
I will not be able to do anything for you.... Ayesha wept and said:
'Will such a day come... [^31]

We remember that the verse had been revealed in the third year of the
Holy Prophet's appointment and Abu-Imamah who is famous as As'ad-ibn-
Zararah was from the Ansars of Medina. He was from the initial group of
the people of Medina who accepted Islam. Therefore, he had no presence
at the time of revelation of the afore-said verse.

Much worse, Ayesha and Hafseh had got married to the Holy Prophet years
after 'Hijrat' and at the time of revelation of the verse, not only was
Ayesha unmarried to the Holy Prophet (as it is made to appear in the
tradition) but had not even been born in the third year of the Holy
Prophet's appointment.

Still worse than this is the fact that Abu-Imamah As'ad-ibn-Zararah died
in the month of Shawwal in the first year after 'Hijrat'. Therefore, at
the time when Ayesha and Hafseh had become the wives and family-members
of the Holy Prophet, he did not even exist so that he could be a witness
to this incident. [^32]

As such, we can say with confidence that Abu-Imamah, Ibn-Abbass and
numerous other narrators have not narrated these traditions themselves
and have come into existence in the year 50 A.H. following Muawiya's
command for the fabrication of traditions. On the basis of this official
command, the real fabricators forged these traditions for the purpose of
invalidating the traditions and the virtues of Ahlul Bayt and attributed
them to reliable or unreliable narrators.

However, the Holy Prophet's climb on the mountain of Safa or on a heap
of stones and his cry of warning to the Quraishites may be true but that
such an event has occured after the revelation of the verse:
[**وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ**] is false and cannot be
correct under any circumstances. The best proof too lies in the text of
the afore-said verse because this verse explicitly commissions the Holy
Prophet to warn his very near ones and not his clan or tribe. Although
the Quraishites were related to the Holy Prophet, yet they were very far
in relation and were partners to him only in name (Quraish) and were
perhaps one in very far ancestral ties.

#### Over The Mountain Of 'Safa'

It was pointed out before that the Holy Prophet's invitation in the
initial stages was limited to his own household. Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.)
who was accompanying him in the cave of 'Hera' gained acquaintance in
the very initial stages of his appointment under the heavenly protection
and revelation. After the Holy Prophet's return to his house, Hazrat
Khadija too joined him. Up to this time, the total number of Muslims
amounted to three persons. Authentic sources reveal that those accepting
Islam did not exceed these three personalities for a long period.[^33]
Later on, Zaid-ibn-Harith and Jafar-ibn-Abi Talib joined this group.

However, we do not know exactly the time of their accepting Islam. After
three years of concealed invitation, the Holy Prophet was commissioned
in the third year of his appointment to invite his very near ones
towards Islam. Verse 124 of Sura Shuara Comprised this command. The
story of the manner of this invitation was already mentioned from the
words of Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.). It was due to this divine command
that the Holy Prophet (S) invited his very near ones for a feast and
then propagated to them and warned them. After this incident, invitation
to Islam gained universality and gradually people from different
quarters pursued Islam and the Muslim population gained strength.

However, as long as the Holy Prophet was in Mecca such universal address
to the Quraish was not possible since the Quraishites (with the
exception of a few) had not brought faith in him let alone the
possibility of warning them of the fire of Hell and speaking to them
about his intercession or non-intercession. Such type of talks could be
accepted to be correct only if the Quraishites, even seemingly, had
accepted his Prophethood and submitted to the Islamic beliefs.

In a society where the Holy Prophet was permanently engaged in dealing
with the arrogant and powerful Quraishites, their plots and their
followers who used to derride him by throwing the camel's paunch over
his head or spill ash over his head or Hurl stones at him, any talk
about his powerlessness in performing intercession or his saying that,
«I cannot do anything for you and you should save yourselves from the
fire of Hell through your own deeds», is far from logic or reason.[^34]

If there existed such a common warning, it should have been at a time
when the entire people had apparently become Muslims and accepted him as
the Prophet. If there was to exist such a common warning it should be
under such circumstances when the entire people have apparently become
Muslims and have accepted him to be the Prophet. The existing traditions
in the Ahl-e- bayt school of thought have come down in this form:

Firstly, all the traditions which comprises the verse of warning speak
without any exception to all; About the warning to the near ones in the
Prophet's household as well as others. [^35]

Secondly, the Holy Prophet's climb over the mountain of 'Safa' and his
speech can be related to the period after the victory of Mecca.

#### What Is The Real Story?

We can find the real story among the existing traditions in the Ahlul
Bayt school of thought. Imam Sadeq (AS.) says:

'When the Holy Prophet (S) gained victory over Mecca he stood on top of
the mountain of 'Safa' and said” 'O Bani-Hashim and 'O the sons of
Abdul-Muttalib!

I am considerate and very concerned about you. Do not say that Muhammad
is from us. I swear by Allah that those related to me from you and other
than you are not but pious and good-doers. It should not happen that you
appear on the Day of Judgement with the burden of this world on your
neck while others appear with the Hereafter accompanying them. Know that
I have not left behind any plea between us and between Allah and you. To
me are my deeds and to you are your deeds.[^36]”

In this very timely speech, the Holy Prophet wanted to clarify that now
that he has gained victory over Mecca and in reality become the ruler of
the Arabian Peninsula, his near ones should not turn their face towards
this world. They should know that nearness and relationship to the Holy
Prophet is based on piety only and none else. Moreover such a proximity
is inconsistent with mammonism or plunder of the public wealth. Unlike
all other worldly governments, they should not think wishfully that now
that one of their near ones has gained control of the leadership and the
reins of government are in his hands, they could thus attain wealth,
power and comfort and have domination and supremacy in this world and
the Hereafter.

In the end, we once more remind you that this tradition may have been
attributed to some of the narrators but he himself may be unaware of
this attribution - For example, the tradition which Abu Uthman Nahdi has
narrated from Zubair-ibn-Amro and Qaleisa-ibn-Mukhareq. About him the
traditionists have said: «Only he has narrated this tradition from these
two persons. In other words, nobody else had heard this tradition from
these two persons.»

Similarly the tradition which had been narrated from Ibn- Abbass,
Abu-Imamah, Burah-ibn-Aazeb and others like them. It is possible that
these people had not spoken such words and we can also be almost certain
that they had not said so. However, if we consider that the official
directive of Muawiya was issued and the entire power and strength of the
ruling Umayyids got employed in forging such traditions, we will clearly
understand that Urwah-ibn-Zubair, the narrator from Ayesha or
Muhammad-ibn-Shahab Zuhri, the narrator from Abu-Huraira[^37] were the
main forgers of traditions and they were the ones who have attributed
these traditions to people such as Ayesha, Abu-Huraira and Ibn-Abbass.
Considering the means available at that time, the faraway places and
cities did not provide the opportunity of research to those desirous of
traditions.

Moreover, if a tradition was attributed to anyone, there was little
chance for a person to have access to him and inquire from him about its
authenticity. Therefore, the traditions even though forged, would remain
on people's lips and later on would get transferred to reliable and
unreliable books and would form a part of the ruling Caliphate's (so
called) Islamic 'Ma'aref' (gnosis) and commandments.

The conclusion which we can derive from the entire discussion is as
follows:

In all the traditions under discussion, one set of traditions which had
connected chain of transmission terminated in such people who had not
been present at the time of the event such as the traditions narrated
from Ayesha, Ibn-Abbass and Abu-Huraira and another set where its
initial narrator could have been present at the time of the event lacked
connection of chain of transmission of the author of book (i.e. the
initial narrator) like the tradition narrated from Zubair-ibn-Awam. Thus
in this collection, none of the traditions came out successfully in
their test and analysis and as per the scales of traditionists none of
them was correct and therefore can not be 'supported'.

Amongst them, only one tradition enjoyed a sound chain of transmission
and it was a tradition where the authorities of the Caliphate school and
the authorities of the Ahlul Bayt school have unanimously narrated it.
We have already expounded this tradition for you with the chain of
transmission going back to Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) The soundness of
the chain of this tradition can be judged from the fact that its chain
of transmissions ending in Imam (a.s.) was correct and connected as
admitted by the traditionists belonging to the Caliphate school[^38].
Moreover, the initial narrator i.e. Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) had been
present at the time of the event and was then approximately fifteen
years of age. [^39]

#### Looking Into The Chain Of Transmission Of The Traditions

With so many traditions narrated with unbroken transmission in the books
of 'Sihah', 'Musnads' and 'tafseers' of the caliphate school from the
companions (of the Holy Prophet) belonging to the 'Muhajirs' (emigrants)
like Ayesha, Zubair, Ibn-Abbass and Abu-Huraira; from the companions
belonging to the Ansars (helpers) like Anas-ibn-Malik, Bureh-ibn-Aazeb
and Abu-Imamah; from those who have out of place been counted to be
amongst the companions like Qabisa and Zubair and from the disciples of
companions like Zuhri and Qatada, there remains no place for doubt or
skepticism in this regard.

But with a quick review, we saw that the concerned verse was revealed in
the third year of the Holy Prophet's appointment and at the time of this
incident none of the narrators were present in Mecca in order to see and
give information of the event, Some of them had not even been born at
the time and some amongst them were not living in Mecca at all. It was
only Zubair-ibn-Awam who could have been present at that time and was
living in Mecca. However, Suyuti's tradition in the 10th century is
severed for him and Suyuti does not mention with what chain of
transmitters he narrates this tradition from him. In this way, all these
kinds of traditions are devoid of credibility.

#### Examining The Text Of The Traditions

In the tradition of Ayesha and Abu Huraira address had been made to
Fatemah (a.s.) while in fact she was not even born or was an infant at
that time and hence could not have been the object of this address.
Rather it was much appropriate if this address had been made to the
other daughters of the Holy Prophet who were elder than Fatemah (a.s.).

In the tradition of Ibn-Abbass, the sentence: [ورهطك منهم المخلصين] was
added to the holy verse of Quran which itself is the biggest proof of
fabrication of the tradition.

Contrary to the previous traditions, the tradition of Abu-Imamah
indicates that the incident had occurred in Medina and the addressees
were the Holy Prophet's wives i.e. Hafesa and Ayesha, while in fact
Abu-Imamah had died long before these two who were not the Prophet's
wives at the time.

Aside from all these evidences, the text of the afore-said traditions
reveal that the Holy Prophet had addressed his very close relatives i.e.
Bani- Hashim, his more distant relatives i.e. Bani-Abd Munaf and all the
Quraishite tribes and warned them from relying upon kinship with the
Holy Prophet and abandoning the virtuous deeds while in fact such a talk
does not have any relation with the third year of the Prophet's
appointment as at that time all the Quraishite clans, Bani-Hashim and
non Bani-Hashim were scorning the Holy Prophet for inviting them towards
monotheism. Similarly it is also incommensurate with the occurence of
the event in Medina because the Quraishite clan were not living in
Medina so as to be addressed.

#### So, What Has Been The Story?

Those who have forged these traditions have in fact tampered with the
following two notifications and have made a hell of a story out of it:

(A) the announcement related to the revelation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And warn, [O Muhammad], your closest kindred. (Holy Quran, 26:
214)***

(B) the Holy Prophet's announcement after the victory of Mecca wherein
no special names were mentioned but the Quraish were the object of
address and they were told not to rely on the kinship with the Holy
Prophet.

By combining these two notifications (where each one held good in its
own place) the forgers fabricated some traditions as a result of which
the real tradition which comprised the virtues of Amir-ul-Mumineen
(a.s.) was consigned to oblivion.

#### The Period When These Traditions Were Forged

Majority of these traditions were forged during Muawiya's era for the
purpose of gaining proximity to the Ummayid Caliphate with the exception
of the tradition of Ibn-Abbass where for two reasons, the period of its
fabrication seems to be befitting the early stages of the Caliphate of
Bani-Abbass:

(A) In the tradition ascribed to Ibn-Abbass, one sentence has been added
to the Quranic verse which is commensurate with the fabricated works of
the dualists in the early stages of the Abbasside's Caliphate just as we
have discussed the same in the first section of the book (خمسون و مائة
صحابي مختلق).

(B) Fabrication of the tradition and its attribution to Ibn-Abbass is
commensurate with the early parts of the Abbasside's Caliphate because,
the forgers first of all wanted to propagate their own tradition by
utilizing the name of the ancestors of the Abbassid Caliphs and
secondly, through this they wanted to gain access to them. Majority of
the tradition which have been forged in the name of Ibn-Abbass is
befitting this period.

#### Two Other Fabricated Traditions

After examination of this repeatedly stated but forged tradition, we
shall evaluate two other forged traditions. Like the previous
traditions, these two traditions too contracted fabrication during
Muawiya's era and the virtues which have come down in them from
Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) have been reversed.

The first tradition is a well-known tradition about the virtues of Imam
Amir- ul-Mumineen: In this tradition, the Holy Prophet says:-

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنا مدينة العلم وعلي بابها ، فمن أراد العلم فليأت الباب
  </p>
</blockquote>

«I am the city of Knowledge and Ali is its gate. So, anyone who wishes
to enter this city must (first) pass through its gate.» [^40]

This famous tradition has also been narrated in other ways:

> أنا مدينة العلم وعلي بابها ، فمن أراد المدينة فليأتها من بابها 136

> أنا دار الحكمة و علي بابها 137

> أنا مدينة الحكمة وعلي بابها ، فمن أراد الحكمة فليأت الباب 138

They have replaced this reliable and famous tradition with a false
tradition which has come down as follows:-

> أنا مدينة العلم وأبو بكر أساسها و عمر حيطانها و عثمان سقفها وعلي بابها
> 139

«I am the city of knowledge and Abu Bakr its foundation, Omar its walls,
Uthman its ceiling and Ali its gate.

With regards to the text of this tradition, suffice it to say that a
city can possess walls and gate but for it to have a ceiling is
something irrational if not stupid.

Another tradition which fell victim to the forgers during Muawiya's era
who fabricated something opposite to it is the famous and reliable
tradition from the Holy Prophet (S) about the virtue of Imam Hassan and
Hussein (a.s.)

> الحسن و الحسين سيدا شباب أهل الجنة 140

«Hassan and Hussein are the masters of the youths of Paradise.»

In order to shatter the creditibility of this tradition, the forgers
during Muawiya's era have narrated from Amir-ul-Mumineen the following:

> قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أبوبكر و عمر سيدا كهول أهل الجنة من
> الاولين إلا النبيين و المرسلين 141

«Abu-Bakr and Omar are the masters of the old men of Paradise - right
from first to the last with the exception of the Prophets and
Messengers.»

In proving the prevarication and fabrication of this tradition, suffice
it to say that Caliph Abu Bakr and Caliph Omar have been reckoned to be
the masters of the old men in Paradise whereas basically, there does not
exist any concept as old age and senility in Paradise.

#### Conclusion

In this discussion, we witnessed the following:

Firstly: For earning the satisfaction of the Caliph and pleasing him,
they have added the sentence: (لا جناح) to the Holy Prophet's tradition
with regards to priority and arrow-throwing and have tampered the
tradition about Hazrat Mahdi's advent.

Secondly: Concerning the Caliph's command they forged another tradition
vis-a-vis the tradition of «Yaum-ul-Anzaar».

Moreover, in the tradition: أنا مدينة العلم they have added the
sentences: وأبو بكر أساسها و عمر حيطانها وعثمان سقفها and against the
tradition الحسن و الحسين سيدا شباب أهل الجنة they fabricated the
sentence أبو بكر و عمر سيدا كهول أهل الجنة

With the help of these alterations and fabrications they initialed
numerous differences and contradictions in the traditions of the Holy
Prophet so much so that they made difficult the recognition of the true
Islam for one and all.

These few examples are sufficient enough to make one recognize the
disastrous calamities which have befallen the traditions of the Holy
Prophet during the Ummayid era.

During this period, they distorted the traditions (which is considered
to be the second pillar of Islam and the explanation and elucidation of
Quran) so much that the entire status of Islamic faith and ethic
contracted alteration and appeared to be metamorphosed. God-willing, you
shall see this matter in detail in the following discussions.

With regards to our previous discussions, the third factor in the
alteration and distortion of Islam is the matter of fabrication of
traditions. We also saw that fabrication of traditions has taken place
because of one of the following two reasons:

(i) For the purpose of gaining proximity to the central power in an
Islamic society i.e. the ruling Caliphate and exploiting the vanities of
the world.

(ii) Enmity with Islam.

Of course on some occasions both of the above factors motivated them in
fabricating traditions.

The third cause of distortion which itself was a factor of distortion as
well as the very basis of distortion was the matter of fabrication of
traditions. Forgery of traditions started mostly after the Holy
Prophet's departure from this world[^41] but an official and universal
command was not issued in this regard. During Muawiya's era, the matter
of alteration and fabrication of traditions took an official turn and a
governmental declaration in this regard was issued from the lofty
position of the Caliphate. Things went still further as the ruling
Caliphate announced and paid heavy rewards for this act. Thus, the
official Islam in reality took shape during the Ummayid era especially
during Muawiya's time.

Producing An Untrue Tradition Concerning Amir-Ul-Mumineen (a.s.)
----------------------------------------------------------------

Ibne Abil-Hadeed, a Shafa'ee Mútazalite scholar narrates from his
teacher Abu Jafar Askari as such: 'Muawiya appointed a huge group of
companions and disciples of the companions for the purpose of forging
false and evil traditions about Ali (a.s.) which would become a source
of defeat and taunt for Hazrat and which would keep the people
uninformed of his innocence. For this act, he set huge amounts of awards
in order to encourage the forger's inclination and make the mammonists
desirous. Such people too forged whatever they wanted and desired.
Amongst them we may mention such names as Abu Huraira, Amr-Aas and
Mughaira-ibn- Shu'aba from the companions (of the Holy Prophet) and
Urwah-ibn-Zubair from the disciples of the companions.

### First Tradition

Muhammad-ibn-Shahab Zuhri narrates that Urwah-ibn-Zubair related to him
a tradition from Ayesha where she says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كنت عند رسول الله إذ أقبل العباس و علي فقال: يا عائشة إن هذين يموتان
على غير ملتي- أو قال ديني
  </p>
</blockquote>

«I was in the presence of the Holy Prophet when Abbass and Ali could be
seen approaching us from a far distance. The Holy Prophet said: 'O
Ayesha, these two will die in a state when they will have not followed
my nation or my religion.»

Abdul Razzaq narrates from Mu'ammar that there were two traditions with
Zuhri which were narrated from Ayesha through Urwah. These two
traditions were about Ali (a.s.).

Once I inquired from Zuhri about those two people (Urwah and Ayesha). He
replied: What have you to do with those two people and their
traditions?! Almighty Allah Knows them better. In connection with Bani-
Hashim they are, in my opinion the accused ones (of hatred, vengeance
and lies).

### Second Tradition

The second tradition which has been narrated from Ayesha through Urwah
is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالت: كنت عند النبي صلى الله عليه و آله إذ أقبل العباس و علي فقال: يا
عائشة! إن سرك أن تنظري إلى رجلين من أهل النار فانظري الى هذين قد طلعا
فنظرت فأذا العباس و علي
  </p>
</blockquote>

She says: I was in the presence of the Prophet when Abbass and Ali came.
The Holy Prophet said: 'O Ayesha, if you wish to see two men of the Fire
then look at these two ones who are approaching towards us! I raised my
head and all of a sudden saw Abbass and Ali![^42]

We do not know who has forged this tradition, whether it was Urwah-ibn-
Zubair or others? Anyhow, it was on the lines of Muawiya's sinister
policies that such a tradition was forged and propagated.

### Third Tradition

Amongst the traditions which Amro Aas has forged is a tradition which
Bukhari and Muslim have unfortunately narrated from him in their
respective books. He says: 'I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) saying:
The progeny of Abi Talib are not amongst my friends. Rather my friends
are Allah, the virtuous believers and the good-doers.

In this connection, we shall refer to Sahih Bukhari and Muslim and will
see that this tradition has been narrated in these two books in the
following manner:

> عن عمرو بن العاص، قال: سمعت رسول الله- صلى الله عليه وآله- جهاراً غير
> سر يقول: ألا ان آل أبي فلان ليسول بأوليائي إنما وليي الله وصالح
> المؤمنين 144

Amro Aas says:- 'I heard the Holy Prophet saying in a loud voice: «The
progeny of Abi so and so (Abi-Talib)are not my friends. My friends are
only Allah and virtuous believers.'»

In another tradition, Bukhari has an annexation to this tradition where
as per the narration of Amro Aas and following this talk the Holy
Prophet said: «But they are having relationship with me and I observe
bonds of relationship (صلة رحم) with them.[^43]»

Now let us see what type of people the progeny of Abi Talib are. In
Arabic (آل) refers to a person's kinsmen and lineage. [^44]

Therefore, the sons of a person are the first ones who are applicable to
the word of [Arabic text]. The sons of Abi-Talib comprises Talib, Aqeel,
Jafar and Ali (a.s.) and a daughter by the name of Faakteh Umm.[^45]
Ha'ani.

But, in reality all these personalities have been entangled in this
forged tradition because of Hazrat Ali (a.s.). Otherwise the Umayyids
had nothing to do with Talib, Aqeel and Jafar. Even their saying that
Abu Talib had been an unbeliever; who had not

brought faith even during the last moments of his life was only for the
sake of proving some sort of a shortcoming in Ali (a.s.) and nothing
else. Uthman would tell Ali (a.s.) as such: «'What should I do. The
Quraish do not love you. You have killed more than thirty of their men
in the battle of «Badr» and that too such people whose face were shining
like sheets made of gold!»

Undoubtedly, Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) was entangled in the strong cord of
enmity and hatred of the Quraishites i.e. the most powerful front in the
Arabian peninsula. In the battle of «Badr» he had killed the most
prominent of the ignorant Quraishites. In addition, even if the ruling
Quraishites did not claim blood from Ali (a.s.) yet they could not see
him sitting on the throne of power and had even emphasised that they
disliked seeing Prophethood and Caliphate coming together in one place
and one family. [^46]

Imam too on numerous occasions has expressed before his Lord his
grievance against them. [^47]

#### Assessing The Previous Tradition

Now let us see what this tradition intended to achieve and what the aim
of its forgery was. Didn't we see how Muawiya used to give commands for
producing contradictory statements for every type of virtue that had
been mentioned for Abu-Turab Amir-ul-Mumineen? (a.s.) This tradition has
one general saying as a result of which all the virtues which has been
narrated about Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) from the Holy Prophet will be
rendered valueless and will appear to have been said for the sake of
observing the bonds of relationship and pleasing his cousin Ali and has
had no basis and origin. Is it not that the Prophet in a famous and very
reliable tradition said:

> من كنت مولاه فهذا علي مولاه. اللهم وال من والاه وعاد من عاداه 150

With the existence of the afore-said tradition under discussion will the
lofty purport of this tradition ever remain intact. If anyone becomes
well- acquainted with the books of traditions belonging to the Caliphate
school, one will realize how the entire commands of Muawiya was put into
effect.

Right from the time of Muawiya up to the time of Omar-ibn-Abdul Aziz,
the Muslims were brought up under the training of the Umayyids in
hatred, animosity and despise with Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.).
Numerous forged traditions aimed in the dishonour of Hazrat was in the
hands of the people and particularly those who were far away from the
true Islamic centers like Mecca and Medina bore the brunt of these
fabrications. You must have repeatedly heard that in the Friday-prayer
sermons over all the Islamic pulpits and in all the Muslim mosques, they
would curse Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) thinking this to be a part of
the obligatory acts.

This was the official policy of the Umayyid government so much so that
it is said that once a preacher forgot to curse Ali (AS.) in one of the
Friday- prayer sermons. On his way towards his house, he suddenly
remembered that he had not cursed Ali (a.s.). He stood there and cursed
Hazrat for a thousand times as an atonement for forgetfulness. This spot
gained sanctity and blessing and a mosque named as [مسجد اللعن] (mosque
of curse)was put up in that very place. Such was the situation of the
Islamic world during the Umayyid dynasty and it was under these
circumstances that such traditions had emerged and propagated.

Of course later on, due to relentless endeavours of Ahlul Bayt and their
companions and the scholars coming after the occultation period, the
truth was heaved out from beneath the ruins of the Umayyid era. But it
was unfortunate that once again an unrelenting assault of Western
culture and persistent endeavours of Jewish, Christian and Communist
Islamicists sunk the truth under the debris of ignorance and inside the
gloom of dubiousness!

After Omar-ibn-Abdul Aziz, especially with the coming of the Abbassides
into power, that too in the name of Al-e-Muhammad[^48]; and the
endeavours of the Imams and their self-sacrificing companions, it was no
longer possible to speak against Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) just as it was
possible during the Umayyid era. Thus, in all the existing manuscripts
of this tradition taken right from 'Sahih Bukhari' and 'Muslim' till
'Musnad Ahmad' and 'Abi Awani' the tradition has come down in this
manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن آل أبي فلان ليسوا بأوليائي...
  </p>
</blockquote>

The progeny of Abi so and so are not my friends., However, in the
commentary of Sahih Bukhari which has been written by one of the
prominent traditionist of the Caliphate school, it has come down that
the progeny of Abi so and so refers to Abu Talib.[^49] Nevertheless he
makes amends and explains that in reference to the progeny of Abu Talib,
the Holy Prophet (only) meant the unbelievers and polytheists amongst
them!

We ask: Who are these unbelievers and polytheists? Is it Ali who is the
first believer and the first one to confirm the Prophethood of the Holy
Prophet? Is it Jafar who is counted to be amongst the great martyrs of
Islam and is honoured with the title of «Zul-Janahain » (owner of a pair
of wings)? Is it Aqeel, Talib, Hassan, Hussein, Abdullah-ibn-Jafar,
Muslim, Muhammad- ibn-Hanafia and their likes? Is history aware of any
polytheist or atheist from the progeny of Abu Talib? Was it not that
majority of them were fore runners in sacrificing themselves in the path
of Islam? And the minority amongst them who were so were at least
Muslims in the true sense.

This was the tradition which has been narrated from Amro-Aas and has
unfortunately found its way in the books of 'Sihah' and 'Musnad' of the
Caliphate school.

### Fourth Tradition

Now let us look into the tradition which has been left behind by Abu
Huraira. A'mash narrates and says: 'At the time when Abu-Huraira arrived
in Iraq along with Muawiya in the year of congregation[^50], he entered
the mosque of Kufa. When he saw the large number of people having come
to receive him, he sat down on his two knees and after blandishing for
several times his bald head, he said: 'O the people of Iraq! Do you
imagine that I will lie about Allah and His Messenger and then burn
myself in the Fire of Hell. I swear by Allah that I heard His Messenger
saying: for every Prophet there is a sanctuary and my sanctuary is in
Medina between Mount «Eer» and Mount «THur». May the curse of Allah, His
Angels and all the people be upon the one who creates any dishonour in
my sanctuary and raises a disturbance in it.

Iraq had been the center of the Shiites of Amir-ul-Mumineen and the
people of Kufa were trained by him and were his followers. Abu-Huraira
speaks among such people. Perhaps his own self is aware that they are
such people who doubt his saying and maybe it is for this reason that he
says:

«Do you imagine that I speak the falsehood and so entangle myself in the
Fire of Hell?»

Therefore, he swears that he has himself heard the Messenger of Allah.
Later, he adds: «I take Allah as witness that Ali has created
disturbance and sedition in this land!».

When news of this tradition reached Muawiya, he honoured Abu Huraira for
this great service. As well as sending him money, he appointed him as
the ruler of Medina. [^51]

#### Assessing The Fourth Tradition

In this tradition Abu-Huraira says that the Holy Prophet has said:
'Medina is my sanctuary and its limits extend from Mount «Eer» to Mount
«THur». But what we can derive from history, biography and geographical
books of the Arabs is this that Mount 'THur' is basically not in Medina
or its surroundings. A mountain by this name exists on the outskirts of
the city of Mecca and it is the same mountain where the Holy Prophet
concealed himself at the time of 'Hijrat' (migration). [^52]

Numerous men of geography have some sayings in this regard which
divulges the falsity of the tradition.

Yaqoobi in the book «Al-Baladan» says: «Mecca is situated between great
mountains .... the mountains which surround the city of Mecca are Abu
Qabees .... Qayeqa'an, Fazeh, Muhsab, THur next to Safa, Hera,
Bashir....' [^53] Moreover he says: «Medina possesses two mountains
which are named «Uhud» and Eer'. [^54]

Muqaddesi who is one of the best Islamic scholar in geography writes in
his book «Ahsan at-Taqasim» as such:

«The cave of 'THur' is placed one league away from Mecca and Mount Hera
is situated on the side of Mina.” '[^55]

Yaqoot Hamavi, the writer of the biggest geographical encyclopedia of
Islam says:

«'THur' is the name of a mountain in Mecca and in it is a cave where the
Holy Prophet had hid himself.'[^56]»

Muhammad-ibn-Abdul Man'am Hamiri in his geographical culture emphasises
as such:

«'THur' which is called as 'THur Athal' is one of the mountains of Mecca
lying on the southern side of the city and is two miles away from
Mecca.[^57]»

Anyone from the famous Arab philologists who has spoken about the word
«THur», has emphasised that it is the name of a mountain on the
outskirts of Mecca like:

Ibn-Athir (died in the year 606) in his book
«An-Nihaya-fi-Gharib-ul-Hadith-wal-Athar».

Faiyumi (died in the year 770) in his book «Al-Mesbah-ul-Munir» under
the topic of «THur».

Allama Ibn Manzoor, a great Arab philologist (died in the year 711) in
his great book «Lisan -ul-Arab al-Muheet» under the topic of «THur».

Firuzabadi (died in the year 817) in his book «Al-Qamoos-ul-Muheet»
under the topic of «THur».

Zubaidi (died in the year 1205) in his magnificient book «Taj al-Arous»
with commentary on «Al-Qamoos-ul-Muheet».

This probe reveals that Abu-Huraira, the narrator of the tradition
suffered from a weak memory and senility and has mentioned the mountain
of 'THur' (near Mecca) to be in Medina.

Several scholars from the Caliphate school have spoken in regard to this
tradition and have strived to justify this mistake some way or the
other.

They say: 'Maybe the Holy Prophet has named one mountain from the
mountains of Medina as «THur».'

They say: Perhaps the Holy Prophet only meant to determine the limits of
the sanctuary in Medina and has likened this limit to the distance
between the two mountains which lies in Mecca.

They say: Due to error and mistake, the transmitter has mentioned 'Mount
THur' instead of mentioning Mount Uhud.

The fourth has evaded the name of 'THur' in the tradition or has
mentioned it in vague terms (so and so) so that it could avoid being
entangled in such problems.

These endeavours such as the above and in some other manners continued
until an ultimate solution was found i.e. the discovery of a mountain by
the name of «THur» in Medina by Abdul-Salam-ibn-Muhammad, a Hanbalite
traditionist who died in the year 669. For the first time, a mountain by
this name was created! For centuries, all the scholars who have spoken
something or the other in this regard have said: «Such a mountain does
not exist on the outskirts of Medina.»

They have also said: «The inhabitants of Iraq have narrated this
tradition while they were unaware of the geographical conditions of
Medina.» Now all of a sudden a man amongst the scholars of Iraq (Basra)
comes along and says: Next to 'Mount Uhud' is a small mountain by the
name of «THur» and adds that the entire people of Medina are aware of
it.

The matter does not end here and in the next century a second witness
comes into the picture. His name is Abdullah Mutri (died in the year
765) and he narrates from his father Muhammad Mutri about the existence
of such a mountain (in Medina). He further adds: The people of Medina,
generation after generation were familiar with a mountain by the name of
'THur' which is next to Mount Uhud and this mountain is small in size
and redish in colour.

In our era, the contemporary scholars have strived in some other manner
to eliminate untrue sayings: A great master by the name of Abdul-Qudoos
and the author of «Athar-ul-Medina» on page 139 of the said book has
drawn the picture of this mountain. Doctor Muhammad Hussein Haikal, the
author of the famous book «Hayat-e-Muhammad» in his other book by the
name of «Manzil al-Vahy» on page 512 has brought the same geographical
topography and on page 440 mentions that he has utilized the matter from
the topography of Abdul-Qudoos i.e. «Athar-ul-Medina».[^58]

However, Doctor Haikal in his previously - mentioned book i.e. «Hayat-e-
Muhammad», like all the historians and geographers mentions that the
cave and mountain of 'THur' is situated on the outskirts of Mecca and
has reckoned this to be the place of concealment of the Holy Prophet
during 'Hijrat' (migration). [^59]

Fabrication Of Tradition By Samur-Ibn-Jundab
--------------------------------------------

Abu Jafar Eskafi Mu'atazali, master of Abil-Hadeed, in pursuit of his
speech has mooted the story of Samur-ibn-Jundab. He says: «Muawiya sent
a hundred thousand dirhams for Samur so that he would narrate a
tradition from the Holy Prophet that the verse,:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُعْجِبُكَ قَوْلُهُ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
وَيُشْهِدُ اللّهَ عَلَى مَا فِي قَلْبِهِ وَهُوَ أَلَدُّ الْخِصَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

meaning:

***«And among men is he whose speech about the life of this world causes
you to wonder, and he calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his
heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries.» (Holy Quran, 2:
204)***

> وَإِذَا تَوَلَّى سَعَى فِي الأَرْضِ لِيُفْسِدَ فِيِهَا وَيُهْلِكَ
> الْحَرْثَ وَالنَّسْلَ وَاللّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الفَسَادَ{205} وَإِذَا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قِيلَ لَهُ اتَّقِ اللّهَ أَخَذَتْهُ الْعِزَّةُ بِالإِثْمِ فَحَسْبُهُ
جَهَنَّمُ وَلَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

«***And when he turns back, he runs along in the land that he may cause
mischief in it and destroy the tilth and the stock, and Allah does not
love mischief-making”***, ***(Holy Quran, 2: 205)***

was revealed in connection to Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali (a.s.) and hence is
counted to be amongst the enemies of the divine religion. Similarly, the
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغَاء مَرْضَاتِ اللّهِ
وَاللّهُ رَؤُوفٌ بِالْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of
Allah***”, ***(Holy Quran, 2: 207)***

has been revealed in honour of Abdul-Rahman-ibn-Muljim Muradi, the
killer of Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.)!

Samur was not satisfied with this amount of money. Muawiya increased the
amount and sent two hundred thousand dirhams.

Once again he refused to accept this amount until Muawiya raised it to
four hundred thousand dirhams. Samur-ibn-Jundab accepted it and divulged
Muawiya's wish to the people in the form of a false tradition from the
Holy Prophet. [^60]

This sinister tradition spread and left a deep impression in the Islamic
society during Muawiya's era so much so that the «Khawarij» came to be
called as شرارة (Sharah) i.e. those who have sacrificed themselves in
the path of Allah and have sold their soul to Him. Thus, in this
fabricated tradition, Ibn Muljim was fitted in verse 207 of Sura Baqarah
and was reckoned to be amongst those who sell themselves to Allah and
sacrifice themselves in His path. This was the first negative effect of
Samur's false tradition.

The second effect was that verses like 204 and 205 from Sura Baqarah
with regards to Ali (a.s.) won fame such that at the time of Imam
Hassan's burial near his great grandfather, when Ayesha came forward in
protest of this act and said that this house belonged to her and
Abdullah-ibn-Abbas argued (with her) that she was (only) one of the nine
wives of the Prophet where all of them would receive one-eight from
Hazrat's inheritence and what could this amount represent? She replied
[انكم قوم خصمون] you are people of dispute and hostility which is in
reference to the afore-mentioned verse which has come down in the forged
tradition and has been collated with Imam Ali (a.s.)!

### The Idols Should Be Broken

On several occasions, writers, scholars and learned men have asked me
whether there does not exist a tradition on Ghadir-khum in the numerous
and reliable sources of the Caliphate school? Haven't the scholars of
the afore-said school come across the tradition of «Yaum-ud-Dar» [يوم
الدار] and the day of [انذار] i.e. the same tradition which had been
previously narrated under the verse: [وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ
الْأَقْرَبِينَ] wherein the Holy Prophet had propagated the three
fundamental Islamic principles of «Tawhid» (Monotheism), «Nabuwwat»
(Prophethood) and «Imamate» / «Caliphate» (Leadership)? What could I
say? Yes, they have seen these traditions but what can be done? As
against the tradition of [يوم الدار] and [انذار] contradictory
traditions (although research shows it to be a forged tradition) exists
in different forms and with different references.

Verily, in the face of every tradition related to the virtues of Imam
Amir-ul-Mumineen and Ahlul Bayt, there exists numerous other
(contradictory) traditions with the objective of shattering and crushing
their credibility in reality results in the truth being revealed from
buried under the heap of falsehood and fabrications.

The seekers of truth in the Islamic history are in need of something
like archeology or are entangled with numerous idols which have occupied
his entire mind, thought and eyes. Unless these idols are broken, the
truth cannot be discovered. What I intend to do is to break the false,
distorted and forged idols which have been made by the criminals and
brought up by the ignorant so much so that they have become greater than
the greatest idols in human history and more invulnerable than all the
invulnerables.

Several times, eminent personalities and scholars have asked me: «Why
don't you write a research biography of the Holy Prophet so that one can
deduce the Islamic ordinances confidently?» But what could I say?

Now, after this relatively long discussion and your familiarity with
these preliminaries, I can now unfold the essential matter which is as
such?

With the existence of such faked traditions and with such texts (which
apparently seem to be reliable but in reality are false and full of
lies) it is impossible for me to write a biography of the Holy Prophet
(SAW.A.).

With so many obstacles, how is it possible to bring the life-history of
the Holy Prophet i.e. a significant part of Islam on paper?

Is it not that today, anyone who wishes to study the life-history of the
Holy Prophet - right from the European Christians and Jews and the
Egyptians or Iranian Muslims refers first of all to «Seera Ibn Hisham»?

But it is a matter of regret to state that after many years of study and
research I believe that a biographer worse than Ibn Hisham[^61] (from
the view-point of concealment of the truth) has not yet come into
existence. [^62]

Is it not that today, anyone desirous of doing research in the history
of Islam, refers to Tarikh-e-Tabari[^63] who is regarded to be the
'Imam' (leader) of all historians by the eminent scholars of the
Caliphate school?

But, I believe that he has taken precedence over all other historians in
propagating falsehood.

If such books are taken to be first-hand sources and references, then,
how can it be possible to recognize Islam? Verily, these idols which are
the greatest obstacles in the path of knowing Islam should be shattered.
I have till now written four volumes of books and in them, I have
critically analysed «Tarikh-e-Tabari». I am thankful of this favour of
Allah Who has shattered a big idol through me - His feeble slave. With
these books i.e. two volumes of «Abdullah-ibn-Sabah» and two volumes of
(خمسون ومائة صحابي مختلق) Tabari has been vanquished in the eyes of
those seeking the truth!

In order to realize the truth, we have first of all to know the
falsehood and abandon it and it is very well said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعرف الاشياء باضدادها
  </p>
</blockquote>

«Everything is recognizable through its opposite». If night did not
exist, day could not be recognized. If there was not darkness, then
light could not be perceived. We should, before anything else, recognize
people like Abu-Huraira, Anas- ibn-Malik, Muawiya and Amro-Aas so that
the possibility of recognizing the Holy Prophet of Islam and Imam
Amir-ul-Mumineen and such events like the battle of Siffeen, Jamal and
the like of them comes into existence. Unless we recognize Muawiya and
Yazid, we will not be able to comprehend events like the peace of Imam
Hassan (a.s.) and the revolt of Imam Hussein (a.s.).

Moreover, unless we recognize the evil-teachers of Islamic history and
the fabricators and unless we do not consider Tabari, Ibn Hisham and
their followers to be unreliable, we will neither be able to recognize
the positive personalities of Islam nor its negative ones.

Up to now, these fabrications take place in the scene of authentic
Islamic traditions and Islamic history, neither the God of Islam is
recognizable nor the Prophet of Islam and Ali of Islam nor Caliphate,
Imamate and Wasiyat (executorship) and nor finally the Ma'ad
(Resurrection) of Islam!

Thus, we do not possess any means for the recognition of God, Islam and
the truth except the way which we shall pursue in these discussions! The
Imams would follow these very steps for their own special Shiites. Of
course they were needless of striving hard like us. Imam Sadeq (a.s.)
would determine his followers' path with one brief sentence. When he
would address his students with these words:

> ثلاثة كانوا يكذبون على رسول الله: أبو هريرة و أنس بن مالك و إمرأة 167

They would learn the path of perceiving the true and untrue traditions.
But today, if we are to prove this matter, we are needful of writing
numerous books and doing elaborate researches and persistently studying
and doing research for several years in order to perceive the words of
Imam Sadeq (a.s.)

However, if we listen to the decisive will of the Holy Prophet and
accept it in its true sense which was often repeated by him in different
forms: («I am leaving behind two invaluable things amongst you and as
long as you catch hold of these two and follow them, you will never go
astray.») and adopt this path, we shall be delivered from all possible
deviations and from the danger of falling into all kinds of destructive
pits. May Almighty Allah grant us success in following this path to the
very last.

To me, reading such kinds of forged, false and distorted traditions
becomes a sort of spiritual mortification in the face of reading the
correct traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) which
is so much enjoyable to me that I cannot describe my feelings. I wish we
could spend our life only in the path of examining the correct and
authentic traditions. But what can we do? Unless the idol is shattered,
God will not be worshipped and if the forged traditions are not made
known, the authentic traditions will not be recognized.

I intended to make brief the discussion so that we could get to our main
topic. But as we once again realize that unless the required
illumination be not achieved we are bound to continue the discussion.
Perhaps we can grasp the matter by the help of this example:- If we wish
to get to an ancient city and know its limits and boundaries and
perceive its characteristics then, considering the existence of
centuries - old debris over it (i.e. the city) it is not possible and
there is no way other than pulling it out from the heap of debris, soil
and layers which has covered it over the centuries. Of course this task
requires intolerable sufferings and innumerous knowledge.

The Islam which the Holy Prophet had brought has been buried under the
debris of false and forged traditions and for knowing Islam too, we are
needful of a kind of archeological study. Here, we shall set forth one
example from all kinds of forged traditions so as to realize the various
dimensions of this great felony. Thus, the traditions which we have
assessed thus far are not all that exists in this regard. Rather, on the
basis of perusals, we have presented from every kind of tradition one
example in order that we realize what has come upon the rights of the
innocent and what fate has befallen them so that finally, we realize our
path for recognizing Islam which the Prophet has brought. The Path which
must and will remain until the Day of Judgement.

Verses Of «Tayammum» (Dry Ablution)
-----------------------------------

About the battle of Muraisi'h Mughrizi writes:

«The tradition of «Efq» eventuated in this battle because the Messenger
of Allah (S) had descended in a house and he had not water with himself.
In that very place, Ayesha's necklace fell on the ground and got lost.
The Holy Prophet remained in that place till morning searching for the
necklace. Due to unavailability of water in that area, the people fell
in deep hardship. They said: «It is Ayesha who has made us wait in this
arid land. Abu Bakr took umbrage at the remarks of the Muslims and
reproached Ayesha severely. At this moment, the verse of «Tayammum» (dry
ablution) was revealed.... Thereafter, the Muslims moved from this place
and came upon a land which had green pastures and trees! The Holy
Prophet said: 'O Ayesha! Are you ready to run a race with me!?

Ayesha said: 'Yes'! Moments later, she pulled together her clothes and
so did the Holy Prophet. Thereafter they ran and the Holy Prophet outran
Ayesha. Then, he said: I'm getting my own back for the last time you
outran me.' The story goes as such: The Messenger of Allah had once gone
to Abu Bakr's house, Ayesha too was present and held something in her
hand. The Holy Prophet said: Give that thing to me! Ayesha refused and
ran far away. The Holy Prophet too ran after her. However Ayesha outran
the Prophet and went off her own way.

In this journey (battle of Muraisi'h) Ayesha was mounted on a camel
litter and Abu-Muwaihaba, the freed slave of the Prophet, along with
another man kept her moving....[^64] Thereafter, she narrates the story
and hadith of “Efq” (إفك).

Whatever Muqrizi and others have brought in these three fold incidents
has been narrated through Ayesha.

The first incident is the incident of the race:

### Race Between The Holy Prophet And His Wife!

Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal in his 'Musnad' narrates from Hisham-ibn-
Urwah-ibn-Zubair who narrates from his father Urwah that Ayesha said:

«I accompanied the Holy Prophet in one of his journeys. At that time, I
was a young girl and had rather lean built. During the journey, the Holy
Prophet once commanded his followers to advance ahead and they did so.
Thereafter, he said: 'Come forward and let us run a race together! We
ran and soon I overran the Prophet. The Prophet did not utter anything.
Sometime elapsed and I grew bigger and heavier. I had forgotten all
about the race between the Prophet and myself.

In yet another journey, I accompanied the Holy Prophet. During this very
journey, the Prophet once again asked his followers to move ahead and
they did so. Then he said: Come forward and run a race with me! We ran
and this time he overran me. Upon this, he laughed and remarked: Tit for
tat! [^65]

In the same book, Abu-Salma[^66] and Hisham-ibn-Urwah have narrated a
somewhat similar tradition[^67] from their father and
Qasim-ibn-Muhammad, the grandson of Abu-Bakr has narrated a much shorter
account of the event from Ayesha[^68].

This is the tradition about the running-race and as far as its period is
concerned, we are unable to find any trace of it. However, with regards
to the place of the running-race, it is said that it has taken place in
«Baidah». But the tradition about «Tayammum» and «Efq» as per the saying
of the Ibne Sa'ad, the author of «Waqedi» has occured in the battle of
Muraisi'h. He says: «In this battle, Ayesha's necklace got lost as a
result of which the procession of the soldiers came to a standstill.»
Then, the verse of «Tayemmum» was revealed and Osayyed-ibn-Huzair said:
«This is not your first blessing, O progeny of Abu Bakr and it was in
this very battle that the incident of Ayesha and the remarks which the
progeny of «Efq» uttered had occured and Allah revealed a verse in
confirmation of her chastity.[^69]”

However, the tradition of «Tayammum» has come down in the books of
'Sahih' of the Caliphate school in the following manner.'

### Hadith About «Tayammum» (Dry Ablution)

Bukhari in the book of «Tayammum» narrates from Abdul-Rahman-ibn- Qasim
who narrates from his father that Ayesha, wife of the Holy Prophet said:
«We had accompanied the Prophet in one of his journeys until we reached
'Baidah' or Zaatul-Jaish[^70]. There, I lost my necklace. The Holy
Prophet and his men remained in that desert area in order to find my
necklace!! There was no water to be found about and the Muslim soldiers
who were hard pressed for thirst approached Abu-Bakr and said: «Do you
see what Ayesha is doing? She has made the Holy Prophet and his men stay
in a place devoid of water.»

Abu Bakr approached me in a state when the Messenger of Allah had laid
his hand on my knees and had fallen asleep! He said: 'You have dissuaded
the Prophet and the people from moving forward while there is neither
water in this place nor have the people water with themselves!' Ayesha
says:

«Abu-Bakr reproached and blamed me in this regard. Moreover, he pounded
on my side and I could not move from my place as the Prophet had laid
his head on my knees. Moments later, the Prophet awoke from his sleep.
As there was no water for fulfillment of the religious obligations of
the people, God revealed the verse of «Tayammum» and the people
performed «Tayammum» (dry ablution).»

Osayyed-ibn-Huzair who was from the Ansars said:

«This has not been your first blessing 'O progeny of Abi-Bakr!»

Ayesha says: “As we made the camel on which I was mounting to move
ahead, we found the necklace which laid beneath her.[^71]”

In 'Musnad' of Ahmad it is narrated from Abdullah -ibn-Zubair that
Ayesha said: «In one of the journeys, I had accompanied the Holy
Prophet. On the way we reached a place called “Turbaan”193 which was a
few miles away from the city of Medina. This place was arid and dry....»

In the end of the tradition it has come down that Abu-Bakr addressed
Ayesha as such: “My daughter, I did not know that you are so much of a
blessing. Since you dissuaded the Mus[^72]ims from moving ahead and made
them wait in this desert, Almighty God resolved them with blessing and
comfort and revealed the verse of “tayammum” for them”. [^73]

#### A Probe Into This Tradition

In the tradition of «tayammum» we see that the Holy Prophet makes the
people stay in the arid desert and plateau not withstanding the fact
that the people have no water with themselves. All the soldiers of Islam
and the animals accompaning them suffer hardship until morning. All this
occured for the sake of finding Ayesha's necklace which was made out of
sizzling stones.

The Holy Prophet keeps his soldiers waiting in the dry desert in order
to find his wife's missing necklace. The Muslims on the other hand take
their complain of hardship and distress to Abu-Bakr. He in turn
approaches his daughter and reproaches and blames her for this doing and
says: «In all the journeys, the Muslims face hardship and difficulty for
your sake.»

However when the Muslims become perplexed in the matter of prayers,
Almighty God reveals the verse of «tayammum». Thus the Muslims perform
«tayammum» for the first time and offer their prayers with tayammum.
Right here, Abu-Bakr addresses her daughter as such: «O my daughter, I
was not knowing that you are so blessed and full of goodness and
blessing! Since you have dissuaded the Muslims from moving ahead and
have been the cause of their waiting, God has revealed goodness upon
them! » Also, Osayyed-ibn-Huzair says: «This is not your first goodness
and blessing 'O the progeny of Abi-Bakr!» After this too, the
compassionate God does not allow the matter of necklace to be rendered
futile. Rather, the next morning it is found under the sleeping-place of
the camel.

This event is the sign of abundant love and great affection of the Holy
Prophet towards his wife, Ayesha so much so that the God of Islam too
safeguards this love and affection and reveals statutory blessings for
the Muslims due to the afore-said love.

A brief investigation into the various aspects of this event reveals
that this tradition does not conform to the circumstances and conditions
of the battle of Muraisi'h or Bani-Mustalaq. This is because in this
battle, due to the dispute which arose between the Muslims of Ansars and
Muhajirs over the matter of water and the dangerous speech which
Abdullah-ibn-Obi Salool - a hypocrite - had delivered on that occasion
and there existed the possibility of an internal unrest, the Holy
Prophet commanded his people to quickly advance forward towards Medina
such that the belligerent people had time only for a short nap, prayers
and food, and spent the rest of their time in galloping towards Medina.

Moreover, just as it has come down in the tradition narrated from Ayesha
or the tradition forged in her name, the decree of «tayammum» should
have been much more universal than for it to remain a secret for a
selected few. Thus the entire soldiers of Islam faced unavailability of
water in this battle and became needful of «tayammum». The verse on
«tayammum» too was revealed on this occasion and all the soldiers acted
upon it and regarded this as one kind of goodness, blessing and comfort
which descended from the heavens and congratulated and expressed their
thanks to those who had been the cause of bringing this blessing and
comfort.

Considering the form of revealation of the decree and the verse of
«tayammum» and its universal aspect, the matter of «tayammum» should not
have remained hidden from a person like the second Caliph,
Omar-ibn-Khattab and that should not a person like him be aware of this
common affair which has occured in his very presence!? All have seen and
are aware of this affair but not Omar- ibn-Khattab! The same has come
down in a tradition narrated from Sahih-Muslim as follows:

A person approached Omar (during the latters Caliphate) and said: «I had
a wet dream and could not find water to perform ablution. What was I
supposed to do? Omar said: «In such situations, keep away from prayers!»
Ammar who was present at that time said:

“'O Amir-ul-Mumineen! Don't you remember that in one of the journeys to
war, both of us had to perform ablution and could not find any water? On
that day, you avoided prayers but I rolled on the dust and then offered
my prayers and when we narrated this matter to the Holy Prophet he said:
«As for you 'O Omar! it was not right on your part to abandon the
prayers. As for you, 'O Ammar! you should not have rolled on the dust
just as animals do. Suffice it was to strike your hands on the dust and
then rub them over your face and hands up to the joints....[^74]”

How come this common decree descended in the sight of the common Muslims
but remained hidden from the other companions (of the Holy Prophet)?
Just as Omran-ibn-Husain narrates:

«The Holy Prophet (S) witnessed a man (from his companions) keeping
himself aside from the others and refraining from performing prayers. He
said: 'O so and so person, Why don't you perform your prayers like the
others? He replied: 'O the Messenger of Allah. I have had a wet dream
and I have not yet performed the purification ablution. He said: You
only need to perform the «Tayammum» if you have not any water available.
[^75]

Moreover, how can we reconcile the previous tradition with the tradition
which Urwah has narrated from Ayesha and Nesa'ee has brought the same in
his book? They say:

«The Holy Prophet sent Osaid-ibn-Huzair along with a group to search for
Ayesha's necklace whom she had lost somewhere on the way. A long time
passed in search for this necklace and the time for prayers approached.
Incidentally they had no ablution and could not find any water too for
performing ablution. Helplessly they offered their prayers without
ablution.

Thereafter, they related the incident to the Holy Prophet and for this
very reasons, God revealed the verse of «tayammum».

Osaid-ibn-Huzair said: 'O Ayesha! May Allah bestow you with goodness. I
swear by Allah that no event has occured which was distasteful to you
except that Allah set goodness and blessing in it for you and the
Muslims.»[^76]

In Sahih Bukhari, this tradition has come down in the following manner.
«The Holy Prophet despatched a person....»

How can we reconcile this tradition from Ayesha with the first tradition
while we see a vast difference existing between the two?

The first tradition mentions that the Prophet, in a journey back from
war, came down to a house located in an arid land. The Muslims too had
no water with themselves. Thus they complained their hardship to
Abu-Bakr, in the morning too, after the revelation of the verse,
everyone performed «tayammum» and offered their prayers with «tayammum»
for the first time. At the time of departure, Ayesha's necklace too was
found underneath the camel.

But the second tradition mentions that the Holy Prophet despatched one
or more persons in search for Ayesha's necklace which had been left
behind in some house. These persons who were sent for this task could
not find water during this journey and hence offered prayers without
ablution. This was because the verse of «tayammum» had not yet been
revealed and they were unaware of its decree. Thereafter, when they
returned back to Medina and related their story to the Holy Prophet the
verse of «tayammum» was revealed.

If we wish to believe in the authenticity of all the traditions present
in the «Sihahs», we don't know how to bring a reconciliation between
these two traditions!?

\* \* \*

Moreover, how is it possible to reconcile these two traditions under our
discussion with what Ibn-Saad has narrated in «Tabaqat» about the life-
history of Maimum-ibn-Sanbaz Asla where the narrator, Rabii says: «I
heard from my father who heard from his father that a Muslim man by the
name of Asla once narrated as such:, 'I was doing service to the Holy
Prophet and saddling the ride for him.' One night the Holy Prophet said:
'O Asla! arise and make ready my horse! I said: 'O the Prophet of God. I
have had a wet dream! Thereafter he kept silent for a few moments. Then
Jibra'eel descended and brought the verse of (صعيد) i.e. the verse of
«tayammum» wherein the word of (صعيف) (dust) can be found.[^77] Then,
the Holy Prophet called me and displayed to me the manner of performing
«tyammum». I did the same and then attended to his horse....

Later when we came across water he said: 'O Asla, arise and perform
«Ghusl» (major ablution).[^78]

\* \* \*

Similarly, in what manner can we reconcile Ayesha's traditions with the
tradition which Ibn-Jarir Tabari has brought under the exegesis of the
verse: [^79] **وَلاَ جُنُباً إِلاَّ عَابِرِي سَبِيلٍ** Ibn-Jarir
narrates from Yazid-ibn-Abi Khabib that the houses of some of the people
from the Ansars had their doors facing the mosque.

Sometimes it would happen that they would experience wet dreams and
would also face the problems of unavailability of water. Under these
circumstances, they could not even leave their houses for the sake of
procuring water and performing «Ghusl» (major ablution) because they
could not pass through Prophet's mosque in the state of «Janabah» (major
ritual impurity) and also there existed no other way. Therefore, God
revealed the verse of tayammum. [^80]

Similarly, Ibn Munzar and Ibn Abi Hatim narrate from Mujahid that in
explanation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كُنتُم مَّرْضَى أَوْ عَلَى سَفَرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if you are ill or on a journey. (Holy Quran, 4: 43) ***

he (i.e. Mujahid) says: “This verse has been revealed about a man from
Ansars who was so sick that he was not able to stand and perform
ablution. Moreover, he had no one to assist him prepare his means for
ablution. This man approached the Holy Prophet and explained his
condition to him. On this occasion too, God revealed the verse of
'tayammum'. [^81]

Similarly, Ibn Jarir narrates from Ibrahim Nakh'ee who said:

«The Holy Prophet's companions suffered wounds in one of the battles.
The number of injured men were many. Later too, a few of them
experienced wet dreams. This was reported to the Holy Prophet.

Thereafter the blessed verse: ....

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كُنتُم مَّرْضَى أَوْ عَلَى سَفَرٍ ....
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if you are ill or on a journey… (Holy Quran, 4: 43) ***

was revealed in its full form.

Verily, how can one reconcile with so many different and diverse
traditions and reckon all of them to be correct and true?

With utmost regret, we have to say that the traditions which have been
narrated from Ayesha and which is ascribed to her and comprises the
incident of revelation of the verse of «tayammum», has been falsely
propagated and spread. Even the European and Western Orientalists and
Islamicists have had access and paid interest to them and drawn support
from them under the topic of «tayammum» in their book of 'Encyclopedia
of Islam.' [^82]

### The Reality Of This Matter

If we take into consideration the nature and territorial make-up of
'Hejaz' (Saudi - Arabia) and know about its severe scarcity of water
(just as what I have witnessed in my numerous journeys to this holy
land)and also realize this fact that 'Salât' (prayers) had been made
obligatory immediately after the Holy Prophet's appointment, we will
arrive to this conclusion that it is impossible for the divine
legislation of the law of «tayammum» to have been postponed all this
time (about eighteen years) and its decree to have been revealed in the
year 5 A.H. or 6 A.H. The Muslims out of compulsion, had been in need of
something as a substitution for water where they could resort or «Ghusl»
(major ritual ablution).

This need had certainly arisen hundreds and thousands of times right
from the outset of Islam until the year 6 A.H. Moreover, whenever a
Muslim was faced with any problem, he would approach the Prophet and the
latter in turn would explain the divine law for him. This was the
natural structure of this matter. However, if we resort only to the Holy
Quran, we will see the story being different from what has come down in
the aforesaid traditions. In the Holy Quran, the decree of «tayammum»
has come down next to ablution and «Ghusl» (major ritual ablution) as a
substitution to them.

In Surah Nisa:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَقْرَبُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَأَنتُمْ
سُكَارَى حَتَّىَ تَعْلَمُواْ مَا تَقُولُونَ وَلاَ جُنُباً إِلاَّ
عَابِرِي سَبِيلٍ حَتَّىَ تَغْتَسِلُواْ وَإِن كُنتُم مَّرْضَى أَوْ
عَلَى سَفَرٍ أَوْ جَاء أَحَدٌ مِّنكُم مِّن الْغَآئِطِ أَوْ لاَمَسْتُمُ
النِّسَاء فَلَمْ تَجِدُواْ مَاء فَتَيَمَّمُواْ صَعِيداً طَيِّباً
فَامْسَحُواْ بِوُجُوهِكُمْ وَأَيْدِيكُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَفُوّاً
غَفُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! do not go near prayer when you are intoxicated
until you know (well) what you say, nor when you are under an obligation
to perform a total ablution - unless (you are) travelling on a journey
until you have washed yourselves; and if you are sick, or on a journey,
or one of you come from the privy or you have made love to your women,
and you cannot find*** ***water, betake yourselves to pure dust, then
wipe your faces and your hands; surely Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving.
(Holy Quran 4:43)***

In Surah Maeda:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ إِذَا قُمْتُمْ إِلَى الصَّلاةِ
فاغْسِلُواْ وُجُوهَكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ إِلَى الْمَرَافِقِ وَامْسَحُواْ
بِرُؤُوسِكُمْ وَأَرْجُلَكُمْ إِلَى الْكَعْبَينِ وَإِن كُنتُمْ جُنُباً
فَاطَّهَّرُواْ وَإِن كُنتُم مَّرْضَى أَوْ عَلَى سَفَرٍ أَوْ جَاء
أَحَدٌ مَّنكُم مِّنَ الْغَائِطِ أَوْ لاَمَسْتُمُ النِّسَاء فَلَمْ
تَجِدُواْ مَاء فَتَيَمَّمُواْ صَعِيداً طَيِّباً فَامْسَحُواْ
بِوُجُوهِكُمْ وَأَيْدِيكُم مِّنْهُ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! When you rise up to prayer, wash your faces and
your hands up to the elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet to the
ankles; and if you are under an obligation to perform a total ablution,
then wash (yourselves) and if you are sick or on a journey, or one of
you comes from the privy, or you have made love, and you cannot find
water, betake yourselves to pure dust and wipe your faces and your hands
there with.... (Holy Quran 5:6)***

The meaning of these verses is this that «Wuzu» (ablution) and its
substitution with «Tayammum» (dry ablution) and «Ghusl» (major ritual
ablution) and its substitution with «Tayammum» (dry ablution) had
already been once legislated and its decree revealed continuously one
after the other in one verse.

This inevitability should have been much before what Ayesha has said and
much before her marriage to the Holy Prophet (S). Wisdom too deems
expedient such a state while we know that «Salât» (prayer) had been
legislated right from the outset of the Holy Prophet's appointment to
the post of Messengership and along with it, Gibra'eel had taught the
manner of performing “Wuzu” (ablution).[^83]

Thus «Ghusl» (major ritual ablution) and «Tayammum» (dry ablution) too
must have immediately followed «Wuzu» (ablution) in being legislated.

Of course, it can be said that these three decrees were perhaps revealed
far from the common Muslim's perspective because basically there did not
exist more than two or three Muslims at that time. Therefore, it is not
much of a concern if majority of them were unaware of the union of
«Tayammum» with «Wuzu» and «Ghusl» and had not heard the aforesaid
verse.

Whenever anyone amongst them encountered unavailability ofwater or faced
any such problem, he would approach the Holy Prophet and explain his
condition. The Holy Prophet too would either practically teach him the
obligation of «Tayammum» or recite for him the holy verse of Quran. It
was in this manner that the reality of the matter had been concealed for
a person or had been forgotten by him.

This analysis is a solution as we see it. However, that such a needed
decree had not been revealed until the year 5 A.H. or 6 A.H. and the
time of its legislation was when the Holy Prophet (S) remained in the
desert with his soldiers for a long duration until he found his wife's
valualess necklace seems to be against common sense and custom and is
incompatible with the supreme level of the Holy Prophet's disposition.

The Consequence Of Propagating Such Forgeries In The Islamic Texts
------------------------------------------------------------------

The consequence of propagating such forgeries in the Islamic texts and
sources has been that in the views of those believing in the
authenticity of such traditions, the supreme personality of the Holy
Prophet (S) is diminished to the level of an ordinary man in addition to
disallowing anyone from objecting and complaining against the lustful
and voluptuous rulers and Caliphs such as Yazid-ibn-Muawiya. In reality,
two aims and objectives for forging such traditions have come to hand:
Firstly, the Holy Prophet has been brought down even lower than the
level of an ordinary person and secondly, the actions of the slipshod
rulers and the irreligious Caliphs has been justified.

History recalls such incidences from the lives of the (so called)
Islamic rulers - the very divulgence of which is itself shameful. The
historians have said:

«When Muawiya wanted to take allegiance from the Muslims for his son
Yazid, he wrote a letter in this regard to Ziad-ibn-Abih, the Governor
of Basra.', Ziad replied: 'What will the people say in the face of this
recommendation while we know that Yazid plays with dogs and monkeys,
wears multicoloured dresses, always drinks wine and dances in tune to
tambourine?» On the other hand, there exists such personalities like
Hussein -ibn-Ali, Abdullah-ibn-Abbass, Abdullah-ibn-Zubair and
Abdullah-ibn- Omar. Thus, you order him to simulate his ways for one or
two years so that we might succeed in deluding the people in this
regard.

Following this letter, Muawiya commanded his son Yazid to accompany the
Muslim warriors in the summer battle[^84] with the Romans. But Yazid
pretended to be sick and on the way went to the Cloister of Marran[^85]
under the pretext of taking rest. But once there, he resorted to
drinking wine with his beloved one. In this battle, the Islamic soldiers
got affected by smallpox and when this unpleasant news reached Yazid, he
recited the following two-line poem:

When at Cloister of Marran I lean on soft sacks and Umm Kulsum besides
me and I drink the morning wine I no longer care if the soldiers are
affected by sickness and smallpox .[^86]

If such an event and other such incidents is committed by Yazid and his
father amongst the Muslims, then Muawiya's plan and ambition with
regards to taking allegiance for Yazid will be confronted with defeat
and the Umayyids will no longer remain in the Islamic history.

Can a remedy be found for the advancement of Muawiya's objectives? Does
a way exist for Yazid and his like to attain rulership as the Caliphate
of the Holy Prophet?

Muawiya had found the way.

If Yazid was taking his beloved one with himself in the battle-journey
and making merry with her at the cloister of Marran, the same too could
be reported in the case of the Holy Prophet. Verily, in a made-up
tradition, the Holy Prophet too takes his wife along with himself in one
of the battle- journeys and on the way, asks his soldiers to move ahead
so that he could enjoy and run a race with his wife or orders his
soldiers to remain in an arid land for the sake of finding his beloved's
necklace and himself thoughtlessly rests on her lap and sleeps. Not only
God refrains from reproaching him but instead reveals the verse of
«Tayammum» in due consideration of his manifestation of love and
affection towards his beloved wife!!

Then, assuming these traditions to be authentic, there no more remains
any place for objecting to this (so called) Caliph of the Holy Prophet
i.e. Yazid - that he too has left the Islamic army and has himself
thoughtlessly resided at the Cloister of Marran busy making merry with
his beloved one.

### The Period Of Forgery Of Such Traditions

It is for the sake of all these reasons that we reckon the matter of
forgery and propagation of such traditions to be befitting the era of
Muawiya. Besides, we had seen in the past that Muawiya had vowed to bury
the blessed name of the Holy Prophet. Thus, his enmity with Bani-Hashim
and the Holy Prophet himself on the one hand and his evil plots and
plans for the continuation of the Umayyid government and the Caliphate
of Yazid on the other hand were the main factors instigating him to
forge such lies through his agents.

The Jewish and Christian Islamicists and Orientalists too were searching
for their anti-Islamic aims in these very traditions (which
unfortunately are many in the references of the Caliphate school). Thus,
they have brought these traditions along with its analysis in their
books and researches as an introduction to the Holy Prophet and have
presented them to be the identity of Islam; the Holy Prophet and his
decrees and commandments. Of course we have to state with utmost regret
that they have to a certain extent achieved their objective too.

One of the eminent English Islamicists and Orientalists confesses as
such: «Basically, the Western writers were susceptible and ready to have
the worst beliefs about the Holy Prophet and whenever they came across
an explanation and exegesis which was objectionable in some way or the
other, they would pounce on the opportunity and regard it to be true and
authentic.” [^87]

Since the European Islamicists could not find the like of these
traditions in the references of the Ahlul Bayt school, they acquired
Islam only and only from the sources and references of the Caliphate
school.[^88] Their eastern followers too, either knowingly or
unknowingly have traversed the same path and followed in their
foot-steps.

212- In writing the biography of the Holy Prophet, this same English
scholar has only referred to Tarikh-e-Tabari, Seerah Ibn Hisham,
Mughazi, Aqdi, «Tabaqat» of Ibn Sa'ad, Sahih-e-Bukhari, Musnad Ahmad,
Asad-ul-Ghaba and Al-Asabah i.e. the references of the Caliphate school
only and has not referred to even one single reference from the Ahlul
Bayt school.

### The Consequence Of These Traditions On the thoughts of those believing in them

In the end, we once more emphasize that such traditions gives a special
kind of insight to those believing in their correctness and
authenticity. Thus they open the way for the propagation of such
deviated school of thoughts like «Wahabism» and worse still, all the
anti-Islamic groups like the Bahai's and the like of them seek their
(evil) purposes in these very sources and references. Thus we see them
introducing Islam with the help of those traditions and texts which
exists in the Caliphate school.[^89]

Aside from these two groups, the university - going intellectuals and
the eastern Islamicists too who traverse the same path as the Western
professors and pioneers drink water from the same spring. With the
motive of research in its entirety, they have in their recognition of
Islam, relied mostly or rather wholely on the sources and references of
the Caliphate school and have not paid attention to the pure
fountain-head of the Ahl-e- bayt school. In their recognition and
presentation of Islam, they have not reaped the benefits of the
traditions of the Imams (a.s.) - the household of the Holy Prophet (S)
whereas the Holy Prophet had repeatedly stated that those who are the
well-whishers of Islam should hold on fast to his household members
after his departure.

On the day of «Ghadeer-e-Khum» he said:

> (أنا تارك فيكم ثقلين أولهما كتاب الله فيه الهدى والنور فخذوا بكتاب
> الله واستمسكوا به- فحث على كتاب الله ورغب فيه ثم قال- وأهل بيتي أذكركم
> الله في أهل بيتي أذكركم الله في أهل بيتي أذكركم الله في أهل بيتي) 194

In the farewell Hajj Ceremony, while delivering a sermon on the day of
Arafat, the Holy Prophet said:

> يا أيها الناس إنّي تركت فيكم ما إن اخذتم به لن تضلوا: كتاب الله وعترتي
> أهل بيتي195

And, as per the narration of Abu Saeed Khudri the Prophet said:

> إني أوشك أن أدعى فأجيب و أني تارك فيكم الثقلين كتاب الله عز وجل وعترتي
> كتاب الله حبل ممدود من السماء الى الارض، وعترتي أهل بيتي، وان اللطيف
> الخبير أخبرني أنهما لن يفترقا حتى يردا علي الحوض فانظروني بم تخلفوني
> فيهما 196

From the historical references, exegesis and traditions of the Ahlul
Bayt school, the eastern Islamicists refer and pay attention to only
those parts which the westerners have referred and paid attention to.
For example, amongst the history books of Islam written by the Shi'ite
scholars; that which is studied by the Europeans is the same as what is
considered in the scholarly gatherings of the Islamic east like
«Tarikh-e-Yaqubi» and «Waqat Siffeen» and it is quite obvious that with
such meagre texts, one cannot recognize and present all the aspects of
Islam extracted from the Ahlul Bayt school.

As the source of recognition of Islam, «Tarikh» (history) and refer much
less to the historical books and texts and traditions written by Shaikh
Mufeed, Sayyid Murtaza, Shaikh Tusi and their likes in spite of the fact
that all of them were the most knowledgeable men of their time. Besides,
their writings are approximately ten centuries old. Thus, due to their
adherence to the Ahlul Bayt school, they have been neglected by western
orientalism and because of the inattention of the European, they have
still remained unrecognized in the Islamic east - outside the domains of
religious knowledge.

In short, keeping aloof from the knowledge of the Imams (Ahlul Bayt) and
their followers has become the most important factor in the distortion
of Islam in the writings of all the western and eastern Islamicists.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحق أحق أن يتبّع
  </p>
</blockquote>

In analysing and describing the factors which were responsible for the
distoration of Islam by the hands of the powerful ones of past history,
we came across some significant and fundamental factors like:

(1) Prevention from writing and propagating the traditions of the Holy
Prophet.

(2) Shattering the Holy Prophet's image as the one bespeaking the Quran.

(3) Fabrication of traditions in the various dimensions of Islam.

The third factor i.e. fabrication of traditions which was reckoned to be
the last portion and in reality the strongest factor in distortion,
appeared in different forms. In the past, we saw that a few amongst the
companions of the Holy Prophet embarked in the fabrication of traditions
during the beginning of the Umayyid era and the apparently Islamic
government of the Umayyid too was the initiator and the main instigator
of this event.

### Presence Of Sunni Scholars In The context of Fabrication of Traditions

We shall now engage in some other portion of this factor of distortion
and that is the presence of Sunni scholars in the context of fabrication
of traditions and their efforts in analysing and explaining Islam with
the help of the distorted culture loaded with lies and forgeries of
Judaism and Christianity.

In the Arabian - peninsula i.e. the society where the Holy Prophet was
appointed, the level of culture, knowledge and learning was at a very
low ebb. The explanation which the Holy Quran gives about this society
is an indication of this matter. In one place, the Quran describes the
Arab society during the period of ignorancy as the “manifest deviation”
[^90]and at some other place says: “The dwellers of the desert (Arabs)
are very hard in paganism and hypocrisy”[^91]. The entire culture and
knowledge present in this society was nothing other than poetry, speech
and knowledge about genealogies and a history of wars, bloodshed,
killings, plunder which they took a sickly pride in.

Once, in the Holy Prophet's mosque people had gathered around certain
man. When the Prophet entered the mosque and witnessed this gathering,
he inquired: «Who is this man around whom the people have gathered?» It
was replied: «He is an «Allama» i.e. (the most learned scholar)!» The
Holy Prophet asked: «What is an «Allama»?» They said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعلم الناس بأنساب العرب و قليعها و أيام الجاهلية و الاشعار العربية
  </p>
</blockquote>

'He is most learned of all men in the genealogies of the Arabs and their
historical events, the wars during the period of ignorancy and the poems
of its poets!» The Holy Prophet (S) said: «This is the kind of knowledge
which will neither harm a person if he is ignorant of it nor benefit a
person if he possesses it. [^92]»

Whatever has come in this tradition reveals the real set of knowledge of
the Arabs: knowledge of genealogies, knowledge about historical events
and wars, poems and literature. As far as knowledge of genealogies is
concerned, attention was paid even to the genealogy of animals and in
particular the genealogy of horses. Later, books were written in this
regard such as «Ansab-ul-Khail» of Hashim Kalbi.

With regards to poems, attention too was paid to its various kinds such
as lyrics, odes, epics and feastly poems and those pertaining to
self-glorification and dispraise. With the advent of Islam and the
connection it established with the most advanced civilizations of that
time i.e. the Romans - Christians, Iranians and later the Indian
civilization, the social atmosphere changed. Medina, which in the past,
represented an Arab city or at the most the capital of Arabian peninsula
transformed into one of the world's most important cities of that time.
The learned men and political representatives from various important
cities of the world would come and visit this city. The governor, ruler
and judge would travel from this city to the farthest reaches of Iran,
Syria and Africa.

Association and sociability had come into existence between the Arabs
and Romans and the Arabs and Iranians. Even marriages would take place
amongst these tribes. In reality, the Arab tribe which was once far away
from the world's common history and was sitting aside from the cultural
events prevailing upon the universal civilization of all, at once set
foot into history and gained supremacy over the world's civilized
tribes.

However, the level of cultural differences between the Arabs and the
Romans and the Iranians was a fact which could not be neglected under
any circumstances. As such, the questions which would arise for the
city - dwellers would not arise so much for the desert - dwellers.
Basically, the entire thoughts of Arab named revolved around keeping
different names for his camels or giving various titles to his sword or
recitation of poems about wars or the ruins of his lover's place. This
was the ultimate limit of his mental scope and development.

However, the city - dwellers, in particular the Syrian and Iranians of
that time had other thoughts in their mind which basically was never
mooted in the unenlightened culture of the Arabs and no solution was
thought for them. The city - dwellers would ask: «'How has this sky been
established'? 'How has this earth been created?' 'Does this world have a
beginning or an end?' 'What will happen to us after death?' And 'What
shall we see?'» If such a person would turn into a Muslim he would still
ask other questions about Quran and Islam. For example: «What is the
meaning of this verse? What was Noah's Ark? Where was it? and finally
where did it go?» Who are the tribe of Aad? Who are Ibrahim, Musa and
Isa?

How was their condition and form of life? And hundreds of other
questions and matters.

This exigency was severely felt and the everincreasing impact of
questions and problems became more than before. This was under the
circumstances when the Holy Prophet was not present in the society and
nothing was being narrated from him. The distinguished and Islamic -
trained companions like Salman, Abu Zar, Ammar, Miqdad and Ibn Masoud
had withdrawn themselves aside. The Holy Prophet's household too were
far from official responsibility and Ali, who was the gate of the Holy
Prophet knowledge and about whom the Prophet said:

> انا مدينة العلم وعلي بابها 200

Was now robbed of his Imamate and confined to the house or engaged in
planting date-palms or farming in the desert. A person like Abu-Huraira
(who did not fear forging traditions and would say: From my own bag!
when asked about the sura he narrated a tradition [^93]) was not
enlightened enough to solve the problems in a respectable manner. For
example he has said: (and this saying has also been narrated in the most
authentic books) If a fly drops into food and consequently the food
becomes contaminated with one of its wings then, dip the fly into the
food because one of its wing is an ailment while the other is a cure!
[^94]

In another tradition he says: 'God sent Gabriel to the Holy Prophet
commanding him to approach Abu-Bakr and inform him that: “We are pleased
with him. Is he (too) pleased with Us? [^95]”

Such sayings cannot satisfy the enlightened men. The problems remain
unsolved. The government which has remained helpless in replying to the
problems mooted by the opposition or friends will not be able to last
long. Thus a way of solution was reflected upon and a new gate was
opened which unfortunately is still open till today. That is to say, the
scholars and learned men of Jews and Christians were officially employed
for solving the scientific problems, explaining the Quran and relating
the commandments. The Christian and Jewish scholars who were now
newly-converted Muslims became leaders in scientific works in the
Islamic society and sat on the seat for pronouncing decrees or were
commissioned to deliver general speeches before the Friday-prayer
sermons or engaged themselves in interpreting the Quran, training the
students, etc...

### Story Tellers

The term [قصّاص] (= storyteller) is a term related to علم الحديث i.e.
science of traditions - carrying a special scientific meaning. In order
to have an authentic narration, it is necessary for the one narrating a
tradition to mention accurately and lucidly the narrator of the
tradition and the successive chain of its transmitters. For example, he
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني سعيد ين جبير قال: حدثني عبد الله بن عباس قال: قال رسول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Or says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني سويد بن غفلة عن علي بن أبي طالب عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Or says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني سويد بن غفلة عن علي بن أبي طالب عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله
  </p>
</blockquote>

i.e. so and so a person narrated to me from so and so a person and he
from Ali-ibn-Abi Talib (a.s.) and he from the Messenger of Allah (S).
This course and method is customary in the 'Science of traditions' [علم
الحديث]. For distinguishing the truth from the falsehood, in addition to
the examination of the text the chain of transmission which the narrator
and transmitter uses is also examined. However, with regards to the past
events which have been narrated in the Holy Quran, it is needless to
narrate their chain of transmitters. The Quran itself is the chain of
transmitters of these events. The holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ نَقُصُّ عَلَيْكَ أَحْسَنَ الْقَصَصِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We narrate to you, [O Muhammad], the best of stories***… ***(Holy
Qur’an 12:3)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَـذَا لَهُوَ الْقَصَصُ الْحَقُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed, this is the true narration…  (Holy Qur’an 3:62)***

For this reason, those who have spoken about the past events, the
history of the Prophets, creation and other such matters without setting
forth the chain of transmitters linked to the Holy Prophet and
apparently their words resembled the stories of the Quran were called as
[قصّاص] (storytellers). Of course in our times the meaning of a
«storyteller» is similar to a «fairy-tale teller» and this is not a good
title. However, in those times a «storyteller» was meant to be a person
who like the Holy Quran, talked about the history of the Prophets and
other such matters without narrating the chain of transmission.

### Tamim ad-Dari, the christian scholar, The spokesman of the islamic world:

The first person who has found the basis of story-telling in the Islamic
world is Tamim ad-Dari.

Authentic sources say:

> لم يكن يقص على عهد رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم و لا لأبي بكر و كان
> أول من قص تميما الداري، استأذن عمر بن الخطاب أن يقص على الناس قائما
> فأذن له عمر 204

In the covenant of the Holy Prophet, there did not exist story-telling.
The same was the case in the covenant of Abu-Bakr too. The first person
who engaged in such an affair was Tamim ad-Dari. He asked
Omar-ibn-Khattab to allow him to collect and narrate stories for the
people and the latter allowed him to do so.

#### His Record Before Islam

Concerning the stipulation of those who have written the life-history of
the companions of the Holy Prophet, Tamim ad-Dari i.e. Tamim-ibn-Aus
ibn- Kharaja (agnomen - Abu Ruqaiyya) was a Christian and in the year 9
A.H. i.e. during the last year of the Prophet's life, he came to Medina
and became a Muslim:

> كان نصرانيا وقدم المدينة فأسلم 205

Verily, it is not that he was an ordinary Christian but it is said that
he was reckoned to be the monk amongst the Palestinians and a devotee of
that place:

> كان راهب أهل فلسطين وعابد أهل فلسطين206

In other words, he was not an ordinary person in the Christian religion.
Rather, he was reckoned to be a famous monk and worshipper amongst the
people of Palestine.

Moreover, they add:

> من علماء أهل الكتابين 207

«He was a scholar as well as being well-versed in the Torah and Bible.»

Apart from being a monk, he was also a tradesman during the era of
ignorancy. Bukhari narrates in his 'Sahih' that Tamim ad-Dari and
Addi-ibn- Badda (who was a relative of Amro Aas) went for a business
trip along with a person from the tribe of Bani-Saham, On the way, this
man died in a land where there were no Muslim dwellers.

His wealth fell in the hands of Tamim and Addi who handed them to his
family-members, when they returned. Moments before dying, this Sahami
person wrote the accounts of his wealth and kept it amongst them.
However, this affair remained concealed from the eyes of the two
partners.

Amongst the wealth of the Sahami man, a cup made of silver existed which
was decorated with gold and was the biggest and most valuable part of
its owners wealth. Of course its particulars were recorded in the list
of wealth. Tamim and Addi sold this cup and shared the money which
amounted to five hundred dirhams and handed over the remaining wealth to
the family-members of the Muslim partner.

Amongst the wealth, the family-member found a deed of the entire wealth
of their father wherein mention was made of a cup coated with gold. The
family-members approached the two partners of their father and claimed
from them the cup present in their father's wealth. They denied this and
said: 'We are unaware of such a cup. The dispute was taken before the
Holy Prophet. He commanded that those two should attend the mosque and
after the prayers, swear to God that they had not committed treason and
had brought all that was left of the dead man's property.

They sweared accordingly but later on, the cup was found with someone
who confessed to having bought it from Tamim. When Tamim was questioned
about it, he said: Yes, it is the truth. But, we had bought it from that
Sahami man and we forgot to reveal this matter to you at that time. At
this very moment, the verse 106 and 107 from Sura Maeda was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يِا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ شَهَادَةُ بَيْنِكُمْ إِذَا حَضَرَ
أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ حِينَ الْوَصِيَّةِ اثْنَانِ ذَوَا عَدْلٍ مِّنكُمْ
أَوْ آخَرَانِ مِنْ غَيْرِكُمْ إِنْ أَنتُمْ ضَرَبْتُمْ فِي الأَرْضِ
فَأَصَابَتْكُم مُّصِيبَةُ الْمَوْتِ تَحْبِسُونَهُمَا مِن بَعْدِ
الصَّلاَةِ فَيُقْسِمَانِ بِاللّهِ إِنِ ارْتَبْتُمْ لاَ نَشْتَرِي بِهِ
ثَمَناً وَلَوْ كَانَ ذَا قُرْبَى وَلاَ نَكْتُمُ شَهَادَةَ اللّهِ
إِنَّا إِذاً لَّمِنَ الآثِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«O you who believe! call to witness between you when death draws nigh
to one of you, at the time of making the will, two just persons from
among you, (i.e. Muslims) or two other than you, (i.e. non-Muslim) if
you are travelling in the land and the calamity of death befalls you;
the two (witnesses) you should detain after the prayer; then if you
doubt (them), they shall both swear by Allah, (saying): We will not take
for it a price, though there be a relative, and we will not hide the
testimony of Allah for then certainly we should be among the sinners.»
(Holy Quran, 5: 106)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ عُثِرَ عَلَى أَنَّهُمَا اسْتَحَقَّا إِثْماً فَآخَرَانِ
يِقُومَانُ مَقَامَهُمَا مِنَ الَّذِينَ اسْتَحَقَّ عَلَيْهِمُ
الأَوْلَيَانِ فَيُقْسِمَانِ بِاللّهِ لَشَهَادَتُنَا أَحَقُّ مِن
شَهَادَتِهِمَا وَمَا اعْتَدَيْنَا إِنَّا إِذاً لَّمِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«Then if it becomes known that they both have been guilty of a sin,
two others shall stand up in their place from among those who have a
claim against them, the two nearest in kin; so those two should swear by
Allah: Certainly our testimony is truer than the testimony of those two,
and we have not exceeded the limit, for then, most surely we should be
of the unjust.» (Holy Quran, 5: 107)***

As per the order of these verses, two persons nearest in kin and
relatives of the Sahami man sweared near the foot of the Holy Prophet's
pulpit that the possession of the cup had been mentioned amongst the
list of inheritance deed and it is they who are uttering the truth and
not these two men. In this manner, the Holy Prophet commanded them to
give back the cup or its equivalent to the heirs of the Sahami man.
[^96]

This is the past record of Tamim's ugly face during his Christianity.
His life can be summarized as such: «A scholar in Torah and Bible, a
Christian monk and a big tradesman across the oceans» who of course had
sometimes committed the crime of theft while trading.

After this event, the Holy Prophet addressed Tamim who was then a
Christian as such: «Convert to Islam since Islam will forgive you of
your past sins.» In other words, the moment a person enters into the
fold of Islam, it eliminates all his past impurities. Thus, in this
manner Tamim accepted Islam in the year 9 A.H.

#### During The Second Caliph's Era

During the period of Omar-ibn-Khattab's Caliphate, Tamim Dari, the
former Christian scholar who had not witnessed the Prophet's period for
more than one year was now allowed to address the Holy Prophet's
companions like Salman, Abu-Zar, Miqdad, Ammar Huzaifa, Khuzaima and
others. As a speaker and orator prior to the Friday-prayers he was given
the liberty of addressing the general Muslim population of Medina once
in a week. Of course, the Muslims were supposed to sit the Friday-
prayer ceremony through which they did and listened to his speeches.
During Uthman's reign of Caliphate, he was charged with fulfilling this
responsibility twice a week. [^97]

The second Caliph, Omar-ibn-Khattab would respect Tamim to a great
extent and would call him by the title of خير أهل المدينة (the best man
in Medina) [^98]. This was exactly at the time when persons like Imam
Amir-ul- Mumineen (a.s.) and the eminent companions of the Holy Prophet
were present. Later, when the people were divided into classes on the
basis of the second Caliph's command, Tamim was placed in the rank of
the 'people of Badr' who were reckoned to be the most honourable
companions of the Holy Prophet and were receiving pays more than any
other class.

The people of Badr became the first group of the Holy Prophet's
followers where the «Muhajirin» (emigrants)amongst them received five
thousand dirham and the «Ansars» (helpers) amongst them received four
thousand dirhams. The next group were those who had participated in the
battle of 'Uhud' and following them were the people of 'Khandaq', people
of 'Khaibar' and then the 'peace of Hudaibiyya' and last of all
consisted of those who had become Muslims after the Holy Prophet and
they received two hundred dirham from the public-treasury.

At that time, the Caliph linked Tamim Dari to the 'people of Badr' and
placed him besides the pioneers and vanguards of Islam and earmarked
five thousand dirham for him from the public - treasury.[^99] Moreover,
when the second Caliph gave orders that the 'Nafila' (supererogatory)
and 'Mustahab' (recommendable)prayers should be offered in congregation
in the month of Ramadhan (in the year 14 A.H.), two persons were
appointed by him for leading the congregation where one of them was
Tamim Dari. (a newly-converted Muslims who was previously a Christian,
monk and scholar).

He would attend the congregation prayers and lead the Muslims with his
one thousand dirham value garment in an utmost majestic state.
[^100]Tamim remained in Medina until the end of Uthman's Caliphate and
rule. However, after Uthman's death, he fled to Syria and resided there
until 40 A.H. i.e. the year of martyrdom of Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen
(a.s.). Historians have said: Tamim died in Syria and his grave is
situated in the house of «Jubreen» in Palestine.

#### His Penetration Into The Caliphate School

This Christian monk and scholar who was now a newly-converted Muslim had
been quenched with tampered culture of the Torah and Bible and had not
undergone so much Islamic and Prophetic training so as to undergo a
radical positive change. In order to realize the influence of such a
person in the Islamic society of his time and the official Islam, it is
necessary to ponder over what the scholars of «Rijal» (researchers in
the biographies of the companions) have said: Persons like Abu-Huraira
from whom 5,374 traditions have been narrated in the books 'Sihah',
'Musnad' and other narrative sources of the Caliphate school,
Anas-ibn-Malik who has 2,286 traditions to his credit,
Abdulla-ibn-Abbass who has narrated 1,660 traditions and numerous other
disciples of the companions were amongst his students and have narrated
traditions from him.

#### Hadith Of «Jassaseh» And «Dajjal»

The most famous tradition which has been narrated from Tamim Dari
reveals the culture which he possessed and strived to disseminate it in
the newly-founded Islamic society. This tradition is about «Dajjal» and
is well- known as «Jassaseh». It is narrated as such:

Fatemah-bin-Qais says:

«The voice of the Prophet's caller could be heard crying out: الا صلاة
جامعة (come for the congregation prayers). I left my house and then
offered prayers in the mosque with the Holy Prophet. I was sitting in
the front row of the ladies. After prayers, the Holy Prophet sat on the
pulpit and while smiling said: 'Everyone should remain in his or her own
place.' Thereafter he added: 'Do you know why I have called you in
this?' The people replied: 'God and gathering, His Messenger know
better!' He said: «I have called you here in order to inform you that
Tamim Dari who was formerly a Christian has now accepted Islam and has
become a Muslim, Moreover, he has narrated to me a tradition which is in
agreement with what I used to narrate for you and it is about Messiah
Dajjal.» He has narrated to me as such:

«I boarded the ship along with thirty men from the tribes of «Lakhm» and
«Juzaam». The sea turned stormy, For one month we were entangled in the
horrendous storm, Later, the storm pulled us to an island. We stepped
off unto the shore. There, we witnessed a strange animal which was very
hairy so much so that his head could not be clearly seen. We approached
the animal and said: «What are you?» It replied: 'I am Jassaseh![^101]
We said: 'What is Jassaseh? It replied: Do not ask me about anything.
Enter this monastery because the man who is inside is eager to see you
and wishes to acquire knowledge about you! On hearing these words, we
began to fear and thought that perhaps he was Satan who has now appeared
in this form. Soon we went towards the monastery.

Inside, we witnessed a man the like of whom we had never witnessed.
However, his hands and legs were bound with chains. We asked: 'Who are
you?' He replied: You shall soon know about me. But first, introduce
yourselves to me. We informed him that we were Arabs and related to him
the story of the ship and our fate. Thereafter, he asked us some
questions and said: 'In what condition is the palm of “Baisan”?[^102]

Does the lake of “Tabariyya” contain water or not?[^103]

How is the spring of “Zughar”?[^104].... Then he said: 'Inform me about
the unlettered Prophet.' We said: he has appeared in Mecca and is now
residing in Yathrib (Medina). He said: Have the Arabs waged wars against
him? We replied: 'Yes.' He said: 'How has these battle been fought?' We
said: 'Sometimes he has been victorious and sometimes his enemies have
beaten him.' He said: But it is to their own interest to follow him.
Then, he said: 'Now I shall introduce myself. I am Messiah (Dajjal) and
it is not far that I will be given permission to emerge. I shall walk on
the earth and traverse every place save Mecca and Taiba (Medina) in only
forty days. These two cities are forbidden upon me and on every way
which leads to them stands an angel with a sword who prevents me from
entering these places.' Thereafter, the Holy Prophet while striking his
staff thrice on the pulpit said: This place is «Taiba». He further
added: Didn't I inform you about this matter before? The people replied:
'Yes!' Then, he said: Tamim's tradition is interesting and astonishing
for me because it is in agreement and conformity with whatever I had
revealed to you in the past. [^105]

#### Review Of This Tradition

Here we shall not examine as to how it is possible that a sea should be
entangled in a storm for one whole month! Basically, it could be no
other sea other than the Mediterranean sea? And whether this sea on
which man has travelled across for a thousand years has really possessed
an unheard island where Dajjal was imprisoned in it and «Jassaseh» was
busy gathering information is quite astonishing. If at that time it was
possible for someone to believe that such an unknown island existed, can
the same be believed in the recent centuries? Has this unreasonable
saying been accepted today?

Moreover, where can an animal by the name of «Jassaseh» whose head and
tail are unrecognizable and speaks eloquent Arabic too be found!? Does
such a thing really sound sensible or not? Also, why Dajjal who was
bound with chains and had the permission for revolting has not done so
during these one thousand and four hundred years? In those days, it was
possible for someone like the fabricator of this news who was unaware of
the future to say that Dajjal had been granted permission to revolt but
today, after a gap of centuries we are aware of the extent of the
falsity of this matter.

We leave these and such other questions and their answers to the
knowledge and insight of our readers. We only ask: What kind of evil
repercussions and misunderstandings can be created in Islam from that
which is mentioned in the tradition: that the Holy Prophet hears it from
Tamim Dari with acceptance and then announces this with delight to the
Muslims in an official and large gathering. What kind of an opinion will
an educated, enlightened and discerning Muslim derive about his Prophet?
What will a non-Muslim who is doing research about Islam, say? And how
can they believe in a Prophet who narrates such superstitions and lies?

Another question which we have in mind is whether there was no Muslim in
the length of these centuries to doubt in the integrity of this
tradition and the Holy Prophet's utterances on the pulpit? The reply is
«No», because this tradition has been narrated in Sahih Muslim and
whatever gets narrated in Sahih Muslim and Bukhari cannot be doubted! In
any way, there exists no doubt in the fantasy and fabrication of the
text of this tradition. So, where does the impairment lie or rather
where can we look for it?

Sayyid Muhammad Rashid Ridha, an emiment Egyptian scholar[^106], has
conducted research in this regard and suggests a way for solving this
matter. He does not say that Fatemah-bin-Qais, the narrator of the
tradition has made a mistake or has not spoken the truth or has been
entangled in delusive thought and imagination since, she is after all
the companion of the Prophet and a companion is worthy of respect!
Moreover, the narrators of Sahih Muslim and Muslim himself are
faultless. Thus, this tradition verily refers back to the Holy Prophet
and cannot be said that any mistake or crime has taken place on the part
of the narrators.

However, the tradition too is not worthy of acceptance under any
circumstances through wisdom and knowledge of our time. Rashid Ridha
reckons the solution to lie in this that the Holy Prophet has made a
mistake for narrating Tamim's sayings i.e. he has unknowingly entangled
himself in the claws of Tamim's superstitious and false story and
without discovering his mistake has divulged it to the people. Muhammad
Abdoh's expression is as follows:-

> النبي ما كان يعلم الغيب فهو كسائر البشر يحمل كلام الناس على الصدق إذا
> لم تخف به شبهة 219

«The Holy Prophet is not aware of the unseen. He is similar to other
human - beings and believes in the sayings of the people if they sound
reasonable and rouse no doubt.»

In reality, the Holy Prophet (S) has been deceived by Tamim's words and
has happily revealed and taught them to the people without realizing
that his sayings are plain superstitions.

Now, this basic question arises that as to why such kinds of traditions
have found their way in the books of traditions?

We do not wish to find fault with Tamim Dari and argue as to why he has
resorted to such superstitious tales. And basically what his intentions
were in narrating such sayings? Rather, we wish to inquire why this tale
has not entered the story-books and has found its way in the book of
[الجامع الصحيح] (The comprehensive authentic traditions)?

Those who remember our previous discussions are aware that with regards
to the orders of the ruling authorities, traditions were not being
written down before the year 100 A.H. and it was during Omar-ibn-Abdul
Aziz's era that for the first time traditions appeared in the written
form. It is possible that such a story which could have been attractive
and exciting too for the people of that time, must have been narrated by
Tamim Dari and the Muslims too must have heard about it. Later, during
the length of time, some Muslim or the other has made an error and
imagined that he has heard the story in the form of tradition from the
Holy Prophet. Perhaps, in this manner it has been narrated through
Fatemah-binte Qais or Aamer Shuabi, the other narrator and has found its
way in the books of tradition. The reality of the affair is this that
neither the Holy Prophet has uttered such words nor there had been any
gathering in the mosque for listening to his talks.

In the 'science of hadith' [علم الحديث] or 'contextual study of hadith
[علم دراية الحديث] this (tradition) has been reckoned to be [رواية
الكبار عن الصغار] as one kind amongst the various kinds of hadiths which
means a greater person narrating tradition from a smaller person. For
example, when a companion (of the Holy Prophet) narrates a tradition
from a disciple of the companion, his narration will be counted to be
[الكبار رواية عن الصغار] because a companion, due to his companionship
with the Holy Prophet and his leading in the chain of narrators is
considered to be greater than a disciple who does not possess such
priorities. With regard to this tradition too it has been said: 'Since
the Holy Prophet has narrated this tradition from one companion i.e.
Tamim Dari, it is therefore [رواية الكبار عن الصغار] [^107]

#### Western Islamicists And The Hadith Of «Jassaseh»

In the length of history of the Christian CHurch's campaign against
Islam, one of the most common Christian accusation has been this that
the Holy Prophet has acquired his words and basically the Islamic
knowledge and commandments from the Christians and Jews. At first, the
ecclesiastic forces, by relying on the similarities which exists among
some of the matters in the present-day Torah, Bible and the holy Quran,
have reiterated this accusation during the centuries.

Later, when due to progressive exigencies, the need of knowledge in the
form of Orientalism and Islamlogist was felt in the countries of
European colonizers and it came into being with all its expanded scope,
this saying because one of the most common accusations of the western
Islamicists against Islam and the Islamicist agents of the English,
French, Holland.... ministries have, under the pretext of research and
investigation, reiterated this accusation day after day.

By paying attention to these preliminaries it will become clear that to
what extent Tamim's hadith can be a proof of such lies and accusations.
Unfortunately, in connection to the discussion about Dajjal and the
life- history of Tamim himself, the Western Islamicists refer to this
tradition in the most important book in this field i.e. «Encyclopaedia
of Islam» and also specify that he was able to divulge the worship of
the Syrian Christians before the Prophet. Aside from giving such kind of
information in religious matters to the Holy Prophet (!) he also placed
before him the story of Dajjal, the end of time and Jassaseh and the
Prophet too listened to such talks with acknowledgement and revealed and
taught them to the Muslims as a scholarly gift.[^108]

Professor Lifi Dalavida, a master in Arabic Language and semitic
languages and an expert in Islamic history writes about Tamim Dari in
the Encyclopaedia of Islam as such: “Tamim was a Christian just like
most of the Syrian Arabs. Thus he was able to acquaint Hazrat (i.e. the
Holy Prophet)about the worship of the Syrians amongst which was the
matter of lightening of candles in the mosque. It is said that Tamim was
the first person who narrated religious stories. The stories about the
establishment of the Hour (Resurrection) and the appearance of Dajjal
and Jassaseh were all from such type. Tamim divulged these stories for
the Prophet who in turn revealed them to the people. [^109]”

Previously, we had seen how, during the Umayyid era, they (i.e. the
Umayyids) strived hard in crushing the Holy Prophet's personality.
Unfortunately, the results of this endeavour which took the shape of a
tradition and found its way in the reliable books of the Caliphate
school became the (main) factor in influencing Rashid Ridha to believe
that the solution of this matter lies in this that the Holy Prophet had
committed a mistake! (God forbid).

#### On The Path Of Greater Recognition Of Tamim Dari

Rub-ibn-Zanba'a says:- «I approached Tamim Dari. I saw him cleaning
barley to feed his horse in spite of the presence of servants and slaves
besides him». I said: «You need not do this work as your servants and
slaves are present! Is there not anyone amongst them to perform this
task?» Tamim said: 'Yes. But I have heard the Holy Prophet saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما من إمريء مسلم ينقى لفرسه شعيراً ثم يعلقه عليه إلا كتب له بكل حبة
حسنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Any Muslim who cleans barley for his horse and (then) hangs it around
her neck to be fed a goodness is written for him to the extent of the
number of those barleys.” [^110]

This forged tradition is an example of the traditions narrated from
Tamim wherein the Holy Prophet sayings and the Islamic knowledge is
reduced to such levels that one reward is fixed for every barley given
to a horse.

One of the deceitful acts of Tamim Dari which has been recorded in
history and has remained till today is this that during Muawiya's era,
he presented a letter from the Holy Prophet wherein the latter mentions
that he has given Tamim some flourishing village and hamlet of Syria as
a fief. These villages consisted of Bait-Ayoon, Hebrun, Martum and
Bait-e-Ibrahim.

The text of the Prophet's letter which Tamim presented in this regard is
as follows:

>  هذا ما أعطى محمد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم لتميم الداري وأصحابه:
> أني أعطيتكم بيت عينون وحبرون والمرطوم وبيت إبراهيم برمتهم وجميع ما
> فيهم عطية بتٍّ ونفذتُ وسلمتُ ذلك لهم ولأعقابهم من بعدهم إلى أبد
> الأبدين، فمن آذاهم فيه آذى الله. شهد أبو بكر بن أبي قحافة وعثمان وعلي
> بن ابي طالب224

«This is whatever Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah (S) has presented to
Tamim Dari and his companions. I present you Bait-Uyoon, Hebrun, Martum
and Bait-Ibrahim along with the belongings in these villages - i.e. its
trees, animals and people. This gift is decisive and irrevocable. I have
approved and surrendered it to him and his family- members forever. The
witnesses upon this matter are Abu-Bakr, Omar, Uthman and Ali-ibn-Abi
Talib.»

The proofs of prevarication of this letter are many:

One of them is that the Holy Prophet never used to send greetings and
salutations upon himself after mentioning his name in the letters which
he would write or rather had others to write. Of course if others would
write something they would note down greetings and salutations after his
blessed name.

Another reason is that the Holy Prophet would never give a flourishing
place as a fief to anyone in this manner i.e. with all its inhabitants.
Rather, he would give barren and dead land so that they would enliven
them or give pastures which could be turned into a place suitable for
animal husbandry.

Yet another proof. If the Holy Prophet had gifted each and everything of
these villages (its people, animals and property) to Tamim and his
followers it means that he had gifted the people of this place to him as
slaves and that too forever and until the Day of Judgement. And then he
said: «If anyone vexes them i.e. Tamim Dari, his family-members,
relatives and descendants he has in fact vexed Allah.

Another reason which we can mention is that the witnesses to this
munificence comprised those people who later on attained the Caliphate
in order. In other words, precisely in accordance with the same order of
government, they have signed below this letter. This order is itself a
clear proof of this letter being forged and fabricated because, none of
the witnesses seen in the numerous letters of the Holy Prophet's pact
follow this order. For this very reason we say that this letter had been
forged during Muawiya's era. By means of this letter, Tamim took from
Muawiya the possession of the afore-mentioned flourishing places which
were around Bait-ul-Muqaddas and in Syria and Palestine and then
migrated and lived there until the end of his life. He died there and
was buried too in that very place.

#### Summary

With such record before Islam and such actions and statements after
Islam Tamim Dari was the official speaker of the Islamic government. As
mentioned before, he was appointed as the official speaker before the
Friday-prayers during the period of the second and third Caliph where he
would narrate stories.

Amongst the first steps which Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) implemented
after gaining control of the government was that he dismissed the
story-tellers from the mosque. [^111]

Of course, like most other fugitives on the run from the just government
of Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.), they took refuge in Muawiya. In this
manner, the story of story-teller came to an end - of course not
forever - and for the first time this chapter was wiped off from the
history of Islam by the hands of Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen although
afterwards, it regained considerable official recognition during the
period of the statemen.

The first epoch of the life of the story-tellers reached its end during
this period. However with the fresh revival of their affairs, their
influence in the Islamic reflection remained alive just as we saw in the
past, the influence of Tamim's whimsical narration of traditions.

About his life, they say: The Holy Prophet has narrated tradition from
him and Ibn Abbass, Anas-ibn-Malik, Abu-Huraira, Abdullah-ibn-Omar and
scores of disciples of the companions have learnt and narrated
traditions from him. [^112]

The possibility of the Holy Prophet (S) having had narrated tradition
from Tamim, the example of which we saw before, can be decisively and
accurately judged to be false. However, those amongst the companions who
did not possess well-grounded knowledge of Islam like Abu-Huraira, Anas,
Abdullah-ibn-Omar and also the disciples of the companions who wished to
learn Islam from the tongue of persons like Tamim took the sayings of
this Christian but newly-converted Muslim scholar and monk and narrated
them in the form of traditions for the future generation.

As such, the series of hadiths which in the «science of traditions» [علم
الحديث] is called as «Israeeliyat» i.e. stories of Bani-Israel i.e.
whatever has been available in Torah, Bible, Talmud and such kind of
distorted books of Old Testament has found its way in the Islamic world
and has remained here and taken the colour of «tafseer» (exegesis),
hadith and Islamic history.

Is it not that in numerous instances of the Torah it is mentioned that
God walks or that God can become visible or that He speaks with Adam or
wrestles with Yaqoub right from sunset till early dawn? Is it not that
the Torah speaks about the various kinds of sins committed by the
Prophets and that they are not immune from wine, adultery and other
sins? Verily, all such talks which in reality have been the result of
distortions of the heavenly facts present in the true Torah and Bible
have entered Islam through such people and filled the various books of
the Caliphate school.

As such, one of the factors which was responsible for distortion in
Islam was the existence of such kind of people. Unfortunately, we have
to state that the sayings of Tamim Dari, Wahab-ibn-Munabbah and most
important amongst them Kab al-Ahbar[^113] have not only penetrated the
historical, narrative and interpretive text of the Caliphate school but
have also influenced a few historical, narrative and interpretive
sources of the Ahl-e- bayt school and as such the lucid sciences of the
Ahlul Bayt have become so tainted in some of the books. In the Ahlul
Bayt school, the primary principle is based on research. Thus in the
traditions pertaining to jurisprudence, an accurate multilatered
research is not adequately conducted in the case of historical, ethical
or interpretive traditions and so a few signs of distortions of the
enemies of Islam can be seen here and there in such books.

For achieving the true Islam i.e. the Islam which the Holy Prophet has
brought, we are left with no option but to hold fast unto him and reap
the benefits of his sciences and that of his Ahlul Bayt who are the
inheritors of his unlimited knowledge. On many occasions, Hazrat
himself, in various forms has said the following:

> إني تارك فيكم الثقلين كتاب الله وعترتي ما إن تمسكتم بهما لن تضلوا بعدي
> أبداً 228

«I am leaving behind two valuable things amongst you - the Book of Allah
and my household members. If you hold on to these two things, you will
never go astray.»

Just as we witnessed, the ruling figures strived to fill the vacant
sayings of the Holy Prophet and the true Islamic gnosis with the culture
of «Ahl-e- Kitab» - Jews and Christians. It was on this very path that
the scholars from «Ahl-e-Kitab» sat on the throne of Quranic exegesis
and explanation of gnosis in the Islamic societies. Previously, we had
discussed about manner of his influence in the Islamic society. Now we
shall examine the personality and operation of yet another scholar of
«Ahl-e-Kitab» who was called as Kab al-Ahbar and was reckoned to be a
great Jewish scholar.

Kab Al-Ahbar, The Jewish Scholar, The Expositor Of Quran
--------------------------------------------------------

This man whose name was «Kab-ibn-Matea» and agnomen was «Abu- Ishaaq»
(also) possessed the title of «Kab al-Ahbar». Sometimes he was also
called as «Kab-ul-Ahabr» but his most famous name was his very title
i.e. «Kab ul-Ahbar».

«Ahbar» is the plural of «Habr» [حَبْر] and «Habr» [حَبْر] is a title
given to a Jewish scholar although a Christian scholar too is sometimes
called as «Habr» [حَبْر]. He was called as «Kab al-Ahbar» by the Jews
because the entire holy books which were supposed to be in the hands of
their scholars were all in his hands or that he was reckoned to be the
greatest or at least one of the greatest scholars amongst them.

About his life-history, historians have said that he was the most
eminent scholar amongst the «Ahl-e-Kitab».[^114] They have also stated
that he was from the Jewish scribes from Yemen and had come to Medina
during Omar's reign of government and had accepted Islam during
Abu-Bakr's era. [^115]

From the available traditions it can be judged that «Kab al-Ahbar» had
gone to Medina so that en-route he could finally travel to
Bait-ul-Muqaddas and settle there. During the period of the Christian
might and power, the Jews were harassed and tortured by them. For this
reason, the Jews could not live in peace in Bait-ul-Muqaddas which was a
holy place for them too. However, with the advent of Islam and the
freeing of this land from the hands of the Christian rulers, «Kab
al-Ahbar» wished to travel and settle in the promised land of the Jews
i.e. Syria and Bait-ul-Muqaddas.

Ibn Asaker, the writer of the great history of Damascus says: Omar-ibn-
Khattab addressed Kab as such: «Now that you have accepted Islam why
don't you stay in Medina which is the place of the Holy Prophet's
migration and also the place of his shrine?» Kab replied: «I have come
across a point in the revealed Book of God that Syria has been named as
God's treasure on the earth where His servants are gathered in that
treasure.

Kab would always use the title «Book of God» for Torah (in spite of the
fact that Torah at that time was a distorted book and there was no other
heavenly revealed book existent.) and whenever he would rememorate the
divine book he had only the Torah in mind (this matter can be repeatedly
found in the traditions narrated by him).

The second Caliph insisted that Kab remains in Medina, Kab too stayed in
Medina until Uthman's rulership. Uthman ruled for a period of twelve
years. During the first six years, he did not change so much from the
line of policy adopted by the previous two governments and so there were
no protests. However, during the second half of his Caliphate,
conditions changed and that because of permitting the Bani-Umayyids and
his own relatives to interfere in the affairs of the government. At this
time, Kab left Medina and joined Muawiya in Syria. During this very
period he died at the age of 104 years.

Historians have mentioned the year of his death to be 35 A.H. [^116]

«Kab al-Ahbar» strived hard to spread the Jewish tales amongst the
Muslims. Most of the Jewish tales, the praises and eulogies for the
«Ahl-e- Kitab» and their «Qibla» (direction faced in prayer) i.e.
«Bait-ul- Muqaddas» and especially those things which have come down in
the Islamic texts have all been disseminated through him. The proof to
this saying is the presence of Kab's narrations in the books of
«Tafseer» (exegesis) «Hadith» (tradition), Islamic «Seerah» (biography)
and «Tarikh» (history).

Ibn Asaker in his «Tarish» narrates from Kab al-Ahbar as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحب البلاد الى الله الشام و أحب الشام إلى الله القدس
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The most beloved land on earth before God is the land of Syria and the
most beloved spot in Syria before God is Qods. [^117]”

Conclusion: Syria and Qods are more beloved and valuable before God than
even Mecca and Medina.

Also, he has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تسعة أعشار الخير بالشام وجزئه في سائر الارضين
  </p>
</blockquote>

“God has placed nine tenth (9/10) of the goodness and blessing in the
land of Syria and distributed only a part of the remaining over the
entire earth.” [^118]

Also, he has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خمس مدائن من مدن الجنة: بيت المقدس و حمص و دمشق و جبرين و ظفار اليمن
  </p>
</blockquote>

«There are five cities from the cities of Paradise: Bait-ul-Muqaddas,
Hums, Damascus, Jabreen (a flourinshing place near Bait-ul-Muqaddas) and
Zafaar-ul-Yemen (the place where Kab used to live before migrating to
Medina and then Syria). [^119]

Also, he has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أربعة أجبل : جبل الخليل ، ولبنان ، والطور ، والجودي ، يكون كل واحد
منهم يوم القيامة لؤلؤة بيضاء تضيء ما بين السماء والأرض ، يرجعن إِلَى
بيت المقدس حتى تجعل فِي زواياه ويضع الجبار جل جلاله عليها كرسيه حتى
يقضي بين أهل الجنة والنار وَتَرَى الْمَلائِكَةَ حَافِّينَ مِنْ حَوْلِ
الْعَرْشِ يُسَبِّحُونَ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّهِمْ وَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ
بِالْحَقِّ وَقِيلَ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

«On the Day of Judgement, foul mountains namely Jabal al-Khalil which is
situated near Bait-ul-Muqaddas and on which is placed the grave of
Hazrat Ibrahim-e-Khalil, Jabel-e-Lebanon (mountain range of Lebanon),
Jabal-e- Tur (mountain range of Tur), and Jabal-e-Judii (mountain range
of Judii) will be like sparkling pearls between the heavens and the
earth. On that day these four mountains will be moved back to
Bait-ul-Muqaddas and will be placed in the four corners of the city.
(Then) the Omnipotent God will set His Throne on it and from there, He
will pass judgement over the people of Paradise and Hell.

Thereafter, he sets forth, at the end of his saying the holy verse of
Quran as a proof: «And you shall see the angels going round about the
throne glorifying and praising their Lord; and judgement shall be given
between them with justice, and it shall be said: All praise is due to
Allah, the Lord of the worlds”[^120],[^121]. In other words, he wishes
to say that the interpretation of this holy verse is something which has
come down in his sayings.

Our declaration that such matters has penetrated into the reliable
Islamic texts can be judged from this very tradition which is present in
the great history of Ibn Asaker as well as in the famous exegesis of
«Durrul- MantHur».

These are examples wherein one can clearly observe the manner in which
the matters related to «Ahl-e-Kitab» especially the Jews have become
prevalent among the Muslims by means of Kab:

Bait-ul-Muqaddas is respectable. God sets His seat or throne - which are
physical too - in that place. The four mountains which are sacred mostly
for the Jews and the land of Bait-ul-Muqaddas are the bases and
pavillion for God's throne.

Also, he says:[^122] «On the Day of Judgement the people of Syria will
be told that God would take care of them just as a warrior takes care of
his arrows kept in his quiver. This is because Syria is the most beloved
land before Him and its people are His most beloved creatures.»

He adds: «Anyone who enters Syria will come under God's mercy and favour
and anyone who exits from it will be a loser.»

Similarly, he says: «The haven for the Muslims from dangers and
calamities is the city of Damascus and the place of deliverance for
Dajjal is the river of Abu-Fatras (a place near Rumallah in Palestine)
and the place of refuge from God and Magog is the mountain of Tur.
[^123]

In another tradition, Kab says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الكعبة تسجد لبيت المقدس في كل غداة
  </p>
</blockquote>

«Every morning, the Ka'aba (the holy House of God) prostrates before
Bait -ul-Muqaddas. [^124]

It is interesting to state that this tradition is read to Imam Baqir
(a.s.) and then commented: Kab has spoken the truth, Imam reproached
them by saying:

'You have lied and so has Kab.'[^125]

Yet in another tradition, Kab has said:

> لا تقوم الساعة حتى يُزَفّ البيت الحرام الى البيت المقدس241

The Day of Judgement will not be established but after Bait-ul-Haram has
been shifted towards Bait-ul-Muqaddas. Thereafter, these two holy houses
will be made to enter Paradise along with their residents and the
reckoning of the creatures and the presentation of deeds on that day
will be conducted at Bait-ul-Muqaddas.

You must have observed that in these expressions, the focal point is
this that the sanctities of Islam like the Ka'aba prostrate before the
sanctities of the Jews like Bait-ul-Muqaddas or fall in humbleness or
advance towards it in order to reach Paradise. Is it not that these
words, inculcations or propaganda of such thoughts finally lead to Islam
greeting Judaism with humility? It is on the basis of these information
that we believe that Kab spread Judaism and its culture amongst the
Muslims and presented its fake values as lofty Islamic values.

### The Students Of Kab

In addition to his endeavours in spreading his own sayings and the
distorted Jewish culture in the Islamic society, Kab also engaged in
training students who would assist him in propagating Judaism. Aside
from training those students mentally, this double-faced Jew also
endeavoured to introduce them as learned men and scholars in the
society. Under various pretexts, he would strive to make his students
earn fame.

Amongst Kab's students, we may mention the name of Abdullah-ibn-Amro-
ibn-Aas. Once Kab asked him a question and Abdullah responded correctly.
Kab then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت افقه العرب
  </p>
</blockquote>

«You are more learned and knowledgeable than all the Arabs.»

In the city of Mecca, Kab was asked a question and he said: «Go and
inquire from Abdullah-ibn-Amro Aas. When the question was put before
Abdullah and he replied, Kab said: صدق الرجل عام والله

«He has spoken the truth. I swear by Allah that he is a learned man.»
[^126]

Amongst Kab's other students was Abu-Huraira, the famous narrator of
numerous traditions in the Caliphate school.

Kab strived to give this man who gained importance (only) from Muawiya's
era and onwards special type of training and satiate him with Jewish
perspicacity.

Tabari, in the three of his traditions reveals how Kab, in the course of
his training to Abu-Huraira has taught the latter the Jewish
culture.[^127]

Apart from the numerous traditions which Abu-Huraira has narrated
without having mentioned the name of Kab, there are yet numerous other
traditions wherein Abu-Huraira has mentioned the real source of his
information i.e. Kab.[^128] It is for this very reason that religious
scholars reckon Abu-Huraira to have been one of Kab's students and
trainees. [^129]

Just as in the case of Abdullah-ibn-Amro Aas, with regards to
Abu-Huraira too, Kab al-Ahbar strived to make him earn fame and
credibility. Once Kab, after having conversed with Abu-Huraira in length
said about him as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما رأيت أحداً لم يقرء التوراة أعلم بما فيها من أبي هريرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

«I have not come across any person who has not read the Torah but has
understood its meanings better than Abu-Huraira. [^130]

### Kab's Influence In Official Positions

For achieving his objectives, this Jewish scholar strived hard to
penetrate the hearts of the powerful men and the Caliphs. He pursued
this path by living a special way of life. Even in this posture, Kab
strived contentiously in propagating the Jewish culture i.e. from the
one side he was propagating his own culture and from the other side he
was concentrating in penetrating in the system of Caliphate and drawing
the Caliph's attention.

In one of his meetings with Omar-ibn-Khattab, he said:-

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انا لنجدك في كتاب الله على باب من أبواب جهنم تمنع الناس أن يقعوا فيها
فإذا مِتّ لم يزالوا يقتحمون فيها الى يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

«We could find your name in the divine Book (of course by divine Book,
he meant the Torah) wherein is mentioned that you have been placed near
the gates of Hell and you prevent the people from entering it. However,
as soon as you die the people will ceaselessly enter Hell and this will
continue until the Day of Judgement. [^131]

Perhaps, the Holy Prophet too did not possess such a virtue; that up to
the time he was alive, he could stand near the gates of Hell and have
the power to prevent the people from entering it. The same is true for
Abu-Bakr and nobody other than Omar too possessed this virtue. It is
only Omar who is the barrier for the people - such people who with their
evil deeds have to enter Hell - and with his death, there no longer
remains any barrier in the way of Hell!

Similarly, when Omar-ibn-Khattab got killed by the hands of Abu-Lualu,
Kab said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لئن سأل عمر ربه ليبقينه الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If Omar requests Allah to allow him to remain alive, then certainly
Allah will grant him a long life.”[^132]

As usual, here too, Kab indirectly referred to the Torah and narrated
one story from it.

From the traditions it sometimes appears that the ruling power too
wanted Kab to earn fame and credibility amongst the Muslims and that
people should show trust and faith in him.

In an authentic book of exegesis of the Caliphate school, Omar-ibn-
Khattab inquired from Kab the meaning of [عدن] from the following
verse:-

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَأَدْخِلْهُمْ جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ الَّتِي وَعَدتَّهُم وَمَن
صَلَحَ مِنْ آبَائِهِمْ وَأَزْوَاجِهِمْ وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ إِنَّكَ أَنتَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ. وَ قِهِمُ السَّيِّئَاتِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Our Lord, and admit them to gardens of perpetual residence which You
have promised them and whoever was righteous among their fathers, their
spouses and their offspring. Indeed, it is You who is the Exalted in
Might, the Wise. And protect them from the evil consequences [of their
deeds]… (Holy Quran, 40: 8-9)***

Kab al-Ahbar immediately replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قصور من ذهب في الجنة يسكنها النبيون و الصّديقون و أئمة العدل
  </p>
</blockquote>

«(It refers to) golden places and mansions in Paradise which are the
places of residents for the Prophet, the truthful ones and the just
rulers.

Therefore, he started interpreting the verse [**قِهِمُ السَّيِّئَاتِ**]
and said: [**سَّيِّئَاتِ**] in this verse refers to chastisement where
God protects such people from chastisement.[^133]

Verily, just as you have realized, the expressions of this Jewish
scholar in the form of interpretation of the Holy Quran has found its
way in the exegesis of the Caliphate school. For example, it has come
down in Tafseer (exegesis) of Suyuti and Qurtabi as the interpretation
of verses eight and nine of Sura Ghafir.

In another instance, the second Caliph asks Kab about the source and
make of the House of God (Kaaba). Kab too gives a detailed reply and
says: Originally, 'Hajar-al-Aswad' was a red ruby which was brought by
Hazrat Adam (a.s.). It's center part was hollow and empty and....[^134]

Once, when discussions were held on Arabian poets, Caliph Omar too was
present.

He asked Kab: Have you found any poems in the Torah? Kab replied: 'Why
not. I have seen in the Torah a group from progeny of Ismaeel who knew
their Ingeel by heart and uttering wise words and striking examples
which I think were none other than the Arabs.[^135]

Kab al-Ahbar had so much commemorated the Torah as the Book of God that
the Islamic society too in their contact with Kab, would mention the
Torah as the Book of God.

One day Muawiya asked him: «Have you found anything on the river Nile in
the Torah?»

Kab replied: 'Yes! I swear by the One who split the sea for Musa (Moses)
that I have seen in the Book of God that every year, God reveals twice
upon Nile as such: God commands you to flow. So, following this command
it flows. Then it is (again) revealed to the Nile to cease flowing and
it stops flowing. [^136]

Ibn-Abbass narrates and says: One day I was in Muawiya's presence when
he recited Verse 86 from Sura Kahf in a very special form. I objected to
this and Muawiya inquired this matter from Abdullah-ibn-Amro Aas. He in
turn substantiated Muawiya's views.

In reply, I said: The Quran has been revealed in our house i.e. we are
worthy enough to speak about it and not people like Abdullah-ibn-Amro-
Aas. Finally Mmuawiya who at that time had the reign of government in
his hand decided to send someone to Kab and solve this difference by
relying on his view.[^137]

In praise of him (i.e. Kab), Muawiya would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الا ان كعب الاحبار أحد العلماء
  </p>
</blockquote>

«Know that Kab al-Ahbar is one of the scholars».[^138]

It was the significance of this talk that there were only two others
whose name would be mentioned along with the name of Kab.

It was on the strength of these preliminaries that Kab al-Ahbar had
become a great source of gnosis during Omar-ibn-Khattab's time and much
longer after him. With well-thought plans, he would draw the Muslims
towards the Jewish culture. Through him, the distorted culture of
Judaism would mingle with the pure and clean gnosis of Islam; and would
lay its foot in the Islamic texts of exegesis, history, biography and
hadith; and would alter the Islamic insight and correct world-view of
the Muslims and would taint them with the superstitions present in
Judaism.

What is more regretful is this that these Jewish superstitions have
entered the authentic books of hadith and most important of all, have
filled Tabari's history and exegesis and tafseer (exegesis) of
Durrul-MantHur, Ibn-Kathir and the like of them. Worst of all, the
Jewish culture of Kab al-Ahbar has also penetrated from the exegesis of
the Caliphate school into some of the exegesis of the Ahlul Bayt
school[^139] and to the extent that it has influenced such sources, it
has pushed aside the gnosis of Ahlul Bayt.

### The Guardians Of Islam - The Opposition To Kab Al-Ahbar

Here, it is necessary to verify the stance adopted by the guardians of
Islam like Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) vis-a-vis Kab and the manner in which
they used to confront this man who was the propagator of Jewish culture
amongst the Muslims. The incident which we shall narrate below reveals
Imam's position and the manner of his encounter and confrontation with
the distortions made by Kab al-Ahbar:-

During Omar-ibn-Khattab's reign of government a meeting was once held in
the Caliph's presence. Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) too was present. Kab
was also one of the attendants. The Caliph asked: 'O Kab! Do you know
the entire Torah by heart?

Kab replied: No, but I know most of it by heart! A person told the
Caliph as such:

'O Amir-ul-Mumineen, ask him about God's whereabouts before the creation
of His Throne. Also, from what He created water on which He placed His
Throne?

Omar said: 'O Kab, can you answer these questions?

Kab replied: 'Yes 'O Amir-ul-Mumineen. I have found in the «source of
wisdom»[^140] that before the creation of the throne, God had been
everlasting and eternal and was on top of the rocky structure of
Bait-ul- Muqaddas and this rocky structure too was placed in the air.
When God decided to create the Throne, He spitted as a result of which
deep seas and roaring waves came into existence. At that very moment,
God created His Throne from some portion of the rocky structure of
Bait-ul-Muqaddas which was beneath Him and then He sat on it. From the
remaining portion of the rocky structure too, He created the dome of
Bait-ul-Muqaddas....

Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) while shaking the dust off his clothes and
uttering words which signalled the Greatness of God like [حبل الخالق]
(Glory be to His Creation) or [جل الله] (Greatness or Glory be to Allah)
or [الله اكبر] (Allah is the Greatest) stood up from his place so as to
leave the gathering in the manner of protest. It is an Arab custom that
whenever they want to express their disgust towards some matter they
shake the dust off their clothes as if to say that such talks cannot
hold good for me.[^141]

When Omar-ibn-Khattab observed this scene he requested Imam to take his
seat and deliberate over the matter of discussion. Imam sat back in his
place and turning towards Kab said:

«Your companions took the wrong path, distorted the Divine Book and
attributed falsehood to God. 'O Kab, woe be to you if you consider the
rocky structure and air to be with God and thus consider them to be
everlasting and eternal too. As a result, we will be having three
eternal beings. Aside from this, the Almighty God is far higher than
having a place for Himself and He is not what the pagans say and the
ignorants imagine. Woe to you 'O Kab. The One who creates these
magnificent seas by spitting as you say, is far greater than taking
position on the rocky structures of Bait-ul-Muqaddas[^142] and ....

The hadith is lengthy and indicates the confrontation of Imam vis-a-vis
these deviated and distorted events and the heresies. However, the
incident of Imam planting date-trees was because of the fact that if he
had lived among people and his presence felt by the Muslims, his life
would have been endangered and there existed the possibility of his
murder with no benefit to Islam.

### Why Kab Al-Ahbar Was Given Attention?

Now it is necessary to examine the reason behind the endeavours of the
Caliphs (like Muawiya) in bringing up Kab al-Ahbar in the Islamic
society and placing him at a high level of knowledge in the Islamic
society.

The first person who devoted attention to Kab al-Ahbar and compelled him
to stay in Medina and referred to him as one eminent scholar and leading
authority was the second Caliph. The reason behind his move is not
clearly known. However, by examining his life-history, it appears that
he had had a past acquaintance and familiarity with Judaism and Torah
and that this amazing book often excited him.

Jabir narrates that one day Omar-ibn-Khattab approached the Holy Prophet
(S) with a small book which contained some portions of the Torah. The
Holy Prophet was then seated and Omar said: 'O the Messenger of Allah,
this booklet is from the Torah and I have brought this for you from the
Torah. The Holy Prophet kept silent. Omar continued his talk and wished
to recite the Torah.

He was glad that he had attained knowledge and under such an amazing and
joyful state, he wished to recite it before the Holy Prophet. As a
matter of fact he wanted approval and encouragement from the Holy
Prophet. However, the Holy Prophet on the contrary became angry and
every moment his anger increased. But Omar was unaware. He had the Torah
in hand and unaware of his uncontrollable state, he wished to recite it
for the Holy Prophet. Abu-Bakr was present there and was aware of the
situation. He feared lest a verse in rebuke or chastisement would be
revealed. Thus he came down harshly upon Omar and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثكلتك الثواكل ماترى بوجه رسول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

«May you perish. Don't you see how the colour of the Holy Prophet's face
has changed due to severity of his anger and discomfort?!?»

It was only at that very moment that Omar lifted his head and looked at
the Prophet. Observing the severity of anger on his blessed face he
became terrified and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أعوذ بالله من غضب الله ورسوله
  </p>
</blockquote>

«I seek refuge in Allah from His wrath and His Messenger's wrath.»!

The Holy Prophet said: 'O the son of Khattab. Do you have doubt,
uncertainty and confusion in your religion? Then, he added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والذي نفسي بيده لقد جئتكم بها بيضاء نقية! لا تسألوهم عن شيء فإنّهم لن
يهدوكم وقد ضلّوا... فإنه لو كان موسى حياً بين أظهركم ما حلّ له ألّا
يتّبعني
  </p>
</blockquote>

«I swear by the One in whose Hand is my soul that I have brought a
«Shariat» (religious law) pure and lucid. Then, he said: Do not ask
anything from the «Ahl-e-Kitab» (i.e. do not ask your religious affairs
from them). They can never guide you because they are themselves
misguided. If Musa (Moses) (a.s.) was now alive and living amongst you,
nothing was lawful other than his obedience towards me. [^143]

What conclusion can we draw from this tradition which has come down in
the authentic books through various channels? Does it reveal anything
other than this matter that the Caliph had an interest in the Torah and
was looking at it as a marvel? Thus it is not irrelevant that during his
own ruling, he refers to the Jewish scholars and the gnosis of Torah.

As far as this humble servant of God is aware, this reality is one of
the most vital factors in magnifying Kab al-Ahbar and bringing him up in
status in the Islamic society. But the matter does not end here. In this
regard, other reasons too had been at work.

Amongst them, those involved in ruling the government after the Holy
Prophet were not possessing much knowledge and insight in the
recognition of the world and its origin and end. The one well-acquainted
with these matters i.e. the gate of the city of Holy Prophet's
knowledge - Amir-ul- Mumineen (a.s.) too was compelled to engage in
date-palms and keep himself aloof from the society. The solution lay in
this that people such as Tamim Dari and Kab al-Ahbar whose heart and
soul were quenched with Christianity and Judaism and could at least
answer from their distorted know-how, the demands of the seekers of
knowledge and also considering that their upliftment did not pose any
danger to the ruling Caliphs, should be raised and accepted in the
society as one element amongst the various elements of the ruling power.

The historical event which set forth below is a proof of our reasoning:

A person by the name of Subaigh Tamimi set out towards the «Aajdan» of
the Muslims i.e. the centres of provinces which was also the army base
of Islam and knocked at every door for putting forth some questions. His
questions were related to the Holy Quran. This man wandered about in
Syria, Alexandria or Kufa searching for people who had lived in Medina
and had seen the Holy Prophet. This was in order to receive replies from
them for his queries. He goes to Egypt, Subaigh has neither seen the
Prophet nor has he heard his talks. Now, in pursuit of recognition of
the Holy Quran and for hearing the exegesis of the holy Quran, he
travels city to city until he gets to Egypt. His story is reported to
Amro-ibn-Aas the ruler and governor of Egypt. Amro-ibn-Aas sends him to
the Islamic capital i.e. Medina and reports his intentions in a letter
to Caliph Omar-ibn- Khattab. Subaigh reaches Medina. The messenger too
approaches Omar along with Amro's letter and hands him the letter. After
becoming aware of its contents Omar says: 'Where is this man? The
messenger replies: He is on the camel's saddle. Omar says: 'If he flees
you will be punished severely.' According to another tradition, a person
approaches the Caliph and says: 'I met a person who was inquiring about
the Holy Quran.' Omar says: 'O God, make me overvome him.

Anyhow, Subaigh Tamimi comes before the Caliph. When he comes in the
Caliph's presence he has the Holy Quran in hand. When he sees the Caliph
of the Muslims and indispensibly thinks him to be the centre of Islamic
knowledge and heedless of what has occured he asks: 'O Amir-ul-
Mumineen, what is [Arabic text] (swear by the wind that scatters far and
wide)?

Omar says: 'Who are you?'

The man replies: 'I am Subiagh, the servant of God.' Omar says: I too am
God's servant. Then he folds his sleeves and begins to beat the man with
a stick which was prepared on his commands. He beats him to such extent
that his head stained with blood or, as per some other tradition, he
whipped his back with twig so much so that Subaigh's back was cut deeply
and his skin was torn apart. Thereafter, he let him go. The injured and
blood- stained man was set free until he was healed of his wounds. Once
again, Omar summons him and repeats the same event. When for the third
time he was brought before the Caliph in order to be punished, he said:
'If you intend to kill me, then do that once and for all so that I get
relieved. And if you wish to rectify me, I swear by God that Ii have
been rectified and I will no more discuss such matters.

The Caliph ordered that he be mounted on a camel without any litter or
cover and then be exiled to Basra near Abu Musa Ashari. In a letter, he
also commanded Abu Musa the governor of Basra to forbid any person from
coming into contact with this man. Similarly, they stopped giving him
the yearly privileges and provisions which was shared amongst all the
Muslims.

Abu Uthman Nahdi says: «Whenever this man would approach us, even if we
were hundred in number we would move from our places and run away out of
fear of being punished on Omar's command».

At last, things became worse for this man and life became miserable for
him, Helplessly one day, he approached Abu Musa and appealed him for
help.

Abu Musa reported in a letter to Caliph Omar that this man has repented
and his repentence too is a very sincere one. Omar in reply wrote as
such: So you may now allow the people to come in contact with him.

It is noted down in history that this man who was an eminent personality
amongst his own tribe was now despised and had lost his prestige and
creditability. [^144]

An incident exactly opposite to the one above exists in the history of
Islam. This incident is related to the era of Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen's
reign of government. One day Imam goes on the pulpit and while reciting
a sermon says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سلوني فوالله لا تسألوني عن شيء يكون الى يوم القيامة إلّا حدثتكم به
وسلوني عن كتاب الله فوالله ما من آية...
  </p>
</blockquote>

«Ask me question. I swear by Allah that you will not ask me anything of
the events that are to occur till the Day of Judgement except that I
will answer them to you. Also, ask me about the Quran, the Book of
Allah. I swear by Allah that there is not a single verse but that I am
aware whether it has been revealed at night or during the day; whether
it has been revealed in the mountains or in the desert and....

The narrator says: «Ibne al-Kawwa was sitting behind me. He stood up and
said:

'O Amir-ul-Mumineen, what is ذاريات? This man i.e. Ibne al-Kawwa was a
leading figure amongst the Khawarij and an enemy of Amir-ul- Mumineen
(a.s.).

Ibn Abbass who was also present in the gathering says: «Ibne al-Kawwa
wished to ask the same thing which Subaigh had once asked Omar-ibn-
Khattab. This man was under the impression that by setting forth this
question he would be able to discredit Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen.

Imam (a.s.) said: «Woe be to you. Ask questions with the aim of
acquiring knowledge and not for causing trouble and inconvenience or out
of pride and haughtiness. (الذَّارِيَاتِ) are winds which blow at the
time of harvest of wheat and barley.» Immediately, Ibne al-Kawwa asked:
'What is (الْجَارِيَاتِ يُسْراً)? Imam replied: «They are ships sailing
over the water.» Again he asked: What is (الْمُقَسِّمَاتِ)? Hazrat said:
«They are Angels[^145]....»

When Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali (a.s.) who was well-acquainted with the
content of Quran was not to be in the society and instead planted date
trees in a farm outside Medina and make the date-palms flourish or dig
the subterranean canals; and the companions of the Holy Prophet too were
banned from narrating traditions; and when the ruling powers and rulers
were themselves not firm in knowledge, then there was no alternative but
for such people like Kab al-Ahbar, Tamim Dari and Wahab-ibn-Manbah to
come into the scene.

### Summary

The factors which were responsible in raising the status of the Jewish
and Christian scholars and the «Ahl-e-Kitab» in the Islamic society
which consequently made them earn fame are as follows:

First - Those responsible for bringing up Kab and his likes were
familiar and acquainted with the culture of Ahl-e-Kitab and were looking
at it with wonder and surprise. As a matter of fact, in the pre-Islamic
era the Arabs used to look upon the Jews and Christians with respect and
honour and would reckon them to be people of the Book, civilization and
culture. Such a state of mentality remaining alive in some of the rulers
became a factor which caused Tamim - Dari and Kab al-Ahbar to be looked
upon with the same honour and respect and be paid attention as scholars
and leading authorities and figures of knowledge.

Second - It was to the interest of the ruling power not to propound the
sciences of the Holy Prophet (SAW.A.) which was left behind in the hands
of his companions and/or personalities like Imam Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.)
who possessed the entire sciences. This was so that they could carry on
with their rule and power.

Third: The ruling powers were themselves devoid of adequate knowledge
and were incapable of the problems which were propounded after the Holy
Prophet's departure.

It was because of these reasons and factors that Kab, Tamim, Wahab and
their likes laid foot into the arena of Islamic society and their
presence proved to be one of the misfortunate factors in the distortion
of Islam. These people succeeded in distorting (in various dimensions)
the true Islam and presenting a religion defective with distortions and
superstitions.

Such people who in the Islamic history have become famous as (قصّاصين)
(story tellers) are a part of the unknown factors in the distortion of
Islam. I have referred to tens of volumes of books on history exegesis,
biography and 'Rijal' before I could succeed in laying open a few of
their destructive deeds and affairs.

The Islamic history and exegesis have become defective mainly due to the
consequence of Kab al-Ahbar's affairs. He has spoken on every subject:
God, Day of Judgement, «Hashr» (revivification), «Nashr» (resurrection),
creation, skies, the earth, «Arsh» (Celestial throne) Ka'aba,
Bait-ul-Muqaddas, Sulaiman, Dawoud, Prophets and Angels and such talks
have come out in the form of exegesis, history and biographies in Islam.

Thus, the Islam which was supposed to be taken from the house of the
Holy Prophet's Ahlul Bayt, has been drawn from such sources and origins.
In present times too, the Jewish, Christian and Marxist, Islamicists
have engaged and still engage in recognizing Islam through these
sources.

[^1]: However in recent centuries since the Zoroastrians have lived in
thc Islamic societies, they have gradually and steadily given up this
practice and considered it to be an evil and ugly act. Refer to Sae'ed
Nafisi: «The social history of Iran» 2/35 and Christensen: «Iran at the
time of Sassanides» - translated by Rashid Yasemi Pg. 348 - 2nd edition.

[^2]: Wasa'el-us-Shia 98/11 Tradition No. 7 and Safinat-ul-Bihar 527/2.

[^3]: Al-Bedaya-wal-Nihaya 10/153 + Al-Mauzu'aat 3/76 + Le'aali al-
Masnu'ah 2/468.

[^4]: He died in the year 224 or 225 A.H. at the age of 93. (Mizan-ul-
Ehtedal 3/153 + Al-Fehrest - Laben Nadim /113 Tehran Print)

[^5]: By 'year of congregation' [عام الجماعة] is meant the year 40 Hijri
when Muawiya had pined full control of all the Islamic lands. This
afore-said year was called [Arabic text] because none opposed Muawiya in
that year. The reason why the followers of the Caliphate school are
called as Ahl-e-Sunnat and Jama'at (men of tradition and community) is
because they are unanimious and united in following the Caliphs and are
unopposed to them.

[^6]: As per the narration of Ibn-Abil Hadeed - Commentary of Nahjul-
Balagha 3/15 - 16 old print and Vol. 11/44-45 Print - Muhammad Abul-
Fazl Ibrahim.

[^7]: Refer to Al-Fehrest Labin Nadeem /90. Tehran - print

[^8]: As per the narration of Ibn-Abil Hadeed: Commentary of Nahjul-
Balagha 3/15 onwards - old print and Vol. 11/46 print - Muhammad Abul-
Fazl Ibrahim.

[^9]: And warn, [O Muhammad], your closest kindred. (Holy Quran, 26:
214).

[^10]: And perhaps Zaid, because he too had lived in this house and was
reckoned to be one of its members.

[^11]: Tarikh-e-Tabari 3/1172-1173 and Vol. 2/319-321 print - Muhammad
Abul-Fazl Ibrahim + Tafseer-e-Tabari 19/74-75 + Al- Badayah wal-Nihaya
3/39-40 + Ibn-Athir 2/41-42 print - Daarul-Kitab al- Arabi +
Musnad-e-Ahmad Vol. 2/352 - 1992 print - Ahmad Muhammad Shaker +
Tafseer-e-Durarul-MantHurr 5/97.

[^12]: Sahih - Muslim 1/133 print - Muhammad Ali Subhi.

[^13]: Refer to Tabari with regards to the events in the third year
Tarikh-e- Tabari /69-1174, printed in Europe and vol. 2/319, Egyptian
print - research by Muhamamd Abul-Fazl Ibrahim. Similarly Tarikh-e-Ibn
Athir 2/41 + Tarikh-e-Ibn Kathir 3/37 + Tarikh al-Khamis 1/287 +
At-Tabaqat- ul-Kubra 1/199 onwards + Insab-ul-Ashraf 1/15 onwards +
Al-Ektefa 1/279-281 Egyptian print.

[^14]: At-Tabaqat-ul-Kubra 8/58 Beirut print + Asad al-Ghaba 6/188-192.

[^15]: Refer to the research on 'Musnad' of Ahmad undertaken by Ahmad
Muhammad Shaker vol. 2/352 1992.

[^16]: Usul-Kafi Vol. 1/457 and 458 + Tarikh-ul-A'imma Labin Abi al-
Thalaj /6 - precious collection + Taj al-Mawalid Tabari /97 - precious
collection + Mustadrak ala-Sahiheen 3/156.

[^17]: Sahih Muslim Vol. 1 Pg. 133; [كتاب الايمان] Tradition No 348
Sunan Nesa'ee 6/248-250; [كتاب الوصايا] - chapter of إذا أوصى لعشيرته
الاقربين Musnad Ahmad 2/333

[^18]: Muslim 1/133 - Tradition No. 350

[^19]: At-Tabaqat-ul-Kubra 1/78 + Emtah-ul-Asmah 1/326 + Sair Ehlam
an-Nebala 2/436 + Fath-ul-Bari 6/31 and 7/391 + Al-Asabah 3/287 + Al-
Ma'aref 278

[^20]: 'Musnad' Ahmad 3/476 and 5/60

[^21]: From his biography, refer to Al-Asabah 3/215.

[^22]: Al-Asabah 3/215. Also refer to Al-Tabaqat 1/309-310 + Asad-ul-
Ghabah 4/383-384.

[^23]: 'Musnad' of Ahmad 1/281,307 + Sahih Muslim 1/134.

[^24]: Al-Asabah 2/322

[^25]: Durrul-MantHurr 5/95-97 narrated from Tabari section 19/72
onwards and Sunan Tirmidhi 5/338-340 Tradition 3184, 3185 and 3186.

[^26]: Al-Asaba 1/84-85. According to another narration, he was eight
years old at the time of 'Hijrat' which means that he had not been born
at the time of revelation of the verse. Refer to Al-Ma'aref /308-309.

[^27]: Refer to Al-Asaba 1/146-147 + Asad-ul-Ghaba 1/205 + Al- Astee'ab
1/153-155 - Research of Ali Muhammad Bujari + At-Tabaqat-le-
Khalifa-ibn-Khayat 1/186,303 and 449.

[^28]: Tafseer-Tabari 19/73 and 75 - One tradition exists each from Ibn-
Shahab, Zahak and Qatada who died in the year 124, 105 and 117 A.H.
respectively. They were from the 'disciples of the companions' and had
not seen the era of the Holy Prophet.

[^29]: Jaameh-ul-Bayan-Fi-tafseer Quran - Tabari section 19/74

[^30]: Refer to Al-Ma'aref-Ibn Qutaiba /426 - A research of Tharvat
Akasha + Tabaqat al-Hafiz /25 + Tazkerat-ul-Hafiz 1/65 + Tahzeeb-ul-
Tahzeeb 6/277.

[^31]: Suyuti: Durrul-MantHurr 5/96 -Twelfth tradition under the
afore-said verse.

[^32]: Asad-ul-Ghaba 1/76-77 + Al-Asaba 1/50 + Al-Estee'ab 1/80-82 +
Al-Ma'aref-Ibn-Qutaiba /309.

[^33]: Tabari 2/311-312; three traditions - second Egyptian edition -
research by Muhammad Abul-Fazl Ibrahim + Al-Estee'ab ala-hamesh-ul-
Asaba 3/163 + Al-Asaba 2/480 + Asad-ul-Ghaba 4/49

[^34]: In this connection, refer to the related traditions in Sahih
Muslim Vol. 1 Pg. 133 onwards, especially the first in tradition.

[^35]: Refer to Tafseer-e-Burhan' Vol. 3/189-192 which has brought ten
traditions under this verse with such contents.

[^36]: Sifat-us-Shia - Eight tradition Pg. 165

[^37]: Refer to Sahih Muslim Vol. 1/133 & 134 - Cairo print.

[^38]: Refer to the research of Ahmad Muhammad Shakir in the footnote of
Musnad Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal 2/352 - Tradition 1371

[^39]: Tabari 2/319 - research of Muhammad Abul-Fazl Ibrahim + Ibn-
Athir 2/41 Darul-Kitab al-Arab

[^40]: Mustadrak-Sahihain + Tarikh-e-Baghdad 4/348; Vol. 7/172 & Vol.
11/48 and 49 + Maj'ma-uz-Zava'ed 9/114 + Tahzeeb-ut-Tahzeeb 6/320 and
vol. 7/427 + Asad-ul-Ghaba 4/22 old edition and Vol. 4/100 new edition +
Al-Jaa'me as-Sagheer 1/108 Egyptian print + Muntakhab Kanz- ul-Ummal
ala-hamesh-ul-Musnad 5/30 + As Sawa'eq al-Muharrega /122 +
Tarikh-e-Khulafa 170 - Karachi print.

[^41]: Fabrication of tradition in the form of uttering false things
about the Holy Prophet began during Hazrat's time itself so much so that
he has warned the people against this act and promised them the Fire.
Refer to Tirmidhi 5/634 tradition 3715 and Ibn-Maaja 1/13-15.

[^42]: Commentary of Ibne Abil-Hadeed on Nahjul-Balagha 1/258 - first
edition - Egypt.

[^43]: Bukhari - كتاب الأدب Section – باب يبل الرحم ببلالها Vol. 8/6 and
Vol. 3/34 - Egyptian print.

[^44]: The author of «Mufradat-ul-Quran» says: الآل قيل مقلوب عن الاهل و
يصغر على أهيل... و يستعمل فيمن يختص بالانسان اختصاصا ذاتيا إما بقرابة أو
بموالاة.. وقيل آل النبي عليه الصلاة والسلام أقاربه وقيل المختصون به
(About the term "آل") Jauhari in «As-Sihah» and Raazi in «Mukhtar
as-Sihah» says:و آل الرجل: أهله وعياله Fayumi in «Al-Mesbah al-Munir»
has said:- و الآل: أهل الشخص وهم ذو قرابته وقد اطلق على اهل بيته
Firoozabadi in «Al-Qamus al-Muhit» says: والآل أهل الرجل و اتباعه
واوليائه ولا يستعمل إلا فيما فيه شرف غالباً

[^45]: Elaam-ul-Wara be-Elaam-ul-Huda /151

[^46]: Tarikh-e-Tabari 4/222 - Research of Muhammad Abul-Fazl Ibrahim
Omar-ibn-Khattab's address to Ibn Abbass.

[^47]: Nahjul-Balagha - Sermons 33, 172 and 217 Pages 77, 236 and 246 -
The research of Subhi Saleh.

[^48]: Yaqubi 3/81 & 89; Beirut and Najaf print + At-Tanbeeh wal-Ashraaf
Masoudi /293 + Ibn Athir 4/301 and 310

[^49]: Fath-ul-Baari 4/453 - Egyptian print.

[^50]: In explanation of this term, refer to the previous chapter.

[^51]: Commentary of Ibne Abil-Hadeed 1/359 - First edition; Egypt.

[^52]: Tabari 2/378; Daarul-Ma'aref print in Egypt + Ibn-Hisham 1/485 -
Ibrahim al-Abyari and others second edition + Ensab-ul-Eshraf 1/260 -
Muhammad Hamidullah print + Ibn-Athir 2/73 - Daarul-Kitab print + At-
Tabaqatul-Kubra 1/228 - Beirut print + Uyoon al-Akhbar 1/184 - Beirut
print + Al-Wafa-be-Ahwal Mustafa 1/236

[^53]: Al-Baladan /78 - Najaf Print.

[^54]: Al-Baladan /77

[^55]: Ahsan at-Taqasim-fi-Ma'arefat al-Aqalim /102

[^56]: Mu'ajam al-Baladan 2/86-87 - Beirut print.

[^57]: Ar-Rauz-ul-M'athar-fi-Khabar-ul-Aqthar /151 and also under the
matter 'cave' from the same book /425 - Research by Dr. Ehsan Abbassi.

[^58]: All these discussions have been utilized from the commentary of
Sahih Muslim - Research of Muhammad Fa'ad Abdul - Baaqi / 995-998 -
Lebanon print.

[^59]: Refer to Hayat-e-Muhammad 176-177 - First edition.

[^60]: Commentary of Al-Nahj 1/358-361 - old edition.

[^61]: Abu Muhammad Abdul-Malik-ibn-Hisham - died in 213 or 218.

[^62]: A detailed reasoning of this saying has come in my book called
«Man -Tarikh-ul-Hadith».

[^63]: Muhammad-ibn-Jareer Tabasi - born in 224 and died in 310.

[^64]: Muqrizi: Emtah al-Asmah /206-207 - Damascus print + Kitab-ul-
Maghazi 2/426-427 - Egyptian print.

[^65]: 'Musnad' of Ahmad 6/39, 129, 182, 264 & 280 + Muntakhab
Kanz-ul-Ummal 6/173 + Uyoon-ul-Akhbar-Ibne Qutaiba 1/315.

[^66]: 'Musnad' of Ahmad 6/39, 129, 182, 264 & 280 + Muntakhab
Kanz-ul-Ummal 6/173 + Uyoon-ul-Akhbar-Ibne Qutaiba 1/315.

[^67]: 'Musnad' of Ahmad 6/39, 129, 182, 264 & 280 + Muntakhab
Kanz-ul-Ummal 6/173 + Uyoon-ul-Akhbar-Ibne Qutaiba 1/315.

[^68]: 'Musnad' of Ahmad 6/39, 129, 182, 264 & 280 + Muntakhab Kanz-
ul-Ummal 6/173 + Uyoon-ul-Akhbar-Ibne Qutaiba 1/315.

[^69]: At-Tabaqat 2/65 - Beirut print.

[^70]: Bukhari 1/48-49, 2/194, 3/48 and 4/122. Zaatul-Jaish was in one
house in Medina.

[^71]: Bukhari - Book of Tayammum Vol. 1/48-49; Chapter on virtues of
Abu-Bakr 2/194 and Exegesis of Sura Maeda 3/48 & 4/122 + Muslim -
section of Tayammum 1/191-192 + Nesa'ee 1/163 + Mutah Malik 1/53- 54 +
'Musnad' of Ahmad 6/179 + Abu Awanah 1/302.

[^72]: Turbaan is a land between Zaatul-Jaish, Mellal and Siyalah and it
possesses abundant water. In the battle of 'Badr', the Holy Prophet
stayed in this place. Muajam al-Baladan 1/833.

[^73]: 'Musnad' of Ahmad Vol 6/272 -273

[^74]: 'Musnad' of Tablisi - tradition 638 + 'Musnad' of Ahmad 4/265 +
319 + Muslim 1/193 + Nesa'ee 1/170 + Kanz-ul-Ummal 5/142 - tradition
2926 + 'Musnad' of Abi Awanah 1/306 + Abu Dawoud 1/88.

[^75]: Nesa'ee 1/171

[^76]: Nesa'e 1/172 - First edition + Bukhari Vol. 1/49; Vol. 2/205 and
Vol. 3/169 + Muslim 1/192 + 'Musnad' of Ahmad 6/57.

[^77]: يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَقْرَبُواْ الصَّلاَةَ
وَأَنتُمْ سُكَارَى حَتَّىَ تَعْلَمُواْ مَا تَقُولُونَ وَلاَ جُنُباً
إِلاَّ عَابِرِي سَبِيلٍ حَتَّىَ تَغْتَسِلُواْ وَإِن كُنتُم مَّرْضَى أَوْ
عَلَى سَفَرٍ أَوْ جَاء أَحَدٌ مِّنكُم مِّن الْغَآئِطِ أَوْ لاَمَسْتُمُ
النِّسَاء فَلَمْ تَجِدُواْ مَاء فَتَيَمَّمُواْ صَعِيداً طَيِّباً
فَامْسَحُواْ بِوُجُوهِكُمْ وَأَيْدِيكُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَفُوّاً
غَفُوراً O you who have believed, do not approach prayer while you are
intoxicated until you know what you are saying or in a state of janabah,
except those passing through [a place of prayer], until you have washed
[your whole body]. And if you are ill or on a journey or one of you
comes from the place of relieving himself or you have contacted women
and find no water, then seek clean earth and wipe over your faces and
your hands [with it]. Indeed, Allah is ever Pardoning and Forgiving.
Holy Quran, 4:43

[^78]: At-Tabaqat-ul-Kubra 7/65-66 - Beirut print. Moreover this story
has also come down in «Estee'ab», «Asad-ul-Ghaba» and «Al-Asaba» with
some minor differences. Muttaqi too has narrated it in his «Kanz-ul-
Ummal» 5/145 - tradition 2961.

[^79]: Nisa /4:43

[^80]: Durrul-MantHurr 2/166

[^81]: Durrul-MantHurr 2/166 - Explanation of Sura Nisa 4: 43.

[^82]: Shorter Encyclopedia of Islam Pg. 588-589 and the topic of
«tyammum» in Da'erat-ul Ma'aref Islamiah - Translated in Arabic 5/158 -
Egyptian print.

[^83]: Refer to A'lam-ul-Wura /47 - Research of Ali Akbar Ghaffari +
Bihar -ul-Anwar 18/179 - Tradition 10 and 184; tradition 14 and 194;
tradition 30 and 196.

[^84]: For many years, the Muslim army was attacking the Romans during
the summer season and so these soldiers came to be called as «Sayefah»
(صايفة).

[^85]: The Cloister of Christian settlers surrounding the Islamic cities
which had been the centre of the worst and ugliest kind of debauchery,
libertinism and wine-drinking when most of the heads of the Caliphate
during the Umayyid and Abbassid period used to take resort to these
places for sport and play (which in fact had been places initially meant
for worship). For this reason, Yazid too had taken shelter in the
Cloister of Marran which was a luxuriant and prosperous place for
indecent acts. Refer to «Dayarat- Shabashti» and «Muajam al-Baladan» -
Yaqut Hamavi.

[^86]: Mujam al-Baladan 2/534

[^87]: M. Watt: Muhammad at Mecca, Pg. 53.

[^88]: In writing the biography of the Holy Prophet, this same English
scholar has only referred to Tarikh-e-Tabari, Seerah Ibn Hisham,
Mughazi, Aqdi, «Tabaqat» of Ibn Sa'ad, Sahih-e-Bukhari, Musnad Ahmad,
Asad-ul- Ghaba and Al-Asabah i.e. the references of the Caliphate school
only and has not referred to even one single reference from the Ahlul
Bayt school.

[^89]: For example refer to «Bayan-e-Haqayaq» - Sayyid Abbass Alawi
/220-221 where he lakes support of the 'Gharaniq' traditions while
accounting for the repentence - letters of Bab.

[^90]: Sura Jumah, verse 2

[^91]: Sura Tauba, verse 97

[^92]: Usul-e-Kafi Vol. 1/32 + Muntakhab al-Kunz 4/55

[^93]: Bukhari – كتاب نفقات - chapter 2

[^94]: Bukhari – كتاب بدء الخلق - chapter 17 and – كتاب الطب - chapter
48 + Musnad Ahmad 2/203, 246, 263, 340 & 355

[^95]: Tarikh-e-Baghdad 2/106

[^96]: Sahih Bukhari - [Arabic text] - 4/13 & 14 + Fath-ul-Bari
6/338-340 + Tirmidhi 5/258-259 tradition 3059 & 360 + Abu Dawoud 3/307
tradition 3606 + Tarikh-ibn-Asaker 10/470-473 + Tahzeeb Ibn Asaker
3/357-358.

[^97]: Tahzeeb-Tarikh-e-Ibne Asaker 3/360 + Zahbi: Sair A'adam-un-Nabala
2/448 - London print.

[^98]: Al-Asabah 3/473 - Cairo print 1979. In the tradition of Zahbi, we
find the words [خير المؤمنين]. Refer to Sairo A'lam an-Nubala 2/446 -
Beirut print.

[^99]: Futouh al-Baladan / 556 - Egyptian print - Research by Dr.
Salahuddin al-Munjid.

[^100]: Tarikh-e-Ibne Asaker 10/479 and Tahzeeb-e-Ibne Asaker 3/360 +
Ibne Haban: Kitab-us-Saqat 3/40 - Hyderabad print + Sair 2/447

[^101]: «Jassaseh» [Arabic text] is a person who spies too much.

[^102]: A village in Syria.

[^103]: A small lake in Syria.

[^104]: A place in Syria.

[^105]: Sahih Muslim 8/203-205 - old Egyptian print, Book of Al-Fatan
Chapter 24 tradition No. 119 and new edition Vol. 4 / Pg. 2261-2264 +
Musnad Taylaesi / 228-229 tradition No. 1646 + Musnad Ahmad Vol.
6/373-374, 412-413 & 416-417 + Tirmidhi - Book of Al-Fatan Chapter 66 +
Ibn Maaja - tradition 4074.

[^106]: The famous student of Muhammad Abdoh who died in the year 1975.
He found the magazine «Al-Minar» and wrote «Tafseer Al-Minar». For
knowing his life-history, refer to Zarkuli: Al-A'lam 6/360-361; 3rd
edition.

[^107]: Refer to «commentary of Nuri on Sahih Muslim» with regard to the
commentary of this same tradition.

[^108]: Refer to the issue of Dajjal written by Winsang and the matter
of Tamim Dari written by Lifi Dalavida in the «Encyclopaedia of Islam»;
first edition and in the matter of Dajjal in the shorter Encyclopaedia
of Islam pg. 67.

[^109]: Refer to the Arabic translation of the Encyclopaedia of Islam
Vol. 5 Pg. 481.

[^110]: Musnad Ahmad 4/103.

[^111]: Muntakhab Kanz-ul-Ummal 4/56 + Tahzeeb-ut-Tahzeeb 10/157-158 +
Furu al-Kafi 7/263 + Wasa'el-us-Shia 3/515 + Al-Wafi 3/74 +
Fajr-ul-Islam / 192.

[^112]: Sairo-A'alam an-Nubala 2/443; Beirut print + Tehzeeb Tarikh-Ibne
Asaker 3/347; Beirut print.

[^113]: In the next chapter, we shall be examining Kab's life and his
great destructive affairs.

[^114]: Ibn Sa'ad / Vol. 7, Pg. 156 + Tazherat-ul-Hefaz / Vol. 1, Pg. 52
Indian print.

[^115]: Ibn Sa'ad / Vol. 7, Pg. 156 + Tahzeeb-ut-Tahzeeb 8/438 + Al-
Asabah 2/298.

[^116]: Shazarat ax-Zahab; 1/4 - 2nd edition, Beirut.

[^117]: Ibn Asaker: History of the city of Damascus Vol. 1 / Pg. 110 -
Damascus print.

[^118]: Ibn Asaker History of the city of Damascus 1/147.

[^119]: Ibn Asaker Vol. 1/211-212.

[^120]: Zumar /75

[^121]: Ibn Asaker 2/122 + Durrul - MantHurr 5/344

[^122]: History of Ibn Asaker 1/110

[^123]: Ibn Asaker 1/232

[^124]: Tafseer Durrul-MantHurr 1/136

[^125]: Furu Kafi - Book of Hajj; Chapter of virtue of Looking al
Ka'aba, Tradition No. 1 Vol. 4 / Pg. 240.

[^126]: Tarikh-e-Tabari 1/402, 2nd edition - research of Muhammad Abul-
Fazl Ibrahim.

[^127]: Tarikh-e-Tabari 1/265 & 266 + Tafseer-e-Tabari 23/55.

[^128]: For example refer to Tarikh-e-Tabari Vol. 1/115 + Al-Asabah
3/299.

[^129]: Al-Asabah 3/298 and Tahzeeb-ut-Tahzeeb / last volume related to
translation of Abu-Hurraira's life - history + Al-Bedayah - wah-Niheyeh
8/103.

[^130]: Zahbi: Tazkerat al-Hefaz 1/36 + Al-Asabah 4/206

[^131]: At-Tabaqat-ul-Kubra 3/240; European print and Vol. 3/332 Beirut
print.

[^132]: At-Tabaqat-ul-Kubra Vol. 3/257 - European print and Vol. 3/354 -
Beirut print.

[^133]: Tafseer al-Qurtabi 15/295 + Tafseer-e-Durrul MantHurr 5/347

[^134]: Durrul-MantHurr 1/132

[^135]: «Al-Umdat» By Ibn Rasheeq /25; Egyptian print.

[^136]: An-Nujum az- Zaaherat-Fi-Muluk Mesr-wa-Qahera Vol. 1/33.

[^137]: Tafseer Durrul-MantHur 4/248.

[^138]: At-Tabaqat al-Kubra 2/358; Beirut print.

[^139]: Exegesis like «Tafseer Abul-Fotouh Raazi» and «Tafseer-e-Ghazor»
have brought some of those traditions of Kab al Ahbar which have not
been inconsistent with the principles of Islam.

[^140]: By «source of wisdom», he means the Torah. This quality is from
the qualities of the Holy Quran where Kab has utilized it for the
distorted Torah.

[^141]: فعظم علي على ربه وقام على قدميه و نفض ثيابه فأقسم عليه عمر
أنيعود الى مجلسه و يغوص في الحديث

[^142]: نزهة الناظر و تنبيه الخاطر Famous as Majmu'a Maram 235-236

[^143]: Sunan-e-Darami 1/115; Damascus print + Musnad-e-Ahmad 3/387 and
470.

[^144]: Sunan Darami - two traditions Vol. 1/54 & 55 + Tafseer-e-Ibn
Kathir 4/232 + Etqan 2/4 + Tafseer-e-Qurtabi 18/29 Cairo print +
Tarikh-e-Ibne Asaker Vol. 8 Pg. 117-118.

[^145]: Fath-ul-Bari 10/221; Egyptian print + Tafseer-e-Ibn-Kathir
4/231; Egyptian print + Kanzul-Ummal 2/357; Indian print +
Tafseer-e-Tabari 26/116; Egyptian print.


