Chapter 6: The Exceptionally Unique
===================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْوِتْرَ الْمَوْتُورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Exceptionally Unique

Commentary
----------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْوِتْرَ الْمَوْتُورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Exceptionally Unique

The original meaning of *al-witr* in the Arabic language is *al-fard*
(single) and *man la thaniya lah* (one who does not have a second)’[^1].
And *al-mawtur* which is an adjective of *al-witr* also means the same,
but is brought as an emphasis[^2] in this case. A similar example[^3]
has come in the Qur\`an with regard to *hijr* (forbidden) and *mahjur*
(prohibited)*,* the latter being an emphasis of the former:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةَ لاَ بُشْرَى يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلْمُجْرِمِينَ
وَيَقُولُونَ حِجْرًا مَّحْجُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day when they shall see the angels, there shall be no joy on
that day for the guilty, and they shall say:*** **It is a forbidden
thing totally prohibited.** ***(25:22)***

And in the well-known supplication of *al-Sabah*, Amir al-mu’minin ‘Ali
(AS) tries to emphasize *al-layl* (the night) with the adjective
*al-alyal* (nightly):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلِّ اللَّهُمَّ عَلَى الدَّلِيلِ إِلَيْكَ فِي اللَّيْلِ الأَلْيَل
وَالْمَاسِكِ مِنْ أَسْبَابِكَ بِحَبْلِ الشَّرَفِ الأَطوَل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Bless, oh Allah, the guide to You in the darkest night, him who, of Thy
ropes, clings to the cord of the longest nobility...[^4]

Some scholars opine[^5] that *al-witr* refers to Imam al-Husayn (AS)’s
unique spiritual status which the Holy Prophet (S) and the Infallible
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) also possess. Hence, in relation to the
rest of the creation an infallible leader (*al-imam al-ma’sum*) the like
of Imam al-Husayn (AS) occupies a unique station, and hence is *al-witr
al-mawtur*.

Amir al-mu’minin ‘Ali (AS) describing an Infallible Imam as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُوجَدُ لَهُ مَثِيلٌ وَلاَ يَقُومُ لَهُ بَدِيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

**He is peerless**, no substitute can represent him.[^6]

And in another tradition, Imam al-Ridha (AS) describing the qualities of
an infallible Imam, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِِمَامُ وَاحِدُ دَهْرِهِ لاَ يُدَانِيهِ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imam is unique in his time. **None can come closer to him in
rank.**..[^7]

We may also say that Imam al-Husayn (AS) is a manifestation of the
Divine Name *al-Witru*. The Holy Prophet (S), after speaking about the
Divine Names, is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ وِتْرٌ، يُحِبُّ الوِتْرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely He [Allah] is Unique, and He Loves the unique[^8]

Expounding the meaning of *Ya Witru* in his commentary on the
supplication of *al-Jawshan al-Kabir*, Mulla Hadi Sabzawari says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(يَا وِتْرُ) ايْ انه الوجود الصرف البسيط الذى لا يخالطه سنخ اخر من
ماهية أو مادة أو قوة أو استعداد...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ya Witru* means that He is Sheer Existence, which is Simple
[Non-composite], and nothing accompanies it like quiddity (*mahiyya*),
matter (*madda*), potentiality (*quwwa*) or potential
(*isti’dad*)...[^9]

The corollary of being ‘sheer existence’ (*al-wujud al-sirf*) and
‘non-compositeness’ (*al-basata*) is uniqueness. This is because it is
impossible for a non-composite entity to have a second. Hence, no entity
can be likened to His Sacred Essence, nor can any entity be compared to
Him.

Imam ‘Ali (AS) explaining the meaning of the phrase *Allahu Akbar* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْنِيْ اَلْوَاحِدُ الاَحَدُ الَّذِيْ لَيْسَ كَمِثْلِهِ شَيْءٌ لاَ
يُقَاسُ بِشَيْءٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

It means that He is One, Non-composite, the like of which there is
nothing, and nothing can be compared to Him...[^10]

The Ahl al-Bayt (AS), being the most perfect manifestations of the
Divine Names, enjoy such an exalted station near Allah, that none can be
compared to them. They undoubtedly are manifestations of the Divine Name
*al-Witr*, which means مَنْ لاَ ثَانِيَ لَهُ (One who does not have a
second). In a tradition narrated from Zurara, Imam al-Baqir (AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّا لاَ نُوصَفُ وَكَيْفَ يُوصَفُ قَوْمٌ رَفَعَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمُ
الرِّجْسَ وَهُوَ الشَّك
  </p>
</blockquote>

And surely we cannot be described, and how can a people be described
from whom Allah has removed impurity, which is doubt...[^11]

Apparently the doubt that is spoken about in this tradition is related
to the realities of the Creator and His creation. The Ahl al-Bayt (AS),
due to their lofty spiritual status, transcend the lower levels of
conviction and enjoy the level of *haqq al-yaqin* or even higher.
Therefore the absence of doubt should not be conjectured to be merely in
the conceptual level.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْوِتْرَ الْمَوْتُورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The Exceptionally Unique**

Some commentators give the possibility that this verse refers to Imam
al-Husayn (AS)’s uniqueness with regard to everyone, including Prophet
Muhammad (S) and the other members of his infallible progeny (AS). This
however is not because his spiritual station is higher than theirs, for
all of them unite in the Muhammadan Light (al-Nur al-Muhammadi). In a
conversation with Salman and Jundub, Imam ‘Ali (AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَنَا اُحْيِي وَاُمِيْتُ بِاِذْنِ رَبّيْ، اَنَا اُنَبّئُكُمْ بِمَا
تَاْكُلُوْنَ وَمَا تَدّخِرُوْنَ فِيْ بُيُوْتِكُمْ بِاِذْنِ رَبّيْ،
وَاَنَا عَالِمٌ بِضَمَائِرِ قُلُوْبِكُمْ وَالأئِمّة مِنْ اَوْلاَدِيْ
يَعْلَمُوْنَ وَيَفْعَلُوْنَ هَذَا إِذَا اَحَبُّوْا وَاَرَادُوْا لاَنّا
كُلّنَا وَاحِدٌ، اَوَّلُنَا مُحَمّدٌ وَآخِرُنَا مُحَمّدٌ وَاَوْسَطنَا
مُحَمَّدٌ وَكُلّنَا مُحَمّدٌ فَلاَتُفَرِّقُوْا بَيْنَنَا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

I revive the dead, and make the living ones die by my Lord’s permission;
I can inform you about what you eat and what you store in your homes by
my Lord’s permission; and I know what is hidden in your hearts; and the
Imams from my progeny (AS) can [also] know this and do the aforesaid if
they desired and wanted, because all of us are one**: the first among us
is Muhammad, the middle one among us is Muhammad, the last among us is
Muhammad, and all of us are Muhammad; therefore do not differentiate
between us**.[^12]

The reason, as some great scholars like the late ‘Allama
al-Tabataba\`i[^13] and Ayatullah Sa’adat Parwar (may Allah elevate
their noble spirits) expound[^14], why Imam al-Husayn (AS) occupies a
unique station, is his utilization of the greater opportunity to
manifest his perfect qualities by carrying out his great movement and
sacrificing everything he had for the sake of the Only Beloved. The Holy
Qur\`an says that for everyone are stations according to what they did:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلٍّ دَرَجَاتٌ مِّمَّا عَمِلُوا وَلِيُوَفِّيَهُمْ أَعْمَالَهُمْ
وَهُمْ لاَ يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And for all are degrees according to what they did, and that He may
pay them back fully their deeds and they shall not be wronged.
(46:19)***

If the other Imams (AS) faced the same conditions that Imam al-Husayn
(AS) had encountered, they too would have done what he did. The
opportunity however was gifted to Imam al-Husayn (AS) and accordingly he
acquired a station that is unparalleled. The following tradition refers
to a unique station for Imam al-Husayn (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُوِيَ عَنِ الرَّسُوْلِ الاَعْظَمِ قَالَ لِزَوْجَتِهِ اُمّ سَلَمَة:
اَوْحي اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إلَيَّ اَنَّ لَهُ (اَيْ لِلْحُسَيْنِ)
دَرَجَةً لاَ يَنَالُهَا اَحَدٌ مِنَ الْمَخْلُوْقِيْنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Most Noble Messenger (S) said to his wife Umm Salama: Allah Revealed
unto me that verily he (al-Husayn) has a station which none of the
creation would attain.[^15]

And Imam al-Husayn (AS) just before his departure from Madina sees the
Prophet (S) in his dream saying to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنَّ لَكَ فِي الْجَنَّةِ دَرَجَاتٍ لاَ تَنَالُهَا إِلاَ
بِالشَّهَادَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

And indeed you have stations in the Paradise that you shall not attain
save with martyrdom.[^16]

A Peerless Contingent Being
---------------------------

In his masterpiece *Jalawat-e-Rabbani* Ayatullah Muhammad Ridha Rabbani
(may Allah elevate his spirit) believes and tries to establish that Imam
al-Husayn (AS) is a peerless contingent being (*mumkin al-wujud bila
sharik*). At one place he says: In our book *Tawhid-e-Rabbani we* have
comprehensively explained the meaning of the magnificent name Allah. One
of its meanings is, “*aliha al-khalq ‘an darki ma’iyyatih wal ihata
bikayfiyyatih*” (The creation is baffled in comprehending His whatness
and apprehending His howness)[^17], which the cleaver of the knowledge
of the disciplines of the foremost and latter ones and the fifth
brilliant star of Divine Leadership and Guardianship, Hadhrat Imam
al-Baqir (AS) has mentioned. Imam al-Baqir (AS) has said that Allah is
that God before Whose Essence and Attributes the intellects of the
entire creation are bewildered, confounded and mystified.

Sa’di, the Persian poet says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جهان متفق بر الهيتش
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فرو مانده در كنه ماهيتش.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The entire creation is unanimous in his Godhood*  
*Unable to apprehend the Essence of His Being*

Thereafter Rabbani says that Imam al-Husayn (AS), who is a manifestation
of the Name Allah, likewise, confounds the intellects and overcomes the
human beings with perplexity and amazement.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيك يا أعجوبة الكون غدا الفكر كليلاً. أنت حيّرت ذوي اللب وبلبلت
العقولا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O the marvel of existence, the intellect is exhausted in You; You
confounded people of insight and confused the intellects*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين حسين كيست كه عالم همه ديوانه اوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين چه شمعي است كه جانها همه پروانه اوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Who is this Husayn, that the entire world is mad after him; What candle
is this, that all the souls are its moth(s)?*

Imam Husayn (AS) not only puzzled and astounded the human world and
realm of humanity, but also made the most exalted angels and the
residents of the Divine throne as well as the entire chain of the sacred
intellects, astonished at his display of intense love and self-sacrifice
in the path of the Eternal and Infinite Beloved.[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْوِتْرَ الْمَوْتُورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The martyr, whose near ones have been killed, but their blood have not
been avenged for

Lexicologists like al-Turayhi in his *Majma’ al-Bahrayn*, have defined
the word *mawtur* as one whose near one has been unjustly killed but his
blood has not been avenged for as yet[^19]. And since he is *mawtur*, he
necessarily is the *tha’ir* (avenger of the blood) as well. Muhammad bin
Muslima in the battle of Khaybar employs a similar expression when he
tells the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا الْمَوْتُوْرُ الثَّائِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am one whose kin has been unjustly killed but his blood not yet
avenged, and I am the avenger.[^20]

The word *witr* also signifies ‘the blood that has been spilled
unjustly’[^21]. Therefore when we address Imam al-Husayn (AS) as
*al-witr al-mawtur* we mean he is the martyr whose near ones and
companions were unjustly killed, but their blood has not been avenged
for. Hence he is the avenger of their blood.

Some commentators opine that if we consider the Imam (AS) to be the one
who would avenge the blood of his near ones, then that would transpire
during his return to this world (*raj’a*). With regard to *raj’a*,
Hamran narrates from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَوَّلَ مَنْ يَرْجِعُ لَجَارُكُمُ الْحُسَيْنُ فَيَمْلِكُ حَتَّى
تَقَعَ حَاجِبَاهُ عَلَى عَيْنَيْهِ مِنَ الْكِبَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed the first one to return is your refuge al-Husayn (AS), who will
rule [for so many years] until his eyebrows would hang over his eyes,
out of old age.[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْوِتْرَ الْمَوْتُورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The Alone who was Rendered Solitary**

Sometimes the word *witr* is translated as ‘alone’, whereas the word
*mawtur* as ‘one whose relation is slain, and so is separated from him
and rendered solitary’.[^23] Imam al-Husayn (AS) was rendered solitary
after he lost his near ones and noble companions and stood alone to
fight against the forces of evil.

Some analysts of this radiant *Ziyarat* believe that the enemies of
Islam right from the time of the Holy Prophet (S) planned how to isolate
and make people be indifferent of the household of the Holy Prophet (S).
The word *al-witr* can also allude to this situation that the Imam (AS)
experienced. Therefore he was the lonely one, whose relation was slain
and who was rendered solitary.

We must understand that the Imam (AS), due to his sublime rank was even
lonelier than his companions and family members in the plains of
Karbala. The station of Imamate is unique and has no parallel. In this
sense he was not only from the strangers (*ghuraba’*) like his
companions, but also *gharib al-ghuraba’* (the stranger of the
strangers). In a *Ziyarat* narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (AS) we address
Imam al-Husayn (AS) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا غَرِيبَ الْغُرَبَاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you, o stranger of the strangers.[^24]

In this state of intense *ghurba*, the enemies did not spare the lives
of his noble family members and companions, and rendered him solitary
and alone. It is in these moments that he cried from the depths of his
heart:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ مِنْ نَاصِرٍ يَنْـصُرُ الذُّرِّيَّةَ الأَطهَار، هَلْ مِنْ
مُجْيْرٍ لأَبْـنَاءِ الْبَتُوْلِ، هَــلْ مِنْ ذَابٍّ يَذُبُّ عَنْ
حَرَمِ الرَّسُوْلِ ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Is there any helper to help the immaculate progeny? Is there any
protector for the children of al-Batul (AS)? Is there any defender to
guard the sanctuary of the Messenger of Allah?

Perhaps Imam al-Husayn (AS) summed up his message to his lovers in these
short, but very meaningful expressions. The call was made to ‘the
future’ and every receptive heart can hear it every moment. Imam
al-Husayn (AS) was the epitome of Islam, and his call was the call for
the emancipation of Islam. If we are receptive enough to hear his call,
then every step of ours must be geared towards assiting Islam. If we
struggle to eradicate sin and try to perfect ourselves as well as others
and revive Islam, then we do respond to his call. Otherwise we should
not be surprised if we also rank among those who left him alone. May
Allah protect us from being among those who leave him alone.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْوِتْرَ الْمَوْتُورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The Alone and Deprived**

Sometimes the word *al-mawtur* is employed to mean ‘one who is deprived’
(*al-manqus*). The following tradition of the Holy Prophet (S) is
translated taking this meaning into consideration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَوْتُورُ أَهْلُهُ وَمَالُهُ مَنْ ضَيَّعَ صَلاَةَ الْعَصْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who is deprived of his family and wealth is one who wastes the
prayer of ‘Asr[^25]

Therefore if we take the word *witr* to mean ‘alone’, the phrase would
mean ‘the alone who was deprived of his hometown, family and wealth’.

[^1]: Sayyid Husayn al-Hamadani, Sharh al-Asma’ al-Husna, p.143

[^2]: This variable has been discussed by great scholars like al-Naraqi
in his Mushkilat al-Akhbar (p. 301) and al-Shubbar in his Masabih
al-Anwar (p. 341). ‘Allama al-Tabataba\`i also translated al-witr
al-mawtur as ‘the unique one’ (Rukhshad, Dar Mahzar-e-’Allameye
Tabataba’i, p. 184)

[^3]: Other examples that have come in Arabic literature are: bardun
barid, shi’run sha’ir, etc.

[^4]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 84, p. 339

[^5]: I heard this opinion from Ayatullah Ansari Shirazi, from whom I
would study the 9th volume of the magnum opus al-Asfar of Mulla Sadra.

[^6]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 25, pp. 169-170

[^7]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.1, p. 201

[^8]: ‘Allama al-Tabataba\`i, al-Mizan, v.8, p. 359

[^9]: Mulla Hadi Sabzawari, Sharh al-Asma’ al-Husna, p. 722

[^10]: Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Ilal al-Shara’i\`, v.2, p. 320

[^11]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, v.2, p. 182

[^12]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.26, p.6

[^13]: Muhammad Husayn Rukhshad, Dar Mahzare ‘Allameye Tabataba’i, p.
184

[^14]: Ayatullah Sa’adat Parwar, Furugh-e-Shahadat, p.40

[^15]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 44, p.225

[^16]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 58, p.182

[^17]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.3, p. 222

[^18]: Ayatullah Muhammad Ridha Rabbani, Jalawat-e-Rabbani, v.1, pp.
278-279.

[^19]: Shaykh al-Turayhi, Majma’ al-Bahrayn, v.4, p. 463

[^20]: Al-Zubaydi, Taj al-’Arus, v.7, p. 582

[^21]: Mirza Tehrani, Shifa’al-Sudur, p. 165

[^22]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.53, p.43

[^23]: Al-Zubaydi, Taj al-’Arus, v. 7, p.583

[^24]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.98, p.230

[^25]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.80, p.28


