Chapter 7: Peace be unto you and unto the spirits who descended in your courtyard
=================================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ وَعَلى الأَرْوَاحِ الَّتِى حَلَّتْ بِفِنَائِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you and unto the spirits who descended in your courtyard

Commentary
----------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ وَعَلى الأَرْوَاحِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you and unto the spirits...

In this verse not only do we declare that Imam al-Husayn (AS) is in the
state of *salam*, but also bear witness that his noble companions who
sacrificed their lives for Allah and attained the great station of
martyrdom, also enjoy the state of peace and protection from calamities.
And if we take the verse to be invocative, then we also pray for higher
states of *salam* for them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلىَ الارْوَاحِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And unto the spirits (*arwah*)

The word a*rwah* in the above phrase is the plural of *ruh*. And the
word *ruh* (spirit) comes from the word *rih* (wind)[^1]. *Ruh* has the
quality of *rih*, which moves (*mutaharrik*) and makes things move
(*muharrik*). The *ruh* likewise moves and makes the body move. In a
tradition narrated in *al-Kafi*, Imam al-Sadiq (AS) tells Muhammad bin
Muslim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الرُّوْحَ مُتَحَرِّكٌ كَالرِّيْحِ وَإِنَّمَا سُمِّيَ رُوْحًا
لأَنَّهُ اشْتُقَّ اِسْمُهُ مِنَ الرِّيْحِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed *ruh* (spirit) is in motion like *rih* (lit. wind), and ***it was
named ruh because its name was gotten from al-rih...***[^2]

In fact the entire universe, constantly moves and travels towards Allah,
for the Holy Qur\`an explicitly tells us that every entity does
*tasbih*, which, according to authoritative lexicographers like Raghib
al-Isfahani, fundamentally means:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْمَرُّ السَّرِيْعُ فِيْ عِبَادَةِ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“...to travel swiftly in the path of Divine worship.”[^3]

Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُسَبِّحُ لَهُ السَّماواتُ السَّبْعُ وَالأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فيهِنَّ وَإِنْ
مِنْ شَيْ‏ءٍ إِلاَّ يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَلكِنْ لا تَفْقَهُونَ
تَسْبيحَهُمْ إِنَّهُ كانَ حَليماً غَفُورا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The seven heavens glorify Him, and the earth [too], and whoever is in
them. There is not a thing but that it glorifies Him with praise, but
you do not understand their glorification. Indeed He is all-forbearing,
all-forgiving. (17:44)***

Spirit- A Higher Level of The Body
----------------------------------

Some of us conjecture that the human being is “composed”- in the
physical sense- of a body and a spirit, and that the spirit comes down
to, and settles in the body as a separate thing. This stereotype is
incorrect, for the human being is a unit of different levels of reality,
the spirit being one of them. The spirit is a higher reality of the very
body, and the body serves as a lower manifestation of the spirit.
Observe the following verse of the Qur\`an which talks about how the
human spirit is blown:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الإِنْسَانَ مِنْ سُلاَلَةٍ مِنْ طيْنٍ. ثُمَّ
جَعَلْنَاهُ نُطفَةً فِيْ قَرَارٍ مَكِيْنٍ. ثُمَّ خَلَقْنَا النُّطفَةَ
عَلَقَةً فَخَلَقْنَا الْعَلَقَةَ مُضْغَةً فَخَلَقْنَا الْمُضْغَةَ
عِظَامًا فَكَسَوْنَا الْعِظَامَ لَحْمًا ثُمَّ أَنْشَأْنَاهُ خَلْقًا
آخَرَ فَتَبَارَكَ اللهُ أَحْسَنَ الْخَالِقِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly We created man of an extract of clay,*** ***Then We
made him a small seed in a firm resting-place,*** ***Then We made the
seed a clot, then We made the clot a lump of flesh, then We made (in)
the lump of flesh bones, then We clothed the bones with flesh,*** **then
We made it another creation,** ***so blessed be Allah, the best of the
creators. (23:12-14)***

Here Almighty Allah explicitly tells us that it is the very body that He
creates in another form: *thumma ansha’nahu khalqan akhara* (then we
made ***it*** another creation). In this verse the third person pronoun
“*hu*” refers to the material body. In other words, Allah perfects the
very body and brings it to a higher state.

The great philosopher and mystic, Mulla Hadi Sabzawari, in his poetical
masterpiece *al-Manzhumah* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلنَّفْسُ فِي الْحُدُوْثِ جِسْمَانِيّةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي الْبَقَا تَكُوْنُ رُوْحَانِيّـــــــــــة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The soul in its origination is material,*  
*but in its survival is spiritual.*[^4]

Perhaps the first person to expound this body-spirit relation in a
logical manner was Sadr al-Muta’allihin. Al-Kharrazi[^5] writes:

Mulla Sadra believes that soul is created corporeally. That is, there
exists at first corporeal soulless matter. Then, under certain
conditions, soul comes into being gradually through matter and its
substantial motion. When the fetus settles in its place it starts its
evolution on the strength of trans–substantial motion. The fetus first
takes a natural mineral shape.

Then, because of further evolution, it takes a vegetative form. At this
stage, the corporeal matter is mature enough to take on perception; but
as long as it is devoid of sense under the influence of environment,
there exists no room for soul therein. After having found vegetative
form within the womb, and been influenced both by external factors, and
their stimulants, the corporeal matter passively takes on sense, and
then the earliest form of perception takes place. Thus, the first
manifestation of soul occurs. Here it could be said that soul is created
out of corporeal matter...[^6]

There is a tradition from Imam ‘Ali (AS) worthy of contemplation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَضْمَرَ أَحَدٌ شَيْئًا اِلاَّ ظَهَرَ فِيْ فَلَتَاتِ لِسَانِهِ
وَصَفَحَاتِ وَجْهِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

No one hides anything save that it appears in the lapses of his tongue
and the cheeks of his face.[^7]

This shows a unity between the outer side of the human being which is
his physical structure and his inner side which is the spirit. The
physical can only reveal what is hidden of the spiritual if it is united
with the latter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلىَ الارْوَاحِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And unto the spirits (*al-arwah*)

Some commentators of this sacred *Ziyarat* have given the possibility
that the *arwah* mentioned in this verse refers to the angels who live
around the radiant *rawdha* of Imam al-Husayn (AS). Explaining the
reality of angels, Shaykh al-Tabrasi in his *Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan*
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمَلاَئِكَةُ رُوْحَانِيُّوْنَ خُلِقُوْا مِنَ الرِّيْحِ فِي قَوْلِ
بَعْضِهِمْ، وَمِن النُّوْرِ فِيْ قَوْلِ الْحَسَنِ، لاَ يَتَنَاسَلُوْنَ
وَلاَ يَطعَمُوْنَ وَلاَ يَشْرَبُوْنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And angels are spiritual entities (*ruhaniyyun*). They were created from
*al-rih (the wind)* according to some, and from light (*al-nur*)
according to al-Hasan, they neither mate, not eat, nor drink.[^8]

We should note however that words like *al-rih* and *al-nur* must not
quickly transport us to their material extensions. Words, as has been
established in its own place, have been coined for the spirits of their
meanings. Therefore these terms have a subtler meaning, the discussion
of which is beyond the scope of this work. One should however at least
understand that they do not necessarily refer to the wind that we can
feel, or the physical light that we can vision.

According to authoritative scholars like Mir Damad and Mulla Hadi
Sabzawari, *al-ruhaniyyun* (the spiritual entities) are the highest of
the classes of the angels. In his *Sharh al-Asma’* Sabzawari says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...فَالأَعْلى طبَقَةً اَلَّذِيْنَ طعَامُهُمْ التَّسْبِيْحُ
وَشَرَابُهُم التَّقْدِيْسُ اَلرُّوْحَانِيُّوْنَ....
  </p>
</blockquote>

...The angels of the highest level, whose food is glorification
(*al-tasbih*) and whose drink is sanctification (*al-taqdis*), are the
*ruhaniyyun*...[^9]

There are ample traditions that explicitly mention the existence of so
many angels in the proximity and neighborhood of the grave of Imam
al-Husayn (AS). The following is an example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُحَمّد بْن مَرْوَان، عَنْ أَبِيْ عَبْدِ اللهِ، قَالَ: سَمِعْتُهُ
يَقُوْلُ: زُوْرُوْا الْحُسَيْنَ وَلَوْ كُلُّ سَنَة، فَاِنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ
أَتَاهُ عَارِفًا بِحَقِّهِ غَيْرَ جَاحِدٍ لَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ عِوَضٌ
غَيْرُ الْجَنَّةِ، وَرُزِقَ رِزْقًا وَاسِعًا، وَأَتَاهُ اللهُ بِفَرَجٍ
عَاجِلٍ، اِنَّ اللهَ وَكَّلَ بِقَبْرِ الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ
أَرْبَعَةَ آلاَف مَلَكٍ كُلُّهُمْ يَبْكُوْنَهُ وَيُشَيِّعُوْنَ مَنْ
زَارَهُ إِلى أَهْلِهِ، فَاِنْ مَرِضَ عَادُوْهُ، وَاِنْ مَاتَ شَهِدُوا
جَنَازَتَهُ بِالاِسْتِغْفَارِ لَهُ وَالتَّرَحُّمِ عَلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad bin Marwan is reported to have said: I heard him [Imam al-Sadiq
(AS)] say: Visit al-Husayn (AS), even if it is once a year, for
whosoever comes to him, with knowledge of his station, and not a
non-believer, would not be given other than Paradise, and he would be
bestowed with extensive sustenance, and Allah would quickly relieve him
(from his problems). **Indeed Allah entrusted four thousand** ***angels
on the grave of al-Husayn***, all of who weep for him. They accompany
the visitor until he returns to his family, and if the visitor gets sick
they visit him, and if he dies, they witness his bier and seek for his
forgiveness and mercy.[^10]

Therefore *salam* can also be expressed for these spirits who accompany
the grave of al-Husayn (AS). In another *ziyara* of bidding farewell to
Imam al-Husayn (AS) we explicitly send our salams to the angels.
Al-Mashhadi in his *al-Mazar* narrates the following *Ziyarat*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا مَلاَئِكَةَ رَبِّي الْمُقِيْمِيْنَ فِيْ
هَذَا الْحَرَمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be on you o angels of my Lord, **who inhabit this
sanctuary**.[^11]

According to this nondescript, the most probable meaning of *al-arwah*
refers to the companions, but there is no harm if we intend the angels
too.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...الَّتِي حَلَّتْ بِفِنَائِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

...who descended in your courtyard

The past tense verb حَلَّتْ ‘*hallat*’ means نَزَلَتْ ‘*nazalat*’ (they
came down, or descended). And the word *fina’* in the phrase “*bi
fina’ik*” means ‘open space in front or at either side of the house’ or
‘the courtyard’. The above phrase indicates that the spirits of the
companions of al-Husayn (AS) enjoy his company and neighborhood after
their martyrdom. The implication that the word ‘*hallat*’ gives, as some
commentators have stated, is that the station of the companions is lower
than that of the Imam (AS), a reality which by now is quite clear to the
readers, for the Imam (AS) is in an apex which none can comprehend and
fathom.

Outstanding Qualities of the Companions of Imam Al-Husayn (AS)
--------------------------------------------------------------

It would not be without benefit to mention some of the outstanding
qualities of the companions of Imam al-Husayn (AS), for that would make
us understand better their sanctity and elevated spirits:

### 1.The Best Companions (Khayru Ashab)

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَسْتَوِي أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ وَأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ أَصْحَابُ
الْجَنَّةِ هُمُ الْفَائِزُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The companions of Hell Fire and the companions of the Paradise are
not alike; the companions of the Paradise are the achievers. (59:20)***

Imam al-Husayn (AS) is reported to have said about his noble companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِيْ لاَ اَعْلَمُ اَصْحَاباً اَوْفَى، وَلاَ خَيْراً مِنْ اَصْحَابِيْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Surely I do not know companions more faithful and better than my
companions’.[^12]

In one of the radiant *ziyarat*, we address the companions of Imam
al-Husayn (AS) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا خَيْرَ أَنْصَارٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you O best helpers.

It is important for us to know the literal meaning of *ashab*, so that
we can understand the traditions narrated about the *ashab* of lofty
personalities like Imam al-Husayn (AS). There has been a tendency among
many people to conjecture that *ashab* merely refers to those who
physically accompany someone.

For example, those who physically accompanied the Holy Prophet (S) are
known as *ashabu Rasulillah* (S). Although such usage of the word is
common, it is not always meant. Before we establish our contention, let
us consider the meaning of *ashab*: Raghib al-Isfahani in his lexicon of
Qur\`an under the discussion of the root word صحب *“s h b”* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصاحب الملازم إنسانا كان أو حيوانا أو مكانا أو زمانا ولا فرق بين أن
تكون مصاحبته بالبدن وهو الاصل والاكثر أو بالعناية والهمة وعلى هذا قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَئِنْ غِبْتِ عَنْ عَيْنِيْ لَمَا غِبْتِ عَنْ قَلْبِيْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Al-sahib* [pl. *ashab*] is one who accompanies whether a human being,
an animal, a place or an age. And it makes no difference whether his
company is with his body, which is primarily and mostly the case, or
through concern and ambition. And based on this it is said:

*If you hide from my eyes*  
*You cannot hide from my heart.*[^13]

In verse 59:20 quoted in the beginning, we observed that the noun
*ashab* is annexed to Paradise and Hell Fire. The literal import of the
verse, which also is an established reality, reveals that despite their
physical existence in this corporeal world, the *ashab*, depending on
their state, either spiritually accompany Paradise or Hell Fire.
Therefore the criteria of sharing the company of someone or something is
not always physical and material.

A well-known tradition narrated by some Muslims to establish the purity
of all those who physically accompanied the Holy Prophet (S) is as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَصْحَابِيْ كَالنّجُوْمِ بِاَيّهِمْ اِقْتَدَيْتُمْ اِهْتَدَيْتُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

My companions are like stars, whosoever among them were you to follow,
you will be guided.[^14]

The Holy Qur\`an, traditions of the Holy Prophet (S), the intellect as
well as history falsifies this tradition if we were to interpret the
word *ashab* to merely mean ‘whosoever met the Holy Prophet (S) or
physically accompanied him’. For the sake of brevity, we would not like
to explain this matter here. Interested readers may refer to a host of
scholarly books written on this subject, especially sparkling works like
the outstanding masterpiece*’Abaqat al-Anwar* of the esteemed Indian
scholar Sayyid Mir Hamid al-Husayni al-Hindi.

Weren’t the enemies who fought against Imam Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (AS)
in the battle of Jamal and Siffin not among those who physically
accompanied the Holy Prophet (S)? And what about the battle of Siffin?
Can Mu’awiya, who did meet and share the company of the Holy Prophet (S)
but fought against the Divinely appointed leader of the time, be
considered as a *najm* (a star) through which one can achieve guidance?
It is absurd to attribute something like this to the Holy Prophet (S) or
misinterpret what he (S) said.

There is another tradition narrated by Shi’i sources however, that is
somewhat similar to the abovementioned traditon, but sound and more
meaningful: Imam al-Baqir (AS) narrates from the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا وَجَدْتُمْ فِيْ كِتَابِ اللّهِ عَزّ وَجَلّ فَالْعَمَلُ بِهِ
لاَزِمٌ لاَ عُذْرَ لَكُمْ فِيْ تَرْكِهِ، وَمَا لَمْ يَكُنْ فِيْ
كِتَابِ اللّهِ وَكَانَتْ فِيْهِ سُنّة ٌمِنِّي لاَ عُذْرَ لَكُمْ فِيْ
تَرْكِ سُنّتِيْ، وَمَا لَمْ يَكُنْ فِيْهِ سُنّةٌ مِنّيْ فَمَا قَالَ
اَصْحَابِيْ فَخُذُوْهُ، فَإِنّمَا مَثَلُ اَصْحَابِيْ فِيْكُمْ كَمَثَلِ
النّجُوْمِ، بِاَيّهَا اُخِذَ اهْتُدِيَ فَبِاَيّ اَقَاوِيْلِ
اَصْحَابِيْ اَخَذْتُمْ اِهْتَدَيْتُمْ، وَاِخْتِلاَفُ اَصْحَابِيْ
لَكُمْ رَحْمَةٌ، قِيْلَ: يَا رَسُوْلَ اللّهِ مَنْ اَصْحَابُكَ؟ قَالَ:
اَهْلُ بَيْتِيْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is essential to act according to what you find in the Book of Allah;
and you have no excuse to abandon it. Likewise you have no excuse to
abandon whatever is not in the Book but there is a tradition about it
from me. And when there is no tradition about something from me, then
take whatever my *ashab* say.

For surely the example of my *ashab* among you is like the example of
stars (*kamathal al-nujum*), from whosoever among them advice is taken,
guidance is achieved; therefore whichever statements of my *ashab* you
take, you would get guided; and frequenting my *ashab* is a mercy for
you. The Holy Prophet (S) was asked: **‘O Apostle of Allah, who are
your** ***ashab*****? He (S) said: ‘My progeny’**.[^15]

Here the meaning of *ashab* is used very aptly because the essence of
the human being is in his spirit and not his body. The Ahl al-Bayt (AS)
being in the heights of perfection and united in the Muhammadan Spirit,
truly accompany the Holy Prophet (S) even if the confines of time and
place were to separate them. Hence they really are stars perpetually
radiating light.

The aforesaid discussion was to illustrate the meaning of *ashab* when
Imam al-Husayn (AS) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِيْ لاَ اَعْلَمُ اَصْحَاباً اَوْفَى وَلاَ خَيْراً مِنْ اَصْحَابِيْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Surely I do not know companions more faithful and better than my
companions’[^16]

Here the Imam (AS) is not merely referring to their physical presence,
but also alludes to their spiritual sanctity. In fact their apparent
presence in the ranks of Imam al-Husayn (AS) in the plains of Karbala
and their physical company depicted nothing but their spiritual company
as well. This is because it required exalted spirits to remain steadfast
in the ranks of the Imam (AS) despite the knowledge about their
ephemeral end.

### 2. The Most Loyal Companions (al-awfa)

As earlier mentioned, the Imam clearly said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِيْ لاَ اَعْلَمُ اَصْحَاباً اَوْفَى وَلاَ خَيْراً مِنْ اَصْحَابِيْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Surely I do not know ***companions more loyal*** and better than my
companions’[^17]

Here the word *awfa* is employed thus showing that they were the most
loyal of all companions. Whenever loyalty is talked about, there is
always a pledge behind it. Perhaps the best expression of their state is
conferred by the following verse of the Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنينَ رِجالٌ صَدَقُوا ما عاهَدُوا اللَّهَ عَلَيْهِ
فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ قَضى‏ نَحْبَهُ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَنْتَظِرُ وَ ما
بَدَّلُوا تَبْديلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Among the faithful are men*** **who fulfill what they have pledged to
Allah.** ***Of them are some who have fulfilled their pledge, and of
them are some who still wait, and they have not changed in the least.
(33:23)***

One of the places where the loyalty of the companions of Imam al-Husayn
(AS) was radiantly manifested was on the night of ‘Ashura’ when Imam
al-Husayn (AS) said to them that the enemies were after him and that
they were free to leave. All of the loyal companions in unison expressed
their loyalty and said that they would never leave the Imam (AS) and
were ready to be martyred with him.

### 3. Intense Lovers of Allah (‘Ushhaq)

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَشَدُّ حُبًّا لِّلّهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***...and those who believe are more intense in their love for Allah...
(2:165)***

It is narrated from Imam al-Baqir (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَرَجَ عَلِيّ يَسِيْرُ بِالنَّاسِ حَتَّى إِذَا كَانَ بِكَرْبَلاَءِ
عَلىَ مَيْلَيْنِ اَوْ مَيْلٍ تَقَدَّمَ بَيْنَ اَيْدِيْهِمْ حَتَّى طافَ
بِمَكَانٍ يُقَالُ لَهَا الْمِقْذَفَانِ فَقَالَ قُتِلَ فِيْهَا مِائَتَا
نَبِيّ وَمِائَتَا سِبْط كُلُّهُمْ شُهَدَاء وَمَنَاخُ رُكّابٍ
وَمَصَارِعُ عُشّاقٍ شُهَدَاء لاَ يَسْبِقُهُمْ مَنْ كَانَ قَبْلَهُمْ
وَلاَ يَلْحَقُهُمْ مَنْ بَعْدَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

[Imam] ‘Ali (AS) went out with some people until he reached a place one
or two miles near Karbala’, whereupon he went forward and
circumambulated around a place known as *al-miqdhafan*, and said: ‘This
is the place where two hundred Prophets and their grandsons were killed,
all of who were martyrs; and it is the halting place of horsemen and the
battle ground of intense lovers (*‘ushshaq*) and martyrs, whom neither
those who came before them or will come after them can prevail [in
status].[^18]

The word عُشَاق *‘ushshaq* that is employed in the above tradition is
worthy of consideration. It is the plural of the word *‘ashiq*
(passionate lover), which is known to be derived from عَشَقَة *‘ashaqa*
a plant that coils around a tree from its roots to its branches, and
thus envelops it the way passionate love embraces one’s entire
heart[^19]. Ibn ‘Arabi translates *‘ishq* as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم العشق وهو التفافه بالقلب مأخوذ من العشقة اللبلابة المشوكة التي تلتف
على شجرة العنبة وأمثالها فهو يلتف بقلب المحب حتى يعميه عن النظر إلى
غير محبوبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then comes *‘ishq* which is when love coils the heart; it is gotten from
*al-’ashaqa*, which is the thorned convolvulus (or bindweed), that,
twisting in a spiral, wraps around the grapevine and other similar
plants. In this way, blinding love (*‘ishq*) wraps around the heart of
the lover, blinding him so that he can see no one other than his
beloved.[^20]

In the well-known *Ziyarat al-Shuhada’* we address the companions of
Imam al-Husayn (AS) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَآ أَوْلِيآءَ اللهِ وَأَحِبّآءَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you, O friends and **beloveds of Allah**[^21]

This verse has so much to reveal. The word *ahiba’* is the plural of the
word *habib*, which is commonly translated to mean *mahbub* (beloved).
However, its linguistic form *fa’il* ( فعيل ) can confer both the
meanings of an active participle (فاعل) and a passive participle
(مفعول)*,* which means we can employ the word *habib* either to means
‘the lover’[^22] or ‘the beloved’ or both. If we only take the common
meaning, however, and translate the word *habib* as *mahbub*, the result
is the same. This is because whosoever is the beloved of Allah, is
necessarily His lover.

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ مَن يَرْتَدَّ مِنكُمْ عَن دِينِهِ
فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللّهُ بِقَوْمٍ يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ أَذِلَّةٍ
عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ يُجَاهِدُونَ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَلاَ يَخَافُونَ لَوْمَةَ لآئِمٍ ذَلِكَ فَضْلُ اللّهِ
يُؤْتِيهِ مَن يَشَاء وَاللّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! whoever from among you turns back from his
religion, then Allah will bring a people,*** **He shall love them and
they shall love Him,** ***lowly before the believers, mighty against the
unbelievers, they shall strive hard in Allah’s way and shall not fear
the censure of any censurer; this is Allah’s grace, He gives it to whom
He pleases, and Allah is Ample-giving, Knowing. [5: 54]***

Furthermore the linguistic pattern *fa’il* (فعيل) is both a hyperbolic
form *(sigha mubaligha*), which gives the connotation of abundance and,
an assimilate epithet[^23] (*sifa mushbiha*), which confers the sense of
continuity. Therefore, the companions of the Imam (AS) were abundantly
and perpetually in love of Allah.

If we try to study the origin of the word *habib*, we may be able to
unravel other noteworthy secrets. Expounding on the etymology of the
word *‘hubb*’ Sayyid al-Jaza’iri in his ethical masterpiece *al-Anwar
al-Nu’maniyya* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمّي الحب حبا لوصوله إلى حَبّة القلب التي هي منبع الحياة، وإذا اتصل
بها سرى مع الحياة في جميع اجزاء البدن واثبت في كل جزء صورة المحبوب
  </p>
</blockquote>

The infinitive noun ‘*hubb*’ (lit. love) was called *hubb* because it
reaches the *habbat al-qalb* (the seed of the heart), which is the
source of life. And when it reaches the seed of the heart it penetrates
with life to all the parts of the body and leaves the picture of the
beloved in every part.[^24]

And the only Master who plants, splits, and makes germinate the seed of
love is the *Faliq al-habbi wa al-nawa* **(*****the Splitter of the
grain and the pit- 6:95*****),** and it is He alone who rears this love
and leads it to its perfection, for it is He alone who is *Rabb
al-falaq* ***(the Lord of splitting- 113:1).***

Another interesting expression we employ when we address the companions
is the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا أَصْفِيَاءَ اللهِ وَأَوِدَّاءَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you, O chosen ones of Allah and His **lovers**[^25]

The word *awidda’* is the plural of وَدِيْد *wadid*[^26] in the
linguistic pattern of *fa’il* (فعيل) which, as discussed above, gives
the connotations of permanence and abundance. In addition, it also
confers the meaning of both the active participle (*fa’il*) and the
passive participle (*maf’ul*), which means that there is constant mutual
love between the lovers and the Beloved. Also, the origin of the word
*wadid* and other words of the same family, is *watad* (nail), which
confers the meaning of stable and constant love.

Ha’iri in his *Muqtaniyat al-Durar* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأصل الودّ من الوتد وهو أثبت من المحبّة
  </p>
</blockquote>

...and the origin of *al-wudd* is *al-watad* (nail) and it is more firm
than *al-mahabba* (germinal love)...[^27]

And in his *Tafsir Ruh al-Bayan* Haqqi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الود أثبت فى أرض القلب من المحبة لاشتقاقه من الوتد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Al-wudd* is more firm in the earth of the heart than *al-mahabba*,
because it is derived from *al-watad* (nail)...[^28]

Having known that the companions of Imam al-Husayn (AS) were among the
intense lovers of Allah, let us briefly look at the origin of their
intense love. What actually makes one a lover for another?

Every sound conscience will agree that knowledge for perfection would
reap love and attachment for the same. So long as one is ignorant of
another, one cannot develop love for him. It is after acquiring
knowledge about the perfect qualities of a certain person that one
develops love and attachment for the beloved.

Furthermore, love requires the lover to be naturally inclined to the
qualities of the beloved, otherwise the knowledge of the attributes of
the beloved would not reap love. If a person, for example, has no
inclination towards physical beauty, despite his knowledge of the
physically beautiful, he would not develop love for the physically
beautiful. It is when the heart naturally loves and appreciates beauty
that when the beautiful is beheld, the spark of love is ignited and a
raging fire follows.

The noble companions of Imam al-Husayn (AS), having retained their
innate nature, were natural lovers of Absolute Perfection (*al-kamal
al-mutlaq*) and also enjoyed the *ma’rifa of Almighty Allah,* and that
is what made them crave to meet their Only Beloved.

Knowledge of Allah is sometimes classified into two:

• Conceptual & Acquired Knowledge (*al-’ilm al-husuli*)

• Presential & Divinely Endowed Knowledge (*al-’ilm al-hudhuri*)

Conceptual knowledge is very limited and a kind of narration of what is
behind the curtain. Presential knowledge, on the contrary, is to lift
the curtain from the face of the Beloved[^29]. In clearer terms, it is
to beautify oneself with the attributes of the Beloved. Between the
conceptual appreciation of the Beloved and lifting the veil of the
Beloved there is utter remoteness. It is the presential knowledge of
Allah that makes one perpetually an amorous lover. Such a lover
manifests the love of the Only Beloved in every move he makes.
Expressions like the following reveal how intense was the love that
glowed in the hearts of the Imam (AS)’s companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَامَ إِلَيْهِ رَجُلٌ يُقَالُ لَهُ زُهَيْر بن اَلْقَيْن اَلْبَجلِي،
فَقَالَ : يَا بْنَ رَسُوْلِ الله، وَدَدْتُ اَنّيْ قُتِلْتُ ثُمّ
نُشِرْتُ، ثُمّ قُتِلْتُ ثُمّ نُشِرْتُ، ثُمّ قُتِلْتُ ثُمّ نُشِرْتُ
فِيْكَ وَفِي الّذِيْنَ مَعَكَ مِائَةَ قَتْلَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

A man called Zuhayr bin al-Qayn al-Bajli came to the Imam (AS) and said:
‘O son of the Apostle of Allah, I wish I would be martyred and then
resurrected and again be killed and resurrected, and again be killed and
resurrected in your way and in the way of those who are with you, a
hundred times.[^30]

All this fervor shows nothing but passionate love for Almighty Allah,
for sacrificing oneself for al-Husayn (AS) who is a manifestation of
Allah’s Attributes is nothing but to sacrifice oneself for Allah, the
Only Beloved.

The following verse of the Holy Qur\`an also depicts the reality of
which we have so far spoken:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِن كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللّهُ
وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَاللّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you and
forgive you your faults, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (3:31)***

We should remember that it is only after embellishing ourselves with the
Attributes of Allah, that our actions would be according to what Allah
and His messenger wants.

### 4. Sharp Inner Vision (Kushifa lahum al-Ghita’)

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كُنتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِّنْ هَذَا فَكَشَفْنَا عَنكَ غِطاءكَ
فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly you were heedless of it, but now We have removed from you
your veil, so your sight today is sharp. (50:22)***

Ibn ‘Amara reports from his father who reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْتُ لَهُ اَخْبِرْنِيْ عَنْ اَصْحَابِ الْحُسَيْنِ وَإِقْدَامِهِمْ
عَلَى الْمَوْتِ فَقَالَ: إِنّهُمْ كُشِف لَهُمُ الْغِطآءِ حَتّى رَاَوْا
مَنَازِلَهُمْ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

I asked Imam al-Sadiq (AS): Tell me about the companions of al-Husayn
(AS) and how they would advance to their death, and he said: ‘**Indeed
the curtain was unveiled for them**, until they saw their dwellings in
Paradise...[^31]

In one of the *ziyarat*, we address the companions of Imam al-Husayn
(AS) in the following manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...أَشْهَدُ لَقَدْ كَشَفَ اللهُ لَكُمُ الْغِطآءَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...I bear witness that most surely Allah unveiled for you the
curtain...[^32]

Sharp inner vision is attainable by every human being who purifies his
spirit. The reason why many of us do not enjoy this kind of vision, is
the murkiness of our hearts. Following is a tradition narrated from the
Holy Prophet (S) worthy of reflection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْلاَ تَكْثِيْرٌ فِيْ كَلاَمِكُمْ وَتَمْرِيْجٌ فِيْ قُلُوْبِكُمْ
لَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا أَرَى وَلَسَمِعْتُمْ مَا أَسْمَعُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Was it not for your loquaciousness and confusion in your hearts, you
would have surely seen what I see, and you would have surely heard what
I hear.[^33]

In fact the faithful human being is required to behold the kernel of the
universe. Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلَمْ يَنْظُرُوا في‏ مَلَكُوتِ السَّماواتِ وَ الأَرْضِ وَما خَلَقَ
اللَّهُ مِنْ شَيْ‏ءٍ وَأَنْ عَسى‏ أَنْ يَكُونَ قَدِ اقْتَرَبَ
أَجَلُهُمْ فَبِأَيِّ حَديثٍ بَعْدَهُ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Have they not contemplated the dominions of the heavens and the
earth,** ***and whatever things Allah has created, and that maybe their
time has already drawn near? So what discourse will they believe after
this?! (7:185)***

### 6. Immersed in God (Rabbaniyyun)

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَـكِن كُونُواْ رَبَّانِيِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But be godly people...(3:79)***

And in one of the salutational recitals we address the companions of
Imam al-Husayn (AS) in the following way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ ايّهَا الرّبانيّون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you, ***O Rabbaniyyun**...*[^34]

This verse talks about the great spiritual status of the noble
companions of Imam al-Husayn (AS). *Rabbaniyyun* is the plural of
*Rabbani*, which according to some lexicographers like al-Turayhi
denotes ‘one who is perfect in both knowledge and action’[^35] Others
translate ‘*Rabbani*’ more accurately and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الربّانِي هو المنسوب الى الرّب وزيادة الالف والنون فيه تدل علي
المبالغة فِي النسبة فتكون المعنى: من كان شديد الاختصاص بالرب وكثير
الاشتغال بعبوديته وعبادته، ويجوز ايضا ان يكون منسوبا الى الرّب بمعناه
المصدرى فيدل علي المبالغة فِى تربية الناس وتدبيرهم...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Rabbani* رَبَّانِيْ is one who is attributed to الربَ’the Lord’ and the
additional ‘*alif*’ and ‘*nun*’ in the word is to denote intensification
in attribution, and hence the meaning of the word would be: One who is
intensely attributed to the Lord and absorbed in His submission and
worship; and the word can also be related to الربّthe Lord in its
infinitive (*masdar*) sense, so that it would mean intensity in training
the people and controlling their affairs...[^36]

And both the meanings can be true together.

### 7. Spiritual Sovereignty

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْنَا يَا نَارُ كُونِي بَرْدًا وَسَلاَمًا عَلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We said: O fire! be a comfort and peace to Ibrahim! (21:59)***

Jabir narrates from Imam al-Baqir (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الْحُسَيْنُ بْن عَلِيّ لاَصْحَابِهِ قَبْلَ أَنْ يُقْتَلَ: إِنَّ
رَسُوْلَ اللهِ قَالَ: يَا بُنَيَّ إِنَّكَ سَتُسَاقُ إِلَى الْعِرَاقِ،
وَهِيَ أَرْضٌ قَدْ اِلْتَقَى بِهَا النَّبِيُّوْنَ، وَأَوْصِيَاءُ
النَّبِيِّيْنَ، وَهِيَ أَرْضٌ تُدْعى “عَمُوْرَا” وَإِنَّكَ
تُسْتَشْهَدُ بِهَا وَيُسْتَشْهَدُ مَعَكَ جَمَاعَةٌ مِنْ أَصْحَابِكَ
لاَ يَجِدُوْنَ أَلَمَ مَسِّ الْحَدِيْدِ، وَتَلاَ: قُلْنَا يَا نَارُ
كُوْنِيْ بَرْدًا وَسَلاَمًا عَلَى إِبْرَاهِيْم تَكُوْنُ الْحَرْبُ
عَلَيْكَ وَعَلَيْهِمْ بَرْدًا وَ سَلاَمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Before his martyrdom, Imam al-Husayn bin ‘Ali said to his companions:
Indeed the Apostle of Allah (S) said [to me]: O my dear young son,
surely you will be led to ‘Iraq; it is a land where Prophets of Allah
and Successors of the Prophets have met; It is a land called ‘Amura. And
indeed you shall be martyred there together **with a group among your
companions who would not sense the pain of the touch of iron**. Then
Imam al-Husayn (AS) read the verse***: ‘O Fire, be cool and peaceful for
Ibrahim’ (21:59).*** The war will be cool and peaceful on you and
them.[^37]

Explaining this situation of the Imam, the grand Ayatullah Jawadi Amuli
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ووفقا لرواية الامام الباق فإن جنود الحسين يوم عآشوراء لم يكونوا
يستشعروا آلام الضرب والطعن و الجراح إلا بما تولده القرصة من ألمٍ...
لماذا؟ لأن الروح هي مصدر الألم والفرح. يصوم احدهم فيشعر بوطأة الظمأ و
الجوع...و يصوم الآخر فلا نرى فيه إلا النشاط والابتهاج...اليست الظروف
الفيزيائية متساوية للاثنين...فلماذا يتعذب الاول و ينطلق الآخر؟! لانّ
الروح لدي الثانِي مشدودة الى نقطة بعيدة عن الظروف المادية. و لقد كان
ابطال كربلاء من تلك الروح العظيمة المبهورة بالغيب...
  </p>
</blockquote>

**According to a tradition from Imam al-Baqir (AS) the army of al-Husayn
(AS) did not feel the pain of the blows and wounds on the ‘Ashura’ day
save a pinch...why is that?** This is because the spirit is the origin
of pain and happiness. One of you may fast and feel the pangs of hunger
and thirst...whereas another would fast but we would find in him nothing
but happiness and high-spiritedness...aren’t the physical conditions
similar for both? So why is the first in torment while the second does
not feel anything? This is because the spirit of the second is attached
to a realm distant from the material conditions. Indeed the gallant
warriors of Karbala’ were among those great spirits overcome by the
unseen plane of existence.[^38]

### 8. Worshippers through Awareness (al-’Ubbad)

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُّحَمَّدٌ رَّسُولُ اللَّهِ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ أَشِدَّاء عَلَى
الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاء بَيْنَهُمْ تَرَاهُمْ رُكَّعًا سُجَّدًا
يَبْتَغُونَ فَضْلًا مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَرِضْوَانًا سِيمَاهُمْ فِي
وُجُوهِهِم مِّنْ أَثَرِ السُّجُودِ ذَلِكَ مَثَلُهُمْ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ
وَمَثَلُهُمْ فِي الإنجِيلِ كَزَرْعٍ أَخْرَجَ شَطأَهُ فَآزَرَهُ
فَاسْتَغْلَظَ فَاسْتَوَى عَلَى سُوقِهِ يُعْجِبُ الزُّرَّاعَ لِيَغِيظَ
بِهِمُ الْكُفَّارَ وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا
الصَّالِحَاتِ مِنْهُم مَّغْفِرَةً وَأَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and those with him are firm of
heart against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves; you will
see them bowing down, prostrating themselves, seeking grace from Allah
and pleasure; their marks are in their faces because of the effect of
prostration; that is their description in the Tawrat and their
description in the Injeel; like as seed-produce that puts forth its
sprout, then strengthens it, so it becomes stout and stands firmly on
its stem, delighting the sowers that He may enrage the unbelievers on
account of them; Allah has promised those among them who believe and do
good, forgiveness and a great reward. (48:29)***

Sayyid Radhi al-Din bin Tawus al-Hasani (may Allah elevate his noble
spirit) in his well-known *maqtal*, *al-Luhuf ‘ala Qatla al-Tufuf*
narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ بَاتَ الْحُسَيْنُ وَ أَصْحَابُهُ تِلْكَ اللَّيْلَةَ وَ لَهُمْ
دَوِيٌّ كَدَوِيِّ النَّحْلِ مَا بَيْنَ رَاكِعٍ وَ سَاجِدٍ وَ قَائِمٍ
وَ قَاعِد...
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Al-Husayn and his companions were awake the whole night [of ‘Ashura’]
and **their environment resembled an area permeated with the sound of
the humming of bees**. **[In other words all of them were busy in the
remembrance of Allah and the sound of their whisperings permeated the
entire environment.] Some were in the state of** ***ruku’*****, others
in the state of** ***sujud*****, some standing and others sitting...**
[^39]

And al-Qazwini narrates from the History of *al-A’tham al-Kufi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنه ما نام في تلك الليلة الحسين ولا احد من اصحابه واعوانه إلى الصبح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely that night neither al-Husayn nor anyone of his companions and
supporters slept until morning.[^40]

Worship is undoubtedly a merit when it is not reduced to mere actions
and recitals. The companions of al-Husayn (AS) were men who worshipped
Almighty Allah out of awareness and knowledge. Their appellations such
as *ahibba’Allah (Divine lovers)*, *‘ushshaq (intense lovers)* and
*kushifa lahum al-ghita (the curtains were unveiled for them)*, all
demonstrate their knowledge and deep insight. This is because such
qualities are essential corollaries of knowledge, without which they
carry no meaning. It is such kind of worship that is natural and
praiseworthy.

Expression of utter humility near the Absolute Perfect Being can only
come about naturally after one realizes whom he is infront of. Such
realization is in stages. Sometimes one has conceptual knowledge about
the Creator and thus he maintains a degree of humility in prayer, but
that cannot be compared to one who has presential knowledge of Allah. It
is such knowledge about which Imam ‘Ali (AS) talks in a conversation
with a *rabbi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ اَبِي الْحَسَن الْمَوْصَلِي عَنْ اَبِيْ عَبْدِ اللهِ قاَلَ: جَاءَ
حِبْرٌ إِلى اَمِيْرِ الْمُؤْمِنِيْنَ، فَقَالَ: يَا اَمِيْرَ
الْمُؤْمِنِيْنَ هَلْ رَاَيْتَ رَبّكَ حِيْنَ عَبَدْتَهُ؟ قَالَ:
فَقَالَ: وَيْلَكْ لَمْ اَكُنْ لأَعْبُدَ رَبّا لَمْ اَرَه، قَالَ:
وَكَيْفَ رَاَيْتَهُ؟ قَالَ: وَيْلَكْ لاَ تُدْرِكُهُ الْعُيُوْنَ فِي
مُشَاهَدَةِ الاَبْصَارِ وَلكِن رَاَتْهُ الْقُلُوْبُ بِحَقَائِقِ
الاِيْمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-Hasan al-Mawsali narrates from Abi ‘Abdillah [al-Sadiq (AS)] who
said: A rabbi came to Amir al-Mu’minin (AS), and said: ‘Ya Amir
al-Mu’minin, did you see your Lord when you worshipped Him? Imam (AS)
said: ‘Woe unto you! Eyes do not comprehend Him in their ocular vision,
but hearts see Him through the realities of conviction.[^41]

Worship without knowledge and awareness, on the contrary is
insignificant and sometimes dangerous too. Consider the following
traditions:

a. Imam ‘Ali (AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلاَ لاَ خَيْرَ فِي عِبَادَةٍ لاً فِقْهَ فِيْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed there is no good in that worship that is without
understanding.[^42]

b. Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ عِبَادَةَ إِلاَّ بِالتّفَقّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no worship save with understanding[^43]

c. Imam ‘Ali (AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَكّنُوْا فِيْ اَنْفُسِكُمْ مَعْرِفَةَ مَا تَعْبُدُوْنَ، حَتّى
يَنْفَعَكُمْ مَا تُحَرّكُوْنَ مِنَ الْجَوَارِحِ بِعِبَادَةِ مَنْ
تَعْرِفُوْنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Settle in your hearts the knowledge of Whom you worship so that the
members that you move in worship of Whom you know can benefit you.[^44]

d. Imam ‘Ali (AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ خَيْرَ فِيْ عِبَادَةٍ لاَ عِلْمَ فِيْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no good in that worship which accompanies no knowledge.[^45]

It is interesting to note that the expression ‘They had the humming as
the humming of bees’ لَهُمْ دَوِيّ كَدَوِيّ النّحْلِ that has come for
the noble companions of Imam al-Husayn (AS) has also come with regard to
the Khawarij, who were adamant in their ignorant stance and ready to
fight against Imam ‘Ali (AS) in the battle of Nahrawan. Jundub bin
Zuhayr al-Azdi narrates:

When the Kharijites separated from Imam ‘Ali (AS), he set out to fight
against them and we set out with him. I reached their camps, and found
that their environment was covered with the sound of the recitation of
Qur\`an. [The words used in the tradition is *lahum dawiyyun kadawiyy
al-nahl* (they had the sound of the humming of bee)]. Among them were
those who wore burnoose and had calluses on their foreheads. When I saw
that, doubt crept my heart; so I separated myself from them, descended
from my horseback, fixed my lance on the ground, and kept my shield, and
placed my armor over it.

And I stood in prayer while I cried: “O Allah if fighting against them
is according to Your desire, then show me something by which I know that
it is the truth; and if it is not according to Your desire, then divert
me from the battle. Suddenly Imam ‘Ali came and descended from the horse
of the Apostle of Allah, and stood in prayer, and then suddenly a man
came and said: ‘They [the Kharijites] have crossed the river. Then
another one came and firmly tied his mount, and said: They crossed it
and left. Thereafter Amir al-Mu’minin (AS) said: ‘They have not crossed
the river, nor will they cross it, and they surely will be killed near
it; this has been informed to me by Allah and His Apostle.’

The Imam (AS) [then] said: ‘O Jundub, do you see that hill?’ I said,
‘Yes.’ He said: ‘Surely the Apostle of Allah (upon whom be peace)
narrated to me that they would fight near there.’ As for us, we would
first send a messenger unto them, who would invite them to the Book of
Allah and the Sunna of His Prophet, and they would shoot at his face
with arrows, and he would be killed. Jundub says: We went towards them
and saw them still in their army not yet departed or left. So the Imam
(AS) called his men and gathered them, then he came near their ranks
saying: ‘Who will take this Qur\`an and walk towards these people and
call them to the Book of Allah and the Sunna of the Prophet (S)? One who
does so, would be killed and attain Paradise. None save a youth from
Banu ‘Amir bin Sa’sa’a responded to this call.

The Imam (AS) however, on observing his young age, said: ‘Return to
where you stood.’ Then he made the same announcement again, and none
save the same youth responded positively to his call. So the Imam (AS)
said: ‘Take it [the Qur\`an], but mind you that you would be killed.’ So
he walked with it unto them until he came to a place where they could
hear him. He called them, and they shot at him with arrows, and he
returned to us, while his face resembled a porcupine (for he was
surrounded with arrows). So ‘Ali (AS) said: Attack them! So we attacked
them. Jundub says: The doubt [that had crept my heart earlier) came out,
and I [fought] and slew...’[^46]

Therefore the yardstick to judge the truly worshipful nature of a person
is not by the quantity of his worship, but the quality of his worship.
The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي خَلَقَ الْمَوْتَ وَالْحَيَاةَ لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ
أَحْسَنُ عَمَلاً وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفُورُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***...Who created death and life that He may try you-- which of you is
best in deeds; and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving. (67:2)***

Ample traditions explicitly say that the value of one’s worship is
according to one’s understanding and intellect. Observe the following:

a. The Holy Prophet (S) addressing a people who praised a man [for his
worship] said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَيْفَ عَقْلُ الرّجُلِ؟ قَالُوا: يَا رَسُوْلَ اللهِ نُخْبِرُكَ عَنْ
اِجْتِهَادِهِ فِي الْعِبَادَةِ وَاَصْنَافِ الْخَيْرِ، وَتَسْاَلنَا
عَنْ عَقْلِهِ؟ ! فَقَالَ: إِنّ الاَحْمَقَ يُصِيْبُ بِحُمْقِهِ اَعْظَمَ
مِنْ فُجُوْرِ الْفَاجِرِ، وَإِنّمَا يُرْتَفَعُ الْعِبَادُ غَدًا فِي
الدّرَجَاتِ وَيَنَالُوْنَ الزّلْفَى مِنْ رَبّهِمْ عَلىَ قَدَرِ
عُقُوْلِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How is the man’s intellect? They said: O Apostle of Allah, we inform you
about his struggle in worship and good actions, and you ask us about his
intellect? Thereupon the Prophet (S) said: Indeed an idiot (*ahmaq*) due
to his silliness can perform something graver than the crimes of
criminals; **and surely the servants [of Allah] would only be elevated
tomorrow in stations and reach the proximity of their Lord according to
their intellects.**[^47]

b. Muhammad bin Sulayman al-Daylami reports from his father who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْتُ لأَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ فُلاَنٌ مِنْ عِبَادَتِهِ وَدِينِهِ
وَفَضْلِهِ فَقَالَ كَيْفَ عَقْلُهُ قُلْتُ لاَ أَدْرِي فَقَالَ إِنَّ
الثَّوَابَ عَلَى قَدْرِ الْعَقْلِ‏...
  </p>
</blockquote>

I informed Imam al-Sadiq (AS) about the *‘ibada* and religiousness and
merits of a certain person. **Thereupon he asked me: how is his
intellect/understanding?** I said: I do not know. So he said: ‘Surely
reward is according to one’s intellect/understanding.’[^48]

c. The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْعِلْمُ إِمَامُ الْعَمَلِ، وَالْعَمَلُ تَابِعُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Knowledge is the leader of action and the action is its follower.[^49]

Although the Khawarij were well known for their excessive worship and
recitation of Qur\`an, their ignorance never allowed them to benefit
from their worship or recitation. Perhaps the following verse of the
Holy Qur\`an aptly describes their example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ ضَلَّ سَعْيُهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَهُمْ
يَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ يُحْسِنُونَ صُنْعًا أُولَئِكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَلِقَائِهِ فَحَبِطتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فَلاَ نُقِيمُ
لَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَزْنًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those whose endeavour goes awry in the life of the world, while they
suppose they are doing good.’ They are the ones who deny the signs of
their Lord and the encounter with Him So their works have failed. On the
Day of Resurrection We will not set for them any weight. (18:104-105)***

They struggled to station themselves in the surface of religion, but
were deprived of that too. They had not understood the Holy Qur\`an and
thus were ready to fight against the very epitome of the Qur\`an. When
Imam ‘Ali (AS) tried to explain to them the deception that had entangled
them, they thought they understood religion more than one who was
literally chosen by the Holy Prophet (S) as his *wasi* (vicegerent).

So wild had their attitude become that they had the audacity to
slaughter a sincere companion of the Holy Prophet (S) who was loyal to
his teachings, and slit the womb of his expectant wife. The latter’s
crime was merely loyalty to Imam ‘Ali (AS).

Although this is past history for us, the Khariji trend has remained up
to this day. The Wahhabis, due to their identical attitude, can aptly be
known as the ‘neo-Kharijites’.

What is interesting is that even Westerners have likened the Wahhabis
with the Khawarij. For example, Jon Kyl, a Republican Senator from
Arizona writes in the *Front Page Magazine*:

Islamic extremism as an ideology is hardly new with the first movement
that resembles today’s phenomenon, known as the Kharijites, appearing
shortly after the birth of Islam in the 7th century.

Later it was expounded on by various Islamic scholars, such as Ibn
Taymiya in the 13th century, but it did not become institutionalized
until the mid-18th century when the theories promulgated by the radical
cleric Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab were accepted and imposed as the
state religion of his realm by the founder of the House of Saud. [^50]

Esposito, in his Islam and Politics writes:

“Religious zeal and military might merged in a religiopolitical movement
that waged holy war with a zeal reminiscent of the early Kharijites,
viewing all Muslims who resisted as unbelievers. The tribes of Arabia
were subdued and united in the name of Islamic egalitarianism.”[^51]

The apparently worshipful attitude of the Kharijites, both present and
past, should not lead one to surmise that worship in great quantity is
not praiseworthy. Those who have attained realization would naturally be
pulled towards constant worship. They would, in terms of a tradition, be
‘amorous lovers’ of worship. Consider the following tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبي عبد الله قال: قَالَ رَسُوْلُ اللهِ: اَفْضَلُ النّاسِ مَنْ
عَشِقَ الْعِبَادَةَ فَعَانَقَهَا وَاَحَبّهَا بِقَلْبِهِ، وَبَاشَرَهَا
بِجَسَدِهِ وَتَفَرّغَ لَهَا، فَهُوَ لاَيُبَالِي عَلى مَا اَصْبَحَ مِنَ
الدّنْيَا عَلىَ عُسْرٍ اَمْ عَلى يُسْرٍ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) says: The Apostle of Allah (S) said: The best of
people is one who intensely loves worship (*‘ashiqa al-’ibada*),
embraces it, loves it through his heart, and performs it with his body
and occupies himself with it; Thereafter he does not care about the
situation he faces in the world, whether it be difficult or easy.[^52]

If we reflect on some historical accounts of the Holy Prophet (S) and
his Infallible Progeny (AS) we would come to realize how abundantly they
engaged in worship. It was their exalted state that made them constantly
absorbed in prayer. It is reported about Hadhrat Zahra’ (AS) that she
would stand in prayer so much that her feet would get swollen[^53]. And
concerning Imam ‘Ali (AS) Imam al-Sadiq (AS) narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ دَخَلَ اَبُو جَعْفَرٍ عَلىَ اَبِيْهِ فَإِذَا هُوَ قَدْ بَلَغَ
مِنَ الْعِبَادَةِ مَا لَمْ يَبْلُغْهُ اَحَدٌ، وَقَدْ اِصْفَرّ لَوْنُهُ
مِنَ السّهْر، وَرمضت عَيْنَاهُ مِنَ الْبُكَاءِ، وَدَبّرَتْ جِبْهَتُهُ
مِنَ السّجُوْدِ، وَوَرّمَتْ قَدَمَاهُ مِنَ الْقِيَامِ فِيْ الصّلاَةِ.
قَالَ: فَقَالَ اَبُو جَعْفَرْ: فَلَمْ اَمْلِكْ حِيْنَ رَاَيْتُهُ
بِتِلْكَ اْلحَالِ مِنَ الْبُكَاءِ فَبَكَيْتُ رَحْمَةً لَهُ، وَإِذَا
هُوَ يُفَكّرُ، فَالْتَفَتَ إِلَيّ بَعْدَ هَنِيْئَةٍ مِنْ دُخُوْلِيْ،
فَقَالَ: يَا بُنَيّ اَعْطنِيْ بَعْضَ تِلْكَ الصّحُفِ الّتِيْ فِيْهَا
عِبَادَةُ عَلِيّ، فَاَعْطيْتُهُ، فَقَرَاَ فِيْهَا يَسِيْرًا ثُمّ
تَرَكَهَا مِنْ يَدِهِ تَضَجّرًا وَقَالَ: مَنْ يَقْوَى عَلىَ عِبَادَةِ
عَلِيّ بْنِ اَبِيْ طالِب؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely Abu Ja’far came to his father, while he had worshipped Allah so
much that none would equal him, and due to night vigil his complexion
had turned pale; his eyes had become sore out of weeping, and his
forehead had sunk in due to a lot of prostration, and his legs became
swollen out of standing in prayer. Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: [Seeing
this] Abu Ja’far [al-Baqir (AS)] said: I could not control myself from
weeping when I saw him in that state; so I wept in mercy for him. And
suddenly he lay contemplating. Then after a little while, he faced me,
and said: ‘O my dear little son, give me some of those manuscripts that
speak about the worship of ‘Ali (AS); so I gave him, and he read from it
a little, and then left it in dissatisfaction and said: ‘Who can worship
like ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (AS)’?[^54]

These and many other incidents show how absorbed were the Ahl al-Bayt
(AS) in the worship of Allah. Their worship, however, was out of insight
and knowledge of the worship and the Worshipped One. So absorbed were
they, that when an arrow is removed from the feet of Imam ‘Ali while he
is in prayer, he does not sense any pain whatsoever.

In conclusion, it should be realized that the companions of Imam
al-Husayn (AS) were worshippers who worshipped Allah as a natural
outcome of their knowledge and vision. If such worship is done
constantly and in abundance, it is highly recommended and praiseworthy.
But if it is performed without knowledge, it has very little or no value
at all.

### 9. Strangers (Ghuraba’)

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِجَالٌ لاَ تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلاَ بَيْعٌ عَن ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
وَإِقَامِ الصَّلاَةِ وَإِيتَاء الزَّكَاةِ يَخَافُونَ يَوْمًا
تَتَقَلَّبُ فِيهِ الْقُلُوبُ وَالأبْصَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the remembrance
of Allah and the*** ***keeping up of prayer and the giving of poor-rate;
they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes shall turn about.***
***(Holy Qur\`an, 24:37)***

The Holy Prophet (S) was once asked about *ghuraba’* (strangers in the
real sense of the word), and he (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلَّذِيْنَ يُحْيُوْنَ مَا اَمَاتَ النَاسُ مِنْ سُنَّتِيْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

They are those who will revive what the people ruined from my
Sunna.[^55]

Sacrificing themselves for the revival of religion, the companions of
Imam al-Husayn (AS) steadfastly stood against the enemies. Earlier Imam
al-Husayn (AS) had permitted them to leave if they wished to, but they
never dared to even think of deserting him. Among the rest of the
Muslims, they were truly the *ghuraba’* whose stations others never
appreciated.

Imam al-Husayn (AS), however, was even more *gharib* then them, for he
occupied a station that even his companions never comprehended. It is
therefore correct to call him *Gharib al-ghuraba’* (The stranger among
the strangers (his companions)). In one of the salutational recitals we
address Imam al-Husayn (AS) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسّلاَمُ عَلىَ خَامِسِ اَصْحَابِ اَهْلِ الْكِسَاءِ، اَلسّلاَمُ عَلَى
غَرِيْبِ الْغُرَبَاء...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you O the fifth member of the people of the cloak, Peace
be unto you, **O stranger of the strangers**...[^56]

[^1]: Al-Mustafawi, Al-Tahqiq fi Kalimat al-Qur\`an al-Karim, v.4, p.
254

[^2]: Thiqat al-Islam al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v. 1, p. 133

[^3]: Al-Isfahani, Al-Mufradat fi Gharib al-Qur\`an, p. 392

[^4]: Mulla Hadi Sabzawari, Sharh al-Man³uma, v.5, p. 113

[^5]: Kamal Kharrazi, Mulla Sadra’s Idea of Soul-Body Relation and its
Consquences in Psychology,
http://www.mullasadra.org/New\_Site/English/Paper%20Bank/Anthropology/kam...

[^6]: Mulla Sadra, Asfar, vol.9, p. 112

[^7]: Imam ‘Ali , Nahj al-Balaghah, v.4, p. 7

[^8]: Shaykh al-al-Tabrasi, Majma’ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur\`an, v.1,
p. 190

[^9]: Mulla Hadi Sabzawari, Sharh al-Asma’ al-Husna, v.2, p. 51

[^10]: Ibn Qulawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, pp. 175-176

[^11]: Al-Mashhadi, Al-Mazar, p. 426

[^12]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Kitab al-Irshad, p. 43

[^13]: Al-Raghib al-Isfahani, Mufradatu Alfa¨ al-Qur\`an, p. 475

[^14]: Al-Tha’labi, Tafsir al-Tha’labi, v.3, p. 334

[^15]: Shaykh al-Saduq, Ma’ani al-Akhbar, p. 156

[^16]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Kitab al-Irshad, p. 43

[^17]: Ibid.

[^18]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.41, p. 295

[^19]: Sayyid al-Jaza’iri, al-Anwar al-Nu’maniyya, v.3, p. 166

[^20]: Ibn ‘Arabi, al-Futuhat al-Makkiyya, v.4, p. 259

[^21]: Al-Mashhadi, al-Mazar, p. 464

[^22]: Al-Zubaydi, Taj al-’Arus, v.1, p. 393

[^23]: Pierre Cachia (University of Edinburgh), “THE MONITOR, A
Dictionary of Arabic Grammatical Terms”, p. 107, published in 1973 by
Longman Group Ltd.

[^24]: Al-Jaza’iri, Al-Anwar al-Nu’maniyya, v.3, p. 161

[^25]: Al-Shahid al-Awwal, al-Mazar, p. 129

[^26]: Al-Zubaydi, Taj al-’Arus, v.5, p. 306

[^27]: Ha’iri, Muqtaniyat al-Durar wa Multaqatat al-Thamar, v.12, p. 115

[^28]: Haqqi, Tafsir Ruh al-Bayan, v.10, p. 393

[^29]: In more accurate terms, the Beloved has no veil. We are full of
veils. We must therefore struggle to eradicate the veils from our side
so that we can vision the face of the Only Beloved.

[^30]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.44, p. 316

[^31]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.44, p.297

[^32]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 45, p.70

[^33]: ‘Allama al-Tabataba\`i, Tafsir al-Mizan, v.5, p. 270

[^34]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.4, p. 574

[^35]: Al-Turayhi, Tafsir Gharib al-Qur\`an, p. 100

[^36]: Ayatullah Sayyid Mahmud Taleqani, Partuwi az Qur\`an, v.5, p. 185

[^37]: Qutb al-Din al-Rawandi, al-Khara’ij wa al-Jarayih, v.2, p. 848

[^38]: Ayatullah Jawadi Amuli, Thawrat al-’Ishq al-Ilahi, p. 232

[^39]: Sayyid Radhi al-Din bin Tawus, al-Luhuf ‘ala Qatla al-Tufuf, p.91

[^40]: Al-Imam al-Husayn wa Ashabuhu, v.1, p. 264

[^41]: Al-’Amili, al-Fusul al-Muhimma fi Usul al-A’imma, v.1, p.180

[^42]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, v.1, p. 36

[^43]: Shaykh al-Rayshahri, Mizan al-Hikma, v.3, p. 1798

[^44]: Ibid.

[^45]: Ibid.

[^46]: al-Rawandi, al-Khara’ij, v.2, p.755

[^47]: Ibn Shu’ba al-Bahrani, Tuhaf al-’Uqul, p. 54

[^48]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, v.1, p. 11

[^49]: Shaykh al-Rayshahri, Mizan al-Hikma, v.3, p. 2035

[^50]: Jon Kyl, Terrorism: Growing Wahhabi Influence in the United
States, http://www.FrontPageMagazine.com, July 3, 2003

[^51]: Esposito, Islam and Politics, page 36.

[^52]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.2, p. 83

[^53]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.43, p.84

[^54]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.46, p.75

[^55]: Al-Azhari, Mu’jam Tahdhib al-Lugha, v.3, p. 2646

[^56]: Al-Mashhadi, al-Mazar, p. 497


