Chapter 9: O Aba ‘Abdillah…
===========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ لَقَدْ عَظُمَتِ الرَّزِيَّةُ وَجَلَّتْ
وَعَظُمَتِ الْمُصِيبَةُ بِكَ عَلَيْنَا وَعَلَى جَمِيعِ أَهْلِ
الإِسْلامِ وَجَلَّتْ وَعَظُمَتْ مُصِيبَتُكَ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ عَلَى
جَمِيعِ أَهْلِ السَّمَاوَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Aba ‘Abdillah, I swear by Allah, the loss is great; and the calamity
on us and all the enthusiasts of Islam because of what befell you is
great and severe. And the calamity that befell you is reckoned by all
the inhabitants of the heavens in the heavens as great and severe.

Commentary
----------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

O utterly obedient servant of Allah...

Once again we *call* Imam al-Husayn (AS), although we realize that he
can listen to us and behold our presence wherever we are. And why employ
the vocative particle *ya* to call him? We said in the beginning that
*ya* is used for a person who is quite far. The reason is that we would
like to express our deep veneration for his exalted self.

This is because although he may ontologically be very close to us, his
exalted spirit is utterly remote from our inferior level. The most
important thing, however, is to be able to see his noble self when we
address him. If we purify our souls and behold the realm beyond this
world we may be able to vision what most of the people are deprived of
due to their accumulation of sins.

The very fact that we *address* Imam al-Husayn (AS) presumes that the
*mukhatab* (addressee) is present before us. Otherwise why don’t we
employ the third person pronoun and invoke *salam* on his exalted being?
And since the traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) teach the believers to
always aspire for the best, whenever we recite this salutation we must
crave to attain the station that can facilitate a direct communication
with Aba ‘Abdillah al-Husayn (AS). When such an encounter is made
possible, the heart breaks and the rivers of tears flow and the believer
melts down before *al-witr al-mawtur*.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ لَقَدْ عَظُمَتِ الرَّزِيَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O utterly obedient servant of Allah, by Allah, the loss is great.

Some commentators of this sacred *Ziyarat* say that the vocative
particle *ya* is once again brought in this verse to renew the feelings
of sorrow for what befell on Imam al-Husayn (AS). Al-Kashani supporting
this view says, “*Juddida nida’uhu litajdid al-huzn...*”[^1] (calling
the Imam was renewed due the renewal of sorrow...).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ عَظُمَتِ الرَّزِيَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

By Allah, the loss is great.

The letter ‘*lam*’ (لَ ) in لَقَدْ *laqad* is employed for taking an
oath. And since the particle قَدْ ‘*qad*’ here appears before a past
tense verb *‘azhumat* (*is great*), it denotes emphasis. Hence *laqad
‘azhumat* would mean ‘By Allah, surely great has been...’. The origin of
the word ‘*raziyya*’ (رَزِيَّة) is the word *razi’a* (رَزِيْئَة) with a
*hamza* (ء) after the letter *ya*’. Some have merely translated it as a
calamity. However, it denotes a specific kind of calamity: calamity due
to loss. Al-Kashani in his commentary says that it specifically refers
to the calamity of the loss of the dear and beloved ones[^2]. However,
it is also used for a calamity of loss in the general sense.

Before his departure from this mortal world, the Holy Prophet (S) in his
state of illness sought a paper and pen to write something very
important for the Muslim Umma. An ignorant man nearby said, “Indeed pain
has overtaken the Messenger of Allah, and you have the Qur\`an with you.
The Book of Allah is sufficient for us”.

This followed a difference of opinion among people near the Holy Prophet
(S). On seeing this chaotic state of affairs, he told them to disperse
from there. ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas in reference to the impediment that
hampered the Holy Prophet (S) to write down the important direction,
would employ the word *raziyya* and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الرَّزِيَّةَ كُلَّ الرَّزِيَّة مَا حَالَ بَيْنَ رَسُوْلِ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَسَلَّمَ وَبَيْنَ أَنْ يَكْتُبَ لَهُمْ ذَلِكَ
الْكِتَابُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely the calamity, a total calamity hindered the Messenger of Allah
from writing for them that testament..[^3]

The verb رَزَءَ *raza’a* or *razi’a* literally means ‘he lessened’ or
‘he diminished’[^4]. Al-Firuzabadi in his *al-Qamus al-Muhit*, giving an
example of how this verb is used, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا رَزِئْتُهُ بِْالْكَسْرِ مَا نَقَصْتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ma razi’tuhu* means I have not lessened[^5]

Therefore *laqad* *‘azhumat al-raziyya* means ‘By Allah, indeed the loss
is great.’

This phrase talks about the greatness and intensity of the calamity that
the believers faced by losing an Infallible Imam of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS)
who enjoyed a very exalted rank near Allah and represented Allah on
earth. Only those who comprehend the greatness of such a Divine leader
can tangibly feel the loss. Amir al-mu’minin ‘Ali (AS) says in a
meaningful tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلَّمَا عَظُمَ قَدْرُ الشَّيْ‏ءِ الْمُتَنَافَسِ فِيهِ عَظُمَتِ
الرَّزِيَّةُ لِفَقْدِه
  </p>
</blockquote>

...so, the greater the value of the envied entity the greater the
calamity of its loss.

And since the sanctity of Imam al-Husayn (AS) is such that its essence
is incomprehensible, the gravity of losing his personality is likewise
incomprehensible. In addition, the difficult circumstances that Imam
al-Husayn (AS) and his noble progeny faced and the manner in which their
sanctity was violated leave such wounds in the hearts of his lovers that
make them tearful forever. Ibrahim bin Abi Mahmud narrates from Imam
al-Ridha\` (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ يَوْمَ الْحُسَيْنِ اَقْرَحَ جُفُوْنَنَا وَاَسْبَلَ دُمُوْعَنَا
وَاَذَلَّ عَزِيْزَنَا، بِاَرْضِ كَرْبٍ وَبَلاَءٍ، وَاَوْرَثَتْنَا
الْكَرْبُ وَالْبَلاَءُ اِلى يَوْمِ الانْقِضَاءِ، فَعَلَى مِثْلِ
الْحُسَيْنِ فَلْيَبْكِ الْبَاكُوْنَ، فَاِنَّ الْبُكَاءَ عَلَيْهِ يَحُط
الذُّنُوْبَ الْعِظَامَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely the day of al-Husayn wounded our eyes and made our tears pour
down and dishonored our venerated ones in the land of sorrow and
tribulation, and thereby it **made** ***us inherit sorrow and calamity
until the final day***, and therefore the mourners must weep for the
likes of al-Husayn, for surely weeping over him wipes out major sins
...[^6]

Imam al-Mahdi (AS) in his well-known *Ziyarat al-Nahiya* addressing Imam
al-Husayn (AS) cries:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَئِنْ اَخَّرَتْنِي الدُّهُوُرُ،وَعَاقَنِيْ عَنْ نَصْرِكَ
الْمَقْدُوْرُ،وَلَمْ اَكُنْ لِمَنْ حَارَبَكَ مُحَارِبًا، وَلِمَنْ
نَصَبَ لَكَ الْعَدَاوَةَ مُنَاصِبًا، فَلأنْدُبَنَّكَ صَبَاحًا
وَمَسَاءً، وَلاَبْكِيَنَّ عَلَيْكَ بَدَلَ الدّمُوْعِ دَمًا، حَسْرَةً
عَلَيْكَ وَتَأسُّفًا عَلَى مَا دَهَاكَ وَتَلَهُّفًا، حَتَّى اَمُوْتَ
بِلَوْعَةِ الْمُصَابِ وَغُصَّةِ الاكْتِيَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

But as I have been hindered by the course of time and as (Allah’s)
decree has prevented me from helping you, and as I could not fight those
who fought you, and was not able to show hostility to those who showed
hostility to you, I will, therefore, lament you morning and evening, and
will weep blood in place of tears, out of my anguish for you and my
sorrow for all that befell you, until I meet death from the pain of the
catastrophe and the choking grief.[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ عَظُمَتِ الرَّزِيَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

By Allah, the loss is great.

Before one tries to swear and say that the loss is great, one must have
knowledge about the same. Although we cannot even imagine the magnitude
of the loss that the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) encountered in the plains of
Karbala, it is important for us to search for authentic information
about the same, so that we may naturally express our sorrow as we recite
this particular phrase.

An Unparalleled Incident
------------------------

One of the reasons that make this calamity outstanding and unique is
that those who joined al-Husayn (AS) knew very well what awaited them.
Despite that, they chose with complete volition on their side, to
undertake this sacred journey and meet the calamities with open arms.
Imam al-Husayn (AS) made it very clear to them when he resolved to
embark on his journey to ‘Iraq that martyrdom is what awaits him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَانَ فِيْنَا بَاذِلاً مُهْجَتَهُ، مُوَطنًا عًلى لِقَاءِ اللهِ
نَفْسَهُ فَلْيَرْحَلْ مَعَنَا فَإِنّيْ رَاحِلٌ مُصْبِحًا إِنْ شَاءَ
اللهُ تَعَالى...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever is ready to sacrifice his soul for us, and has stationed
himself for meeting Allah, he must leave with us, for surely I will
leave tomorrow morning Insha Allah...[^8]

It is such a move in complete awareness of the horrendous massacre that
singles out the tragedy of Karbala. The late eminent scholar ‘Allama
Muhammad Taqi Ja’fari in response to a question asked as to why the
Karbala event is the most sorrowful of all events in history, said:

The important factor in the story of al-Husayn (AS) which cannot be
compared to any other event whatsoever is that it was out of complete
awareness and choice. At no moment did they lose their free will.
Furthermore, historical analysis shows that even at the very last moment
if the Imam (AS) would say ‘yes’ [to Yazid], not only would the
difficult situation be over, but he would be saved from that place, and
perhaps the next era would be his era...[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَلَّتْ وَعَظُمَتِ الْمُصِيبَةُ بِكَ عَلَيْنَاوَعَلَى جَمِيعِ أَهْلِ
الإِسْلامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

...and the calamity on us and all the enthusiasts of Islam because of
what befell on you is great and severe...

The past tense verb جَلَّتْ ‘*jallat*’ mentioned in the above phrase is
commonly translated in the same way as the verb *‘azhumat* (is great).
Some lexicographers however state that there is a fine difference
between the two verbs: whereas *‘azhumat* can apply for both material as
well as spiritual intensity, *jallat* is only correct for spiritual
greatness[^10]. Therefore this phrase implies that the calamity on us is
spiritually great. All that the Imam (AS) and his noble family members
as well as sincere companions faced has enormously hurt our spirits and
the spirit of every lover of Islam. In revealing the magnitude of the
tragedy, Imam al-Hasan (AS) addressing his brother says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَوْمَ كَيَوْمِكَ يَا اَبَا عَبْدِ الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no day like your Day O Aba ‘Abdillah.[^11]

And Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (AS) in one of his sermons says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَذِهِ الرَّزِيَّةُ الَّتِيْ لاَ مِثْلهَا رَزِيَّةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

...and this is a calamity the like of which there is no calamity.[^12]

And ‘Abdullah bin al-Fadhl narrates from Imam al-Sadiq (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ يَوْمَ قُتِلَ الْحُسَيْنُ اَعْظَمُ مُصِيْبَةً مِنْ جَمِيْعِ
سَائِرِ الاَيّامِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed the day of the martyrdom of al-Husayn is a day of greater
calamity then all other days...[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى جَمِيعِ أَهْلِ الإِسْلامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

and on all the members of the enthusiasts of Islam

The genitive construction *Ahl al-Islam* denotes ‘those who are intimate
and attached to Islam’. The literal meaning of the word *ahl* according
to some lexicographers is *uns* (intimacy) coupled with specific
relationship and attachment[^14]. The word Ah al-Bayt refers to the
people of a house, because they are intimate, attached, and have a
specific relationship to the house.

Therefore when we say that the loss and calamity is great on all the Ahl
al-Islam we mean that all those who really have intimacy, attachment and
relationship with Islam suffer with great loss and calamity. This is
where we must try to analyze ourselves and see whether we are from the
Ahl al-Islam or not.

The main reason why the Ahl al-Islam must express sorrow is that Imam
al-Husayn (AS) is the epitome of Islam. Naturally therefore, all the
lovers of Islam would tangibly feel sorrowful when any kind of calamity
befalls him.

In one of his counsels to his contemporary, Imam al-Baqir (AS)
describing the Ahl al-Bayt (AS), says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَحْنُ مَوَاضِعُ الرِّسَالَةِ وَنَحْنُ الدِّيْنُ‏...
  </p>
</blockquote>

And we are the places of the Divine Message, and we are the
Religion...[^15]

And in another tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (AS) informs his companion
Dawud:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا دَاوُدَ نَحْنُ الصَّلاَةُ فِي كِتَابِ اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
وَنَحْنُ الزَّكَاةُ وَنَحْنُ الصِّيَامُ وَنَحْنُ الْحَجُّ وَنَحْنُ
الشَّهْرُ الْحَرَامُ وَنَحْنُ الْبَلَدُ الْحَرَامُ وَنَحْنُ كَعْبَةُ
اللَّهِ وَنَحْنُ قِبْلَةُ اللَّه...
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Dawud, we are the prayer (*al-salat*) in the Book of Allah, the
Invincible and Exalted, and we are the poor rate (*zakat*), and we are
the fast (*al-siyam*), and we are the pilgrimage (*al-hajj*) and we are
the sacred month (*al-shahr al-haram*) and we are the sacred city
(*al-balad al-haram*) and we are the Ka’ba of Allah and we are the
*qibla* of Allah...[^16]

These traditions inform us that the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) were
epitomes of religion. Therefore love for religion in the true sense is
love for them, and vice versa.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَلَّتْ وَعَظُمَتْ مُصِيبَتُكَ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ عَلَى جَمِيعِ
أَهْلِ السَّمَاوَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the calamity that befell on you is reckoned by all the inhabitants
of the heavens in the heavens as severe and great.

In this phrase we confess that not only was the calamity great for the
earth and its inhabitants, the heavens and their inhabitants likewise
were overtaken by sorrow and grief for what transpired on a
representative of Allah on earth.

Imam ‘Ali bin Musa al-Ridha (AS) addressing to Ibn Shabib says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَكَتِ السَّمَاوَاتُ السَّبْعُ وَالأَرَضُونَ لِقَتْلِهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Certainly, the seven heavens and earths cried because of his martyrdom
(i.e. of al-Husayn (AS)).

And Imam al-Sadiq (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ الْحُسَيْنَ: لَمَّا قَضَى بَكَتْ عَلَيْهِ
السَّمَاوَاتُ السَّبْعُ وَالأَرَضُونَ السَّبْعُ وَ مَا فِيهِنَّ وَمَا
بَيْنَهُنَّ وَمَنْ يَنْقَلِبُ فِي الْجَنَّةِ وَالنَّارِ مِنْ خَلْقِ
رَبِّنَا وَمَا يُرَى وَ مَا لاَ يُرَى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed when Aba ‘Abdillah al-Husayn bin ‘Ali (AS) left this world, the
seven heavens and the seven earths and whatever is in and between them,
and whososever moves in Paradise and Hell Fire from the creation of our
Lord and what can be seen and what cannot be seen wept for him.[^17]

It should be known that it has been established in its own place that
every existential entity has a share in comprehension (*shu’ur*),
glorification (*tasbih*), laudation (*hamd*), love (*‘ishq*), and
lamentation (*buka\`*). Those, however, who have not contemplated on the
Holy Qur\`an and the traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) well, may
consider this as far fetched. In order to grasp this reality
intellectually, they should refer to works on the Transcendent
Philosophy (*al-hikmat al-muta\`aliya*) propounded by leading
philosophers such as Mulla Sadra and Mulla Hadi Sabzawari (may Allah
elevate their noble spirits).

Following is a verse of the Holy Qur\`an that clearly informs us about
the possibility of the sky weeping:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَما بَكَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّماءُ وَالأَرْضُ وَما كانُوا مُنْظَرينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So neither the sky wept for them, nor the earth; nor were they
granted any respite. (44:29)***

Commenting on this verse, Imam al-Sadiq (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ تَبْكِ السَّمَاءُ عَلىَ أَحَدٍ مُنْذُ قُتِلَ يَحْيَى بْنِ
زَكَرِيَّا، حَتَّى قُتِلَ الْحُسَيْنُ، فَبَكَتْ عَلَيْهِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

The sky did not cry over anyone ever since Yahya bin Zakariyya was
slain, until al-Husayn (AS) was slain, whereupon it cried over him.[^18]

And Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS) is reported to have said the following
about the abovementioned verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا بَكَتِ السَّماَءُ عَلىَ أَحَدٍ بَعْدَ يَحْيَى بْنَ زَكَرِيَّا،
إِلاَّ عَلىَ الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيّ، فَإِنَّهَا بَكَتْ عَلَيْهِ
أَرْبَعِيْنَ يَوْمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

The sky did not cry for anyone after Yahya bin Zakariyya save on
al-Husayn bin ‘Ali (AS), for surely it cried over him for forty
days.[^19]

The verse as well as the comments of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) clearly reveal
to us that the sky manifests sorrow and expresses its lamentation as
well.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَلَّتْ وَعَظُمَتْ مُصِيبَتُكَ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ عَلَى جَمِيعِ
أَهْلِ السَّمَاوَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the calamity that befell on you is reckoned by all the inhabitants
of the heavens in the heavens as severe and great.

The article *al* that precedes *al-samawat* (السماوات) confers the
meaning that all the heavens are taken into consideration.

And heavens and skies should not transport us to their material
extensions. Scholars of authority opine that they refer to the higher
levels of the universe of contingent existence.

The phrase *ahl al-samawat* can refer to the angels who inhabit the
heavens and all the exalted departed souls who witnessed or came to know
about the tragedy of Karbala.

Consider the following traditions:

Imam al-Ridha (AS) tells Ibn Shabib:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ نَزَلَ إِلَى الأَرْضِ مِنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ أَرْبَعَةُ آلاَفٍ
لِنَصْرِهِ فَوَجَدُوهُ قَدْ قُتِلَ فَهُمْ عِنْدَ قَبْرِهِ شُعْثٌ
غُبْرٌ إِلَى أَنْ يَقُومَ الْقَائِمُ فَيَكُونُونَ مِنْ أَنْصَارِهِ
وَشِعَارُهُمْ يَا لَثَارَاتِ الْحُسَيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Four thousand angels descended on earth to aid him, but (when they were
allowed to reach there) they found him martyred. **So they remained at
his grave, dishevelled and covered with dust, and will remain there
until the rising of al-Qa’im** (Imam al-Mahdi A, whereupon they will aid
him. Their slogan will be, ‘Vengeance for the blood of al-Husayn (AS)!’

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) tells a companion called Fudhayl:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لَكُمْ لاَ تَأْتُونَهُ يَعْنِي قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنِ فَإِنَّ
أَرْبَعَةَ آلاَفِ مَلَكٍ يَبْكُونَ عِنْدَ قَبْرِهِ إِلَى يَوْمِ
الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

What is the matter with you that you do not visit him [the grave of Imam
al-Husayn (AS)]? Surely four thousand angels constantly weep near his
grave, [and will do so] until the Judgment Day.[^20]

As for the departed souls, one of the traditions that break the hearts
and make us realize how grave is the matter of al-Husayn (AS) is the
following conversation between Imam al-Sadiq (AS) and Abu Basir, his
loyal companion, who had lost his physical eyesight, but was endowed
with spiritual effulgence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا بَصِيرٍ إِذَا نَظَرْتُ إِلَى وُلْدِ الْحُسَيْنِ أَتَانِي مَا
لاَ أَمْلِكُهُ بِمَا أَتَى إِلَى أَبِيهِمْ وَآلِهِمْ يَا أَبَا بَصِيرٍ
إِنَّ فَاطمَةَ لَتَبْكِيهِ وَتَشْهَقُ...فَلاَ تَزَالُ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ
مُشْفِقِينَ يَبْكُونَ لِبُكَائِهَا وَيَدْعُونَ اللَّهَ
وَيَتَضَرَّعُونَ إِلَيْهِ إِلَى أَنْ قَالَ قُلْتُ جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ
إِنَّ هَذَا الأَمْرَ عَظِيمٌ قَالَ غَيْرُهُ أَعْظَمُ مِنْهُ مَا لَمْ
تَسْمَعْهُ ثُمَّ قَالَ يَا بَا بَصِيرٍ أَ مَا تُحِبُّ أَنْ تَكُونَ
فِيمَنْ يُسْعِدُ فَاطمَةَ فَبَكَيْتُ حِينَ قَالَهَا فَمَا قَدَرْتُ
عَلَى الْمَنْطقِ وَمَا قَدَرْتُ عَلَى كَلاَمِي مِنَ الْبُكَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: O Aba Basir, when I look at the progeny of
al-Husayn (AS), I am overcome due to what happened to their father and
his family; O Aba Basir, Indeed Fatima (AS) constantly weeps for him
(al-Husayn (AS)) and sighs [out of deep sorrow]....So the angels
constantly sympathize and weep due to her weeping and pray to Allah and
express their humility to Him.... Abu Basir said: May I be made your
ransom. Indeed the matter is great. Thereupon the Imam (AS) said: What
you have not heard other than this is even greater. Thereafter the Imam
(AS) said: O Aba Basir: Don’t you want to be among those who assist
Fatima (AS)? Abu Basir says: When he said this, I started weeping and
could not utter a word, nor could I speak due to my weeping...[^21]

This tradition clearly hints to us that whatever we have heard and known
about Imam al-Husayn (AS) cannot be compared to that which we do not
know.

[^1]: Mawla HabibulLah Kashani, Sharhu Ziyarat ‘Ashura\`, p. 53

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Al-Tabari, Al-Mustarshid, p. 682

[^4]: E.W. Lane, E.W. Lane Arabic-English Lexicon, under the root word
raza’a

[^5]: Al-Firuzabadi, Al-Qamus al-Muhit, v.1, p. 122

[^6]: Sayyid Radhi al-Din bin al-Tawus, Iqbal al-A’mal, v.3, p. 28

[^7]: Muhammad bin al-Mashhadi, Al-Mazar, p. 500

[^8]: Al-Shaykh ‘Abdullah al-Bahrani, al-’Awalim (al-Imam al-Husayn
(‘a)), p. 216

[^9]: Muhammad Ridha Jawadi & ‘Ali Ja’fari, Dar Mahzar-e- Hakim
‘Allameye Ja’fari, p. 18

[^10]: Al-Mustafawi, Al-Tahqiq fi Kalimat al-Qur\`an al-Karim, v. 2, p.
102

[^11]: Al-Bahrani, al-’Awalim (al-Imam al-Husayn ), p. 154

[^12]: Ibid.,, p. 448

[^13]: Ibid.,,p. 516

[^14]: Al-Mustafawi, Al-Tahqiq fi Kalimat al-Qur\`an al-Karim, v. 1, p.
169

[^15]: Al-Daylami, Irshad al-Qulub, v.2, p. 418

[^16]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.24, p. 303

[^17]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.4, p. 575

[^18]: Al-Bahrani, Al-Burhan fi Tafsir al-Qur\`an, v. 3, p. 701.

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 45, p. 222

[^21]: Shaykh al-Nuri, Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v.10, p. 314


