Preface
=======

By Shaykh Muhammad M Khalfan

All praises belong exclusively to Allah, and may His peace and
benedictions be on Muhammad, the most perfect epitome of Divine
Attributes and his infallible progeny, the Ahl al-Bayt, who are
rightfully known as the ships of salvation, whosoever boards their ship,
earns eternal felicity, and whosoever lags behind and is indifferent
drowns and attains eternal damnation.

Al-Qanduzi, the Hanafite narrator of traditions, in his radiant
collection *Yanabi’ al-Mawadda* (lit. Fountains of Constant Love)
narrates a tradition from Abu Dharr al-Ghiffari who narrates from the
Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ مَثَل َ أَهْلِ بَيْتِي فِيكُمْ مَثَلُ سَفِيْنَةِ نُوْح، مَنْ
رَكِبَهَا نَجَا وَمَنْ تَخَلَّفَ عَنْهَا هَلَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The similitude of my progeny among you is that of the ship of Noah A;
whosoever boards it is saved, and whosoever lags behind would perish[^1]

The ship of al-Husayn (AS), however, according to another tradition is
more rapid: Once a companion of Imam al-Sadiq (AS) asked him about the
prophetic tradition “Surely al-Husayn is the lamp of guidance and the
ship of salvation” saying: “Aren’t you [the Ahl al-Bayt (AS)] ships of
salvation [too]?” The Imam (AS) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّنَا سُفُنُ النَّجَاةِ إِلاَّ أَنَّ سَفِيْنَةَ الْحُسَيْنِ
أَوَسَعُ وَأَسْرَعُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

All of us are ships of salvation, save that the ship of al-Husayn (AS)
is **more spacious and faster**.[^2]

This tradition is also endorsed by great mystic scholars who can
appreciate the sublime secrets of religion. The late mystic-scholar
Ayatullah Mirza Tabrizi in his monumental prayer manual *al-Muraqabat*
says:

It should be known that the door of al-Husayn (AS) is the door of
comprehensive mercy, rapid response and approval. And he [the Imam]
would say during his life time: ‘The similitude of doing good is rain
water which covers both the virtuous as well as the sinful.’[^3]

Sayyid Haddad al-Musawi a great Shi’ite saint and a contemporary of
‘Allamah al-Tabataba\`i, is reported to have quoted their mentor in
practical gnosis, Ayatullah Qadhi al-Tabataba\`i as having said:

My teacher, Marhum Qadhi (may his spirit be sanctified) said to me that
it is impossible for a human being to attain the station of *tawhid*
[proximity to God] without the path of Sayyid al-Shuhada’.[^4]

And ‘Allama al-Tabataba\`i is reported to have said:  
 That Hadhrat [i.e. Imam al-Husayn (AS)] has great attention towards the
wayfarers of the path of God in removing the veil and impediments of the
‘path of God’.[^5]

One of the excellent ways of establishing contact with Imam al-Husayn
(AS) is through offering salutations to his exalted personality
(*Ziyarat)*. This can be achieved either in front of his radiant tomb in
Karbala, or in the environs of one’s house observing some specific
etiquettes.

The secret however is that the *za’ir*, one who performs the *Ziyarat*,
must yearn to the attain the apex of the meaning of what he recites and
unite with the spirit of the *mazur* (the visited one). The grand
Ayatullah Jawadi Amuli in his masterpiece ‘*Adabe Finaye Muqarraban*’
says:

*Ziyarat* is the mystical presence of the fervent lover (*‘ashiq*) in
the dwelling of the Beloved; it is the visitor’s passionate encounter of
the abode of the visited one; it is the lover’s expression of intense
love and consideration for the beloved; it is when the enamored one
sincerely gives his heart in the alley of the possessor of the
heart...[^6]

The present commentary tries to examine and reflect on one of the
well-known *ziyarat* that many of the Muslims recite with great zeal and
devotion. Most of the Shi’a Muslims express their veneration and sorrow
when they recite this sublime *Ziyarat* on the day of ‘Ashura\`.
However, the Infallible Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) have taught us to
recite it very often. Besides its ample merits, it is a program of
revolution for the sleeping masses.

The crux of the *Ziyarat* is *al-tabarri’* and *al-tawalli*, which can
correctly be translated as ‘fleeing from imperfection’ and ‘seeking
perfection’, or in the beautiful words of every Muslim *La ilaha illa
Allah* -Besides Allah- the Only Beloved, there is no other *ilah*
(beloved). The Name Allah exemplifies all the perfect attributes of the
Divine Essence, which the human being has been molded to appreciate and
naturally seek. The Holy Qur\`an says:

**’...*****the innate nature of Allah, upon which the human beings were
molded..*****.’(30:30).**

Therefore the *Ziyarat* in reality is a call to the unsullied innate
disposition (*fitra*) of the human being.

In expressing veneration and seeking the higher levels of peace for Imam
al-Husayn (AS) we are trying to unite with his ideas, thoughts and
towering volition, and in cursing his opponents, who overtly declared
themselves to be Muslims and believers, but were extensions of the
hypocrites, we are trying to flee from all their ideas, thoughts and
actions. Hence this recital trains the reciter to overhaul himself and
unite with the spirit of the sacred Imam (AS). In fact, as we shall come
to observe in this *Ziyarat* later, one of the beautiful supplications
taught to us when expressing our greetings to the Imam is to seek
spiritual harmony with the Imam (AS) in both this world as well as the
Hereafter. We say later in this *Ziyarat:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَسْأَلُ اللهَ الَّذِي أَكْرَمَنِي بِمَعْرِفَتِكُمْ وَمَعْرِفَةِ
أَوْلِيَائِكُمْ وَرَزَقَنِي الْبَرَاءَةَ مِنْ أَعْدَائِكُمْ أَنْ
يَجْعَلَنِي مَعَكُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So I ask Allah, who ennobled me by knowing you and knowing your
friends, and enabled me to seek remoteness from your enemies, to place
me in your company in this world and the Hereafter.*

Understanding the aforementioned obliges every high-spirited seeker of
truth to aim for the achievement of the crux of the *Ziyarat* rather
than be selfishly motivated to gain personal benefits. The rewards of
the *Ziyarat* which are both sacred and sublime should not be the only
factor to lead us to recite it. It is the natural love for the Imam (AS)
who exemplifies the Divine Attributes in himself that should transport
us to recite this humble presentation. In fact some traditions, as we
shall soon consider, clearly state that whosoever visits Imam al-Husayn
(AS) in Karbala is as if he has visited Allah at His Throne.[^7]

Another very important point to bear in mind is that because the reciter
of this *Ziyarat* has been guaranteed by the Imams (AS) that his needs
would be fulfilled, he must be very careful in distinguishing ‘that
which is really a need’ from ‘that which is not really a need’. The
great saint Ayatullah Haddad al-Musawi, a contemporary of ‘Allama
al-Tabataba\`i, would see people clinging onto the radiant enclosure
where Imam al-Husayn (AS) is buried, and instead of seeking their real
needs, asking for those things that would increase the burden that they
had already accumulated. He is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاس حِيْنَمَا يَذْهَبُوْنَ إِلى زِيَارَةِ
العَتَبَاتِ الْمُقَدَّسَةِ يَقِفُوْنَ مَاسِكِي الضَّرِيْحِ
فَيَتَوَسَّلُوْنَ بِالإِمَامِ لِحَوَائِجِهِمْ الْمَادِّيَّةِ
فَيَحْمِلُوْنَ ثِقْلاً عَلى ثِقْلِهِمْ وَلَمْ يَسْئَلُوا الإِمَامَ
بِأَنْ يَّأْخُذَ مِنْهُمْ ثِقْلَهُمْ وَهُوَ التَّعَلُّقُ
باِلدُّنْيَا،بَلْ يَسْئَلُوْنَهُ بِاَنْ يُعْطيَهُمْ بَيْتاً اَوْ
وَلَداً اَوْ زَوْجاً اَوْ سَيَّارَةً، وَمَا سَمِعْنَا عَنْ اَحَدٍ
دَخَلَ بِخِدْمَتِهِ وَقَالَ لَهُ خُذْ مِنِّيْ كَذَا وَكَذَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

When most of the people visit the holy shrines, they stand holding fast
onto the enclosures of the graves and ask the Imam (AS) to mediate on
their behalf, so that their material needs are fulfilled. Consequently,
they add a burden over their burden. They do not ask the Imam (AS) to
remove their burden which is ‘attachment to the world’; rather they ask
for a house, an off spring, a wife or a car; and never have we heard
from anyone who entered in his service, and asked him: ‘Relieve me from
such and such a thing.’[^8]

In one of his lessons on practical ethics (*akhlaq*), Ayatullah
Mujtahidi (may Allah elevate his status) narrates the following
incident:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حاج شيخ ‏عبدالكريم حائری (ره) را در حرم امام ‏ ‏ديدند كه گريه ‏می‏كند
و به امام می‏گويد: آقا جان من مجتهد شده‏ام، ولی می‏خواهم آدم ‏بشوم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Haj Shaykh ‘Abd al-Karim Ha\`iri [the founder of the Islamic Seminary of
Qum] was seen in the haram of Imam al-Husayn (AS) weeping and telling
the Imam (AS): O dear master, I have become a juristconsult
*(mujtahid)*, but I want to become a [perfect] human being.[^9]

Some traditions clearly teach us about the ultimate purpose of
*Ziyarat*. Observe the following:

1. Safwan bin Mihran is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ اَبِيْ عَبْدِ اللهِ َ قَالَ: مَنْ زَارَ قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنَ وَهُوَ
يُرِيْدُ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ شَيَّعَهُ جَبْرَئِيْلُ وَمِيْكَائِيْلُ
وَاِسْرَافِيْلُ حَتَّى يَرِدَ إِلى مَنْزِلِِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: ‘Whosoever visits the grave of al-Husayn (AS)
while ***he seeks Allah***, the Invincible and Exalted, Jibra\`il,
Mika\`il, and Israfil accompany him until he returns back to his
house.’[^10]

2. Mu\`ammar is reported to have said: I heard Zayd bin ‘Ali (AS)
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَارَ قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ لاَ يُرِيْدُ بِهِ اِلاَّ
اللهَ تَعَالى غُفِرَ لَهُ جَمِِيعُ ذُنُوْبِهِ وَلَوْ كَانَتْ مِثْلُ
زَبَدِ الْبَحْرِ، فَاسْتَكْثِرُوْا مِنْ زِيَارَتِهِ يَغْفِرُ اللهُ
لَكُمْ ذُنُوْبَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever visits the grave of al-Husayn bin ‘Ali (AS) while he ***does
not seek thereby save Allah**, Allah* would forgive all his sins even if
they be like the foam of the ocean; therefore, visit him often, and
Allah would forgive your sins.[^11]

Seeking ‘Allah’ as mentioned in the abovementioned narrations refers to
yearning for Allah’s proximity, which in reality is perfecting oneself
to attain the attributes of Almighty Allah. If this is the purpose
behind *Ziyarat*, the visitor would naturally struggle for a complete
unity with religion and divine values.

Before we begin the commentary of this radiant *Ziyarat*, which is also
reckoned to be among the sacred traditions[^12] *(ahadith qudsiyya)*,
and understand both its particular as well as its universal import, it
is imperative to generally know the significance of *Ziyarat*, and its
exalted purpose.

Meaning of Ziyarat
------------------

The word *‘Ziyarat’* is derived from the word “*zawr*” which means to
deflect or draw away from something. A lie is called *zur* because it
deflects from the path of truth. The *za’ir* is known to be so, because
he deflects from other than “the one he intends to visit”. That is why
some lexicographers translate “*Ziyarat*” to mean intention *(qasd)*,
for the one who deflects from other than a certain entity intends the
entity. Al-Fayumi, a well-known lexicographer in his authoritative
lexicon *al-Misbah al-Munir* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و(الزِّيَارَةُ) فِي الْعُرْفِ قَصْدُ الْمَزُوْرِ اِكْرَامًا لَهُ
وَاسْتِئْنَاسًا بِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The conventional meaning of *al-Ziyarat* is to intend the one to be
visited, for his veneration and intimacy.[^13]

And it is said that the reason why *Ziyarat* is referred to as visiting
the saintly human beings, is because it is to deflect from the material
routine and draw away from the corporeal world and incline towards the
world of spirit, while one is present in the corporeal environment and
maintains one’s bodily form.[^14]

Sometimes *Ziyarat* is translated as *‘ittihad al-za\`ir bi-al mazur’*
(the unity of the visitor with the visited one). In simpler words: ‘to
color oneself with the attributes of the visited one’. This definition
does not contradict the former definitions, for ‘seeking and uniting
with the attributes of the *mazur* (visited one)’ is nothing but
‘deflecting and drawing away from attributes contrary to the *mazur*’.
In a subtler expression, we can say ‘*Ziyarat* is to flee from
imperfection while struggling for perfection’.[^15]

Allusions of this reality can also be gotten from the Qur\`anic verse:

**‘*****And flee towards Allah*****’ (51:50).**

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) is reported[^16] to have commented on this verse
saying “*ay* *hujju*” (It means ‘perform *hajj’*). And the literal
meaning of *hajj* is *qasd* (intention). In a conversation he had with
his son Zayd bin ‘Ali, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَعْنَى قَوْلِهِ عَزّوَجَلّ: فَفِرُّوْا إِلَى اللهِ يَعْنِي
حُجُّوْا إِلى بَيْتِ اللهِ، يَا بُنَيّ إِنَّ الْكَعْبَة َبَيْتُ اللهِ
فَمَنْ حَجّ بَيْتَ اللهِ فَقَدْ قَصَدَ إِلى اللهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the meaning of Allah’s speech “*And flee to Allah...*” is *Hujju ila
baytillah* (Intend the house of Allah); O my dear young son, surely the
Ka’ba is the house of Allah; therefore, whosoever intends the house of
Allah, has surely intended Allah...[^17]

Therefore *hajj*, as it is correctly conveyed, is not only ‘*hajju bayt
Allah al-Haram’* (intending the sacred House of Allah), but *hajj Allah*
(intending Allah) as the verse explicitly conveys: *fa firru ila Allah*
(so escape towards Allah). And escaping towards Allah is seeking His
noble attributes and fleeing from the contrary. And *hajj* if perfomed
with its proper etiquettes, as the experts of the kernel of Islamic law
mention, enables one to attain such noble attributes.

Some narrations explicitly say that doing *Ziyarat* of the Holy Prophet
(S) and the infallible Imams (AS) is like doing the *Ziyarat* of Allah.
Consider the following traditions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ زَيْد الشَّحَّامُ قَالَ: قُلْتُ لاَبِي عَبْدِ اللهِ: مَا لِمَنْ
زَارَ رَسُوْلَ اللهِ ؟ قَالَ: كَمَنْ زَارَ الله َعَزَّوَجَلَّ فَوْقَ
عَرْشِهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd al-Shahham is reported to have said: I asked Abu ‘Abdilah (al-Sadiq
(AS)): What is the reward for one who visits the Messenger of Allah? The
Imam (AS) said: ‘It is like one who has visited Allah at His throne
(*‘arsh*).’[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ زَيْد الشَّحَّام،عَنْ اَبِيْ عَبْدِ اللهِ قَالَ: مَنْ زَارَ
قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنِ بنِ عَلِيّ عَارِفًا بِحَقِّه كَانَ كَمَنْ زَارَ
اللهَ فِيْ عَرْشِه...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd al-Shahham is reported to have said: Abu ‘Abdillah (al-Sadiq (AS))
said: Whosoever visits the grave of al-Husayn (AS) with the knowledge of
his status is like one who visits Allah at His Throne.[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ جَابِر اَلْجُعْفِي، قَالَ: دَخَلْتُ عَلى جَعْفَر بنِ مُحَمّد فِيْ
يَوْمِ عَاشُوْرَآء،فَقَالَ لِيْ: هَؤُلاَءِ زُوَّارُ اللهِ وَحَقُّ عَلى
الْمَزُوْرِ اَنْ يُكْرِمَ الزَّائِرَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir al-Ju’fi is reported to have said: I came to Ja’far bin Muhammad
(al-Sadiq (AS)) on the day of ‘Ashura\`, and he said to me: ‘These
people are the visitors of Allah (*zuwwar Allah*), and it is the right
of the *mazur* to honor the *za’ir*...[^20]

The above traditons confer the implication that because the Imams (AS)
are manifestations of Allah’s sublime names,[^21] visiting them and
seeking their proximity is the same as seeking the proximity of Almighty
Allah. Proximity here, we should understand, does not refer to any kind
of physical closeness.

Rather, it refers to spiritual proximity. In other words, as the *za’ir*
(one who deflects from other than the attributes of the *mazur*) draws
spiritually closer to the Imam (AS) he in reality embellishes himself
with the attributes of Almighty Allah which the Imam (AS) exemplifies
according to his *limitations*. The Imams (AS), however, are sheer
manifestations (*mazhahir*) of Allah’s names and thus no attribute
independently belongs to other than Allah. The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللهُ لاَ إلَهَ إلاَّ هُو لَهُ الأسْمآء الحُسْنى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah, other than Him there is no God; and to Him alone*** ***belong
the Beautiful Names...(20:8)***

Notice here that instead of Allah saying ‘The Beautiful Names belong to
Allah’ He says ‘To Him alone belong the Beautiful Names’. In grammatical
terminology, the predicate is brought before the subject. And whenever
this happens, it signifies restriction. In other words ‘To Him alone
[and no one else] belong the Beautiful Names’.

Those who are able to appreciate the secrets of prayer tangibly
comprehend this reality in the state of *ruku’* when they vision that no
one other than Almighty Allah has any perfection whatsoever. Imam
Khumayni in his Etiquettes of Prayer says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِعْلَمْ اَنَّ عُمْدَةَ اَحْوَالِ الصّلاَةِ ثَلاَثَةٌ،وَسَائِرُ
الاَعْمَالِ وَالاَفْعَالِ مُقَدِّمَاتُهَا وَمُهَيّئَاتٌ لَهَا،
الاَوَّلُ: اَلْقِيَامُ.وَالثّانِيْ: َلرُّكُوْع.
َالثّالِثُ:السُّجُوْدُ.وَاَهْلُ الْمَعْرِفَةِ يَرَوْنَ هَذِهِ
الثَلاَثَة إِشَارَةً إِلى التَّوْحِيْدَاتِ الثَّلاَثَة...وَفِي
الرُّكُوْعِ تَرْكٌ لِرُؤْيَةِ النَّفْسِ عَلى حَسَبِ مَقَامِ الصّفَاتِ
وَالاَسْمَاءِ وَرُؤْيَة لِمَقَامِ اَسْمَاءِ الْحَقّ وَصِفَاتِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Beware that the main states of prayer are three, and the rest of the
acts serve as introductory and preparatory phases: (1) *qiyam*, (2)
*ruku’*, and (3) *sujud*. And the men of gnosis reckon these three acts
as the three kinds of unity...and in the state of *ruku’* one cannot
behold himself in terms of attributes and names, and beholds God’s
exclusive station of Names and Attributes. [In other words, he sees that
every kind of attribute or name belongs only to God].[^22]

Ziyarat of Believers
--------------------

Islam highly encourages one to visit one’s Muslim brother or sister.
However, it does not emphasize on any kind of *Ziyarat* whatsoever. It
encourages meaningful *Ziyarat* - *Ziyarat* with a purpose and aim.
Observe the following traditions:  
 Imam al-Sadiq (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ تَزَاوَرُوا فَإِنَّ فِي زِيَارَتِكُمْ إِحْيَاءً لِقُلُوبِكُمْ
وَذِكْراً لأحَادِيثِنَا وَأَحَادِيثُنَا تُعَطفُ بَعْضَكُمْ عَلَى
بَعْضٍ فَإِنْ أَخَذْتُمْ بِهَا رَشَدْتُمْ وَنَجَوْتُمْ وَإِنْ
تَرَكْتُمُوهَا ضَلَلْتُمْ وَهَلَكْتُمْ فَخُذُوا بِهَا وَأَنَا
بِنَجَاتِكُمْ زَعِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Visit one another, for verily in your visitation is the revival of your
hearts, and a remembrance of our speeches; our speeches make you harbor
affection for one another; and if you act according to them, you would
be guided and saved, and if you shun them, you would go astray and
perish; therefore follow them while I guarantee your salvation.[^23]

And Imam al-Baqir (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَزَاوَرُوا فِي بُيُوتِكُمْ فَإِنَّ ذَلِكَ حَيَاةٌ لاَمْرِنَا رَحِمَ
اللهَ عَبْداً أَحْيَا أَمْرَنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Visit one another in your homes for surely in that is the revival of our
affair; may Allah’s Mercy be upon one who revives our affair.[^24]

It should be noted that the revival of the affair discussed in the above
traditions is nothing but the revival of Islamic values, for the Ahl
al-Bayt (AS) are protectors of Islamic values and to remember them and
their teachings is to elevate the human spirit in reality. One should
not conjecture that there is any personal gain that these infallible
leaders of truth derive from such gatherings. Rather it is their
followers who benefit.

Another important point to bear in mind is that ‘the revival of their
affair’ cannot be merely achieved by thoughts and words. We must sow the
seeds of resolution in our visitations in order to reap the fruits of
applying the teachings of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS).

So far *Ziyarat* has been reduced to visitation in the earthly abode.
The Islamic worldview, however, due its sharp and accurate cognition of
reality, as taught by the Holy Qur\`an, the Holy Prophet (S) and his
infallible successors, does not limit *Ziyarat* to the corporeal world.
It rather believes that human beings can communicate with those who have
transcended this limited world of matter and can listen to them as well.
In our daily prayer, we address the Holy Prophet (S) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ
وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you O Prophet and may Allah’s mercy and blessings be on
you.[^25]

This statement presumes the presence of the *mukhatab* (the addressee).
And therefore we believe that the Prophet (S) is present and can behold
our presence too.

One of the important etiquettes of entering the shrine of the Holy
Prophet (S) and the infallible Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) is to read
the well-known *idhn al-dukhul* (recital of permission to enter). The
*za’ir* (visitor) adopts a very humble attitude, and appreciating the
presence of the Holy Prophet (S) seeks his permission to enter his
sanctuary. In this well-known recital, we say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...واَعْلَمُ اَنَّ رَسُولَكَ وَخُلَفَائَكَ اَحْياَء عندك يُرزَقون،
يَرونَ مَقَامِي وَيَسْمَعُوْنَ كَلاَمِي، وَيَرُدّوْنَ سَلاَمِي...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...and I know that Your Apostle and vicegerents (upon whom be peace) are
alive, receiving sustenance in Your proximity, they see where I stand
presently, and hear my speech and respond to my salutation...[^26]

Unlike those who consider the human being as an entity which perishes
after the worldly death, Islam teaches mankind that death is a purgatory
and bridge to the realm beyond. In fact, to be more accurate, death is
“tearing of some veils” from the higher reality of everything. Great
people like Imam ‘Ali (AS), due to their intense purity, could boldly
claim that they can behold the ultimate form of the reality of this
world while they still exist in this earthly abode. In one of his famous
dictums, Imam ‘Ali A is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ كُشِفَ الغطاء مَا ازْدَدْتُ يقينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

If the curtains were unveiled nothing would be added to my
conviction.[^27]

The tearing of veils, however, should not be considered as being limited
to the Prophets (SA) and infallible Imams (AS). Those human beings who
are entirely submissive to the laws of Almighty Allah and have purified
their hearts can also relatively enjoy such exalted positions. In fact,
Almighty Allah calls the human beings to appreciate the kernel of this
world in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَ وَلَمْ يَنْظُرُوا فِي مَلَكُوتِ السَّماواتِ وَالارْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And do they not look into the kernel of the heavens and the earth?
(7:185)***

Hence there is an invitation to tear the veils that we have created for
ourselves by sinning. In another interesting dictum of the Holy Prophet
(S) we are told:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْلا أَنَّ الشَّيَاطينَ يَحُومُونَ عَلَى قُلُوبِ بَنِي آدَمَ
لَنَظَرُوا إِلَى مَلَكُوتِ السَّمَاوَات
  </p>
</blockquote>

Was it not for the Satans circling around the hearts of the off-spring
of Adam, they surely would have beheld the kernel of the heavens.[^28]

Therefore, the more purity we enjoy, the better we can communicate with
those exalted spirits who have left this material world, are alive in
the real sense of the word, and due to their exalted station of
existential mediation (about which we shall soon discuss in detail) can
influence the world of contingent existence and even benefit us in
different ways. There have been ample narratives indicating how people
visited the shrines of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) and solved very great
problems in their lives.

Our aim of *Ziyarat*, however, must transcend seeking personal benefits.
It is therefore important to first decipher the purpose of *Ziyarat*,
and the reason why our holy Imams (AS) would teach us particular
recitals for visiting the tomb of their grandfather Imam al-Husayn (AS).
Of course this does not mean that one should not seek personal benefits
from the great personalities, but one must at least have realized the
ultimate purpose of *Ziyarat*.

It is through such realization, dear readers, that rain falls from the
hearts and embraces every human being, rather every creature beyond time
and place. Such realizations tear the veils of the past and future, and
release the human being into the world of perpetual bliss and ecstasy.
Soon the reader shall understand the words of this nondescript, for the
world of Ahl al-Bayt (AS) is a world yet unknown. Their followers have
no share save appreciating the tip of the iceberg:

Imam ‘Ali (AS) is reported to have said to Abu Dharr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْلَمْ يَا أَبَا ذَرٍّ أَنَا عَبْدُ اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
وَخَلِيفَتُهُ عَلَى عِبَادِهِ لا تَجْعَلُونَا أَرْبَاباً وَقُولُوا فِي
فَضْلِنَا مَا شِئْتُمْ فَإِنَّكُمْ لا تَبْلُغُونَ كُنْهَ مَا فِينَا
وَلا نِهَايَتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Know O Abu Dharr that I am [only] a slave of Allah and His vicegerent
over His servants; do not consider us as lords and you may say whatever
you want about our merits, for you cannot appreciate the essence of our
perfection, nor its zenith...[^29]

And in another tradition he (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يُقَاسُ بِآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ مِنْ هَذِهِ الأمَّةِ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

...None from this *umma* can be compared with the progeny of Muhammad
(upon whom be peace)...[^30]

The Purpose of Ziyarat
----------------------

One of the fundamental requisites of understanding the purpose of
*Ziyarat* is to have a correct worldview. If we realize the purpose of
human creation, and submit our volition to our intellectual decision,
our deeds would be directed towards our eternal salvation. The purpose
of human creation according to Qur\`an and Sunna is to worship Almighty
Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالإِنْسَ إِلاَّ لِيَعْبُدُوْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And I have not created the jinn and the men save that they worship me
alone. (51:56)***

And worship without knowledge carries no meaning. This is because
worship is not a mere exercise without any sense of devotion. *‘Ibadah*
in the literal sense is defined as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العِبَادَةُ هِيَ نَصبُ الْعَبْدِ نَفْسَهُ فِي مَقَامِ المْمْلُوكِيَّة
لِرَبّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘Ibada* is when the servant places himself in the position of being a
bondsman of his Lord.[^31]

And this cannot transpire without the knowledge of the Creator. It is by
appreciating His real ownership[^32] of the entire world of creation,
His knowledge over all things, His omnipotence and omnipresence that the
human being is overtaken and humbles himself down before Allah. He also
realizes that the true Lord and Master is none but his Creator, and thus
he places himself in the station of being an obedient slave of Almighty
Allah. Imam al-Husayn (AS), underlining the clear link between knowledge
and worship is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ جَلَّ ذِكْرُهُ مَا خَلَقَ الْعِبَادَ إِلاَّ
لِيَعْرِفُوهُ فَإِذَا عَرَفُوهُ عَبَدُوهُ فَإِذَا عَبَدُوهُ
اسْتَغْنَوْا بِعِبَادَتِهِ عَنْ عِبَادَةِ مَا سِوَاهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely Allah (SwT) did not Create His servants except for knowing Him,
and when they know him, they would worship Him, and when they worship
Him, it would suffice them from worshipping other than Him...[^33]

The worship that results from prior knowledge reaps knowledge itself.
Knowledge before worship, however, is mostly intellectual (*‘aqli*) and
conceptual (*tasawwuri*). It is the result of rationally establishing
the existence of God and His attributes as well as the utter poverty and
dependence of the entire creation on His infinite existence. Having
realized this the impartial servant worships with veneration and awe. If
such worship was out of sincerity, then he is availed with a higher form
of knowledge, which is beyond the realm of intellect. It is known in the
language of traditions as ‘*yaqin* (conviction)’ and ‘the vision of the
heart’ which is knowledge by presence (*al-’ilm al-hudhuri*). Perhaps
the following verse of the Qur\`an alludes to the close link between
worship and conviction:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And worship your Lord so that conviction comes to you***[^34]

In some of the *ziyarat* taught to us by the infallible Imams (AS) we
are taught to address the Imams declaring that they had attained the
exalted station of *yaqin* through sincere worship. Consider the
following examples:

1. In one of the *ziyarat* of the Holy Prophet (S) we are taught by Imam
‘Ali (AS) to address his noble being as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَأَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ قَدْ نَصَحْتَ لاُِمَّتِكَ، وَجَاهَدْتَ فيِ
سَبِيْلِ رَبِّكَ، وَعَبَدْتَهُ حَتّى أَتَاكَ الْيَقِيْنُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...And I bear witness that you gave counsel to your nation and struggled
in the way of your Lord, and worshipped Him until conviction
(*al-yaqin*) came to you...[^35]

2. In another *Ziyarat* we address Imam al-Husayn (AS) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللهِ أَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ قَدْ بَلَّغْتَ عَنِ اللهِ
عَزَّوَجَلَّ مَا اُمِرْتَ بِهِ وَلَمْ تَخْشَ أَحَدًا غَيْرَهُ
وَجَاهَدْتَ فِيْ سَبِيْلِهِ وَعَبَدْتَهُ صَادِقًا حَتّى أَتَاكَ
الْيَقِيْنُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...O Aba ‘Abdillah, I bear witness that surely you conveyed what you
were ordered by Allah (the Invincible and Majestic) and other than Him
you never feared anyone, and you struggled in His way, and worshipped
Him truthfully until conviction (*al-yaqin*) came to you...[^36]

3. In one of the *ziyarat* of Imam al-Ridha (AS) we are taught to
address him as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...اَشْهَدُ اَنَّكَ قَدْ اَقَمْتَ الصَّلاَةَ وَآتَيْتَ الزَّكَاةَ
وَاَمَرْتَ بِالْمَعْرُوْفِ وَنَهَيْتَ عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ وَعَبَدْتَ
اللهَ مُخْلِصًا حَتّى اَتَاكَ الْيَقِيْنُ، السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا
أبَا الْحَسَنِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...I bear witness that you kept prayer upright and gave the poor tax and
invited to what was good and forbade the evil and worshipped Allah
sincerely until conviction (*al-yaqin*) came to you; peace be upon you O
Aba al-Hasan...[^37]

There are stages of *yaqin.* The *yaqin* spoken about in the above
traditions is beyond the comprehension of the likes of me and you.
Obviously it is a level of knowledge by presence, but beyond our
description.

Having realized the fundamental role of sincere worship, our *ziyarat,*
which also rank among acts of worship*,* should serve as catalysts to
earn the exalted station of appreciating the truth by the vision of the
heart. Such a state is only possible for a person who is utterly
submissive to Allah.

The *Ziyarat* therefore should teach the *za’ir* the lesson of utter
submisssion to Allah. In other words, the *Ziyarat* should be a means of
uniting the *za’ir* with Abu ‘Abdillah (an appellation depicting Imam
al-Husayn (AS)’s utter submission to Allah). And this can easily be
attained after we understand the meaning of the *Ziyarat* and exemplify
its teachings in ourselves.

If we read the *Ziyarat* for our lower ambitions in life, there would be
no difference between us and the laity who have busied themselves with
the world of matter. Therefore we should bear an exalted aspiration and
aim for a great transformation in order to unite with the spirit of
al-Husayn (AS).

Readers do appreciate that the reason why the allies of contemporary
formalists hamper us from expressing our sorrow near the graves of the
infallible leaders, is because they have realized the revolution it can
create in the hearts.

Imam al-Husayn (AS) is a symbol of uprising against falsehood even at
the cost of the sacrifice of every possession. Our *Ziyarat* which is an
endeavor of unity and harmony with his noble spirit, therefore, should
be a declaration of readiness rather than a mere transaction or habitual
recitation.

[^1]: Al-Qanduzi, Yanabi’ al-Mawadda, v.2, p.90

[^2]: Sayyid ‘Adil al-’Alawi, Risalat Islamiyya, v.6 p. 183

[^3]: Ayatullah al-Tabrizi, al-Muraqibat, p.286

[^4]: Sayyid ‘Ali al-Musawi al-Haddad,’Arifun fi al-Rihab al-Qudsiyya,
p.47

[^5]: Hadi Hashimiyan, Daryaye ‘Irfan, p.97

[^6]: Ayatullah Jawadi Amuli, Adab-e-Finaye Muqarriban, v.1, p. 17

[^7]: Ibn Qulawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 147

[^8]: Sayyid Ali al-Musawi al-Haddad,’Arifun fi al-Rihab al-Qudsiyyah,
p. 146

[^9]: See the following
website:http://www.tebyan.net/Religion\_Thoughts/TheLearned/Contemporary/2008/1/2...

[^10]: Ibn Qulawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 274

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Ibid., p.333

[^13]: Ahmad al-Fayumi, al-Misbah al-Munir, p. 136

[^14]: Ayatullah Jawadi Amuli, Adabe Finaye Muqarriban, v.1, p. 23

[^15]: It is important to note that fleeing from imperfection is the
same as fleeing towards perfection.

[^16]: ‘Allama al-Tabrasi, Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan, v.9, p. 268

[^17]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.3, p. 321

[^18]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.4, p. 585. It should be noted here
that ‘throne’ does not refer to the material throne for Almighty Allah
is greater than such limitations.

[^19]: Ibn Qulwayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 324

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: A reference to the tradition of Imam al-Sadiq : Nahnu al-Asma’
al-Husna’ We are the Most Beautiful Names of Allah.’

[^22]: Imam Khumayni, al-Adab al-Ma’nawiyya li al-Salat, p. 523

[^23]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 17, p. 258

[^24]: Ibid., v. 17, p. 352

[^25]: Ayatullah al-Sistani, Minhaj al-Salihin, v.1, p. 226

[^26]: Shaykh ‘Abbas Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, new ed., p. 380

[^27]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 40, p. 153

[^28]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 6, p. 332

[^29]: Ibid., v. 62, p. 7

[^30]: Ibid., v. 32, p.11 7

[^31]: ‘Allama al-Tabataba\`i, Tafsir Al-Mizan, v.1, p.24

[^32]: Readers must differentiate between real ownership in which the
existence and subsistence of an entity is entirely dependent on the
owner, and legal ownership in which the existence and subsistence of a
property is independent of the owner.

[^33]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.23, p.83

[^34]: Holy Qur\`an, 15:99

[^35]: al-Himyari al-Qummi, Qurb al-Isnad, p. 382

[^36]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, v.4, p. 573

[^37]: Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha , v.1, p. 302


