Introduction
============

By Shaykh Abbas M H Ismail

Ziyarat: External Proof
-----------------------

The Holy Qur\`an is clear in its explication of the reason for which the
jinns and humans were created: to worship Allah[^1] (SwT) which can only
be done with any real quality after we come to know Him.[^2] Our
fundamental aim is thus inextricably linked to gaining gnosis of Him.
This task is by no means a simple one as the Qur\`an clearly states that
He is incomparable to anything we may already know, and therefore
unknowable in His entirety.[^3]

But far from being an oppressive ruler over His subjects and setting
them a task doomed to failure, Allah (SwT) desires that humans fulfil
their potential and attain salvation by achieving closeness to Him. He
has therefore, through His undiminishing mercy, granted His servants
access to numerous avenues to be able to reach at least some level of
gnosis:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللهَ وَابْتَغُوۤا إِلَيهِ
الْوَسِيلَةَ وَجَاهِدُوا فِى سَبِيلِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Be mindful (of your duty) to Allah and seek means
of nearness to Him, and struggle in His way, so that you may be
successful***.[^4]

Of these avenues and means, the most effective is to seek the
intercession and guidance of the Fourteen Infallibles and to obey
them.[^5] The Qur\`an mentions that by obeying the Messenger, one would
have thereby followed Allah (SwT).[^6] The same applies when considering
the family of the Prophet, the Ahl al-Bayt (AS), whose obedience may
also be included in the category of being a valid act of servitude to
Allah (SwT).[^7]

By this argument, the seemingly difficult duty upon the shoulders of
humans at first consideration, i.e. the worship of Allah (SwT) through
His gnosis, is made somewhat manageable by the adherence of humans to
the obedience and love of the Prophet (S) and his holy family, the Ahl
al-Bayt AS); by loving and obeying the Prophet and his family, humans
are fulfilling both a Qur\`anic injunction of seeking a means to the
nearness of Allah (SwT), as well as correctly identifying this means as
being none other than the Fourteen Infallibles.

Ziyarat: An Internal Inclination
--------------------------------

Allah (SwT) has created the human with an innately ordained disposition
towards goodness,[^8] known as *fitrah* in Arabic.[^9] This *fitrah*,
even whilst confined to the realm of the corporeal world, continuously
yearns and seeks goodness and is instinctively attracted and naturally
inclined to honouring and respecting those instances of goodness it
perceives, whether the acts are current and live, or have happened in
the past and belong to legends of history, such as members of the Ahl
al-Bayt (AS).[^10]

Therefore, through both external instruction via the Qur\`an and the
lives of the Infallibles, and through the internal proof, the *fitrah,*
the connection with the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) is a fundamental part of human
existence and assists to fulfil an inherent metaphysical need within us
of seeking closeness to Allah through noble characteristics perceived in
extra-ordinary personalities.

Ziyarat And A Link To Hajj
--------------------------

When describing the Islamic forms of worship two terms are often used:
*‘Ibadah* and *Dhiyafah.* The term *‘Ibadah* generally relates to the
outer, jurisprudential nature of our acts of worship whilst *Dhiyafah*
can often refer to the inner, spiritual dimensions.[^11] As an example,
our Ramadhan supplications, (our *‘Ibadah)* seek for Allah (SwT) to
grant us the chance to perform the Hajj pilgrimage, *“… In this year and
every year …”*[^12] The Hajj, which is the resulting *Dhiyafah* at Allah
(SwT)’s house in Makkah*,* actually takes place three months later in
the month of Dhu al-Hijjah.

A close consideration of this will demonstrate that Allah (SwT)’s
initial pleasure was for us to ask of Him in Ramadhan to grant us Hajj.
In prescribing to us what our supplications should be in Ramadhan
through set prayers, Allah (SwT) enables His to become aware of what his
Master has to offer. The Wise Lord, in commanding His subjects to ask of
Him, is able to show us the magnanimity of His banquet and the lofty
aspirations we may have of Him. Thus, every subsequent supplication of
the servant will improve as he is now aware of what the Host of hosts
can grant to him and these two elements become inseparable – i.e. each
instance of seeking is accompanied by a higher level of giving, and thus
the circle continues between Master and slave. This may be the true
meaning behind this excerpt of Du’a al-Iftita:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لاَ يزيده كثرة العطاء إِلاَّ جوداً وَ كرماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And His excessive giving does not increase in Him, except (from the
point of view of) generosity and kindness*.[^13]

When considering the *Ziyarat* of the Infallibles, a similar conclusion
seems to hold true. The Infallibles, through their positions as
intermediaries and avenues between Allah (SwT) and His subjects, are
able to encourage the elevation of people’s wants and desires beyond
mere material wishes. Just as Allah (SwT) has a banquet He wishes to
share, so too the Infallibles; their banquet is to assist humans to
reach levels of divine proximity.

The importance and weight of this is adequately portrayed in some of the
legal opinions expressed by eminent Muslim jurists of previous
generations. Both ‘Allamah Hilli and Sheikh Tusi have been cited as
having declared it to be compulsory for Hajj pilgrims to perform the
*Ziyarat* of the Holy Prophet in Medina, and have even permitted the
Islamic ruler to force people to do so if they do not perform the
*Ziyarat* of their own volition.[^14] The Holy Prophet has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أتى مكة حاجاً و لم يزرني إلى المدينة جفانى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoseover comes to Makkah as a Hajj pilgrim and does not visit me in
Medina has shunned me.[^15]

Such is the importance placed upon *Ziyarat* that even after performing
the rites of Hajj and after seeking proximity to Allah (SwT) in Makkah,
‘Arafah, Muzdalifa and Mina, the pilgrim is still expected to pay
respects to the Holy Prophet. This is a view common in both Shi’a and
Sunni sources.[^16]

Walayah and Ziyarat
-------------------

Al-Kulayni reports in al-Kafi from Imam al-Baqir (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَر قَالَ بُنِيَ الإِسْلامُ عَلَى خَمْسٍ عَلَى
الصَّلاةِ وَ الزَّكَاةِ وَ الصَّوْمِ وَ الْحَجِّ وَ الْوَلايَةِ وَ
لَمْ يُنَادَ بِشَيْ‏ءٍ كَمَا نُودِيَ بِالْوَلايَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Islam has been founded upon five: Prayers, Alms-giving, Fasting,
Pilgrimage and Walayah. And nothing has been emphasised the way emphasis
has been placed on Walayah.[^17]

The cited hadith suggests that of all the acts of worship, it is the
*Walayah* of Allah (SwT), and the Ahl al-Bayt (AS), that is the most
important. Hence one of the most important etiquettes of the act of
*Ziyarat* is to establish a firm connection with the visited one. It is
at this juncture that our acts may transform from mere *‘Ibadah* to
something similar to *Dhiyafah.*

Whilst recognising the host and his kindness it would be foolish not to
be cautious of other false hosts and adversaries of the Infallibles. By
distancing ourselves from these people, we engage in *Tabarri,* a
pre-requisite to *Tawalli –* seeking closeness to the Infallibles.
*Tabarri* is a key theme among the reliable *ziyarat* supplications.
Ziyarat al-’Ashura\` is emphatic upon this point, and urges the reader
to seek distance from not only the direct adversaries of the Infallibles
that confronted the Infallibles in their lifetimes, but even all
previous usurpers and oppressors, spanning generations, and their
supporters and partisans.[^18] This demonstrates that for our visitation
to truely carry the colour of *Walayah,* the *Walayah* we profess must
be comprehensive and absolute.

The folly of not adhering to this is eloquently portrayed by the Master
of eloquence, Amir al-Mu\`minin, ‘Ali. Al-Majlisi quotes in Bihar
al-Anwar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ رجلاً قدم على اميرالمؤمنين فقال: يا اميرالمؤمنين! إنّي اُحبّك و
اُحبّ فلاناً – و يسمى بعض أعدائه – فقال عليه السلام: أما الآن فأنت
أعور فإما أن تعمى و إما أن تبصر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed a man approached Amir al-Mu\`minin (AS) and said: “Verily I have
love for you and I also love so and so” – and he named one of his (the
Imam’s) adversaries – he (Imam) replied: “At this moment you are as
though you possess one eye (and your vision is incomplete). So either
you should choose blindness or complete vision.”[^19]

In the Imam’s words, such a person is incomplete and must address his
course of action lest he were to become completely attached to
falsehood, thereby becoming utterly lost.

Sincerity and Ziyarat
---------------------

Islamic ethical discourse stresses the importance of one’s intention and
sincerity as a defining factor in the classification of the quality of
any action. The purer the intention of the actor in performing the act,
the more reward and benefit will be gained from that action. In this
regard, people are of different grades and qualities.

Whilst the outer action may actually seem identical and uniform, the
inner realities and benefits may be tremendously different due to the
difference in the purity and sincerity of the intention. It is only in
the non-corporeal realm where such realities exist in their truest form.
The hadith reports that comment upon this reality are manifold. We cite
one such report to grant light to our discussion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن البزنطي قال: قرأت كتاب أبي الحسن الرضا: أبلغ شيعتي أنّ زيارتي تعدل
عندالله عزّ و جلّ ألف حجّة. قال: فقلت لأبي جعفر : ألف حجّة؟ قال: إي
والله ألف ألف حجّة لمن زاره عارفاً بحقه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Bazanti narrates, “I read in the letter of Abu al-Hasan al-Ridha
(AS): Tell my Shi’as that verily the rewards of my Ziyarat, according to
Allah the Mighty and Glorious, is equal to one thousand Hajj
pilgrimages. So I said to Abu Ja’far (Imam al-Jawad) (AS): A thousand
Hajj pilgrimages? He (AS) said to me: Yes, by Allah! A thousand thousand
(a million) Hajj pilgrimages for he who performs his Ziyarat whilst
understanding his rights.”[^20]

An Intellectual Spark
---------------------

The truly balanced servant must however realise the potential granted
him by Allah (SwT) in being able to utilise all the divine bounties and
be wary of satanic traps. It may be all too easy for one to assume that
sincerity is sufficient; however, if one is simply unaware of the inner
realities of wayfaring and its etiquette, then it is possible the
intellect is under-utilised and mere sincerity, whilst praiseworthy,
will lead to a lesser outcome.

The Qur\`an, when describing the Messenger’s mission, speaks of both
*Tazkiya* (purification) as well as *Ta’lim* (education).[^21] Such
accuracy in one’s intake of education will result in the realisation
that each one of the noble acts, *Salat, Sawm, Zakat, Hajj, Walayah,*
has no outer, worldly existence, but rather these entities exist in
their truest and most radiant form in the non-corporeal realm. If each
of these were to be understood, considered and treated as living
entities (albeit in the non-material realm), capable of speech, form and
interaction, one’s approach to them would surely be of a particularly
focused, respectful and determined nature.[^22]

Together with these realities, the true realities of the visited ones,
i.e. the Infallibles that are the intermediaries for initial receipt and
subsequent channeling of divine grace, can not err nor do they suffer
any imperfection; and although they exist in their most majestic form as
light-ordained celestial beings in another sphere, they are able to
influence matters in the physical world through their specially ordained
mastership granted by Allah (SwT) and dependent upon His permission.

Following these principles, a wayfarer can coach and train himself to be
mindful and intensely aware of such truths and when he is able to do so
he will witness an active manifestation of the Qur\`anic injunction:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَالْمَغْرِبُ فَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ
وَجْهُ اللهِ إِنَّ اللهَ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***To Allah belongs the east and the west, so whithersoever way you turn
there will be the face of*** ***Allah…***[^23]

Such an outlook will be truly appreciative of the divine at all times
and places.

There is a possibility for the opposite to also become true. The Qur\`an
offers a stark warning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلَى مَنْ كَسَبَ سَيِّئَةً وَأَحَاطتْ بِهِ خَطيـۤئَتُهُ
فَأُوْلَـۤئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed whoever does evil and his sins surround him on every side,
such shall be the inmates of the fire, and they shall remain therein
forever.***[^24]

Such a person will no longer be able to perceive the divine and the
‘face of Allah’, rather his outlook will be satanic and evil:
whithersoever this person may turn he would perceive the face of
Shaytan; evil would envelop him and he would descend into a spiral of
negativity, blocked senses, narrow mindedness and a skewed sense of
reality. It may be that he is accepting of all things he perceives as
utmost truth, or even worse, he may deny all true things as utter
falsehood.[^25]

Thus, the individual wayfarer, in seeking a companion, a means, and an
avenue to the Absolute Truth, must be conscious of the choice of whom he
visits and must approach the visitation with a true gnosis and
recognition of the visited one, as well as a heart of sincerity, and
thereby be completely balanced and guided.

Marhum Tustari declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتفاوتت التأثيرات بتفاوت المعرفة بحق الامام الحسين فقد ورد في الروايات
التقييد بكونه عارفا بحق الامام الحسين صلوات الله تعالى عليه
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the difference in the benefits (of the *Ziyarat*) is due to the
difference in the levels of recognition (in the people reciting the
*Ziyarat*) of the rights of Imam al-Husayn (AS), as the narration
mentions the condition (for benefiting from the *Ziyarat)* is to be
aware of the rights of Imam al-Husayn, blessings of Allah, the High,
upon him.[^26]

A Mystical Firebrand
--------------------

Having now realized the intrinsic beneficial nature and the importance
of ziyarah it befits the wayfarer and the slave of the visited one to
reflect upon the inner meanings of the act of *Ziyarat*. The etymology
of the word stems from زور , originally meaning ‘to move away’ from a
thing. Ahmad Ibn Faris comments that the term is used to refer to the
act of *Ziyarat* because when a person visits another, he has
effectively moved his attention away from everyone and everything else
to concentrate upon the visited one. Fayumi adds that Ziyarat involves
honouring the visited one and making a bond with them.[^27] Ayatullah
Jawadi Amoli suggests that the turning away may also be from the
material world of bodies and quiddity towards the celestial realm of
souls and spirits.[^28]

The *Ziyarat* should therefore transport us into a higher level of
consciousness and spiritual being. Freedom from the world of matter is
essential if we are to reach the heights of our potential. An
interesting narration quoted by Marhum Tustari encapsulates this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ من زاره كان كمن زار الله تعالى في عرشه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely one who visits him (Imam al-Husayn) is like one who visits Allah
at His throne.[^29]

Tustari’s own relfection on this hadith is to conclude that ‘visiting
Allah’ is an allusion to the intense proximity with Allah (SwT), in this
instance achieved through the *Ziyarat*.

Whereas proximity to Allah (SwT) can only come about through a polished
level of faith and cleanliness of the heart. Hence, the *Ziyarat* of the
Martyr of Kerbala assists and facilitates to complete one’s level of
faith, and cleanse the heart, resulting ultimately in the intense
closeness with Allah (SwT).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
پیروی رسول حق، دوستی حق آورد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
پیروی رسول کن، دوستی خدا طلب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شرع، سفینۀ نجات، آل رسول، ناخداست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ساکن این سفینه شو دامن ناخدا طلب
  </p>
</blockquote>

Following the Prophet of Truth, brings about the friendship of Truth;  
 So follow the Prophet, thereby seek the friendship of Truth.  
 The Shari’ah, is the ship of salvation, the Family of the Prophet, is
its captain;  
 Abide aboard the ship and seek to hold tight to the captain.[^30]

Through our closeness with the Ahl al-Bayt (AS), we are also able to
benefit from some of the grace which they are granted. In Sura al-Ahzab,
in one of the most well-known and oft-recited verses of the Qur\`an,
Allah (SwT) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ وَمَلاَئِكَـتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَى النَّبِىِّ يَاأَيُّهَا
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا صَلُّواْ عَلَيْهِ وَسَلِّمُواْ تَسْلِيما
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed Allah and Angels bless the Prophet; O you who believe! Invoke
blessings upon him and and invoke salutations upon him with a worthy
salutation***.[^31]

Perhaps we miss too easily our own potential in reaching such a stage,
where Allah (SwT) and His angels can bless us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَاأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا اللهَ ذِكْراً كَثِيراً
وَسَبِّحُوهُ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلاً هُوَ الَّذِى يُصَلِّى عَلَيْكُمْ
وَمَلاَئِكَتُهُ لِيُخْرِجَكُمْ مِّنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ
وَكَانَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَحِيماً تَحِيَّتُهُمْ يَوْمَ يَلْقَوْنَهُ
سَلاَمٌ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ أَجْراً كَرِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

O you who believe! Remember Allah with frequent remembrance, and glorify
Him morning and evening. It is He who sends His blessings to you and so
do His angels, that He may bring you out of the darkness into light, and
He is Most Merciful to the believers. The day they encounter Him their
greeting will be ‘Peace’, and He holds in store for them a noble
reward.[^32]

Thus Allah (SwT) and His angels also bless certain fallible beings –
those that have inculcated within themselves a plentiful remembrance.
The result of this blessing is that Allah (SwT) is able to empower them
to come forth from darkness into light. As we have seen, the very same
effect is true when visiting the Infallibles, who assist in our
spiritual migration towards Allah (SwT) and away from the material
world. Because their source is ultimate purity, the Absolute Truth, in
calling upon them to provide us with our spiritual guidance we are
confident of the veracity and accuracy of the offerings we can obtain
from them. Again this points towards *Tabarri and Tawalli:* ensuring
that our hosts are true hosts and truly able to offer us munificence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَنْظُرِ الإِنْسَانُ إِلَى طعَامِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

So let man consider his food.[^33]

Regarding the verse above, Imam al-Sadiq (AS) has declared that the
allegorical meaning of the word food is ‘knowledge’. He states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِلْمُهُ الَّذِي يَأْخُذُهُ عَمَّنْ يَأْخُذُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is his knowledge that he acquires – from whom does he acquire
it?[^34]

By ensuring our source of information and spiritual nourishment is pure,
we will be able to avoid spiritual stagnation and prove to be a true
instance of leaving the darkness and entering the light.

Ziyarat: The Return Journey from Truth (Al-Haqq) to Creation (Al-Khalq)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

According to the commandments from the Holy Threshold (الناحية المقدّسة)
of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS), once this enlightenment is achieved, the
journey of the new possessors of light continues onwards towards their
fellow human beings. As a recipient and now a guardian of this light,
the true servant of the Holy Threshold discharges the duties placed upon
him by helping others to emerge from darkness. He becomes the true
manifestation as described in Sura al-An’am:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَ مَنْ كَانَ مَيْتاً فَأَحْيَيْنَاهُ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُوراً
يَمْشِى بِهِ فِى النَّاسِ كَمَن مَّثَلُهُ فِى الظُّلُمَاتِ لَيْسَ
بِخَارِجٍ مِّنْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is he who was lifeless, then we granted him life, and granted him a
light by which he walks among people, like one whose likeness is that of
one who dwells in manifold darkness which he cannot escape?***[^35]

Hence the truly enlightened one seeks to offer the light and bounties he
receives to others, to help them in their quest for enlightenment, and
in this way may become worthy of the epithet of being a servant at the
courtyard of the Holy Threshold.

Ziyarat: At The Master’s Service
--------------------------------

Thus far we have indulged ourselves in seeking from the Infallibles of
the Holy Family. There is however a level of servitude and obligation
expected of us, which demonstrates the comprehensiveness of Islam – a
religion of faith, belief, spirituality **and** action. The Master of
the believers describes this relationship in sermon 34 of the Nahj
al-Balagha. He begins by outlining the rights that we enjoy over him
which include:

1. He should advise us with sincerity  
 2. He should collect the monies for the public treasury and spend them
according to our needs  
 3. He should ensure our education so we do not remain ignorant  
 4. He should nurture us into truly scholarly people

The Imam then mentions the rights he enjoys over us:

1. Loyalty to his allegiance  
 2. To do *Nasihah* to him in both his presence and absence  
 3. To answer his call when he calls us  
 4. To be obedient to his command

The second item in this list is worthy of some deeper contemplation. The
word *Nasihah* in this context should not be confused with the common
usage of the word which translates to ‘advice’. In this instance we are
considering the choicest Imam and the truest leader, an Infallible, and
the epitome of perfection; so how could advice be given from us to he
who is guided by Allah (SwT), himself being the Straight Path of
salvation?

A closer consideration of the term *al-Nasihah* will reveal that its
true meaning is the opposite meaning of غِشّ, a term used to denote any
type of dilutedness or taintedness. For example milk that has been mixed
with water is referred to as *Maghshush (مغشوش),* from the same root as
غشّ. According to this analysis, this would render the meaning of
*Nasihah* in this context to its root: freedom from any type of
dilutedness or taintedness. This meaning has also been used in the
Qur\`an where Allah (SwT) commands the believers to repent with
sincerity. The word used, *Nusuhan,* stems from the same root as
*Nasihah:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا تُوبُوا إِلَى اللهِ تَوبَتاً نَصُوحاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Repent to Allah with sincere repentance!***[^36]

The scholars of ethics have also elaborated the meaning of *Nasihah* to
be the opposite of jealousy *(Hasad)*. This would add a further
dimension to the meaning of *Nasihah* to be that someone who truly
possesses the trait of *Nasihah* will wish a bounty for his brother
believer that will be in his brother’s benefit and something that he
would wish for himself; and naturally such an act would also need to be
free from any form of taintedness.[^37] Therefore, offering sincere
advice that is open, honest and in the benefit of the one being advised,
is only one manifestation of the trait of *Nasihah* and not the entire
meaning of the term.

Thus the Imam in this context, by using the word *Nasihah,* regards one
of his rights over us as complete sincerity without any form of
taintedness. This will apply both in his presence, and equally in his
absence. Our conduct in thought, belief and action, should be such that
the master whom we are visiting attains confidence that we are truly
his, sincerely for him, and utterly devoted to his cause. The following
narration may clarify this further:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله : من يضمن لي خمساً أضمن له الجنّة ... النصيحة لله عز و
جل والنصيحة لرسوله والنصيحة لكتاب الله والنصيحة لدين الله والنصيحة
لجماعة المسلمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (S) has said, “He who can guarantee me five things, I
will guarantee for him Paradise … *Nasihah* for Allah The Mighty and The
Glorious, and *Nasihah* for His Prophet, and *Nasihah* for the book of
Allah, and *Nasihah* for the religion of Allah, and *Nasihah* to the
Muslim nation.”[^38]

In the words of the Prophet, Paradise may be earned by someone who is
pure, sincere and untainted in his conduct towards Allah (SwT), His
Prophet, His Book, His Religion and to the Muslim Ummah.

Ziyarat: A Structured Approach To The Meeting Place At The Two Seas
-------------------------------------------------------------------

**Ziyarat: A Structured Approach to the Meeting Place at the Two
Seas**[^39]

Marhum Tustari[^40] has elaborated on a series of special timings at
which the benefits and rewards of the *Ziyarat* of Imam al-Husayn (AS)
is particularly enhanced:

1. Every Friday  
 2. Every Month[^41]  
 3. Twice per year in person for those able to afford  
 4. Thrice per year, to guarantee freedom from poverty  
 5. On the happy occasions of Nowruz, Mab’ath, Ghadir and others  
 6. In Rajab:  
 a. On the night preceding the first day of Rajab

b. On the first day of Rajab

c. On the night preceding the fifteenth day of Rajab

d. On the fifteenth day of Rajab

7. In Sha’ban:  
 a. On the third day of Sha’ban

b. On the night preceding the fifteenth day of Sha’ban

c. On the fifteenth day of Sha’ban

8. In Ramadhan:  
 a. At any time

b. On the night preceding the first day of Ramadhan

c. On the night preceding the fifteenth day of Ramadhan

d. On the last night of Ramadhan

e. On each of the nights of Qadr and the subsequent days

9. In Dhu al-Hijjah:  
 a. On the night preceding the day of ‘Arafa

b. On the day of ‘Arafa

c. On the night preceding ‘Eid al-Adha

d. On the day of ‘Eid al-Adha

e. On the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth days of Dhu al-Hijjah

f. On the day of ‘Eid al-Ghadir

10. In Muharram:  
 a. On the night preceding ‘Ashura and on the day of ‘Ashura

b. On the thirteenth day of Muharram

11. In Safar:  
 a. On the twentieth day of Safar

These are some of the meritorious times mentioned for the *Ziyarat* of
Imam al-Husayn (AS). However, such an action is praiseworthy and would
yield benefits to an attentive and sincere heart at any time.  
 We beseech the master of martyrs to allow us his visitation and
remembrance as long as Allah (SwT) grants us life and as long as time
subsists.

Abbas Mohamed Husein Ismail  
 London  
 3 December 2008  
 4 Dhu al-Hijjah 1429

[^1]: Holy Qur\`an, 51:56

[^2]: Al-Saduq, ‘Ilal al-Shara’i

[^3]: Holy Qur\`an, 42:11

[^4]: Ibid. 5:35

[^5]: M. Tahriri, Simaye Mukhbitin, Mishkat, Tehran, 2000, pp.13-14

[^6]: Holy Qur\`an, 4:80

[^7]: Ibid. 42:23, 33:33

[^8]: J. Amoli, Adab e Finaye Muqarraban, Isra, Qum, 2002, p.55

[^9]: Holy Qur\`an, 30:30

[^10]: J. Amoli, Adab e Finaye Muqarraban, Isra, Qum, 2002, p.18

[^11]: J. Amoli, Sahbaye Safa, Mashar, 2001, p.26

[^12]: A. Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: J. Amoli, Adab e Finaye Muqarraban, Isra, Qum, 2002, p.32

[^15]: M. Najafi, Jawahir al-Kalam, volume 20

[^16]: See A. Amini, al-Ghadir, volume 5

[^17]: M. al-Kulayni, al-Kafi

[^18]: J. Amoli, Adab e Finaye Muqarraban, Isra, Qum, 2002, p.62

[^19]: M. al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, volume 27

[^20]: M. Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, volume 99

[^21]: J. Amoli, Sahbaye Safa, Mashar, 2001, p.29

[^22]: Ibid. p.30

[^23]: Holy Qur\`an, 2:115

[^24]: Ibid. 2:81

[^25]: J. Amoli, Sahbaye Safa, Mashar, 2001, p.31

[^26]: J. Tustari, al-Khasais al-Husayniyyah, p.164

[^27]: J. Amoli, Adab e Finaye Muqarraban, Isra, Qum, 2002, p.23

[^28]: Ibid.

[^29]: J. Tustari, al-Khasais al-Husayniyyah, p.165

[^30]: M. F. Kashani, Diwan e Fayz Kashani, p.32. The word ‘daman’ in
Farsi has not been translated literally but rather its contextual
meaning (au)

[^31]: Holy Qur\`an, 33:56

[^32]: Ibid. 33:41-44

[^33]: Ibid. 80:24

[^34]: J. Amoli, Sahbaye Safa, Mashar, 2001, p.230 quoted from Safinah
al-Bihar

[^35]: Holy Qur\`an, 6:122

[^36]: Ibid. 66:8

[^37]: J. Amoli, Adab e Finaye Muqarraban, Isra, Qum, 2002, p.52

[^38]: M. Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, volume 2

[^39]: An allusion to Holy Qur’an, 18:60

[^40]: J. Tustari, al-Khasais al-Husayniyyah, pp.166-168

[^41]: Tustari quotes Imam al-Sadiq , “Whosoever performs his Ziyarah
(at least) one time per month, will earn the reward of one hundred
thousand martyrs like those slain in Badr.”


