The Source of Ziyarat ‘Ashura` and its Authenticity
===================================================

Ziyarat ‘Ashura\` is a sacred tradition (hadith qudsi) which is
authentic and veracious. Its main references are two fundamental works
of authority:

1. Misbah al-Mutahajjid by Shaykh al-Tusi

2. Kamil al-Ziyarat by Ibn Qulawayh

All the traditions that narrate this ziyara are proven by scholars of
hadith to be sound and veracious. In order to establish their
authenticity, they have discussed all the chains of narration at length
and proven the reliability of every narrator. Those interested in
understanding the intricacies of the traditions may refer to works
written in this regard.[^1]

The contemporary venerated jurisconsult, Ayatullah Sayyid al-Shubayri
al-Zanjani (may Allah protect his noble spirit) was asked about the
authenticity of Ziyarat ‘Ashura\` and he responded saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بغض النظر عن التأييدات الغيبية الواردة بطرق معتبرة حول زيارة عاشوراء
والتي برأسها دليل على اعتبار هذه الزيارة الشريفة، فإنَّ السند المذكور
في مصباح المتهجد في ذيل هذه الزيارة سند صحيح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Disregarding what has been narrated from reliable sources about its
endorsement from the unseen realm (*al-ta’yidat al-ghaybiyya*), which in
itself suffices as a proof of the authenticity of this sacred *Ziyarat*,
the chain of narration mentioned in *Misbah al-Mutahajjid* after this
*Ziyarat* is veracious.[^2]

Other Ways of Establishing Authenticity
---------------------------------------

Apart from the aforesaid, the authenticity of this radiant *Ziyarat* can
be established through other methods considered in the science of
*hadith*. For example, there are many other *ziyarat* where expressions
similar to those contained in Ziyarat ‘Ashura\` appear. This indirectly
endorses the veracity of the *Ziyarat*.

Furthermore, much of the information contained in the *Ziyarat* has come
in so many of our traditions, some of which are copiously narrated and
even rank among the traditions that are successively narrated
(*mutawatir*) in terms of meaning at least.

Shaykh Muhammad al-Sanad, one of the contemporary Shi’a scholars, when
asked about the veracity of the different supplications and *ziyarat*,
including Ziyarat ‘Ashura\`, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان مضأمين الزيارات والأدعية المدرجة في السؤال لا يقتصر ورود مضمونها
على تلك الزيارات والأدعية فهناك العديد من الزيارات الأخرى والاًدعية
الأخرى بأسانيد اُخرى قريبة المضمون معنىً ولفظاً لقطعات من الاُولى، كما
أن هذه الزيارات والأدعية قد ورد كثير من مضامينها في الروايات الواردة
في المعارف، وهي في كثير من طوائفها مستفيضة بل بعضها متواتر معنوي أو
إجمالي، وعلى هذا فالدغدغة في أسانيد هذه الزيارة أو تلك أو هذا الدعاء
وذاك تنطوي على عدم المام بهذه الحقيقة العلمية المرتبطة بعلم الحديث
والرواية
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed the contents of the ziyarat and supplications under question do
not only appear in their respective places, but there are a number of
other ziyarat and supplications with other chains of narration, that
have similar contents both in word and meaning. Furthermore most of
their contents have been narrated in other traditions on Divine
Teachings, many of which have been copiously narrated.

Rather some of them are also successively narrated (mutawatir) in their
meaning and gist. Therefore being worried about the chains of narration
of this Ziyarat or that or this supplication or that, is because of
disregarding this intellectual reality that pertains to the science of
traditions and narrations.[^3]

Those, therefore, who persist in doubting the authenticity of the
*Ziyarat* overlook the other factors that strongly endorse the
*Ziyarat*. The great Shi’a scholars have always lived with this
*Ziyarat* and many of them incessantly recite it with great zeal and
humility.

Some ignorant people, due to the expression of imprecation contained in
the *Ziyarat* try to doubt its authenticity. Such people feel that Islam
is a religion of peace and hence such words must not be uttered. In
response to them, we say that curse is not any kind of abusive
expression. Its reality, as we shall come to learn in the commentary of
the *Ziyarat* is to seek the remoteness of the accursed.

Such prayer for remoteness, considering its Qur\`anic origin, is nothing
but harmony with Allah’s Volition. We shall also learn that cursing
those who established the foundation of oppression and evil is also a
kind of expression of one’s stance against evil. If one tries to reflect
carefully, one would understand that the spirit of cursing evil and its
epitomes it to flee from imperfection. It is important for us therefore
to tear off the veils of the periphery of the *Ziyarat* and touch the
center and appreciate the universal message that it confers.

*La’n* and invoking curse is not merely an emotional state of anger that
is evanescent. It is a translation of the reality. Therefore whether we
invoke curse on them, or not they will always be distanced from the
mercy of Allah (SwT), due to the seeds of mischief that they had sown in
this world.

Seeking the kernel of the curses, we would come to realize that we have
parables of Yazid and Mu’awiya in our time and age too. If we cursed the
Yazid of a thousand years ago, it was not because of himself per se, but
his ideology and actions. The Yazid of today must be repelled the same
way. This is the message of curse.

May the Almighty enable us understand the spirit of the *Ziyarat*, so
that we avoid discussing trivial issues that distance us from a sacred
effusion that rains down perpetually and requires receptive
containers.  
 The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْزَلَ مِنَ السَّماءِ ماءً فَسالَتْ أَوْدِيَةٌ بِقَدَرِها
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He sends down water from the sky whereat the valleys are flooded to
[the extent of] their capacity…(13:17)***

*All Praises Belong to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds*

[^1]: The contemporary scholar Ayatullah Ja’far Subhani has written a
separate treatise on establishing the veracity of Ziyarat ‘Ashura\`
[http://www.Imamsadeq.org/book/sub3/rasaeel-va-maghalat-j3/]

[^2]: http://www.alhodacenter.com/ashora/details.php?id=2996

[^3]: http://www.rafed.net/research/05/06.html


