Chapter 1: Peace be on you, O entirely obedient servant of Allah
================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be on You, O entirely obedient servant of Allah

Commentary
----------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto You

*Salam* is an infinitive noun commonly translated as “peace”. Its
literal import, however, is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّعَرّي مِنَ الآفَاتِ الظَّاهِرَةِ وَالْبَاطنَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“to be free from calamities, whether apparent or hidden.”[^1]

Therefore by saying “*Al-salamu ‘alayka*” in its invocative sense, we
are seeking the state of freedom from every kind of calamity, whether
apparent or hidden, for Imam al-Husayn (AS).

It is clear that the Imam (AS) already enjoys the state of *salam* and
is in fact one of the manifestations of Allah’s attribute *al-Salam.* In
one of the *ziyarat* when addressing him we say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَوْمَ وُلِدْتَ وَيَوْمَ تَمُوْتُ وَيَوْمَ
تُبْعَثُ حَيّا، اَشْهَدُ اَنّكَ حَيّ شَهِيْدٌ تُرْزَقُ عِنْدَ
رَبّكَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

You were at peace the day you were born, and will be at peace the day
you die, and the day you will be raised alive. Surely I bear witness
that you are a living martyr receiving sustenance near Your Lord...[^2]

Here the phrase ‘*Al-salamu ‘alayka*’ is taken as a declarative
statement, and thus the difference of translation. Therefore we bear
witness that Imam al-Husayn (AS) was and will always remain in the state
of *salam*.

In a tradition about the nocturnal ascent (*al-mi’raj*) of the Holy
Prophet (S) it is reported that when the Holy Prophet (S) encountered a
group of Angels, Divine Apostles and Prophets, it was said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مُحَمَّدُ سَلِّمْ عَلَيْهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Muhammad, convey your salutations to them.

So he (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلامُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَةُ اللَّهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

May the peace of Allah, His mercy and His blessings be upon you

Thereupon Allah revealed unto him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلامَُ وَالتَّحِيَّةُ وَالرَّحْمَةُ وَالْبَرَكَاتُ أَنْتَ
وَذُرِّيَّتُكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Peace, benedictions, mercy and blessings, are you and your progeny.[^3]

Here the Holy Prophet (S) and his progeny (*dhurriyya*) are introduced
as *“al-salam”*. Hence, seeking *salam* for Imam al-Husayn (AS), would
mean seeking higher degrees of the state of *salam* for him, since the
levels of *salam* in the plane of contingent existence have no end. The
level of *salam* in which there is no kind of imperfection whatsoever is
that of *al-Salam al-Mutlaq (the Absolute Peace)*, which solely belongs
to Almighty Allah. The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ اللَّهُ الَّذِي لا إِلهَ إِلا هُوَ الْمَلِكُ الْقُدُّوسُ
السَّلامُ الْمُؤْمِنُ الْمُهَيْمِنُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He is Allah, other than Whom there is no God, the Sovereign Lord, the
Holy One, the Peace [Free from every kind of imperfection], the Securer,
the Guardian...(59:23)***

Commenting on the Divine Name *al-Salam*, ‘Allama al-Tabataba\`i in his
*Tafsir al-Mizan* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّلاَمُ مِنْ أَسْمَائِهِ تَعَالَى لأَنَّ ذَاتَهُ الْمُتَعَالِيَةَ
نَفْسُ الْخَيْرِ الَّذِيْ لاَ شَرَّ فِيْهِ‏...
  </p>
</blockquote>

And *al-Salam* is among His Names, for His Exalted Essence is sheer
goodness wherein there is no evil...[^4]

And in a tradition, Hadhrat Fatima al-Zahra’ (AS) referring to this kind
of *salam* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ هُوَ السَّلاَمُ، وَمِنْهُ السّلاَمُ، وَإِلَيْهِ السّلاَم .
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely only Allah is *the Absolute Peace* and from Him alone comes peace
and unto Him alone returns peace[^5]

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have once informed Hadhrat Khadija
(AS) that Gabriel was nearby and he sent his *salams* to her. Thereupon
she said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللهُ السّلاَمُ وَلِلّهِ السَّلاَمُ وَعَلىَ جِبْرَائِيل السَّلاَمُ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah is the Absolute Peace, and to Him alone belongs peace and upon
Gabriel be peace.[^6]

And since the Absolute Peace loves us, He always invites us to His abode
of peace:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يَدْعُو إِلى‏ دارِ السَّلامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Allah invites to the abode of peace...(10:24)***

The indefinite verb *yad’u* in the above verse confers the sense of
continuity, which means that Allah constantly invites us towards His
abode of peace, which is Paradise. Some commentators however confer a
subtler interpretation, and say that Allah is *al-Salam*, which means
that He is free from every kind of imperfection whatsoever. And when He
invites us to *Dar al-Salam*, He calls us to the state of freedom from
every kind of imperfection whatsoever. His call will remain constant,
for the stages of *salam* have no end. In his commentary on the above
verse, *al-Bahrani* narrates the following tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الْعَلاَء ا بْن عَبْدِ الْكَرِيْمِ، قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ أَبَا
جَعْفَريَقُوْلُ فِيْ قَوْلِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: وَاللَّهُ يَدْعُوا
إِلىَ‏ دارِ السَّلامِ، فَقَالَ: إِنَّ السَّلاَمَ، هُوَ اللهُ عَز
وَجَلَّ، وَدَارُهُ الَّتِي خَلَقَهَا لأَوْلِيَائِهِ اَلْجَنَّةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-’Ala\` bin ‘Abd al-Karim reports: I heard Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (AS)
saying about the verse ‘And Allah calls towards the abode of peace’:
Indeed *al-Salam* is Allah, the Invincible and Magnificent, and His
abode that He created for His near ones is Paradise.[^7]

*Al-janna* in the above tradition is prefixed with the definite article
*‘al’* which also confers the connotation of a specific kind of
paradise. And since Allah (SwT) principally always calls towards the
best, for his grace pours out infinitely, the loftiest paradise one can
ever achieve is *jannat al-liqa’* (the paradise of meeting Allah). Here
the aspirant of paradise yearns for nothing but the proximity and vision
of the All-Beloved. And scholars of insight have said that the journey
to perfection never ends. Therefore it is very apt to constantly call
every one to the abode of the Absolute Peace.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto You

The definite article *‘al’* in the abovementioned phrase conveys
different meanings. It can be taken to allude to something known both to
the adressor as well as his addressee.[^8] And because it is clear to
all that no kind of perfection comes from anyone save Allah, for He
alone is the Principal Cause of the universe, we are only permitted to
seek perfection from Him in the independent sense. Therefore if we
employ the phrase *al-salamu ‘alayka* in the invocative sense, we can
translate it as ‘*the peace from Allah be upon you*’. This is when we
take the article *al* to refer to the specific peace that comes from
Allah, which is a Divine bestowal and creation.

However if we translate *al-salam* in the phrase *al-salamu ‘alayka* as
“the specific peace that Allah possesses”, then we are seeking Absolute
Peace for Imam al-Husayn (AS). In other words, we are seeking the
ultimate state for the Imam (AS). Seeking such kind of peace is not
unprecedented. In the well-known supplication of *al-Sahar* of the Holy
month of Ramadhan we seek the Divine Names in their perfect form. In
fact the innate nature of every human being has been faishioned to
aspire for the Infinite.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are at peace from my side

If the *za’ir* however were to consider *‘al’* to refer to himself, the
above phrase can be taken as declarative. In other words, he is trying
to say: سلاَمِيْ عَلَيْكَ *Salami ‘alayka* (You are at peace from my
side)[^9]. Consequently, the *za’ir* is trying to assure the *mazur*
(the visited one) that he is at peace with him and he would not do
anything that would cause harm or disturb him. Instead, he would
manifest in himself things that would be geared to seek the *mazur’s*
protective physical as well as spiritual life. This is one of the very
important stations of the *za’ir*, since he is in fact reasserting his
covenant with Almighty Allah, by informing his beloved Imam (AS) that
besides avoiding anything that would cause harm to him (AS), he would do
those things that would manifest the spirit of peace as well.

One of the things that does not concur with the spirit of *salam* is to
sin. If one utters the above statement and then engages in sin, he will
not have maintained the spirit of the *salam* that he uttered. This is
because the fourteen infallibles (AS) have the ability to witness the
actions of their followers. And when they find them sinning, they get
disturbed.

Following are narrations that establish the infallible Imam’s ability to
vision the deeds of his followers:

1. We humbly express in the well-known *Ziyarat al-Jami’a al-Kabira*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتُمُ الصِّرَاط الاَقْوَمُ وَشُهَدَاءُ دَارِ الْفَنَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

...You are the upright path and **the witnesses of the abode of
extinction** [i.e. the world...][^10]

2. Imam al-Sadiq (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ فِي قَوْلِهِ وَقُلِ اعْمَلُوا فَسَيَرَى
اللَّهُ عَمَلَكُمْ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
هَاهُنَا الائِمَّةُ الطاهِرَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Believers referred to in the verse “And say, go on working: Allah will
see your conduct, and His ***Apostle and the believers [as well]”
(9:105)*** are the Immaculate Imams (AS).[^11]

Hence the Imams (AS) can behold our mistakes and wrong deeds, and when
they do so, they get upset:

1. Thiqat al-Islam al-Kulayni narrates the following tradition in his
al-Kafi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ سَمَاعَةَ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ قَالَ سَمِعْتُهُ يَقُولُ مَا
لَكُمْ تَسُوءُونَ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ فَقَالَ رَجُلٌ كَيْفَ نَسُوؤُهُ
فَقَالَ أَمَا تَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّ أَعْمَالَكُمْ تُعْرَضُ عَلَيْهِ
فَإِذَا رَأَى فِيهَا مَعْصِيَةً سَاءَهُ ذَلِكَ فَلاَ تَسُوءُوا رَسُولَ
اللَّهِ وَ سُرُّوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Suma’a reports: I heard him (i.e. Imam al-Sadiq (AS)) say: What is the
matter with you? Why do you displease the Messenger of Allah (S)?
Thereupon a man asked him: And how do we displease him? The Imam (AS)
said: Don’t you know that your actions are presented before him; and
when he finds a sin in them, he is displeased; therefore do not
displease the Messenger of Allah (S) but (rather) make him happy.[^12]

2. Al-Kulayni also narrates the following tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ أَبَانٍ الزَّيَّاتِ وَكَانَ مَكِيناً عِنْدَ
الرِّضَا قَالَ: قُلْتُ لِلرِّضَا: ادْعُ اللَّهَ لِي وَلِأَهْلِ بَيْتِي
فَقَالَ أَ وَلَسْتُ أَفْعَلُ وَاللَّهِ إِنَّ أَعْمَالَكُمْ لَتُعْرَضُ
عَلَيَّ فِي كُلِّ يَوْمٍ وَلَيْلَةٍ قَالَ فَاسْتَعْظَمْتُ ذَلِكَ
فَقَالَ لِي أَ مَا تَقْرَأُ كِتَابَ اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَ قُلِ
اعْمَلُوا فَسَيَرَى اللَّهُ عَمَلَكُمْ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
قَالَ هُوَ وَاللَّهِ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طالِبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abdullah bin Aban al-Zayyat, a distinguished personality near Imam
al-Ridha (AS), reports: I said to al-Ridha (AS): Pray to Allah for me
and my family, and he said: Don’t I do that? I swear by Allah surely
your actions are presented to me every day and night. “I was extremely
amazed at that,” says al-Zayyat. Then the Imam (AS) said: Do you not
read the Book of Allah, the Invincible and Exalted, who says: ***(And
say, Go on working: Allah will see your conduct, and His Apostle and the
faithful [as well])? (9:105)*** I swear by Allah ‘*the faithful*’
mentioned in this verse is ‘Ali bin Abi Talib.[^13]

Hence engaging in sin, and being inconsistent with the spirit of
*salam,* makes us violate our covenant with the Imam (AS). Those,
therefore who recite their *ziyarat* without considering this vital
point, are either hypocrites or weaklings who like to utter lies in
front of the Imam (AS).

There is a group of sinful reciters, however, whom the self that
excessively invites one to evil (*al-nafs al-ammara*) has weakened, but
are nevertheless hopeful for change. Whenever such people recite the
*Ziyarat*, they should experience utter humiliation, and always seek
change. They must realize that in order for one to prosper and change,
one should perpetually seek Divine Succor and make a firm resolve to
leave all those things that are forbidden, however minute they may seem
to appear.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

May peace from Allah be upon you

Sometimes the article *‘al’* is employed as a substitute for the second
particle (*mudhafun ilayhi*) of a genetive construction. For example,
when referring to a book whose owner is known to be a certain Zayd, we
can say *al-kitabu* (the book) instead of saying كِتَابُ زَيْدٍ *kitabu
Zaydin* (Book of Zayd). Here the article ‘*al*’ is a substitute for
Zayd. Likewise ‘*al*’ in ‘*al-salamu*’ can be a substitute for a
particular person. And bearing in mind that there is no perfection
whatsoever but that it originates from Allah, and that the preposition
عَلى’*ala*’ indicates that the origin of s*alam* is from a higher plane
of existence and we know that there is no Absolutely High save Allah,
‘*al*’ can be said to refer to Allah. In this case the statement
*al-salamu ‘alayka* either means peace from Allah be upon you, or ‘peace
of Allah’ be upon you.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I surrender all my affairs to you

Another meaning of *salam* documented by lexicographers is ‘*al-taslim*’
(to surrender). Therefore the statement ‘*Al-salamu ‘alayka*’ would mean
‘I surrender myself to you’. In other words, we are trying to tell Imam
al-Husayn (AS) that “I am your slave. Whatever you say, I shall obey.
Your desire is mine. If you want me to reform myself and others, I shall
do so.” If we look at the matter from an ontological (*takwini*) point
of view, we come to realize that whether we declare our slavehood or
not, the Imam’s light, which according to different traditions, is an
intermediary of grace (*wasitat al-faydh*), dominates us. Nevertheless
the Divine law has facilitated volitional action, and thus nothing is
forced on anyone. When surrending ourself to the Imam (AS) let us
secretly ask the Imam (AS) to assist us and make us serious and keep us
steadfast in our commitment.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto You

Sometimes, the article *‘al’* in *al-salam* conveys either of the
following meanings: (1) All kinds of peace, (2) The most perfect kind of
peace, or (3) The absolute peace. This is when the definite article
*‘al’* denotes ‘genus’ (*al-jins*) or ‘species’. Grammatically, whenever
the definite article *‘al’* is taken to denote genus, one of the
following three implications can be gotten:

• All the extensions (*masadiq*) of the genus (*jins*) are taken into
consideration. For example, in chapter *al-’Asr* we say: *Inna al-insana
lafi khusr*, we mean ‘**every human being** is in loss’ (103:2) because
*al* in ‘*al-insan*’ denotes genus and all the extensions of genus are
taken into consideration. In our case, when we say *‘al-salamu ‘alayka’*
in the invocative sense, we mean “*all kinds of peace be upon you*”

• All the extensions of the perfect attributes of the genus are taken
into consideration. For example, when we say *hadha huwa al-rajul*, we
mean, ‘*this is a perfect man*’ because ‘*al-rajul*’ denotes ‘*the man
who has all the perfections of a man*’. In our case, when we say
*al-salamu ‘alayka* in the invocative sense, we mean ‘*perfect peace be
upon you*’.

• The genus (*jins*) in its absolute sense. In other words no limitation
is attributed to the genus. It denotes an *absolute form.* Therefore
when we say*: al-salamu ‘alayka*, we can mean *Absolute Peace without
any limitations, be upon you.* In this case, therefore, we are seeking
the highest level of peace for Imam al-Husayn (AS)*.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

May peace from Allah **envelop You**

A grammatical intricacy worthy of consideration is that the preposition
عَلَى *‘ala* in اَلسّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ *Al-salamu ‘alayka* denotes the
sense of envelopment[^14]. In other words we are asking Almighty Allah
to envelop and cover Imam al-Husayn (AS) with the state of peace and
freedom from every apparent and hidden calamity that is according to his
noble essence. Therefore *al-salamu ‘alayka* would mean: “May Allah
**envelop** you with the state of peace.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace from Allah envelop **you**

Another important point to bear in mind is that the second person
masculine pronoun كَ ‘*ka*’ in عَلَيْكَ*’alayka* presupposes the
presence of the *za’ir’s* addressee, and this obliges him to attain
receptivity to comprehend and appreciate the same. We do not use the
third person pronoun '*hu’* to indicate that our invocation of *salam*
is for an absent *mazur* (the visited one).

Some of the great saints, due to their spiritual struggle, would attain
levels of receptivity that would enable them to see the Imam (AS) or
listen to the response that our Imam (AS) would give. It is narrated
that the late Rajab ‘Ali al-Khayyat, who was a tailor by occupation, due
to his strict observation of Islamic laws and harmony with the teachings
of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS), was endowed with a penetrating vision and could
appreciate what others cannot. Shaykh Muhammadi Rayshahri in his
collection of the memoirs of this late saint narrates the following
interesting account about him:

One of Shaykh Rajab ‘Ali Khayyat’s devotees said that the Shaykh had
once held a session in the house of one of his friends. Before starting
his talk, he felt somehow weak due to hunger and asked for some bread.
Half a loaf of bread was brought for him to eat, and thereafter he began
the meeting. The following night he said: “Last night I made salutations
to the holy Imams (AS) but I did not see them. I pleaded to find the
reason. I was told intuitively: ‘You had half of that food and the
hunger alleviated. Why then did you eat the other half?! Having some
food that is enough for the body’s need is all right, but extra to that
would cause veil and darkness.’”[^15]

Another interesting account is narrated by Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi
Bahjat, a well-known contemporary saint, who is quoted by one of his
disciples to have said:

One day Shaykh Bahjat (may Allah elevate his status) said to us: In the
past people would travel to the city of Mashhad on camels and mules.
Once some farmers of Jasib, a region of Qum, travelled to Mashhad for
the *Ziyarat* of Imam al-Ridha (AS). On their return they saw a man from
their village carrying a lot of fodder. So they reproved him saying: ‘O
Shaykh, leave struggle for the world, for that would not benefit you and
go to Mashhad at least once, and they started reproving and reprehending
him. The old man said to them: ‘Surely you went to the *ziyara* of the
Imam (AS), but did the Imam (AS) respond to your salutation (*salam*)?
They said: What is this that you are saying?

Is it possible for an Imam who has died to respond to a salutation? The
old man said: what do you mean by saying alive or dead? Indeed the Imam
(AS) sees us and listens to our speech, and what is the benefit of
*Ziyarat* if it is one sided? They said: Is it possible for you to
enable this to happen? He said: Yes; then he stood facing Mashhad and
said: *“Al-salamu ‘alayka ayyuha al-Imam al-Thamin”* (Peace be unto you,
O the Eight Leader of Guidance), and he heard a call that said: *‘Wa
‘alaika al-Salam..’* (And upon you [too] be peace...’). Hearing this the
farmers regretted about what they had said to the old man and felt
ashamed of themselves.[^16]

Dear readers, these were occasions encountered by men who are not
reported to have apparently immersed themselves in intellectual
occupations throughout the day as is the case with Islamic scholars. But
yet we see that they were able to attain receptivity that would qualify
them to see or listen to the call of the Imam (AS). Our endeavor
therefore should be to eradicate the darkness that we have accumulated
in our hearts and lift the veils, so that when we convey our humble
salutations, we are privileged to listen to the sacred response of our
Imam (AS).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

May Allah always envelop you with peace

Another important allusion worthy of consideration is hidden in the kind
of sentence we employ when seeking peace for the Imam (AS) or declaring
the same. Observe that the above sentence is a nominal sentence (*jumla
ismiyya*). It starts with a noun and not a verb. Therefore it signifies
continuity and permanence. Hence we can either translate it as “*May
Allah always envelop you with peace*” or “*You will always be enveloped
with peace from my side*”[^17].

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am at peace with you

Some authoritative lexicographers define s*alam* as extreme coherence
(*al-muwafaqa al-shadida*).[^18] Considering this definition, if we take
the phrase ‘*Al-salamu ‘alayka* as declarative then we are expressing
our extreme harmony and unity with Imam al-Husayn (AS). It is the fear
of such state of *salam* expressed by the revolutionary *za’ir* that led
tyrants like the the *Abbasid al-Mansur al-Dawaniqi*, *Harun al-Rashid*
and *al-Mutawakkil* among other oppressors to hamper and even kill
anyone who visited the shrine of Imam al-Husayn (AS).

In his *Maqatil al-Talibiyyin*, Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani says:

Al-Mutawakkil was very hostile towards the descendants of Abu Talib,
cruel towards their group and suspicious of their activities...It
occurred to him that ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Yahya ibn Khaqan, his vizier, also
used to think badly of them and the denunciation of their activity
seemed good to him. He carried out actions against them that none of the
‘Abbasids before him had carried out. Among these, he ploughed up the
grave of al-Husayn (AS) and removed all trace of it. He put armed
garrisons on the rest of the roads. Anyone they found making a
pilgrimage to it, they brought to him. He killed or punished them
severely.[^19]

Despite all these threats, the aspirants of al-Husayn (AS) flocked like
love birds yearning to express their love before their beloved whose
love had soaked their hearts and gave them no respite. Abu al-Faraj
narrates:

Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Ashnani reported to me: My promise to perform
the pilgrimage seemed impossible in those days because of the terror.
Then I decided to risk my life to do it. A perfume merchant helped me to
do that. We set out to perform the pilgrimage, hiding by day and
travelling by night until we came to the area of al-Ghadhiriyyah. From
there we departed in the middle of the night and went into between two
garrisons so that we came to the grave of al-Husayn (AS). It was hidden
from us. We began to sniff for signs of it and search for some aspect of
it until we came upon it.

The structure, which had been around it, had been torn down and burnt.
Water had been made to flow over it and the place where bricks had been
sunk down so that it had become like a ditch. We performed the rituals
of the pilgrimage to him. We threw ourselves down on the ground and
smelled a fragrance from it which I have never smelled anything like. It
was like some kind of perfume. I asked the perfume merchant, who was
with me, ‘What fragrance is this?’ ‘By God, I have never smelled any
kind of perfume like it,’ he replied. We made our farewells and put
marks around the grave in a number of places. When al-Mutawakkil was
killed, we gathered with a group of the descendants of Abu Talib and the
Shi’ah to go to the grave. We removed the marks and restored it to the
state which it had been before.[^20]

In their astute and accurate directions, the Imams (AS) would also
encourage their followers to go to visit the shrine of Imam al-Husayn
(AS) even at the cost of death and martyrdom. They would inform them
that the more the fear of being attacked the more the reward for
visiting al-Husayn (AS). ‘Allama Majlisi quotes Muhammad bin Muslim
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لِيْ اَبُو جَعْفَرٍ مُحَمّدُ بْنِ عَلِيّ : هَلْ تَاْتِيْ قَبْرَ
الْحُسَيْنِ ؟ قُلْتُ: نَعَمْ عَلى خَوْفٍ وَوَجِلٍ. فَقَالَ لَهُ: مَا
كَانَ مِنْ هَذاَ اَشَدّ فَالثّوَابُ فِيْهِ عَلى قَدَرِ الْخَوْفِ
وَمَنْ خَافَ فِيْ إِتْيَانِهِ آمَنَ اللهُ رُوْعَتَهُ يَوْمَ يَقُوْمُ
النَّاسُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِيْنَ وَانْصَرَفَ بِالْمَغْفِرَةِ
وَسَلَّمَتْ عَلَيْهِ الْمَلآئِكَةُ،وَزَارَهُ النَّبِي وَدَعَا لَهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin ‘Ali (al-Baqir) (AS) said to me: Do you
come to the grave of al-Husayn (AS)? I said: Yes, but in dread and fear.
The Imam (AS) said: ‘If the situation is severe, its reward would be in
proportion to the fear; and whosoever visits him in fear, Allah would
protect his heart on the Day when the people would stand for the Lord of
the Universe; and he would leave in the state of being forgiven, and the
angels would send their salutations to him, and the Holy Prophet (S)
would visit him and pray for him...[^21]

The Imams (AS) likewise expressed their extreme attachment to Imam
al-Husayn (AS). Rather they would encourage others to pray for them near
the radiant dome of Imam al-Husayn (AS). Consider the following
traditions:

1. ‘Allama Majlisi in vol. 101 of his *Bihar al-Anwar* quotes Ibn Abi
Ya’fur to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْتُ لاَبِيْ عَبْدِ اللهِ : دَعَانِيْ الشَّوْقُ إِلَيْكَ اَنْ
تَجَشَّمْتُ إِلَيْكَ عَلى مَشَقَّةٍ فَقَالَ لِيْ: لاَ تَشْكُ رَبَّكَ
فَهَلاَّ اَتَيْتَ مَنْ كَانَ اَعْظَمُ حَقًّا “ عًلًيْكَ مِنِّيْ؟
فَكاَن َمِنْ قَوْلِهِ: “فَهَلاَّ اَتَيْتَ مَنْ كَانَ اَعْظَمُ حَقًّا
عَلَيْكَ مِنِّيْ اَشَدُّ عَلَيَّ مِنْ قَوْلِهِ “ لاَ تَشْكُ رَبَّكَ “
. قُلْتُ: وَمَنْ اَعْظَمُ عَلَيَّ حَقًّا مِنْكَ ؟ قَالَ:اَلْحُسَيْنِ
بْنِ عَلِيّ اَلاَ اَتَيْتَ الْحُسَيْنَ فَدَعَوْتَ اللهَ عِنْدَهُ
وَشَكَوْتَ إِلَيْهِ حَوَايِجَكَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

I said to Abu ‘Abdillah [al-Sadiq (AS)]: My fervent desire to meet you
called me to bear the difficulties to come to you. The Imam (AS) said:
‘Do not complain to your Lord; and why didn’t you come to one who has a
greater right over you than me?’ Ibn Abi Ya’fur says: His statement ‘Why
didn’t you go to one who has a greater right over you than me?’ made me
feel more uneasy than his statement “Do not complain to your Lord”. So I
said: ‘And who has a greater right over me than yourself?” The Imam (AS)
said: “Al-Husayn bin ‘Ali (AS); why didn’t you come to al-Husayn (AS)
and pray to Allah near him, and raise your complaint to Him about your
needs?[^22]

2. Ibn Qulawayh reports in his *Kamil al-Ziyarat* that Abu Hashim
al-Ja’fari, one of the companions of Imam al-Hadi (AS) is reported to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَخَلْتُ عَلى اَبِي الْحَسَنِ عَلِيّ بْنِ مُحَمّد وَهُوَ مَحْمُوْمٌ
عَلِيْلٌ، فَقَالَ لِيْ: يَا اَبَا هِاشَمِ اِبْعَثْ رَجُلاً مِنْ
مَوَالِيْنَا اِلى الْحَائِرِ يَدْعُو اللهَ لِيْ، فَخَرَجْتُ مِنْ
عِنْدِهِ، فَاسْتَقْبَلَنِيْ عَلِيّ بْنِ بِلاَل فَاَعْلَمْتُهُ مَا
قَالَ لِيْ، وَسَاَلْتُهُ اَنْ يَكُوْنَ الرَّجُلُ الَّذِيْ يَخْرُجُ
فَقَالَ: اَلسَّمْعُ وَالطاعَةُ، وَلَكِنَّنِيْ اَقُوْلُ: اِنَّهُ
اَفْضَل مِنَ الْحَائِرِ إِذْ كَانَ بِمَنْزِلَةِ مَنْ فِي الْحَائِرِ،
وَدُعَاؤُهُ لِنَفْسِهِ أَفْضَل مِنْ دُعَائِيْ لَهُ بِالْحَائِرِ،
فَاَعْلَمْتُهُ مَا قَالَ، فَقَالَ لِيْ: قُلْ لَهُ: كَانَ رَسُوْلُ
اللهِ َ أَفْضَل مِنَ الْبَيْتِ وَالْحَجَرِ، وَكَانَ يَطوْفُ
بِالْبَيْتِ وَيَسْتَلِمُ الْحَجَرَ، وَاِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالى بِقَاعًا
يُحِبُّ اَنْ يُدْعى فِيْهَا فَيَسْتَجِيْبُ لِمَنْ دَعَاهُ،
وَالْحَائِرُ مِنْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

I came to Abu al-Hasan (Imam ‘Ali al-Naqi (AS)) while he had fever and
was unwell. He said to me: ‘O Aba Hisham, send one of our followers to
the Ha’ir (the dome of Imam al-Husayn (AS)) to pray to Allah for me. So
I left him and met ‘Ali bin Bilal. I told him what the Imam (AS) had
said and requested him to carry out the duty, and he was at his service.
‘However,’ said he, ‘indeed the Imam (AS) is greater than the Ha’ir, for
he equals the station of the one who is buried in the Ha’ir, and his
supplication for himself is better than my supplication for him in the
Ha’ir.’ Abu Hisham says: I informed the Imam (AS) about what ‘Ali bin
Bilal said, whereupon he said: Tell him that the Apostle of Allah was
better than the *Bayt al-Haram* and the *Hajar al-Aswad*, whereas he
would circumambulate round the Ka’bah and touch the Hajar; and indeed
Allah has places where He loves to be called, so that he may respond to
the call of the caller, and the Ha’ir is one among them.[^23]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto You

*Al-Salam*, as we came to learn earlier, is one of the attributes of
Almighty Allah, which some of his noble servants, like the infallible
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS), due to their utter submission exemplify.
The path for others too is left open. Every human being is invited to
the abode of peace, and therefore he must strive to attain the same. But
a true beliver has an all-embracing heart, and thus yearns for the
betterment of others too. Perhaps that is why we are encouraged to greet
others with *al-salam*. The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلاَمُ اِسْم مِنْ أَسْمَاءِ اللهِ تَعَالى فَافْشُوهُ بَيْنَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Al-Salam* is a name from among the names of Almighty Allah. Therefore,
spread the same between yourselves...[^24]

In fact the word *muslim* has originally been derived from Allah’s Name
*al-Salam*. The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَسَمّى اللهُ باِسْمَينِ سَمَّى بِهمَا أُمّتِى هُوَ السَّلاَمُ
وَسَمَّى أُمّتِي المُسْلِمِينَ، وَهُوَ الْمُؤْمِنُ وَسَمَّى أُمَّتِى
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah named Himself with two names with which he [also] named my nation:
He is *al-Salam* and He named my nation *muslims*, and He is *al-Mu’min*
and He named my nation *mu’mins*.[^25]

Perhaps due to this reason, scholars like Sayyid al-Shubbar in his
*al-Anwar al-Lami’a* and ‘Allama Majlisi in his *Bihar al-Anwar* believe
that one of the meanings of *al-salamu ‘alayka* is[^26]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِسْمُ السَّلاَمِ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

May Allah always envelop you with His Name *al-Salam.*

Therefore, Almighty Allah not only requires each of us to be at peace,
but teaches us to ask for our Muslim brothers and sisters to be availed
of the same. It should be understood however that the levels of peace
are infinite. Therefore invoking peace for others while we greet them
should never cease.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I declare that Absolute Peace envelops you

Scholars of insight mention one of the meanings of the phrase *al-salamu
‘alayka* as “the Divine Name *al-Salam* envelops you, and you are his
manifestation”. In this case the phrase is taken as declarative and
*al-Salam* is taken to mean the Divine Name *al-Salam*. In his *Sharh
al-Asma’*, Mulla Hadi Sabzaw³ari when discussing about the Divine Name
*al-Salam* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...أَحَدُ مَعَانِي قَوْلِنَا: سلام عليك، اَنّ السّلاَمَ الْمُؤْمِنَ
الْمُهَيْمِنَ مُحِيْط عَلَيْكَ وَأَنْتَ مَظْهَرُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

...one of the meanings of our statement ‘*salamun ‘alayk*” is that the
Peace, the Securer, the Guardian envelops you and you are His
manifestation.[^27]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you

It is important to understand the remote distance between the sincerity
of one who merely declares or verbally seeks peace for the *mazur* (‘the
visited one’) and one who personifies peace in every dimension of his
being and actively struggles to ensure the same for the *mazur*. In fact
some of our traditions clearly emphasize the vital role of the practical
application of *al-salam*. Look at the following traditions:

1. ‘Allama Majlisi narrates the following in his *Bihar al-Anwar*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَاءَتْ جَارِيَةٌ لِلْحَسَنِ بِطاقِ رَيْحَانٍ فَقَالَ لَهَا أَنْتَ
حُرٌّ لِوَجْهِ اللَّهِ فَقِيلَ لَهُ فِي ذَلِكَ فَقَالَ أَدَّبَنَا
اللَّهُ تَعَالَى فَقَالَ إِذا حُيِّيتُمْ الْآيَةَ وَكَانَ أَحْسَنُ
مِنْهَاإِعْتَاقَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

One of the slave women of Imam al-Hasan (AS) came to him with a bouquet
of aromatic plants, whereupon the Imam (AS) said to her: You are free
for the sake of Allah. So the Imam (AS) was asked as to why did he free
her, and he said: ‘Almighty Allah trained us and said: *‘**And When***
***you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a better one than it, or
return it...*** **‘(4:86).** And to let her free is better return than
her gift.[^28]

Therefore the *tahiyya* (lit. seeking another’s life & well-being
(*talab al-hayat*)) referred to in the above verse conventionally
translated as ‘greeting’ is not limited to a verbal expression of peace,
but embraces other examples of its etymological definition too such as
‘doing virtue to another’.

2. Imam al-Sadiq (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْمُرَادُ بِالتَّحِيَّةِ فِيْ قَوْلِهِ تِعِالى: وَإِذَا حُيّيْتُمْ
بِتَحِيَّةٍ السَّلاَمُ وَغَيْرُهُ مِنَ الْبِرّ وَالاِحْسَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Al-tahiyyah* (greeting) in the verse **‘*****And when you are greeted
with a greeting...*****’** is to greet and perform other acts of virtue
and good.[^29]

These are traditions that show how practical s*alam* can be. Many of us
do not realize this and conjecture that we have earned ample blessings
and reward for our *salams* as the holy Qur\`an and the sacred
traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and his infallible progeny clearly
exemplify.

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا دَخَلْتُم بُيُوتًا فَسَلِّمُوا عَلَى أَنفُسِكُمْ تَحِيَّةً
مِّنْ عِندِ اللَّهِ مُبَارَكَةً طيِّبَةً كَذَلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللَّهُ
لَكُمُ الْآيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So when you enter houses, greet yourselves with a salutation from
God, blessed and pleasant. Thus does God clarify His signs for you so
that you may apply reason. (24:61)***

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا دَخَلَ اَحَدُكُمْ بَيْتَهُ فَلْيُسَلِّمْ، فَإِنَّهُ يَنْزِلُهُ
الْبَرَكَةُ، وَتَؤْنِسُهُ الْمَلآئِكَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

When one enters his house, he must say *salam*, for that makes blessings
descend on the house and the angels become fond of it.[^30]

Should we restrict these luminant words of guidance to the realm of
speech or do they portray the loftier aspects of the reality of
*al-salam*? In fact if there is no coherence between what the tongue
utters and what the heart and mind feel and what the actions portray,
then how can we claim the honesty of the *musallim* (greeter)?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Aba ‘Abdillah

The word ‘*ya*’ is a vocative particle *(harfu nida’*) employed to call
the *munada* (vocative). In simple terms it is a word used to *call*
someone. However, grammarians hold that يَا’*ya*’ is specifically
employed for that vocative who is at a far distance[^31]. For example,
if we would like to call ‘Ali who is at a far distance, we say
يَاعَلِيّ‘*Ya ‘Ali!’*. The distance considered here was physical and
spatial. Rhetoricians however employ the same when they would like to
praise an exalted personality even if he was very near.

We address Almighty Allah, for example, who is closer to us than our
jugular veins as يَااَلله *Ya Allah*, because the Essence of Allah is
Exalted. In the well-known verse of the Throne (*Ayat al-Kursi*) we
declare this reality of Allah’s Exalted Essence as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He Alone is always the Extremely High & Great (2:255)***[^32]

In our present situation our vocative and addressee is Imam al-Husayn
(AS) who due to his freedom from the limitations of the material world
and comprehensive being is intensely close to us and can see and listen
to us too. Hence the reason we employ the vocative particle *‘ya* and
say ‘*Ya Aba ‘Abdillah’* is to express his exaltedness and confess our
lowliness.

The people of heart, however, can well appreciate the implication
manifested when the ‘the lover calls the beloved’. The implication is to
get near to the Beloved. Hence when we call Aba ‘Abdillah (whose import,
as we shall soon expound means ‘the utterly submissive slave of Allah’)
we are seeking his closeness, or in other words ‘the attributes that
personifies his exalted being’.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Father of ‘Abdullah

The words *Aba ‘Abdillah* literally mean ‘the father of the obedient
slave of Allah’. Arabs honorify their fellow brothers by calling them
with a teknonym (*kunya*) a name that mostly mentions the first or one
of the offsprings of the ‘named one’. Hence if a person had a son named
‘Abdullah, he is called *Abu ‘Abdillah*, which means ‘father of
‘Abdullah’. One of the reasons behind the Imam (AS) being called Abu
‘Abdillah is that he had an offspring called ‘Abdullah, famously known
as الرَّضِيْعُ *al-radhi’* (one who is still breastfeeding).

He was mercilessly martyred by the enemies after Imam al-Husayn (AS)
read *adhan* in his ear following his birth. In the well-known *Ziyarat
al-Nahiya al-Muqaddasa* Imam al-Zaman (AS) addresses this new born as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلى عَبْدِ اللهِ بن الحُسَيْن الطفْلِ الرَّضِيْعِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Perpetual peace be unto ‘Abdillah, the one who was still
breastfeeding...[^33]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Obedient Slave of Allah

Sometimes however, someone is attributed with a teknonym (*kunya*) not
because he is the father of so and so, but because he enjoys a certain
quality. For example, one who is well known for his open-handedness and
generosity is called Abu Jawad. In our case, a number of commentators of
this exalted *Ziyarat*, opine that one of the reasons the holy Imam (AS)
was given the *kunya* Abu ‘Abdillah was his extreme submissiveness to
Allah. In other words, he was the true slave of Allah.

Traditions indicate that Imam al-Husayn (AS) was given the teknonym
after his birth which subtly alludes to the submissive state of Imam
(AS) ever since his childhood. In a tradition narrated in *Bihar
al-Anwar*, Asma’ is quoted to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا كَانَ فِيْ يَوْمِ سَابِعِهِ جَاءَنِيْ النَّبِيّ فَقَالَ:
هَلُمِّي اِبْنِيْ فَاَتَيْتُ بِهِ... ثُمَّ وَضَعَهُ فِيْ حِجْرِهِ
ثُمَّ قَالَ: يَا اَبَا عَبْدِ اللهِ عَزِيْزٌ عَلَيَّ ثُمَّ بَكَى...
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘On the seventh day after his birth, the Prophet (S) came to me and
said: ‘Bring me my son.’ So I brought Husayn to him...Then he kept him
on his bossom and said: ‘**O Aba ‘Abdillah**, it is indeed difficult for
me...then he burst into tears...’[^34]

This tradition indicates that the Imam (AS) got the teknonym since his
very early childhood and thus enjoyed an exalted status since then.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Utterly Submissive Servant of Allah

It may be argued that if the *za’ir* himself, due to his submissiveness
to Almighty Allah is also an *‘abd* of Allah, why should he still call
the Imam with the vocative particle ‘*ya*’? The answer to this is very
simple: *‘ubudiyya* and submissiveness are of different levels. The
distance between the stage of *‘ubudiyya* that the infallible Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) occupy and the stage their true followers enjoy is
extremely vast. Consider the following narrations:

1. ‘Ibad bin Suhayb is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْتُ لِلصَّادِقِ جَعْفَر بْنِ مُحَمَّد: اَخْبِرْنِيْ عَنْ اَبِيْ
ذَرّ، اَهُوَ اَفْضَلُ اَمْ اَنْتُمْ اَهْلُ الْبَيْت؟ فَقَالَ: يَا
ابْنَ صُهَيْب كَمْ شُهُورُ السَّنَة فَقُلْتُ: اِثْنَا عَشَرَ شَهْرًا،
فَقَالَ: وَكَمِ الْحُرُم مِنْهَا؟ قُلْتُ: اَرْبَعَةَ اَشْهُر، قَالَ:
فَشَهْرُ رَمَضَان مِنْهَا؟ قُلْتُ: لاَ، قَالَ: فَشَهْرُ رَمَضَان
اَفْضَلُ اَمِ الاَشْهُرِ الحُرُم؟ فَقُلْتُ: بَلْ شَهْرُ رَمَضَان،
قَالَ: فَكَذَلِكَ نَحْنُ اَهْلُ الْبَيْت لاَ يُقَاسُ بِنَا اَحَدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I asked al-Sadiq (AS), Ja’far bin Muhammad (upon whom be peace): Inform
me whether Abu Dharr is better than you the Ahl al-Bayt (AS)? The Imam
(AS) said: ‘O son of Suhayb, how many months are there in one year’? I
said: ‘twelve months.’ Thereupon he (AS) said: ‘And how many among them
are sacred (*hurum*)?’ I said ‘Four months.’ He (AS) said: ‘And is the
month of Ramadhan among them?’ I said: ‘No.’ He (AS) said: ‘Then is the
month of Ramadan greater or the four sacred months?’ I said: ‘Rather the
Holy month of Ramadhan is greater.’ The Imam (AS) then said: ‘So is the
case with us, the Ahl al-Bayt; none can be compared to us.’[^35]

2. Jabir al-Ju’fi, a companion of Imam al-Baqir is reported to have
narrated that Imam al-Baqir (AS) once said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّا مِنَ اللهِ بِمَكَانٍ وَمَنْزِلَةٍ رَفِيْعَةٍ ! فَلَوْلاَ نَحْنُ
مَا خَلَقَ اللهُ تعَالى سَمَاءًا وَلاَ اَرْضًا، وَلاَجَنَّةً
وَلاَنَارًا، وَلاَ شَمْسًا وَلاَقَمَرًا، وَلاَجِنِّيًّا وَلاَ
إِنْسِيًّا. يَا جَابِر، إِنَّا اَهْلُ الْبَيْتِ لاَ يُقَاسُ بِنَا
اَحَدٌ، مَنْ قَاسَ بِنَا احدًا مِنَ الْبَشَرِ فَقَدْ كَفَرَ . يَا
جَابِرُ، بِنَا الله أنْقَذَكُمْ، وَبِنَا هَدَاكُمْ،وَنَحْنُ وَاللهِ
دَلّلْنَاكُمْ عَلى رَبِّكُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely we have an exalted status near Allah! Were we not there, Allah
would not have created any heaven nor earth, nor any Paradise nor Hell
Fire, nor any sun or moon, or any Jinni or human being. O Jabir! **We
are the Ahl al-Bayt; none can be compared to us; whosoever compares any
human being with us, has disbelieved (or covered (the truth)).** O
Jabir! Through us Allah emancipated you, and through us He guided you;
and, I swear by Allah we have guided you to your Lord...[^36]

3. Imam ‘Ali (AS) is reported to have said to Abu Dharr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِعْلَمْ يَا اَبَاذَرّ اَنَا عَبْدُ اللهِ عَزَّوَجَلَّ وَخَلِيْفَتُهُ
عَلى عِبَادِهِ لاَ تَجْعَلُوْنَا اَرْبَابًا وَقُوْلُوْا فِيْ فَضْلِنَا
مَا شِئْتُمْ فَاِنَّكُمْ لاَ تَبْلُغُوْنَ كُنْهَ مَا فِيْنَا وَلاَ
نِهَايَتَهُ، فَاِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّوَجَلَّ قَدْ اَعْطانَا اَكْبَرُ
وَاَعْظَمُ مِمَّا يَصِفُهُ وَاصِفُكُمْ اَوْ يَخْطرُ عَلى قَلْبِ
اَحَدِكُمْ فَإِذَا عَرَفْتُمُوْنَا هَكَذَا فَاَنْتُمُ الْمُؤْمِنُوْن .
  </p>
</blockquote>

Know, O Abu Dharr, that I am an utterly submissive servant of Allah on
the earth and His vicegerent over His other servants; do not consider us
(the Ahl al-Bayt (AS)) to be Lords, and then say about our merits
whatever you want, ***for certainly you would not comprehend the essence
of our station, nor its zenith***, for verily Allah bestowed on us
better and greater than what describers among you describe or what has
penetrated in the imagination of anyone; so when you know us in this
way, you surely are the believers.[^37]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you O Aba ‘Abdillah

One of the areas where it is recommended for one to call his fellow
Muslim brother with a teknonym is when he is present before him. In our
case, therefore, because we know that Imam al-Husayn (AS) is present
before us, and we address him using the second person pronoun “*kaf*’,
it is apt to begin our address with his teknonym. Imam al-Ridha (AS) is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا ذَكَرْتَ الرَّجُلَ وَهُوَ حَاضِرٌ فَكَنِّهِ وَإِذَا كَانَ غائباً
فسَمِّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

If you mention a man in his presence, then do so using his teknonym
(*kunya*), and if he were to be absent, then call him by his name.[^38]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O father of ‘Abdullah

It is important to look at the root meaning of the word ‘*ab*’ in *Aba
‘Abdillah* which we normally translate as ‘father’. In the Arabic
language the word اب ‘*ab*’ literally means:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ كُلّ مَنْ كَانَ سَبَبًا فِى اِيْجَادِ شَيْءٍ اَوْ اِصْلاَحِهِ
اَوْ ظُهُوْرِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever is a cause in the existence of a thing or its reform or its
manifestation is known as ‘*ab*’.[^39]

And since Imam al-Husayn (AS) converges with the Muhammadan Light
(al-Nur al-Muhammadi) which is the intermediary of Divine Grace, he is a
*sabab* (cause) in the existence, reform and manifestation of the
caravan of human beings. Therefore he is Abu ‘Abdillah. Whatever grace
any servant of Allah receives is through the Muhammadan Light.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O father of ‘Abdullah

In a well-known tradition, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الآباَءُ ثَلاَثَة: اَبٌ ولّدكَ وَاَبٌ عَلَّمَكَ وَاَبٌ
زَوَّجَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed there are only **three fathers**: the father who was the reason
for your birth, the father who taught you, and the father who married
you (to his daughter).[^40]

And because Imam al-Husayn (AS) was from among the infallible Imams (AS)
responsible to guide humanity and teach them the path of salvation, he
is known as Abu ‘Abdillah meaning ‘father or tutor of a true servant of
Allah’. In this case every human being enjoys from al-Husayn’s banquet
of practical submission. The previous Prophets of Allah are no
exception. Imam al-Husayn (AS) also serves as a father to the Prophets
of Allah before the Seal of the Prophets (AS), since they drew
inspiration from him even before his birth. Consider the following
narratives from ‘Allama Majlisi’s *Bihar al-Anwar* and Bahrani’s
*al-’Awalim*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللهِ، قَالَ: إِنَّ إِسْمَاعِيْلَ الَّذِيْ قَالَ
اللهُ تَعَالى: وَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ إِسْمَاعِيْلَ اِنَّهُ كَانَ
صَادِقَ الْوَعْدِ وَكَانَ رَسُوْلاً نَبِيًا لَمْ يَكُنْ إِسْمَاعِيْلُ
بْنِ اِبْرَاهِيْمَ بَلْ كَانَ نَبِيًّا مِنَ الاَنْبِيَاءِ، بَعَثَهُ
اللهُ عَزَّوَجَلَّ إِلى قَوْمِهِ فَأخَذُوْهُ فَسَلَخُوْا فَرْوَةَ
رَأسِهِ وَوَجْهِهِ، فَاَتَاهُ مَلَكٌ، فَقَالَ: إِنَّ اللهَ جَلَّ
جَلاَلُهُ بَعَثَنِيْ إِلَيْكَ فَمُرْنِي بِمَا شِئْتَ، فَقَالَ: لِيْ
اُسْوَةٌ بِمَا يُصْنَعُ بِالْحُسَيْنِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is reported from Abi ‘Abdillah (al-Sadiq (AS)) who said: ‘Indeed the
Isma’il that Almighty Allah talks about in the verse ***‘And mention in
the Book Isma’il. Indeed he was true to his promise, and an apostle and
a prophet.’(19:54)*** was not Isma’il (AS) the son of Ibrahim (AS), but
was a prophet among prophets whom Allah, the Invincible and Sublime,
sent to his people; and they killed him, and skinned his scalp and face;
so an angel came to him, and said: ‘Surely Allah sent me to you; so
order me to do what you want.’ He said: ‘I have model of emulation of
what will happen to al-Husayn (upon whom be peace)...[^41]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُوِيَ اَنَّ نُوْحًا لَمَّا رَكِبَ فِي السَّفِيْنَةِ طافَتْ بِهِ
جَمِيْعَ الدُّنْيَا، فَلَمَّا مَرَّتْ بِكَرْبَلاَ اَخَذَتْهُ الاَرْضُ
وَخَافَ نُوْح اَلْغَرْقَ، فَدَعَا رَبَّهُ، وَقَالَ: إِلَهِيْ طفْتُ
جَمِيْعَ الدُّنْيَا وَمَا اَصَابَنِيْ فَزَعٌ مِثْلَ مَا اَصَابَنِيْ
فِيْ هَذِهِ الاَرْضِ، فَنَزَلَ جِبْرَئِيْلُ، وَقَالَ يَا نُوْحُ فِي
هَذَا الْمَوْضِعِ يُقْتَلُ الْحُسَيْنُ سِبْط مُحَمَّدٍ خَاتَمِ
الاَنْبِيَاءِ، وَابْنِ خَاتَمِ الاَوْصِيَاءِ، فَقَالَ: وَمَنِ
الْقَاتِلُ لَهُ يَا جَبْرَئِيْلُ؟ قَالَ: قَاتِلُهُ لَعِيْنُ اَهْلِ
سَبْعِ سَمَاوَات وَسَبْعِ اَرَضِيْنَ، فَلَعَنَهُ نُوْح اَرْبَعَ
مَرَّاتٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated that when Nuh (AS) boarded the Ark, it transported him
throughout the world; and when he passed by Karbala, the earth forced
the ark towards itself, and Nuh (AS) feared of drowning; so he prayed to
his Lord: O my God, I went round the entire world, and nowhere was I
afraid as I have been in this place; Thereupon Gabriel (AS) descends,
and tells Nuh (AS): “O Nuh this is the place where Husayn (AS), the
grandson of the Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets and the son of the
Seal of the Divine Trustees would be killed. Nuh asked him: And who
would kill him, O Gabriel? Gabriel said: His killer is one whom the
inhabitants of seven heavens and the seven earths curse; so Nuh (AS)
curses him four times...[^42]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُوِيَ اَنَّ اِبْرَاهِيْمَ مَرَّ فِيْ اَرْضِ كَرْبَلاَ وَهُوَ
رَاكِبٌ فَرَسًا فَعَثَرَ بِهِ وَسَقَط إِبْرَاهِيْمُ وَشَجَّ رَأْسُهُ
وَسَالَ دَمُهُ، فَاَخَذَ فِيْ الاِسْتِغْفَارِ، وَقَالَ: إِلهِيْ اَيُّ
شَيْءٍ حَدَثَ مِنِّيْ؟ فَنَزَلَ إِلَيْهِ جَبْرَئِيْلُ وَقَالَ: يَا
إِبْرَاهِيْمُ مَا حَدَثَ مِنْكَ ذَنْبٌ، وَلكِن يُقْتَلُ هُنَا سِبْط
خَاتَمِ الاَنْبِيَاءِ، وَابْنُ خَاتَمِ الاَوْصِيَاءِ، فَسَالَ دَمُكَ
مُوَافَقَةً لِدَمِهِ. قَالَ: يَا جَبْرَئِيْلُ وَمَنْ يَكُوْنُ
قَاتِلُهُ؟ لَعِينُ أَهْلِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرَضِينَ... فَرَفَعَ
إِبْرَاهِيْمُ يَدَيْهِ وَلَعَنَ يَزِيْدَ لَعْنًا كَثِيْرًا ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated that [Prophet] Ibrahim (AS) passed by the land of Karbala
while he was riding his horse. The horse made him stumble and Ibrahim
(AS) fell off and his head got wounded and blood started flowing out of
him. Thereupon, he began seeking Allah’s forgiveness, and said: ‘O my
God, what [wrong] have I done?’

Thereupon Gabriel descends on him and says: ‘O Ibrahim, you have not
committed any sin; but this is the place where the grandson of the Seal
of Prophets (AS) and the son of the Seal of the Divine Trustees would be
killed; thus your blood flowed in accordance with his blood. He asked
Gabriel: ‘And who would be his killer?’ Gabriel said: ‘The one cursed by
the inhabitants of the heavens and the earths...Ibrahim raised his hands
and excessively sends curses on Yazid...[^43]

These narratives as well others which we have ommitted for the sake of
brevity, clearly indicate that Imam al-Husayn (AS) was an example for
his predecessors too. In simpler words, ‘he serves as a timeless model’.
The curses from the Prophets in all their particularity depict the
universal stance against oppression. Hence, Imam al-Husayn (AS)
educated, educates and will always educate the human beings with the
lesson of utter submission, even at the cost of sacrificing everything.
Consequently, we rightfully address him as Abu ‘Abdillah (the father or
tutor of a truly submissive servant of Allah.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Servant of Allah

The name ‘Abdullah is of very great significance since it also implies
that ‘the named’ is a manifestation of all the attributes of Almighty
Allah. This is because the name Allah which is sometimes referred to as
*al-ism al-a’zham* (the greatest name of God) is also a name that
comprehends in itself all the sublime attributes of the Divine Essence.
Hence one who is a servant of such a Being, necessarily is submissive to
His orders, all of which manifest His sublime attributes.

Thus whatever a submissive servant of Allah does, he would do it
according to what Allah wants, and what Allah wants clearly depicts His
sublime attributes. In simple terms: If the king of a certain town
possesses excellent traits, his totally obedient servants would carry
the same traits, because whatever they do accord with what the king
wants.

All the prophets of Allah as well as the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS)
are *‘Ibad Allah* (totally submissive servants of Allah) and
consequently manifestations of His Most Beautiful Attributes as well. It
is for this reason perhaps that Imam ‘Ali (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ الاَسْمَآءُ الْحُسْنى
  </p>
</blockquote>

We are the Most Beautiful Names of Allah[^44]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you, O obedient servant of Allah

In the Arabic rhetoric there is a rule that says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعْلِيْقُ الْحُكْمِ بِالْوَصْفِ مُشْعِرٌبِالْعِلِّيَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

When a statement is qualified with a certain attribute the quality
denotes the reason behind the statement.

Bearing this in mind, if we consider the above verse to be a declarative
statement, it would be clear for us that the reason why we declare that
Imam al-Husayn (AS) enjoys the state of s*alam* (freedom from
calamities) is that he is an ‘utterly submissive servant of Allah’. In
other words the reason for “*Assalamu ‘alayka*” is “*Ya Aba ‘Abdillah*”.
In simpler words, ‘I declare that you are in the state of Salam, O
utterly submissive servant of Allah’ [and the reason for you to be in
that state is your characteristic of being utterly submissive to Allah].

Anecdotes for Reflection
------------------------

1. Haj Sayyid Ahmad Baha al-Dini, an employee of the Office of the late
Imam Khumayni is reported to have said:

Imam Khumayni would pay his respects to Sayyid al-Shuhada (Imam
al-Husayn (AS)) before and after every canonical prayer: he would for
example pay his respects before the morning prayer, and then after the
morning prayer, before the *maghrib* prayer, before the ‘isha’ prayer,
and then after the ‘isha’ prayer, before the *zhuhr* prayer, before the
‘asr prayer and then after the ‘asr prayer. In this way he would
altogether pay his respects eight times a day to Sayyid
al-Shuhada’[^45].

2. A friend of the late saint, Shaykh Rajab ‘Ali al-Khayyat, narrates:

‘Together with the Shaykh we went to Kashan. The Shaykh had the habit
that wherever he traveled, he would visit the cemetery of that place. As
we entered the cemetery in Kashan, he said: “*Al-Salamu ‘alayka ya Aba
‘Abd Allah (AS)*” (“Salutations be on you O Imam Husayn (AS)”) We walked
a few steps further on, and then he said: “Do you not smell anything?”
‘No, what smell?’ We asked. Then he asked: “Don’t you feel the smell
(scent) of red apples?” Our answer was ‘no’ again. We went further on
and met the man in charge of the cemetery.

The Shaykh asked him: “Has anyone been **buried** here today?” The man
answered: ‘‘Just before you arrived someone was buried’, and then he
took us to a newly covered tomb. There it was! We all smelled the scent
of red apples. We asked the Shaykh about the scent, to which he
answered: “When this person was buried here, the sacred person of Sayyid
al- Shuhada’ [Imam Husayn (AS)] came here and for the sake of this
person (and by the blessed visit of Sayyid al-Shuhada’ (AS)) the
punishment was removed from those buried in this cemetery.”[^46]

[^1]: Raghib al-Isfahani, al-Mufradat, p. 421.

[^2]: Ibn Qulawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 391

[^3]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, v.3, p. 486

[^4]: ‘Allama al-Tabataba\`i, al-Mizan, v.10, p.39

[^5]: Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Amali, p. 175

[^6]: Al-Maghribi, Sharh al-Akhbar, v.3, p.21

[^7]: Al-Bahrani, Al-Burhan fi Tafsir al-Qur\`an, v.3, p. 24

[^8]: In Arabic grammar terminology this kind of al is known as al li
al-’ahd al-dhihni

[^9]: In order to understand this particular kind of usage better,
consider verse 19:47 where Prophet Ibrahim  assures Azar that he would
not harm him. He employs the phrase ‘Salamun ‘alaikum….’ Exegetes of
Qur\`an well-grounded in the Arabic language, like Qadhi al-Baydhawi in
his Anwar al-Tanzil wa Asrar al-Ta’wil take this view into
consideration.

[^10]: Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, p. 622

[^11]: Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.23, p. 339. It should be
noted that Imam al-Sadiq  mentions the most perfect extensions (atamm
al-masadiq) of the believers as the Imams . Otherwise the verse clearly
tells us that one who has really achieved the expected state of belief
can enjoy a station which would enable him to see the actions of others.

[^12]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.1, p. 219

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: . Mirza Tehrani, Shifa al-Sudur, p. 98; Tadhkirat al-Za’irin
[Ref: Persian collection ‘Nigahi be Ziyarat-e ‘Ashura’, p. 142 ]

[^15]: Muhammad al-Rayshahri, Kimyaye Mahabbat (Elixir of Love), p. 94

[^16]: Mahmud al-Badri, Uswat al-’Arifin, p. 215

[^17]: Jar Allah al-Zamakhshari, Tafsir al-Kashshaf, v.4, p. 401

[^18]: Al-Mustafawi, al-Tahqiq, v.5, p. 188.

[^19]: Shaykh Shams al-Din, The Revolution of al-Husayn ,
http://www.al-islam.org/revolution/2.htm

[^20]: Shaykh Shams al-Din, The Revolution of al-Husayn ,
http://www.al-islam.org/revolution/2.htm

[^21]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 101, p.11

[^22]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 101, p. 46; Ibn Qulawayh,
Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 315

[^23]: Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Qulawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 460

[^24]: Shaykh al-Tabrasi, Mishkat al-Anwar, p.349

[^25]: Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthur, v.4, p. 373

[^26]: This meaning has been narrated by both the Shi’a as well as the
Sunni scholars in their commentaries of Qur\`an and lexicons as well.

[^27]: Mulla Hadi al-Sabzawari, Sharh al-Asma’, p. 324

[^28]: Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.81, p. 273

[^29]: Shaykh al-Huwayzi, Tafsir Nur al-Thaqalayn, v.1, p. 524

[^30]: Muhammadi al-Rayshahri, al-Khayr wa al-Baraka fi al-Kitab wa
al-Sunna, p. 206

[^31]: Al-Sabban in his glosses over Sham’uni’s commentary over the
Alfiyya of Ibn Malik, says: ‘Indeed a far object is only called with
particles that contain letters of protraction (harf al-madd), because
when a far object is called it requires one to prolong his voice, so
that the vocative can hear. (Al-Sabban, Hashiyat al-Sabban, v.3, p.
1145.)

[^32]: This is one phrase where the comprehensive beauty of the Qur\`an
can well be appreciated for all those who can appreciate the subtle
issues of Arabic grammar and syntax. This small verse describes so many
things at the same time: (1) It is a nominal sentence (al-jumla
al-ismiyya) and thus it signifies permanence (2) the pronoun huwa
denotes ‘specificity’ and thus these two attributes that follow it are
originally reserved for Allah. (3) The form ‘ali similar to فعيل ‘fa’il’
is known as ‘al-sifa al-mushbiha’ in the Arabic, which denotes intensity
and permanence.

[^33]: al-Shahid al-Awwal, al-Mazar, p. 149

[^34]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.44, pp. 250-251

[^35]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.22, p. 406

[^36]: Muhammad bin Jurayr al-Tabari al-Shi’i, Nawadir al-Mu’jizat, p.
124

[^37]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.26, p.2

[^38]: ‘Allama al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.75, p. 335

[^39]: Sharh Kalimat Amir al-Mu’minin , p.15

[^40]: ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Sharh Kalimat Amir al-Mu’minin , p. 15

[^41]: Shaykh ‘Abdullah al-Bahrani, al-’Awalim- al-Imam al-Husayn , p.
108

[^42]: Shaykh ‘Abdullah al-Bahrani, al-’Awalim- al-Imam al-Husayn , p.
102

[^43]: Ibid.

[^44]: Al-Sayyid Hashim al-Bahrani, Madinat al-Ma’ajiz, v.1, p. 556

[^45]: It is Imam al-Husayn who established prayer and ensured its
perpetuity. In the well-known ziyarat al-warith we address the martyred
Imam  as follows: اشهد انك قد اقمت الصلاة...I bear witness that you
established prayer. (Author)

[^46]: Muhammad al-Rayshahri, Kimyaye Mahabbat, p. 115


