Chapter 4: Peace be on you, O son of Fatima – the leader of the women of the worlds
===================================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ ياَ بْنَ فَاطمَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيِّدَةِ نِسَآءِ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be on You, O son of Fatima- the Leader of the Women of the Worlds

Commentary
----------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ ياَ بْنَ فَاطمَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you, O son of Fatima

This verse is one of the most radiant verses of *Ziyarat ‘Ashura’*, for
it reveals the pleasant origin of Imam al-Husayn (AS) and his utter
purity. Not only is the Imam (AS) a physical offspring of the sublimest
example of purity and goodness, he is her spiritual artifact (*bina’*)
as well. One of the appellations of Hadhrat Fatima (AS) is *al-Tayyiba*
(the pleasant one). In a well-known *Ziyarat* of the Holy Prophet (S) we
supplicate as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...اَللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلىَ فَاطمَةَ الطيِّبَةِ الطاهِرَةِ
الْمُطهَّرَةِ، الَّتِيْ انْتَجَبْتَهَا وَطهَّرْتَهَا وَ فَضَّلْتَهَا
عَلىَ نِسَاءِ الْعَالَمِيْنَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...O Allah, bless Fatima, *the pleasant one* (*al-Tayyiba*), the pure,
the purified, whom You chose, purified and preferred over all the women
of the worlds...[^1]

Imam al-Husayn (AS) being the offspring of a pure mother the like of
*al-Tayyiba*, also inherits utter purity. Small wonder it is that one of
his appellations is *al-Tayyib*: Abu Shibl narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْتُ لأَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ أَزُورُ قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنِ قَالَ نَعَمْ
زُرِ الطيِّبَ وَأَتِمَّ الصَّلاَةَ فِيه...
  </p>
</blockquote>

I said to Imam al-Sadiq (AS): I visit the grave of *al-Husayn* (AS) He
(AS) said: Yes, *visit al-Tayyib*[^2] *(the pleasant one),* and pray the
complete prayer (and not *qasr*) near him...[^3]

In another tradition, Abu Sa’id al-Mada’ini says: I entered in the
presence of Abu ‘Abdillah [al-Sadiq (AS)], and I said: May I be made
your ransom. Should I visit the grave of al-Husayn (AS)? He (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَعَمْ يَا أَبَا سَعِيدٍ ائْتِ قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنِ ابْنِ رَسُولِ
اللَّهِ أَطيَبِ الأَطيَبِينَ وَأَطهَرِ الطاهِرِينَ وَأَبَرِّ
الأَبْرَارِ فَإِنَّكَ إِذَا زُرْتَهُ كَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَكَ بِهِ خَمْساً
وَ عِشْرِينَ حَجَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yes O Aba Sa’id, visit the grave of al-Husayn (AS), the offspring of the
Messenger of Allah (S), **the most pleasant of the most pleasant ones
and the most pure of the pure ones**, and the most righteous of the
righteous ones; for surely if you visit him, Allah will write for you
the reward of twenty five pilgrimages (*hajjs*).[^4]

In the well-known *Ziyarat al-Jami’a al-Kabira* there is a statement
that alludes to the *process of the transfer* of purity. We are taught
to address the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) in the following way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَأََنَّ أَرْوَاحَكُمْ وَنُورَكُمْ وَطينَتَكُمْ وَاحِدَةٌ طابَتْ
وَطهُرَتْ بَعْضُهَا مِنْ بَعْض...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...and that your spirits, your light, and your nature are one; they
became pleasant and purified some from others...[^5]

In another tradition where the *basis of transfer* is clearly depicted,
the Holy Prophet (S) presents a Divine law:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...فَأَبَى أَنْ يُخْرِجَ مِنَ الطيِّبِ إِلاَّ الطيِّبَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

...And He [Allah] did not allow to produce from a pleasant entity save a
pleasant entity.[^6]

In a beautiful conversation with Kumayl bin Ziyad al-Nakha’i Amir
al-mu’minin ‘Ali (AS) narrates the Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلِيٌّ مِنِّي وَابْنَايَ مِنْهُ وَالطيِّبُونَ مِنِّي وَأَنَا مِنْهُمْ
وَهُمُ الطيِّبُونَ بَعْدَ أُمِّهِمْ وَهُمْ سَفِينَةٌ مَنْ رَكِبَهَا
نَجَا وَمَنْ تَخَلَّفَ عَنْهَا هَوَى...
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is from me, and my two sons are from him, and the *tayyibun* [a
reference to the A’imma (AS)] are from me, and I am from them, and they
are the *tayyibun* (pleasant ones) after their mother, and they are the
Ark upon which whoever boards is emancipated, and whosoever lags behind,
falls...[^7]

Readers are requested to reflect on the phrase “*wa hum al-tayyibun
ba’da ummihim*” (and they are the pleasant ones after their mother)
which subtly alludes to the root and transfer of their purity.

In order to understand better the transfer of purity, let us consider
the following verses and narrations:

1- The Holy Qur\`an presents a parable of universal significance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَى كَيْفَ ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلاً كَلِمَةً طيِّبَةً
كَشَجَرَةٍ طيِّبَةٍ أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ وَفَرْعُهَا فِي
السَّمَاءِ.تُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِينٍ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهَا وَيَضْرِبُ
اللَّهُ الأَمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Don’t you see how Allah sets forth a parable?*** **A pleasant
word**[^8] ***(kalima tayyiba) is like a goodly tree, whose root is
firmly fixed, and its branches (reach) to the heavens, It brings
forth*** ***its fruit at all times, by the leave of its Lord. So Allah
sets forth parables for men, in order that they may receive admonition.
(14:24)***

This verse must be understood in light of the fact that Allah’s word is
different from the word of the human being. According to a radiant
expression of Amir al-mu’minin ‘Ali (AS) in *Nahj al-Balagha*, Allah’s
words are His very creations. He A says: ‘*And surely His speech is the
action that He originates...’*[^9]

Therefore when we speak of *kalima tayyiba* we refer to a pleasant and
good being. And among the fundamental requisites of such an entity, as
depicted in the above verse, is a firm and powerful origin. One who is
born to parents of firm knowledge and action, would always inhabit the
skies of spiritual elevation, and benefit others every moment by the
permission of their Lord. In a tradition Imam al-Baqir (AS) says the
following about the aforementioned verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...نَحْنُ الشَّجَرَةُ الَّتِيْ قال الله تَعاَلىَ أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ
وفَرْعُهَا فِي السَّماَءِ،نَحْنُ نُعْطي شِيعَتَنَا مَا نَشَاءُ مِنْ
عِلْمِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

We are the tree about which Almighty Allah said **“*****...whose root is
firmly fixed, and its branches (reach) to the heavens*****” (14:24).**
We are the ones who give our Shi’as what we want from our
knowledge...[^10]

2. Imam Amir al-mu’minin ‘Ali (AS) alluding to the reality that the
fruit depends on the water of the plant says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ كُلَّ عَمَلٍ نَبَاتٌ، وَكُلَّ نَبَاتٍ لاَ غِنَى
بِهِ عَنِ الْمَاءِ، وَالْمِيَاهُ مُخْتَلِفَةٌ، فَمَا طابَ سَقْيُهُ
طابَ غَرْسُهُ، وَحَلَتْ ثَمَرَتُهُ، وَمَا خَبُثَ سَقْيُهُ خَبُثَ
غَرْسُهُ، وَأَمَرَّتْ ثَمَرَتُه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

...and know that every action is a plant, and every plant is not
needless of water, and waters are of different kinds. And if the water
of a plant is pure and pleasant, its growth would be pleasant and its
fruit sweet. And if the water of a plant is dirty and unpleasant, its
growth would be unpleasant and its fruit bitter.[^11]

3. Alluding to the fundamental importance of the land where the plant
grows, the Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْبَلَدُ الطيِّبُ يَخْرُجُ نَبَاتُهُ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِ وَالَّذِي
خَبُثَ لاَ يَخْرُجُ إِلاَّ نَكِدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The good land** ***its vegetation comes out by the permission of its
Lord, and as for that which is bad, it does not come out except
sparsely. (7:58)***

4. In a well-known *Ziyarat* when addressing the Imams of the Baqi’
cemetery in Madina we say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...طبْتُمْ وَطابَ مَنْبِتُكُم...
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are pleasant and the place of your growth too is pleasant and
pure...[^12]

5. Alluding to the pleasant growth of Hadhrat Maryam (AS) Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَقَبَّلَها رَبُّها بِقَبُولٍ حَسَنٍ وَأَنْبَتَها نَباتاً حَسَناً...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Thereupon her Lord accepted her with a beautiful acceptance, and
caused her to grow as a lovely plant...(3:37)***

6. Imam al-Husayn (AS) says in his well-known supplication of ‘Arafa:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقْتَنِي مِنَ التُّرَابِ، ثُمّ أَسْكَنْتَنِي اْلأَصْلاَبَ آمِناً
لِرَيْبَ الْمَنُوْنِ وَإِخْتِلاَفِ الدُّهُوْرِ، فَلَمْ أَزَلْ ظَاعِناً
مِنْ صُلْبٍ إِلى رَحِمٍ فِيْ تَقَادُمِ الأَيَّامِ الْمَاضِيَةِ
وَالْقُرُوْنِ الْخَالِيَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

...You created me from clay, then established me in loins safe from the
unpredictable turn of destiny and the difference of times; **then I have
been shifting from the loin to the womb along the course of the bygone
days and the past centuries**.’[^13]

Here Imam al-Husayn (AS) is trying to teach us of a profound reality:
the question of transfer of purity or impurity is not necessarily from
the immediate parents. Generations are responsible.

7. In the well-known *Ziyarat al-Warith* we address Imam al-Husayn (AS)
in the following way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ نُوْراً فِي الأصْلاَبِ الشَّامِخَةِ وَالأرْحَامِ
الْمُطهَّرَةِ لَمْ تُنَجِّسْكَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةُ بِأََنْجَاسِهَا ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely I bear witness that you were **a** **light in the great loins and
the pure wombs**, the [age of] ignorance did not taint you with its
dirt...[^14]

Here again notice the words *al-aslab* (loins) and *al-arham* (wombs)
are in the plural form, which means that Imam al-Husayn (AS) is the
edifice of a whole generation, and not mere one *sulb* (loin) and
*rahim* (womb).

8. In his address to the disobedient Kufans on the plains of Karbala he
alluded to his pure origin saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلاَ اِنَّ الدَّعِيّ بْنَ الدَّعِيّ قَدْ رَكَزَ بَيْنَ اثْنَتَيْن،
بَيْنَ الْقِلَّةِ وَالذّلّةِ، وَهَيْهَات مَا آخُذُ الدَّنِيّة، اَبى
اللهُ ذَلِكَ وَرَسُوْلُهُ، وَجُدُوْدٌ طابَتْ وَحُجُوْرٌ طهُرَتْ،
وَاُنُوْفٌ حَمِيَّةٌ وَنُفُوْسٌ اَبِيَّةٌ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Beware the illegal offsping, product of the illegal offspring, has made
me to choose between the two: fighting with my few men and accepting the
degradation [of paying oath of allegiance to Yazid]; this [i.e.
accepting the latter] is farfetched; I will never accept degradation;
Allah and His Messenger and ***pleasant grandparents and pure bossoms
and leaders of valor and protective souls*** do not allow that...[^15]

The aforementioned quotations teach us that in order for one to be
bestowed with an offspring the like of Imam al-Husayn (AS), one is
required to travel through a similar spiritual chain. Obviously a
completely indentical chain is impossible to attain, but one can
establish the foundation of a chain that nurtures the values of the
lineage of Imam al-Husayn (AS). There is always time for rectification
and change. The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُخْرِجُ الْحَيَّ مِنَ الْمَيِّتِ وَيُخْرِجُ الْمَيِّتَ مِنَ الْحَيِّ
وَيُحْيِي الأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا وَكَذَلِكَ تُخْرَجُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead
from the living, and gives life to the earth after its death, and thus
shall you be brought forth. (30:19)***

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) explaining the phrase ‘*He brings forth the living
from the dead and brings forth the dead*’ in a tradition says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْحَيّ اَلْمُؤْمِنُ الَّذِيْ تَخْرُجُ طيْنَتُهُ مِنْ طيْنَةِ
الْكَافِرِ.وَالْمَيِّتُ الَّذِيْ يَخْرُج مِنَ الْحَيِّ هُوَ
اَلْكَافِرُ الّذِيْ يَخْرُجُ مِنْ طيْنَةِ الْمُؤْمِنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The living is the believer whose clay comes out from the clay of a
disbeliever, and the dead that comes out from the living is a
disbeliever, who comes out from the clay of a believer.[^16]

Therefore if we firmly resolve to purify our beliefs and actions and
unite with the spirit of *tawhid*, we can serve as the foundation of a
powerful generation to come[^17]. This is where determining issues such
as ‘the formation of the worldview of the youth’, ‘spouse selection and
its correct criteria’, ‘etiquette of spousal interaction’, ‘prenatal
care in both the physical as well as spiritual dimensions’, ‘child
upbringing’, ‘the importance of the temperament of the wetnurse during
breastfeeding’ etc. come into focus. Modern science has partially
contributed in showing how some of these factors determine the felicity
and happiness of the child.

The Canadian Psychiatrist, Dr. Thomas Verny, well-known as the world’s
leading expert on the effects of the prenatal and the early post-natal
environment on personality development in his ‘*The Secret Life of the
Unborn Child*’ has interesting information to reveal. He says:

... a woman is her baby’s conduit to the world. Everything that affects
her, affects him. And nothing affects her as deeply or hits with such
lacerating impact as worries about her husband (or partner). Because of
that, few things are more dangerous to a child, emotionally and
physically, than a father who abuses or neglects his pregnant wife...

An equally vital factor in the child’s emotional well-being is his
father’s commitment to the marriage. Any number of things can influence
a man’s ability to relate to his partner, from the way he feels about
his wife or his own father to his job pressures or his own insecurities.
(Ideally, of course, the time to work out these problems is before
conceiving, not during a pregnancy.)[^18]

(The mother’s) thoughts and feelings are the material out of which the
unborn child fashions himself. When they are positive and nurturing, the
child can ... withstand shocks from almost any quarter. But the fetus
cannot be misled either. If he is good at sensing what is on his
mother’s mind generally, he is even better at sensing her attitude
towards him...[^19]

Certainly exemplifying the method of how to prepare the foundation of a
powerful generation would require a separate work in itself. One of the
very important secrets for the success of the future child is the
perfection of the preparatory causes.

If both the spouses enjoy a sound temperament and spiritual purity, and
both consume the right foods before and after copulation, and both
maintain an environment of serenity and Divine love, they would always
serve as foundations of powerful generations to come.

The Holy Qur\`an cites a beautiful parable showing that Divine Grace is
abundantly showered to all. The limitations of the receptacles, however,
determine the nature of their bodies and spirits. The more deficient the
receptacle, the more deificient the result. This also pertains to
physical beauty. Hence you may find some children with excellent
physical features, but poor moral traits, and vice versa. The Holy
Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنزَلَ مِنْ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَسَالَتْ أَوْدِيَةٌ بِقَدَرِهَا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He sends down water from the skies, and the channels flow, each
according to its measure...(13:17)***

Philosophically explaining the differences in quality of the off-springs
born, the late Imam al-Khumayni in his book *‘al-Talab wa al-Irada*
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاعلم أنَّ واجب الوجود بالذَّات لمَّا كان واجب الوجود من جميع الجهات
والحيثيَّات يمتنع عليه قبض الفيض عن الموضوع القابل فَإِنَّ قبضه بعد
تماميَّة الاستعداد وعدم نقصٍ في جانب القابل مستلزمُ لنقصٍ في الفاعل أو
جهة امكانٍ فيه تعالى عنه. وهذا اللزوم والوجوب كلزوم عدم صدور القبيح
وامتناع صدور الظلم عنه اختياريُّ اراديُّ لا يضُرُّ بكونه مريداً
مختاراً قَادِراً فَإِذَا تَمَّت الإستعدادات في القوابل أفيضت الفيوضات
والوجودات من المبادي العالية. وأَمّا إِفَاضة الفيض الوجودي بمقدار
الاستعداد وقابلية المواد للتاسب بين المادة والصورة للتركيب الطبيعي
الإتحادي بينهما لا يمكن قبولها صورة الطف من مقتضى استعدادها كما لا
يمكن منعها عمّا استُعِدَّت له...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then be it known to you that because the Essentially Necessary Being is
necessary in every dimension, it is impossible to withhold grace from
the receptacle of grace. This is because withholding it while the latter
enjoys complete receptivity or does not have any deficiency,
necessitates the imperfection of the Provider of grace or His contingent
nature, exalted is He from such attributions. And such kind of necessity
[when we say that it is impossible to withhold Divine Grace] is similar
to the essential impossibility of evil and oppression issuing from God,
which is something volitional and does not contradict

His possession of free will and power. Hence when there exists complete
receptivity in the receptacles, grace is bestowed from higher causes.
And as for bestowing existential grace in proportion to the receptivity
of potency of the receptacle (*al-madda*), it is because there is a
specific coherence between the potency of a receptacle (*al-madda*) and
the actuality of its form (*al-sura*), due to a united natural
composition between them, and thus the receptacle cannot accept a
subtler and more perfect form than the requisite of its aptitude.
Similarly it is impossible to deprive it from that which it can
potentially accept.

Therefore there is no stinginess or favoritism from the All-Gracious. He
bestows abundance of grace to every human being from the onset. The
receptacles, however, are deficient, and thus limit or hamper the grace.
The doors, however, are never closed. The temporal life of this world is
an opportunity to change. The human being, from which ever land it
starts developing, is in possession of an unsullied innate nature. It is
the parents that blemish their attitudes and direct them to the path of
spiritual destruction.

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ مَوْلُودٍ يُولَدُ إِلاَ عَلَى الْفِطرَةِ فَأَبَوَاهُ
اللَّذَانِ يُهَوِّدَانِهِ وَ يُنَصِّرَانِهِ وَ يُمَجِّسَانِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

No baby is born save with the sound nature (*fitra*). Thereafter it is
his parents that change him into a Jew, a Christian, or a Magian.[^20]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بْنَ فَاطمَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you, O son of **Fatima**

*Ibnu Fatima* is a matronym worthy of contemplation. In order to
understand it well it is imperative for us to look at the origins of the
name *Fatima*. According to traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS), the name
‘*Fatima*’ has various derivatives. Some of them are as follows:

1. Her weaning (*fitam*) was concurrent with Divine inspiration and she
was detached from impurity (*futimat ‘an al-tamth*):

Imam Abu Ja’far [al-Baqir (AS)] is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا وُلِدَتْ فَاطمَةُ أَوْحَى اللَّهُ إِلَى مَلَكٍ فَأَنْطقَ بِهِ
لِسَانَ مُحَمَّدٍ فَسَمَّاهَا فَاطمَةَ ثُمَّ قَالَ إِنِّي فَطمْتُكِ
بِالْعِلْمِ وَفَطمْتُكِ مِنَ الطمْثِ ثُمَّ قَالَ أَبُو جَعْفَر
وَاللَّهِ لَقَدْ فَطمَهَا اللَّهُ بِالْعِلْمِ وَعَنِ الطمْثِ فِي
الْمِيثَاقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

When Fatima (AS) was born, Allah sent down a revelation to an angel, who
thereupon made the tongue of Muhammad (S) speak whereupon he named her
Fatima (AS). Then Allah (SwT) said: Indeed I detached you [from
ignorance] through knowledge (*fatamtuki bi al-’ilm*) and detached you
from menstruation (*fatamtuki min al-tamth*). Thereafter Abu Ja’far (AS)
said: I swear by Allah, indeed Allah detached her [from ignorance]
through knowledge and detached her from menstruation during the Divine
covenant (*fi al-mithaq*).[^21]

Commenting on this, ‘Allama Majlisi in his *Bihar al-Anwar* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بيان: فطمتك بالعلم أي أرضعتك بالعلم حتى استغنيت وفطمت، أو قطعتك عن
الجهل بسبب العلم أو جعلت فطامك من اللبن مقرونا بالعلم كناية عن كونها
في بدو فطرتها عالمة بالعلوم الربانية. وعلى التقادير كان الفاعل بمعنى
المفعول كالدافق بمعنى المدفوق
  </p>
</blockquote>

Exposition: *Fatamtuki bi al-’ilm* (I detached you through knowledge)
means *ardha’tuki bi al-’ilm* (I fed you with knowledge) until you were
satisfied and weaned. Or it means “I detached you from ignorance by
means of knowledge”, or “I made your weaning from milk accompany
knowledge”, which alludes that from the very beginning of her inner
makeup she was endowed with the Divine knowledge (*‘ulum Rabbaniyya*).
In the aforesaid possibilities, the active participle (*fa’il*) is in
the meaning of the passive participle (*maf’ul*) such as *al-dafiq* in
the meaning of *al-madfuq* (86:6)[^22]

Considering Imam al-Husayn (AS) as *ibnu Fatima*, we conclude that he is
an offspring of one who was free from physical impurities and endowed
with Divine knowledge even before her descent to this worldly life.
Consequently he (Imam (AS)) also possesses similar qualities: his birth
did not accompany any kind of impurity and he was endowed with Divine
knowledge from the very onset. Following are traditions worthy of
contemplation:

• In a tradition narrated in al-Kafi, Imam al-Baqir (AS) enumerating
some of the characteristics of an infallible Imam says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...يُولَدُ مُطهَّراً مَخْتُوناً وَإِذَا وَقَعَ عَلَى الأَرْضِ وَقَعَ
عَلَى رَاحَتِهِ رَافِعاً صَوْتَهُ بِالشَّهَادَتَيْنِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...He [the infallible Imam (AS)] is born pure and circumcised, and when
he descends on the ground he falls on his arms, while he loudly declares
the *shahadatayn*...[^23]

• In another tradition narrated from Hadhrat Safiyya Bint ‘Abd
al-Muttalib, where the specific details of the pure birth of Imam
al-Husayn (AS) is mentioned we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا سَقَط الْحُسَيْنُ بْنُ فَاطمَةَ كُنْتُ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهَا فَقَالَ
لِيَ النَّبِيُّ هَلُمِّي إِلَيَّ بِابْنَيَّ فَقُلْتُ يَا رَسُولَ
اللَّهِ إِنَّا لَمْ نُنَظِّفْهُ بَعْدُ فَقَالَ النَّبِيُّ أَنْتَ
تُنَظِّفِينَهُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَدْ نَظَّفَهُ وَطهَّرَهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

When al-Husayn (AS), the son of Fatima (AS) descended to the ground, I
was near Fatima (AS). Thereupon the Prophet (S) said to me: Bring to me
my son. I said: O Messenger of Allah, we have not yet cleaned him. So
the Prophet (S) said: Do you think you would clean him? Indeed Allah has
cleaned and purified him...[^24]

• With regard to Imam al-Husayn (AS)’s knowledge even prior to his
descent in this material world, we have ample traditions that reveal
that the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) possessed knowledge even prior to their birth.
One of these that speak of this reality is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ أَنَا وَعَلِيٌّ وَفَاطمَةُ وَالْحَسَنُ
وَالْحُسَيْنُ كُنَّا فِي سُرَادِقِ الْعَرْشِ نُسَبِّحُ اللَّهَ
وَتُسَبِّحُ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ بِتَسْبِيحِنَا قَبْلَ أَنْ خَلَقَ اللَّهُ
عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ آدَمَ بِأَلْفَيْ عَامٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said: I, ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan
and Husayn, were in the pavilion of the Divine Throne glorifying Allah,
and the angels would glorify through our glorification. This was two
thousand years before Allah created Adam...

This tradition speaks of their light which was prior to their earthly
descent. The fact that they resided in the pavilion of Divine Throne
reveals their vast knowledge already. This is because in other
traditions the ‘Arsh is translated as Divine Knowledge:

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَالْعَرْشُ هُوَ الْعِلْمُ الَّذِي لاَ يَقْدِرُ أَحَدٌ قَدْرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

...And the throne is knowledge which none can measure...[^25]

**2. She and her followers are detached from the Hell Fire**

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said to Hadhrat Fatima (AS) in
the presence of Imam ‘Ali (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا فَاطمَةُ أَتَدْرِيْنَ لِمَ سُمِّيْتِ فَاطمَة؟ فَقَالَ عَلِيٌّ: يَا
رَسُوْلَ اللهِ لِمَ سُمِّيَتْ؟ قَالَ: لأَنَّهَا فُطمَتْ هِيَ
وَشِيْعَتُهَا مِنَ النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Fatima, do you know why you were named Fatima? Imam ‘Ali (AS) said: O
Messenger of Allah, why was she named Fatima (AS)? He (S) said: Because
she and her Shi’as are detached from the Hell Fire.[^26]

Imam al-Husayn (AS), who is the offspring and fruit of Fatima (AS)
likewise enjoys the same characteristic: in sacrificing whatever he had
for the emancipation of the entire humanity, he serves as a radiant
signpost of detaching those who follow his noble footsteps from
Hellfire.

In fact, in visiting his grave and expressing our salutation to his
noble self there is emancipation from Hellfire. Ibn Qulawayh narrates in
his masterpiece collection *Kamil al-Ziyarat*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أبو عبد الله: مَنْ أَتَى قَبْرَ أَبِيْ عَبْدِ الله فَقَدْ وَصَلَ
رَسُوْلَ اللهِ وَوَصَلَنَا وَحَرُمَتْ غِيْبَتُهُ وَحَرُمَ لَحْمُهُ
عَلىَ النَّارِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: Whosoever comes to the grave of Abu ‘Abdillah
[al-Husayn (AS)], has indeed established contact with the Messenger of
Allah (S) as well as us, and backbiting him is forbidden and his flesh
***is forbidden on the Hell-Fire***...[^27]

On the day of ‘Ashura\` while addressing Imam al-Husayn (AS) as our
host, we request him to ask Allah to emancipate us from Hell Fire:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ أَنَا ضَيْفُ اللَّهِ وَضَيْفُكَ وَجَارُ
اللَّهِ وَجَارُكَ وَلِكُلِّ ضَيْفٍ وَجَارٍ قِرًى وَقِرَايَ فِي هَذَا
الْوَقْتِ أَنْ تَسْأَلَ اللَّهَ سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى أَنْ
يَرْزُقَنِي فَكَاكَ رَقَبَتِي مِنَ النَّارِ إِنَّهُ سَمِيعُ الدُّعَاءِ
قَرِيبٌ مُجِيب‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Aba ‘Abdillah, I am the guest of Allah and your guest, and the refugee
of Allah and your refugee; and for every guest there is a hospitable
reception; and the hospitable reception I need from you at this moment
is that you ask Allah, to provide me with emancipation from Hell Fire.
Surely He listens to prayers and is near to us.[^28]

We must try to understand this tradition carefully. What we seek from
Imam al-Husayn (AS) is not prayer for future safety but current
emancipation. And emancipation presumes that we are already burning in
Hell Fire. Scholars of gnosis tell us that due to our inner blindness,
we cannot perceive our inner pathetic state. Otherwise, if the curtains
of darkness were unveiled from our hearts we would comprehend the fire
that is in us.

3. She was severed and detached from evil

Yunus bin abyan is reported to have said: Abu ‘Abdillah [al-Sadiq] (AS)
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَدْرِيْ أَيُّ شَيْءٍ تَفْسِيْرُ فَاطمَة؟ قُلْتُ: أَخْبِرْنِيْ يَا
سَيِّدِيْ، قَالَ: فُطمَتْ مِنَ الشَّرِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do you know what is the meaning of the name Fatima? I said: Inform me, O
master. He (AS) said: [It means that] she was detached from evil
(*sharr*)....[^29]

And *sharr* (lit. evil) is interpreted by some scholars as sin. The Holy
Qur\`an sometimes also employs it for the same meaning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ مِثْقالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْراً يَرَهُ.وَ مَنْ يَعْمَلْ
مِثْقالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So whoever does an atom’s weight of good will see it, and whoever
does an atom’s weight of evil will see it. (99:78)***

Observe that the word “*sharr*” here is employed to denote an evil
action, which is “sin” itself.

Hence Fatima (AS) was *ma’suma* (infallible). Her offspring and the
fruit of her noble being, who is Imam al-Husayn (AS) likewise was free
from sin. This is because he is among the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) whom Allah
(SwT) Himself purified from sin and indecency.

The Holy Qur\`an says in Surat al-Ahzab:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...إِنَّما يُريدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَ يُطهِّرَكُمْ تَطهيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***...Indeed Allah desires to repel all impurity from you, O People of
the Household, and purify you with a thorough purification. (33:33)***

4. Her lovers are detached from Hellfire

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي سَمَّيْتُ ابْنَتِي فَاطمَةَ لِأَنَّ اللَّهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
فَطمَهَا وَفَطمَ مَنْ أَحَبَّهَا مِنَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed I named by daughter as Fatima because Allah, the Invincible and
Exalted, **detached her and those who love her from the
Hell-Fire.**[^30]

According to a universal principle conveyed by the Holy Qur\`an, a true
lover is a sincere follower:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُوني‏ يُحْبِبْكُمُ
اللَّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَ اللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say, “If you love Allah, then follow me; Allah will love you and
forgive you your sins, and Allah is all-forgiving, all-merciful.”
(3:31)***

Therefore those who sincerely follow the footsteps of Hadhrat Zahra’
(AS) and hence enjoy true love for her, would obviously be detached from
Hell Fire. In a very beautiful tradition Imam al-Baqir (AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَلِ الدِّينُ إِلاَّ الْحُبُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And is religion other than love?[^31]

Imam al-Husayn (AS) in this sense being *ibnu Fatima* (AS) likewise is
one whose love emancipates one from Hell Fire. In fact there is a
narration that pertains to the true love of all the Ahl al-Bayt (AS).
The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحَبَّنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ حَشَرَهُ اللَّهُ آمِناً يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever loves us the Ahl al-Bayt, Allah would raise him in the state
of protection on the Day of Judgment.[^32]

5. She is an intermediary of Divine Grace

In different traditions we are told that Allah derived the name Fatima
from His Name *Fatir al-samawati wa al-ardh* (6:79) (The Cleaver of the
heavens and the earth). The name *al-Fatiru* comes from the word *fatr*
which means to “cleave”. Here it means one who cleaves and breaks
non-existence and brings about existence. In conclusion, as some
scholars have written in their works, it means ‘The Originator’. Observe
the following traditions:

• In a lengthy tradition, where the Ahl al-Kisa’ (AS) were present, the
Holy Prophet (S) at one point addresses Hadhrat Fatima (AS) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَشَقَّ لَكِ يَا فَاطمَةُ اسْماً مِنْ أَسْمَائِهِ فَهُوَ الْفَاطرُ
وَأََنْتِ فَاطمَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

...And He derived for you O Fatima a name from His Names, for He is
*al-Fatiru* (the Originator), and you are *Fatima*.[^33]

• Almighty Allah in a conversation with prophet Adam (As) introduces the
light of Fatima (AS) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَهَذِهِ فَاطمَةُ وَأَنَا فَاطرُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأََرْضِ فَاطمُ
أَعْدَائِي عَنْ رَحْمَتِي يَوْمَ فَصْلِ قَضَائِي وَفَاطمُ أَوْلِيَائِي
عَمَّا يَعْتَرِيهِمْ وَيَشِينُهُمْ فَشَقَقْتُ لَهَا اسْماً مِنِ
اسْمِي‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

...and this is *Fatima* while I am the *Fatir al-samawati wa al-ardh*
(Originator of the heavens and the earth), *Fatimu a’da’i min Rahmati
yawma fasli qadha’i* (the Severer of My enemies from My mercy on the day
of My judgment), and *Fatimu awliya’i ‘amma ya’tarihim wa yashinuhum*
(the Relinquisher of affliction and disgrace from those near to me). So
I derived for her a name from My Name.

• In a supplication taught by Angel Jibra’il (AS) to Prophet Adam (AS)
we read as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا حَمِيدُ بِحَقِّ مُحَمَّدٍ يَا عَالِي بِحَقِّ عَلِيٍّ يَا فَاطرُ
بِحَقِّ فَاطمَة...
  </p>
</blockquote>

O praised one, I swear by the station of Muhammad, O Exalted One, I
swear by the station of ‘Ali, O Originator, I swear by the station of
Fatima (AS)...[^34]

Readers must understand that this tradition does not speak simply of the
method of derivation that we commonly know. Fatima (AS) plays a
fundamental role in the creation and origination of the heavens and the
earth. She unites with the Muhammadan Light which is the first Divine
Creation, from which proceeds every good.

Imam al-Husayn (AS), being *ibnu Fatima (AS)*, also manifests the
attribute of *al-Fatiru*. This is also because he is united with the
Muhammadan Reality (*al-Nur al-Muhammadi*), which is the intermediary of
Divine grace.

Other traditions also indicate that they - the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) - are
the intermediaries (*wasa’it*) between Allah and the creation. For
example, in one of his brilliant messages, our 12th Holy Imam (AS) is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نحنُ صَنائِعُ رَبِّنا والخَلقُ بَعْدُ صَنَائِعُنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

We are the actions of our Lord, and the creation thereafter are our
actions.[^35]

And in a lengthy tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) tells Imam ‘Ali (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...ياَ عَلِيُّ وَلَوْلاَ نَحْنُ مَا خَلَقَ اللَّهُ آدَمَ وَلاَ
حَوَّاءَ وَلاَ الْجَنَّةَ وَلاَ النَّارَ وَلاَ السَّمَاءَ وَلاَ
الأََرْض...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...O ‘Ali, and was it not for us (the Ahl al-Bayt (AS)), Allah would not
have created Adam, nor Hawa’, nor Paradise, nor Hell Fire, nor the sky,
nor the earth...[^36]

Commenting on this tradition, Imam Khumayni in his book of gnosis,
*Misbah al-Hidaya* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله: ((لَوْلاَ نَحْنُ مَا خَلَقَ اللهُ آدَمَ)) إلى آخره. لأنهم وسائط
بين الحق والخلق وروابط بين الحضرة الوحدة المحضة والكثرة التفصيلية؛ وفي
هذه الفقرة بيان وساطتهم بحسب أصل الوجود، وكونهم مظهر الرحمة الرحمانية
التي هي مفيض أصل الوجود...
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet (S) said: ‘*Was it not for us Allah would not create
Adam...*’ This is because they (the Ahl al-Bayt (AS)) are intermediaries
(*wasa’it*) between God and the creation, and links between the Presence
of Sheer Unity (*al-hadhra al-wahda al-mahdha*) and separative plurality
(*al-kathra al-tafsiliyya*); and this part of the tradition explains
their intermediary role in terms of existence, and that they are
manifestations of the All-comprehensive Mercy of Allah, which confers
existence itself...[^37]

6. The creation cannot comprehend her reality

In the well-known Qur\`anic commentary of *Furat al-Kufi* we read the
following tradition narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (AS) about the chapter
al-Qadr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ أَنَّهُ قَالَ إِنَّا أَنْزَلْناهُ فِي
لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ اللَّيْلَةُ فَاطمَةُ وَالْقَدْرُ اللَّهُ فَمَنْ
عَرَفَ فَاطمَةَ حَقَّ مَعْرِفَتِهَا فَقَدْ أَدْرَكَ لَيْلَةَ الْقَدْرِ
وَإِنَّمَا سُمِّيَتْ فَاطمَةَ لِأَنَّ الْخَلْقَ فُطمُوا عَنْ
مَعْرِفَتِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Abu ‘Abdillah al-Sadiq (AS) is reported to have said that in the
verse ‘Indeed we sent it on the *laylat al-qadr*” the word *al-layla*
refers to Fatima (AS) and the word *al-qadr* refers to Allah. Therefore
whosoever knows Fatima (AS) the way she must be known, then indeed he
has comprehended the *laylat al-qadr*. And surely she was named *Fatima*
because the creation was detached from comprehending her reality (*li
anna al-khalqa futimu ‘an ma’rifatiha*).

Readers should understand that the Imam (AS) is referring to the
esoteric and inner meaning of this verse.[^38]

Expounding on this tradition[^39], the saintly scholar, Ayatullah ‘Ali
Sa’adat Parwar (may Allah elevate his noble spirit) in his brilliant
treatise on the spiritual status of Hadhrat Fatima (AS) *Jelweye Nur*
says that this tradition is understandable after we believe that the
reality of the entire Holy Qur\`an was received all at once by the heart
of the Holy Prophet (S) on the night of grandeur. This is because Fatima
(AS) similar to her father enjoys a receptacle that can contain the
Divine message. Hence it is proper to call her *Laylat al-Qadr*.

Bearing the aforesaid in mind, the matronym *Ibnu Fatima (AS)* implies
that the creation is likewise detached from knowing the exalted status
and sanctity of Imam al-Husayn (AS).

In a lengthy conversation, Imam ‘Ali (AS) says to Abu Dharr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...فَإِنَّكُمْ لاَ تَبْلُغُونَ كُنْهَ مَا فِينَا وَلاَ نِهَايَتَه‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

...for surely you will not attain the zenith or of our station, nor its
ultimate state...[^40]

And in a brilliant tradition, Imam al-Ridha (AS), defining the station
of an infallible Imam (AS) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِِمَامُ وَاحِدُ دَهْرِهِ لاَ يُدَانِيهِ أَحَدٌ وَلاَ يُعَادِلُهُ
عَالِمٌ وَلاَ يُوجَدُ مِنْهُ بَدَلٌ وَلاَ لَهُ مِثْلٌ وَلاَ
نَظِيرٌ...فَمَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يَبْلُغُ مَعْرِفَةَ الْإِمَامِ أَوْ
يُمْكِنُهُ اخْتِيَارُهُ هَيْهَاتَ هَيْهَاتَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imam is unique in his time. None can come closer to him in rank, and
no scholar equals him, and he has no subtitute, nor does he have an
example or peer...Who then can attain the knowledge of Imam or is able
to venture into knowing him? It is indeed farfetched! It is indeed
farfetched!...[^41]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بْنَ فَاطمَةَ سَيِّدَةِ نِسَآءِ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O son of Fatimah, the Mistress of the Women of the Universe

If we ponder over the appellation that follows the name Fatima (AS) we
come to understand another very important implication of this verse.
Hadhrat Fatima (AS) is known as *Sayyidatu* *nisa’ al-’alamin*
(*Mistress of the women of the worlds*), which reveals her presiding
status (*siyada*) over all other women, past, present, and future. The
word *sayyida* is the feminine form of the noun *sayyid*, which confers
the connotation of presidence and mastership.

In order to understand the *root meaning* of mastership (*siyada*), some
authoritative scholars like Ayatullah Jawadi Amuli refer to the
following tradition of Amir al-mu’minin (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ِباحْتِمَالِ الْمُؤَن يَجِبُ السّؤْدُد
  </p>
</blockquote>

By shouldering responsibilities mastership becomes essential.

In this sense, all the fourteen infallibles are *sadat*, for they are
the fundamental beings who have shouldered the heaviest responsibility
any being can ever shoulder. In the ontological and existential sense
they represent the middle link between Allah and His creation. Therefore
every good is sourced through their light. Hence they have mastership
over the entire caravan of the creation.

Shaykh Saduq narrates in his masterpiece collection *‘Ilal al-Sharayi\`*
from Imam al-Sadiq (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ قَالَ: إِنَّمَا سُمِّيَتْ فَاطمَةُ
مُحَدَّثَةً لِأَنَّ الْمَلاَئِكَةَ كَانَتْ تَهْبِط مِنَ السَّمَاءِ
فَتُنَادِيهَا كَمَا تُنَادِي مَرْيَمَ بِنْتَ عِمْرَانَ فَتَقُولُ يَا
فَاطمَةُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطفاكِ وَطهَّرَكِ وَاصْطفاكِ عَلى‏ نِساءِ
الْعالَمِينَ يَا فَاطمَةُ اقْنُتِي لِرَبِّكِ وَاسْجُدِي وَارْكَعِي
مَعَ الرَّاكِعِينَ فَتُحَدِّثُهُمْ وَيُحَدِّثُونَهَا فَقَالَتْ لَهُمْ
ذَاتَ لَيْلَةٍ أَ لَيْسَتِ الْمُفَضَّلَةُ عَلَى نِسَاءِ الْعَالَمِينَ
مَرْيَمَ بِنْتَ عِمْرَانَ فَقَالُوا إِنَّ مَرْيَمَ كَانَتْ سَيِّدَةَ
نِسَاءِ عَالَمِهَا وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ جَعَلَكِ سَيِّدَةَ
نِسَاءِ عَالَمِكِ وَعَالَمِهَا وَسَيِّدَةَ نِسَاءِ الأَوَّلِينَ وَ
الْآخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fatima (AS) was known as *Muhaddatha* (one spoken to by the angels)
because the Angels would descend from the heaven and call her the way
they would call Maryam, daughter of ‘Imran. They would say: Indeed Allah
has chosen you and purified you and chosen you over the women of the
worlds. O Fatima be obedient to your Lord and prostrate and bow down
with those who bow down. So she would speak to them and they would speak
to her. One night she said to them: isn’t the one who has more merit
over all the women of the world Maryam, the daughter of ‘Imran? They
said: Indeed Maryam was the Mistress of her world, and indeed Allah, the
Invincible and Magnificent made you the Mistress of the women of your
and her world as well as the Mistress of the preceding and succeeding
women.[^42]

The word *al-’alamin* confers the meaning that her mistressship envelops
all the worlds, and she presides every woman whatsoever. This is because
when the article ‘*al*’ precedes a plural noun, it refers to *all the
extensions* of the noun.

Imam al-Husayn (AS) being *ibnu Fatimati Sayyidati nisa’ al-’alamin*,
and hence a product and fruit of the mistress of the women of the world,
also enjoys qualities of mastership.

Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (AS) reports from Imam al-Husayn (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ يَقُولُ فِيمَا بَشَّرَنِي بِهِ: يَا حُسَيْنُ
أَنْتَ السَّيِّدُ ابْنُ السَّيِّدِ أَبُو السَّادَةِ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Among the glad tidings that the Messenger of Allah (S) would give me,
is: O Husayn, you are the master (sayyid), son of the master (sayyid),
father of masters (sayyids)...[^43]

And in the well-known *Ziyarat al-Arba’in* Imam al-Sadiq (AS) teaches us
to address Imam al-Husayn (AS) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْتَهُ سَيِّداً مِنَ السَّادَةِ وَقَائِداً مِنَ الْقَادَةِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

...and He (Allah) made you a *sayyid* from the sayyids, and a leader
from the leaders...[^44]

The Path Towards Mastership
---------------------------

When we try to to address Imam al-Husayn (AS) with mastership, we must
struggle to embark on a spiritual journey to attain a color of the same.
The Ahl al-Bayt (AS) whose light presides over the creation have also
taught us the path towards *siyada* (mastership).

One of the fundamental criteria of mastership is generosity and
open-handedness (*jud*). Consider the following narrations:

1. Imam al-Husayn (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ جَادَ سَاد وَمَنْ بَخِلَ رَذِلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever bestows generously reigns supreme, and one who is stingy
becomes ignoble.[^45]

2. The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيِّدُ الْقَوْمِ خَادِمُهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The sayyid of a nation is their servant.[^46]

3. Imam ‘Ali (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالْجُوْدِ تَكُوْنُ السِّيَادَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mastership comes about through open-handedness.[^47]

4. Imam ‘Ali (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَبَبُ السِّيَادَةِ اَلسَّخَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Generosity is the cause of mastership.[^48]

5. Imam ‘Ali (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَجَاوَزْ مَعَ الْقُدْرَةِ وَأَحْسِنْ مَعَ الدَّوْلَةِ تَكْمُلُ لَكَ
السِّيَادَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Forgive in power and do good in fortune, your mastership will turn
perfect.[^49]

Considering the aforesaid narrations which speak of generosity and
open-handedness as the criteria of mastership, let us consider the
following narration that speaks of the best kind of open-handedness:

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأََجْوَدَ النَّاسِ مَنْ جَادَ بِنَفْسِهِ وَمَالِهِ فِي سَبِيلِ
اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

...And the most openhanded of all people, is one who generously bestows
his self and his wealth in the way of Allah.[^50]

And Imam al-Husayn (AS) was that sayyid who sacrificed everything that
he had for the sake of Allah. Therefore he has *al-siyada al-’uzhma*
(The greatest mastership).

Hilal bin Nafi’ reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وروى هلال بن نافع قال: إني لواقف مع أصحاب عمربن سعد إذ صرخ صارخ: أبشر
أيها الامير فهذا شمر قد قتل الحسين، قال: فخرجت بين الصفين فوقفت عليه
وإنه ليجود بنفسه فوالله مارأيت قط قتيلا مضمخا بدمه أحسن منه ولاأنور
وجها، ولقد شغلني نور وجهه وجمال هيبته عن الفكرة في قتله ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hilal bin Nafi’ reports: I stood with the companions of ‘Umar bin Sa’d,
when a caller shouted: Glad tidings to you, O Amir, for this is Shimr,
who has already killed al-Husayn (AS). Hilal says: I left between the
two ranks and stood besides him (al-Husayn (AS)) while surely *he was
giving away his life*; I swear by Allah I never saw a killed man smeared
in his blood more beautiful and more sparkling in face than him. And
indeed the light of his face and the beauty of his awe-inspiring
appearance occupied me from thinking about his martyrdom...[^51]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بْنَ فَاطمَةَ سَيِّدَةِ نِسَآءِ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O son of Fatimah, the Leader of the Women of the Worlds

Some commentators of Ziyarat ‘Ashura\`[^52] have defined *siyada* as
*sharafa wa ‘ulluw al-martaba.* In other words, when we say Hadhrat
Fatima (AS) is *Sayyidatu nisa’ al-’alamin*, we mean she is the most
high-ranking of all women, past, present, and future:

Shaykh Saduq in his *al-Amali* narrates a lengthy tradition from the
Holy Prophet (S), who at one point says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا اِبْنَتِي فَاطمَة فَهِيَ سَيِّدَةُ نِسَاءِ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
مِنَ الأَوَّلِيْنَ وَالآخِرِيْنَ، وَإِنَّهَا لَتَقُوْمُ فِيْ
مِحْرَابِهَا فَيُسَلِّمُ عَلَيْهَا سَبْعُوْنَ أَلْف مَلَكٍ مِنَ
الْمَلاَئِكَةِ الْمُقَرَّبِيْنَ، وَيُنَادَوْنَهَا بِمَا نَادَتْ بِهِ
الْمَلاَئِكَةُ مَرْيَمَ فَيَقُوْلُوْنَ: يَا فَاطمَةُ إِنَّ اللهَ
اصْطفَاكِ وَطهَّرَكِ وَاصْطفَاكِ عَلىَ نِسَاءِ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for my daughter Fatima, *she is the Mistress of the women of the
worlds from the foremost and latter ones*, and surely she stands in her
place of prayer, whereupon seventy thousand angels close to Allah, send
their salutations to her, and call her with what the angels called
Maryam. So they say: “O Fatima, indeed Allah chose you and purified you,
and chose you over the women of all the worlds.”[^53]

Therefore Imam al-Husayn (AS) who is the son and edifice of *Sayyidatu
nisa’i al-’alamin* also is among the most elevated of people. We have
already mentioned traditions that clearly distinguish Imam al-Husayn
(AS) as *sayyid*. However, because we defined the word *sayyid* here to
mean *sharif*, let us consider the following verse of the well-known
salutational recital of *Ziyarat al-Jami’a al-Kabira*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَطأْطأَ كُلُّ شَرِيْفٍ لِشَرَفِكُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

And every *sharif* (one who enjoys an elevated status) bows down before
your elevated status (*li sharafikum*)...[^54]

This clearly informs us that the Infallible Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
(AS) enjoy the highest stations, and therefore all of them are *sayyids*
in relation to the people.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بْنَ فَاطمَةَ سَيِّدَةِ نِسَآءِ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O son of Fatimah, the Mistress of the Women of the Universe

Another possible meaning of *Sayyidat al-Nisa*, as understood from a
tradition, is that she is *mufrudhat al-ta’a* (one who must be obeyed)
with regard to all the women. That is, whatever she commands must be
obeyed, and her words and deeds are are proof for them. Rather according
to a tradition, she has this position with regard to all:

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَانَتْ مَفْرُوْضَةَ الطاعَةِ عَلىَ جَمِيْعٍ مِنْ خَلْقِ
اللهِ مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالإِنْسِ وَالطيْرِ وَالْوَحْشِ وَالأَنْبِيَاءِ
وَالْمَلآئِكَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And indeed she (AS) was **one to be compulsorily obeyed by all the
creation: the Jins, the human beings, the birds, the wild animals, the
prophets and the angels**.[^55]

And *mafrudhat al-ta’a* (one who must be obeyed) in this tradition
should not be merely taken as one who must be obeyed by all through
their volitions. Rather it also speaks of *wilaya takwiniyya*
(ontological presidence), which means that she has Divinely bestowed
power and can control or lay effect on their entities of existence. This
definition of mistressship is an inspiration from the following
tradition:

‘Allama Majlisi narrated the following tradition in *Bihar al-Anwar*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ النَّبِيُّ: عَلِيٌّ سَيِّدُ الْعَرَبِ فَقَالَتْ عَائِشَةُ يَا
رَسُولَ اللَّهِ أَلَسْتَ سَيِّدَ الْعَرَبِ؟ قَالَ أَنَا سَيِّدُ وُلْدِ
آدَمَ وَعَلِيٌّ سَيِّدُ الْعَرَبِ. فَقَالَتْ عَائِشَةُ: يَا رَسُولَ
اللَّهِ وَمَا السَّيِّدُ؟ قَالَ : مَنِ افْتُرِضَتْ طاعَتُهُ كَمَا
افْتُرِضَتْ طاعَتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet (S) said: ‘Ali is the Sayyid of the Arabs. So ‘A\`isha
asked: O Messenger of Allah, aren’t you the Sayyid of Arabs? He (S)
said: I am the Sayyid of the children of Adam, and ‘Ali is the Sayyid of
the Arabs. So ‘A\`isha asked: O Messenger of Allah, and who is a sayyid?
He (S) said: One whose obedience is made compulsory, the way my
obedience is made compulsory.[^56]

And the traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) are clear that all the Imams
are *muftaradh al-ta’a*. There are clear expressions about that in some
interesting traditions. Observe the following traditions:

Al-’Amili in his *Wasa\`il al-Shi’a* narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ وَرُوِيَ أَنَّ الصَّادِقَ مَرِضَ فَأَمَرَ مَنْ عِنْدَهُ أَنْ
يَسْتَأْجِرُوا لَهُ أَجِيراً يَدْعُو لَهُ عِنْدَ قَبْرِ الْحُسَيْنِ
فَوَجَدُوا رَجُلًا فَقَالُوا لَهُ ذَلِكَ فَقَالَ أَنَا أَمْضِي
وَلَكِنَّ الْحُسَيْنَ إِمَامٌ مُفْتَرَضُ الطاعَةِ وَهُوَ إِمَامٌ
مُفْتَرَضُ الطاعَةِ فَرَجَعُوا إِلَى الصَّادِقِ وَأَخْبَرُوهُ فَقَالَ
هُوَ كَمَا قَالَ وَ لَكِنْ أَ مَا عَرَفَ أَنَّ لِلَّهِ تَعَالَى
بِقَاعاً يُسْتَجَابُ فِيهَا الدُّعَاءُ فَتِلْكَ الْبُقْعَةُ مِنْ
تِلْكَ الْبِقَاعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated that Imam al-Sadiq (AS) once got ill, and ordered someone
who was near him to to tell his people to hire someone, so that he may
pray for him near the grave of al-Husayn (AS). So they found a person,
and told him to do what is required. He said: I will go, **but al-Husayn
(AS) is an Imam who must be compulsorily obeyed (muftaradh al-ta’a) and
he (i.e. Imam al-Sadiq (AS)) [likewise] is an Imam who must be
compulsorily obeyed**.[Aren’t they equal in status?] So they went to
Imam al-Sadiq (AS) and informed him what the person had said. The Imam
(AS) said: What he said is correct. However, is he not aware that Allah
has places, wherein supplications are accepted. And that spot [i.e. near
the grave of al-Husayn (AS)] is among those places.[^57]

‘Allama Majlisi narrates the following tradition in his *Bihar
al-Anwar*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ الْفَضْلِ قَالَ كُنْتُ عِنْدَ أَبِي عَبْدِ
اللَّهِ فَدَخَلَ عَلَيْهِ رَجُلٌ مِنْ أَهْلِ طوسَ فَقَالَ لَهُ: يَا
ابْنَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ مَا لِمَنْ زَارَ قَبْرَ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ
الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ؟ فَقَالَ لَهُ: يَا طوسِيُّ مَنْ زَارَ قَبْرَ
أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ وَهُوَ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّهُ
إِمَامٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ مُفْتَرَضُ الطاعَةِ عَلَى الْعِبَادِ غَفَرَ
اللَّهُ لَهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِهِ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ وَقَبِلَ
شَفَاعَتَهُ فِي سَبْعِينَ مُذْنِباً وَلَمْ يَسْأَلِ اللَّهَ جَلَّ
وَعَزَّ عِنْدَ قَبْرِهِ حَاجَةً إِلاَ قَضَاهَا لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abdullah bin al-Fadhl is reported to have said: I was with Abu
‘Abdillah [al-Sadiq (AS)], and a person from the inhabitants of Tus came
in his presence. He said to the Imam (AS): O son of the Messenger of
Allah, what reward is there for one who visits the grave of Abu
‘Abdillah al-Husayn bin ‘Ali (AS)? The Imam (AS) said to him: **O Tusi,
whosoever visits the grave of Abu ‘Abdillah al-Husayn bin ‘Ali (AS)
while he knows that the Imam (AS) is one who is compulsorily to be
obeyed (*****muftaradh al-ta’a*****) by the servants of Allah**, Allah
would forgive him his past and future sins, and would accept his
intercession for seventy sinners, and he would not ask any need from
Allah near the Imam’s grave save that Allah would fulfil his need.[^58]

‘Allama Majlisi narrates the following tradition in his *Bihar
al-Anwar*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ عَبْدِ الْحَمِيدِ بْنِ نَصْرٍ قَالَ قَالَ أَبُو عَبْدِ اللَّهِ:
يُنْكِرُونَ الإِِمَامَ الْمُفْتَرَضَ الطاعَةِ وَيَجْحَدُونَ بِهِ
وَاللَّهِ مَا فِي الأََرْضِ مَنْزِلَةٌ أَعْظَمَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ مِنْ
مُفْتَرَضِ الطاعَةِ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Hamidh bin Nasr reports: Abu ‘Abdillah [Imam al-Sadiq] (AS)
said: They deny the Imam who must be compulsorily obeyed and reject him.
***I swear by Allah there is no station in the earth greater near Allah
then one who must be compulsorily obeyed***...[^59]

[^1]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.98, pp.262-263

[^2]: The root meaning of al-tayyib is ‘that which is desirable, in
which there is no kind of apparent or hidden dirt…’ [See Mustafawi’s
al-Tahqiq, v.7, p. 151]. Al-Isfahani confers a similar definition in his
Al-Mufradat. He says: ‘wa asl al-tayyib ma tastalidhhuhu al-hawas, wa ma
tastalidhhuhu al-nafs’ (and the root meaning of al-tayyib is that by
which the senses take pleasure, and that which the soul takes pleasure
[See Al-Mufradat of Al-Isfahani, , p. 527.]

[^3]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, v.4, p. 587

[^4]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.98, pp. 41

[^5]: Shaykh al-Tusi, Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, v.2, p. 613

[^6]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.65, p. 24

[^7]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.74, p. 278

[^8]: Unlike the word of man which is expressed by the tongue, kalima
with regard to Almighty Allah refers to His creation. His creation is
His speech. Therefore kalima tayyiba refers to a being of purity.
Prophet ‘Isa  in the Holy Qur\`an is referred to as “…wa kalimatuhu
alqaha ila Maryam…” (and His Word that He cast toward Mary) (4:171)

[^9]: Imam ‘Ali , Nahj al-Balagha, sermon 228

[^10]: Qutb al-Din al-Rawandi, Al-Khara’ij wa al-Jarayih, v.2, p. 596

[^11]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.29, p. 600

[^12]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.4, p. 559

[^13]: Sayyid Radhi al-Din bin Tawus al-Hasani, Iqbal al-A’mal, v.2,
p.74

[^14]: Sayyid Radhi al-Din bin Tawus al-Hasani, al-Luhuf fi Qatla
al-Tufuf, p.6

[^15]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.45, p.9

[^16]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.2, p. 5

[^17]: One of the interpretations given for kalima tayyiba is kalimat La
ilaha illa Allah. If the parents purify themselves and make their
foundations of belief and action firm, they would serve as origins of
those human beings who truly personify La ilaha illa Allah.

[^18]: Dr. Thomas Verny, The Secret Life of the Unborn Child, p.25

[^19]: Ibid., p. 43

[^20]: Shaykh Saduq, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, v.2, p. 49

[^21]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.1, p. 460

[^22]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 43, p. 13. Allama is trying
to simply say that the word Fatima which is in the pattern of an active
participle signifies the meaning of a passive participle. This is
because she is “cut off from ignorance” and “cut off from impurity”. So
in this case she is the passive participle.

[^23]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.1, p. 388

[^24]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 43, p. 256

[^25]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 4, p. 89

[^26]: Ibid., v. 43, p. 14

[^27]: Ibnu Qulawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 127

[^28]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 4, p. 89

[^29]: Shaykh Saduq, Al-Khisal, p. 414

[^30]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 43, p. 12

[^31]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.8, p. 79

[^32]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 27, p. 79

[^33]: Ibid., v. 37, p. 47

[^34]: Ibid., v.44, p.245

[^35]: Ibid., v.53, p. 178

[^36]: Ibid., v.18, p. 345

[^37]: Imam Khumayni, Misbah al-Hidaya, p. 78

[^38]: Al-Kufi, Tafsir Furat, p. 581

[^39]: In order to understand the core of this tradition which is beyond
the scope of this work, readers are requested to refer to pp. 11-112 of
the Persian treatise Jelweye Nur.

[^40]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 26, p. 1

[^41]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.1, p. 201

[^42]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 14, p. 206

[^43]: Ibid., v. 36, p. 344

[^44]: Ibid., v. 98, p. 331

[^45]: Shaykh Baqir Sharif al-Qarashi, Hayat al-Imam al-Husayn , v.1,
p. 157

[^46]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, v.4, p. 378

[^47]: Al-Amadi, Ghurar al-Hikam, p.378

[^48]: Al-Wasiti, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’i³, p. 281

[^49]: Al-Wasiti, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’i³, p. 200

[^50]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 73, p. 12

[^51]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 45, p. 57

[^52]: Shaykh ‘Ali Haydar Mu’ayyad, Adhwa’ ‘ala Ziyarat ‘Ashura\`, p.
131

[^53]: Shaykh Saduq, Al-Amali, p. 575

[^54]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 99, p. 132

[^55]: Al-Shahrudi, Mustadrak Safinat al-Bihar, v.6, p. 208

[^56]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.4, p.198

[^57]: Al-’Amili, Wasa\`il al-Shi’a, v.14, p. 537

[^58]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.4, p.198

[^59]: Ibid., v.25, p.141


