Chapter 5: Peace be unto you, O blood of Allah and the son of the blood of Allah
================================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا ثَارَ اللَّهِ وَابْنَ ثَارِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto You, O Blood of Allah and the son of the Blood of Allah

Commentary
----------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا ثَارَ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto You, O possessor of the blood venerated by Allah

The word *thar* ثَار in the Arabic language has been employed for
different meanings: avenging for blood, rancour, blood, the slain, etc.

Many commentators of *Ziyarat ‘Ashura’* have rendered the phrase ‘*thar
Allah*’ as ‘blood of Allah’. ‘Allama al-Tabataba\`i likewise is reported
to have said the same thing when asked about its meaning.[^1]

In order for this verse to be comprehensible, a *mudhaf* (first particle
of a genetive construction) is taken to be elliptical and hidden before
the word *thar*. The sentence would originally read “*ya sahiba
tharillah*” (O *possessor* of the blood of Allah’. Therefore when we say
“*ya thar Allah*”, we actually mean “*ya sahiba tharillah*”.

Obviously Allah is free from any kind of anthropomorphic attribute
(Qur\`an, 42:11), and thus the meaning of ‘blood of Allah’ should not be
taken as ‘the blood that is a part of Allah’, far is He from any kind of
imperfection whatsoever. The possibility that *thar* *Allah* means ‘the
blood owned by Allah’ is although correct in the real sense, for
Almighty Allah has absolute ownership over every entity (Qur\`an,
3:189), it is not meant in the present case. This is because the
appellation ‘*thar Allah*’ here denotes a distinct characteristic of
al-Husayn (AS) whereas ‘*thar Allah*’ in its general sense refers to
every human being. Unless, however, we would like to express the
nobility (*sharafa*) of the blood of Imam al-Husayn (AS), which was
sacrificed in the way of Allah.

We do have similar instances in the Arabic language such as *baytullah*
(house of Allah), *ruhullah* (spirit of Allah), *naqatallah* (camel of
Allah: 91:13), etc. Annexing the name Allah in such instances is in
order to reveal the nobility of the first particle of the genetive
construction. In short, when we say ‘*ya thar Allah*’ we mean ‘O one
whose blood is the blood that Allah venerated and preferred over the
blood of others.’[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا ثَارَ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you, O the spilled blood, whose avenger is Allah

One of the most clear expositions[^3] for *thar Allah* is that it refers
to that blood that has been spilled in falsehood and injustice, and is
attributed to the *wali al-dam* (one who has the right to avenge for the
blood). Therefore when we say *thar Allah* we mean ‘the spilled blood
that belongs to Allah’, and He alone is the avenger of the same. This
meaning can be understood in other salutational recitals as well. For
example in one of the *ziyarat* of Imam al-Husayn (AS) we address him as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَاَنَّكَ ثَارُ اللهِ فِِي الاَرْضِ وَالدَّمُ الّذِيْ لاَ يُدْرِكُ
ثَارَهُ اَحَدٌ مِنْ اَهْلِ الاَرْضِ وَلاَ يُدْرِكُهُ إلاَّ اللهُ
وَحْدَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

...and that you are the blood of Allah (*thar Allah*) in the earth and
**the blood** that none of the inhabitants of the earth can avenge, and
none save Allah alone can avenge it.[^4]

This, however, does not contradict those salutational recitals and
supplications that encourage us to ask Almighty Allah to enable us
avenge the blood of Imam al-Husayn (AS) with our present Imam (AS), for
he is a vicegerent of Allah on earth and His medium, and can thus serve
as Allah’s representative in avenging the blood of Imam al-Husayn (AS).

The Holy Qur\`an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَقْتُلُوا النَّفْسَ الَّتي‏ حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ إِلاَّ بِالْحَقِّ
وَمَنْ قُتِلَ مَظْلُوماً فَقَدْ جَعَلْنا لِوَلِيِّهِ سُلْطاناً فَلا
يُسْرِفْ فِي الْقَتْلِ إِنَّهُ كانَ مَنْصُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do not kill a soul [whose life] Allah has made inviolable, except
with due cause, and whoever is killed wrongfully, We have certainly
given his heir an authority. But let him not commit any excess in
killing, for he enjoys the support [of law.] (17:33)***

Al-Bahrani in his *Tafsir al-Burhan*, while commenting on the above
verse narrates the following tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُحَمَّد بنِ سِنَان، عَنْ رَجُلٍ، قَالَ: سَأَلْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِ
اللهِ عَنْ قَوْلِهِ تَعَالىَ: وَمَنْ قُتِلَ مَظْلُوماً فَقَدْ جَعَلْنا
لِوَلِيِّهِ سُلْطاناً فَلا يُسْرِفْ فِي الْقَتْلِ إِنَّهُ كانَ
مَنْصُوراً.قال: ذَلِكَ قَائِمُ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ، يَخْرُجُ فَيَقْتُلُ
بِدَمِ الْحُسَيْنِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad bin Sinan narrates from a person who said: I asked Aba
‘Abdillah [al-Sadiq (AS)] about the verse “and whoever is killed
wrongfully, We have certainly given his heir an authority”, and he said:
**That is the Qa\`im of the progeny of Muhammad (AS). He will come out
and rise to avenge the blood of al-Husayn (AS)...**[^5]

We also read in the supplication of *al-Nudba*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَيْنَ الطالِبُ بِدَمِ الْمَقْتُوْلِ بِكَرْبَلاَءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Where is the one who would avenge the blood of the one who was killed in
Karbala’...[^6]

Therefore whether we say that Allah Himself will avenge the blood of
Imam al-Husayn (AS) or the present Imam (AS) will do the same, there is
no difference. This is because the Imam (AS) is an entirely submissive
servant of Almighty Allah and whatever he does is whatever Allah wants.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا ثَارَ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you, O one whose blood is the blood of Allah

One of the possible meanings of the phrase *ya thar Allah* is ‘*ya man
tharuhu thar Allah’* (O one whose blood is the blood of Allah)[^7]. Here
the *za’ir* declares that Imam al-Husayn (AS) enjoys the lofty spiritual
state of *al-baqa’ bi Allah ba’d al-fana’* (survival in Allah after
dissolution in Him) which the mystic-scholars expound in their works.
Due to the comprehensive and profound meaning it entails, we would not
like to go into the details of this reality here.

Those who have attained heights of human perfection through
supererogatory worship and obedience (*nawafil*) come to a station where
they vision and comprehend that every act of theirs is done through
Almighty Allah. In other words, Almighty Allah becomes their means of
action. In a sacred tradition [*hadith al-qudsi*], Almighty Allah is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يَتَقَرّبُ إِلَىّ عَبْدٌ مِنْ عِبَادِيْ بِشَيْ‏ءٍ اَحَبُّ إِلَىّ
مِمّا افْتَرَضْتُ عَلَيْهِ. وَإِنّهُ لَيَتَقَرَّّبُ إِلَىّ
بِالنّافِلَةِ حَتّي اُحِبّهُ، فَاِذَا اَحْبَبْتُهُ، كُنْتُ اِذاً
سَمْعَهُ الّذِيْ يَسْمَعُ بِهِ وَبَصَرَهُ الَّتِيْ يَبْصُرُ بِهَا
وَلِسَانَهُ الّذِيْ يَنْطقُ بِهِ وَيَدَهُ الّتِيْ يَبْطشُ بِهَا، إِنْ
دَعَانِيْ اَجَبْتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

My servant does not draw near to me with anything more lovable to Me
than what I have made obligatory on him. And surely he never ceases to
draw near to Me through supererogatory acts until I love him. And when I
love him, I am his hearing through which he hears, his sight through
which he sees, his tongue through which he speaks, his hand through
which he grasps. When he calls on Me I respond to him.

This tradition speaks of two fundamental kinds of proximity: (a)
proximity attained through obligatory deeds (*qurb al-fara’idh*), and
(b) proximity attained through supererogatory deeds (*qurb al-nawafil*).
*Thar Allah* refers to the first level. In this level it is the servant
who becomes the instrument of Allah. Almighty Allah Sees, Hears, and
Speaks through His servant. This should not lead one to conjecture that
Allah is in need of His servant, for the latter’s very existence as well
as subsistence entirely depend on Allah’s volition. Being an instrument
of Allah rather shows the utter obedience of the servant and his unity
with Divine volition.

Perhaps Imam al-Husayn (AS)’s well-known dictum ‘*Ridha Allah Ridhana
Ahl al-Bayt’* (The pleasure of Allah is our pleasure, the Ahl al-Bayt
(AS)[^8] refers to this very state. The servant in this state becomes
عَيْنُ الله *‘aynullah* (the eyes of Allah), يََدُالله *yadullah* (the
hand of Allah) or ثَارَالله”*tharullah*” (blood of Allah), which means
that He employs these intermediaries of the elevated human being to do
what He decides. Hashim bin ‘Umara narrates: I heard Amir al-mu’minin
‘Ali (AS) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا عَيْنُ اللَّهِ وََأَنَا يَدُ اللَّهِ وَأَنَا جَنْبُ اللَّهِ
وَأَنَا بَابُ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am the eye of Allah, and I am the hand of Allah; and I am the side of
Allah and I am the door of Allah.[^9]

And Aswad bin Sa’id reports: I was with Abu Ja’far (AS), and he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ حُجَّةُ اللَّهِ وَنَحْنُ بَابُ اللَّهِ وَنَحْنُ لِسَانُ اللَّهِ
وَنَحْنُ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ وَنَحْنُ عَيْنُ اللَّهِ فِي خَلْقِهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

We (the Ahl al-Bayt) are the proof of Allah, we are the door of Allah,
and we are the tongue of Allah, and we are the face of Allah, and we are
the eye of Allah in His creation...[^10]

Scholars of insight when expounding this exalted state also refer to the
following verse of the Holy Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمْ تَقْتُلُوهُمْ وَلكِنَّ اللَّهَ قَتَلَهُمْ وَما رَمَيْتَ إِذْ
رَمَيْتَ وَلكِنَّ اللَّهَ رَمى‏ وَلِيُبْلِيَ الْمُؤْمِنينَ مِنْهُ
بَلاءً حَسَناً إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَميعٌ عَليمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You did not kill them; rather it was Allah who killed them; and you
did not throw when you threw, rather it was Allah who threw, that He
might test the faithful with a good test from Himself. Indeed Allah is
All-Hearing, All-Knowing. (8:17)***

This verse speaks of the Battle of Badr. The Holy Prophet (S) asks Imam
‘Ali (AS) to give him a handful of pebbles, whereafter he (S) throws
them at the faces of the polytheists of Quraysh.[^11] Almighty Allah
describes this as His own action. In other words, the Holy Prophet (S)
was Allah’s agent and medium. He is told: *You did not throw when you
threw, but Allah threw*. In reality no kind of selfhood remained in the
Prophet (S). His entire being manifested the Divine.

*Thar Allah*, according to some Divine scholars, refers to this very
kind of perfection. Imam al-Husayn (AS)’s entire movement and sacrifice
manifested the attributes of Allah.

Scholars of insight, considering the reality that Imam al-Husayn (AS) is
*thar Allah* say that the compensatory price of the blood of al-Husayn
(AS) therefore is Allah Himself. The late scholar Ayatullah Muhammad
Ridha Rabbani in his *Jalawat-e-Rabbani* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن حضرت مقام ثاراللهي را واجد است و بهمين جهت است كه خونبهاي او خود
خداست
  </p>
</blockquote>

That Hadhrat occupies the station of *thar Allah* and for this very
reason his compensatory price is God Himself.[^12]

And in his comments over ‘Allama al-Tabataba\`i’s translation of *thar
Allah* as ‘*blood of Allah*’ Shaykh Rukhshad, a former student of
‘Allama says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
منظور اين است كه خداوند متعال خود خونبهاي امام حسين – عليه السلام – مي
باشد؛ زيرا در برابر شهادت و فداكاري آن حضرت هيچ نعمتي از نعمتهاي آخرتي
جز ديدار پروردگار قرار نمي گرفت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This implies that Almighty God Himself is the compensatory price of the
blood of Imam al-Husayn (AS). This is because in exchange for the Imam’s
martyrdom and sacrifice, there was no blessing of the Hereafter other
than the vision of God.[^13]

Perhaps the reason why the compensatory price of al-Husayn (AS) is Allah
Himself is the Imam’s state of utter dissolution in the Beloved and
survival by Him (*al-fana’ fi Allah wa al-baqa’ bihi*)[^14]. As we said
earlier, Imam al-Husayn (AS), due to his very exalted station, was a
medium of Allah’s works.

Therefore, like the Prophet (S) who is told **‘*****you did not throw
when you threw, rather it was Allah who threw*****’(8:17),** Imam
al-Husayn did not fight gallantly when he fought gallantly in the plains
of Karbala’ but Allah fought gallantly in the plains of Karbala’. This
is because every element of Imam al-Husayn (AS) was for Allah. Hence he
can rightly be known as ‘*aynullah* (eye of Allah), *yadullah* (hand of
Allah), *lisanullah* (tongue of Allah), *tharullah* (blood of Allah),
etc.

Mentioning the lofty station of Imam al-Husayn (AS) and his companions,
al-Naraqi in his *Mathnawi-e-Taqdis* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين فناي بنده در مولا بُوَد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين فنا از صد بقا اولي بُوَد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين عدم باشد رهِ كويِ بقا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فهم آن خواهي برو تا كربلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This is the dissolution of the servant in his Master*  
*This dissolution is better than a hundred lives*  
*This dissolution is a path towards the alley of survival*  
*If you would like to know its reality go upto Karbala.*[^15]

Although the compensatory price for the horrendous massacre cannot be
paid, the meaning of ‘avenging the blood of Imam al-Husayn (AS)’, as we
shall come to understand later in this *Ziyarat*, would in reality be a
struggle to eradicate all those enemies who are openly against a Divine
government being established, where the laws of Allah are executed and
the religion is practised in the best possible manner, so that an
environment for human perfection is facilitated for every human being.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا ثَارَ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O one who has been killed for the sake of Allah

*Thar* has also been translated as *qatil* (the one who is killed). And
when Allah is annexed to the word *thar*, it confers the meaning
*qatilullah* (the one killed for Allah or in His way). The expression
*qatilu Allah* has come in different *ziyarat* related to Imam al-Husayn
(AS). For example in a *Ziyarat* taught by Imam al-Sadiq (AS) we address
the Imam (AS) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا قَتِيلَ اللَّهِ وَابْنَ قَتِيلِهِ أَلسَّلاَمُ
عَلَيْكَ يَا ثَارَ اللَّهِ وَابْنَ ثَارِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be unto you O martyr, the son of a martyr, peace be unto you, O
blood of Allah, the son of the blood of Allah...[^16]

Observe that the phrase ‘*thar Allah wabna tharih*’ has also come in
this *Ziyarat*. Does it mean therefore that *thar Allah* has a different
meaning from *qatil Allah*? Obviously in this place it is possible.
However we can also take *thar Allah* as an emphasis of *qatil Allah*.
In our case, i.e. in Ziyarat ‘Ashura’, however, it is possible that this
phrase would like to confer the meaning of both the phrases depicted in
the above quotation. And Allah is All-Knowing.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَابْنَ ثَارِه
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the offspring of the blood of Allah

This phrase talks about Imam ‘Ali (AS) also occupying the exalted
station of *thar Allah*. Perhaps it would like us to know that Imam
al-Husayn (AS) being the product (*ibn*) of a *thar Allah* inherited the
same appellation from his father.

[^1]: Muhammad Husayn Rukhshad, Dar Mahzare ‘Allameye Tabataba\`i, p.
177

[^2]: Habibullah Kashani, Sharhu Ziyarat ‘Ashura\`, p. 45

[^3]: Sayyid Mahdi Mir Baqiri, Sabr-e-Jamil Sayr o Suluk ba ‘Ashura\`,
pp. 75-76

[^4]: Ibn Qulawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, v.1, p. 216

[^5]: Al-Bahrani, Al-Burhan fi Tafsir al-Qur\`an, v.3, p. 528

[^6]: Al-Mashhadi, al-Mazar, p. 579

[^7]: Habibullah Kashani, Sharhu Ziyarat ‘Ashura\`, p. 45

[^8]: Imam Khumayni, Glosses on the Commentary of Fusus al-Hikam, pp.
281-282

[^9]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.1, p. 145

[^10]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.25, p. 384

[^11]: Shaykh al-Bahrani, Al-Burhan fi Tafsir al-Qur\`an, v.2, p. 662

[^12]: Ayatullah Muhammad Ridha Rabbani, Jalawat-e-Rabbani, v.1, p.305

[^13]: Muhammad Husayn Rukhshad, Dar Mahzare ‘Allameye Tabataba\`i, p.
177

[^14]: One should not misconceive such kind of unity being a kind of
compositional unity (ittihad) or incarnation (hulul); far is Allah from
every kind of deficiency whatsoever. Those endowed with a sharp vision
say that such a state is nothing but ‘the unveiling of the reality.’ The
utterly submissive human being understands that he is nothing but an
action of Allah.

[^15]: Mawla al-Naraqi, Mathnawi-e-Taqdis, p. 273

[^16]: ‘Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v.98, p. 151


