The Role of knowledge in Development
====================================

We found that in the process of man's development, the heart is the main
wayfarer that proceeds towards Allah (SWT) in the way of servitude. In
the wake of the activities of the heart, other efforts would assume a
form of servitude and would bear an impact on man's development.

The genuine process of development would commence when man recognizes
the means and the end, and treads the path (towards this end) with
will-power and choice. Thus its main condition is (to have) learning and
knowledge. Now we must consider the role of knowledge in the process of
development. Is it a perfection or not? And if it is a perfection, is it
genuine, relative or preferential?

On the value and importance of knowledge, various extreme views have
been expressed. Some, like the Mashsha philosophers, regarded knowledge
and philosophy not only as a perfection but also as a principle and the
ultimate point of all human perfection. As already pointed out, the
perfect human being is one who has logical knowledge of all facts of
existence. On the other hand, another group of persons are of the view
that acquired knowledge has no relationship with human perfection.
"Official learning is a hubbub altogether." They have not sufficed even
with this. They have regarded learning as a block and barrier in
development. They have even called it "al-Hifalbul-Akbar".

At this point, we do not intend to analyze and interpret these
statements or to justify and find a way to bring them together. Rather,
on the basis of the method of this discussion and issues we have so far
proven, we intend to find the position of knowledge in the process of
development.

After realizing that man's ultimate perfection is to reach *qurbah* with
Almighty Allah and to establish an intuitive link with Him, there is no
question that the final stage of man's process (of development) is of a
speculative type. Such speculative knowledge is an innate desire and
genuine perfection. It is even the ultimate point of all perfection. But
the point is in acquired and mental knowledge. In this regard, the
following must be pointed out:

According to the interpretation already mentioned for perfection, one
can regard knowledge as man's perfection, because knowledge is an
existential trait acquired by man. Through knowledge, man rejects
non-existence and imperfection. For this purpose, knowledge is naturally
sought by man.

We however explained that each existential trait is not absolutely the
perfection of that which is qualified with it. Rather existential traits
are at times genuine perfections and at other times, preferential and
relative perfections. Relative perfections will be deemed the true
perfection of a being, in case they serve as means to reach genuine
perfection.

If they are used contrary to the direction of the ultimate perfection,
they will be a prelude to imperfection and ultimate downfall, even
though they are perfections as compared to lower degrees.

Knowledge is either acquired, theoretical or practical. Although
theoretical sciences have no direct relationship with the trend of
development, some of them such as divine sciences, facilitate the
recognition of the objective for man. In case they are employed to reach
*qurbah* with Allah (SWT), they will serve as an invaluable preferential
perfection.

Although other theoretical sciences are not a prelude to the recognition
of the objective or a means to reach it, they can greatly contribute to
the required recognitions. These are especially those sciences which
unveil the mysteries and philosophies of existence and which can play an
effective role in eliminating vital requirements which are a
preferential value. Enjoyment of these blessings could be a motive to
thank and worship Allah (SWT) and thus it can establish connection with
man's true prosperity. However the relationship between practical
sciences and man's process of development and its preliminaries needs no
explanation. Obviously man's conscious development hinges on them.

We must emphasize that all acquired sciences pave the way and broaden
the facilities for man's true progress. They never bear a certain and
indispensable impact on man's prosperity. As a result, learning, in the
form of mental reserves, could not be considered as a potential
perfection for man, unless it becomes a means to reach *qurbah* with
Allah (SWT), to promote theism, to show the means, to enjoy divine
blessings so as to thank (Almighty Allah) or to prepare the ground for
the development of oneself and others.

With respect to the issues set forth, our position vis a vis pragmatism
becomes clear.

The advocates of pragmatism which is a manifestation of humanism, are of
the view that science and art are valid if they provide a better
standard of living. What is essentially valid according to the
pragmatists is useful work for living.

In response to these, we mark that neither worldly life nor efforts made
for individual and social welfare are possessed of genuine value, so
that science and art would become valid in the light of them. The only
thing which is essentially valid for man is the *qurbah* of the Almighty
Allah and whatever facilitates this *qurbah* will be valuable to the
same extent and to degree that it serves as a means. The perfect human
being bears no label other than theism and accepts no ism other than
*Ilahiism* and regards genuineness exclusive to Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…ذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْحَقُّ وَأَنَّ مَا يَدْعُونَ مِنْ
دُونِهِ هُوَ الْبَاطِلُ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"That is because Allah is the Truth, and that what they call upon
besides Him, that is, the falsehood... (22:62)."***

As a consequence, neither acquirement of knowledge and art nor
individual and social work possesses absolute validity. All of them will
gain validity only in case they are done to serve Allah (SWT) and are
carried out in the light of (establishing) relationship with Him.

The following might be set forth: Even though pragmatism regards
validity based on usefulness in earthly life and cannot be approved as
such, a pragmatic inclination towards genuineness of work for life in
the Hereafter is acceptable. Consequently, performing deeds useful for
life in the Hereafter has relative validity but science and art are
deprived of even this relative validity.

It must however, be borne in mind that man's prosperity is rooted in the
heart and not in body organs and limbs and the means. The heart has the
principal role in moving towards *qurbah* with Allah (SWT). 'Thus
relative validity belongs to the activities of the heart and external
deeds become valid in the light of them and not the vice versa In the
same way that science could become valid as a prelude to decent deeds,
it could play a more important role as a prelude to belief which is
prior to action and its basis.

The Relationship of Science, Belief and Action
----------------------------------------------

If taken in the sense of mental acknowledgement, belief is the same as
science and its permanence is not optional because reason takes in some
science extemporaneously and man has no power to acquire or confirm
them.

Although some sciences are normally acquired optionally with their
preliminaries, they are not kept up by choice. That is to say, these
preliminaries might involuntarily come to mind upon hearing a sound or
seeing a line. Man might involuntarily perceive and confirm them.
Indeed, when the preliminaries of knowledge are prepared by choice and
will, there will necessarily be motives for acquiring them.

This motive might be the sense of curiosity. Or it might be the
attainment of honour, material enjoyment or the satisfaction of Allah
(SWT). Only in the latter case will it be deemed worship. The
materialization of such worship should however, have the precedents of
knowing and recognizing Allah (SWT).

Belief, as stressed in this discussion and as deemed the basis of
prosperity in the Qur'an and the religious texts, refers to a truth
diametrically opposed to *kufr* and giving up faith. It is different
from knowing and recognizing. Many a time, man knows something but his
heart does not accept and admit it. As a result, he deliberately opposes
it and when necessary, denies it verbally as well. Such a negation which
is knowingly done is worse than one carried out unknowingly and is more
disadvantageous for man's development as stated by the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“...وَجَحَدُوا بِهَا وَاسْتَيْقَنَتْهَا أَنْفُسُهُمْ ظُلْمًا
وَعُلُوًّا”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And they denied them unjustly and proudly while their soul had been
convinced of them... (27:14)."***

Quoting Hadrat Musa (AS), it addresses Fir'awn as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا أَنْزَلَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ إِلَّا رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالْأَرْضِ بَصَائِرَ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"...Truly you know that none but the Lord of the heavens and the
earth has sent down these... (17:102)."***

In the meantime, Fir'awn said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…مَا عَلِمْتُ لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرِي…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"...I do not know of any god for you besides myself... (28:38)."***

In the period of the Messenger (SA) of Allah and afterwards, there were
people like Fir'awn who denied the realities. There still exist such
people as well. The psychological motive behind such a denial is that
man sees the acceptance of some realities as a barrier in his freedom
and slovenliness and as obtrusive in the strong desires which he cannot
give up. The Holy Qur'an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“بَلْ يُرِيدُ الْإِنْسَانُ لِيَفْجُرَ أَمَامَهُ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! Man desires to give the lie to what is before him (75:5)."***

More explanation will be later given in this regard.

The conclusion is (as follows): Belief means the heart's acceptance of
that which reason and the mind have confirmed, the (heart's) undertaking
of all its means, and the (heart's) summary decision to carry out its
practical requirements. Thus belief hinges and depends on recognition.
But it is not the same as knowledge and it is not its permanent
requirement.

Hence the relationship between belief and action is made clear, because
belief requires action but is not the same as outward action. It is
rather its root and provides direction for belief. The worth, merit and
active advantage of the action depends on belief. If an act does not
spring from belief in Allah (SWT), it will have no effect in man's true
prosperity, even if it is a good act and brings about great worldly
rewards for the agent and for others:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
’’وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَسَرَابٍ بِقِيعَةٍ يَحْسَبُهُ
الظَّمْآنُ مَاءً حَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَهُ لَمْ يَجِدْهُ شَيْئًا وَوَجَدَ
اللَّهَ عِنْدَهُ فَوَفَّاهُ حِسَابَهُ“…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***" And (as for) those who disbelieve, their deeds are like the mirage
in a desert, which the thirsty man deems to be water; until when he
comes to it he finds it to be naught, and there he finds Allah, so He
pays back to him his reckoning in full... (24:39)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
’’مَثَلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِرَبِّهِمْ ۖ أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَرَمَادٍ
اشْتَدَّتْ بِهِ الرِّيحُ فِي يَوْمٍ عَاصِفٍ ۖ لَا يَقْدِرُونَ مِمَّا
كَسَبُوا عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ“…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***" The parable of those who disbelieve in their Lord; their actions
are like ashes on which the wind blows hard on a stormy day; they shall
not have power over anything out of what they have earned...
(14:18)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَقَدِمْنَا إِلَىٰ مَا عَمِلُوا مِنْ عَمَلٍ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ هَبَاءً
مَنْثُورًا”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And We will proceed to what they have done of deeds, so We shall
render them as scattered floating dust (25:23)."***

Thus belief is man's first step in his trend of development towards the
ultimate perfection, i.e., the *qurbah* of Almighty Allah. This step is
the root of step taken later and the essence of all stages of
perfectibility.

The second step in man's process of development is an activity performed
by the heart after establishing belief in Allah (SWT) and without the
interference of body organs and limbs. This means remembrance of Allah
(SWT) known as *dhikr*.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And remember Allah much, that you may be successful (62:10)."***

The stronger and more concentrated this remembrance is, the more
effective it will be in man's progress. It may be that a moment's
complete remembrance is more effective than years of physical worship.

The third step constitutes other spiritual acts performed by man while
remembering Allah (SWT). These include thinking and reflection on divine
verses and on the signs of His power, grandeur and wisdom. Permanence of
*dhikr* and reflection will bring about cordial attachment and
affection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىٰ
جُنُوبِهِمْ وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Those who extol Allah, standing, sitting and (lying) on their sides
and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth ...
(3:191)."***

Then it is the turn of various body activities. In other words, the
summary decision which is a requisite of belief becomes evident in
various manifestations and in the form of major and minor will-powers.
'These will-powers which are, in one respect, secondary to the main
will-power strengthen *dhikr* and belief.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَأَقِمِ الصَّلَاةَ لِذِكْرِي…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"...Keep up prayer for My remembrance (20:14)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَالْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ يَرْفَعُهُ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And the good deeds lift them up... (35:10)."***

Likewise if will-power is contrary to the demands of belief, it will
gradually weaken belief. Thus the relationship between belief and action
is exactly the same as that between the root of a plant and the
vegetable functions. That is to say, intake of nutritious food would
lead to the growth and solidification of the root and intake of
poisonous and disadvantageous material would weaken and finally dry the
tree from the root. In like manner, decent deeds are effective in the
permanence and solidification of belief. Doing indecent deeds and
committing sins would weaken and finally dry belief from the root:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“فَأَعْقَبَهُمْ نِفَاقًا فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يَلْقَوْنَهُ
بِمَا أَخْلَفُوا اللَّهَ مَا وَعَدُوهُ وَبِمَا كَانُوا يَكْذِبُونَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"So He made hypocrisy to follow as a consequence into their hearts
till the day when they shall meet Him because they failed to perform
towards Allah what they had promised with Him and because they told lies
(9:77)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ثُمَّ كَانَ عَاقِبَةَ الَّذِينَ أَسَاءُوا السُّوأَىٰ أَنْ كَذَّبُوا
بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَكَانُوا بِهَا يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Then evil was the end of those who did evil, because they rejected
the communications of Allah and used to mock them (30:10)."***


