Management of Will-Power
========================

Previous discussions shed light on the ultimate perfection, the
destination of the process of development and the principal trend and
policy progress and development. Determination of its minor and minute
trends is vested with ethics and *fiqh*. The final part of this
discussion is about regulation of the soul to tread the path of
development, i.e. recognition of how we can prepare grounds for a
decisive determination and serious will-power to tread the path of
worship and perform the duties related to servitude.

We know that each living being possesses the two principal features of
understanding and voluntary movement. According to a logical
interpretation, the combination of these two reflects the essential
distinction and privilege of the animate being.

In man, who is a distinguished living being, these two features exist in
a more extensive, complex and profound form. They make up the two joint
psychological systems: the system of perception and the system of
will-power. These two systems are so related and interdependent that
they at times confuse even the exact scientists.

To realize the quality of development of will-power and its relationship
with perception, it is apt to primarily cast a glance at various types
of perception, as well as attractions which lead to the emergence of
will-power.

For long the philosophers and scientists have engaged in analyzing man's
perceptions and instincts. They have classified them in various forms.
Irrespective of common scientific discussions and philosophical
conclusions, we will embark on a speedy survey of man's psychological
functions with regard to perception, the sources of will-power, the
quality of its emergence and the development of a voluntary action, so
as to acquire the needed recognition for self-cultivation and for giving
a sound and divine direction to our actions.

The System of Perception
------------------------

In man, perception has various forms to which we will briefly refer:

Some perceptions are coupled with specific physical, chemical,
physiological actions and reactions of external factors and sense
organs. These include seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching.

Another group of minor perceptions develop without contact with external
factors. These include hunger and thirst.

Yet another group of our perceptions develop in the mind with particular
psychological forces which have various forms. Research on the types,
features, forces related to them, as well as their relationship or lack
of relationship with the nervous system, is beyond the scope of this
discussion.

In our own being, we see that external sense perceptions somehow remain
in the mind even after sense organs cut off (their) relationship with
the external world. After ignoring or forgetting them, they can once
again come to mind and are reflected in the consciousness. The same
holds true for internal sense perceptions, passive conditions and other
matters related to perception.

Another mental activity is related to understanding general concepts
which takes place due to the analysis of minor perceptions or in some
other form. It is similar to making up specific concepts known as
"secondary contemplative sciences" such as the meaning of existence,
non-existence, *wujub* and *imkan*.

Another mental activity is about composite perceptions and development
of propositions. This creates a form of unity among various concepts. In
like manner, combination of two statements under specific conditions
leads to the perception of a third proposition known as "the conclusion
of reasoning."

At this point, it is fitting to provide a brief explanation on the
propositions:

Mental propositions could, in one sense, be divided into apparent and
acquired ones and in another sense, into theoretical and practical
propositions. Normally, theoretical perceptions are related to
"theoretical reason" and practical perceptions to "practical reason".
They introduce practical reason as the power which gives order and stirs
will-power. At times, it is conceived that will-power is related to
practical reason or is its effect. This is while it has been proven that
theoretical and practical reason are not separate faculties and that
practical understanding is not substantially different from theoretical
understanding.

The function of reason with regard to practical understanding is exactly
the same as that of theoretical understanding. That is to say, reason
perceives the relationship between action and its result just as the
cause-effect relationship. When this perception turns into valid
concepts with the aid of the mind's conceptualization faculty, it turns
into orders issued by reason, else reason, in fact has no role other
than understanding. It does not have direct relationship with
will-power, motivation and stimulation. The do's and don'ts of man's
activities attributed to reason are similar to the do's and don'ts
applied by scholars of natural sciences and mathematicians in stating
the rules.

There is also another form of understanding for all and sundry. This is
one's speculative knowledge of oneself, one's deeds, physical means and
impressions produced by the nervous system, likewise there is a
speculative awareness of the sublime source. At the beginning, this is
an unconscious awareness for ordinary people and should be promoted to
the level of consciousness with effort and endeavour.

Apart from these general and known perceptions, there are other
perceptions such as telepathy, sciences drawn from jinns, spirits or
those in the state of hypnosis or mania, information revealed to the
ascetic, satanic temptations and angelic and divine inspirations.

Above all these perceptions is the *wahy* of *nubuwwah* revealed unto
the prophets (AS) by Almighty Allah. It is similar to the inspiration
and narration provided for other chosen servants, just as the mother of
Prophet Musa (AS) received tidings of her child's return and his
elevation to the level of prophethood. The same holds true with respect
to Lady Maryam (AS) and to the Imams' (AS) inspiration with sciences.
The truth of these is not clear for all but those who have personally
realized them.

Moreover each understanding and perception is not coupled with its
logical and philosophical interpretation, just as we are all involved
with satanic temptations and visibly see their impacts on ourselves but
cannot express their nature. The general way to confirm the source and
explain the emergence of such perceptions is, apart from observing their
outcomes to obey the words of the Infallible Imams (AS) or to quote
those who have reached realization and whose statements are reliable.

The System of Will – Power
--------------------------

In man, there are inclinations, drives and attractions which serve as
the source of will-power and voluntary actions. Psychologists have
analyzed various forms of natural and inherent drives and have divided
them into various groups. They have differences of views in the number
and quality of classification. At this point, we will mention the
inclinations and drives which we substantially find in ourselves
(without following the terminology and principles of a specific school
of thought).

Some drives have a clear relationship with the chemical and
physiological body functions, such as the urge to eat and drink which is
with man from birth to death and which is stimulated when the body
requires food and water. The same is tenable for sexual desire which
develops at the age of puberty due to the secretion of specific
hormones.

Another group of motives give rise to specific bodily functions. Those
lacking insight believe that psychological motives are the same as body
function such as the desire to defend or take revenge which becomes
apparent in the form of anger and which turns the face red and makes the
veins on the neck swollen. This is similar to the urge to escape from
danger. This is deemed as a form of defense mechanism. Another group of
motives comprise "feelings", the most important of which is feeling for
one's relatives and community. Another instinct is curiosity and quest
for the truth which prompts man to discover what is unknown and to learn
about the realities.

The quest for power, domination, mastery and extension of one's zone of
activities is another instinct. Another form of instincts is related to
the attainment of titles of importance, such as rank, status and
personal independence. Another type of innate drives relates to
spiritual and moral beauties and perfections. This incites man to attain
various forms of obtainable perfection and beauties, to establish
relationship with perfect and beautiful objects and finally to show
humility towards the genuine perfection.

All human instincts are rooted in self-love. This has two main branches
of "preservation of one's (integrity of) being" and "attainment of
feasible perfections". Preservation of one's (integrity of) being is
related to an individual or to the mass, to the elimination of needs and
dangers to the satiety of hunger, thirst, sexual desire, to the
fulfillment of the instinct to defend, escape and take revenge and to
the satisfaction of familial and social sentiments.

In like manner, attainment of perfection comprises the instincts of
curiosity, quest for power, search for status and love for perfection
and beauty.

You must not conceive that what we set forth means a restriction of all
human instincts and desires. Likewise it must not be assumed that
classification of instincts means that they are separate in terms of the
effects they produce. It might be that several instincts have a share in
a single action.

Another point which must be kept in view is that the separation of
drives and desires from sciences and perceptions does not purport a
denial of their quality of being based on intelligence. Without doubt,
these attractions and psychological conditions are not like magnetic
attractions which take place without understanding and intelligence. The
point however, is to differentiate the system of absolute perception
from the system of will-power, as the latter requires stimulation and
motivation while the former does not entail these. Also the relationship
between these two systems is to be studied so as to provide greater
awareness of psychological phenomena in order to regulate and control
them.

The Connection between the System of Perception and the System of Will–Power
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Stimulation of each desire depends on a specific feeling which is in
accord and is harmonious with it. For instance, appetite is dependent on
hunger. This link is so strong that normally both states are regarded as
a single state.

Satisfaction and satiety of instinctive desires and demands depend on
proportionate perceptions. At this stage, the contribution made by the
system of perception to the system of stimulation is so clear that it
requires no explanation. Satisfaction of one desire requires the
extensive cooperation of various powers of perception. For example, the
care taken in modern cooking, points up to the extensive perception
activities, ranging from sensory to imaginary to mental, having a share
in it.

The relationship of these two systems however, is not exclusive to these
two functions. There is rather another form of relationship between them
which is of utmost importance in our discussion. This refers to the
effect of some perceptions which have no natural relationship with a
particular drive in stimulating desire, will, hatred and aversion. For
instance, seeing a scene, hearing a sound or smelling something could
stir one's appetite or provoke sexual desire of other drives. Or concern
with colour and a specific condition could bring about aversion towards
and reluctance for another type of food or object.

The impact of some of these is so common and obvious that one conceives
that they have a natural link with the stimulation of desires, such as
smelling food and becoming hungry. On the contrary, some others are
hidden and insignificant such that one conceives that some desires are
stirred by chance or without cause or stands at awe in explaining their
causes. Recognition of such relationship is of utmost importance for our
purposes because concern with them indicates what a tremendous effect a
glance or a sound can at times have in man's fate and how it could stir
a desire or decision that could lead to his prosperity or adversity.

The secret behind this relationship is in association of perceptions and
ideas. That is, the formation of man's mind is such that repeated
synchronism and perception would bring to mind something upon
experiencing another thing related to it. For instance, upon smelling a
food, whose taste, colour and smell is known to man, he will recall its
taste and have appetite for it. If we investigate the causes behind our
decisions, we will realize that sense perceptions, especially those
related to visual and auditory matters, play a significant role in our
imagination and reflections and in turn, in our voluntary deeds. Thus we
conclude that one of the best means to check our desires and demands and
filially to establish greater self-control and to curb carnal desires
and satanic temptation is to control the perceptions and foremost to
control the eyes and the ears:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُولَٰئِكَ كَانَ
عَنْهُ مَسْئُولًا”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Surely the hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these, shall
be questioned about that (17:36)."***

Likewise one of the best means to stir beneficial decisions is to meet
virtuous people, to hear their tales, to recite the Qur'an, to study
advantageous books, to go on pilgrimage to shrines and sites which would
make man mindful of Allah (SWT), of His chosen servants and of the
sacred goals and objective which these servants have pursued:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“...فِيهِ آيَاتٌ بَيِّنَاتٌ مَقَامُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"In it are clear signs, the standing place of Ibrahim... (3:97).”***

This elucidates the philosophy behind many *wajib*, *mustahabb*, *haram*
and *makruh* decrees of Islam, such as going on *hajj* pilgrimage and
the sacred sites or abstaining from looking at sensual scenes or showing
aversion towards sitting in a seat which has been warmed and which still
holds the warmth produced by a strange *ghayr-mahram* lady. It also
elucidates the role of a friend in one's prosperity or adversity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَضَلَّنِي عَنِ الذِّكْرِ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءَنِي ۗ وَكَانَ
الشَّيْطَانُ لِلْإِنْسَانِ خَذُولًا”
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الرَّسُولُ يَا رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِي اتَّخَذُوا هَٰذَا
الْقُرْآنَ مَهْجُورًا“...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O woe is me! Would that I had not taken such a one for a friend!
Certainly he led me astray from the reminder after it had come to me...
(25:28-29)."***

"Whenever Allah has a good turn toward His servant, He will grant him a
virtuous friend, If he forgets (Allah), the friend will remind him and
if he remembers (Allah), the friend will assist him."

"The disciples told Jesus Christ: With whom should we associate? He
said: With one who would remind you of the Lord, whose words would
enhance your knowledge, and whose deeds would make you inclined towards
the world to come."

The same holds true for the effect of our words and lees on others and
for the role of our acts as a model for the prosperity or adversity of
(our) family and society. Thus we shoulder another form of
responsibility:

"Call on the people without words (i.e. with deeds, set an example for
the people.)"


