The Role Played by Desire and Inclination in Perception
=======================================================

Using the faculties and means of perception is, to a large extent,
within our own power. For instance, whenever we desire, we would set
eyes on a scene and watch it. Whenever we do not want this, we avoid
looking at the scene or shut our eyes. It might be conceived that when
the eyes are open and when enough light is available, there is no longer
a specific condition required to see the object before us.

This is while experience has proven the opposite of this conception,
because many a time, we do not see an object even though its visible
form is reflected in the eyes and we do not hear a sound even though
sound waves bring about the vibration of the eardrum. And this is when
we are concentrating on something else.

This reflects that perception is not solely a physical phenomenon or a
physiological function. It rather is related to the soul. By paying
attention, perception develops and by ignoring, perception is lost.
Material actions and reactions provide the conditions and requirements
of perception.

In most cases, paying attention or not, doing so depends on man's
personal desire and inclination. That is to say, when man desires to
have a specific perception, he will focus attention on it. And with the
necessary conditions available, perception will take place. On the
contrary, when man has no inclination (towards something), he will not
focus attention on it and will not perceive it. For example, a baby's
cry might be heard by the mother alone. Even at times, a mother starts
out of her dream upon hearing her baby's cry while she might not be
awakened by a louder sound produced by someone else. The reason is
nothing other than the psychological factor and the mother's affection
for her child.

The influence of willingness and inclination in perception is not
exclusive to sense perceptions. It rather exists in various forms in the
imaginations, ideas and even rational deductions: For instance, people
have better memories for the things they like. Intellectual affairs in
which the thinker is interested proceed better.

More surprisingly, from their reflections, people derive the conclusions
which they have already approved and with which they have been inspired,
even though they might conceive that it is a natural conclusion derived
from logical reasoning. This is while their personal interest has been
effective in selecting the prerequisites of a reason or in the quality
of regulating the prerequisites. It might even lead to fallacious
reasoning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“بَلْ يُرِيدُ الْإِنْسَانُ لِيَفْجُرَ أَمَامَهُ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Nay! Man desires to give the lie to what is before him (75:5)."***

Explanation: Man's unwillingness to derive a conclusion that is contrary
to his own wishes would at times, lead to neglect and inattention
towards the subject. At times, it would bring about neglect toward the
preliminaries. In case due to external factors, he passes these stages
against his wishes and reaches an undesirable conclusion, he falls into
doubt and misgiving. If the reasoning is so clear that it leaves no room
for misgiving, then it is time for a failure of memory. In a short span
of time, man will forget it altogether. If a factor reminds him of it,
he will refrain from wholeheartedly accepting and believing it. He will
obstinately deny it, as previously indicated in expressing the
difference between knowledge and belief:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنْ يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ وَمَا تَهْوَى الْأَنْفُسُ ۖ
وَلَقَدْ جَاءَهُمْ مِنْ رَبِّهِمُ الْهُدَىٰ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... They follow naught but conjecture and the low desires which
(their) souls incline to; and certainly the guidance has come to them
from their Lord (53:23)."***

As a consequence, a person who is immune from the domination of opposing
desires could be confident of his mental deductions; else so long as
carnal desires wield control over man and so long as concern for
material goods, sensuality, status, position and other unbridled demands
attracts the soul, there will be no hope of reaching sound conclusion
from mental and intellectual activities in related fields.

With regard to speculative knowledge and awareness of them, mental
desires and attachments play a significant role. For example, the
conditions and states of the soul would at times become unconscious and
neglected due to concern for another object. In philosophical terms, in
such a state, there is no awareness of knowledge. In like manner, the
soul's speculative awareness of Almighty Allah could be neglected due to
concern for material objects. The soul will not become aware of it
unless, willingly or necessarily, it cuts off concern for material
means.

Consequently, correct enjoyment of the powers of perception will be
feasible when the heart is purged from material and carnal desires and
when the mind is cleared of prejudgments and is adorned with *taqwa*.
Progress in the stages of *taqwa* prepares man for the rays of
spirituality and heavenly and divine inspirations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَذِكْرَىٰ لِمَنْ كَانَ لَهُ قَلْبٌ أَوْ أَلْقَى
السَّمْعَ وَهُوَ شَهِيدٌ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Most surely there is a reminder in this for him who has a heart or
he gives ear and is a witness (50:37)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ذَٰلِكَ الْكِتَابُ لَا رَيْبَ ۛ فِيهِ ۛ هُدًى لِلْمُتَّقِينَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"This Book, there is no doubt in it, is a guide to the muttaqun
(those who guard against evil) (2:2)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا. وَقَدْ خَابَ مَنْ دَسَّاهَا“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"He will indeed be successful who purifies it, and he will indeed
fail who corrupts it (91:9-10)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…إِنْ تَتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ فُرْقَانًا…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... If you are careful of (your duty to) Allah, He will grant you a
distinction... (8:29)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَآمِنُوا بِرَسُولِهِ
يُؤْتِكُمْ كِفْلَيْنِ مِنْ رَحْمَتِهِ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ نُورًا
تَمْشُونَ بِهِ“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and believe in
His Apostle: He will give you two portions of His mercy, and make for
you a light with which you will walk... (57:28)."***

On the contrary, following carnal desires and having attachment for the
world would lead to fascination, deviation and deprivation of sound
understanding. It would bring about the domination of Satan, enhancement
of ignorance, deviation and combination of unawareness and inward
blindness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”أَفَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلَٰهَهُ هَوَاهُ وَأَضَلَّهُ اللَّهُ
عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ وَخَتَمَ عَلَىٰ سَمْعِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَجَعَلَ عَلَىٰ
بَصَرِهِ غِشَاوَةً فَمَنْ يَهْدِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ اللَّهِ“...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Have you then considered him who takes his low desire for his god,
and Allah has made him err having knowledge and has set a seal upon his
ear and his heart and put a covering upon his eye. Who can then guide
him after Allah... (45:23)?"***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“كُتِبَ عَلَيْهِ أَنَّهُ مَنْ تَوَلَّاهُ فَأَنَّهُ يُضِلُّهُ
وَيَهْدِيهِ إِلَىٰ عَذَابِ السَّعِيرِ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Against him it is written down that whoever takes him for a friend,
he shall lead him astray and conduct him to the torment of the burning
fire (22:4)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”وَمَنْ يَعْشُ عَنْ ذِكْرِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ نُقَيِّضْ لَهُ شَيْطَانًا
فَهُوَ لَهُ قَرِينٌ. وَإِنَّهُمْ لَيَصُدُّونَهُمْ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ
وَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ مُهْتَدُونَ“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the
Beneficent God, We appoint for him a Satan, so he becomes his associate.
And most surely they turn them away from the path, and they think that
they are guided aright (43:36-37)."***


