Conclusion
==========

We found out that face-to-face with natural and social factors and their
clash and confrontation, man should not be a neutral observer. On the
contrary, he should play a decisive and effective role in employing
specific human powers. With his voluntary and conscious activity, man
should use all (his) powers (by setting them) in the right track. He
should mobilize them in the way of reaching the main objective and the
ultimate perfection.

Without doubt, the power of reasoning is one of the human faculties that
could aid this fruitful effort. Solidification of this power will have a
tremendous impact on the process of man's development. Even Socrates
(according to the different interpretations related from him) saw virtue
in reason, learning and wisdom.

But Aristotle cavilled at him saying that many men possessed of learning
and wisdom do not use them and thus are not qualified with ethical
virtues. For this reason, (Aristotle believed that) it could not be
regarded as the foundation of all virtues. By accepting this criticism
we add that basically the function of perceptive powers is not to
stimulate and instigate. Even divine guidance and illuminations
transcending reason cannot spontaneously give rise to will-power and do
not guarantee man's attainment of the desired perfection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…”الَّذِي آتَيْنَاهُ آيَاتِنَا فَانْسَلَخَ مِنْهَا... وَلَوْ شِئْنَا
لَرَفَعْنَاهُ بِهَا وَلَٰكِنَّهُ أَخْلَدَ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ وَاتَّبَعَ
هَوَاهُ“…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... Of him to whom we give our communications, but he withdraws
himself from them.... And if we had pleased, we would certainly have
exalted him thereby; but he clung to the earth and followed his low
desire... (7:175-176)."***

The requirement of prosperity is the domination of the sublime desire to
worship Allah (SWT) and the defeat of base carnal and satanic desires.
At the same time however, we stress the significant role of man's power
of reason in justifying (his) will-power. The reasoning faculty assists
us in providing the preliminaries for selection and the manner of
regulating and justifying them. These discussions are instances of its
effects. As a result, we should always determine our course of action in
the light of the guidance of reason and we should prepare ourselves for
the reception of divine illuminations.

The power of reason has great importance in determining the objective
and recognizing the main course of action. However, it is not sufficient
for the recognition of details of the course of action and exact plans.
One must necessarily seek help from the *wahy* and reap benefit of the
all-embracing programmes of religion. Thus it is exigent to strengthen
the religious insight and to expand (the range of) awareness of
religious sources and resources, as solidification of innate perception
by means of heartfelt concerns and exercise to concentrate them in
various forms of worship is an important - or rather the most genuine
factor for true development. Recognition of all these realities takes
place owing to reason and rational reflections.

But in this part of the discussion, it is of exceptional importance for
us to know how to provide grounds for stimulating the sublime human
demand and desire to reach *qurb* with Allah (SWT) and how to strengthen
this demand and make it overpowering.

It was previously noted that at times, a desire is stirred due to
actions and reactions inside the body. At other times, contact with
external factors provides this. Still at other times it is due to
psychological activities which are, in themselves stimulated by external
stimuli. Normally instincts related to the branch of self-preservation
are roused naturally with the first two factors. The philosophy behind
the fact that their stimulation is not dependent on man's conscious
activity is that man's individual and social existence in this world is
directly related to the functioning of these instincts.

If the instincts were dependent on man's will and choice, they would be
abandoned and no ground would be left for the process of development
because of heedlessness or erroneous ideas. Yet after ground is paved
for development, it is man's turn to reach perfection through voluntary
activity. As man's true perfection is voluntary, the greater the range
of free choice, the greater possibility will there be for voluntary
development. For this purpose, the activity of the second branch of
instincts, even the stimulation of the instincts and the determination
of the means to satisfy them have been, to a large extent, entrusted to
man so that he would reach a developmental result by preparing the means
for it.

When a desire is stirred in man and when upon satisfying it, a pleasure
is derived or a pain is removed, the soul will pay greater attention to
it. In the second phase, this desire will appear in a stronger form. And
finally as a result of its recurrence, it will be implanted in the soul.
Likewise the soul will become interested in the external factor which
promotes the action and which somehow serves as a means to fulfill the
desire. In this state, we express love for such and such an act, object
or person.

The requirement of love is the incessant concern of the soul for the
beloved and the performance of deeds harmonious with this concern. So if
we want to give a particular direction to our process (of development)
and to mobilize all our powers for the attainment of a specific goal, we
must strive for the persistence of the soul's concern for the objective
and for its direction. We must do something, so that the soul would
become acquainted with the objective and would develop strong love and
affection for it.

Persistence of the soul's concern for and concentration on a single
objective hinges on ignoring whatever is contrary to it and on
abstaining from independently considering any other demand. The soul
should employ all instincts at the service of its sublime and
perfectionist demand and deem their satisfaction secondary to the
fulfillment of this (main) demand. Success in this endeavour depends on
a practical programme comprising specific positive and negative efforts
to strengthen the desire for (reaching) perfection and theism: The most
significant positive items of this programme are as below:

Worship and especially the timely performance of the *wajib* daily
*salat* with full concentration and sincerity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”قَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ. الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي صَلَاتِهِمْ
خَاشِعُونَ“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Successful indeed are the believers who are humble in their prayers
(23:1-2)."***

If possible, we should devote a part of our time to heartfelt
remembrance (of Almighty Allah) and we should allocate an appropriate
time and place to it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…وَاذْكُرْ رَبَّكَ فِي نَفْسِكَ تَضَرُّعًا وَخِيفَةً”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And remember your Lord within yourself humbly and fearing ...
(7:205)."***

Continuation of this act would bring about the heartfelt intimacy with
Allah (SWT), the pleasure of praying to Allah (SWT) and indifference
towards material enjoyments. Likewise we should not abandon charity
donations and sacrifice which are the best means to dispense with
worldly pleasures and to purify the soul from being tarnished by the
worldly affairs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَمَنْ يُوقَ شُحَّ نَفْسِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ...”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And whoever is preserved from the niggardliness of his soul,
these it is that are the successful ones (59:9)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…لَنْ تَنَالُوا الْبِرَّ حَتَّىٰ تُنْفِقُوا مِمَّا تُحِبُّونَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"You shall not attain goodness unless you spend out of what you
love... (3:92)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…خُذْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ صَدَقَةً تُطَهِّرُهُمْ وَتُزَكِّيهِمْ بِهَا”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Take alms out of their property, you would cleanse them and purify
them thereby... (9:103)."***

*Salat* and charity donation are complementary to one another. It is
perhaps for this reason that they are often cited with one another in
the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَأَوْصَانِي بِالصَّلَاةِ وَالزَّكَاةِ مَا دُمْتُ حَيًّا...”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And He has enjoined on me prayer and poor-rate so long as I live
(19:31)."***

Each day, we should allocate a part of our time to meditation over the
features and signs of Allah (SWT), the goal behind creation, His
infinite blessings and beneficence, determination of the sound course of
action, the prolonged nature of the path, shortage of time and power,
multiplicity of barriers (in the way), futility of worldly objectives,
limited and infected nature of worldly pleasures, attachment of worldly
pleasures to pains, hardships and afflictions, as well as other matters
which encourage man to tread the path of servitude and which preclude
him from egotism and mammonism.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... Most surely there are signs in this for a people who reflect
(13:3).”***

We should make a daily programme for the recitation of the Holy Qur'an
with concentration and meditation. Likewise we should study the
traditions, sermons, philosophical statements, jurisprudential decrees
and ethical orders so as to always remember the objective and the sound
means of reaching it, and so as to use them (as signals) to remind us of
our desire to seek perfection.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And certainly We have made the Qur'an easy for remembrance but is
there anyone who will mind? (54:17, 22, 32, 40)."***

The most important negative aspects of this programme are as follows:

(1) We should not go to excess with regard to material pleasures, as
these would habituate the soul with animal drives. In using worldly
blessings, our motive should be to prepare the means for the development
process. These means include salubrity, power and vivacity of the body
for worshipping and being grateful to Allah. Among factors involved are
fasting, not eating to satiety, saying little and sleeping little while
observing moderation and health.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنِ اللَّغْوِ مُعْرِضُونَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And who keep aloof from what is vain (23:3)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَأَنْ تَصُومُوا خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ ۖ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And that you fast is better for you if you know (2:184)."***

(2) We should control the sensory and visionary powers which could
stimulate animal drives through association. We should especially
safeguard the eyes and the ears from seeing sensuous scenes and hearing
vain and amusing words and sounds. On the whole, we should abstain from
whatever draws our attention to things that do not satisfy Allah (SWT):

“**إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُولَٰئِكَ كَانَ
عَنْهُ مَسْئُولًا**…”

***"... Surely the hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these
shall be questioned about that (17:36)."***

(3) We should keep our thoughts from declining. We should especially
avoid studying and discussing doubtful matters which we do not have the
power to answer. If we occasionally conceive of doubtful matters or hear
them, we should immediately set to find a convincing answer to them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”وَقَدْ نَزَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الْكِتَابِ أَنْ إِذَا سَمِعْتُمْ آيَاتِ
اللَّهِ يُكْفَرُ بِهَا وَيُسْتَهْزَأُ بِهَا فَلَا تَقْعُدُوا مَعَهُمْ
حَتَّىٰ يَخُوضُوا فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِۚ إِنَّكُمْ إِذًا مِثْلُهُمْۗ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ جَامِعُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْكَافِرِينَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ
جَمِيعًا“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And indeed He has revealed to you in the Book that when you hear
Allah's communications disbelieved in and mocked at, do not sit with
them until they enter into some other discourse; surely then you would
be like them; surely Allah will gather together the hypocrites and the
unbelievers all in hell (4:140)."***

"Whoever listens to (the words of) a speaker has worshipped him. Thus if
this speaker represents Allah, the listener has worshipped Allah and if
he represents Satan, the listener has worshipped Satan.[^1]"

The point which must be kept in mind in the regulation and
implementation of the programme is the observation of gradualness and
moderation. That is to say, we should never inflict an intolerable
pressure on ourselves because, in addition to bringing about rebellion
and revolt in the soul, it might produce irreparable physical or
psychological damage. As a result in drawing up a programme, it is apt
to consult an informed and reliable person. On the other hand, we should
not be slack in carrying out the specified programmes and we should not
make excuses for abandoning them, because the continued pursuit of these
programmes brings about useful results. At any rate, we should put our
trust in Allah (SWT) and ask Him to grant us success.

“All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.”

[^1]: Wasa' ilush - shi'a, Section on the Features of a Judge, chapter
10, wisdoms 9 and 13


