Perfection
==========

Although the meaning of perfection is clear and needs no definition, we
are forced to provide an explanation in this regard, so that mistakes
would not be made in certain instances.

Without doubt, perfection is an existential trait with which a being is
endowed. But when we compare an existential matter with various things,
we find that there is perfection as compared to some, while as compared
to others, there is no perfection, rather it might occasionally lead to
deficiency and decline of its existential value. Likewise some others
principally do not have the talent to possess some forms of perfection;
for instance, becoming sweet is a sign of perfection for some fruits
such as pears and honeydew. On the contrary, being sour or having other
flavours might be a sign of perfection for some other fruits.

Another example is that acquirement of science and knowledge is
perfection for man while stones and wood are not qualified to possess
it. The secret behind the matter is that each being is accorded a
specific substantial limit and boundary. Going beyond this boundary
would turn that being into another form which is, by essence,
inconsistent with it. Substantial changes might be coupled with a change
in the molecular structure, increase of decrease of their atoms,
elemental or inner changes in the atoms, transmutation of matter into
energy or vice versa.

At times, it is possible that while the quantity and quality of the
atoms and molecules of two things is the same, their essence is
different, as the artificial seed of the plant is devoid of the
vegetable property, growth and development while it is exactly similar
to the natural seed in terms of elements and the form of composition.

In any case, each intrinsic value, on the basis of natural expedience is
compatible with some traits and will be apt to reach the same brand of
perfection. But the emergence of a novel intrinsic value does not always
require the obliteration of former perfections. Many beings assume
various functions alongside one another and preserve their former
perfections, as, in plants, atoms and minerals are exactly present and
the vegetable function is positioned above all and alongside them. The
same holds true for animals and human beings.

In these types of beings, former perfections might, to a degree,
facilitate the emergence of a more sublime (form of) perfection. But it
is not that their progress would absolutely lead to perfection of the
last function and be a new form or at least make no interference with
it.

Rather in many cases the attainment of a perfection appropriate to the
last form requires the restriction of former perfections, just as having
a great deal of foliage interferes with a tree's process of bearing
sufficient fruit or being exceedingly fat prevents a hound from reaching
its ideal perfection of speed in gamboling and running. As a result, the
true perfection of every being consists of a trait or traits which he
can possess in tune with his last function. Other matters will be
preferential perfection and the preliminary of perfection to the extent
that they are useful for the attainment of a being's true (form of)
perfection.

The Chain of Perfections
------------------------

When we compare a tree with gravel or a heap of sand, we realize that
the tree actually possesses especial capacities not found in stone and
sand. Despite the similarity in their atoms and molecules, effects are
derived from the tree that cannot emerge from stone and sand.

We will express this truth in this way that there is potential
perfection in the tree which is the plant feature and the origin of all
activities and of produce exclusive to plants.

In like manner, plants are potentially possessed of perfections which
inanimate objects are incapable of attaining, just as the sapling of a
fruit-bearing tree is apt to bear loads of sweet fruit while no such
capacity exists in stone and wood.

Evidently, by possessing the said function and faculty, the plant not
only does not lose its physical qualities and natural powers but also
uses them to promote its functions and to go through the path of its
functions and the path of its development. Consequently, one can reach
the conclusion that to reach perfection, a plant reaps benefit from
natural powers and, of course is in need of them but to the extent that
it can use them to reach perfection.

Likewise, an animal possesses vegetable qualities plus sense and
voluntary movement which is a requisite of its animal state. In the same
manner, it employs vegetable qualities to reach human perfection. It
needs these qualities to the extent that they are beneficial for its
animal development. In like manner, man possesses natural, vegetable,
and animal qualities plus powers which emanate from humanity. Man
employs all subordinate powers at the service of his human development.
For this purpose, he needs them all to the extent that they are
effective in reaching his human perfections. But as excessive foliage is
not at all advantageous to the apple tree, one cannot regard the
unconditional use of vegetable and animal powers useful for man.

The following conclusions can be drawn from this discussion:

(A) Corporal beings can be classified on the basis of existential
perfections. Among beings with which we are familiar, inanimate objects
occupy a lower position while animals are in the middle and human beings
occupy the sublime position. Obviously, in this classification, the type
and value of the perfection, and not its volume and amount, is taken
into account.

Therefore, it should not be said that if man is more perfect than other
animals, why can't he eat as much as a cow, run as fast as a deer, and
devour like a lion?! Just as in the case of the superiority of plants
over inanimate objects, it is not said that if a tree is superior to
stone and sand, then why is not it as weighty as the Himalaya Mountains
and why cannot mines of gold or oil wells be found in it?!

(B) Each corporal being which possesses a more sublime degree of
existence has inferior powers to be employed in the way of its
development.

(C) Employment of the inferior powers should be to such an extent that
is useful for the attainment of more sublime perfections, else it will
lead to stagnation and termination of the trend of development. And it
will occasionally lead to decline and deterioration.

(D) With respect to the previous discussion, it can be concluded that
the true perfection of every being consists of that which its last
function demands, although this perfection has various degrees as
bearing apples is perfection for the apple tree but it has various
degrees. But other perfections which are substantially different from
this one and which are naturally in a lower state are not actually
regarded as the perfection of this being and are only deemed as a
preliminary and a device.

Thus perfection can be divided into genuine and organic or actual and
relative. Degrees can also be specified for genuine perfections.

E) To determine the extent of exploitation of inferior powers, it is
necessary to take in mind the actual and genuine perfection. In other
words, the inferior existential traits can be recognized even as an
organic and preliminary perfection for something, in case they serve as
rudimentary for an elevated and actual form of perfection. Here, once
again, emphasis is laid on the necessity of recognizing man's actual
perfection.


