Perfectibility Movement and Its Causes and Conditions
=====================================================

Perfection and the perfectibility movement of a being consists of
gradual changes coming over it as a result of which its potential power
to obtain an existential feature (perfection) is made active. These
changes occur by way of powers deposited in the nature of the
perfectible being and by the use of external conditions and facilities.

For example, when grain is planted and when water, wind, warmth, light
and other required conditions are provided, it is split and then it
develops stem and leaves. Then it becomes a cluster and finally about
seven hundred seeds are produced from it. The changes which occur in the
grain from the very first to the emergence of seven hundred perfect
seeds are termed as the perfectibility process. The powers, which exist
in the said grain and by which the required material are absorbed and
the harmful material are discharged and through which the absorbed
material are turned into similar seeds by action and reaction, are
called the causes of development. Water, wind, light and other external
factors are called "the conditions of development."

Evidently, recognition of the amount of development and, in other words
of the extent of the zone of existence and sphere of perfection of a
being, as well as the causes and conditions of development, is usually
possible by way of experience, even though the possibility of reaching
recognition through other means cannot be negated.

Certain questions arise at this point: Do all beings undergo change and
transformation or are there beings among those that we know or those
that possibly exist without our awareness which are essentially
unchangeable and which undergo no change and transformation at all? Is
any change in the substance, in the appearance, in the attributes, in
the proportions and in the additions an actual and real change? Or is it
that change in proportions cannot be classed as an actual change? Would
any actual change lead to the development of a perfectible trait or is
it possible that the outcome of a movement be the loss of a group of
existential traits? These are all relevant questions but as our
discussion does not revolve around their answers now, we will abstain
from answering them.

Scientific and Non - Scientific Movement
----------------------------------------

In the case of the vegetable seed, the changes which result in the
division of a seed into several seeds are not due to scientific
understanding and finding. The same holds true for changes which occur
in an egg until it leads to the hatching of the egg. The difference is
that the perfectibility process undergone by the chicken to become a
developed hen hinges on perceptions without which the chicken cannot
reach its befitting perfection.

If supposedly, the chicken could not sense hunger, thirst, warmth and
coldness, and if it could not differentiate grain and water from stone
and wood and if cold water and fire were the same for it, then it would
not undergo any growth and development.

Rather it would, by no means be able to carry on living. Thus we get to
the conclusion that perfectibility processes can be divided into two
main types: perceptual and natural or scientific and non-scientific.

Instinctive and Non - Instinctive Perception
--------------------------------------------

The perception required for a group of perfectibility movements is at
times naturally and inherently present, even though the creature
(possessing it) is not fully aware of it, such as the instinctive
perceptions of animals. At times, this is acquired gradually and by way
of learning. Naturally, the creature is fully aware of it, such as
sciences learned by man.

At this point, some questions arise which must be answered elsewhere:
Are plants devoid of all forms of perception or is it possible that some
type of perception exists in a group of them? Are all animal perceptions
instinctive or do some of them reap benefit from acquired perceptions?
Supposing that animals possess acquired perception, does it have any
inherent difference with man's acquired perceptions or not?

Voluntary and Involuntary Movement
----------------------------------

At times, the development movement occurs spontaneously and
involuntarily as soon as the required conditions are met for the being
possessed of sufficient capacity for a particular form of development.
In certain instances, it depends on the implementation of will and
authority, as we explicitly realize our optional activities and clearly
differentiate them from natural and involuntary acts.

Obviously in the voluntary processes, the rate of progress and
development depends on the will and choice of the mobile creature. In
other words, inability to reach the desired perfection is not due to the
deficiency of innate faculties or to the presence of unfavorable
external conditions and possibilities. It rather depends on the will and
choice of the being as well.

As choice and selection is not possible without knowledge and awareness,
good choice hinges on sound knowledge and recognition. The vaster the
range of knowledge and the greater the possibility of acquiring positive
learning, the greater the possibility of soundly using them for
voluntary developments will be, as voluntary acts will be more freely
carried out with a vaster range of action and a variety of external
conditions.

This provides a solid reason for the necessity of recognizing the
objective as well as recognizing the correct path (of reaching it)
because, as already pointed out, choice hinges on knowledge and
awareness and man's development - or at least, part of it - is
voluntary. Of course, if Allah (SWT) willing we will discuss the
emergence of will power and elements conducive to it.

Another question comes up here: apart from man, are there any other
beings possessing free choice? And supposing that there are such beings,
is there a more perfect being than man among them or not?

But it is clear that a positive or negative response to such questions
bears no impact on the discussion underway.


