Recognition of Perfection before Attaining it
=============================================

It is obvious that man's actual perfection, i.e. moral perception and
intuitive knowledge, is possible only for those who have reached it. But
as the attainment of voluntary perfections depends on knowledge and
awareness, it is necessary that these perfections be somehow recognized
beforehand, so that they would become favourable and voluntary, and be
obtained by choice and will-power. If the means of recognizing them was
exclusive to findings, their acquirement would never be possible.

Thus, the recognition needed beforehand is not of the intuitive type. It
is rather the same subjective recognition and is termed as ‘acquired
knowledge’ which is obtained through reasoning and deduction from
rational premises or inference from indisputable historical principles.
Basically, this discussion is for researchers who intend to recognize
perfection and to find a way to reach it. One who has reached true
perfection is no longer in need of such discussions.

Therefore, expecting to recognize the truth of human perfection prior to
reaching it in the same way that we recognize our own moral perceptions
is totally out of place. We have no choice other than finding a
subjective, and not an intuitive knowledge towards it by way of
reasoning and realizing its specifications by the aid of reason and
tradition.

Of course, we will try to select the preliminaries of reasoning from the
simplest and clearest positive and moral teachings, so that both the
conclusion would be clearer and more assuring; and the benefit would be
more general. But, in the meantime, we will also refer to some
traditional reasonings or to more complex rational proofs well.

Can Man's True Perfection Be Recognized by Experience?
------------------------------------------------------

One might possibly reflect that in the same manner that the perfection
of a tree or an animal can be recognized through experience and
experimentation, in the case of man too, the issue can be solved with
the help of scientific experimentation.

That is to say, can a large number of people be subjected to
experimentation at various times and in different places so as to see
what perfection they reach and what their ultimate limit is? And with
this very means, one can retrace the criteria of development and the way
of reaching ultimate perfection.

But a little deliberation indicates that the issue on man is not so
simple because primarily all kinds of vegetations and animals are
inferior to man in terms of existential perfections. For this reason,
all human beings could recognize and investigate their perfections, but
those human beings who have not attained true perfections could not
basically understand the origin of these perfections and the ones who
possess them. In this respect, they resemble children who want to test a
perfection exclusive to mature people. Rather only experts who have, at
least realized the primary degrees of man's true perfection can have a
share in this investigation.

Secondly, the perfection of every type of vegetation and animal has a
specific and limited boundary which can be easily learned and
recognized. Over the centuries, no difference in terms of type of
perfection and its ultimate limit has been seen among the members of one
species. In this way, by examining a number of them, one can become
confident that their typical perfection is that which has been
recognized so far; for instance, the perfection of an apple tree is to
bear a fruit with a specific flavour, colour, fragrance and size. Or the
perfection of the honeybee is to live according to a particular system
and to produce a sweet and fragrant fluid called honey.

Of course, it is possible that apple and honey possess properties and
advantages which man has not realized as yet. But whatever these
advantages are, they belong to the apple and the honey which this tree
and animal have (respectively) produced all through the centuries. But
when we glance at man - this strange and mysterious being - we find that
despite his relatively small size and his similarity with other animals
in many material ways, he has features which make him completely
distinguished and distinct. It is man whose existential secrets are
diurnally unveiled and who divulges a new facet of his skills. It is man
who has not stopped moving and changing for a minute since creation.

Each day man makes more apparent the various manifestations of his
teachings and industries all over the world. Still these salient and
astonishing developments are all the material fruit of this wonderful
tree; yet the recognition of its moral fruit is not so easily possible.
It might be that man's spiritual and moral wonders are greater than his
material ones as those who tread the world of spirit express matters
which cannot be understood by others and perform acts which cannot be
justified and rationalized with material laws and which can in no way be
denied. With all this in view, can one say that recognition of man's
existential limits is thoroughly practicable in the same way that the
perfection of vegetations and animals is realized?

Thirdly, only sense perceptions can be directly put to examination while
spiritual perfections and moral virtues cannot be directly experimented
and weighed. Even if the signs of many of them can, to some extent be
experimented, indeed the recognition of the spiritual source from which
these signs originate and the evaluation of its perfection cannot be
experimented.

With respect to the afore cited points, it is not strange that
philosophers and scientists are in disagreement over the recognition of
man's actual perfection.

Views of Philosophers on Man's Perfection
-----------------------------------------

With regard to differences which philosophers and thinkers have in their
world views, it is natural that they should express different views
about man. But analysis of all these views and of their relationship
with various isms renders no significant benefit. For this reason, we
will suffice with only mentioning a few basic views.

(1) Man's perfection is obtained by ever more enjoyment of material
pleasures. To reach them, one must employ learning and technology to
reap benefit from natural resources and riches, so that a more peaceful
and enjoyable life would be procured. This view is based on materialism,
Epicureanism and individualism.

(2) Man's perfection rests on the collective enjoyment of natural
blessings. And to reach it, effort must be made for the welfare of all
classes of society. The difference between this view and the former one
is that this view is based on socialism.

(3) Man's perfection is in spiritual and moral progress which can be
attained through mortification of the flesh and struggle against
material pleasures. This view is the exact opposite of the preceding
ones.

(4) Man's perfection is in intellectual progress which is obtained by
way of learning and philosophy.

(5) Man's perfection is in intellectual and moral development which is
attained through learning the sciences and acquiring virtuous habits.
The last two views, like the third one, are inconsistent with
materialism with this difference that in the third view, man's body is
considered an enemy which must be fought and by victory over which (one
can) reach human perfection. In the last two views, however, the body is
deemed a device which must be employed to reach perfection. The
difference between the fourth view and the fifth one is obvious but at
times, the fifth view is regarded as the interpretation of the fourth
view.

Evidently, each of the aforementioned views, as well as other views not
put forward here, are based on particular philosophical principles which
must be considered beforehand, pursuit of them requires a series of
profound philosophical discussions which are not in tune with the trend
of this discussion. As we noted in the introduction, the method of
discussion here is to use the clearest moral and positive learning and
to abstain from complex reasonings which necessitate a great deal of
preliminary arguments. In this way, the discussion will be more
advantageous, that is to say, people who are not too familiar with
philosophical issues and traditional reasoning, can reap benefit from
it.

Moreover, in the twists and turns of reasonings in which naturally,
inclinations to a particular philosophical movement and a specific
principle are found, we would not face the reaction of the proponents of
other philosophical movements and the bias of the opponents.
Furthermore, so long as there is the possibility of (going on) a short
cut and a direct path, there is no use in treading crooked and
inconvenient paths.

For this reason, we will try not to conduct the reasoning for the
recognition of man's true perfection on specific philosophical bases
which are accepted by only some movements or on specific verbal views
which are acceptable for only a particular group. We will rather start
the discussion from the simplest and clearest of our own learnings with
regard to man. It is evident that the requisite of starting off from
such preliminaries is not that in the course of reasoning and deduction
no confrontation with some philosophical views would occur and that the
conclusion drawn from the discussion would be accepted by all movements
and religions. Such an expectation is principally like expecting the
agreement of contradictory things which is necessarily impossible.


