Giving Direction to Innate Desires
==================================

Man possesses numerous instincts, feelings, sentiments, desires,
motives, spiritual qualities, psychological activities and reactions
which have been, more or less, discussed by philosophers, psychologists
and psychoanalysts. Different views have been expressed about the
recognition of the truth, the classification and distinction of what is
genuine from what is not genuine, the quality of development and growth,
and the relation of these with bodily organs especially with the nervous
system, the brain and the glands. Recounting and interpreting these
ideas are not compatible with the nature of this discussion.

Here we will consider some of the most genuine innate desires which come
to our mind without confirming or rejecting a particular philosophical,
psychological or psychoanalytical movement. We will endeavor to survey
their manifold manifestations and the trend of their development, as
well as the efforts of man to satisfy them in various conditions and
facets of his life, that we may thus seek a way to recognize man's true
perfection and ultimate goal; this is because innate desires are the
most genuine powers gifted by the creator in man's being, so that he
would engage in movement, action, effort, endeavor as they require and
would tread his path towards perfection and prosperity by using inborn
and acquired powers, as well as external facilities.

Thus the direction or directions specified by these desires could lead
us to the ultimate goal and path as the needle of a compass would
provide us with the direction. As a consequence, it is apt to study and
consider them meticulously and patiently and, by abstaining from hasty
prejudgments and judgments, to derive a sound and decisive result from
our reflections so that we would take hold of the key to the treasure of
prosperity.

Perception and Its Degrees
--------------------------

Man bears an innate desire to know, become aware of, and encompass the
realities of existence. This desire emerges in the early stages of
childhood and is not taken away from man to the end of his life. The
continuous questions posed by children are indicative of the presence of
this inborn desire. The more talented will be a child, the vaster and
more profound his questions will be. The more knowledge and learning he
acquires, the greater unknown matters he will face and new issues will
come up for him.

So the direction of sense perceptions, which are devices for the
fulfillment of this innate desire, is towards a complete and
all-embracing awareness of the world of existence. The sphere of this
desire is so vast that no being falls outside it. Now we will study the
scientific progress of man from the starting point. We will follow it up
step - by - step to see where it will end.

Man's awareness of the world starts with the external senses and the
contact of body organs with objects around him. By specific actions and
reactions, each sense organ transfers first to the nerves and then to
the brain impressions of light, sound, warmth, smell, taste and the
like. In this manner, man becomes aware of such qualities and features
which are related to material objects on the surface and which are
located at a particular radius around him.

But for several reasons, sense perception is inexpressive and
insufficient to satiate man's curiosity and instinct to seek the truth
because firstly, it applies to particular qualities of the surface and
form of palpable objects and not to all their qualities, their essence,
their substance and not to impalpable objects. Secondly, the range of
sense perception is limited and dependent on particular conditions. For
example, the eye can see the rays whose wave length is no less than 4 %
micron and no more than 8% micron. For this reason, ultra - violet and
infra-red rays are invisible.

Likewise, the ear can hear sounds whose frequencies are between 30 to
16000 vibrations per second. In like manner, other sense perceptions
also require specific conditions. Secondly, their duration in time is
very short. For instance, the eyes and the ear can hold the effect of
light and sound for only a second. And when sense organs lose contact
with the outside world our perception is barred. The issue of slips of
perception is another story which further clarifies the inadequacy of
sense perceptions.

However, the means of awareness and recognition is not confined to sense
perceptions alone. For example, man possesses another faculty which,
after the body's contact with the material world is cut off, can
preserve in a special form the signs it has received and can remember
them when needed and can reflect them in the consciousness. Similarly,
there is another faculty which can understand general meanings, which
can prepare the mind for confirmations and propositions, and which can
make possible the reflections and mental deductions, be they empirical
or theoretical.

Through these internal faculties, man can expand the zone of his
awareness and draw conclusions from innate and palpable experiences and
perceptions. Development of philosophy, sciences and industries is
indebted to these inward and mental faculties, with this difference that
what is in mind in other sciences (apart from philosophy) is the
recognition of features and effects of creatures so as to exploit them
for better living. But the main objective in philosophy is to recognize
the intrinsic qualities, as well as the cause and effect relation of
objects. Complete recognition of a being is not feasible without
recognizing its existential causes:

‘Ash-Shaykhur-Ra'is has expressed this rule in detail in his
Kitabush-Shifa. As the chain of reason leads to the Almighty Allah
(SWT), it can be concluded that man's rational movement leads to piety.

Many philosophers believe that man's scientific development ends at this
point. For this reason, they regard man's perfection - or to put it more
precisely, man's scientific perfection - limited to the mind's
all-embracing awareness of the world of being. But further consideration
of innate desires indicates than man's instinct to seek the truth is not
fully satisfied with this degree of awareness and demands an objective
awareness, as well as a speculative and intuitive understanding of the
realities of existence. And such an understanding could not be reached
with mental concepts and philosophical discussion.

No matter how extensive and clear the mental perceptions and concepts
are, they cannot show us the objective realities. The difference between
these and external realities can be compared to the difference between
the meaning of hunger and its inward reality. Our conception of hunger
is a state coming over man when his body is in need of food. But if a
person has never experienced this state, he cannot understand it through
this definition. In like manner, for (showing) the realities of being,
ranging from Allah (SWT) to matter, philosophy can provide us only with
such concepts while the recognition and realization of objective
realities is far different from such definitions.

What thoroughly quenches our thirst for seeking the truth is the
speculative knowledge and intuitive awareness of objective realities
which is inseparable from understanding their existential appraisals and
connections. And if all existing beings are viewed as dependent on and
connected to the Almighty Allah (SWT), then in fact, all objective
knowledge goes back to awareness of one independent and genuine reality,
as well as His reflections, manifestations and signs.

Power and Its Manifestations
----------------------------

Among man's innate desires, mention can be made of the desire to wield
power, to be capable of performing deeds and to have control over other
beings. This desire also emerges in childhood and endures to the end of
a person's life. Of course, this desire has degrees depending on age
differences, period of life and external factors. A healthy infant's
motions and movements of hands and feet and the untiring gamboling of
children are indications of this innate desire. By and by, range of
man's quest for power increases, extending to infinity.

At first, performing various deeds, establishing power and extending
strength, occur by means of stimulating nerves and by muscles with the
aid of natural powers alone. These constant movements made by the child
on instinct help increase his physical power, by and by, his muscles
become stronger and more ready to perform greater and more laborious
functions.

This goes on until he reaches the peak of youth and the climax of
physical power. From then on, he faces the period of stagnation and
inertia. Then comes the period of senility and old age, gradually the
physical powers are exhausted but the zest for power never dies down in
man.

To extend the domain of his power, man does not suffice with natural
powers. By the help of sciences and industries, man endeavours to find
better devices to conquer the world and subjugate the universe. It goes
without saying that scientific discoveries and inventions, especially in
recent times, have greatly contributed to the satisfaction of this
inborn desire and will later do so as well.

Man does not even refrain from using the power of his fellow creatures.
In far as conditions and facilities permit, man uses others for his own
benefit. Effort to reach social positions and to be honoured nationally,
as well as the nation’s demand for superiority at the international
level, are manifestations of this desire which at times, appear in a
correct and sound form, while at other times, it appears in the form of
aggression on the rights of others in various shapes of oppressive
colonization and exploitation.
The quest for increased power does not stop at this level. Rather it
even embraces imperceptible and metaphysical powers as well.

Various branches of exotic sciences, spiritism, and different forms of
sensual mathematics are all indicative of man's wondrous efforts to
develop his abilities.

But supposing that man masters the perceptible and imperceptible forces,
does his ability reach utter perfection then and is his thirst for power
quenched in full? No matter how extensive and variegated these powers
are, will they not finally be finite? Will they not intrude on the
workings of similar powers? And will they not be doomed by more superior
powers? With these limitations, how can they fulfill man's boundless
demands?

It is crystal clear that this inborn desire cannot be fulfilled except
by taking hold of an infinite source of power. Efforts made by people of
high aspirations would not end without it.

Love and Worship
----------------

Man possesses another inborn desire which is not of the same form as the
demand to know, to have ability, or to be aware of and to conquer the
world. The desire to attract, to be attracted and to unite is related to
existence and understanding. As this desire has not become clear for the
psychologists and psychoanalysts, and a sufficient discussion and
research has not been made with regard to it, it is difficult to clarify
and explain it.

Deep inside, each person finds that he likes something and someone as
though the latter constantly draws his spirit toward itself/himself like
a powerful magnet. This attraction and drive has various degrees and
signs. Differences of degrees are so much that they create doubts in
their substantial unity.

The most salient manifestation of innate affection can be raced in a
mother. Its sign is that a mother enjoys embracing, caressing, and
taking care of her child. Motherly affection is one of the most glorious
manifestations of innate love. Its manifestations have always been
described and praised by poets and writers. The same holds true for
father's love towards his child.

A similar form of affection exists among children, parents, sisters,
brothers and other family members who are tied together with a specific
natural bond. Another manifestation of this can be viewed among fellow
creatures that are linked by the general relationship of human beings.
This affection is increased in intensity in other forms of human
relationship, such as being fellow city people, being neighbours, being
of the same age, being man and wife, being of the same religion and of
the same ideology, etc are added to it.

Another expression of affection is in man's attachment to objects which
he uses in his material life and to which he is linked by the way they
can fulfill his living requirements. Examples are attachment to
property, wealth, clothes and place of residence.

Another demonstration of man's affection appears in man's love for
beauties, exquisite objects and especially beautiful human beings. That
is to say, it is man's love for objects which satisfy his aesthetic
sense and which establish contact with his psyche.

Similar to this is love for spiritual beauties, such as the beauty of
concepts, comparisons, metaphors, and ironies, as well as love for
cadences in verse and prose which is the passion of poets and of those
with good taste. Or it can be spiritual and ethical perfection and
elegance which is lauded by psychologists and moralists. Or it can be
beauty of sensibility like the elegance in the order of the world of
being which the philosophers marvel at. Or it can be existential beauty
which is perceived by gnostic intuition. On the basis of this
perception, existence equals beauty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“الَّذِي أَحْسَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُۖ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Who made good everything that He has created...(32:7)."***

The more powerful the status of being, the greater will its beauty be
and the more enjoyable will be its seeing.

In other words, to the extent of his capacity, each being will show a
reflection of Divine Light. The more perfect he is, the greater
manifestations of it he will reflect.

On the whole, three degrees could be designated for affection in terms
of intensity and weakness:

First - The weak status which requires proximity to the beloved in
normal conditions. But there is no sacrifice and selflessness in it.

Second - The average status which, in addition to the desire for
proximity, requires sacrifice in the way of the beloved but to the
extent that it does not interrupt general interests and basic personal
interests.

Third - The status of captivation and selflessness when the lover
refrains from no sacrifice in the way of the beloved. The lover regards
the peak of enjoyment in following the will of the beloved’s traits and
deportment or rather in existential attachment or better say, in
subjecting himself to perdition for the sake of the beloved. Its sign is
taking pleasure in expressing humility and homage to the beloved.
Another sign of it is that he unconditionally attaches superiority to
the will of the beloved as compared to that of other beings and other
objects.

Without doubt, the greater the love for something, the greater will be
the enjoyment experienced in reaching it. But on the other hand,
intensity of enjoyment hinges on the degree of desirability and the
existential value of the beloved. Thus if a person develops the
strongest form of affection towards the most precious of all beings and
realizes that being's existential merit, he will experience the greatest
enjoyment when he is united with that beloved. In case, this act of
being united is not confined to time, place and other limiting
conditions and in case it is possible at any time and anywhere, this
inborn desire is fully materialized and it will suffer no shortage.

As a result, the infinite direction of this inborn desire is in a
burning love for an infinitely beautiful and perfect beloved who has the
strongest existential ties with man and whom man can find himself living
and dying for, and linked and related to. In this manner, he will reach
true union and no factor can separate him from his beloved.

Love for a being that does not possess these conditions cannot fully
satisfy this desire and will always be coupled with disappointment,
defeat, separation, disunion, etc.


