Pleasure and Perfection
=======================

With a little consideration in his own being, each person can very
clearly realize that he is by nature in search of pleasure, happiness
and comfort, and that he escapes from pain and agony. The indefatigable
efforts and endeavours in life are for the purpose of enjoying more
powerful and more enduring pleasures and of escaping from or at least,
diminishing the pains, agonies and illnesses. When these coincide, they
are compared; that is to say, slight pain and hardship is endured for
being released from greater pain and affliction, and a slight and
limited pleasure is sacrificed for a greater and more enduring
enjoyment.

Likewise, enduring slight pain to reach a great and lasting pleasure and
dispensing with a slight pleasure to be relieved of great pain are the
requirements of man's reason and nature. All rational functions are
performed on the basis of these calculations. Differences seen in people
with regard to preferring certain pleasures and pains are due to
differences in discernment, mistakes in calculation and other factors
which will be discussed later.

Therefore from one angle, pleasure is the motive behind activity and
effort in life, and from another angle it is the outcome and result of
this effort. From a final viewpoint, it can be regarded as perfection
for sensible beings because it is an existential trait which human
beings are apt to possess.

An act which provides pleasure and draws pain away is desired and wanted
by man. Man likes and is fond of anything which is pleasurable to reach.
Likewise, the term affection is used in the case of desirable deeds and
traits. And this clears up the relationship among pleasure,
determination and affection.

But it must be borne in mind that, at times, man aspires for a specific
pleasure reaching which requires a great deal of preparations. As a
result, he decides to carry out deeds, each of which might be a
preparation itself. In fact, the determination to carry out each of the
deeds is a reflection of the genuine will accorded to performing the
main deed.

In the same way, genuine affection is given to a being that is genuinely
desired by man. In the light of this, minor affections are developed
towards its preparations and attachments, reaching each of which brings
about a minor pleasure and conforms to its relationship with the genuine
object of desire and pleasure.

In earlier discussions, we arrived at the conclusion that man's true
perfection is the ultimate existential degree and the most sublime
perfection which man is able to reach. All other perfections are like
preliminaries and are organic or relative. Their being preliminary
perfections hinges on their effect in making man reach his true
perfection, even though the latter might be of various degrees.

As a consequence, true perfection is man's genuine desire and the
desirability of other objects is minor and depends on their involvement
in reaching true perfection. Likewise, the pleasure desired by man is
one derived from reaching true perfection. Other pleasures are like
preliminary steps, because, as already pointed out, genuine pleasure is
derived from fulfilling a genuine desire.

Consequently, recognition of true perfection depends on recognition of
genuine pleasure. Conversely, recognition of genuine pleasure hinges on
recognition of true perfection. As genuine pleasure provides the
greatest pleasure possible, recognition of genuine pleasure is
accompanied by recognition of something which can provide man with the
greatest, the most sublime, and the most enduring of all pleasures. For
this reason, if we get to know the most pleasurable beings, we will also
recognize the genuine pleasure and true perfection.

Thus it is befitting to ponder over the reality of pleasure and the
reason behind differences in its degrees, so that we could recognize the
most sublime and the most enduring pleasures of man.

What is Pleasure? And what Are the Most Sublime Pleasures of Man?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

What we experience within us and interpret as pleasure is a conceptual
state overcoming us when we reach a desired objective, provided that we
consider that objective as desirable and that we be aware of it and pay
heed (to it) upon reaching it. Thus if we do not regard something
desirable, reaching it will bring about no pleasure for us. Likewise, if
we pay no heed to reaching something, we will derive no enjoyment from
it.

As a consequence, in addition to the presence of one who takes pleasure
(in something) and the object of desire, taking pleasure depends on
having a specific perceptual power with which reaching the desired
objective could be perceived. In the same way, it hinges on recognition
of desirability and paying attention to reaching it. Various degrees of
pleasure depend on the intensity and weakness of perception, as well as
desirability or attention paid by man.

That is to say, a person's enjoyment of eating delicious food might be
more than someone else's, as he might have a stronger and healthier
taste. Or a person might derive more enjoyment from eating a particular
type of food, as it might be more pleasurable for him. Or a particular
person might derive more enjoyment from a special dish when he fully
concentrates on the food rather than on other objectives. In like
manner, two students might derive different types of enjoyment from
learning a specific branch of science due to their different views on
the desirability, utility and practicality of it.

It is also clear that the stability of the pleasure depends on the
endurance of conditions which lead to its emergence. The supposed
pleasure is cut off when the one taking pleasure or the object of
pleasure is destroyed or when it is no longer desirable or when the
person changes his mind or ceases paying attention to it.

The multiplicity seen among the person taking pleasure, the objective of
pleasure and the conditions leading to the emergence of pleasure has
general applicability in the case of ordinary pleasures. The essence of
pleasure however, can be traced in other cases where no such
multiplicity exists. In these cases, the word pleasure could be used
with a kind of conceptual interpretation as is the case with regard to
science and affection.

For example, to gain knowledge, the presence of the scholar, the object
of learning and the trait of having knowledge is required, but its
interpretive meaning also applies to the soul's speculative knowledge of
itself or Almighty Allah's knowledge of Himself, even though in these
cases, there is no multiplicity among knowledge, the scholar, and the
object of learning likewise, the common meaning of affection requires
the presence of the lover, the beloved, and the state of love but no
such external plurality exists in the case of self-love.

As a consequence, instances of pleasure can be found which do not
require the said multiplicity. For example, in the case of Almighty
Allah, it could be said that enjoyment emanates from Him, even though in
this case, the *Bihjat* interpretation is more befitting as some
scholars have remarked. In the same manner, with regard to man, it could
be said that he takes pleasure from his own being.

As his own being is dearer than anything else for him, the pleasure he
derives from himself will be more than what he experiences in the case
of other pleasures due to its desirability. In other words, all other
pleasures serve as a reflection of his self-enjoyment because they have
emerged in the process of reaching a phase and perfection in his being.

Failure to derive pleasure in normal conditions is due to inattention.
Whenever man can pay full attention to himself and ignore aught else by
the help of external factors such as great dangers, exercise and
concentration, he will derive exceptional pleasure. For example, if a
person is sentenced to death and considers the verdict binding, he will
derive an unparalleled enjoyment when he later realizes that the verdict
has been annulled.

Of course, in this example, pleasure is related to being brought back to
worldly life after being disappointed at it. Yet it is a good example
for our discussion, as it elucidates man's love for life and his
enjoyment of himself.

The outcome of discussion is that the pleasure experienced by man is
either derived from his own being or his own perfection or from other
beings which he is in need of and is somehow related to. Thus, he will
reach the most sublime status of pleasure if he can see himself tied to
one who embraces all connections and links, and who makes man needless
of any other dependence. If he finds his own being linked to Him and
sees no independence for himself, he will take the pleasure of
independence from Him.

As a consequence, man's true object of desire from whom he derives the
greatest pleasure is one to whom he is inextricably linked. Genuine
pleasure is derived from seeing his own relationship with Him or from
seeing Him while he himself is linked to him or in fact, from viewing a
reflection of His grandeur and elegance.

The Peak of Desires and Extreme Limit of Aspirations
----------------------------------------------------

The conclusion derived from earlier discussions is that man's innate
desires extend to infinity. There is no limit or boundary to any of
these desires they do not require restriction or halt at a particular
level. On the contrary, they all lead man to the ultimate (point).
Having boundless desires is verily one of the characteristics of man.
Temporary and limited success does not content man. Even the
non-religious philosophers do not deny man's innate desires. Rather this
is regarded as one of the most important principal differences of man
and animals.

Russel notes (as below):

"One of the most important principal differences of man and animals is
that human desires, as opposed to those of animals, are boundless and
cannot be fully materialized.[^1]."

Although these wishes are variegated, they are all finally brought
together and their ultimate satisfaction is summed up in one thing:
relationship with the Infinite source of Knowledge, power, beauty and
perfection. It is the feature of the states of being that the more
severe, powerful and perfect they become, the more they incline towards
unity and extension. Human faculties which are dispersed when belonging
to the body are united when attached to the soul. While possessed of
unity and extension, the soul embraces all human powers:

In like manner, the extreme point of each of the innate desires which
extends to infinity and which is then united with other desires is, in
fact, one ultimate desire perceived from various viewpoints and angles.
And that is dependence on a perfect Infinite Being, that is to say,
proximity to the Almighty Allah.

In such a state, man realizes his complete relationship with the
creator. He sees himself dependent on and linked to Him or rather (he
sees himself as) the incarnation of dependence on and relationship with
Him. Before His presence, man observes no independence for himself. In
this state, he sees all objects dependent on the holy divine Being and
acquires speculative knowledge of the realities of existence. On the
basis of his own existential involvement, he reaps benefit from rays of
divine grandeur and beauty. Then man's innate desire to recognize the
realities of existence is materialized.

Likewise, in this state, man finds a way to the source of infinite
power. By being related to this source, man obtains the power to perform
whatever he wills and wishes. Thus, his innate desire to seek power is
satiated.

Similarly, in this state, man can reach the greatest degree of love for
the most eminent of the beloved. And he can establish ultimate
proximity, closeness, union and true relationship with Him. In other
words, he can see his proximity and relationship very clearly and can
consequently reach the best and most permanent pleasures:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“فِي مَقْعَدِ صِدْقٍ عِنْدَ مَلِيكٍ مُقْتَدِرٍ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"In the seat of honour with a most powerful king (54:55)."***

As a consequence, innate human desires which spring from humanity and
which are the requisites of this present state and of his type lead man
to infinity. Their full satisfaction is not feasible without
establishing proximity to Allah (SWT) and being linked to eternal world.

Thus man's true perfection is (to reach) the state of proximity Allah
(SWT). Other physical and spiritual perfections are only a means to
reach this end. And these means should be used on the basis of criteria
already set forth, that is to say, to the extent of their impact on
reaching true perfection. None of them - not even the most sublime and
delicate one of them - could be regarded as genuine human perfection,
even if they are the distinctive features of man and are not found in
other animals.

To put it in other terms, man will truly and actually become a human
being and go beyond the animal state when he takes strides towards the
proximity to Allah (SWT). Prior to stepping in this path, he is either a
potential human being while he still has the gift to reach this state or
he has totally fallen and has been ranked as animals or below animals,
while he has lost this gift by misuse of his will-power.

It is for this reason that the Holy Qur'an regards the *kafirun*
(disbelievers) who have lost the gift of faith and piety as the worst
beings and elsewhere regards them as being more misled than the
quadruped.

In Suratul Anfal, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَهُمْ لَا
يُؤْمِنُونَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Surely the vilest of animals in Allah's sight are those who
disbelieve, then they would not believe (8:55)."***

In another verse, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَلَوْ عَلِمَ اللَّهُ فِيهِمْ خَيْرًا لَأَسْمَعَهُمْ ۖ وَلَوْ
أَسْمَعَهُمْ لَتَوَلَّوْا وَهُمْ مُعْرِضُونَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely the vilest of animals, in Allah’s sight, are the deaf, the
dumb, who do not understand (8:22).”***

In chapter Araf, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أُولَٰئِكَ كَالْأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ
الْغَافِلُونَ…..”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... They are as cattle, nay, they are in worse errors; these are the
heedless ones (7:179)."***

Is Full Satisfaction of Innate Desires Feasible?
------------------------------------------------

At this point, the doubt might arise that even though innate desires
incline towards infinity, can they be satisfied fully, especially with
regard to the fact that man is a weak and infirm creature with limited
natural and acquired powers which are finite in terms of time and which
cease with the approach of death no matter how extensive these powers
are?

To remove this doubt in terms suited to the style of this discussion,
(it can be said) that (man's) nature in itself is proof for their
feasibility, because innate desires are among objective realities and
the laws and principles of being. They resemble attractions which are
proof of the attractive force. They are not like mental pictures which
are developed through the senses and the mental powers. Their relation
to objective realities is like the relation of the discoverer to the
discovered, so that there would be the possibility of their being
contrary to the truth.

But limitation of human powers and their cessation with death is based
on materialism and on restriction of life to the material world, both of
which are in contradiction to (man's) nature. Man's innate desire for
metaphysical perfections and for life in the Hereafter renders the
afore-cited point null and void and amply proves the metaphysics and
life in the Hereafter.

Of course, (man's) nature is not the sole proof for this matter.
Numerous logical and historical proofs can be cited for them. We will
make reference to just one of them.

Deliberation on the system of creation indicates that, ranging from the
smallest atoms to the greatest galaxy, everything follows a wonderful
and astonishing order. The permanence of the world and the evolvement of
its numerous phenomena are indebted to this firm, measured and
calculated order. The more the sciences are promoted, the better they
can unveil the grandeur of this order and the subtlety of its mysteries
and philosophies.

The wonderful human inventions and industries have taken place in the
light of discovering these mysteries and the relationship among the
creatures. As a result of this, one cannot regard the development of a
phenomenon in the world as unaccounted for and superfluous and (one
cannot) deem it void and useless, because its evolvement is an outcome
of this system. It is in itself a part of this system; an element in the
grand system of creation, and it is effective in the system's movement
towards the objective and the ultimate end.

Principally a void and useless being will, willingly or unwillingly,
bring about disorder and corruption. Thus the presence of innate desires
in man will not be void and useless. Rather it is an important factor
for man's progress, development and attainment of prosperity and
happiness. If man's happiness and perfection was exclusive to material
prosperity and was limited, the presence of boundless wishes would have
been null and void.

Placing these desires in man's being without the possibility of their
satisfaction is like showing someone a path and feigning that it is very
long and far off such that the person musters all his courage to tread
the path and moves towards the imaginary destination at full speed.
While moving with full speed, his head would suddenly collide with a
stone and he would realize that the path was nothing but a blind alley.
It goes without saying that this act of deception is not befitting
Allah, the Wise. It is only done by the foolish ones who enjoy deceiving
the people and who take pleasure in the suffering and failure of the
people because of their own psychological complexes and who finally
laugh in a languishing manner at the disappointment of those deceived.

The Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“….. أَوَلَمْ يَتَفَكَّرُوا فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ ۗ مَا خَلَقَ اللَّهُ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Do they not reflect within themselves: Allah did not create the
heavens and the earth and what is between them two but with
truth….(30:8).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…. وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ رَبَّنَا مَا
خَلَقْتَ هَٰذَا بَاطِلًا سُبْحَانَكَ.…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… And reflect on the creation of heavens and the earth: Our Lord!
You have not created this in vain! Glory be to you …..(3:191).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاءَ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا لَاعِبِينَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between
them for sport (21:16).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثًا وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا
لَا تُرْجَعُونَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What! Did you then think that we had created you in vain and that
you shall not be returned to us? (23:115).”***

Is A Completely Conscious Relationship with Allah Rationally Possible?
----------------------------------------------------------------------

On the basis of the conclusion derived from earlier discussions full
satisfaction of man's innate demands is possible only in the light of
complete and conscious relationship with the source of being. The
possibility of such a relationship can be proven by philosophical
reasoning. And that is: all creatures are inseparably linked with their
lord and the essence of their beings is relationship with and dependence
on Him. As man can have conscious speculative knowledge about his
essence and as his essence is nothing but relationship with the lord, he
can establish a fully conscious relationship with Him. Or in other
words, he can recognize and objectively see his own complete existential
relationship with Him.

Divine philosophers unanimously accept the speculative knowledge of the
soul. Whenever man dispenses with concern for sense perceptions and
sensual desires and whenever he focuses attention on his own being, he
will realize this through speculative knowledge. This knowledge is
traced in other conditions as well, even if ample attention could not be
paid to it due to being occupied with other perceptions. One can
strengthen this (knowledge) by way of diminishing material attachments,
practicing self-examination and focusing attention on oneself, and can
elevate it to a state of clarity and awareness.

Existential relationship with and dependence on the Lord can be proven
by (using) the principles of sublime wisdom as explained by the late
Sadrul-Mutaallihin, in this manner that existence has linear degrees.
The descending degrees, with radial order range from sublime degree, its
effect and what is linked to it.

True causality refers to existential relationship (but) not between two
objects which exist independently because in this case, neither would be
in need of the other object for existence. It rather exists between an
independent being and a dependent one whose being is linked with and
dependent on the cause. Thus the relationship of the effect to the true
cause that imparts existence to him is nothing but absolute link and
intuitionist annexation. If a person sees its reality, he will find it
as dependent on the cause and as a reflection of it.

As a result, whoever succeeds in seeing his essence will find himself
dependent on and linked with the Lord. Or, he will find himself as the
incarnation of dependence on and relationship with the Lord. Such an
observation will not be separate from observing ray of Almighty Allah's
illuminations because understanding the relationship of the dependent
being is impossible without understanding the possessor of relationship
and the independent Being who eternalizes it:

"Enlighten our inward eyes towards yourself with the light of sight, so
that the inward eyes would strip off the curtains of light and reach the
source of grandeur and our souls would be attached to your sacred
presence.[^2]."

Thus observation of the essence of being is coupled with the independent
observation of a ray of divine light of beauty and grandeur:

"Whoever recognizes himself has recognized his Lord."

The vaster the existential sphere of the soul, the more perfect its
status, and the more profound and concentrated its observation, the
greater and more will the understanding of divine illuminations be:

“And link me to the most luminous ray of Your power, so that I would
know You only and turn away from aught but You.[^3]"

The better man understands this attachment and dependence, the greater
attention he will pay to the promoter of (this) attachment and the
Genuine and Independent Being, and the more he will derive benefit from
the rays of His glory, so much so that he will become a thorough
reflection and a perfect manifestation of the Almighty Allah (glory be
to His power):

"There is no separation between You and them, except that they are Your
servants and creations and that their management is in Your Hands and
that they begin (their lives) from You and return to You"[^4]

By finding such a connection, man's desire to seek the truth and to
pursue power is fully satisfied. By obtaining what he truly desires and
establishing an existential link with Him, man reaches the greatest
degree of pleasures. The most perfect phase of this develops when the
soul totally dispenses with the management of the body, when it pays
attention to nothing but Allah, when worldly occupations do not attract
its attention and do not keep it from submerging in observation:

"And on the day of meeting You, light up our eyes with seeing You. [^5]"

The Simplest Way
----------------

The simplest way to believe in the possibility of connection with
Almighty Allah is that which Allah has shown the people through His
messengers and through this, He has greatly favoured His servants and
given them the final notice:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“… لِئَلَّا يَكُونَ لِلنَّاسِ عَلَى اللَّهِ حُجَّةٌ بَعْدَ
الرُّسُلِ….”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"...So that people should have no argument against Allah after the
(coming of) the messengers...(4:165)."***

Without exception messengers of Allah have called the people towards
proximity with Allah and connection with the source of Infinite
knowledge and power. They have given tidings to the people to enjoy
eternal blessings, infinite pleasures and whatever they wish:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“لَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ جَزَاءُ
الْمُحْسِنِينَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"They shall have with their lord what they please; that is the reward
of doers of good (39:34).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…فِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِيهِ الْأَنْفُسُ وَتَلَذُّ الْأَعْيُنُ ….”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... Therein shall be what their souls yearn after and (wherein) the
eyes shall delight... (43:71)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…فَلَا تَعْلَمُ نَفْسٌ مَا أُخْفِيَ لَهُمْ مِنْ قُرَّةِ أَعْيُنٍ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"So no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh
the eyes... (32:17)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“لَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ فِيهَا وَلَدَيْنَا مَزِيدٌ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"They have therein what they wish and with us is more yet
(50:35)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي صَدَقَنَا وَعْدَهُ وَأَوْرَثَنَا الْأَرْضَ
نَتَبَوَّأُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ حَيْثُ نَشَاءُ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... (All) praise is due to Allah, who has made good to us His
promise and He has made us inherit the land; we may abide in the garden
where we please... (39:74)."***

The principal privilege of their call over that of other reformers is
that they remind (the people) that this limited and transient life is
not man's final abode. It rather is a prelude to reach eternal
prosperity and it is a bridge to get to an eternal world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”بَلْ تُؤْثِرُونَ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَى
.إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَفِي الصُّحُفِ الْأُولَىٰ صُحُفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَى
“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Nay! You prefer the life of this world, while the Hereafter is
better and more lasting. Most surely this is in the earlier scriptures,
the scriptures of Ibrahim and Musa (87:16-19)."***

As the main reason behind the denial of the disbelievers and the
rejection of the messengers has been (due to) considering this truth
improbable:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا هَلْ نَدُلُّكُمْ عَلَىٰ رَجُلٍ
يُنَبِّئُكُمْ إِذَا مُزِّقْتُمْ كُلَّ مُمَزَّقٍ إِنَّكُمْ لَفِي خَلْقٍ
جَدِيدٍ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And those who disbelieve say: Shall we point out to you a man who
informs you that when you are scattered the utmost scattering you shall
then be most surely (raised) in (to) a new creation (34:7)?"***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
” زَعَمَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنْ لَنْ يُبْعَثُوا ۚ قُلْ بَلَىٰ
وَرَبِّي لَتُبْعَثُنَّ ثُمَّ لَتُنَبَّؤُنَّ بِمَا عَمِلْتُمْ ۚ
وَذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌَ….يَوْمَ يَجْمَعُكُمْ لِيَوْمِ
الْجَمْعِ ۖ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ التَّغَابُنِ ۗ وَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ
وَيَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا يُكَفِّرْ عَنْهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِ وَيُدْخِلْهُ
جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا
ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ َالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَكَذَّبُوا
بِآيَاتِنَا أُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ۖ وَبِئْسَ
الْمَصِيرُ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Those who disbelieve think that they shall never be raised. Say:
Aye! By my Lord! You shall most certainly be raised, then you shall most
certainly be informed of what you did. And that is easy to Allah... On
the day that He will gather you for the day of gathering, that is the
day of loss and gain, and whoever believes in Allah and does good, He
will remove from him his evil and cause him to enter gardens beneath
which rivers flow, to abide therein forever; that is the great
achievement. And (as for) those who disbelieve and reject our
communications, they are the inmates of the fire, to abide therein evil
is the resort (64:7, 9, 10)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ”وَنَحْشُرُهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَلَىٰ وُجُوهِهِمْ عُمْيًا
وَبُكْمًا وَصُمًّا ۖ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۖ كُلَّمَا خَبَتْ
زِدْنَاهُمْ سَعِيرًا. ذَٰلِكَ جَزَاؤُهُمْ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَفَرُوا
بِآيَاتِنَا وَقَالُوا أَإِذَا كُنَّا عِظَامًا وَرُفَاتًا أَإِنَّا
لَمَبْعُوثُونَ خَلْقًا جَدِيدًا. أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ
الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ قَادِرٌ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يَخْلُقَ
مِثْلَهُمْ وَجَعَلَ لَهُمْ أَجَلًا لَا رَيْبَ فِيهِ فَأَبَى
الظَّالِمُونَ إِلَّا كُفُورًا“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And We will gather them together on the day of resurrection on
their faces, blind and dumb and deaf; their abode is hell; whenever it
becomes allayed We will add to their burning. This is their retribution
because they disbelieved in our communications and said: What! When we
shall have become bones and decayed particles, shall we then indeed be
raised up into a new creation? Do they not consider that Allah, Who
created the heavens and the earth, is able to create their like, and He
has appointed for them a doom about which there is no doubt, but the
unjust do not consent to aught but denying (17:97 - 99)."***

The messengers of Allah did not suffice with invitation, promise, and
warning. Rather, with the permission of the Lord, they reflected
instances of the signs of relationship with divinity and with the
infinite source of knowledge and power, so that everyone would
understand that resorting to the limited material means is not the sole
way of acquiring knowledge and power and that it is possible for man to
use divine sciences and metaphysical powers.

By presenting news of the unseen, discovering hidden secrets, and
expressing the sciences and the philosophies while being unschooled, the
messengers practically proved the possibility of establishing connection
with divinity and acquiring unseen are mystical sciences:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“….وَعَلَّمَ آدَمَ الْأَسْمَاءَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And He taught Adam all the names... (2:31)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ وَعَلَّمْنَاهُ مِنْ لَدُنَّا عِلْمًا….”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And whom We had taught knowledge from Ourselves (18:65)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَآتَيْنَاهُ الْحُكْمَ صَبِيًّا….”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And We granted him wisdom while yet a child (19:12)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…”قَالُوا كَيْفَ نُكَلِّمُ مَنْ كَانَ فِي الْمَهْدِ صَبِيًّا. قَالَ
إِنِّي عَبْدُ اللَّهِ آتَانِيَ الْكِتَابَ وَجَعَلَنِي نَبِيًّا“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... They said: How should we speak to one who was a child in the
cradle? He said, surely 1 am a servant of Allah; He has given me the
Book and made me a prophet (19:29 - 30)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…وَأُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا تَأْكُلُونَ وَمَا تَدَّخِرُونَ فِي بُيُوتِكُمْ
ۚ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And I inform you of what you should eat and what you should
store in your houses... (3:49)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…عُلِّمْنَا مَنْطِقَ الطَّيْرِ وَأُوتِينَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... We have been taught the language of birds, and we have been
given all things,- (27:16)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…وَكُلًّا آتَيْنَا حُكْمًا وَعِلْمًا…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And to each one We gave wisdom and knowledge... (21:79)."***

Above all is the Holy Qur'an which is the eternal miracle of the prophet
(SA) of Islam, which has been revealed to an unschooled individual in a
degenerated and backward society and which, from its revelation, has
challenged the jinn and the men to bring a chapter like it. And as we
know, despite numerous claims in this regard, no one has ever been able
to challenge it. And on the basis of the explicit foretelling of the
Qur'an, this will never be materialized.

In like manner, by performing extraordinary deeds and triumphing over
natural forces, the divinely appointed messengers have practically
proven the possibility of freedom from material bonds and attainment of
an invincible power.

Emergence of a live cattle from the heart of the mountain by Prophet
Salih, Prophet Ibrahim's deliverance from Namrud's great fire,
transformation of a cane into a dragon or the ripping of the sea or
making twelve springs flow from a stone by Prophet Musa, curing those
blind by birth or giving life to the deed by Prophet Isa, taming of
perceptible and imperceptible forces for Prophet Sulayman are examples
of the extraordinary deeds performed by the prophets as related by the
Holy Qur'an. The successors of the messengers and even many of their
true followers also enjoyed possessing such knowledge and powers.

A holy *hadith* given by the Prophet (SA) states:

"My servant, obey me that I make you an example of myself. To whatever I
say "Be", it will be created. I will make you such that to whatever you
say "Be", it will be created."

And if the miracles proven by authentic and successive relations are
gathered, they will make up great many volumes.

With all this is it befitting that some people, blindly and impudently,
deny the existence of the metaphysics and the possibility of
establishing connection with it and preclude others from pursuing this
path as well.

The truth is that even if such miracles and clear verses did not exist,
it would be apt for man to implement the programmes set forth by the
messengers even experimentally and to evaluate their grand impact on
man's material and spiritual prosperity. Because the matter is of such
great importance that it justifies any sacrifice to have it fulfilled,
especially with regard to the fact that implementing the programmes of
the messengers, as opposed to many other plans, does not require
dispensing with all worldly blessings and pleasures, it rather
guarantees comfort and peace in this world as well. Among the messengers
and their followers, there have also been people who have enjoyed
worldly blessings more that the mammonists have done.

Would not the unexceptional insistence of all messengers on this matter
and the unrivalled sacrifice of themselves, their successors and their
true followers to propagate it, develop in the heart of the just person
the possibility of the rightfulness of their claim?! What a great thing
fairness is!

Is the value of such a reality less than the value of discovering
natural secrets and conquering heavenly spheres? Enduring great pain and
difficulty and using numerous natural forces as well as man power for
scientific discoveries is worthy of attention and praise but using a
part of (these) forces to establish connection with the infinite source
of knowledge and power and to reach eternal prosperity and happiness is
not correct and logical? What a great thing wisdom and far-sightedness
is!

Proof from the Verses and the Narrations
----------------------------------------

What we deduced from moral and rational premises is confirmed by the
Book and the *Sunnah*. In some instances, we made reference to
traditional proofs. Now we will mention some other examples from among
the verses and narrations.

The Holy Qur'an introduces man as pious by nature and claims that all
human beings, in a phase of being, have clearly observed their Lord and
confessed His divinity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“… أَلَسْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Am I not your Lord? They said: Yes! (7:172)***

The worldly life is for the sake of carrying out the covenant of
servitude and determining man's fidelity towards this innate promise and
covenant and finally reaching voluntary development through piety:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنْسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And I have not created the jinn and the men except that they should
serve Me (51:56)."***
For this evaluation, various conditions are put forth so that each
person would freely choose his path:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“… لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلًا…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... That He might manifest you, which of you is best in action
(11:7).”***

In the dark labyrinths of life, only those who love their Lord, who take
refuge with Him, and who seek His satisfaction are guided unto the right
and safe path and unto Allah:

“…**وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَشَدُّ حُبًّا لِلَّهِ**…”

***"...And those who believe are stronger in love for Allah...
(2:165).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Say: If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you
(3:31).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”يَهْدِي بِهِ اللَّهُ مَنِ اتَّبَعَ رِضْوَانَهُ سُبُلَ السَّلَامِ
وَيُخْرِجُهُمْ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ بِإِذْنِهِ
وَيَهْدِيهِمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"With it Allah guides him who will follow His pleasure into the ways
of safety and brings them out of utter darkness into light by His will
and guides them to the right path (5:16)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…وَمَنْ يُسْلِمْ وَجْهَهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ فَقَدِ
اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And whoever submits himself wholly to Allah and he is the doer of
good (to others), he indeed has taken hold of the firmest thing upon
which one can lay hold... (31:22)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَاعْتَصَمُوا بِهِ
فَسَيُدْخِلُهُمْ فِي رَحْمَةٍ مِنْهُ وَفَضْلٍ وَيَهْدِيهِمْ إِلَيْهِ
صِرَاطًا مُسْتَقِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Then as for those who believe in Allah and hold fast by Him, He will
cause them to enter into His mercy and grace and guide them to Himself
on a right path (4:175)."***

Such people will finally succeed in meeting the grace of Allah and
reaching His proximity and being united with their Beloved:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ .ارْجِعِي إِلَىٰ رَبِّكِ
رَاضِيَةً مَرْضِيَّةً. فَادْخُلِي فِي عِبَادِي. وَادْخُلِي جَنَّتِي "
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O soul that art at rest! Return to your Lord, well - pleased (with
him), well - pleasing (Him), so enter among My servants, and enter into
my garden (89:27-30)."***

“**فِي مَقْعَدِ صِدْقٍ عِنْدَ مَلِيكٍ مُقْتَدِرٍ**”

***"In the seat of honour with a Most Powerful King (54:55)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ نَاضِرَةٌ. إِلَىٰ رَبِّهَا نَاظِرَة “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On that day, some faces shall be bright, looking to their Lord
(75:22-23).”***

But those who dote on worldly ornaments, who prefer the love of others
to that of Allah and who have no eagerness for His mercy will suffer an
infinite and painful torment and will be deprived of seeing their innate
Beloved.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”إِنَّ الَّذِينَ لَا يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءَنَا وَرَضُوا بِالْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَاطْمَأَنُّوا بِهَا وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ آيَاتِنَا
غَافِلُونَ. أُولَٰئِكَ مَأْوَاهُمُ النَّارُ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Surely those who do not hope in our meeting and are pleased with
this world's life and are content with it and those who are heedless of
our communications. (As for) those, their abode is the fire because of
what they earned (10: 7-8)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”قُلْ إِنْ كَانَ آبَاؤُكُمْ وَأَبْنَاؤُكُمْ وَإِخْوَانُكُمْ
وَأَزْوَاجُكُمْ وَعَشِيرَتُكُمْ وَأَمْوَالٌ اقْتَرَفْتُمُوهَا
وَتِجَارَةٌ تَخْشَوْنَ كَسَادَهَا وَمَسَاكِنُ تَرْضَوْنَهَا أَحَبَّ
إِلَيْكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَجِهَادٍ فِي سَبِيلِهِ
فَتَرَبَّصُوا حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَ اللَّهُ بِأَمْرِهِ“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Say: If your fathers and your sons and your brethren and your mates
and your kinsfolk and property which you have acquired, and the
slackness of trade which you fear and dwellings which you like, are
dearer to you than Allah and His messenger and striving in His way, then
wait till Allah brings about His command... (9:24)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“كَلَّا إِنَّهُمْ عَنْ رَبِّهِمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ لَمَحْجُوبُونَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Nay! Most surely they shall on that day be debarred from their Lord
(83:15)."***

In the Prophetic *ahadith* and the narrations of the *Ahlul Bayt (AS)*
there are also numerous proofs, instances of which will be related from
the holy *ahadith* narrated by the Prophet (SA), as well as the prayers
of the infallible *Imams (AS).*

In *Hadith-ul-miraj*, the Holy Prophet (SA) is addressed as below:

"Whoever is to please Me will be accorded three traits by Me: I will
teach him a gratitude which will not be coupled with ungratefulness, a
*dhikr* which will not have forgetfulness, a love by which he will not
prefer the love of the creatures to that of Mine. I will love him when
he loves Me and I will make him loved by My servants and I will open up
his inward eyes to My glory grandeur and I will not hide from him
knowledge of the select of My people in the darkness of night and in the
light of day, I will tell him secrets so that his conversation with
creatures and with his companions will be cutoff (i.e. so that his heart
will always be inclined towards Me and he will deem Me the partner to
his conversation). I will make him hear My words and the words of my
angels and I will reveal to him the secret I have hidden from the people
...

I will make his mind overflow with My knowledge and I will substitute
for his reason (i.e, I will manage his affairs in such a way that he
would not need the working of reason in them and that he would use his
reason only in the way of knowing Me). (When the believer's soul leaves
the body and receives kindness before Allah, it says:) O Allah ! You
made Yourself known to me, so by knowing You, I became needless of Your
servants. By Your power and glory, if Your satisfaction lay in my being
torn to pieces and severely killed for seventy times, I would prefer
Your satisfaction.... (Almighty Allah confirms His words and says in His
right): I will open his eyes and ears so that he would hear My words
whole heartedly and see My glory and grandeur with inward eyes.

O Ahmad! If a servant prays as much as the (entire) dwellers of the
heavens and the earth, if he fasts as much as the (entire) dwellers of
the heavens and the earth, if he takes no food like the angels and if
his clothes are like those of the naked (scant), he will not be in
proximity with Me if I see in his heart only a tinge of love for the
world or concern for the reputation, mastery, fame or ornaments of the
world, I will draw My love away from his heart and I will make his heart
gloomy, so that he would forget Me and I will not make him taste the
sweetness of Knowing Me. My peace and mercy be upon you."

In another *hadith*, He states:

"The Almighty Allah states: None of my servants will seek proximity with
Me by that which is more dear to Me than things I have made *wajib* to
him. Then with the *nawafil*, he will seek proximity, so that I would
love him, When I love him, I will be the ear with which he hears, the
eyes with which he sees, the tongue with which he speaks and the hand
with which he takes hold (of things). If he calls Me, I will answer his
call. And if he makes a request, I will grant it."[^6]

In another *hadith*, He says:

"O son of Adam! I am a Needless One who will not become needful. Obey Me
in what I have ordered, so that I would make you a needless one who will
not become needful. O son of Adam! I am a living one who will not die.
Obey Me in what I have ordered, that I would make you a living one who
will not die. O son of Adam! To whatever I say "Be", it will be
(created). Obey Me in what I have ordered so that I would make you say
"Be" to whatever you wish and it will (be (created)."[^7]

In the prayer of the month of Sha'ban, Amirul-Muminin(AS) addresses
Allah as below:

"Set my effort in a comfort derived from reaching Your names and Your
holy presence... O Allah, grant me the ultimate connection with
Yourself. Open our inward eyes with the light of observation towards
Yourself; so that the inward eyes would tear apart the veils of light
and reach the treasure of glory and our souls would cling to Your holy
presence... Attach me to the most luminous ray of Your power, so that I
would know You alone and would turn away from aught but You."

In Kumayl Prayer, he says (the following) to Almighty Allah:

"O Allah, supposing that I bear patience on your torment, how could I
bear patience on being separated from you? And supposing that I have
patience on the heat of your fire, how could I have patience of not
looking towards your glory and greatness?"

The Imam (AS) is related as saying:

"I saw nothing except that I saw Allah before (seeing) it."

In response to a person who asked him: "Have you seen your Lord?” he
said: "Would I worship One Whom I cannot see?"

In the Arafah prayer, the *sayyidush-shuhada'*, Al-Imam Al-Husayn(AS)
says (the following) to Allah..

“O Allah! Through the variety of Your signs (in the world of being) and
the changes in states and conditions. I found that the purpose is to
make Yourself known to me in everything, so that I would not be ignorant
of You in anything... O Allah! Association and engagement with the signs
creates a gap in meeting (You), so grant me the blessing of service that
would near me to You. How can they set proof of Your existence, a being
that needs You for existence? Is there any other appearance that You
lack, so that it would lead to Your appearance? When have You been
absent to require proof? And when have You been away, so that Your signs
would draw (the others) to You?! Blind be the eyes which do not see You
keeping a watch over them and unprofitable be the transaction of a
servant to whom You have not bestowed Your love. O Allah! You have
ordered reference to the signs, so draw me to Yourself by the overflow
of the illuminations and the guidance of mental insight, so that like
the moment of entrance (into Your presence, I would return in such a way
that my heart would be immune from observing the sign and trusting them.
O Allah! Teach me with your treasure of knowledge and preserve me with
Your veil of immunity. Inform me of the truth of those seeking Your
proximity and guide me to the path of those You draw towards Yourself.
With Your management and will-power make me needless of my own
management and will-power. You are the one Who cast rays in the hearts
of Your friends so that they recognize You as being possessed of unity.
And You are the One who removed (love for) the others from the hearts of
those fond of you so that they would not love and resort to aught but
You. You are their Companion when everything appalls them. And You are
their guide when the signs become manifest to them. What has been gain,
by one who has lost You? And what has been lost by one who has found
You? Whoever prefers others to You has verily become disappointed. And
whoever turns away from Your presence will suffer great loss. O Lord!
Call me with your mercy, so that I would reach You so that would turn my
face….eager from observing your beautiful visage.”

Munajat ul Raghibin includes (the following):

"I beg You on the manifestations of Your visage and Your holy
illuminations. I abjectly want You to fulfill my conception as to what I
wish from You through Your sentiments of mercy and subtleties of
beneficence: (my wishes are) with respect to Your bounteous honour and
beauteous reward; with respect to proximity with and closeness to You;
and with respect to seeing You."

Munajat ul Muridin includes (the following):

"O Allah! Lead us towards reaching You and set us out on the closest way
to come to Your Presence. You (and naught but You) are my aim. My
wakefulness and vigil are for You and for naught by You. Meeting You is
the refreshment of my eyes. Being united with You is my heartfelt
desire. I am infatuated with Your compassion. I am enamoured of You.
Your satisfaction is my objective. And meeting You is my desire. And
proximity with You is my ultimate demand....O heaven and blessing of
mine! O world and hereafter of mine!"

Munajat ul - Muhibbin includes (the following):

"O Allah! Place us among those whom You have chosen for Your proximity
and guardianship, whom You have made sincere for Your love and
friendship, whom You have made eager to meet You and satisfied with Your
satisfaction, whom You have granted seeing Your visage, whom You have
favoured with Your satisfaction, whom You have safeguarded from being
away and separated from Yourself, whom You have placed in the true
status before Yourself;... whom You have chosen to observe (Your
elegance )...and grant me the favour of seeing You."

Munajat ul Mutawassillin includes (the following):

“And place me among those whose eyes you have lighted up with seeing You
on the day of meeting (You) and whom You have made the inheritors of
real abodes in Your presence.”

Munajat ul Muftaqirin includes (the following):

"Nothing but union with You would extinguish my mental agony. And
nothing but meeting You would put out the fire of my heart. And nothing
but seeing You would quench my avidity. And nothing but closeness to You
would calm me down... and nothing but proximity with You would remove my
sorrow and grief."

Munajat ul Arifin includes (the following):

"(Place me as one of those) whose eyes have been refreshed by seeing
their Beloved. How tasty Your compassion is and how wholesome each sip
of Your proximity is! So grant us refuge from expelling and driving
away."

Mundial ul Dhaikirin includes (the following):

“O Allah! Infatuated hearts are enamored of You. Various intellectuals
have gathered around Your knowledge, so the hearts will not calm down
except by Your remembrance and the souls will not be at rest except by
seeing You…. And I deprecate any pleasure but Your remembrance, any
comfort but acquaintance with You, any happiness but proximity with You,
and any deed but worshipping You.”

Munajat uz zahidin includes (the following):

“Plant trees of love in our hearts and make perfect for us the rays of
Your knowledge…. And refresh our eyes with seeing You on the day of
meeting (You).”

Conclusion Derived From Previous Discussions
--------------------------------------------

Efforts made in the course of life in various scientific, practical,
individual and social spheres will be human only when they take place
for the purpose of reaching man's true perfection. In other words, these
moves which forcibly have a direction will be deemed human endeavours
when they are directed towards human perfection. Giving them a human
direction will be possible only in case they are regarded as the
ultimate point of man's development, because man's movement for
perfection is scientific and voluntary and requires an objective and a
direction. Thus recognition of the objective is not possible prior to
acquiring moral and speculative understanding. Then it will forcibly be
a mental idea and image. Thus the more vivid and conscious this
recognition is, the more possibility for voluntary and optional
development there will be.

Without a tinge of doubt, man's development takes place with the help of
internal forces and psychological motives vested in his being. As a
result, giving direction to innate desires is the best means for the
recognition of man's ultimate goal and true perfection. The result of
deliberation on the direction of each of these desires is that they all
lead man towards infinity. A temporary and limited materialization of
their demands does not fully satisfy man. Their full satisfaction is not
feasible except by having connection with the source of knowledge and
power and by being linked with the infinite treasure of Beauty and
Perfection. It is only in the state of proximity with Allah and
attachment to the illumination of divine glory that man sees his own
essence and that of the entire world of existence dependent on Almighty
Allah:

“And I will open up his inward eyes to My glory and grandeur and I will
not hide from him knowledge of the select of My people."

And his desire to seek the truth is fulfilled. He will, likewise realize
the influence of Allah's infinite power through his own will and he will
create whatever he wishes with the permission of Allah:

“So that I would make you say "Be" to whatever you wish will be
(created)."

Thus, man's desire to have an invincible power is satisfied. In this
state man will be united with a Beloved possessed of infinite beauty and
perfection, will see himself embraced by His endless grace and favour,
and will have all his needs fulfilled by Him. Truly, how pleasant is the
elimination of a need carried out by the beloved and coupled with His
endless grace and compassion:

"When I love him, I will be the ear with which he hears..."

In this state, he will engage in nothing but uniting with Him and will
think of nothing but satisfying Him:

"You and naught but You are my aim."

"Being united with You is my heartfelt' desire.. and Your satisfaction
is my objective."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“… وَرِضْوَانٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ أَكْبَرُ ۚ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And best of all is Allah's goodly pleasure... (9:72)."***

And there will be no separation between him and his Beloved till
eternity and he will not suffer from His separation.

"Then the veil between Him and me will be lifted and then He gets
attracted to my conversation and He looks towards me with affection."

"Whom You have safeguarded from being away and separated from Yourself."

Finally in this state, man sees his being possessed of ultimate
perfection and dependent on the Creator and reaches the greatest of all
pleasures. As he sees no independence for himself in this observation,
his self-love is also deprived of independence. His genuine, independent
affection is bestowed upon Allah. Instead of loving Allah for himself,
he will love himself for Allah, he will thus no longer have any concern
for himself and he will be totally submerged in the beauty of the
Beloved:

"I will make his mind overflow with My knowledge and I will substitute
for his reason."

As a result, man's true desire and inherent beloved is Almighty Allah
and man's true perfection lies in connection and proximity with Him.
Other material and spiritual perfections should be used in the way of
reaching this perfection. All forces should be mobilized to reach this
goal. Each step man takes in a path other than this draws him away from
the destination and any power he uses in a path other than Allah's
satisfaction will be to his loss:

"And I deprecate any pleasure but Your remembrance, any comfort but
acquaintance with You, any happiness but proximity with You and any deed
but worshipping You."

[^1]: Power, p 19

[^2]: Al-Munajtitush-shabeiniyyah

[^3]: Al-Munajdtush-shalminiyyah

[^4]: Prayer cited on the days of the month of Rajab

[^5]: Munajat uz-Zilhidin

[^6]: Al-usul al-kafi, Vol2, p 352; weal' Mahasin Barqi.

[^7]: Iddatud Ibn Fand, p 291


