Reply to Several Questions
==========================

First Question
--------------

If man's true objective is to reach proximity with Allah and if man
experiences the greatest and the most lasting pleasures as a result of
reaching it, how is it that the majority of people are not bent on
having this fulfilled, even though they all seek pleasure and prosperity
by nature?

In reply to this question, it must be said that man's endeavour to reach
true perfection and prosperity and to reap benefit of its pleasure
hinges on recognition and confirmation of its being pleasant. As the
majority of the people do not know the main objective behind creation
and their own true perfection as is due and as they have not tasted the
pleasure of reaching it, they do not seek to find and obtain it. They
however, recognize material and worldly perfection and sense the
pleasure of reaching them.

For this reason, they use up all their energy to reach them, even though
the people are different in their choice of worldly goods and states and
(even though) each person, on the basis of his own perception and
discernment, regards a group of these perfections as more important and
more valuable or as less expensive and easier to find and thus exerts
his efforts mainly to reach it.

Even though recognition of the true perfection has an innate basis, it
will not spontaneously reach the degree of sufficient awareness and
consciousness in the majority of the people and requires sound guidance
and training.

For this purpose, one of the greatest responsibilities of the messengers
is to awaken this innate unconscious instinct and to remind (the people)
of the forgotten divine covenant.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاصْطَفى سُبْحَانَهُ مِنْ وَلَدَهِ أَنْبيَاءَ أَخَذَ عَلَى الْوَحْيِ
مِيثَاقَهُم، وَعَلَى تَبْليغِ الرِّسَالَةِ أَمَانَتَهُمْ، لَمَّا
بَدَّلَ أَكْثَرُ خَلْقِهِ عَهْدَ اللهِ إِلَيْهِمْ، فَجَهِلُوا حَقَّهُ،
واتَّخَذُوا الاْنْدَادَ مَعَهُ، وَاجْتَالَتْهُمُ الشَّيَاطِينُ عَنْ
مَعْرفَتِهِ، وَاقتَطَعَتْهُمْ عَنْ عِبَادَتِهِ، فَبَعَثَ فِيهمْ
رُسُلَهُ، وَوَاتَرَ إِلَيْهِمْ أَنْبِياءَهُ، لِيَسْتَأْدُوهُمْ
مِيثَاقَ فِطْرَتِهِ، وَيُذَكِّرُوهُمْ مَنْسِيَّ نِعْمَتِهِ،
وَيَحْتَجُّوا عَلَيْهِمْ بَالتَّبْلِيغِ، وَيُثِيرُوا لَهُمْ دَفَائِنَ
الْعُقُولِ، وَيُرُوهُمْ آيَاتِ الْمَقْدِرَةِ: مِنْ سَقْف فَوْقَهُمْ
مَرْفُوع، وَمِهَاد تَحْتَهُمْ مَوْضُوع، وَمَعَايِشَ تُحْيِيهِمْ،
وَآجَال تُفْنِيهمْ، وَأَوْصَاب تُهْرِمُهُمْ، وَأَحْدَاث تَتَابَعُ
عَلَيْهِمْ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“From his (Adam’s) progeny Allah chose prophets and took their pledge
for His revelation and for carrying His message as their trust.* *In
course of time many people perverted Allah’s trust with them and ignored
His position and took compeers along with Him. Satan turned them away
from* *knowing Him and kept them aloof from His worship. Then Allah sent
His Messengers and series of His prophets towards them to get them to
fulfill the pledges of His creation, to recall to them His bounties, to
exhort them by preaching, to unveil before them the hidden virtues of
wisdom and show them the signs of His Omnipotence namely the sky which
is raised over them, the earth that is placed beneath them, means of
living that sustain them, deaths that make them die, ailments that turn
them old and incidents that successively betake them.”*[^1]

At this juncture, this grand responsibility is vested with people who
have well recognized the path of the messengers and who have the power
to make it known to others, so as to bring to the right track those who
have swerved from the highways of prosperity and to inform them of their
innate desire.

Second Question
---------------

If the main goal behind man's creation is to reach such a status, then
why has man's nature been vested with instincts which constantly draw
him towards material pleasures and alluring appearances of the world and
which preclude him from proceeding towards the major goal? Is not this a
breach of purpose and contrary to wisdom? And if in place of these,
there were motives which directed man only towards Allah and the
Hereafter, would it not have been more compatible with this objective?

To clarify the answer to this question, two points should be taken into
consideration:

(1) The value of man's perfection lies in its being voluntary. This
privilege has carried man to the state where he is served and worshipped
by the angels. To promote the operation of the will-power, there must
forcibly be various means and different attraction, so that treading the
path of prosperity would not be done by force and by compulsion.

(2) As man's development is gradual and as it is possessed of linear
stages, it is necessary for the will-power to carry on its operation for
a considerable length of time, so that in each phase, man could freely
choose his way and even change direction.

These two points reveal the secret behind man's worldly and gradual
life. Evidently, man's survival in the world of movement, change and
gradual development necessitates means, tools, conditions and specific
facilities. In fact, natural instincts are motives to provide these
means and conditions. In the meantime, they also pave the way for the
will-power and if the correct path is chosen, they can considerably
promote man's progress towards the main objective and the ultimate
perfection. As a consequence, their presence is not contradictory to the
motive behind creation. Rather, their inexistence is contrary to Allah's
absolute wisdom.

Third Question
--------------

Supposing that man's ultimate perfection is in attaining curb with Allah
and in giving up all demands and wishes to reach it and supposing that
reaching this position is possible, such an aspiration would undoubtedly
exist only in a case of a rare number of individuals. Consequently,
reaching the desired perfection is exclusive to them. And others, who
constitute the majority of the people, are deprived of it.

In this case, can it be said that only the select individuals deserve
the name of man and that the others are in fact animals that have no
vestige of humanity other than their appearance and are all doomed to
eternal adversity and wretchedness?

In response to this question, it must be said:

As we have repeatedly noted, man's true perfection has various stages.
If all people cannot reach its greatest degree, they can get to its
lowest state. This can be materialized by believing in Allah and taking
a step in the way of His servitude. Dispensing with all demands and
using all powers for Allah's satisfaction is a prerequisite of reaching
the greater degrees.

Of course, the signs deriving from proximity with Allah are not the same
in all phases. For example, full knowledge of the realities, power to
create anything or complete pleasure in seeing Allah is not fulfilled
for every believer in this world. But those who safeguard their belief
to the end of their lives and who do not dispense with their faith due
to greatness of sin and offence will ultimately reach eternal
prosperity, even though it might take long and even though, in the
course of it, the believers might undergo difficult and painful stages
as punishment of their indecent deeds.

It goes without saying that reaching eternal prosperity and everlasting
paradise also have various degrees. In the world hereafter, each person
will be rewarded commensurate with the basis of his knowledge, belief,
gravity of deeds and ethics. Perhaps in each state, the individuals have
the capacity to perceive the pleasures of that state alone and their
will-power would tend towards reaching them.

As a result, it is not true that whoever does not reach the peak of
human perfection and the ultimate point of proximity with Allah does not
deserve to be called human and will finally be doomed to eternal
wretchedness and suffering.

[^1]: Nahjul - Balaghah, First Sermon


