Qurb (Proximity) with Allah
===========================

*Qurb* (proximity) with Almighty Allah, which is man's ultimate
objective and which must be reached with will-power, does not mean
bridging the gap of time and place, because Almighty Allah is the
creator of time and place and encompasses all times and places and has
no relationship in time and place with any being:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…هُوَ الْأَوَّلُ وَالْآخِرُ وَالظَّاهِرُ وَالْبَاطِنُ ۖ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"He is the first and the last and the Ascendant (over all) and the
knower of hidden things... (57:3)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…وَهُوَ مَعَكُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And He is with you wherever You are... (57:4)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…فَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... Therefore, wherever you turn, there is Allah's face...
(2:115)."***

In addition, the spontaneous bridging of time and place is not deemed a
perfection. So what is actually meant by this proximity?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أَلَا إِنَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ مُحِيطٌ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... Now surely He encompasses all things (41:54)."***

The being and all the existential states of all creatures are within
Allah's power and linked to His will-power. Rather, the existence of
everything hinges on connection with and dependence on Him. As a result,
He is closer (than aught) to everything:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And We are nearer to him than his life vein (50:16)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“فَلَوْلَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ غَيْرَ مَدِينِينَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And We are nearer to it than you, but you do not see (56:85)."***

And this is a true existential proximity but it is not acquired. For
this purpose, it cannot be regarded as the ultimate point and
destination of man's development.

For proximity, one can conceive a meaning which is acquired and which is
compatible with man's ultimate perfection. And that is a proximity based
on credit and honour. That is to say, man is subjected to Allah's
special grace such that all his demands come true:

A servant who reaches such a degree has reached his objective. In common
usage too, a person who is loved by an eminent person is called
"*muqarrab*". The Holy Qur'an also uses the term *muqarribun* to refer
to the forerunners of the path of man's development:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“فِي جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ .أُولَٰئِكَ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And the foremost are the foremost, these are the ones who are drawn
nigh (to Allah) (56:10-11).***

But here we do not intend to conduct a verbal discussion and to find a
suitable meaning for the term *qurb*. The intention is rather to draw
greater attention to man's ultimate goal, so that in its light, we would
get to know the general path and the main road towards development. We
must therefore, focus on the reality lurking beyond this honour and
credit.

The reality which is regarded as man's ultimate perfection and which is
called the *qurb* of Allah is a phase of being wherein man's innate
gifts become active through their own voluntary movement. This movement
can be quick and speedy (like that of some messengers and divine
guardians who proceeded with development from the very first moment of
their lives and who reached great perfection in a very small span of
time) as Isa ibn Maryam (AS) said (the following) in the cradle:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنِّي عَبْدُ اللَّهِ آتَانِيَ الْكِتَابَ وَجَعَلَنِي نَبِيًّا…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... Surely I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the Book and
made me a prophet (19:30)."***

According to Shi'ah narrations, the Imams of the Ahlul–Bayt (AS) praised
Allah even in the prenatal state and were born bowing down (to Him). And
these are the *sadiqun*. Or if the movement is average or slow in speed
like that of other believers, it is diametrically opposed to the
declining movement and retrogressive trend pursued by the disbelievers
and the hypocrites.

The perfection derived from this voluntary trend does not depend on time
and place and on material and physical conditions. It is rather related
to man's heart and soul, and material conditions have a role only in
paving the way for (this) movement, else the body's quantitative and
qualitative move or transferring from one place to another have no
impact on man's development, except that they assist man's spiritual and
moral progress and that they are indirectly effective in man's
development.

Thus man's true development consists of a scientific movement within the
soul to reach a state where it could see itself dependent on and linked
with Him, where it could see no independence in being, features, and
deeds for itself and for other creatures, and where no incident would
prevent it from making this observation. The sciences and observations
acquired by man in the course of this movement will heighten his
existential status and will gradually make his essence more perfect.

As a result of this, the less man feels in need of Allah, the more he
deems himself independent in managing the affairs and providing the
means of living and performing physical and mental activities. And the
more independence he considers for other objects, the more ignorant, the
more imperfect and the farther away from Allah will he be. The more he
sees himself in need of Allah, the more he removes the veils of means,
and the more the dark and bright veils are lifted from his eyes, the
more aware, the more perfect and closer to Allah will he be, so much so
that he will become a monotheist in acts and impacts and will see no
independence for traits and beings. This is a state which the deserving
and sincere servants and Allah's chosen friends will reach. Then there
will remain no veil between them and their Beloved.

Thus true *qurb* with Allah is for man to realize that he would have
everything while having Allah's love and satisfaction and that he would
have nothing without Allah.

The Means of Achieving Qurb with Allah
--------------------------------------

All beings in the world of existence are the creatures of Almighty Allah
and are dependent on Him in existence and existential states and have no
independence whatever:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…ذَٰلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of everything... (40:62)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أَنْتُمُ الْفُقَرَاءُ إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ وَاللَّهُ هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ
الْحَمِيدُ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... You are they one who stand in need of Allah, and Allah is He who
is the Self-sufficient the Praised One (35:15)."***

And the reality of their existence is dependence on and attachment to
Him, as well as absolute captivity and servitude.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلَّا وَجْهَهُ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... Every thing is perishable but He... (28:88)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…وَعَنَتِ الْوُجُوهُ لِلْحَيِّ الْقَيُّومِ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And the faces shall be humbled before the Living, the
Self-subsistent God... (20:111)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنْ كُلُّ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ إِلَّا آتِي
الرَّحْمَٰنِ عَبْدًا”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"There is no one in the heavens and the earth but will come to the
Beneficent God as a servant (19:93)."***

And the acts that they perform are the signs of dependence, servitude
and needfulness. Thus ontologically, each person serves Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... while to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the
Earth..(3:83)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“…وَلِلَّهِ يَسْجُدُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ مِنْ
دَابَّةٍ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And whatever creature that is in the heavens and that is in the
earth makes obeisance to Allah (only)... (16:49)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“… وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا
تَفْقَهُونَ تَسْبِيحَهُمْ…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... And there is not a single thing but glorifies Him with His
praise, but you do not understand their glorification... (17:44)."***

Man is not exempted from this general rule, but normally he is not aware
of his ontological servitude. In other words, he has been created in
such a way in this world that he regards himself and other objects as
being independent:

"Allah created the creatures as ignorants."[^1]

That is to say, man does not see himself linked with Allah. In like
manner, he sees his perfections as emerging from himself and deems
himself independent in carrying out various deeds. He sets this
independence in existence and in existential signs for other beings as
well. He constantly endeavours to expand the sphere of his being and to
obtain greater perfections and to find power to carry out more deeds and
to make the foundation of his independence stronger. Among his conscious
perceptions and desires, there is nothing contradictory to this
"imagined independence." Of course he possesses an innate, unconscious
perception of his inherent needfulness and his existential dependence,
but the dominance of that material and animal aspect precludes this
innate perception from reaching awareness except in specific conditions.

After reaching rational development, man can more or less, become aware
of his own needfulness through mental activities and rational analysis
and can realize the presence of Allah. Gradually with the development of
his reason and with expertise in reasoning, he will gain more knowledge
about his fundamental needs and his dependence, until in the ultimate
phase of his rational progress, he will reach acquired awareness of his
dependence. But this mental progress will not bring about an intuitive
knowledge by itself. The domination of instincts and feelings and the
attraction of desires and sentiments will often leave no room for the
appearance and manifestation of innate knowledge, unless man decides to
prevent their inundation, so as to reach self-realization, to prepare a
means deep within his soul and to initiate a spiritual movement towards
*haqq*. That is to say, he should focus on Allah and by continuing and
strengthening sincere regards (for Allah), polish his innate knowledge
and draw himself close to Allah.

In such a state, man's development in the way of the true destination
and innate objective commences. That is to say, with free will and
choice, he will make a conscious effort to realize his connection with
Allah. He will confess his own need, weakness, meanness and finally his
inherent poverty and needfulness. Then he will return to their true
Owner the servants of Allah whom he unjustly attributed to himself and
to others. And he will return the garb of divine power:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّهُ كَانَ ظَلُومًا جَهُولًا…”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"... Surely he is unjust, ignorant (33:72)."***

This movement continues till man becomes a sincere servant. As a
consequence, man's ultimate perfection lies in becoming a sincere
servant or in seeing one's inherent and complete needfulness. To reach
it, one must worship Allah and strive to please Him. That is to say, he
should prefer the will of Allah to that of himself:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِلَّا ابْتِغَاءَ وَجْهِ رَبِّهِ الْأَعْلَىٰ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Except the seeking of the pleasure of his Lord, the Most High
(92:20)."***

Thus, the main course of development, the right path of humanity, and
the correct way of reaching proximity with Allah is worshipping Him,
declaring imagined independence null and void, and confessing one's
complete and all-embracing need of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنْسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And I have not created the jinn and the men except that they should
worship Me (51:56)."***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَأَنِ اعْبُدُونِي ۚ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And that you should worship Me; this is the right way (36:61)."***

Only an effort and endeavour which has a hue of the servitude and
worship of Allah can be deemed as being directed towards proximity with
Allah and towards true development. Nothing other than worshipping Allah
could be regarded as leading towards true perfection.

[^1]: Biharul–Anwar, Vol 3, 15


