Preface
=======

I praise Thee, O Allah!, as much as the scope of Thy knowledge and
dilatation of Thy mercy. Praise I introduce to Thee precious, becoming
Thy godhead to me and my bondage to Thee. In the same amount I do seek
Thy forgiving all my guilts and sins, as Thou ordered. I do implore Thee
being gracious to me by forgiving me, as Thou promised. Thou art my
Master Who does never break His promise.

I do ask Thee by Thy greatest most excellent Name, and Thy perfect Words
to send Thy mercy and blessings to Thy messenger, Mohammed, whom Thou
conveyed with Islam, and he did discern and explicate and take the
followers to the straight path he had paved.

O Allah! Send Thy mercy and blessings to him and his immaculate
infallible family; people of weight and god­fearing, stars of security
and guidance and ships of safety. It is they whom are exclusively given
honor by God, and preferred to the entire nation, and it is they seeking
God's blessings to whom is judged as a pillar part of the ritual prayer
obligatorily imposed upon God's slaves, so that this should be a
continuous remembrance of their standing, if only remembrance were
useful. Remembrance serves only the believers.

The divine jurisprudential formulation conveyed by Islam is, from all
its sides, details and gists, truly a perfect heavenly plan,
scrupulously prepared for leading mankind, particularly, to the best
course and to the beatitude in this and the other world. On the contrary
of the positive systems and formulations that are founded on grounds of
conjecture and surmise, the divine jurisprudential formulation is
naturally and composedly based upon conviction and certitude.

This divine formulation was not kept in the form of mere hypothetical
rules. Through a solicitation chiefly led by the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family), it was thrusted into the world of application and
transferred into actual deeds and eventfulness. This was activated in
slow artistic portrayal. Hence, the solicitation of the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) resulted in a government directly led by
him. This matter is satisfactorily asserting the utmost confidence of
the efficacy of this formulation. As a

result of this application, the ever best nation was emanated, and the
ever greatest state was established. It is the state of the Prophet
Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family).

Nevertheless, while the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) was
bed­ridden in his final disease, and just after his eternal journey to
the Elevated Associate, a series of political downfall and collapse did
actually begin to emerge. Along with such a collapse, processes of
darkening, ostentatious false safety and covering up of the real
collapse were arisen. The originators of such process expected from
their deeds that they would grant an opportunity to cease the collapse
and that none would realize or have a chance to rejoice in the
misfortune of this religion and its embracers. In contrast, The
collapses were ceaseless; they outlived through the history. Each paved
the way to another. Consequently, the Islamic political formulation
turned into a skeleton keeping the name only. With the abatement of the
last Ottoman sultan, the Islamic political system witnessed his final
collapse and forever disappearance!

As they woke up from their inobservance, the Muslims found their
previously united nation a many ruptured nations subsisting perplexity
and loss. (They were so rent asunder to the degree that any form of
reunification was unavailing.), Al­Aqqad describes in his
Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian Fil­Mizan. The united Islamic state became
numerous states. The fever of Islam was changed into a table on which
nations were ruined. This was in the time when the surrounding world is
subject to the jungle law after the materiality has bled its being with
its claws. The world is running after a mirage, misthinking of it as the
curable remedy of its bleeding. It is sparing no efforts is pulling the
mankind, as a whole, to that mirage raising the slogan of mercy and
coercing the patient on having his remedy. While drums are beaten for
arousing tunes of happiness and merriment, the whole world perceives
that the remedy has not been but an illusion.. The collapse of the
communist ideology is not that far away.

What were the reasons beyond the successive collapses that, as a
commencing step, modified the political system of Islam into a
meaningless skeleton lacking its actual dimensions and, then, removed it
totally from the factuality after they had eradicated the validity of
the divine jurisprudential formulation and, hence, banned mankind from
taking Islam as the remedy and benefiting its formulation?

Cerebrally, it is impossible to regard the matter that the
jurisprudential formulation itself is the main reason beyond such
catastrophes and collapses. This formulation is God's made. It is He Who
created every thing adeptly.

We can positively conclude, hereby, that the reason beyond all these
misfortunes were either those who led and directed the political history
of Islam, or people who partook in the process of directing the history
or the both.

The Arabic religious parties, who took the charge of leading the
ceremony of the blind imitation, trafficked in pains of society and
mixed the entire records for achieving definite purposes, have exerted
all their efforts in the course of making people understand that these
political parties' view towards Islam had been the Islam itself. They
misled people to the misrepresentation that Islam and the parties' views
about it are two faces of the same coin. As a matter of fact, Islam is
God's made, while the parties' views towards it are contrived from their
own conceptions. In due course, they endeavored to delude people that
the political history of Islam beginning with the Prophet's decease and
ending at the comedown of the last Ottoman sultan, which is man's made,
had been identically the political system of Islam which is God's made
for directing the political motions of societies. Despite the fact that
by adopting such a concept, the Arabic religious parties had confused
the abstract ideology with their admission of that ideology, preferred
the follower and the branch to the leader and the origin and substituted
the divine jurisprudential formulation for their own conclusions, they
were expressing their exact viewpoints. In addition to their neglect of
any attempt to conceive the divine formulation, they were too short to
receive the theses of Islam that confronted theirs, and capitalized on
all means for the sake of suffocating such theses. They, still, claimed
of their extroversion on the international ideologies and promised of
granting such ideologists the freedom of exhibiting their thoughts.
Meanwhile, they blocked the way in the face of the opposite Islamic
ideologies, preventing their bearers from proceeding any proclamation of
their thoughts. How should the world believe the claims of extroversion
alleged by such political parties?

In this very vision, the Arabic religious parties introduced Islam to
the modern world. The same Islam that had been come forth for the
purpose of releasing, comprising and achieving the mankind's needs and
expectations, became too short to incorporate its embracers. Moreover,
it could not even

admit them! This is the attainment of their shortage of sufficient
knowledgeability. They think they are doing well!

By this humble study, I spared no efforts in the field of proving the
fact that God's revealed representation is different from our conceiving
that representation. I also aimed at proving that the successive
collapses which started just after the Prophet's decease and uprooted
the political system of Islam peremptorily, were not the result of an
error or a shortage in Islam or its eternal jurisprudential formulation.
The real reason was the Muslims — the embracers of Islam — who
substituted God's grace and judgments for their own fancies and
caprices. This is the actual root of misfortunes and, in the same time,
it is the setting point towards Allah.

In favor of providing facilities for comprehension, this study is
divided into four main titles. The first is involved in the meaning and
the cognition of companionship. In the second, I aimed for divulging the
historical roots of this cognition. The third is engaged in expounding
upon the authority in Islam. Because of the considerable relation
between the authority and the political leadership, I debated, in the
fourth title, the political leadership in Islam. By little deliberation,
the reader shall discover that these four topics are correlated to each
other inseparably. Considering it as an Islamic thesis took the charge
of leadership all over the Islamic history, the opinion of the Sunni
sect, quoted from the most remarkable references, is exhibited in
almostly every subject. Following this is the thesis of the Shias,
inferred from their most remarkable references, considering it as the
Islamic opinion that took the role of the opposition all over the
Islamic history. Finally, the judgment of the Islamic doctrine in every
subject is put in the hands of the adorers of the neat doctrinal truths.

Thus, this study took a unique form, argument and course. As much as I
could conceive, for the first time in the modern history, this topic is
debated so comprehensively, perfectly, subjectively and thoroughly, in
information and references, by an Arab individual belonging to the Sunni
sect.

I am not to conceal my loyalty to Mohammed's progeny and the Hashemites
in general. They are the minor weighty thing after the Quran, the major.
Guidance to the right path, however, cannot be attained unless both are
ensued. Deviation cannot be evaded unless both are pursued. This fact is
evidenced by decisive doctrinal texts. Likewise, they are the ships of
saving and the stars of safety and guidance in every darkness. They are
the solution of every problem. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) is the

common denominator of the Muslims. Dedicating the leadership and the
allegiance to his progeny is a matter of attaining everyone's
satisfaction, and extricating the roots of avarice for the power from
everyone's interior. Deprecation of the process of competition on the
power results in settlement. In this means, it is unavoidable to mention
the merits of the Prophet's kinsmen. It is they who guarded and
protected the Prophet to the degree that they had suffered a three year
blockade unanimously decided and practiced by the entire Arab tribes
whose only demand had been either the Hashemites' surrender or giving
Mohammed up so that the Arabs should be killing him. Like many other
prophets, Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family) would have been
killed if the Hashemites had responded to one of the previous demands.
The struggle of the Hashemites for the sake of God is undeniable. Their
sacrifices are as bright as sun.. These are only a sparse part of
Mohammed's kinsmen's merits and glories which I regard as adequate
excuses for my loyalty and fondness of them. Who may blame me, then?

O my Lord, O my Master! Thou know my private and public. Thou do know
that my intention has been but seeking Thy contentment. It is Thy grace
if I am right. Thou are the best master and the best Supporter. It is my
blemish if I am wrong. I repeat:

O Allah! Admit this work exclusively for Thy sake and a present I
provide to Mohammed, Mohammed's family and every single past, present or
coming Hashemite and Muttelibite on this globe to the Day of Judgment.
Regard it as an alms extinguishing my faults and taking me closer to
Thy. The end of their praying is: Praised be Allah, the Lord of the
worlds.

The Author


