Chapter 3 — Purpose of Inventing the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception
=========================================================================

1. Substantiation
-----------------

1. Substantiating the process of the wrongful seizure of power: Muawiya,
the ‘released’, the son of the ‘released’ and one of the
inclined­hearted category, found himself the president, or the king, of
the Islamic state, the representative and, officially, the successor of
God's messenger. This is incredible and unbelievable! It is unacceptable
according to the entire intellectual, doctrinal and positive criteria.
The father, Abu­Sufian, was the head of the parties opposing Islam and
the director of polytheism during the entire battles. His sons,
supporters and he exerted all efforts and used all weapons for resisting
Islam. They had to confess Islam only when they had been completely
surrounded. Here is his son, Muawiya. He is preceding all those who had
preceded him to Islam and whose shoulders were the pillars on which
Islam was established.

There should be a justification of this revolution. The best way
selected was ruling of decency of all of the Prophet's companions. As
long as Muawiya and his faction are reckoned with Sahaba, according to
terminological and the lexical meaning of this idiom, who are entirely
decent, and shall be in the Paradise, and none of them shall be in the
Hell, and there is no difference between them because of the total
qualifications they, indistinctly, enjoy, then what should prevent
Muawiya from being the caliph and the Muslims' juristic leader? What, in
the same manner, should prevent his faction, who are Sahaba
terminologically and lexically, from being his close entourage? They are
so decent that all of them shall be in the Paradise and none shall be in
hell­fire. The far-reaching conception of the Sahaba's ultimate decency
is the most ideal substantiation of Muawiya's royalty. This
wide­spreadingness shows evidently a real view of Muawiya’s artfulness
and evil cunning.

2. Substantiating deeds of Muawiya and his faction: The most
catastrophic misfortunes Islam and Muslims had faced were on the hands
of

Muawiya and his faction. Bishr­bn­Arta'a and Muslim­bn­Aqaba, for
instance, committed the most terrible crimes from which even the heavens
complained and the most hard hearts bled. In the Harra collision, the
whole warriors of Badr were killed. Seven hundred men of Quraish and the
Ansar were killed. From ordinary people, about ten thousand souls were
killed in that collision. Nothing intercepted those commanders from
killing the children. This crime was perpetrated by Bishr­bn­Arta'a when
he killed the babies of Ubeidullah­bn­Abbas. In addition, battles
against Imam Ali prove the criminal conduct of Muawiya and his faction.
The most offensive matter, however, was Muawiya's planning for
terminating Mohammed's progeny inclusively. In executing so, his faction
and he used several devious devices for murdering. He poisoned
Al­Hassan­bn­Ali (peace be upon him),
Abdor­Rahman­bn­Khalid­bn­Al­Waleed, as bn­Abdil­Berr records in his
Alisti'ab, and Abdor­Rahman­bn­Abi­Bakr As­Siddiq. Malik Al­Ashtar was
also poisoned by Muawiya. For this, Amr­bn­Al­Aas said: “Allah does have
soldiers of honey!” Furthermore, Muawiya made Muslims engaged in various
discrepancies and discord. Al­Aqqad says that Mohammed's nation had been
absolutely incapable of achieving unanimity whatever they attempted.
Certainly, the Islamic jurisprudence was deformed on the hands of
Muawiya. (The truth is that the Umayid reign was not Islamic..,), Dr.
Ahmed Amin says.

Is there any way of substantiating these ill deeds other than the
invention of the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception? As the entire
Sahaba are so decent that they shall be in the Paradise, Muawiya and his
faction, then, had not committed any mistake. Had they been mistaken,
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), the indisputably
authentic and true­tongued who does never speak out of desire, would not
have declared the entire Sahaba’s being in the Paradise. Considering him
as an elicitor Sahabi, Muawiya is rewarded in all cases. He shall be
double rewarded if he kills rightfully, otherwise, he shall be once
rewarded. Muawiya is the right, whether he fights or opts for peace,
attacks or absconds, takes or gives. This is because he is a Sahabi; and
Sahaba are entirely decent.

2. Immunity Against Criticism, Maligning, Reviling and Imputing Dishonor
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Accompanying substantiation of Muawiya's usurpation of leadership, the
Sahaba's ultimate decency conception verifies crimes and offenses
committed by his faction and him. Likewise, the conception grants
immunity against any sort of criticism, including the constructive,
railing, maligning and detracting from the estimate of such individuals
since they are Sahaba and, consequently, decent. He whoever criticizes,
maligns or rails at any of the Sahaba, especially those who are
presidents of the state, is reckoned with the miscreants whom are to be
not shared in food and drink and to neglect offering their dead bodies
the ritual funeral prayer. This (juristic) rule is recorded in
At­Thehbi's Al­Mizan. There is no other conception or plan that can
immunize Muawiya such as this Sahaba's ultimate decency conception.

3. Confronting Rivals of Muawiya and His Faction
------------------------------------------------

Adopting the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception secures victory, or
tie at least, of Muawiya and his faction in any conflict against rivals.
For example, if Mohammed's progeny affirm that they are those from whom
God has removed — mental and physical — uncleanness and purified them a
thorough purification, Muawiya and his faction will immediately submit
that simultaneous answer of considering Mohammed's companions — Sahaba —
as decent that they do never lie, since they all shall be in the
Paradise and none of them shall be sent to the hell­fire. If Mohammed's
progeny assert that those who cause harm to them should be reckoned with
those who cause harm to God, Muawiya and his faction shall provide that
immediate answer that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
say: “They are harming me those who harm any of my companions..” In such
a manner, the right is mixed with the wrong, the obedient with the
disobedient and the virtuous with the sinful.

4. Engaging Muslims in Discrepancies
------------------------------------

In case Muawiya obtains the ability of emanating and broadcasting of the
Sahaba's ultimate decency conception with its wide­spreading features, a
party of Muslims will adopt, and another will contravene. Controversy,
accompanied by fanaticism, will arise in each party's convictions. This
will lead to discrepancy and that each party record convictions that
shall certainly be followed by a great deal of successors pursuing
partisan imitation,

claiming of defending the right and their own viewpoints. Regarding the
conception involved, those who support such a conception are not
necessarily supporting Muawiya. They claim of supporting the Prophet's
companions. Those who disagree to the conception, on the other hand, are
acquitting themselves from the view of dissenting the Prophet's
companions, indicating that their aim is divulging trickeries and
political cabals hidden for the other party. Practically, each party has
actually stood in the face of the other shunning Muawiya who, in that
case, is watching the two cheerfully, preparing himself to be the
arbiter whenever necessary. This is the very artfulness intended by
Al­Aqqad in his Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian Fil­Mizan

Grounds of the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception
---------------------------------------------------

bn­Arafa­Naftawayih, one of the most notable hadithists — records that
most of narratives appertained to merits of the Prophet's companions
were forged in the Umayid reign, as the forgers intended attaining the
rulers' satisfaction since they conceived that such falsity would submit
the Hashemites. These false narratives were formed in such a way that
every Sahabi, lexically or terminologically, would be the most virtuous
guide in this world and that curses are continuously thrown on those who
malign or accuse any of the Sahaba of any matters.[19]

Unanimously, historians assert that the origination of forging lies
against the Prophet was in the last of Othman's reign and after
occurrence of the revolution that prejudiced the caliph's soul. This
falsity was extended and spread after people's swearing allegiance to
Ali as he became the legitimate caliph. As soon as Muslims selectively
declared their fealty to Ali, the Umayid's devil moved its horn for
usurping the affair from its rightful owner. At any rate, events went on
and some of declarants of fealty broke their allegiance to the fourth
Rashidite caliph. The consequence of such a repeal was a good many
battles and conflicts between Muslims, that were ended by the Umayids'
dominating power. Due to so, in fact, structure of Muslims' conformity
was seceded, ring of the their unification was ruptured, many
contradictory sects were originated. besides, the many irreconcilable
parties went on advocating their ideas by words and deeds on the account
of the other party. Ground of founding the false hadiths and exegesis of
the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[19] Murteza Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin..., page85.

Holy Quran was quite proper. So, each party exaggerated in defending its
ideology that discrepancy, in its highest rank, occurred. Nothing was
more catastrophic to Islam than forging false sayings and imputing
erroneous and heretic matters to its doctrine. These were the elements
that spoiled Muslim's intellects and caused others to mistrust
fundamentals of Islam. Misfortunes and detriments of such false
narratives were chiefly undergone by those who lived under dominion of
the Umayids. In that reign, the number of hadithists had recorded a
great typical progress, while the number of authentic people had been in
gradual retardation. Majority of the moral Sahaba ceased reporting the
Prophet's narratives unless they had full acquaintance of decency of the
one they were to report to.[20]

Imam Mohammed Abduh referred to the procedures taken by Muawiya for
himself. He asserted that Muawiya had used a mass of the Sahaba and
their successors for fabricating ill news against Ali (peace be upon
him). The composition of such mendacious sayings falsely imputed to the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), was referring to maligning
and repudiating Ali. As Muawiya set a considerable remunerative prize
for forging such lies, those individuals did their best for seeking his
satisfaction. Abu­Hureira was one of those narrators.

In His Dhuhal­Islam, Dr. Ahmed Amin says: “It is to mention that the
Umayids did actually forge or employ people to forge lies against the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) that flow in the service of
their policies from various sides.[21] Muawiya gifted
Abu­Samara­bn­Jundub, the Sahabi, with five hundred thousand dirhams for
inventing the lie of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
stating that Ali­bn­Abi­Talib had been the one intended in the Verse:
(And among men is he whose speech about the life of this world causes
you to wonder, and he calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his
heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries.) In a like manner,
Abu­Samara forged the lie of the Prophet’s having saying that
Abdor­Rahman­bn­Muljim, the assassinator of Ali (peace be upon him), had
been the one intended in God's saying: (And among men

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[20] Mohammed Ebdu's Introductory on Risaletut­Tawhid, pages 7­8, and
Mahmud Abu­Raya's Sheikhul­Madhira, pages 201­2. [21] Ahmed Amin's
Dhuhal­Islam, part.2, page123.

is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah; and Allah is
affectionate to the servants.)”[22]\</\>

Ahaadeeths Narrators
--------------------

Abu­Hureira Ad­Dusi, is one of Muawiya's associates and followers. He
imputed 5374 sayings to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).
Only 446 sayings of them are recorded by Al­Bukhari. Abu­Hureira
accompanied the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) for less than
18 months. The Prophet's grand companions who had adhered to him from
the first moment of his divine envoy till his being transmitted to the
Elevated Associate, reported less than one hundred hadiths — narratives.
The grand Sahaba are Abu­Bakr, Omar, Othman, Ali, Abdor­Rahman­bn­Awf,
Talha­bn­Ubeidillah, Me'ath­bn­Jabal, Selman, Zaid­bn­Thabit and
Ubey­bn­Ka'b. This is an evident example.

Muawiya's Merits
----------------

In his Al­Fawa'idul­Majmu'a Fil­Ahadithil­Mawdu'a, Ashawkani, who proves
falsity and unauthenticity of the entire (hadiths) regarding praising or
mentioning Muawiya's credits, says: “Having reckoned hadiths appertained
to Muawiya's virtues with the forged ones, Ibnul­Jawzi excused that
Isaaq­bn­Rahawayih, Al­Bukhari's most authentic narrator, confessed of
the fact that none of the hadiths respecting Muawiya's virtues had been
authentic at all.”

An­Nisa'i had that famous story pertaining Muawiya's virtues.
Ad­Darqutni relates: An­Nisa'i's companions asked him about Muawiya's
preference. He answered: “How come is it not sufficient for him to be
equated with any, that he seeks preference?” For this reason, he was
pushed out of the mosque..[23]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[22] Murteza Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin..., page85­6.
[23]Mahmud Abu­Raya's Sheikhul­Madhira, pages 183.

Ashafi'i's Impression on Muawiya
--------------------------------

Abul­Fida relates that Ashafi'i informed Ar­Rabee, secretly, of the fact
that testimonies of four individuals from among the Prophet's companions
should not be admitted. Those four are Muawiya, Amr­bn­Al­Aas,
Al­Mugheera and Ziyad.[24]

This might have been the incentive that made bn­Muin ruled of dishonesty
of Ashafi'i in narrating hadiths.

Al­Hassan Al­Basri's Saying
---------------------------

At­Tabari mentions that Al­Hassan Al­Basri used to say:

“Four ill deeds, any of which is sufficiently periling, are Muawiya's.
They are his using the ill­minded ones — with the existence of the
Prophet's companions and virtuous individuals — as rulers of this nation
till he could dominate and cancel principal of advisory. His nominating
Yazeed, his son, the drunkard who dresses silky clothes and plays on
drums, as his successor. His avowing Ziyad as his brother, whereas the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had said: 'Babies are for the
bed, and the prostitutes' share is stones.' His killing Hijr and his
companions. Woe will be him due to killing Hijr and his companions. Woe
will be him due to killing Hijr and his companions.”

The Entire Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception is Having Umayid Flavor
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

According to the content of the entire Sahaba's ultimate decency
conception, Mohammed's progeny must have been reckoned with the decent.
This should definitely make the Umayids stop their maligning and
reviling at them.

Nonetheless, it is noticeable that regarding to his situations towards
Imam Ali, Muawiya, the chief of the despotic party, adopted the very
situation his father had against the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family). Yazeed,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[24]  At­Tabari's Tarikh, Events Of 51. Ibnul­Atheer's, part.3,
page203­9. bn­Asakir's, part.2, page379. Mahmud Abu­Raya's
Sheikhul­Madhira, pages 185.

the son, made no difference in his situation against Al­Hussein­bn­Ali.
As soon as he came to power, the first procedure Muawiya took was
writing missives to his governors and officials, ordering them of
declaring cursing Ali during prayers and from pulpits. Furthermore,
sessions of sermons, in Syria, were programmatically ended with reviling
at Ali. Testimonies of those who accede to Ali or any of his progeny
were inadmissible. Names of such individuals, who showed loyalty to Ali
or any of his sons, were erased from the general record of the province.
Hence, they were discriminated and intercepted from receiving any of the
governmental salaries everybody joined.[25]

In his Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian Fil­Mizan, Al­Aqqad records: “Even if only
the preponderant reports regarding Muawiya's orders of cursing Ali from
pulpits of the Umayid state, are accepted, this will be acceptably
sufficient to prove authenticity of the other reports involved in the
same topic.”[26]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[25] Mahmud Abu­Raya's Sheikhul­Madhira, pages 180, who quoted it from
bn­Asakir's, part.3, page407. [26] Abbas Mahmud Al­Aqqad's Muawiya Bin
Abi Sufian Fil­Mizan.
