Chapter 4 — the Jurisprudential Roots of the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception
=================================================================================

The Sahaba's ultimate decency conception was formulated and concluded in
such a secure approach that it perfectly ensures the inventors' past,
present and future, and deem lawful all their manners. The conception
was also prepared so accurately that its effective presence is secured
at any matter that might influence the inventors, in any form, or modify
their remoteness or closeness to legality, or originate or obliterate
discrepant locations in the rivals' camp, or, finally, misguide rivals
in the midst of suspicion, mystification and unstability.

The most inexplicable matter, indeed, is that we see the adopters of the
conception, nowadays, hold it as their signification to adoring to
Mohammed and his companions. Those modern adopters of that false
conception take charge of supporting it and engage themselves in
discrepancies on behalf of the origin inventors of the conception who
kept themselves out of the ring as if the matter does, in no means, not
concern them.

Those who demand with adjusting the conception are, in fact, not of less
affection of Mohammed and his companions. They only demand with
depending upon intellectual and doctrinal grounds for keeping this
affection in the frame of Islam, neglecting partisan fanaticism and
imitation since these two things do incapacitate the role of intellect
and the grace of functional conversation dedicated to the godly elected
individuals.

The Jurisprudential Authority
-----------------------------

Previously, we could prove that the majority of hadiths regarding merits
of the Prophet's companions was forged in the Umayid reign, seeking
their amenity as the forgers considered their ill deeds as helpful
factors in submitting the Hashemites. This fact is asserted by bn­Arafa,
one of the most notable hadithists. We could prove also that the
historians unanimously agreed upon the fact that invention of forged
lies against the

Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had been originated in the
last stage of Othman's reign and, in a greater size, after the sedition
of his assassination. This size of forging lies and false sayings
attained its climax when people swore allegiance to Ali­bn­Abi­Talib
(peace be upon him). As soon as the legitimate valid declaration of
fealty to Ali was acted, the Umayid devil moved its horn for usurping
authority from its owner. As the Umayids came to power, an organized art
of forging lies and intriguing false sayings against the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) was officiated. “The Umayid rulers offered
rewards so precious that many might hunger for, for those who showed
skillfulness in the art of forging lies and intriguing false sayings
against the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).” Mohammed Abduh
describes.[27]

Such false and forged sayings, besides the authentic ones related by
virtuous Sahaba, were regarded as sources of citation depended on by
Sunnis with all of their various sects and trends.[28]

The Two Authorities
-------------------

### 1. The Sunnis' Authority is the Entire Sahaba

In addition to reports of the virtuous Sahaba, the forged and false
sayings originated in the epoch of sedition and perfectly formed in the
Umayid reign were depended on by those who believed that the entire
Sahaba had been decent of the same rank since they all were to be in the
Paradise. Logically, those who should be in the Paradise should never
forge lies. Sahaba, then, are source of citation of such people whom
were prevalently named Ahlus­Sunneh. So, those Sunnis took and conceived
their religion from those who are terminologically and lexically
entering under the name of Sahaba. The closest to the Umayid royal
palace were those who related the greatest number of false hadiths.
Abu­Mohammed­bn­Hazm mentions that Abu­Abdir-Rahman­bn­Mukhelled
Al­Andalusi's record of hadiths contained about 5374 sayings narrated by
Abu­Hureira alone. Not more than 446 sayings of them are recorded by
Al­Bukhari. The close relationship between Muawiya and Abu­Hureira is a
matter too famous to illustrate. It is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[27] Mohammed Abduh's At­Tarikh, part.2, page347, and Mahmud Abu­Raya's
Sheikhul­Madhira, page201­2. [28] Murteza Ar­Razawi's Aara'u
Ulema'il­Muslimin.., page86.

to mention that the period Abu­Hureira spent with the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) extended for less than eighteen months. In
brief words, for Sunnis, every (hadith) narrated by any of the Sahaba,
in both terminological and lexical meanings, is taken in consideration
and highly regarded as reckoned as a part of the religion, since the
entire Sahaba are ultimately decent and absolutely not liable to
prevarication, as they all are to be in the Paradise. Principally,
narrators should be authentic as long as they show no agreeableness to
Ali or the Prophet's household, lest they are inauthentic and
irreliable.

Yahya­bn­Muin records: As he ruled of authenticity of Sa'eed­bn­Khalid
Al­Bujeli, they protested against him claiming that Sa'eed had been a
Shiite. “Yes, he is Shiite and authentic!!!” He asserted. However, the
Jumhour\* had never used these two descriptions concurrently since the
last years of the first century — A.D)[29]

#### What Is The Doctrinal Base Upon Which Sunnis Relied In Referring To The Sahaba As Legal Authority?

Sunnis claim that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had
said: “My companions' like is the stars; you shall be guided to the
right path if you refer to any of them.” or “..if you rest upon the
words of any.”

bn­Teimiyeh, the named ‘Master of Islam’, comments: “The saying ‘My
companions' like...’ is ruled as doubtful by the most notable
hadithists. Hence, it cannot be regarded as an evidence.” This fact is
written down in At­Thehbi's Hujjetul­Munteqa, page55. The saying,
however, is ruled as incorrect according to the unanimity of the
hadithists.

### 2. The Shias' Authority is the Imams and the Authentic Sahaba

In addition to the Book of God, Shias rested upon sayings of the Imams
of the Prophet's household and narratives related by the virtuous Sahaba
as the jurisprudential sources of citation in regarding the entire
principal and secondary questions and matters Islam had referred to.
Imams of the Prophet's progeny did inherit their entire jurisprudence,
fundamentals and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\* Jumhour and Ammeh are two other names dedicated to the followers of
the Sunni sect. [29]Murteza Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin..,
page92, and Adhwa'un Elas­Sunnetil­Muhammadiyeh, pages 341­4 and 89.

instructions in all of its stages and chapters from Amirul­Mu’minin,
their grandfather, about whom the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) had stated: “I am the city of knowledge. Ali is the door to that
city. He whoever intends the city, must, first, see the door.” Such an
authority enjoyed a constant restraints. Imams (peace be upon him) used
to say: “Whatever we say is concordant to the Holy Book of God. You are
to shun any saying imputed to us if it is contradictory to the Holy Book
of God.” Imam As­Sadiq was wont to say: “My saying is my father's. My
father's saying is his father's. His father's saying is the Prophet's.
The Prophet's saying is God's.”[30]

#### What Is The Doctrinal Base Upon Which Shias Relied In Referring To The Imams As Legal Authority?

Decisive doctrinal texts of the holy Quran and the Prophet's traditions,
in its three categories; words, deeds and signature, that are
unanimously agreeable by both Sunnis and Shias, are the doctrinal base
upon which Shias relied in referring to the Imams of the Prophet's
household as the legal authority. In Quran, Imams of the Prophet's
progeny are those meant in God's saying: (Allah only desires to keep
away the uncleanness from you, O people of the house and to purify you a
thorough purifying.)[31] The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
said: “They — the Prophet's household — are the minor weighty thing as
the Quran is the major.” Guidance to the right path cannot be attained
unless adherence to these two weighty things is reached. In a like
manner, deviation from the right path cannot be avoided unless adherence
to the two weighty things is reached.[32] As the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) describes, the Imams' like is Noah's ark. He shall
be certainly

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[30]Murteza Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin.., page92 [31] exegesis
of the Verse of Purification in the books of exegesis; Ashawkani's
Fetihul­Qadeer, bn­Kutheir's Tafseer, At­Tabari's Tafseer,
Tafseerul­Khazin or any other book involved. [32] At­Tirmithi's, part.5
page328. Az­Zernedi's Nudhumud­Durar, page232. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabee'ul­Mawaddeh, page33, 45 and 445. Al­Mutteqi Al­Hindi's
Kenzul­Ummal, part.1, page153. bn­Kutheir's Tafseer, part.4, page113.
Al­Baghawi's Massabihus­Sunneh, page206. Ibnul­Atheer's Jami'ul­Ussoul,
page137. Mishkatul­Massabih, part.3, page258. As­Suyouti's Ihya'ul­Meyt,
page114. An­Nebhani's Al­Fetihul­Kabeer, part.1, page503 / part.3,
page385. As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour, part.6, page7 and 306.
bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page147. At­Tabarani's
Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer,part.1, page135. (Abstraction of ) bn­Asakir's
Tarikh, part.5, page436. Al­Khawarzmi's Maqtalul­Hussein, part.1,
page104. bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqatul­Kubra, part.2, page194...etc.

saved that who takes it, while those who eschew shall certainly
sink.[33] They are also Mohammed's nation's secure against
discrepancies.[34]

Role of the Two Authorities
---------------------------

### Role Of The Authority At Sunnis

Sahaba, lexically and terminologically, are the authority referred to by
Sunnis in questions of understanding the Quranic texts. The entire
Sahaba, without citing any discrimination, are intended, since they all
are equally decent and, then, to be in the Paradise. In the first stages
following the Prophet's decease, the Sahaba's concern was not more than
reporting the Prophet's sayings and deeds. When sects became numerous
and widespread in various provinces, narrations were including the
Prophet's words and deeds, as well as the Sahaba's. The Sahaba's
opinions occupied the third position after the Quran and the Prophet's
tradition, in sources of Islamic legislation. The Shafi'ite sect was
less fanatic than the other three; the Hanbalite, the Malikite and the
Hanafite. Although he was so enthusiast to principal of analogy he
regarded as the second source of Islamic legislation after the Holy
Quran, Abu­Haneefeh used to prefer the Sahaba's opinions to the analogy
in cases of inconsistency. The following saying is imputed to him: “In
case I could not find the text involved in the Quran or the Prophet's
traditions, I go straightly to the Sahaba's opinions. Supposing that
there were various opinions of various Sahaba, I, then, have full option
to adopt any provided that I do not prefer their followers' opinions to
theirs.”[35]

In his I'lamil­Muwaqqi'in, Ibnul­Qeyyim writes down: “For Imam Ahmed,
principals of legislation are five. The first and the second are the —
doctrinal — texts and the Sahaba's verdicts respectively. Hanafites and
Hanbalites ruled of allocating the Holy Book of Allah to the Sahaba's
deeds. Their argument is that the learned Sahabi would not neglect
applying a general text unless he has an evidence. Hence, applying on
the contrary of a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[33] At­Thehbi's Talkheesul­Mustedrak, page184. bn­Hajar's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page234. As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa.
As­Sabban's Is'afur­Raghibin, page109. Az­Zernedi's Nudhumu
Duraris­Simtein, page235. Al­Kenji's Kifayetut­Talib, page378...etc.
[34] bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page91 and 140. A­Suyouti's
Ihya'ul­Meyt, page114. Muntekhebul­Kenz, part.5, page93... etc. [35] 
Abu­Zuhra's Abu­Haneefeh, page304. Imam Zeid, page418. Murteza
Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin.., page87­8.

doctrinal text is an evidence on allocation of such a text. A Sahabi's
deeds, however, are as same valuable as his words.[36]

As far as one can see, Sunnis have intensely exaggerated in sanctifying
Sahaba. As a matter of fact, this sanctification is identical to
principal of sinlessness.[37]

With diffusion of the juristic sects, this intense exaggeration was used
as a weapon in the face of assenting Imams of the Prophet's progeny.[38]
The Sahaba's sayings were treated as if they were revealed from the
heavens; therefore, they were used in allocating general significations
of the Holy Book of Allah and generalizing a restricted meaning.

### Role Of The Authority At Shias

The Holy Quran was revealed as an explanation of everything at all.
Reports related to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) in
such a decisive proved way that no doubt is arisen about, are reckoned
with the doctrinal texts. In other cases, it is impermissible to refer
contingently to the Prophet's traditions in matters of legislation
except traditions supported by a Quranic text. This is by reason that
the Quran has an explanation of everything thoroughly. The Quran was
revealed in Arabic; the Arabs' tongue, and in a style easily conceived
by everyone. The Prophet's tradition is related by ordinary people who
might be authentic or dishonest in the same rank. Those individuals were
engaged in discrepancies with each other to the degree that some
rejected others' reports and each followed his own conclusion. They
accused each other of the worst misdeeds and ruled of legality of
killing one another.[39]

In brief words, the Holy Quran is decided as the indisputable judge for
Shias since it has a manifestation of every thing thoroughly. Secondly,
the Prophet's traditions; deeds, words and signature, the authenticity
of which is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[36] Ma'ruf Ad­Dawalibi's Al­Madkhalu Ila Ilmi Ussoulil­Fiqh, page217,
and Murteza Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin.., page88. [37] Ma'ruf
Ad­Dawalibi's Al­Madkhalu Ila Ilmi Ussoulil­Fiqh, page217, and Murteza
Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin.., page88. [38] Ma'ruf
Ad­Dawalibi's Al­Madkhalu Ila Ilmi Ussoulil­Fiqh, page217, and Murteza
Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin.., page88. [39] Mohammed Yusuf
Musa's Tarikhul­Fiqhil­Islami, page228, and Murteza Ar­Razawi's Aara'u
Ulema'il­Muslimin.., page88.

decisively proved in such a way that no doubt is arisen around, is also
regarded in authority.

Difference in Base is Difference in Effects
-------------------------------------------

1. Sunnis count on the principal that the entire lexical and
terminological Sahaba, including babies who saw or was seen by the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) once only, are totally so
decent that it is impossible for them to lie or forge lies since they,
unexceptionally, shall be in the Paradise and none of them shall be in
the hell­fire. By this generalization, Al­Hakam­bn­Al­Aas whom, with his
two companions, had been banished by the Prophet, and
Abdullah­bn­Abi­Sarh who had forged lies against the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) and Muawiya; they all are decent, impossible to
lie and their fate shall, beyond any dispute, be the Paradise. Effect of
counting on such a principal is not quite different from the principal
itself. Whatever is said by a Sahabi, after proving his having been a
Sahabi, is definitely correct that inelegance cannot approach. In case
there are various opinions of various Sahaba concerning a certain
question, the elicitor — of juristic rules — is fully free to opt for
any without any flaw at all. For instance, if Al­Hakam­bn­Al­Aas,
Abu­Hureira, Hutheifeh­bn­Al­Yeman and Abu­Bakr had different opinions
in a certain question, it is perfectly optional to take in any's. This
is by reason that they all are decent of the same level as they all are
Sahaba. Hence, it is illicit to criticize or malign any of them like
Sunnis' conducts towards the narrators of other sects!

A more considerable matter is that Hanafites and Hanbalites ruled of
dedicating the Quranic texts to a Sahabi's deed. They claim that a
Sahabi would not shun practice decided by the Quran unless he had an
evidence. Hence, a Sahabi's deed that is contrary to the Quranic text is
an evidence on the dedication of that text. A Sahabi's word, in
addition, is ruled as same as his deed.

The most extraordinary matter is that Sunnis mean by Sahaba all those
individuals that meet the lexical, as well as the terminological,
signification of this term. This means that they rule of sinlessness of
the entire Sahaba, that any of them is a legal legislator, if not
playing a considerable role in legislation.

2 From this side, the matter is very different at Shias. They assent
Mohammed's companions who did their best for the sake of backing this
religion, and strove with their wealths and souls. The well known
supplication frequently repeated by Shias for the sake of Mohammed's
supporters is a highly considerable evidence on their honest loyalty and
sincere tenderness. The following is a piece of that long supplication:

(..O God, and as for the companions of Mohammed especially those who did
well in companionship, who stood the good test in helping him, responded
to him. When he made them hear his message's argument, separated from
mates and children in manifesting his word, fought against fathers and
sons in strengthening his word, fought against fathers and sons in
strengthening his prophecy, and through him gained victory; those who
were wrapped in affection for him, hoping for a commerce that comes not
to naught in love for him; those who were left by their clans when they
clung to his handhold and denied by their kinsfolk when they rested in
the shadow of his kinship; forget not, O God, what they abandoned for
Thee and in Thee, and make them pleased with they good pleasure for the
sake of the creatures they drove to Thee while they were with Thy
Messenger, summoners to Thee for Thee. Show gratitude to them for
leaving the abodes of their people for Thy sake and going out from a
plentiful livelihood to a narrow one, and [show gratitude to] those of
them who became objects of wrongdoing and whom Thou multiplied in
exalting Thy religion..)[40]

Those are Mohammed's companions whom are greatly respected by Shias who
believe in loyalty to them and refer to them in their religious beliefs
after proving authenticity of the narration.

In brief words, Shias rule of decency only after attaining its
probation. The origination of decency of every Sahabi is invalid and
lacks evidences. In full freedom of expressing one's own impressions,
Shias debate and criticize the ill deeds of such Sahaba, and contemplate
each according to his actual importance. They do never befriend those
who antagonize God and His messenger. They declare their acquittal from
those who betook their oaths as a protection for the sake of occluding
the path to Allah. Following such a trend, Shias do not counter the Book
of Allah and the Prophet's traditions and norm and the virtuous
ancestors'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[40] This long supplication mentioned in As­Saheefetus­Sejjadiyeh is
quoted previously.

course of discriminating the Sahaba, and garbling the decent from the
indecent. This was the exact reason beyond which Shias went on
encountering and suffering false accusations.[41]

Because they adopted grounds other than these adopted by Sunnis, Shias
could attain different results.

Numerous Authorities
--------------------

Recurrently, during the reign of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family), a many opinions about a certain case was provided. And he had
been wont to listen to them all before rendering the doctrinal judgment
through a Quranic text or his prophetic tradition. The honest acceded to
this judgment. Hence, they were united after discrepancy, and taken to
the field of certitude after their suspicion. Frequently, occurrences
were repeated and settling solutions were rendered. This made the
numerous opinions about a certain question an appearance of intellectual
enrichment. That was by reason that there was a unique fair and decisive
authority the entire people referred to. Identity of authority is the
base on which social and doctrinal unity rely. Banned discrepancies fall
only when there was more than a unique authority. Since discrepancy is
opposite to unity and for the sake of achieving unity, the ruler will be
having to confiscate people's rights of expressing their ideas.

Objectively, authorities were copious as a result of establishment of
the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception. There were thousands of
authorities with various opinions, conceptions and understanding,
originated in the Islamic society. Due to such a multiplicity, people
were engaged in various sects and parties; each supporting their
authority and believing of its being the only rightful and the only path
to Allah. Practically, ruling authorities, as they are dominators of
mass media of the state, have the capability of focusing lights on a
definite authority, or authorities, and regarding them as the only
honest and rightful and seeker of the straight path to Allah. Encircling
verdicts and conceptions of a selective authority with an aura of
respect and esteem, the ruling regime may lead ordinary people,
indirectly, to trust that authority apart from considering eligibility.
Abu­Hureira, for instance, was an unfamiliar Sahabi who lacked any role
in the Rashidite

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[41] Murteza Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin.., page100.

reign. His job was serving people. The period he had spent with the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) was not more than eighteen
months. Yet, he became an enormous authority whose excessively numerous
sayings were regarded as the absolute right, beside which wrong can
never approach. This was because of his seeking favors of the Umayid
royalty. In that period, Abu­Hureira publicized about seven hundred
(hadiths) exceeding the entire grand Sahaba twofold. These achievements
would not have been progressed if the ruling regime had not adopted and
elected that man for being their representative in an authority
attracting all the other ones.

### The Doctrinal Judgment About The Variety Of Authorities

No religion exists without authority. No doctrine exists without
authority. Mohammed is the unique authority of Islam and its doctrine.
His judgment is decisive. In case there is another authority, according
to God's mandate, he should be basically related to the first one
considering the most knowledgeability and the most familiarity of the
doctrine.

Jewism had a unique authority. Moses (peace be upon him) was the
authority and Aaron was his follower. Aaron would be Moses' successor in
case the latter was absent. When he returned, Aaron returned to his
fellowship.

In a like manner, Christianity has a single authority. He was Jesus
(peace be upon him). The Disciples were related and working for the sake
of that religion under authority of Jesus (peace be upon him). Just
after Mohammed, Moses or Jesus had been transmitted to the Elevated
Associate, the existence of a unique authority for each of these
doctrines, nominated by the first main one, was necessarily falling.
Leaving the religion or the doctrine without an authority is contrary to
perfection of the divine religions and an act of disregard that prophets
are honorably released from.

As to Islam, the authority of Muslims is the Prophet's household and,
markedly, the chief of this dignified clan in every generation. This is
proved by many doctrinal decisive texts. Regarding the wonderment why
those individuals of the Prophet's clan had been defined; we may say,
first, that this is God's grace. He bestows to whomever He wills.
Secondly, the Prophet did set them practically. Reciprocally, the
Prophet and they embraced and supported each other. God shows us that
they have been the best and the most favorable at every period of time.
This is one of specifications of authority. After the Prophet's decease,
it was so clear that

the chief of his household, Ali­bn­Abi­Talib, would be the authority to
whom Muslims should refer. Each individual Muslim was informed of the
decision that Ali would be his master and the master of every male and
female Muslim. This is obvious in Al­Faruq's saying: “This is my master,
your master and the master of every male and female Muslim.” This is the
doctrinal authority.

### Cancellation Of The Doctrinal Authority Necessarily Entails Founding A Surrogate One

It is noticeable that the doctrinal authority was ceased just after the
Prophet's decease. The caliph occupied the role of the doctrinal
authority. Three decades later, the doctrinal authority could recover
his position. Great problems were proceeded till he was assassinated.
When Al­Hassan came to power he realized that these problems had been
still arisen, and that it would not be stabilized unless he would be
assassinated. So, he abandoned that affair. Al­Hussein, together with
his immaculate household, was surrounded in Kerbela and terminated.
Thus, people lost the doctrinal authority. The Umayid rulers spared no
efforts for assigning themselves as the doctrinal authority since
authority is an essential pillar of unificating societies. They worked
for persuading people of their being the doctrinal authority. It is
natural that great numbers of seekers of mundane affairs agreed with
them for achieving that purpose.

### The Only Way Of Founding A Surrogate AuthorityWAS Fabricating The Entire Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception

The entire Sahaba's ultimate decency conception had been lexically and
terminologically designed in such a way that it included the Umayid
rulers. Thus, decency had been imputed to the entire Sahaba. Like the
doctrinal authority, the Sahabi is decent and impossibly forging lies
that he should certainly be in the Paradise. That led to the belief that
the Umayid rulers are decent and fully legible to be the doctrinal
authority of Mohammed's nation. This was the clue to the following
events.

### The Conception Would Have Proved Its Failure If It Had Been Invented By Other Than The Rulers

The Sahaba's ultimate decency conception would have been completely
frail in case ordinary people had fabricated. With a mental and fiscal
support of the ruling authorities, individuals known as the Prophet's
companions had

argued for the conception. The ruling regime did provide a remuneration
for forging false hadiths regarding criticizing the doctrinal authority
succeeding the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). They favored
the adopters of the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception and conferred
them with wealth and credits in addition to utilizing the whole mass
media of the state for publicizing their thoughts.

The Virtuous Sahaba could naturally conceive the whole play; yet, they
were too short to do anything as their hands were enchained, the nation
was engaged in discrepancies and the ruling authorities held fast on
every thing. The grand Sahaba, however, denied the whole conspiracy
suing their tongues and hands. Unfortunately, these forms of denial were
sentenced to death in a dark corner of poor houses as soon as they
attempted to arise. On the other side, a remarkable support of the
conception was occupying the entire mass media of the state. Courses of
maligning, cursing and reviling at the real doctrinal authority of the
nation became such a daily activity coercively practiced by people. The
fate faced by Hijr­bn­Edi would be the same of those whoever object the
ruling regime in this regard. The fate, however, was a form of holding
up the monthly pays and the earnings, if not killing.

So quietly, the process of founding a surrogate authority was keeping
its straight way.

### The Surrogate Authority Became Legitimate

The generation of the virtuous Sahaba was extinct. The virtuous
followers of the Sahaba were deceased. The opposition was terminated.
So, argument of all of those categories became null. A very little size
of those arguments remained. The thing remaining with all its details
was the intact information necessary for imputing legality to the
counterfeit surrogate authority. Those details were considered as a part
of the preserved documents of the state. By this, the counterfeit
surrogate authority became apparently actual and legitimate. This
occurred only after the decease of those who realized the truth, and
whose arguments and objection had been completely hidden. The current
generation, hence, believed that the authority they were noticing
through the ruling regimes were identical to that doctrinal one of which
God had ordered and founded. In this manner, opposing this conception
ware regarded as an opposition to the religion itself, not the founders.
Moreover, the conception became an undiscussible truth. As a judgment,
he whoever disputed, opposed or criticized this conception was ruled as
a miscreant

and that it was haram — forbidden — for people to share him in a food or
a drink, or offer his soul the funeral prayer. The Shias' being forming
the main opposition against such a conception, they, led by the
Prophet's household, were the field of throwing curses as they were
regarded as the principal foes of this religion, disbelievers and
evildoers. This is the view planted in the mentality of people including
the who had been graduated from institutes adopting the Sahaba's
ultimate decency conception. The whole history were re related through
this conception.

The Solution
------------

The solution, in this stage, is nothing other than tolerance. It is the
course of Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family) who was opposed by
the whole people. Yet; he did not submit. Using wisdom, suitable logical
reasoning, legitimate methods, decisive arguments and clear proofs,
Mohammed could cleave the curtains of partisan imitation, and purify the
truth. In the end, people were convinced. This is the only procedure to
be taken by adorers of the doctrinal truth.

In the Absence of the Doctrinal Authority
-----------------------------------------

People confess that the Islamic nation would indisputably assent to
seventy three parties. Saving one, the whole would be sent to hell­fire.
Nevertheless, they were divided into various discrepant sects and
parties each of whom was claiming of being the right alone. They all
believed in the fact that there is only one right which is followed by
that saved party. The saved party is that ensuing the doctrinal
authority. This division was one of the excuses of the foundation of the
Sahaba's ultimate decency conception.

### The Jurisprudential Dissent

In the absence of the doctrinal authority whose mission is explicating
the actual intendment of the doctrinal texts and harmonizing such texts
with actuality, Muslims were engaged in tens of jurisprudential sects
and parties each of which was necessarily showing a political
attributes. These jurisprudential parties were mainly concentrated in
five powers:

1. Ahlul­Beit sect: It is the foremost Islamic sect. It is the sect of
the saved party, as we shall certainly prove. It was called the Jafarite
sect in regard

to Imam Ja'far As­Sadiq (peace be upon him).

2. The Hanafite sect: It is appended to Abu­Haneefeh who had been a
student of Imam Ja'far As­Sadiq before he established his own school.

3. The Malikite sect: It is appended to Malik. Before he established his
own sect, Malik had been receiving his studies from Abu­Haneefeh.

4. The Shafi'ite sect: It is appended to Ashafi'i. In the same manner,
Before Ashafi'i had his own school of jurisprudence, he had been
receiving his studies from Malik.

5. The Hanbalite sect: It is appended to Ahmed who had received studies
of jurisprudence from Ashafi'i before he established his own school.

Pursuant to the previous, it is conspicuous that Imam Ja'far As­Sadiq
was the master of the four founders of Islamic sects. They did take
pride in this fact. Followers of those four sects ruled of the deviation
of the followers of Imam Ja'far As­Sadiq.

### Roots Of The Aggressive Prosecution Against The Prophet's Household

The following are the purposes beyond the permanent aggressive
prosecution against the Prophet's household:

1. Insistence of the prosecuting groups on compelling the Prophet's
progeny to abandon the mission they are exclusively charged with by
Allah.

2. Lexical and functional misrepresentation of properties, the Prophet's
household are exclusively granted by Allah.

3. Founding topical properties that are competing the divine property of
the Prophet's household for distorting the signification and the
functions of their exclusive properties.

4. The entire Sahaba's ultimate decency conception has been established
as the topical property confronting the exclusive properties of the
Prophet's household.

5. Supposing the infallible Prophet's progeny broke off their divine
properties and submitted to the falling matters, they would not be left

alone. They would be enduringly prosecuted by ruling regimes.

6. The previous fact is based on the habit that although rulers espoused
the attractive beautiful mastery by force after they had robbed from its
rightful owners, the spirit, as well as the heart, of that charming
mastery is still with the legitimate spouse. Therefore, mastery
frequently declared this fact in the face of the usurpers. This matter
set fire in the rulers' hearts all that period. This fire incited them
to commit shameful misdeeds.

### Property Of The Immaculate Kinship To The Prophet

The Hashemite race is the most honorable among all people in general and
the Arab in particular. This is proved by doctrinal texts. The house of
Abdul­Muttelib is, in the same manner, the most honorable among all
people in general and the Arab in particular. This is also supported by
doctrinal texts.[42]The Hashemites are sons of Hashim­bn­Abdi Menaf
bn­Qusay­bn­Kelab.[43]

Mohammed's household is the most honorable and the most favorable. God,
in His Holy Book, imposed cherishing those individuals upon the all.
Likewise, He, the Exalted, rendered blessing them as a pillar part of
the ritual obligatory prayers. This meaning is cited in Ashafi'i's
poetic verses:

O the household of Allah's prophet! Your affection

Is a mandate of Allah, revealed in the Quran

It is sufficiently a great pride that

He who does not bless you is false performer.[44]

Mohammed's household is indeed the nucleus of this nation, and the tree
of healing. They are the Prophet's most favorable individuals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[42] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat. As­Seeretul­Halabiyeh. Kenzul­Ummal.
Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak. Al­Beihaqi's. At­Tabarani's. bn­Asakir's. [43]
bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat, part.1, page75, and As­Seeretul­Halabiyeh. [44]
bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa: the exegesis of the Verse 33:56,
page88. An­Nebhani's Asharaful­Mu'eyyed, page99. Imam Sharafud­Din says:
"Undiscussibly, the poetic verses involved are ascribed to Ashafi'i."

God has purified the Prophet's household and removed mental and physical
uncleanness away from them. The Verse of Tatihir — purification — is
obviously visible to every single Muslim. Thanks to God, the Exalted,
and due to their hard striving for the sake of Allah, they preceded the
all. They are the doctrinal authority of Islam and Muslims. They are the
political leadership. These are unattainable glory and untouchable honor
and properties of Mohammed's family.

#### Prospect Of This Property

Property of kinship can be looked at as a matter of ennobling. In
essence, it is a mandate of definite meaning and functions.

#### Meanings Of Property Of The Immaculate Kinship

This immaculate kinship is the leaning point of Muslims. They are the
element that is lonlily able to complete the circle and define its
center. They assemble the Islamic nation in cases of discrepancies. By
referring to that divine leaning point, Muslims are provided with the
proper solution of their discord. Hence, they will not take east or west
or any other direction. They will immediately encompass and direct
towards the immaculate kinship of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family), who are the doctrinal reference of this religion and Muslims.
Those immaculate relatives of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) explicate the beliefs so evidently that the whole Muslims, as
well as non Muslims, will conceive. As another mission, they may provide
the most ideal understanding of the religion, that is absolutely
simultaneous to the divine intendment, after they listen to the various
viewpoints of Muslims.

#### Functions Of The Immaculate Kinship Of The Prophet

The following are the main functions of the infallible progeny of the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family):

1. They are regarded as a point of leaning and assembling Muslims.

2. They are regarded as authority of the religion who solicit for Islam
before other nations and explicate it the Muslims.

3. They are regarded as the minor weighty thing — of this doctrine, as
the Quran is the major. Being guided to the right path cannot be
attained unless these two weighty things are clung. Similarly, deviation
cannot

be avoided unless these two weighty things are held fast. Deviation from
the right path shall be certainly falling if people cohere the Holy
Quran and shun the Prophet's immaculate progeny. This is by reason that
the Quran is the remedy, and the Prophet's progeny are the physician.
Physic, however, is a process of specialization.[45]

4. They are prepared to be the political leadership of this nation.
People, as a whole, will certainly accede to the leadership of
Mohammed's progeny since they are representing radical solutions that
abolish any discrepancy or discord. In the same time, the Prophet's
progeny stand for the source of settlement and the annihilator of greed
and illegal rivalry. The divine doctrine took the charge of nominating
the one to whom authority is transmitted, and way of transmission.

#### Reasons Beyond Granting Property

Why was it Mohammed, not Abu­Sufian, to whom the Divine mission was set
forth? This is God's grace; He grants whomever He opts. Why were some
prophets preferred to others? This is a matter of God's grace. Why was
the Prophet selected from among the Hashemites, not the sons of Teim,
Edi or Umaya? It is God Who favors and bestows favor to whomever He
opts. A deep look to the history of Islam, we, however, may notice some
incentives beyond such an option.

#### Incentives

1. God, the Elevated, showed that Mohammed's kinsmen had been the most
honorable and favorable. It is better for creatures to be led by the
most honorable and favorable. This particularity has been previously
documented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[45] Refer to: Kenzul­Ummal, part.1, page44. The hadith there is quoted
from the hadith books of An­Nisa'i and At­Tirmithi. They relate it to
Jabir who reports it directly from the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family). The same hadith is recorded by At­Tirmithi who relates it
to Zeid Bin Arqam. Imam Ahmed, the remarkable hadithist, records it as
he relates to Zeid by two authentic series of narrators. It is recorded
in page182 and 189 of the fifth vol.of his book. The same hadith is
recorded by Ahmed but, this time, he relates it to bn­Abi Sheibeh and
Abu­Ya'li and bn­Sa'd who, all, relate it to Abu­Sa'eed Al­Khidri.
hadith 945, page47, part.1 of Kenzul­Ummal. As Al­Hakim, in his
Al­Mustedrak, records the hadith in part.3, page148, he commentates:
"This hadith is of authentic documentation according to the criteria
followed by the two Sheiks; Ahmed and Al­Bukhari, although they did not
record." At­Thehbi, also, records the hadith and declares its
authenticity. Talkheesul­Mustedrak.

2. The warning issued by the Hashemites and addressed at the other
Quraishi clans when they attempted to assassinate Mohammed. This warning
was declaimed by Abu­Talib saying: “By God I swear, if you kill him I
will never keep a single one of you alive till you and we shall be
entirely terminated.” By this form, Abu­Talib asserted that he would
slay the entire Quraishi celebrities when it was rumored that Mohammed
had been killed.

3. The Quraishi clans decided, in unison, boycotting and ostracizing the
Hashemites. They cut the social and commercial relations with them. They
agreed upon a covenant containing forbiddingness of espousing, dealing
and associating with the Hashemites. Hence, the Hashemites were occluded
in Cols of Abu­Talib for three years. The Quraishis ruptured supplying
them with alimonies. During these three years, the Hashemite could leave
that Cols only once a year. Cries of their babies could be heard a few
yards away from that col. The Quraishis, however, had one demand only;
the Hashemites would hand them Mohammed for killing, or they might give
him up. Importunately, this demand was rejected. The Hashemites
sacrificed with their souls, wealth, sons and settlement for Mohammed.

4. With the failure of that blockade, the clans of Quraish planned for a
new matter. As they took fright of Mohammed's immaculate relatives, they
selected a man from each clan for assassinating Mohammed. In this way,
every clan would be a partner in the murder and that the Hashemites
would lack the capability of retaliating the entire clans. Practically,
those selective men moved for killing him, but God saved him.

5. The Prophet's immaculate kinsmen were the head of Quraish that no
step would be taken without their consultance.

6. The Prophet's kinsmen are the single means of safety and the shield.
This is proved by decisive doctrinal texts. For these reasons and
others, in addition to the divine grace and the heavenly methodical and
educational preparation of their heads, the Prophet's kinsmen were
treated so exclusively that they were granted this property.

This Property Was Used As A Political Argument In Various Ages
--------------------------------------------------------------

Addressing at the Ansar, Abu­Bakr stated: “People are our subordinates.
We are the Prophet's kinsmen.”[46]

In the same occasion, Omar Al­Faruq addressed at the Ansar: “It is most
surely, by Allah, that the Arab shall never submit to your leadership
when their Prophet is of another clan. They should never elect other
than those among whom prophesy was arisen. This is our evident argument
and bright justification against any of the Arab who may dispute us. Who
dares to dispute us in Mohammed's heritage and authority while we are
his people and clan?! It is none but the wrong disputant, the sinful
seeker or the engaged in a catastrophic affair.”[47]

Commentating on the addresses of As­Siddiq and Al­Faruq, Bashir­bn­Sa’d
discoursed at the Ansar: “Mohammed, peace be upon him and his progeny,
was a man from Quraish. His people is the most meritorious of his
heritage and authority. By God I swear, none shall see me in a situation
disputing them in this affair. Beware of Allah. Dispute not them. Oppose
not them.”[48]

While Ali was engaged in the misfortune of the Prophet's household, the
Ansar submitted to the argument, asserting that they would not swear
allegiance to anyone other than Ali. The majority of the attendants at
the Saqeefa of Bani­Sa'ideh declared their loyalty to Abu­Bakr as the
caliph. Thus, the meeting of Saqeefa was closed at selecting Abu­Bakr as
the Muslims' caliph, Omar as the first councilor of the caliph,
Abu­Ubeideh as the second councilor and the groups who had just elected
Abu­Bakr as the caliph's armed forces.

When the heir apparent, Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab, demanded Ali, who was
shocked by these events, with declaring his fealty to the new caliph,
Ali addressed at the caliph and his councilor: “I am the most rightful
of managing this affair. I do not declare fealty to you. It is you who
are to declare fealty to me. You drew this affair from the Ansar
claiming of your having been the Prophet's kinsmen. Now, you intend to
seize it from us, the Prophet's household. Have you not argued, before
the Ansar, that you had

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[46] bn­Quteibeh's Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh, page84. [47] At­Tabari's
At­Tarikh, part.3, page197­8. [48] An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam, pages
120 and on.

been more meritorious of this authority since Mohammed had been one of
you. They gave you their submission and handed the authority. I, by now,
do use the very same argument you have provided. Whether in his life or
after his death, we are the most meritorious of the Prophet's heritage
and authority. You should treat us with justice if you are believers,
lest, let you live in injustice while you do realize the fact.” “We are
not to leave you before you declare allegiance to Abu­Bakr.” Omar
answered him. Ali, here, orated: “You are milking for gaining half of
the product, and strengthening his position so that he will hand it for
you in the morrow. By God I ask you, Muhajirs! Do not take Mohammed's
sovereignty of the Arab out of his area and his own house, and transmit
it to your areas and houses. Do not push his people away from his
standing and right among people. O groups of Muhajirs! We, by God, are
the most meritorious in him. We are his household and we are the fittest
to this position whilst the perceiver of God's Book, the studious of
God's religion, the most familiar to traditions of God's Apostle, the
well­acquainted of people's affairs, the defender of people in
misfortunes and the distributor between them in full justice is among
us. He is, by God, among us that who carries such attributes. Follow not
your fancies that you shall be certainly deviated and be remoter and
remoter from the right.”

As Sa'd­bn­Basheer heard Ali's words, he commentated: “O Ali! If only
had the Ansar heard your current words, they should never have agreed
upon declaring fealty to Abu­Bakr and, as a result, no any two of them
would have litigated about your meritoriousness in this position.”[49]

Just after the decease of Fatima (peace be upon him), Ali summoned
Abu­Bakr. The Hashemites were attendant when Ali addressed at Abu­Bakr:
“Praised and thanked be Allah. O Abu­Bakr! It was neither a matter of
denying your favor nor was it an envy. We saw that we had been having a
privilege in the position, that you tyrannically usurped.” Going on
mentioning his relation to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family), Ali spoke so detailedly that Abu­Bakr wept. “The Prophet's
relatives are more adorable to me than my relatives.” Abu­Bakr said.[50]

Responding to Al­Mugheera­bn­Shu'beh's suggestion of giving Al­Abbas a
position in their government for blocking the road of argument
repeatedly

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[49] Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh, pages 11­2. [50] Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh,
pages 14­6.

arisen by Ali and Al­Abbas, Abu­Bakr, Omar, Abu­Ubeideh and the
suggester visited Al­Abbas for providing him a position. In their
session, Abu­Bakr addressed a long oration in the middle of which he
said: “Slow down, sons of Abdul­Muttelib! God's messenger was one of us
as same as he was one of you.”

Al­Abbas answered the entire points he had arisen. Regarding the
previous, he said: “The Prophet is from the tree we are its branches
while you are but neighbors.”[51]

Owing to Abu­Bakr's nominating him as his successor besides his being
from Quraish, Al­Faruq became the masterful caliph. For the same
reasons, Othman came to power after him. Practically, Omar nominated
him. In addition, he was indeed from Quraish. For Ali and Al­Hassan
(peace be upon him), they came to power because they were the fittest
and people elected them. When Muawiya seized power by force, he claimed
that he had been from Quraish and one of the Prophet's relatives. Hashim
is Abd Shams's brother. For the entire Umayid rulers, they alleged of
their being the Prophet's kinsmen although they betook duress as their
means of dominating the government. The Abbasids used the same weapon of
kinship. They played on the cords of the suffering faced by the
Prophet's progeny, such as murders of assassinating Ali, Al­Hassan,
Al­Hussein and the immaculate progeny of the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family). Using force, they dominated and ruled.

One of the pillar sides of coming to power after the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) was depending upon the base that leaders should
be Quraishis. Quraishis are the Prophet's relatives. At any rate, it is
evidently noticeable that the Prophet's household were continuously
deprived of the privilege of the Prophet's kinship, while the far did
use it.

The Rulers' Political Treatment With The Prophet's Immaculate People
--------------------------------------------------------------------

A group led by Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab (God be pleased to him) went towards
Ali's house and took him out neglecting the weeping of Fatima Az­Zahra.
They brought him before Abu­Bakr.

Abu­Bakr: Declare your allegiance to this government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[51] Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh, pages 14­6.

Ali: What if I do not?

Abu­Bakr: We will behead you.

Ali: Then, you are to kill the slave of Allah and the brother of His
apostle.

Omar, here, urged Abu­Bakr to issue the order of killing him. Abu­Bakr
answered: “As long as Fatima is next to him, I am not to drive him to
any matter.”

Thus, Ali went directly towards the Prophet's tomb weeping and crying:
“(Son of my mother! Surely the people reckoned me weak and had well-nigh
slain me.)” Fatima arouse his voice with: “O my father! O God's
messenger! See what we had suffered after you from son of Al­Khattaab
and son of Abu­Quhafeh!”

Omar, Abu­Bakr's emissary to the group who boycotted the ceremony of
swearing allegiance, called upon them to come out from Ali's house. As
they sheltered at that place, Omar ordered his companions to bring
firewood: “By my soul's Prevailing I swear, I will set fire in that
house and all of its occupants.” he asserted. “O Abu­Hafs! Fatima is
there.” some reminded. “So what?!” he answered.[52]

Responding to this menace, the rebellious group left that house, and
Omar ceased burning it.

Fatima, however, was dead. She was buried at night underhandedly since
she willed that Abu­Bakr should never offer the ritual funeral prayer to
her soul. Only after Fatima's decease, Ali declared his fealty to
Abu­Bakr who nominated Omar as his successor. During reigns of those two
caliphs, they were wont to precede the Prophet's household at
distributing imports of the state. As Al­Belathiri records in his
Futouhul­Buldan, Omar began, in distributing imports of the state, with
Mohammed’s family, Abu­Bakr’s family and Omar’s family respectively. The
two caliphs used to seek

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[52] bn­Quteibeh's Al­Imameh Wes­Siyaseh, page12. bn­Abdi Rebbih's
Al­Iqdul­Fareed, part.4, page259­60. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu
Nahjil­Belagheh, part.1, page134, and part.2 page19. At­Tabari's Tarikh,
part.3, page202. Al­Belathiri's Ansabul­Ashraf, part.1, page586. Husein
Radhi's Mulhaqul­Muraja'at, page261.

consultancy of Imam Ali, and refer to him in affairs of the state.[53]
In a side, it is acceptable to regard reigns of Abu­Bakr and Omar as the
golden period of the Prophet's progeny, if it is measured to other
reigns.

The Umayids came. They fought against Ali, poisoned Al­Hassan and
completely terminated Al­Hussein and his present household. They
prevented them from drinking from the Euphrates. This calamity is
detailedly recorded in Al­Belathiri's Tarikhul­Ashraf. The Umayids
poured their range on those who acceded to Mohammed's family. Just after
his coming to power, Muawiya wrote missives to the entire governors of
provinces, in which he ordered of declaring reviling at Ali from every
pulpit. This fact is recorded by Al­Aqqad in his Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian
Fil­Mizan, page16.

bn­Asakir, in his At­Tarikh, part3, page407, records that in addition to
cataclysmic procedures taken by the Umayids against the Prophet's
family, every single session of sermons in Syria was ended by reviling
at Ali. The Umayids ruled of inadmissibility of testimonies of the
acceders to Ali. They canceled names of Ali's family and followers from
the general record of the state. Hence, Ali's family and followers were
deprived of receiving any of the imports distributed on the entire
citizens of the state.[54]

The Umayids were followed by the Abbasids. Abu­Bakr Al­Khawarzmi says:
“In brief words, Harun did not die before he had reaped the tree of
prophesy and uprooted the plant of Imamate.”[55]

As he intended to kill Imam Ja'far As­Sadiq, Al­Mansur expressed his
hidden while he was meticulously furious: “A thousand or more
individuals I had killed from Fatima's progeny. Yet, I left their head
and master; Ja'far­bn­Mohammed.”[56] Orally, he addressed at Imam
As­Sadiq: “I will certainly kill you, and kill your people so completely
that none of you I will

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[53] Alisti'ab, part.3, page39. Thekha'irul­Uqba, page81­2. Al­Jawzi's
Tethkiretul­Khawass, page144­8. Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib, page192.
Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page38 ..etc. [54] Abbas Mahmud Al­Aqqad's
Muawiya Bin Abi Sufian Fil­Mizan, page16, and Mahmud Abu­Raya's
Sheikhul­Madhira, page180. [55] Abbas Mahmud Al­Aqqad's Muawiya Bin Abi
Sufian Fil­Mizan, page16, and Mahmud Abu­Raya's Sheikhul­Madhira,
page180. [56] Abu­Bakr Al­Khawarzmi's Ar­Rasa'il, page178.

keep on this earth. I will surely abolish Al­Madina so thoroughly that
no single wall I will keep.”[57]

In his book of history, At­Tabari writes down: “A cabinet full of heads
of Alawid individuals was within the heritage of Al­Mansur to Al­Mahdi;
his crown prince. Hanged to each of these heads, there was a sheet of
paper on which name of that head's owner had been written. In addition
to old­aged ones, there were heads of young and children individuals in
that cabinet.”[58] Al­Mansur used to locate the Alawids in cylinders
used for stabilizing walls of building. As a means of torture, he used
to stabilize them to the walls with hooks. These methods of physical
torture adopted by Al­Mansur is recorded in Al­Ya'qubi's book of
history. Other methods of physical torture were leaving those Alawids
without food till they die due to starvation, and leaving them in places
too malodorous to be tolerated. The tortured were detained in a single
narrow place that they had no place special for defecation. They were
kept in small underground cells that after a period of that detention
those cells were collapsed on their enchained occupants that some of
them might have been dead some weeks ago, but left without burying.[59]

Ar­Rasheed took a bond on himself of eradicating Mohammed's progeny and
their followers. In this regard, he says: “Till when should I bear the
progeny of Abu­Talib? I, by God, will massacre them and massacre their
followers in an unparalleled ways of killing.”[60] He, however, was so
cruel to the Alawids that he pursued them everywhere for killing.[61]

Al­Mansur sent a missive to Imam As­Sadiq inviting him to visit him
often like other people. “We do not have what we should fear you for.
You do not have what we want you for, from affairs of the Hereafter. You
are neither in an elegance that we should congratulate on, nor are you
in a misfortune that we should console you for. What do we have at you,
then?” the Imam answered. “We mean that you associate us for advice.”
Al­Mansur

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[57] Al­Hayatus­SIyasiyyetu Lil­Imarir­Ridha, page87. [58]
bn­Shahrashub's Al­Menaqib, part.3, page357, and Biharul­Anwar, part.47,
page178. [59] At­Tabari's At­Tarikh, part.10, page446, and Al­Miqrizi's
An­Niza'u Wet­Tekhassum, page52. [60] Al­Hayatus­Siyasiyyetu
Lil­Imamir­Ridha, page88. [61] Al­Isfahani's Al­Aghani, part.5, page225.

commented. Imam As­Sadiq answered: “Seekers of mundane affairs do never
advise you, and seekers of heavenly affairs do never associate you.”[62]

#### Categories Of The Prophet's Kinship

1. The close relatives. They are Fatima, Ali, Al­Hassan and Al­Hussein.
Their progeny is attached to this property of close relation. Those
individuals did suffer the entire sorts of agonies and calamities. This
is the reward of Abu­Talib's attitudes to Islam and its Prophet, and
Ali's situations during battles of Islam. They endured the entire
difficulties and, as a result, results went to their enemies.

2. The remote relatives. Those relatives were the rulers for the claim
that they had been the Prophet's clan (Quraish.) So, they received the
whole prizes, while the close relatives suffered the whole distress.

#### Dismissal Of The Immaculate Progeny

As a logical result, Imam Ali was dismissed after the decease of Fatima.
As an appearance of the ruling authorities' aspiration of dismissing the
Imam was their endeavors to attract Al­Abbas, as well as his
descendants, to take a part in their authorities, and urge him on
accepting a good position in their government. Al­Abbas rejected this
offers so definitively that he used decisive words in showing his
situation towards their efforts. Gradually, the close relatives of the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) were isolated from the
Hashemites, the Prophet's clan and people. Pursuant to topical
criterion, supposing following either the ruling authorities or their
rivals, the earlier should be naturally opted regarding their capability
of dominating the whole affairs. This was the reason beyond the fact
that most of people followed the ruling regime, while a minority
followed the Prophet's close relatives. In other words, a poet expressed
this meaning by saying: “Hearts are in the side of the Prophet's
household, while swords are in the other.”

As he accomplished the Fajr prayer during which he obligatorily had to
say (O Allah! Bless Mohammed and Mohammed's household.),
Omar­bn­Sa'd­bn­Abi­Waqqas, the commander of the caliph's army against

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[62] Al­Iqdul­Farid, part.2, page80. bn­Hamdun's Keshful­Ghummeh FI
Amwalis­Sadiq, part.2, page208. Mohammed Baqir's instruction about Imam
As­Sadiq's life account addressed during the International Conference of
Damascus 26­28 / 9 / 1991.

Al­Hussein's, went straightly for massacring all of Mohammed's household
and progeny present at that place. Being not sufficed by killing them,
the caliph's army beheaded the Prophet's household's dead bodies and
robbed their clothes. In addition, horsemen spurred their horses to step
on Al­Hussein's dead body as well as the other individuals of Mohammed's
progeny. This was for seeking the good will of bn­Ziyad and
Yazeed­bn­Muawiya. God, however, had His own affairs in his creatures.
This was one of the fruits of the impracticability of the Hashemites’
joining leadership to prophecy.

#### Representation Of The Prophet's Progeny's Property

No human can shiver what God has stabilized. No creature can change what
the Creator has cited. Rulers have already realized that the exclusive
property of the Prophet's progeny cannot be changed whatever they do to
those individuals. Blessing them is an obligatory ritual precept. Their
purity is mentioned in a candid text of the Holy Quran. Their leadership
of this nation is authentically proved. The divine texts regarding their
merits are imposing. Even if the Prophet's progeny are completely
terminated, their divine property shall remain as the nightmare that
chases rulers permanently. Hence, there is no substitute for the divine
property of the Prophet's progeny.
