Chapter 5 — Prospects Attached To the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception
==========================================================================

The innovators of the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception attached the
following prospects to their fabrication:

1. Misrepresenting the divine property of the Prophet's progeny in such
a way that it would lose its content and function.

2. Descrying a surrogate property competing the Prophet's progeny's one
and backing affairs of the rulers by imitating functions of the
Prophet's progeny.

3. Inventing confused matters and giving rise to states of perplexity
and suspicion among people for keeping them away from affairs of the
ruling authorities, by finding a subordinate discrepancies that,
gradually, would be deep, menacing and perpetual.

Finding Competitive Specifications
----------------------------------

God has removed squalor away from the virtuous household of the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) and purified them thoroughly. Fatima,
Ali, Hassan and Hussein are, according to all criteria, within the
Prophet's household at least. God has purified those individuals
mentally and physically and foretold of their being in the Paradise
before those definite individuals foretold of their being in the
Paradise. According to divine texts, the Prophet's household are masters
of occupants of the Paradise. They are, by the logic rule of the less is
gained by gaining the more, indisputably decent.

The most honorable Sahaba, who had showed honesty to God, are dignified
people who had been decided, by God, as decent. Rulers were not among
those honorable Sahaba. Most of them were classified as ‘released’ who
declared their Islam only after they had been surrounded by Muslims.
There is no single policy in the whole world that has the techniques of
regarding

those ‘released’ individuals as same honorable as the Prophet's
household, except the invention of the entire Sahaba's ultimate decency
conception, with regard to looking upon the lexical, as well as the
terminological, meaning of Sahaba. According to this conception, there
is no difference at all between a Muslim who embraced Islam before
conquest of Mecca and fought, and another who declared his being Muslim
only after the conquest. This conception equates the killer with his
victim; the applicant of the blockade with that upon whom the blockade
had been imposed; the Muhajir with the ‘released’ and the faithful
believer with the hypocrite. Those individuals, as a whole, are enjoying
the very same qualification; decency. Ali­bn­Abi­Talib, one of the
Prophet's household, is a Sahabi in the same weight of Muawiya, the
Sahabi. Both are decent. Both are legislators. Both are to be in the
Paradise. Both are infallible. Ali is the foremost to Islam. He is God's
devotee in the divine texts.. the carrier of the Prophet's pennon during
the whole battles. He is the headmost knight of Islam during the entire
battles. This man is not different from Muawiya who, accompanied by his
father, fought against Islam in the entire battles, and embraced Islam
only after they had been surrounded.

Topical justice does reject such a characterization. The divine justice,
with stronger reason, rejects it, too. Allah and His Apostle and deeds
did differentiate between the two. Who, then, did order us of regarding
the two as equal? Saving the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception, which
was originally invented for eradicating distinction between the foremost
and the tardy; the fighters and the absconders and the first and the
last, what is the evidence on such an equalization?

Invention of the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception and allegation of
the entire Sahaba's decency were originally founded for competing
property of purification exclusively gifted the Prophet's household.

### A Factual Example

With respect to divine texts, Ali is the head of the Prophet's
household, the disciple of this nation, the foremost to Islam and the
pursued by the right. Loyalty to Ali is regarded as same as loyalty to
God, and antagonizing him is as same as antagonizing God. Moreover, he
is a Sahabi admitted by inventors of the Sahaba's ultimate decency
conception. He is foretold of being in the Paradise.

Regarding Ali as a Sahabi, for what reason, then, did you, originators
of the

Sahaba's ultimate decency conceptions, impose people to curse him from
pulpits in the entire provinces of the Islamic state? For what reason
did you curse and revile at him actually? Was it not you who decided the
penalization of reviling at Sahaba? You decided that the revilers at
Sahaba are miscreant whom should be not shared in a food or a drink, and
that the ritual funeral prayer should not be offered to their souls.

Does the entire Sahaba's decency work for benefit of the whole except
Ali and his household? Does it stop when it reaches Ali and his
household in order that characteristic of decency should not be ascribed
to them?

### Another Factual Example

Al­Hassan­bn­Ali and Al­Hussein­bn­Ali are, according to divine texts,
the masters of the youth of the Paradise. They are basils and sons of
God's messenger. According to divine texts, God made the offspring of
every prophet from his own backbone, while Mohammed's was made from
Ali's. At any rate, Al­Hassan and Al­Hussein are decent since they are
Sahaba. It is illicit for any to malign, criticize or revile at any of
Sahaba. He whoever commits such a thing is decided as a miscreant that
he should not be shared in a food or a drink or offered the ritual
funeral prayer. What about, then, those who poisoned Al­Hassan­bn­Ali,
the Sahabi? What is your judgment about those who murdered Al­Hussein
and occluded his household and him from having a single drop from water
of the Euphrates, the river from which beasts, birds and animals
including dogs, drink freely? Is it not to reckon murdering with
maligning? What do you say about those who killed the entire progeny of
Mohammed and robbed their luggage while they were dead, and captured the
harem of Mohammed's progeny and the Sahaba's progeny?

### Expounding Upon the Previous States

Lexically and terminologically, those who poisoned Al­Hassan were
Sahaba. Those who assassinated Ali were Sahaba. Those who murdered
Al­Hussein were Sahaba. Those who terminated the Prophet's progeny in
Kerbela were Sahaba. Those who cursed and reviled at Ali and his
associates were Sahaba. Those who ruled of inadmissibility of
testimonies of Ali's assenters were Sahaba.

### A Striking Surprising and A Wonderment

Al­Hassan­bn­Ali, the Sahabi, is one of the decent. Those who poisoned
him to death are decent because of their being Sahaba.
Al­Hussein­bn­Ali, the Sahabi, is decent. Those who murdered him are
decent because of their being Sahaba. Mohammed's progeny who were
completely terminated in Kerbela were decent. Those who practiced
termination against them were decent because of their being Sahaba.

The poisoner and the poisoned are equally in the Paradise since both are
decent Sahaba! The killer and his victim are both in the Paradise since
they are decent Sahaba! The robber and the robbed are in the Paradise
since both are decent Sahaba!

This equalization raises a real flouting of mankind intellect. It is
forming an appearance of shameful slavery of imitation.

#### Fulfillment Of The Mission

The mission intended by the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception was
fully accomplished. Ali became as same as Muawiya since both were decent
Sahaba who should be in the Paradise. Both are rightful with the
difference that the victorious should be the legitimate ruler of the
nation. The year of victory had been named ‘year of congruity.’

Finding Competitive Protection
------------------------------

The saying that he whoever hurt the Prophet's household would be hurting
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) himself, is faced by the
one that he whoever hurt the Sahaba would be hurting the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family). In a like manner, he whoever bears malice
against Mohammed's household is one of people of the Hell, is faced by
the saying that he whoever bears malice against any of the Sahaba
extensively is one of people of the Hell. Exceeding the protection given
exclusively to the Prophet's household, it was ruled that those who
defame any of Sahaba is reckoned with the miscreant, and that it is
obligatory to avoid sharing him in a food or a drink and avoid offering
his soul the ritual funeral prayer. Just like a carcass, such an
individual should be cast aside. Thus, the Sahaba's ultimate decency
conception granted the Sahaba a protection identical to that given
exclusively to the Prophet's household, but with a little higher degree.

### In Respect of Proclamation

The Quran is the major weighty thing. Mohammed's family is the minor.
Being guided to the right path cannot be attained unless these two
weighty things are adhered. Deviations cannot be eluded unless these two
weighty things are cohered. This fact is decided by incontrovertible
divine texts.[63] The Prophet's household are the Ark of Noah; he shall
be most surely saved that who takes it, while that who lags behind shall
be certainly drowned. This fact is documented by conclusive divine
texts. They are the door to acquittal of sins; he shall be certainly
forgiven that whoever passes through that door. They are the shelter of
this nation. Stars are the shelter of people of this earth, and
Mohammed's household are the protection against discrepancies of this
nation. This is also quoted from undiscussible divine texts. Without
them, this nation shall be like a donkey the backbone of which is
broken. The head of the Prophet's household takes that task of settling
discrepancies established in this nation after the decease of the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). These facts are documented
by indisputable divine texts.

### Examples on What the Sahaba Gain from the Entire Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception

(The like of my companions is salt. Food is valueless without salt.)
This (hadith) is recorded in Alisti'ab, in the margin of bn­Hajar's
Al­Isabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba, part1, page7.

In the (hadith) numbered 33792, of Kenzul­Ummal, part12, page22, the
following is recorded: (Quraish is means of amending people. People
cannot be amended by other that Quraish. Except them, none should be
referred to. Their like is salt. Food cannot be accepted by anything
other than salt.) This (hadith) is related to A'isheh. bn­Edi, in his
Al­Kamil, relates it to A'isheh.

The (hadith) numbered 33807, of Kenzul­Ummal, part12, page25, is the
following: (Quraish is security from drowning for all people of this
earth. Loyalty to Quraish is security of people against being engaged in
discrepancies. Quraish is people of God. People of Iblis — the Satan —
are the Arab tribes who confront them.) This (hadith) is quoted from
At­Tabarani's Al­Kabeer and Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[63] In the section Authority and Political Leadership, every single
word I have previously mentioned will be documented.

In his Al­Issabeh, page19, bn­Hajar, as At­Tirmithi and bn­Hebban
quotes, records the following (hadith): The Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) said: “I ask you by God to take care of my Sahaba.
Betake not them as an advantage. It is just for my cherishing, they are
cherished, and it is just for my hatred, they are hated. He whoever
hurts them, shall be hurting me. He whoever hurts me shall be hurting
God. He whoever hurts God shall be taken in an unexpected time.”[64]

### Texts for Reflecting on

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) stated: “O Ali! He is
departing God that whoever departs me. He is departing me that whoever
departs you.”[65] “He whoever hurts Ali shall be hurting me.”[66] “He
whoever cherished Ali is cherishing me. He whoever bears malice against
Ali is bearing malice against me.”[67] “Your adherent is adherent to me.
My adherent is adherent to Allah. Your enemy is an enemy to me. My enemy
is an enemy to Allah. Woe is those who will bear malice against you
after my departure.”[68] “Blessedness is those who cherish and accept
you. Woe is those who bear malice against you and belie you.”[69] “I do
counsel every one who believed and confided in me to cling to leadership
of Ali­bn­Abi­Talib. He whoever accedes to him shall be acceding to me.
He shall be acceding to Allah that who accedes to me. He whoever
cherishes him shall be cherishing me. He is cherishing Allah that who
cherishes me. He whoever bears malice against him shall be bearing
malice against me. He is bearing malice against Allah that who bears
malice against me.”[70] “Stars are shields of people of this earth
against drowning. My household are shelters of my people against
discrepancies. Any Arab tribe who confront my people shall be the party
of the Satan.”[71]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[64] bn­Hajar's Al­Issabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba, page19. [65] Al­Hakim's
Al­Mustedrak, part.3, page124. According to the criteria of the two
Sheiks, Muslim and Al­Bukhari, this hadith is reckoned with the
authentic ones. [66] Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3, page130. [67]
Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3, page130. [68] Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak,
part.3, page135. [69] At­Tabarani's Al­Kabeer and Kenzul­Ummal, part.3,
page154, hadith 2571. The hadith is recorded by bn­Asakir. [70]
Kenzul­Ummal, part.6, page155, hadith 2576. It is recorded by
At­Tabarani too. [71] This hadith shall be documented in Section:
Political Leadership.

See the Prophet's saying: “Stars are shelters of occupants of the
heavens. My household are the shelters of my people.”[72]

### Wonderment

Supposing a Sahabi hurt or bore malice against Ali, or Ali hurt or bore
malice against a Sahabi; what should the situation be? Whom should we
follow? Who should be the right, and who should be the wrong?!

Supposing Quraish and the Prophet's household each claimed of being
shelter of this nation; how should the situation be? Whom should we
confide on?!

Supposing a party of this nation followed Quraish and another followed
the Prophet's household, and both claimed of being the right; what
should the situation be? Which party should be regarded as the right and
the bearer of the truth?!

Hint at the false saying spuriously imputed to the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family): “Stars are the like of my companions. Guidance
to the right path is concluded by following any of them.” This false
saying is deceitfully arisen.

In At­Thehbi's Al­Munteqa, page551, the following saying of bn­Teimiyeh
is recorded: “The hadith is ruled, by the most learned hadithists, as
doubtful. Hence, it cannot be taken as an evidence.”

Providing a group of Sahaba supported Ali, another supported Muawiya, a
third were non­partisan and a fourth were waiting for results so that
they would follow the victorious. Is it rationally and conventionally
acceptable that the followers of any of these four groups would be
rightful? Who would be the wrong, then?!

On condition a Sahabi claims that the right is in the east, and another
Sahabi claims, in the same time, that the right is in the west, and a
third claims that the right is in the south, and a fourth claims that
the right is in the north and so on that the nation is divided into
seventy three parties each with a definite argument, as we are foretold
by the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). Will it be rationally
and conventionally acceptable that the entire

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[72] This hadith shall be documented in Section: Political Leadership.

parties are rightful and following the right although there is only one
right?! Contrariety is a crime. Unification is a matter of seeking God's
favor. Is it, then, rational that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) engages his nation in discrepancies?!

Imparting the Argument By A Medium
----------------------------------

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said unto Ali: “After me,
you convey my mission and make them hear my voice and explicate for them
matters they will be discrepant about.”[73]

Despite the fact that he was enthusiast to Al­Abbas, Abu­Haneefeh was
wont to prefer any Sahabi's opinion to Al­Abbas's when being variant in
a certain question.[74] It is recorded that Abu­Haneefeh used to say: “I
will refer to the Sahaba's opinions if I lack the ability to infer from
the Quran and the Prophet's traditions. In case there are different
opinions of different Sahaba, I will take from any indiscriminately, in
order not to neglect their opinions and opt for the followers'.”[75] In
his A'lamul­Muwaqqi'in, Ibnul­Qeyyim mentions the following: “For Imam
Ahmed, sources of legislation are five: 1. The text. 2. The Shaba's
verdicts… Hahafites and Hanbalites ruled of allocating the Quran's
judgments to the Sahaba's deeds. This is for the reason that the Sahaba
would not neglect applying the Quran's judgments unless they had an
evidence. Hence, whenever the Sahaba contradicted the Quran, this item
must have been allocated for a specific state or manner. The Sahaba's
deeds, however, are as same as their words.”[76]

By the way, the Prophet's traditions are his words, deeds and signature.
Regarding the saying that the Sahaba's deeds are as same as their words,
this means that lexical and terminological Sahabi's words allocate the
Quran's judgment and generalize the Quran's specific situations. This
reckons the Sahaba's words with the heavenly revelations that wrong does
never approach from any side. The main catastrophe, here, is that every
Sahabi, whether in lexical or terminological meaning, is included in
this (rule). As a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[73] bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagheh. Abu­Nu'eim, in his
Hilyetul­Awliya, records this hadith. [74] Al­Ghezali's Al­Mustafa,
page35­6, and Seyid Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin.. [75]
Abu­Zuhra's Abu­Haneefeh, 304. [76] Ma'ruf Ad­Dawalibi's Al­Madkhelu Ila
Ilmi Ussoulil­Fiqh.

matter of fact, the entire Sahaba's ultimate decency conception granted
the Sahaba's what the Doctrine has not granted to the Prophet's
household.

bn­Khuldoun says: “Not the entire Sahaba were juriscounsults. Doctrinal
laws were not taken from all of them. This task was private to the
Quranists, who had full knowledge of positions of repealing and repealed
Verses, decisive and allegorical Verses and other evidences elicited
from the Quran that they had received from the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) directly or indirectly. For this reason, such
individuals were named ‘Qurra — reciters’ since the Arab were generally
illiterate. For a considerable period, this concern was preserved.”

Mohammed­bn­Sehl­bn­Abi­Kheithema related the following saying to his
father: “Three from the Muhajirs and three from the Ansar were the only
individuals who had authority of issuing judgments and rulings in the
Prophet's reign. They were Omar, Othman, Ali, Ubey­bn­Ka'b,
Me'ath­bn­Jabal and Zaid­bn­Thabit.”

Abdor­Rahman­bn­Qasim relates the following saying to his father: “A
number of Muhajirs and Ansar were usually summoned by Abu­Bakr whenever
he had a question to seek advisory about. He used to summon Omar,
Othman, Ali, Abdor­Rahman­bn­Awf, Me'ath­bn­Jabal, Ubey­bn­Ka'b and
Zaid­bn­Thabit. Those individuals had authority of issuing verdicts in
the reign of Abu­Bakr. People received rulings and verdicts from those
individuals only. When Omar became the caliph, he followed the same
policy.”[77]

Expansion in Issuing Verdicts
-----------------------------

It is noticeable that the entire Sahaba's ultimate decency conception
collapsed the whole traditions relied upon in reigns of Abu­Bakr and
Omar and mutinied against the whole conceptions familiar in reign of the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). According to this
conception, every Sahabi, in lexical and terminological meaning, had the
opportunity of expressing his own opinion towards any question. In the
same manner, it became lawful for every researchist or scholar of
jurisprudence to refer to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[77] bn­Sa'd's Tabaqat, part.4, page168, and Seyid Ar­Razawi's Aara'u
Ulema'il­Muslimin.., page50 and on.

the idea of any Sahabi at all in any question. This was by reason that
the entire Sahaba were equally decent. They all shall be in the
Paradise. It is impossible for them to forge lies. Hence; matters were
commingled so heavily that it became impossible to discriminate. The
foremost to Islam became of the same rank of the tardy. The ‘released’
became as same as the Muhajir. The whole enjoyed the same attribute of
decency. A Sahabi is flawless. It is impermissible to comment on
verdicts, words and deeds of the Sahaba. These rulings are deduced from
the general frame of the entire Sahaba's ultimate decency conception.
What is authentically related to the Sahaba is the right that wrong does
never approach from any side. This is because it was traditions of the
decent who had the capability of restricting a general rule frankly
mentioned in the Holy Quran and, similarly, generalize a restricted
Quranic rule. Consequently, efforts were exceedingly exerted for the
sake of surveying and detecting the life account of the narrators from
many sides like the good general behavior, honesty of their believing
and authenticity of their sayings. As soon as such attributes are
available in personality of a narrator and the saying is truly ascribed
to that Sahabi, then such a text shall be considered as the indisputable
right since it had been issued by a decent Sahabi.

A Principal Restraint on the Narrators
--------------------------------------

It is fully acceptable for any narrator to accede to Abu­Bakr, Omar or
any other Sahabi at all. This loyalty will not injure honesty and
authenticity. It also does not occupy any position of confusedness.
Confusedness falls only on those who show any sort of loyalty to Ali and
the Prophet's household. It is impracticable to regard such narrators
who accede to Ali or the Prophet's household as authentic and then, it
is impossible to accept narratives of such individuals. As a rule, it is
to neglect totally the hadith among the authentic narrators of which
there is an individual who shows loyalty to the Prophet's household. The
acceptable narratives are only those related by authentic men.
Authenticity and loyalty to the Prophet's household do never concur.

Abu­Amr­bn­Abdil­Berr says: “Mohammed­bn­Weddah related that
Yahya­bn­Muin ruled of the unauthenticity of Mohammed­bn­Idris
Ashafi'i.” Yahya­bn­Mu'in is one of the most remarkable hadithists whose
decision about a person is undiscussibly regarded. Ashafi'i, the founder
of a notable sect, is not authentic narrator in the opinion of bn­Muin.
This is an unimaginable matter! This judgment of bn­Muin was issued
because of

Ashafi'i's carrying a little loyalty to the Prophet's household.
Realizing the unacceptability of this ruling, At­Thehbi commented:
“bn­Muin’s words about Ashafi'i were mere a flaw of the tongue due to
following whim and fanaticism.”

Imam Ja'far As­Sadiq, however, is the tutor of founders of the four
sects. He is the director of a four thousand graduate school. He is the
founder of the sect of the Prophet's household and an elevated name in
the sky of the Prophet's people. Although Al­Bukhari, who had recorded
narratives related by Marwan­bn­Al­Hakam, neglected regarding Imam
As­Sadiq's narratives as an evidence on authenticity of a hadith,
Abu­Hatem and An­Nisa'i ruled of the Imam's authenticity (in narrating
hadiths.)

Yahya­bn­Mu'in: (As he ruled of authenticity of Sa'eed­bn­Khalid
Al­Bujeli, they protested against him claiming that Sa'eed had been a
Shiite. “Yes, he is Shiite and authentic!!!” He asserted. However, the
Jumhour had never used these two descriptions concurrently.)

Authentic people are only those disloyal and remote from the Prophet's
progeny. As for Omar­bn­Sa'd­bn­Abi­Waqqas, the commander of Yazeed's
army who massacred Imam Al­Hussein and his household in Kerbela,
Al­Ujeli decides him as (one of the Sahaba’s followers. He is honest.
People reported his narratives.)

Imran­bn­Hattan was decided as an honest by Al­Ujeli. This Imran
composed a number of poetic verses praising bn­Muljim (Cursed be him),
the murderer of Imam Ali for his murder.
