Part 3 — Chapter 1 — Signification of Authority
===============================================

It has been conspicuous that the entire Sahaba's ultimate decency
conception did create a factual authority that installed seeable effects
on jurisprudential and political life of Islam. This authority occupied
the position of the doctrinal one defined by God and explicated by the
Prophet of God, owing to ordinary transmission and imitation. The
doctrinal authority, because of policy of oversight and propounding the
surrogate one, became unfamiliar to the degree that some people
conjectured his illegality. They saw the surrogate one as the
legitimate.

For providing a distinct exhibition of legal facts of the legitimate
doctrinal authority, we are to allocate a specific title for this
purpose.

Authority is that body whose mission is explicating judgments, as well
as rulings, of the divine Islamic doctrine. Such an explication must not
be attained by supposition and conjecture. It must be attained by such a
way of certitude and conviction that it must be identical to the divine
intendment. Applying so, the believers will be accepting this
explication of the doctrinal authority as an intellectual or invariable
fact that can be taken as a conceptional base or a path upon which ideas
are structured or march is commenced. In his lifetime, the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) is the authority of the Muslims to
whom they refer in the doctrinal affairs, and whose words are the
decisive judgment since he is believed as the most knowledgeable of the
doctrinal rulings. After the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family),
the head of his household — the Imam — is the authority regarding his
most knowledgeability of the doctrinal affairs. This is the Shias'
conception. The Prophet's companions, individually and congregationally,
are representing the reference of explicating the divine doctrine after
the Prophet's decease. They are entirely decent. Each individual of them
is decent. They are the eternal occupants of the Paradise. They are the
witnesses who conveyed this religion to us.[1] For all of these
qualifications, the Sahaba are the legitimate authority. Hence, it is a
matter of fact that pursuing any of such individuals shall inevitably
lead to the right

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] bn­Hajar Al­Asqalani's Al­Isabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba, page5 and on.

path. The ruler is the legitimate authority in the absence of the
Sahaba. He is having the right of scrutinizing the various ideas and
conclusions to opt for what he tends. These ideas and conclusions are
the previous questions provided in the time of the Sahaba. The ruler,
whoever he was, is the legitimate authority since the Muslims should
stand in the line of the prevailing in any case.[2] This opinion is
familiarly ascribed to Abdullah­bn­Omar, the famous Sahabi. Sunnis
adopted this opinion. The dominant, hence, is the authority who has the
right to elicit verdicts even if he is not qualified enough to derive
rulings. He also has the license of opting for any opinion of any
mujtahid — having the talent of inferring verdicts and rulings from the
defined sources of legislation, lacking or having the authority of
legislation.

Coherence of Authority and Doctrine
-----------------------------------

There is a correlative relation and cohesion between the authority and
the doctrine. The authority infers the rulings from the doctrine. No
doctrine exists without an authority, and no authority exists without a
doctrine. The essential chore of the authority is demonstrating the
divine belief. The prophet, followed by the authority, substantiates the
very intendment of Allah, the Exalted. The divine doctrine determined
the boundaries of the words, deeds, goals and means of attaining these
goals. Also, the divine doctrine constituted the relationship between
the believers and their doctrine in all levels. Thus, the role of the
authority is restricted in elucidating the doctrine thoroughly and
typifying it with the novel eventualities.

The authority is the only responsible of transferring the texts, rulings
and purposes of the doctrine from hypothesis into application. In other
words, the authority is the one in charge of applying words on levels of
solicitation and administration. In this regard, the Prophet's
presentation of the divine doctrine is a part of that doctrine and
reckoned with the numerous contents of it. While the presentation of
Ali, Al­Hassan, Al­Hussein, Zainul­Aabidin, Ja'far As­Sadiq or any other
Imam is seen as one of the constitutional precedents that are necessary
for those who propose to make their deeds coincide with the divine
intendment. Hence, the presentation of the authorities succeeding the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) is not reckoned as a part of
the doctrine. However, such a presentation is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[2] Al­Qasimi's Nidhamul­Hukm, page244­5.

obligatory upon the individual believing in the legitimacy of that
individual's authority. Doctrinally, it is illicit to contravene the
legitimate Imam who represents the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family). Thus, compliance to this authority is accounted as same as
compliance to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).

Authority is A Matter of Specialization and A Technique of Thorough Experience
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The like of doctrine is a ship the captain of which is the authority. It
is essential charts of divine proposition of salvation. The authority is
the engineer in charge of managing, explaining, interpreting and
materializing the process of planning this proposition objectively and
ideologically. The authority, however, is the instructor of
establishment. Logically, it is insane to prepare the raw materials of
that institution before seeking the advisory of the instructor and the
engineer. Regarding the Islamic doctrine, the authority must be the most
knowledgeable of this doctrine, the most reliable, the most confident of
Allah, the most honorable and the fittest for leadership and authority.
The authority is the arbiter and the spokesman of the divine judgment.
It is inevitable that the authority is the adopter of judgments
identical to the divine intendment.

Variety of Authorities
----------------------

In a single divine doctrine, there is always a single authority. The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), hence, is the most
regardable authority of Islam. In his time, Moses, the prophet, was the
most regardable authority. In case Moses is absent, Aaron becomes the
authority related and following Moses. When both are attendant, Moses is
the authority. The same thing is said about Jesus. He is the authority
in affairs appertained to Christianity. In reality, variety of
authorities results in disintegration of the doctrine, dissipation of
its disciples and extricating of false authorities.

In Islam, the authority is one and only. It is a matter of
specialization and one of the most significant exigencies. In the
absence of the doctrinal legitimate authority, every individual or group
of Muslims take their own way believing their only rightfulness. This
occurs because of frequent practices of erroneous matters. This will
certainly be leading to engagement

in discrepancies and a dispersal too diffusive to be re accumulated
except when there is a single authority whose word is regarded as a
conventional and intellectual reality accepted collectively with full
satisfaction. This is the solitary method of uniting the Muslims.

Difference Between Doctrine and Authority
-----------------------------------------

It is the same difference between solicitation and its crier. Mohammedan
solicitation is relying upon two things; the Quran and the Prophet's
traditions; words, deeds and signature. This is a property of Mohammed
(peace be upon him and his family). The doctrine is the Holy Quran and
its explication; the Prophet's words, deeds and signature. This is by
the consideration that the explicator — the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) — is a coherent part of the doctrine. Similarly,
confiding and committing to the Prophet, and submitting to the
authenticity of his understanding the religion, is a coherent part of
the doctrine. On this account, the Prophet's words are decisive in all
manners, since he is the most knowledgeable and familiar with this
doctrine. In addition, he is the most favorable and the fittest to
leadership.

Thereafter, the religion was perfected and the divine grace was
consummate. The Quran left no single thing without explanation before
the Prophet was transmitted to His Lord's neighbor. The doctrine,
represented by the Holy Quran and the Prophet's words, deeds and
signature, was left among us. The authority is a matter of another
concern. That authority’s mission is explicating the divine doctrine and
harmonizing it with the current mundane circumstances.

Manifesting this idea, we say: the doctrine is a ship the captain of
which is the authority. It is the general and detailed charts of a
scheme the engineer of which is the authority who is completely familiar
with such charts. It is the raw materials needed for constructing the
anticipated edifice, and the authority is that expert of construction.
It is an ideational structure or, in other words, an idiosyncratic
virtual entity, while the authority is the expresser of the attitudes of
that virtual entity towards objective issues. It is not unacceptable to
say that the doctrine is that large pharmacy containing remedy of every
ailment. The authority is the physician whose mission is diagnosing the
malady and prescribing the curative treatment positively found at that
large pharmacy; the doctrine.

Wisdom of Effecting the Authority
---------------------------------

Granting that God compulsorily reveals doing good to a human or
designates a special angel for directing to the good, a human shall not
be meriting the rewards of conducting good since he has been coerced on
doing. There is only one matter becoming the divine abstraction of
testing. This matter is God's granting mankind the capability of
discerning right from wrong, as well as the capability of conducting the
right and the wrong after these two things are shown manifestly to him.
Next to discriminating the good from the bad and revealing what is licit
or permissible, God awards mankind the freedom of doing good or evil
fully satisfactorily and optionally. Only after that, mandatory
individuals deserve the reward or the penalty of opting for good or
evil.

The previous is the ground upon which the idea of messaging divine
epistles to mankind is based. Regarding it as one of the essences of
explicating the divine epistles, the idea of finding an authority was
also originated on the same ground.

The idea of the divine epistles is going around two main pivots:

1. A messenger having the qualifications of conveying the divine
message. This messenger is surmised as the earthy authority of that
message.

2. A message with episodes too impracticable to be conveyed apart from a
messenger or an authority. This message is set by Allah to be taken as
the proposal of the divine guidance. Allah, the Exalted, is the supreme
source to Whom messengers refer in matters appertained to the message.

1st step of revealing a divine missive to mankind is selecting a
messenger or an authority.

2nd step is teaching the elected messenger the contents of that divine
message; that is to mean the doctrine.

3rd step is the messenger's efforts of conveying and explicating the
message adequately to people involved, and surveying their verbal
response. This is for the purpose that that messenger will be the
witness on such people. As being considered as the authority who has
full and thorough acquaintance of the divine message, the messenger is
referred to in questions appertained. He refers to Allah in questions
involved when he

becomes in need of further explication. This is a truth so resolute that
except the ignorant, none would dispute about.

All the time, the messenger is the authority whose mission is explaining
and divulging the message contents and methods of applying such contents
effectively in a way attaining God's acknowledgment.

In case of the messenger's decease, the doctrine is endurable as long as
there are followers. Similarly, there must be an authority for playing
the role of the explicator and witness. This matter is one of the
essences of divine messages. For rehearsing the process of divine
testing, it is imperative that there is only one authority for the one
doctrine for leading the march of caravan of faith whether it was on the
level of preliminary solicitation or government in case the authority
could achieve the process of developing a preliminary solicitation into
a governmental administration.

The Authority is An Undeniable Fact
-----------------------------------

In an essay published in Al­Liwa, the Jordanian journal, issue955,
dated: 17/Safar /1412A.H., I recorded the following:

It is not unfamiliar for the Arab political parties that the divine
epistles addressed at mankind have been ceaseless all over history. We,
hereby, are to ask those honorable political parties to show us whether
there had ever been a divine epistle sent without a human medium; a
messenger? They are to search in the history of the globe as a whole,
beginning with Adam and ending with Mohammed (peace be upon him and his
family). Proving their lack to provide any evidence, it is the proper
time for them to admit the fact that they had been engaged in partisan
imitation and it is, also, the proper time for them to shun that
imitation and take God in consideration during proceeding any further
step concerning their religion, nation as well as mankind as a whole,
who attach great expectations to their religion for being the ultimate
savior of this globe which is the means of transferring humankind from
claws of disgusting materiality into the large phase of divine
compatibility of events and rulings.

The Islamic doctrine has an authority; God's Apostle (peace be upon him
and his family). This doctrine pointed out the authority succeeding the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). This is for the essential
role of authority in the life.

Any family and government have an authority. This is by the reason that
the authority is a principal element of any advocacy, association of
individuals, doctrine and state. The gist of misfortunes the Muslims
have been encountering is their banishing the doctrinal authority
assigned by Allah, and clinging to the surrogate one imposed by the
prevailing powers and humiliatingly concurred by people owing to their
partisan pursuance.
