Chapter 2 — the Doctrine
========================

The relation between doctrine and authority is interdependent. The
existence of an authority is fundamentally actual whenever there is a
doctrine. Contemporaneity and reciprocal perfection between doctrine and
authority are necessarily existent. For focusing thorough light on the
meaning of authority, it is important to study the signification of
doctrine since it is infeasible to understand one without having an
adequate intimacy with the other.

What is the sense of doctrine? Generally, a doctrine implies the mass of
correlate and perfect ideas, rules, principals and values that are
contributing in providing a picture of the past, present and expected or
sought future of the being, disregarding genuineness, comprehensiveness
and perfection of this picture. A definite group of people will be
unquestionably attracted to that doctrine as they have been convinced of
the picture provided. Pursuant to criteria of that doctrine, the group
involved determine their concepts, goals and ways taken for attaining
these goals. From this cause, the doctrine is being the leader, director
and source of the advantage and legislation of that group's life.

Any doctrine, in this aspect, naturally claims of its aptitude to
administrate the followers' life, render convalescent solutions for
their problems, and promote to a bright morrow. In addition, such a
doctrine claims of owning means of meting out prosperity among the
embracers. Such claims can make considerable mental and physical
vibrations in the embracers’ spirits until they advance the doctrine as
a political school ready for evidencing claims through influential
individuals taking the charge of authority and planning policies of that
group in respect of concepts of the doctrine. The political school is
same as the perfect political schedule produced by the doctrine. It is a
declaration of that doctrine's facilitative ideology, philosophy and
principals so that they can be readily applied and experienced. Besides,
the political schedule provided by a doctrine highlights on the goals
and their achieving means. All the above is practically connected with
the existence of a governmental or ruling authority whose main task is
applying this schedule on actuality. In this regard, we can look upon
the emancipating

Capitalism and the Communist Marxism as doctrines.

Two Categories of Doctrines
---------------------------

Mankind knew only two categories of doctrines:

1. Divine doctrines created by God.

2. Positive doctrines counted, or accumulated, by one or more
individuals.

Creating Doctrines and their Essences
-------------------------------------

A deep view in the subject of doctrines makes us discover the fact that
it is possible for any human to conceive any doctrine whether good or
evil. But it is impractical for him to create or even found an ideal
doctrine. As a nature, humans are unqualified to establishing such an
ideal doctrine. Moreover, it is quite moderate to admit the fact that it
is unattainable for the entire human beings to create a single
convictional ideal doctrine even if they were proceeding in the same
level. Yet; it is fictitious and impossible to propose that people will
be on practicing on the same level one day. This takes us to the
certitude that instituting an ideal doctrine is a matter exceeding
ordinary levels and capacities of this life. This is because that such a
concern requires, as a pillar part, a dogmatic knowledge of mankind's
past and their detailed experiences. Besides, it requires a categorical
knowledge of man's nature, exigencies, motives, trends and future.
Future, as a factor of time, is the singular element that shows the
fruition or the abortion of any doctrine. Finally, instituting an ideal
doctrine requires a conservative knowledge of the universe surrounding
mankind. These sorts of knowledge, as a conclusion, are impossibly
attained by any individual, group or even the entire mankind.

Sooner or later, positive doctrines shall be, beyond any dispute,
collapsed. This is for the elementary reason that humankind are
naturally unqualified enough to institute a doctrine. The dogmatic
doctrine that is appropriate to be perpetual ground of authority is the
one created by Allah, the Creator. This is the Islamic doctrine which
was actually representing premise of the state governed by Mohammed the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).

Characteristics of the Islamic Doctrine
---------------------------------------

1. Practically; Islam stands for perfect compliance to Allah, the
Elevated, in every mundane or celestial affair. This can be achieved by
submitting and directing conducts of the Islamic state, including
individuals and groups on the entire levels, to the criteria of the
divine commands defined by the persuasive divine message (the doctrine),
which is Islam, towards carrying through the doctrinal goals. Conducts,
in this regard, consents to the practices bowed to the doctrinal ideal
and intendment.

2. Hypothetically; the Islamic doctrine betokens group of rulings,
judgments, principals and matters to be enjoined and others to be
avoided in addition to the general and detailed instructions revealed by
God, the Exalted, to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). He
(peace be upon him and his family) did explain and call for those things
hypothetically through his solicitation or the government he founded.
Eventually, those matters were put into application by the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) himself through the solicitation and
the government.

Hence, the doctrine comprises God’s revealed matters and the Prophet’s
deeds, words and signature. This role of the doctrine, as a perfected
body, is answering wonderments regarding existence, incentives,
termination, its way and the outcome of life. It also regulates the
relations between the creatures themselves and the relations between
their Creator and them and the universe and them. This universe is
essential for the existence of those creatures and, in the same time,
submitted for serving them. Other roles of the doctrine are showing ways
of the termination of the whole permanence and that of each individual's
life. It reveals the being of another life which is as same as a court
evaluating deeds of all of those who passed through circle of the world.
In other words, it is the end result due to which each shall be rewarded
or penalized so fairly.

This doctrine is a fully occupied record of the entire creatures’
history, especially mankind. In this record, the total experiments are
banked so genuinely and objectively that an artistic depiction showing
absolute audible, visual, mobile, outward and clandestine views and
scenes.

The doctrine, likewise, is the system of individuals, societies,
authorities and mankind in general. It rectifies the life of each
individual solitarily, relations between individuals, their relations
with their Creator and their relations with the world encompassing them.
Those individuals is supported by

advocacy of that doctrine. The advocacy is supported by establishing a
government. The government is supported by goals and supreme ideality.

This doctrine is purposeful. It has the capacity of determining its
goals. There is a purpose for each rulings decided. This ruling is
originally decided and issued for that very purpose. Similarly, there
are goals beyond the existence of individuals, societies, authorities
and mankind as a whole. All of these goals are moving to the same place,
which is the exact general goal of Islam. Goals involved are
circumscribed and standardized in such a way that they deliberately
reflect the scope of energies, without redundancy or blemish, latent in
substances of individuals, societies, authorities and mankind as a
whole. In a like fashion, the goals reflect the energies of beings
enclosing the mankind and submitted to their ministration. Things do not
possess but their energies. Besides goals determined by the Islamic
doctrine, means, methods and ways of achieving and clarifying these
goals are devised so patently that any mystification is unmistakably
removed.

The Dogmatic Depiction
----------------------

Islam, as a doctrine, provides an unequivocal, complete and
comprehensive depiction based upon concluding and certitude. This
dogmatic depiction covers the entire area of goals and general and
specific means in the total fields of life and on the total individual,
social, political, economical and international levels…etc. It is the
accurate general and detailed outlines of factuality of the present and
the expected and sought future, which is anticipated to be an actual
fact, of events. These outlines are anticipated to leading individuals
gradually to the doctrinal purpose using the shortest, the cheapest and
the broadest way. Only then, the doctrine becomes the leader and the
director besides its becoming the source of legality that is resolved as
a perfect ideological structure. Self­contentment and satisfaction, when
attained by conviction and certitude, are the sustainers of such a
structure. Positive beliefs, on the other hand, are attained on grounds
of conjecture and surmise; therefore, they, sooner or later, shall be
collapsing.

The Divine Jurisprudential Formulation
--------------------------------------

The Islamic doctrine betokens the group of rulings, judgments,
principals, matters to be enjoined and those to be avoided in addition
to the general and detailed instructions revealed by God, the Exalted,
to his Prophet (peace be

upon him and his family). The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
did explain and call for those things hypothetically through his
solicitation or the government he founded. The Revealer is Allah, and
the Explainer is God's messenger. The media of explanation were the
Prophet's words, deeds and signature. Revelation and explanation are
forming the divine jurisprudential formulation which stands as the law
effective and valid in every time. The doctrinal authority is the
director and the tutor of the followers of this doctrine after the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).
