Chapter 3 — the Competent Practitioner of Nominating the Authority
==================================================================

As we have previously mentioned, it is necessary that each doctrine has
a legitimate authority being coherent and perfecting that doctrine. It
is unrealizable to find a divine doctrine without an authority in charge
of explicating it. Indispensably, this authority must be the most
knowledgeable, familiar and sincere to the doctrine. In the same manner,
the authority must be the most favorable and the fittest for the
position. These qualifications should be realized by conviction and
certitude, apart from conjecture and surmise. These matters, in fact,
can be comprehended by Allah exclusively considering Him as the Knowing
of the hiddens as well as the appearances. This is the base on which God
is the only One Who is in charge of selecting and nominating the
authority. This is an indisputable truth.

The Divine Custody declared availability of these qualifications in the
prophets whom were elected by God alone all over the mankind history,
disregarding any objection such like those who said: (Why was not this
Quran revealed to a man of importance in the two towns?) or those who
objected and described the prophet as (This fellow, who is contemptible,
and who can hardly speak distinctly.) Since such a sort of objection is
originated from conjecture and surmise, while the divine selection of
prophets is arisen from conviction and absolute certitude of their being
the most knowledgeable, familiar, sincere, favorable, honorable and
fittest for explicating the divine doctrine and leading the ship and the
followers of Islam, these objections were neglected.

Briefly, Allah, the Exalted, is the only Competent to decide the
authorities whose mission is conveying the divine doctrine all over the
mankind history. He, exclusively, does realize the most eligible for
conveying such beliefs. It has never happened that God left choice for
people in the matter of electing the prophets.

Missions and Functions of the Authority Nominated By God
--------------------------------------------------------

It is an indisputable that the entire honorable prophets are authorities
assigned by Allah Who informed us of this election. We are, here, to
show the missions and functions those authorities were to practice.

1. Explication: A perfect hypothetical and practical explication and
clarification of the divine doctrines is one of the most important
missions of prophets. This is proceeded by a solicitation leading to
establishing a government, such as what was achieved by Islam and his
Prophet, Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family). For many prophets,
their solicitation did not lead to establishing a government. The
authority's mission is a hypothetical explication of the divine doctrine
as exactly as he has received from God. This step is followed by
applying that doctrine in the society. Thus, the explication should be
hypothetically and practically perfect. Adopting the very divine means
of application, the prophet applies the doctrinal texts on the events.
This assures the materialization of goals of the divine texts in every
occurrence involved.

2. Defining the circle of legality: the authority — the prophet — is
enjoying an exclusive competency of defining limits of the circle of
legality. For every prophet, these limits are:

a. A divine doctrine forming the center of circle of legality. This
doctrine is the divine manifestations whether in a form of enunciation
and meaning, such as the Torah and the Bible, or meaning such as the
divine denotations.

b. The prophet's explaining the divine doctrine hypothetically and
practically.

c. Interdependence of the doctrine and the authority's explanations. It
is inapplicable to separate one from the other. In other words, the
divine doctrine and the authority's explanations are two faces of the
same coin. It is impossible to understand the doctrine without referring
to the authority's explanations, and it is also impossible to comprehend
the authority's explanations without referring to the basic texts. The
base, here, is God's revelation and structure of guidance. Explanations
are the doors to this structure.

3. Responsibility for the followers: The prophet's being custodian and
leader of the doctrine followers is one of his missions. He is to direct
the followers' affairs and escort them with respect to the divine
doctrine. Practically, this side was obviously noticed. Mohammed (peace
be upon him and his family), the doctrinal authority, was the custodian
and the leader of his followers during his lifetime. Intellectually and
jurisdictionally, custody of the authority is religiously implementable
and timed mission. It was the same person who led the solicitation and
the government established on that solicitation. It was the same person
who explained and applied the doctrine.

4. Standing against conditions of deviation: With the expedience of the
two following pillars, guidance to the right path and disappearance of
deviation are achieved in the reign of the authoritative prophet:

a. A creedal and jurisprudential pillar, which is following rulings of
the divine doctrine (the divine jurisprudential formulation) and the
prophet's explanations of that doctrine.

b. A personal pillar, which is custody and leadership of the prophet
selected for authority. This is applied by the prophet's politicizing
his followers and applying the doctrine to them in the exact
understanding and figure he has received from Allah. For assuring the
predominance of legality and guidance — to the right path, it is
essential to retain the unification of these two pillars. Deviation
shall be the inevitable result if any practical error occurs in both or
one of these. The personal pillar is of the same value of the creedal.
Both form a unique characteristic. It is unfeasible to believe in the
divine doctrine and reject Mohammed's leadership, since it is regarded
as an inseparable part of that doctrine. Deviation is engaged whenever
an endeavor of segregating the personal pillar from the creedal is
practiced. Size of deviation is determined according to the size of the
endeavor of segregation.

5. The ship of safety: The Prophet, the authority, is the only ship of
safety. they shall be certainly winning those whoever board on that
ship; while deviation and drowning shall be the fate of those who eschew
or take any other one.

6. The Prophet, the authority is the door to God's forgiveness: God
shall forgive those who take that door; while those who neglect shall be

shouldering their sins.

7. The Prophet, the authority leads his followers to the right path:
Compliance and ensuing the Prophet is as same as compliance and ensuing
Allah. Obedience to the Prophet is an obedience to Allah. Obedience to
Allah is the right path. Disobeying the Prophet is disobeying Allah.
Disobeying Allah is the grievous deviation.

8. The Prophet, the authority is the safety of the faithful nation and
the obstacle against discrepancies: The safe way is taken only by
following the Prophet, the authority. It is the single way the Prophet
had understood and led to before he took. Indisputably, a path taken by
the Prophet is completely safe and even. With the absence of this
authority, discrepancies will be engaged, safe will be vanished and
people will be following any noise and swerving any breath of wind.

The existence of a single authority that ideally recognizes the divine
regulations, is decided as a shelter against discrepancies and a source
of perpetual safe to the nation.

9. The authority is seen as a weight for the followers that, by adhering
to, protects them against collapsing and devastation.

10. The authority is the exemplar in knowledgeability, god­fearing,
commitment and judging: He is the mobile model of a godly individual who
clings to the divine doctrine.

11. Condensing efforts and coordinating faithful activities for the sake
of generalizing guidance to the right path all over mankind.

The Authority in the Prophet's Reign
------------------------------------

Obedience to God is well attained by complying to the matters He ordered
of and avoiding the matters He forbade. The Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) is the most familiar with the essentialities of matters
to be pursued and those neglected. Practically, obedience to the Prophet
is obedience to God and defiance to the Prophet is defiance to God. This
fact is repeated nine times in the Holy Quran. The Prophet is the
custodian of this religion. He is the well knowledgeable of its hiddens
and secrets. He is the only one who has the capability of outlining the
general rulings of the

doctrine and explicating the exact intended signification in case there
are numerous messages of a certain text. In brief words, the Prophet, in
his reign, was the only one to whom the doctrinal authority is
restricted. He is the one selected for this mission and granted the
perfection by Allah. None can recognize God's mandates and orders so
excellently like the Prophet who is unique and, hence, must be the most
knowledgeable, the most familiar and the most honorable so that his
followers should hold to thoroughly. None can contrast the doctrinal and
intellectual fact that, during his lifetime, the Prophet had been the
authority specialized in explicating Islam and leading Muslims.

The Authority After the Prophet
-------------------------------

### A Preliminary Review To The Actuality

An undeniable fact is that just before the Prophet's being taken to the
Elevated Associate, the religion was perfected and the grace was
completed. Besides, creeds were grounded, rulings were applied and the
government established and headed by the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) was dominant for ten years.

As to the Islam's being the final religion, the peculiarities of its
rulings that are radically general and comprehensive, and the nature of
the task to be shouldered by the Muslims, which is reducing the area of
atheism and guiding mankind to the right path, there must be originally
an authority after the Prophet's decease. This is a matter too intrinsic
to require an evidence if there was no existence to partisan imitation,
submission to actuality and most people's nature of compliance to the
dominant.

Some, including the Arab religious parties, would claim that the
Muslims' scholars are the authorities according to the meaning we are
referring to. The caliph, consequently, will be the supreme authority.
As an answer, we provide the following:

The earlier saying is impracticable. We ask what should the situation be
if the entire Muslim scholars, assuming they are gathered in the same
place, were involved in various numerous parties each of whom is
acceptably supporting and insisting on their own viewpoints that are
relying upon a seemingly legitimate argument? Which party should we
follow, and which viewpoint should we consider? The Arab religious
parties may answer that

the ruler must adopt the viewpoint that he regards as the fittest. So,
they do admit that the most supreme authority is the ruler as considered
as the Prophet's successor! Nevertheless, it is well known that a many
men did come to power in different ways. Some, like Ali and Abu­Bakr,
were god­fearing. Others, like Marwan­bn­Al­Hakam, Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian
and Yazeed, his son, were not. Some came to power in legitimate way;
while others were the rulers as they became the most prevalent, and
people, compulsorily, submitted to their rule. Marwan, for example, was
not knowledgeable and he was illegible to opt for the most becoming
judgment.

### The Need Of An Authority After The Prophet

As it has been previously proved, every prophet is necessarily an
authority on whose shoulders many responsibilities and functions are
settled by God, the Elevated. The ultimate divine solicitation
undertaken by Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family), the master
and seal of prophets, was so successful that it resulted in the
establishment of a government that completely and flawlessly applied the
hypothetical and practical rules of the divine doctrine. Hence, God
declared that the Muslims' religion was completed and the grace was
thoroughly perfected. As he was granted the choice, the Prophet opted
for God's contiguity. He was not surprised by decease. He was sickened
and taken to His Lord's vicinity leaving behind him the divine advocacy
straight and represented by an ideal government and an exalted religion.
It was indeed an explication of everything at all.

Who should be the successive authority? Who should undertake the
missions he had been in charge of? Who should clarify rules of the
divine doctrine after him? Who should have authorization of defining
circle of legality? Who should be the leader of the nation and the
representative pillar of their glory? Who should be the ship of safety?
Who should be the door to forgiveness? Who should be the trustee savior
of this nation? Who should be people's weighty thing? Who should be the
supreme epitome after the Prophet? Who should be the leader of the
believers' march towards manumitting and taking mankind from darkness
into illumination?

Wonderments in Need of Answers
------------------------------

Supposing the Muslims claimed that the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) had not nominated the successive authority whose assignment
would be undertaking missions, explaining rules of the doctrine and
defining

circle of legality, the new leader of the nation, the representative
pillar of the nation's glory, the weighty thing, the supreme epitome and
the commander of battle of manumitting and saving mankind. If the
Muslims claimed so, then this would be contrary to the fact of
perfecting the religion and supplementing the divine grace. This is by
the reason that the previous affairs are pillar parts of the religion
and the divine grace that are impossibly suspended. In case the Muslims
insist on this claim, they would certainly see that the divine doctrine
challenge, denounce and rebuff their allegations contrary to logic,
intellect and bases of life in addition to rules of the divine doctrine.
