Chapter 4 — the Muslims' Attitudes Towards the Authority After the Prophet
==========================================================================

Regarding the authority succeeding the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family), Muslims were engaged in two main parties each of whom is
claiming following the manifest right.

1. The historicists: This term is called upon those who justified and
legalized the total occurrences of the political history of Islam,
eminently the reign of Rashidite caliphate. They are known as
‘Ahlus­Sunneh.’ This term was originated in the Umayid reign and,
markedly, in Muawiya's, when power overcame legality and survival became
for the strongest who could submit majority of people to his domination.
Thence, this year was called ‘year of congruity’, and the party who
followed the prevailing force was called ‘the congruous.’ They are, in
fact, the ruling party. They are, although disagreeing to the ruling
regime in some situations, loyal to the Umayids who possessed the riches
banned to those who stood against the ruling regime. Ahlus­Sunneh,
however, looked at the Umayids as an emblem of the Muslims' unity.

2. The Shariites: They are, in various proportions, the party that
opposed and decided illegality of occurrences of the political history
of Islam. Proportionally, the Rashidite caliphate is considered as a
golden reign if balanced with the Umayid. Moreover, there is no single
face of comparison between the two. The Abbasid caliphate was worse than
the Umayid.

The Shariites see that the divine doctrine did nominate the authority
after the Prophet, and that God did not leave this affair for personal
impressions. They believe that God did elect an authority and granted
him the authorization of joining leadership to issuing judgments. The
defined authority after the Prophet is Ali­bn­Abi­Talib (peace be upon
him). According to arrangements of the doctrine, each authority is to
nominate the successor. The adopters of such a belief is known as
‘Shia.’ Since the time of the Prophet, Shism was instituted. They are
the opposition party all over history. At all the reigns, especially the
Umayid and the Abbasid, Shias were

chased, banished, banned from their basic rights, inadmitted as
testifiers, disavowed as beneficiaries of the state imports and cursed
forever.

Below, both parties' opinion and argument of the authority after the
Prophet shall be respectively debated.

Who is the Authority Succeeding the Prophet?
--------------------------------------------

### The Sunnis' Opinion: the Claim of the Prophet's Leaving His Nation Without Nominating A Successor Or An Authority

Sunnis allege that the Prophet left his nation without nominating a
successor or an authority. That is to mean that he did not indicate to
an Imam or a leader whom should succeed him in undertaking the political
and the religious affairs of the state. They referred to Omar's replying
those who commended him to nominate a definite successor, as their
evidence on the Prophet's leaving his nation without nomination. Omar,
the caliph, said: “Should I name someone, this matter had been done by
that who was more honorable than me — Abu­Bakr. Should I neglect so,
this negligence had been practiced by that who was more honorable than
me — the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family.)­”[3]

The Prophet, they claim, had never willed to anybody to undertake his
mundane and godly affairs, including authority. They referred to
Ummul­Mu'minin, A'isheh, as an evidence on their claim. A'isheh alleged
that the Prophet had died while he was put between her neck and breast,
and his head was on her thigh. She would have certainly heard him had he
willed of anything. Thence, depending on Ummul­Mu'minin's previous
claim, Al­Bukhari and Muslim denied the allegation of the Prophet's
will.

Pursuant to their opinion, too, had the Prophet definitely nominated
somebody in his will, as his successor, Ali­bn­Abi­Talib would never
have been the one intended, as Shias allege. This is by the reason that
had Ali been the one intended, the virtuous Sahaba would most surely not
have disdained this will and elected someone else. This is arisen from
the fact that the Sahaba, as a whole, are decent. He whoever bears any
doubt about the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[3] bn­Quteibeh's Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh, page23, At­Tabari's Tarikh,
vol.3, page34 and Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb, part.2 page353.

order of the caliphs (Abu­Bakr, Omar, Othman and Ali respectively), is
debasing about twelve thousand Sahaba.[4]

Briefly, the Prophet did leave the affair of leading and ruling the
Muslims for themselves considering it as an affair of their own concern.
Necessarily Imamate and authorization are adjacent to headship of the
Islamic government.

### Settlement of the Claim of the Prophet's Leaving His Nation Without An Authority

Later on, Sunnis perceive that the ever most menacing matter that
threatens the existence of the Islamic state is the current leader's
neglecting nominating a successor. They also descry that assigning a
successor is a concern resulting in the benefit of Muslims and Islam.

Let's take a view on the following incident. A'isheh addressed at
Abdullah, the son of Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab: “O son! After carrying my
greetings to Omar, tell him that he should never leave Mohammed's nation
without a guide. He should nominate a successor, lest, they shall be
dispersed. I anticipate that they shall be engaged in seditious
matters.” Abdullah carried Ummul­Mu'minin's message to his father.[5]

Ummul­Mu'minin was quite true; leaving the nation without nominating a
guide or an authority is a matter leading to the arising of seditious
disadvantages and the dispersion of people.

Abdullah, the son, paid thorough intention to this point. While his
father was dying, he stood before him and said: “O Amirul­Mu’minin!
Nominate a successor for leading Mohammed's nation! You should certainly
reproach the supervisor of your camels or sheep if he left the animals
without appointing a supervisor as his representative. You would blame
him for missing his depository. How would you, Amirul­Mu’minin, then do
it with Mohammed's nation?” Al­Faruq, however, provided the same reply:
“Should I name, this matter had been done by that who was more honorable
than me — Abu­Bakr. Should I neglect so, this negligence had been

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[4] Al­Issabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba, part.1, page8 and on. As a footnote
of this book, you may see bn­Abdil­Berr's Alisti'ab. [5] Al­Imametu
Wes­Siyaseh, page23.

practiced by that who was more honorable than me — the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family.)­”[6]

The process of the Prophet's leaving his nation without nominating a
successor was settled by innovation of the procedure so-called the heir
apparent of leadership. This procedure is practiced by the current
leader's nominating a person, disregarding distinct qualifications and
characteristics, as his heir apparent; that is to mean the successor.
This is established for the reason that the current leader, Imam, caliph
or president, disregarding legality or the way by which he had come to
power, is the actual custodian and supervisor of the nation and, in
addition, he is the only one who has full acquaintance of the
convenience of the state he is ruling. Therefore, he is the most
familiar with the future of his state. People, consequently, should
accede and trust the one he is to appoint in the same amount of
confidence they had already provided for the previous. This procedure
was jurisprudentially called the nation's congruity. It was, first,
processed by Abu­Bakr when he appointed Omar as his successor. The same
was processed by Omar when he founded the six­member advisory board.[7]

The heir apparent was enacted as a law. Origin of this process was
Abu­Bakr's nominating Omar, and the Sahaba's showing no objection that
it was seen as the outcome of congruity. For bn­Khuldoun, congruity is
measured as a lawful certificate defined for the benefit of unificating
Muslims, getting rid of seditious concerns, evading keeping Mohammed's
nation dispersed with no supervisor, as A'isheh, Ummul­Mu'minin
expressed[8], and evading any reproach as Abdullah­bn­Omar expressed[9].

According to Sunnis’ opinion, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) was the only leader who had not nominated a successor. On the
contrary of other leaders and presidents of the Islamic states who could
conceive the Muslims' advantages in their life as well as after their
death, the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[6] Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb, part.2, page353, Al­Imametu
Wes­Siyaseh, page23 and At­Tabari's Tarikh, page34. [7] bn­Khuldoun's
Muqeddimeh, page210, Pub. Darul­Fikr. [8] bn­Quteibeh's Al­Imametu
Wes­Siyaseh, page23. [9] Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb, part.2, page353.

Prophet, pursuant to bn­Khuldoun's exposition, saw people only during
his lifetime, and he should not forecast their advantage after his
decease![10]

In Abstract, after a long period of suffering, the virtuous Sahaba could
perceive the fact that it is an inescapable collapsing to leave the
nation without referring to the coming leader, Imam or authority. They
also perceive that nominating a successor, by a will or conventionally,
is a matter flowing in the advantage of the Muslims. Thenceforth, they
enacted the law of appointing an heir apparent.

A more important matter is that the divine Islamic doctrine has shown
everything mentioned in detail or generally in the Holy Quran or by the
Prophet. The religion's being clear of this fundamental question is
contrary to perfection of the religion and completion of the divine
grace. This is emphasized by the fact that the Prophet had opted for his
departure and had awareness of his decease during that final disease.
God has planted caring for this nation in the Prophet's heart and made
him benevolent and merciful to the believers, and let him in on the
future of this nation. Is it, then, rational for him to leave the nation
without referring to an authority succeeding him? How should a prophet
neglect such a serious affair while Abu­Bakr, Omar and A'isheh, who are
not prophets, treated it? Decisively, this matter is unacceptable and
denied by positive doctrinal texts in spite of the estimation of
dominant occurrences in that period.

Sunnis adhered to any argument for justifying occurrences. As they were
disappointed by the texts, they clung to surmise. When surmise was
collapsed, they clasped the advisory board. When that failed, they
adduced mercy to the Muslims and keeping their benefits, unity and
future so that they would not be scattered like a guideless cattle.
After a long period of probing a pretext, they could settle on the
principal that the current Imam or caliph is to nominate his successor
to whom people are to declare loyalty.[11]

### The Prophet’s Successor According to the Sunnis' Opinion

The caliph, the Imam or the president of the Islamic state is the
religious and political authority since he is seen as the Prophet's
representative. The caliph

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[10] bn­Khuldoun's Muqeddimeh, page210, Pub. Darul­Fikr. [11] our
An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam, page8 and on where the total hypotheses
adopted by Sunnis are shown and categorically criticized.

undertakes the Prophet's tasks and functions. He estimates the mundane
and supernal benefits of the nation. He is the leader and the warden of
Muslims in his life and after his decease. He is in charge of assigning
the coming leader and the next authority whose responsibility is
continuing the current caliph's missions. People should confide this new
caliph as they confided the previous one.[12] The caliph enjoys also
total privileges and competencies the Prophet had enjoyed on the nation.
In our An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam, a whole chapter is debating such
competencies. In the same book, the following saying of Dhafir Al­Qasimi
recorded in his Nidhamul­Hukm, is written down: “Competencies and
privileges of a caliph include the utter internal, external and military
affairs. He is the only one on whose shoulders the responsibility of
such affairs falls. In case the caliph authorizes some of managing any
of these affairs, this should not extinguish his competencies and
privileges.”[13]

Al­Mawerdi endeavored to define and proclaim these competencies on
pages15 and 16 of his Al­Ahkam. A summary of this endeavor is entered on
page194 of our An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam. Considering him as the
Prophet’s successor who had been the authority in both mundane and
supernal affairs, the caliph is the Muslims’ religious authority. He has
the authorization of practicing the same acts practiced by the Prophet,
since he is his representative in every field except prophesy. Moreover,
there are some privileges given to the caliphs while the Prophet himself
had not practiced. An example of these is the heir apparent of
caliphate. According to Sunnis' opinion, the Prophet left his nation
without nominating a guide, a leader, an authority or an Imam; while
Abu­Bakr, the intelligent, named Omar as his heir apparent after he had
been counseled by the grand Sahaba. In his turn, Omar defined six
individuals for succeeding him. A scrutinizing view at Omar's will
reveals that Othman was practically the one intended. Othman was
originally called ‘Radeef’ which stands for the heir apparent.[14]
Talha, however, was absent during the advisory board Omar had ordered of
for electing the new caliph. Had Az­Zubeir, Talha and Ali adopted the
same line, Othman should certainly, however, have been the caliph. A
literal implementation of Al­Faruq's will, beyond any dispute, leads to
Othman's

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[12] bn­Khuldoun's Muqeddimeh, page210, Pub. Darul­Fikr. [13] Dhafir
Al­Qasimi's Nidhamul­Hukm, page353. [14] Dhafir Al­Qasimi's
Nidhamul­Hukm, pages 197­8 which is quoted from At­Tabari's.

being elected for caliphate. This very result is attained by taking an
accurate look at any of the references involved.

During the Umayid caliphate, the president of the state, who came to
power due to his domination, used to nominate his heir apparent. In
other words, the prevailing individual was the caliph, who was the
authority having competence of assigning his successor. The same thing
is said about the Abbasid and the Ottoman caliphate.

Abu­Bakr and Omar were the originators of the principal of the caliph's
nominating his successor. Hence; this procedure was pursued by the
others. There is a difference between the purport intended by Abu­Bakr
and Omar at inventing the heir apparent principal and that intended by
the others. The earliers used this principal for evading the
circumstance that any of their relatives may come to power, while the
others used it for enabling their relatives from prevailing the state
and ruling the government after them. Later on, the current caliph's
naming and electing his successor became a regular practice. It was seen
as one of the caliph's rights. Including bn­Khuldoun, a many Sunni
scholars received this matter as one of the caliph's rights. “The Imam
should select on behalf of people in his life and, sequentially, after
his death.[15]

### For Sunnis, the Prevalent Ruler is the Authority

Sunnis regard the caliph who comes to power and practices its
responsibilities as the very authority of the political and religious
affairs. Abu­Bakr, Omar, Othman, Muawiya, Yazeed, Marwan and so on were
the supreme authorities during their reigns. Each played the role of
authority in his time. The same thing is said about the Abbasid and
Ottoman caliphs. Prevalence is the actual measure of authority. The
prevailing ruler, similarly, is the Imam, the guide and the authority of
the nation in both mundane and religious affairs.

Abu­Ya'li Al­Izz records: “Many reports ascribed to Imam Ahmed
indicating that caliphate is attained by prevalence and preponderance.
It may not be in need of a contract. In a narration related by
Abdus­bn­Malik Al­Attar, Imam Ahmed says: ‘It is illicit for any who
really believes in Allah and the Hereafter to pass a single night before
he declares fealty to the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[15] bn­Khuldoun's Al­Muqeddimeh.

individual, whether virtuous or immoral, who used his force in
dominating affairs of the Muslims and became a caliph and titled
Amirul­Mu'minin.’ In another narration reported by Abul­Harith with
respect to rebellion against rulers, Imam Ahmed says: ‘Muslims should
support the victorious party in case two parties struggle for coming to
power.’ This rule was inferred from the (legal) ruling legislated by
Abdullah­bn­Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab when he led the collective prayer in
Al­Madina on the day of battle of Harra. He said: ‘We are with the
prevalent. People should swear allegiance to the predominating.’”[16]

This is the conclusion of the political system of Islam. People should
declare their fealty to the predominating, apart from regarding
religion, qualifications or legal situation. Such a saying became a part
of the political Shari'a.

Concisely, for Sunnis, the prevalent circulating ruler became the
authority in the entire affairs of the Islamic nation.

### The Representative Authority

The prevailing ruler is the actual supreme authority of the nation in
total mundane and religious affairs. Rulers should, even if bed­ridden,
nominate an heir apparent as the new Imam, leader and authority. Rulers
enjoy authorization of doing so since they are the Wali and the warden
of this nation who chooses for people in life as well as after death.
Rulers should appoint an individual taking the charges of people whose
role is to confide only. Legally, this procedure was known as ‘people's
congruity’ which was first originated by Abu­Bakr's nominating Omar as
his successor, and the attendant Shaba permitted and committed
themselves to this.[17]

In a like manner, the ceremony of Muawiya's nominating Yazeed as the
heir apparent was attended by the remaining Sahaba. Practically, people
should declare their allegiance to the new caliph assigned by the late.
Objectors of such a procedure should be decided as ill­doers.

Competencies of the current caliph regarding nominating an heir apparent
are limitless and irrefutable, since he is looked as ‘confident’ as

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[16] Al­Qasimi's Nidhamul­Hukm. [17] bn­Khuldoun's Al­Muqeddimeh.

bn­Khuldoun describes. (Abu­Bakr, the bed­ridden, named Omar as the heir
apparent and told Othman, the registrar of this decision, that he would
have been fit for it.)[18]

Omar, in a like situation, discussed the Muslims' affairs with himself
and reviewed various aspects of the matter while he was in his last
moments. As he scrutinized the most appropriate who would have the
ability of occupying his place, Omar said: “Had Abu­Ubeideh been alive I
would have nominated for caliphate. Had Khalid­bn­Al­Waleed been alive I
would have nominated for caliphate. Had Salim, Abu­Hutheifeh's slave,
been alive I would have nominated for caliphate.”[19] This indicates
that Salim, Abu­Hutheifeh's slave, could have been the caliph if he had
been alive. Salim was not from Quraish. His lineage was unknown.
Nevertheless, he was, as Al­Bukhari recorded, leading the Muhajirs and
the Ansar in collective prayers held in Qeba Mosque. By the way, if
Salim's being the caliph was an all right matter, why was it, then,
illicit for the Ansar, who were racially closer to the Prophet, to be
caliphs? Besides, how should Salim have been caliph while the three
Quraishi individuals who attended the Ansar' meeting at the Saqeefa of
Bani­Sa'ideh, argued that they had been more eligible to caliphate for
their being the Prophet's clan and people? Similarly, how should Salim
have been the caliph while the immutable rule says: caliphs should be
constantly from Quraish? How did it become, later on, lawful to
designate Me'ath­bn­Jabal, the Ansari, for leadership while it had been
illegal for the Ansar to have leadership? Finally, Khalid did exert all
efforts for the sake of combating Islam, while Ali spared no efforts for
the sake of defending it; on which principal was Khalid preferred to
Ali?!

For a simple reason, Omar refused the suggestion of nominating his son,
Abdullah, as the heir apparent. The reason provided by Omar was that
Abdullah had lacked even the ability to divorce his wife in the proper
way!![20]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[18] At­Tabari's Tarikh, part.3, page429 and Ibnul­Jawzi's Seeretu Omar,
page37. [19] At­Tabari's Tarikh, Chapter: Omar's final disease.
bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat, Chapter: Omar's final disease. Al­Imametu
Wes­Siyaseh, page15. [20] bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagheh,
part.1, page64 and many other references.

It is remarkable to reflect precisely upon the report that Omar (Pleased
be him), finally, decided to designate Ali­bn­Abi­Talib for caliphate,
but he was fainted!![21]

From the above we can conclude that, for Sunnis, competencies enjoyed by
the present caliphate with regard to nominating the heir apparent or the
morrow caliph, are incontrovertibly conclusive. It is worthy mentioning
that the law of nominating an heir apparent was first originated by
Abu­Bakr who named Omar as his successor, and Omar who established the
six­member advisory board according to which Othman was practically the
one intended. Nomination of an heir apparent was mostly followed, in the
form of a legislated law, in the Umayid reign. The Abbasids and Ottoman
followed the same practice. The heir apparent was usually the late’s son
or one of the royal family members.[22]

Arguing for keeping Muslims' good, the nomination of an heir apparent
and a morrow authority became an ordained law. Ummul­Mu'minin advised
Omar to nominate the morrow caliph so that they, Mohammed's nation,
should not be scattered. Omar sought her directions in this regard. This
means that the caliph would have nominated the exact one A'isheh had
selected.

### Congregational Authority for Sunnis

“Not all of the Prophet's companions — Sahaba — were legible for issuing
verdicts. Not all of them were referred in questions regarding the
religion. This matter, however, was exclusively attached to the
retainers of the Holy Quran, who were having full acquaintance of its
entire aspects; such as repealing and repealed positions, bases and
allegorical and the rest of its evidences. They had received these
concerns from the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) directly or
from their supreme tutors. Those individuals were named ‘Qurra'’ —
reciters of the holy Quran, since the Arab were illiterate nation and
the ability of reading was an inexperienced matter on these days. This
question lasted all over the first stage of Islam.” bn­Khuldoun
says.[23]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[21] Ibid. An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam. [22] Al­Qasimi's Nidhamul­Hukm,
pages 197­8. [23] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat, part.4, page168, and Ara'u
Ulema'il­Muslimin, pages 50 and up.

By emergence of the Umayids as rulers, the essential sections of the
entire Sahaba's ultimate decency conception were originated to comprise
the entire Sahaba, with the lexical and the terminological meaning of
this term. Without an exception and without any introductory, the entire
Sahaba became so decent that they shall be certainly in the Paradise,
and none of them shall be in the hell­fire, and they are inapplicable to
forge lies. They grew idiosyncratic religious authorities that it is
lawful to rest upon.

As he is reckoned with the first class Sahaba, Abu­Bakr's opinions are
lawful. The same thing is said about Omar's and any other Sahabi's. This
is by the reason that the entire Sahaba are decent.

The following saying is imputed to Abu­Haneefeh: “In case I could not
find the text involved in the Quran or the Prophet's traditions, I go
straightly to the Sahaba's opinions. Supposing there were various
opinions of various Sahaba, I, then, have full option to adopt any
provided that I do not prefer their followers' opinions to theirs.”[24]

In his I'lamil­Muwaqqi'in, Ibnul­Qeyyim writes down: (For Imam Ahmed,
principals of legislation are five. The first and the second are the —
doctrinal — texts and the Sahaba's verdicts respectively. The Hanafites
and the Hanbalites ruled of allocating the Holy Book of Allah to the
Sahaba's deeds. Their argument is that the learned Sahabi would not
neglect applying a general text unless he has an evidence. Hence,
applying on the contrary of a doctrinal text is an evidence on the
allocation of such a text. The Sahabi's deeds, however, are as same
value as his words.)[25]

Like the Prophet, each Sahabi has his own words, deeds and signature.
This means that each Sahabi has his own tradition. From Ibnul­Qeyyim's
saying of estimating a Sahabi’s deeds as same as his words, we can
deduce any Sahabi's deed is used for allocating general significations
of the Holy Book of Allah and generalizing a restricted meaning. This
indicates that the Sahaba's sayings were treated as if they were
revealed from the heavens. The most catastrophic matter in this question
is that every Sahabi, in both lexical and terminological meaning, is
intended in this rule. Abu­Bakr, Muawiya, Marwan­bn­Al­Hakam and
Abdullah­bn­Abi­Sarh are, according to Sunnis’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[24] In the first of this study, bn­Hajar's definition of the Sahaba, on
which Sunnis depend, and an analysis of it are cited. [25] Ma'ruf
Ad­Dewalibi's Al­Medkhelu Ila Ilmil­Ussoul, and Weyyid Murtedha
Ar­Radawi's Ara'u Ulema'il­Muslimin, page87.

conception, Sahaba of the same degree and standing, and are authorities
and stars that guidance to the right path is gained by following any of
them.

As an abridgment, the following is inferred; there is a congregational
authority believed in by Sunnis. Unexceptionally, each Sahabi is an
idiosyncratic unadulterated authority that is impracticable to forge
lies. He speaks only the most evident right since he is one of the
people of the Paradise. He whoever suspects them, or any one of them, is
decided as a miscreant whom should be neither share in food or drink,
nor offered the funeral Prayer when he perishes!! The Sahaba’s followers
became their successors. The Sunni scholars were successors of the
Sahaba's followers. Hence, the variant parties were the dominant powers.

### Roles of the Authorities for Sunnis

In the Rashidite caliphate, the caliph was the supreme authority of
Muslims. He was a decent Sahabi who has the right of seeking the advice
of any and, in the same time, neglects or follows any opinion. Abu­Bakr
and Omar were wont to seek the advice of the retainers of the Quran such
as Ali, Ubey­bn­Ka'b, Me'ath­bn­Jabal, Zaid­bn­Thabit and the like. It
was not unacceptable for the caliph to adopt the opinion of any of them,
since the most important thing had been recognition of the Shariite
ruling. There was no existence for the Sahaba's ultimate decency in the
meaning for which the Umayids advertised and legislated. The majority of
Sahaba played a little role in the aspect of authority. In other words,
they were not authorities.

In the Umayid reign, the matter was not so different. After he had
planted the entire Sahaba's ultimate decency conception, Muawiya, the
decent Sahabi, became the Muslims’ supreme authority. He practiced his
authority as same as the former caliphs did. He had the right to seek
advice and adopt opinion of any. Thanks to the Sahaba's ultimate decency
conception, Muawiya was regarded as one of people of the Paradise that
he took the place of Abu­Bakr, Omar, Othman and Ali despite the fact
that he had been ‘released’ and son of ‘released’. As he was seen as a
caliph, Muawiya enjoyed the caliphs’ same competencies. He had the right
to adopt any opinion from any in case there were variant solutions of
the same question.

For scholastic individuals, they also had the right to adopt any opinion
in case of variety of solutions of the same question. The same thing is
said about Sahaba's followers and scholars; their successors. The
parties enjoyed the same right. After the collapse of the Islamic
caliphate, every scholar

became an independent authority who had his own verdicts and followers.
In a like manner, every Arab party became an autonomous authority
enjoying the right of issuing verdicts and having followers. The mission
of each party was not more than proving its meritoriousness of
predominating power in the province taken as its center.
