Chapter 6 — the Authority After the Prophet
===========================================

Shia’s Opinion
--------------

### A. Requisiteness of Authority

They say: It is untrue that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) left his nation without nominating a leader and an authority,
since these two matters are indispensable and rudimentary for the nation
every time. The saying of the Prophet's leaving his nation without a
leader and an authority contravenes perfection and completion of the
religion and the divine grace. It also opposes the thorough explication
asserted by the Holy Quran. How should the Prophet explicate a minute
affair, such as the proper way of urination, while he neglects a
fundamental affair which is leadership of the nation? Similarly, leaving
the nation without a leader and an authority is a matter contradicting
the Prophet's mercy and care for his people. According to the Holy
Quran, God has thrown in his Apostle's heart mercy and care for this
nation. Who should represent the Prophet in his political and religious
duties? Who should explain the Quran? Who should show limits of circle
of legality? Who should be the saving ship of this nation? Who should be
guiding people to the right? Who should be the security of this nation?
These functions are elements of specialization. Like medicine,
engineering or atomics, these elements are in need of an individual
specialized. None other than the most favorable, the fittest and the
most familiar with questions of the doctrine, who should join political
and religious leadership, can make out these concerns intensively. These
qualifications are identified by God alone. Legally and logically, it is
impractical for God to leave this concern to people's fancies. They are
within the fundamental principles of Islam and the basic prerequisites
of the divine solicitation, government and nation. The greatest evidence
on essentiality of this question is that the deniers who had traversed
the fact that the Prophet himself had clarified the succeeding
leadership, did their best to establish a positive leadership that was
stabilized for the predominant power after the great massacres, suffered
by the Islamic nation, committed for the sake of uniting the nation by
force under authority of that strongest ruler. Owing to the absence of
the

predominant knight, people were engaged in numerous sects, each of which
did establish its own authority.

### B. the Divine Declaration of the Authority

God, the Elevated, has revealed the Quran as a divine message to mankind
and a divine doctrine that provides an unequivocal depiction for the
movements of everything. It also systematizes the political and
religious affairs on this earth and exposes the essential
characteristics of the other life, and links these two lives in a
reciprocal fastened bind. In a like manner, that divine doctrine is
provided as one of the essentialities of God's Book revealed to Mohammed
(peace be upon him and his family), God's slave, so that he should
explicate it to people hypothetically and practically on levels of
solicitation and government. The Prophet did lead the solicitation and
its outcome; the government. A thorough explication of the divine
doctrine was introduced by the Prophet during both stages. The doctrine,
likewise, explicated everything thoroughly for those who received the
Remembrance; the Holy Quran. Hence, since he was the fittest for leading
the followers and applying the doctrine, the most favorable, the keenest
and the most acquainted of that divine doctrine, Mohammed (peace be upon
him and his family) was elected as the authority. During the Prophet's
blessed lifetime, none had the capability of taking his place or
shouldering his missions. God, Who does credulously realize the fittest
for leading the followers and applying the doctrine, the most favorable,
the keenest and the most acquainted of that divine doctrine, has been
the specialist in electing Mohammed for this mission. On that account,
God dedicatedly has granted Himself the right of nominating the
political and religious leader. He, the Elevated, has provided that
leader before people and averred of his being the most acquainted, the
keenest, the most favorable and the fittest. God has also authorized him
to enjoy thorough adequacies of explicating the doctrine to people and
being the political and religious leader and judge.

In case people accepted and showed loyalty to that political and
religious leadership God has provided, Mohammed should be the leader.

The godly solicitation is ceaseless. The believing government endorses
that solicitation. The general purpose is guiding mankind to the right.
Mohammed is a man to be inescapably deceased. God, lonelily, realizes
credulously the fittest among Mohammed's followers for leading the
nation and applying the doctrine, the most favorable, the keenest and
the most acquainted of that divine doctrine. For these reasons, it was
God's dedicate

concern to provide the political and religious leader after Mohammed. In
case people accepted and swore allegiance to that individual provided by
God as the political and religious leader, they should be guided to the
right path. Otherwise, a process of disintegration between political and
religious leadership would occur, and the political leader would be an
individual other than the religious one. Thus, that ruler — political
leader — shall certainly predominate the religious leadership someday.

Al­Hussein­bn­Ali­bn­Abi­Talib (peace be upon him) is, according to
doctrinal texts, the Imam, the political and religious leader and the
guide of people during his lifetime. Nevertheless, people, coercively or
voluntarily, swore their allegiance to Yazeed­bn­Muawiya who,
consequently, became the political ruler while Al­Hussein was the
religious authority. The instance should have been that Al­Hussein holds
political and religious leadership together. As people declared fealty
to Yazeed, an isolation between the political and the religious
leadership occurred. Yazeed became the actual ruler. Since religious
leadership was appendant to the political, the ruler would not be
content before he denuded the religious authority from his competencies,
so that he would be able to have the religious leadership beside the
political. This exactly what happened. Killing was the only way Yazeed
had to deprive Al­Hussein of his competencies. He did kill him.

Shias say that improvement of the Muslims' conditions and future is
depending upon combining the political and religious leaderships. In
other words, the ruler should be the religious authority and that ruler
and religious authority should be the one elected by God.

As an abstract we say: God has been dedicatedly the specialist in
electing and nominating the political and religious leader of the
nation. This is by the reason that He, the Elevated, does credulously
realize the fittest for leading the followers and applying the doctrine,
the most favorable, the keenest and the most acquainted of that divine
doctrine. Before the Prophet's being taken to the Exalted Associate, God
had elected the political and religious leader for Muslims. He, the
Elevated, ordered the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) of
declaring so in the attendance of one hundred thousand Muslims during
the Farewell Pilgrimage. For ten times, the Prophet repeated this
declaration. People, after all, swore allegiance to men other than that
authority nominated by God. Therefore, a process of separation occurred
between the two leaderships. Rulers, thereafter, marched forwardly and
deprived the religious authorities of their capacities. Thus, rulers,
using their

force, held fast on the political and religious leaderships.

The Leader and the Authority Nominated By God
---------------------------------------------

Shias allege that Imam Ali (peace be upon him) was the leader and the
authority nominated by God who elected him to succeed the Prophet in
political and religious affairs. God, correspondingly, ordered His
Prophet of declaring this divine election. Therefore, he declared it in
front of one hundred thousand Muslims. That was in the Farewell
Pilgrimage. They also allege that God has nominated Al­Hassan and
Al­Hussein respectively as the successors of Imam Ali, and arranged this
question in the form that every Imam should nominate his successor. They
were twelve Imams. The twelfth was Imam Al­Mahdi (Mahdi). This Imam is
the Shariite ruler of the Islamic republic of Iran pursuant to the
Article5 of the Iranian Constitution. The representative of that
Shariite Imam is the actual leader of Iran whose missions are practicing
the activities of the Shariite Imam substitutionally till God shall
cause that Imam to come forth.

With respect to the Islamic Shari'a, the head of the Prophet's household
is the Imam, ruler and authority in every time. Headship of the
Prophet's household is perpetually operative. In spite of the rulers'
active endeavors to terminate the Prophet’s immaculate progeny, they
shall never be extinct.

Reasons Beyond Hostility of Sunnis to Shias
-------------------------------------------

As long as Shias are right, what for are they confronted by Sunnis? As
an answer to this inquiry, we say: Shias are seen as enemies because
their allegations put the rulers on the carpet, and invalidate reasons
of their existence as authorities, and create excuses for their enemies
to supplant. Rulers had full control on imports of the state. They,
practically, had brimming option to dispose in such imports. They had
the dominion upon the armed forces and their remunerations. Hence, these
forces comply to those rulers amenably. Rulers possessed the entire mass
media. Shias, on the other hand, were representing the opposition party
all the time. For these reasons, rulers showed malice against them and
persecuted and reproduced them as devils, rebellious and deserters of
the nation's congruous faith. Majority of people had no option other
than agreeing to the ruling authorities' claims. Because Shias had not
been granted any opportunity to express their viewpoints without
encumbrance, rulers misrepresented and

distorted such viewpoints. Ordinary people reported these distorted
viewpoints rulers had mentioned, surreptitiously, on behalf of Shias,
for the sake of making people shrink back from them progressively. As a
matter of fact, most people deem these distorted viewpoints’ veracity
adopted by Shias. The reason beyond so was condensational reports
appertained to this aspect.

Sunnis' Velocity
----------------

From all sides, Sunnis shouted repeatedly with earsplitting cries:
“Believe not Shias; they devoted themselves to being enemies of this
nation, and satisfied themselves with rebellion against congruity.”

Ask them to provide an evidence on their claims.

### Replication on that Velocity

Shias say: ‘year of congruity’ for Sunnis was that in which power
overcame legality. Conception of Sunnism — pursuing the Prophet's
traditions — from which they inferred their name, was originated when
power overcame legality. Unlike the belief adopted by the public,
‘Sunni’ does not indicate pursuing the Prophet's traditions. Shias, in
fact, are the most careful for pursuing the Prophet's deeds, words and
signature. By despising partisan imitation, one can easily perceive that
this saying is not irresponsible at all. By the same token, everybody is
within reach to the authenticity of the previous allegation. Considering
it is true, censure should be alleviated from us. Barring this, we shall
retreat from the wrong. (Surely falsehood is a vanishing thing.)

Meeting the urgency of the pro­truth, the following is the decisive
evidence on our claims:

The Two Authorities
-------------------

For Shias, there were two authorities in Islam after the Prophet's
decease:

The individual authority was held by the — foremost — head of the
Prophet's household; Ali (peace be upon him). This authority faces the
predominant ruler's dictatorship for Sunnis.

The congregational authority was held by the Prophet's progeny and
household. These individuals were loyal to their head. They sided him in
conserving sturdy origins of the religion.

### God is The Nominator Of The 2 Authorities

Shias allege that it was God, the exalted, who assigned the two
authorities and ordered His Prophet of declaring so to the Muslims. So,
the Prophet did declare it in various occasions.

### Shariite Proof Of God's Nominating The Individual Authority

First: The Holy Verse of Wilaya 5:55­6. (Only Allah is your Wali and His
Apostle and those who believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the
poor rate while they bow. And whoever takes Allah and His Apostle and
those who believe for a guardian, then surely the party of Allah are
they that shall be triumphant.)

These two Verses were revealed for Ali when he gave his ring as alms
while he was performing the ritual genuflection of the prayer. In
At­Tha'labi's Tafseer, for instance, these two Verses are debated in
details. As he saw Ali give his ring as alms while he was in his ritual
genuflection of the prayer, Mohammed, the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family), recited the words Moses, the prophet, had supplicated his
Lord with: ( And give me an aider from my family; Ali. Strengthen my
back by him…)

Abu­Therr reported: “By God I swear, before the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) had finished from reciting this supplication,
Gabriel, the Angel, descended to him with the revelation of the Holy
Verse of Wilaya. Exegesists of the Holy Quran, unanimously, remarked
that the Holy Verse involved had been revealed for Ali.[53]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[53] Many exegesists of the Holy Quran remarked to Ali's being the one
intended in the Holy Verses concerned. Refer to, for instance, to
Al­Qawsheji's Sharhul­Tajrid, Chapter of Imamate. Abu­Isaaq Ahmed Bin
Mohammed Bin Ibrahim An­Nisapuri At­Tha'labi's book of Tafseer, about
whom bn­Khellekan, in his Al­Wafiyat, confessed that he had been the
only reliable exegesist in his time. Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel,
part.1 page161. Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib, page311.
Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib, pages 228 and 250. Muhibbud­Din At­Tabari's
Thekha'irul­Uqba, pages 88 and 102. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, part.2
page187. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, Chapter: Imam Ali Bin Abi Talib's
life account, part.2 page409. Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh,
pages 108 and 123. As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour, part.2

The Prophet indeed assigned Ali, Amirul­Mu'minin, as the authority and
his successor. This process was acted in the presence of one hundred
thousand Muslims in Ghadeer Khum. It was on that Thursday when Gabriel,
the Angel, descended from the heavens five hours after the daybreak to
address at the Prophet: “O Mohammed! Your Lord sends His greeting to you
and say (O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your
Lord; and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message;
surely Allah will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not
guide the unbelieving people.)” This Holy Verse was revealed on the day
of Ghadeer — the day on which the Prophet led the Muslims to a place
called ‘Ghadeer Khum’ and declared that Ali would be his successor.[54]

After the Prophet's assigning Ali as the coming Imam, authority and
(caliph), the following Holy Verse was revealed: (This day have I
perfected for you your religion and completed My favor on you and chosen
for you Islam as a religion.) This very Verse was revealed in Ghadeer
Khum, the exact place where Amirul­Mu'minin Ali, was declared as the
succeeding leader. The revelation of that Verse occurred in Dhul­Hijja
(the last month

------------------------------------------------------------------------

page293. Ashawkani's Fetihul­Qadir, part.2 page53. Al­Kelbi's
At­Tasiheelu Li Uloumit­Tanzeel, page181. Az­Zemekhshari's Al­Keshaf
(Book of Tafseer), part.1 page649. At­Tabari's Book of Tafseer, part.6
page288­9. Ibnul­Jawzi's Zadul­Maseer Fi Ilmit­Tafseer, part.2 page383.
Al­Qurtubi's Book of Tafseer, part.6 page216. Al­Jadi's
At­Tafseerul­Muneer Li Me'alimit­Tanzeel, part.1 page210. Fetihul­Beyan
Fi Meqassidil­Qur'an, part.3 page51. Al­Wahidi's Asbabun­Nuzoul,
page148. As­Suyouti's Al­Babul­Manqoul­printed in the margins of
Tafseerul­Jalalein, page213­. As­Sibt Al­Jawzi's Tethkiretul­Khawass
pages 18 and 208. Ar­Razi's Book of Tafseer, part.12 pages 20 and 26.
bn­Kutheir's Book of Tafseer, part.2 page71. There are other thirty six
references mentioning the same fact. [54] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq,
Chapter: Imam Ali Bin Abi Talib's life account, part.2 page86. Siddiq
Hassan Khan Melik Behubal's Fetihul­Bayan Fi Meqassidil­Qur'an, part.3
page63. Al­Hakim Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel Li
Qawa'idit­Tafdheel; the Verses dealing with merits of the Prophet's
progeny, part.1 page187. Al­Wahidi An­Nisapuri's Asbabun­Nuzoul,
page115. Jalalud­Din As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour, part.2 page298.
Ashawkani's Fetihul­Qadir, part.2 page60. Ar­Razi's Book of Tafseer,
part.12 pages 50. bn­Talha's Mettalibus­Sa'ul, part.1 page44.
Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh, pages 25. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page120 and 249. Ashehristani's Almilelu Wen­Nihel,
part.1 page163. Al­Hamawini's Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 pages 72 and 74.
Badrud­Din Al­Hanafi's Umdetul­Qari Fi Sharhi Sahihil­Bukahri, part.8
page58. Al­Hamadani's Mawaddetul­Arabi. Al­Alusi's Rouhul­Me'ani, part.2
page348. Mohammed Ebduh's Tafseerul­Menar, part.6 page463 and many other
references.

of the Hijri year) immediately after the ceremonies of assigning Ali as
the succeeding leader.[55]

Exactly after the ceremonies of designating Amirul­Mu'minin Ali,
Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab approached him and said kiddingly: “Congratulations,
son of Abu­Talib! You became my master as well as the entire Muslims.”
This is an authentic report.[56]

In the coming eras, the Ghadeer day became a general festivity for
Muslims.[57] The hadith of Ghadeer has attained such a high rank of
continuous narration that many Sunni scholars compiled thorough books in
this concern. As examples of these books, we mention the following:

bn­Hajar At­Tabari's Kitabul­Wilaya.

Abul­Abbas­bn­Ahmed­bn­Uqdeh's Kitabul­Wilaya. (333A.H.)

Abu­Bakr Al­Jessabi's Men Rawa Hadithe Ghadeeri Khum. (355A.H.)

Ad­Darqutni's ways of narrating the Hadith of Ghadeer. (385A.H.)

Abu­Sa'd As­Sejistani's Ad­Dirayeh Fi Hadithil­Wilaya. (477A.H.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[55] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, Chapter: Imam Ali Bin Abi Talib's life
account, part.2 page75. Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib,
page19. Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.1 page157. Al­Khateeb
Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu Baghdad, part.8 page290. As­Suyouti's
Ad­Durrul­Manthour, part.2 page295. As­Suyouti's Alittifaq, part.1
page31. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, part.1 page47. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page115. Al­Hamawini's Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1
pages 72 and 74. Al­Ya'qubi's At­Tarikh, part.2 page35. bn­Jarir
At­Tabari's Kitabul­Wilaya. Al­Alusi's Ruhul­Me'ani, part.6 page55.
bn­Kutheir's Al­Bidayeh Wen­Nihayeh, part.5 page213 and many other
references. [56] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, Chapter: Imam Ali Bin Abi
Talib's life account, part.2 page75, hadith 575, 577 and 578.
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib, page18, hadith 24.
Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page94. Al­Khateeb Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu
Baghdad, part.8 page290. Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.1
page158, hadith 213. Abu­Ahmed Al­Ghezzali's Sirrul­Alemin, page21.
Ihqaqul­Haq, part.6 page256. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer, part.1 page132.
Ibnul­Jawzi's Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 page277 and many other
references. [57] Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer, part.1 page267 who referred to
Al­Beiruni's Al­Atharul­Baqiyeh Fil­Qurounil­Khaliyeh, page334.
bn­Talha's Metalibus­Sa'ul, part.1 page44. bn­Khellekan's
Wefiyatul­A'yan, part.1 page60. The life account of Al­Musta'li Bin
Al­Muntessir. The life account of Al­Mustensir Al­Ubeidi, part.2
page223.

Abul­Qasim Ubeidullah Al­Hanafi's Du'atul­Hudati Ila Eda'i
Haqqil­Muwalat. (490A.H.)

In addition, a great deal of other compilers of hadiths did collect
hadiths appertained to this concern in many books. 116 Sahaba and 84
Sahaba's followers reported the hadith of Ghadeer. Beginning with the
second to the fourteenth Hijri century, almostly, all of the Sunni
scholars of various classes and sects, narrated the hadith of Ghadeer.
Al­Amini, in his Al­Ghadeer, mentions that 360 scholars did refer to the
hadith of Ghadeer. We should be sufficed with the fact that
Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab approached Ali and addressed at him:
“Congratulations, son of Abu­Talib! You have become the master of every
male and female believer.” That was on the day of the Ghadeer
declaration.

A Model of the Ghadeer Declaration
----------------------------------

In his Al­Mu'jamul­Kabeer, At­Tabarani relates:

(Hutheifeh­bn­Useid Al­Ghefari, the reverent companion of the Prophet,
said:

As he accomplished the rites of the Farewell Pilgrimage, the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) warned his companions against
residing at some bushes in an elevated place. After a while, he (peace
be upon him and his family) ordered them of sweeping that place by
removing thistles found there. Next to these bushes, the Prophet had
performed a prayer before he stood erect and orated: “O people! The
Aware, the Knowing informed me that prophets attain only half of the age
of the succeeding ones. I do conclude that I am to be soon invited, and
I am to answer. I, as well as you, shall be questioned. What will you
reply?” “We do confirm that you have conveyed, done well and advised.
God may reward you with good.” They answered.

Thence, the Prophet said: “Do you maintain there is no God but Allah,
and Mohammed is Allah's slave and apostle, and the Paradise is true, the
Hell­fire is true, death is true, the post­earthly life is true and the
Hour is coming, there is no doubt about it; and Allah shall raise up
those in graves?” “Yes, we do maintain.” they answered. “O Allah! Be the
witness.” supplicated the Prophet, and added: “O people! Allah is surely
my Master. I am the master of the believers. I am preceded to the
believers' souls. He

whomever I was his master, this — Ali — is his master. O Allah! Accede
to whom accedes to him, and oppose whom opposes him.”[58]

The Prophet then added: “O people! I will be preceding you to the
Heavenly Pool and you shall be following. It is a pool of an area larger
than the distance between Busra — Syria and San'a — Yemen. In it, there
shall be cups as numerous as stars. When you shall be coming to me on
that Pool, I will ask you about the two weighty things. Suppose how
should you esteem me in these two. The major weighty thing is the Book
of Allah, the Elevated. It is a cord, one of its brims is at Allah's
hand while the other is at yours. Cling to it and deviate not and
distort not. The other is my clan; my household. The Aware, the Knowing
has informed me that they shall never separate until they shall join me
on the Pool.”[59]

The Doctrinal Assertion on Ali's Leadership
-------------------------------------------

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) addressed at Ali: “You
are my successor in this world and in the Hereafter.”[60] “After me, you
are the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[58] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, part.2 page50, hadith 548 and 550.
Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page94. Imam Ahmed Bin Hanbal's Al­Musned,
part.4 page281. Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh, page24.
As­Suyouti's Al­Hawi Lil­Fatawi, part.1 page122. Muhibbud­Din
At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba, page67. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh, part.1
page350. At­Thehbi's Tarikhul­Islam, part.2 page197. Khawaja Al­Hanafi's
Ilmul­Kitab, page161. Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu Dureris­Simtein, page109.
Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, pages 30­1, 249. Al­Fakhr Ar­Razi's
Book of Tafseer, part.3 page63. As­Sibt Al­Jawzi's Tethkiretul­Khawass,
page29. Mishkatul­Messabih, part.3 page246. Abaqatul­Anwar, part.1
page285. Al­Hamawini's Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 page77. Al­Muraja'at,
Rev. Hussein Radi, part.2 page177. [59] At­Tabarani's
Al­Mu'jamul­Kabeer. bn­Hajar Al­Haithemi's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page25.
(In this reference, the compiler rules of the authenticity of the
narrative involved.) Al­Haithami's Majma'uzzawa'id, part.6 page164.
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, Chapter: Imam Ali Bin Abi Talib's life
account, part.2 page45, hadith 545. Al­Mutteqi Al­Hindi's Kenzul­Ummal,
part.1 page168, hadith 959, and part.6 page152. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer,
part.1 page26­7. Abaqatul­Anwar, Vol.­Hadithut­Ta'liq, part.1 page3132
and 165. Al­Hakeem At­Terfadi's Nawadirul­Ahwal, page289. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page37. [60] At­Thehbi's Talkhissul­Mustedrak,
page26. (In this reference, the compiler rules of the authenticity of
the narrative involved.) bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, 9,11,12
page16, 107, 72. (In this reference, the compiler reports that Imam
Ahmed­Bin Hanbal­has related and ruled of the authenticity of this
hadith.) Muslim's Book of Hadith, part.2 pages 24 and 323, Chapter:
Ali's Merits, and part.1 page28. Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3
page109. Al­Jam'u Beines­Sahihein, Chapter: Ali's Merits. Al­Bukhari's
Book of Hadith, part.2 page58, Chapter: Battle of Tabuk. Ahmed's Book of

master of every Muslim.” “He whomever I was his leader, Ali is his
leader.” “Ali does deserve more than the share he had taken. He is your
leader after me.” “You are surely the master of every believer, after
me.” “He whomever I was his chief, he — Ali — is being his chief.” “He
whomever I was his master, this — Ali — is being his master.” “You are
surely the leader of the believers after me.”[61]

The Hadith of Manzila — the credit — assured Ali's leadership; “Your
credit to me is as same as Aaron's to Moses. Yet, there is no prophet
proceeding me.” This hadith is one of the Prophet’s most authentic
traditions that the entire hadithists reported and recorded.[62]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hadith, part.1 pages 172, 175, 177, 179, 182 and 185, and part.6 pages
331, 269 and 438, and part.3 page32. As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa,
page65. (In this reference, the compiler mentions that At­Tabarani and
Al­Bezzaz have recorded this hadith.) At­Tirmithi's Book of Hadith,
hadith 2504. Abdul­Berr's Alisti'ab, Chapter: Ali's Manners. [61]
An­Nisa'i's Al­Khassa'is. Ahmed's Book of Hadith, part.4 page438.
Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3 page111. At­Thehbi's
Talkhissul­Mustedrak. Al­Muraja'at, page163­4. An­Nidhamus­Siyasi
Fil­Islam; One. [62] As examples, the following sources can be referred
to: Al­Bukhari's Book of Hadith, part.5 page129, and part.4 page208.
Muslim's Book of Hadith, part.2 page360. Ahmed's Book of Hadith, part.3
pages 50, hadith 1490 (with an authentic documentation), and part.5
pages 56, 57 and 66. bn­Madgeh's Book of Hadith, part.1 page42.
Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3 page109. At­Tabari's Book of History,
part.3 page104. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, hadiths: 30, 125, 148, 149
and 150. (The compiler defined a hundred way of reporting his Hadith.)
Al­Belathiri's Ansabul­Ashraf, part.2 page106. bn­Hajar's Al­Issabetu Fi
Tamyizis­Sahaba, part.2 page507 and 509. Alisti'ab (in the margin of
Al­Issabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba), part.3 page34­5. An­Nisa'i's
Al­Khassa'is, pages 76­8. Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib.
Hilyetul­Awliya, part.7 page194. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page60.
As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa, page168. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh,
page35. Usdul­Ghabeh, part.2 page8. Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu
Dureris­Simtein, page95. Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib, pages 281.
bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha, part.2 page495. At­Tabarani's
Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer, part.2 pages 22 and 54. Al­Haithami's
Majma'uzzawa'id, part.9 page109. Al­Mutteqi Al­Hindi's Kenzul­Ummal,
part.15 page149. bn­EbdiRabbih's Al­Iqdul­Fareed, part.4 page311.
Ibnul­Atheer's Jami'ul­Ukhuwwa, part.9 page468. Mishkatul­Massabih,
part.3 page242. As­Suyouti's Al­Jami'us­Sagheer, part.2 page56.

Guidance After the Prophet
--------------------------

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) expressed: “I am the
forewarner and Ali is the guide. By you, Ali, the guided — to the right
path — shall be led.”[63]

The Attester After the Prophet
------------------------------

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) stated: “This, Ali, and I
shall be the attesters on my people on the Day of Resurrection.”[64]
“Ali is the door to my knowledge. After me, he shall be settling
questions of what I have been asked to communicate to my people.
Cherishing him is creed. Despising him is hypocrisy.” “I am the city of
knowledge. Ali is its door.” In the Chapter: political leadership, these
hadiths shall be detailedly debated. In a like manner, the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) addressed at Ali: “After me, you
shall be settling questions of discrepancy my people will be engaged
in.”[65]

Such traditions do assert that the Prophet had designated the succeeding
authority to whom people should refer to in both political and religious
affairs. That single authority was Ali­bn­Abi­Talib. In the Fourth Title
of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[63] the following books:  bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, part.2 page417.
Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh, page107. Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu
Dureris­Simtein, page90. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page99.
Nurul­Absar, page71. Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.1 page293.
Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib, pages 233. Ihqaqul­Haq, part.4 page301.
Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith),
part.5 page34. Al­Hamawini's Fera'idus­Simtein, part.4 page148.
Fedha'ilul­Khamseh Mines­Sihahis­Sitteh, part.1 page66. As­Suyouti's
Ad­Durrul­Manthour, part.4 page45. Ibnul­Jawzi's Zadul­Maseer Fi
Ilmit­Tafseer, part.4 page207. Al­Alusi's Rouhul­Me'ani, part.13 page97.
Ashawkani's Fetihul­Qadir, part.3 page70. At­Tabari's Book of Tafseer,
part.13 page103. bn­Kutheir's Book of Tafseer, part.3 page502 and many
other references. [64] Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib,
page45, hadiths 67 and 97. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, part.2 page273,
hadiths 793­5. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page239. Al­Mennawi's
Kunouzul­Haqa'iq, page38. At­Thehbi's Al­Mizan, part.4 page138.
Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith),
part.5 page34. [65] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, part.2 page488, hadiths
1008­9. Al­Khawarzmi's Maqtelul­Hussein, page86. Al­Khawarzmi's
Al­Menaqib, page236. Al­Mennawi's Kunouzul­Heqa'iq, page182. Muntakhabu
Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith) page33.

this book, a detailed debate will be given to this subject concerning
political leadership of Islam.

The Shias' Congregational Authority
-----------------------------------

Shias appraise the Prophet and his immaculate household (peace be upon
them all) as their guide owing to their seniority in Islam and God's
preferring them. They are, as Shias see, the sons, women and near people
intended in the Holy Verse of Mubahala — supplicating God to curse the
liar party: (But whoever disputes with you in matter after what has come
to you of knowledge, then say: Come on let us call our sons and your
sons and our women and your women and our near people and your near
people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of
Allah on the liars. 3:61)

This Holy Verse was revealed in the favor of the Prophet, Ali, Fatima,
Al­Hassan and Al­Hussein (peace be upon them).[66] In addition, they are
the rope — covenant — of Allah; (And holdfast to the covenant (rope) of
Allah altogether and be not disunited, 3:103)[67]

They are people of the reminder — the Quran — about whom God said: (so
ask the followers (people) of the reminder if you do not know. 21:7)[68]
They are also the envied intended in the Verse: (Or do they envy the
people for

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[66] An­Nawawi's Muslim's Book of Hadith, Chapter: Ali's Merits, part.2
and 7 page360 and 120. At­Tirmithi's Book of Hadith, part.4 page293.
Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.1 page120­9. Al­Hakim's
Al­Mustedrak, part.3 page150. (The compiler rules of the authenticity of
the hadith.) Al­Hakim's Ma'rifetu Uloumil­Hadith, Type 17. At­Thehbi's
Talkhissul­Mustedrak. Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib.
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, Chapter: Imam Ali Bin Abi Talib's life
account, part.1 page21. At­Tabari's Book of Tafseer, part.3 page299­301.
Az­Zemekhshari's Al­Kheshaf (Book of Tafseer), part.1 page368­70.
Al­Qurtubi's Book of Tafseer, part.4 page104. Al­Wahidi's
Asbabun­Nuzoul, page59. bn­Arabi's Ahkamul­Qur'an, part.1 page275.
Ashawkani's Fetihul­Qadir, part.1 page347. Ar­Razi's Book of Tafseer,
part.2 page699. On page45 of Al­Muraja'at; the index, about 90
otherreferences recording this narrative are written down by Hussein
Razi, the revisor. [67] Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, page130,
hadiths 177­80. bn­Hajar Al­Haithemi's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page189.
Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page139 and 238. Ashabrawi's Al­Itihaf
Bihubbil­Ashraf, page76. Al­Alusi's Rouhul­Me'ani, part.4 page16.
Ashabalneji's Nurul­Absar, page102. [68] Al­Hassakani's
Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.1 page334. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh,
page51. Al­Qurtubi's Book of Tafseer, part.11 page272. At­Tabari's Book
of Tafseer, part.14 page109. bn­Kutheir's Book of Tafseer, part.2
page570. Al­Alusi's Rouhul­Me'ani, part.14 page134. At­Tusturi's
Ihqaqul­Haq, part.3 page482.

what Allah has given them of His grace? 4:54)[69] Similarly, they are
the near of kin intended in the Verses: (And give to the near of kin his
due.. 17:26) (.. It is for Allah and for the Apostle and for the near of
kin.. 59:7) (And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for
Allah and for the Apostle and for the near of kin.. 8:41)[70] They are
the purified intended in the Verse: (Allah only desires to keep away the
uncleanness from you, o people of the House! and to purify you a
thorough purifying. 33:33)[71] In the same way, they are the ones whose
commitment is imposed by God[72] and whose being blessed during
obligatory prayers is also imposed as a pillar rite.[73]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[69] Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib, page467 hadith 314.
Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.1 page143. bn­Hajar
Al­Haithemi's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page150. Ashebelneji's Nurul­Absar,
page102. As­Sebban's Is'afur­Raghibin (In the margin of Nurul­Absar)
page102. Ashabrawi's Al­Itihaf Bihubbil­Ashraf, page76. Abu­Bakr
Al­Hadhrami's Wardus­Sabi, page37. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer, part.3 page61.
[70] As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour, part.4 page177. Al­Haithami's
Majma'uzzawa'id, part.7 page49. At­Tabari's Book of Tafseer, part.15 and
10 page194 and 5. Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.2 page338.
Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page49. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the
margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.1 page228. [71] Muslim's Book of
Hadith, part.2 pages 24 and 323, Chapter: The Prophet's Household's
Merits, and part.2 and 15 page368 and 149. Al­Hassakani's
Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.2 page33. Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3
page347. At­Thehbi's Talkhissul­Mustedrak (In the margin of Al­Hakim's
Al­Mustedrak). As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour, part.5 page198.
Ashawkani's Fetihul­Qadir, part.4 page279. In our An­Nidhamus­Siyasi
Fil­Islam, pages 76 and up, a persuasive scientific ebate is given to
this subject. [72] Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.2 page130.
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib, page307. Muhibbud­Din
At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba, pages 25 and 138. bn­Hajar Al­Haithemi's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, pages 101, 135 and 136.  Ibnus­Sebbagh's
Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh, page11. Al­Khawarzmi's Maqtelul­Hussein, pages 1
and 57. At­Tabari's Book of Tafseer, part.25 page25. Al­Hakim's
Al­Mustedrak, part.3 page172. Ashabrawi's Al­Itihaf Bihubbil­Ashraf,
pages 5 and 13. As­Suyouti's Ihya'ul­Meyt (In the margins of Al­Itihaf
Bihubbil­Ashraf) page110. At­Thehbi's Talkhissul­Mustedrak (In the
margins of Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak) part.3 page172. Az­Zemekhshari's
Al­Keshaf (Book of Tafseer), part.3 page402. Al­Qurtubi's Book of
Tafseer, part.16 page22. Ashawkani's Fetihul­Qadir, part.4 page537.
Hilyetul­Awliya, part.3 page201 and many other references .. [73]
Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer, part.2 page302. bn­Hajar Al­Haithemi's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, pages 87 and 139. Ar­Razi's Book of Tafseer,
part.7 page391. Muhibbud­Din At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba, page19.
Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.1 page269. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh
Mines­Sihahis­Sitteh, part.1 page208. An­Nebhani's
Al­Anwarul­Muhammediyeh, page422. Ashafi'i's poetry: It is sufficiently
a great pride that He who does not bless you is false performer. This
poetry is mentioned in bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page146.
Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page354. As­Sebban's
Is'afur­Raghibin(In the margin of Nurul­Absar) page118. Ashabrawi's
Al­Itihaf Bihubbil­Ashraf, page29. Ashabalneji's Nurul­Absar, page105.

In addition, the Prophet's household are the minor weighty. The Holy
Quran and they are standing for the fortress against deviation.[74] They
are the leading people[75] and the ship of salvation; he shall be saved
that whoever embarks it, while the tardy shall be surely sunk.[76] They
are the security against discrepancies. He should be reckoned with the
party of the Satan that whoever opposes them.[77] They are the security
of this nation.[78]

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) stated: “With each
generation of my nation, there will be decent individuals from my
descendants, whose mission shall be eliminating, away from this
religion, distortion of the deviated and falsification of the dishonest
and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zeini Dehlan's As­Sirewtun­Nubawiyyeh, (In the margins of
As­Seeretul­Halabiyeh) part.3 page332 and many other references. [74]
At­Tirmithi's Book of Hadith, part.5 page328. Al­Mutteqi Al­Hindi's
Kenzul­Ummal, page153. bn­Kutheir's Book of Tafseer, part.4 page113.
Ibnul­Atheer's Jami'ul­Ussoul, part.1 page187. At­Tabarani's
Al­Mu'jamul­Kabeer page137. Mishkatul­Massabih, part.3 page258.
As­Suyouti's Ihya'ul­Meyt (In the margins of Al­Itihaf bihubbil­Ashraf)
page114. An­Nebhani's Al­Fetihul­Kabeer, part.1 page503. bn­Hajar
Al­Haithemi's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page147 and 226. At­Tabarani's
Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer, part.1 page135. Al­Khazin (Book of Tafseer), part.1
page154. At­Tajul­Jami'u Lil­Ussoul, part.3 page308. An­Nisa'i's
Al­Khassa'is, page21. Muslim's Book of Hadith, part.2 page362 and many
other references. [75] bn­Hajar Al­Haithemi's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa,
page148 and 226. Al­Haithami's Majma'uzzawa'id, part.9 page163.
As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour, part.2 page60. [76] At­Thehbi's
Talkhissul­Mustedrak. Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu Dureris­Simtein, page235.
Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page30 and 370. bn­Hajar Al­Haithemi's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page184 and 234. As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa.
As­Sebban's Is'afur­Raghibin (In the margin of Nurul­Absar) page105.
Al­Hamawini's Fera'idus­Simtein, part.2 page246. Al­Kinji's
Kifayetut­Talib, pages 378. At­Tabarani's Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer, part.2
pages 22. As­Suyouti's Ihya'ul­Meyt (In the margins of Al­Itihaf
bihubbil­Ashraf) page113 and many other references. [77] bn­Hajar
Al­Haithemi's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page91 and 140. As­Suyouti's
Ihya'ul­Meyt (In the margins of Al­Itihaf Bihubbil­Ashraf) page114.
Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith),
part.5 page93. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page298. An­Nebhani's
Jawahirul­Bihar, part.1 page361. [78] Muhibbud­Din At­Tabari's
Thekha'irul­Uqba, page17. Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu Dureris­Simtein, page234.
As­Suyouti's Ihya'ul­Meyt (In the margins of Al­Itihaf Bihubbil­Ashraf)
page112. As­Suyouti's Al­Jami'us­Sagheer, part.2 page161. An­Nebhani's
Al­Fetihul­Kabeer, part.3 page267. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the
margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.3 and 5 page267 and 92. bn­Hajar
Al­Haithemi's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page185 and 233. As­Sebban's
Is'afur­Raghibin (In the margin of Nurul­Absar) page128 and many other
references.

misrepresentation of the ignorant. Your Imams are your delegates to
Allah. Decide on the most proper delegates.”[79]

The Fruit of the Shias' Pursuing the Doctrinal Authority
--------------------------------------------------------

Since they have acceded to Mohammed and his immaculate household, and
they betaken the head of the Prophet's household as their Imam and
guide, Shias are selected, by Allah, for conserving the religion with
its total sturdy principals. Hence, the Prophet foretold of the good
tidings that they are the best of mankind. As the Holy Verse: (As for
those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of men (mankind)
98:7), was revealed, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
addressed at Ali: “O Ali! These are you and your group.”[80]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[79] bn­Hajar Al­Haithemi's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page148. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, pages 226, 236 and 327. Muhibbud­Din At­Tabari's
Thekha'irul­Uqba, page17. [80] Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.2
pages 356­66 hadiths 1125­35, 1137 and 1139­48. Al­Kinji's
Kifayetut­Talib, pages 244­5. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, pages 62 and
187.  Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh, page107. Az­Zerendi's
Nudhumu Dureris­Simtein, page92. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh,
page62. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, Chapter: Imam Ali Bin Abi Talib's
life account, part.2 page442. Ashabalneji's Nurul­Absar, page71 and 102.
bn­Hajar Al­Haithemi's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page96. As­Suyouti's
Ad­Durrul­Manthour, part.6 page379. At­Tabari's Book of Tafseer, part.3
page146. As­Sibt Al­Jawzi's Tethkiretul­Khawass, page18. Ashawkani's
Fetihul­Qadir, part.5 page477. Al­Alusi's Rouhul­Me'ani, part.30
page207. At­Tusturi's Ihqaqul­Haq, part.3 page387. Al­Amini's
Al­Ghadeer, part.2 page57. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh Mines­Sihahis­Sitteh,
part.1 page378. Ghayetul­Meram, 28 part.2 page328. Al­Hamawini's
Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 page156.
