Part 4 - Chapter 1
==================

Regulations of the Society Movement
-----------------------------------

Like any other political society, the Islamic is bound by two main
regulations:

The first regulation is the divine jurisprudential formulation. It is
the doctrine that represents the law efficacious in the Islamic society.
It is the general and the detailed outlining that totally covers the
entire fields of the Islamic society. Namely, it is the central pharmacy
that contains the curative remedy of every ailment that may act upon
that society. This formulation comprises the hypothetical, as well as
the applicable, bases of every malady and remedy, and provides a proved
guarantee of the potency and the effectuality of this treatment.
Moreover, this formulation is so highly designed that it covers the
lives of individuals, families, societies, countries and the world as a
whole. It is also designed to line up societies, lead them to
cooperation and harmony and satisfy their material and mental needs.

The second regulation is the political leadership decided by the
doctrine. Pursuant to the rules of the divine political formulation,
this authority is empowered to submit the movement of the Islamic
society to these rules. To wit, the authority stands for the engineer
who is fully acquainted of the detailed and the general outlining of the
divine doctrine, or the physician who supplies physical services,
prescribes the remedy and the way of taking it and, finally, watches how
the unhealthy takes it till the achievement of recovery. He is, also,
the hypothesizer of the divine political formulation and the general
supervisor on the applications and the authority to whom people should
refer in understanding the ruling and their aims. This is by the reason
that that authority is being the most familiar with the rulings and the
aims of the divine formulation, the most favorable and the fittest for
leading the followers of that doctrine.

It is to add that that authority is the explicator, of the formulation,
whose mission is communicating and conveying it as exactly as he has
received

from his Lord, and applying its texts into factuality. He is the witness
on the process of the hypothetical and applicable explication of the
formulation. He is the foreteller of the individuals loyal to the
doctrine, and the warner of those impeding it. He is the solicitor to
Allah and the illuminated lamp that lights up the course of the society
during its movements.

Harmony and Perfection Between the Divine Doctrine and the Political Leadership
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Islamic divine doctrine is, totally and fundamentally, relied upon
two basic pillars; the revealed Book of Allah - the Holy Quran - and
Allah's Apostle, Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family). He is the
political leader whom is divinely authorized of leading the solicitation
of the advocacy and designated for leading the government derived from
that solicitation. This means that the political leadership of the
solicitation and the government established on its basis are inseparable
parts of the doctrine. In the same way, the political leadership of Saul
was an inseparable part of the doctrine operative at that time. The same
thing can be said about the leadership of David and Solomon, the
prophets.

Pursuant to the natural criteria, it is impractical to solicit the
divine doctrine and explicate and implement its rulings without the
political leadership of Mohammed. He is the only individual authorized
to interpret the texts of that doctrine into application. Thus, he
himself did this job through the solicitation he called for and the
government established as a result of that solicitation. He was the
pivot and base of the political leadership to whom position of authority
of both solicitation and government had been designated.

This pertinent and constitutive dependence and perfection is sustained
by the fact that God, the Exalted, had never revealed a - divine -
missive to mankind without an apostle, and had never revealed a -
divine - book without the existence of an individual the mission of whom
was guiding the believers with respect to the rulings of that book. Had
it been useful to disunite the interrelated bind between the divine
doctrine and the political leadership - the missive and the apostle, it
would have been elementary for God to reveal copies of the divine book
to each sane individual through which He, the Elevated, would have
enjoined of applying the rulings given. By the same token, there would
not have been need for selecting thousands

of apostles, prophets and guides.

On the intellectual, logical, religious and natural criteria, the
disunity of the interrelation and perfection between the divine doctrine
and the political leadership is inapplicable. Similarly, adherence to
the Quran and neglecting the political leadership is a matter out of the
circle of reasoning. Unanimously, those who believe in Quran and
disbelieve in Mohammed as a political and religious leader, are decided
as disbelievers. Those who believe in Mohammed as the political
leadership and neglect the Quran are, correspondingly decided as
disbelievers. Giving credence to the divine doctrine as the effective
law, and Mohammed as the religious and political leader whose mission is
guiding the believers through that effective law, is among the
fundamental bases of faith.

The political leadership, consequently, is the instituting body whose
responsibility is explicating the doctrine and guiding the followers
according to the rulings of that doctrine. Like doctoring, atomics and
engineering, the approaches of explicating the doctrine and guiding the
followers are completely procedures of specialization. It is unfeasible
to leave such missions to fancies and individual hypotheses.

Qualifications of the Doctrinal Political Leadership
----------------------------------------------------

Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family), as being the first
political and religious leader of Islam, should be taken as the guide
and the exemplar of that political leadership. Those who take the
position of leadership were characterized as the Prophet's successors.
Hence, being the most knowledgeable, the keenest of the divine doctrine
and its rulings, the most favorable and the fittest, politically and
religiously, have been the qualifications of the Prophet's political and
religious leadership. Our evidence is that it was God, the Elevated, Who
nominated him for joining political leadership to the religious. No
single Muslim can protest against this fact.

Thereupon, any political or religious leadership succeeding the Prophet
should be carrying the same qualifications. Hence, the leader succeeding
the Prophet should be:

1. The most knowledgeable of the divine doctrine.

2. The keenest to the rulings of the divine doctrine.

3. The most favorable among the followers of that divine doctrine, and

4. The fittest for guiding the followers.

These are positive criteria, orderly prospects and finite purposes of
every individual intending but the right and disdaining humors. It is
for the good of believers - in Islam - entirely that the most
knowledgeable, the keenest, the most favorable and the fittest should
guide them. In a like manner, it is for none's good that any unqualified
individual leads the nation.

Adept At Assuring Availability of the Qualifications Involved
-------------------------------------------------------------

There is no single individual, group or nation can assure in a way of
certitude and conviction, the availability of the qualifications
involved in a certain person. As those individuals, groups and nations
enjoy natural, logical and systematic capacities and competencies too
short to assure, in ways of certitude and conviction, any fact, and that
they realize the manifestation only, they are not adept at assuring
availability of the qualifications involved at any individual. As a
matter of fact, the hiddens are unknown. The results attained after the
utmost endeavors of elicitation and scrutinizing the most knowledgeable,
the keenest, the most favorable and the fittest, shall be indisputably
grounded upon conjecture and surmise. These results may be right and may
be wrong. The most unquestionable fact is that these endeavors of
elicitation and scrutiny, which are the fruit of learnedness, are
suffocated by whims.

Since everyone's actual demand is certitude and conviction, not
conjecture and surmise, the qualified and competent of providing the
secure information based upon certitude and conviction is none but
Allah, the elevated. It was He Who introduced Mohammed for us and
positively informed of his being the most knowledgeable, the keenest,
the most favorable and the fittest. It is Allah Who is the Owner of the
doctrine and the Most Observant of its interest. Conformably, it is
Allah Who is the One intended to introduce the qualified individual, on
bases of certitude and conviction, every time commencing with the day of
Mohammed's decease till the Resurrection Day.

Striving for carrying out his Lord's mandate, Mohammed worked for
introducing the one elected for the political and religious leadership
after him since the earliest hours of his solicitation. He also showed
the course according to which the process of scrutinizing the one
bearing the qualifications involved shall be adopted.

As an abstract, we can brief this study by saying that it is Allah, the
Glorious, the Elevated, Who is in charge of assuring the availability of
the qualifications of the political and religious leader.

The Acceptingness of the Divine Volition
----------------------------------------

Swearing allegiance is the procedure through which people can express
their acceptingness of the divine volition and their admissibility of
so­and­so's being elected as the most qualified for guiding the nation.
Thus, people's will and purpose shall be concordant to God's will and
purpose. Accordingly, the one elected shall be acquiring the legality of
his position from two sources; God, Who identified the qualifications
and designated as the leader due to which, and people, who accepted
God's identification of the most qualified and declared their fealty to
the political and religious leader.

In due course, the entire affairs of the nation, as well as the doctrine
and the political leadership, shall be amenable, and everyone shall be
cropping the sweetest fruits of that government. The solicitation and
the government shall be sailing towards God in a peaceful climate and,
finally, the shadows of the divine grace shall be covering every body.

The Refusal of the Divine Volition
----------------------------------

In case people disagree with the divine volition of the most
knowledgeable, the keenest, the most favorable and the fittest based
upon certitude and conviction, and they name someone else for succeeding
the Prophet, this conceivably means that they refuse the divine volition
based upon certitude and conviction, and substitute it for another
earthly one based upon conjecture and surmise.

As a matter of fact, this process of refusal and substitution does not
change the reality in any way. It does never make the substitute more
fitter than the

one divinely elected. Conversely, this process acts such a categorical
disunity that political and religious leadership is held by an
individual other than the one divinely appointed. Considering the
political and religious leadership is an approach of specialty and that
the substitute is unqualified for this position, the occurrence of
consecutive collapses shall certainly be befalling and continuing till
disunion and degradation occupy the whole state of Islam. The nation, as
well, shall be progressively moving out of the circle of the divine
jurisprudential formulation to that of intellect, surmise, craving or a
mixture of these three circles. When this falls, the divine doctrine
shall be refraining from any more bestowal, and God's ire shall
ceaselessly be chasing this nation. These deadfalls shall never be
evaded unless affairs, including the leadership appointed and conformed
by God, take their proper places anew.

Without a doubt, God does never coerce the diseased to take the curing
remedy, nor does He drive the deviate compulsorily to the right path.
God only prescribes and provides the remedy and urges the diseased to
take it. In the same way, He shows the deviate the right path and
encourages them to take. It is, then, the diseased's fault if they
abstain from taking the remedy, and the deviate's fault if they desist
to take that right path. The same thing is said about those who repel
both the divine doctrines and the loyalty to the apostles of God, or any
of them singly.

Varieties of Refusal of the Divine Volition
-------------------------------------------

First: Accepting the divine doctrine and rejecting being loyal to the
political leadership. An example on this variety is the Israelites'
believing in their prophet and rejecting the leadership of Saul. They
surmised that he had been unqualified for leadership. God, then,
notified that He had (increased him abundantly in knowledge and
physique) and backed him with clear evidences. So, they had to accept
him, and their refusal was changed into recognition.

Second: Accepting the divine doctrine and rejecting being loyal to the
political leadership succeeding the prophet. The rejectors claim that
the successive leadership had been arisen by the prophet's own
inference, not God's mandate. Since the prophet, according to the
rejectors' opinion, is not more than an ordinary person that may make
errors, there should be no blame if they violate his inference and
substitute the appointed leader for another. Applying this variety on
Mohammed's companions, it is to

say that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) nominated a man
from the Hashemites, whom had been gifted the divine prophesy, as his
successor, and it is more appropriate for everybody in the Muslim
society that a non­Hashemite occupies the position of leadership. In
addition, the one nominated by the Prophet had been enjoying
good­humoredness and a sort of self-esteem. There were many individuals,
who were the celebrities of Quraish, older than that young­aged man
elected by the Prophet. For the previous reasons, the Prophet's society
believed in the divine doctrine, but rejected being loyal to the man God
had prepared and the Prophet had contrived and introduced as his
successor. This man was Ali­bn­Abi­Talib.

Third: Rejecting the divine doctrine being the effective law in the
society and rejecting declaring loyalty to the individual identified by
God. This sort of rejection takes its embracers to atheism directly. God
protect us against atheism.
