Part 1 — Chapter 1
==================

1. the Lexical Meaning of Sahaba
--------------------------------

### A. in Lexicons

(As'hab, Sahaba, Sahibi, Yas'habu, Suhbeh, Sahabe.) According to the
Arabic­Arabic dictionaries, these idioms mean to associate, to
accompany, to sit with, to submit to, to accede to. (Sahib) means the
associate, the submissive, the sitter with, the companion, the custodian
or the keeper of a matter. This word (Sahib) is called on those who
refer to a definite sect. It is said: The As'hab (followers) of Imam
Ja'far, the As'hab of Abu­Haneefeh,.. etc.

### B. in the Holy Quran

Allah, the Elevated, revealed the Quran in Arabic. One of the
characteristics of Quran is being the only convictional reference of
Arabic. It is the words of Allah, the knowing, dogmatically, of the most
accurate hiddens and the deepest secrets of this language. By reading
the Holy Quran, we discover that the words derived from the idiom
involved are included in the following forms: (Tussahibeni, Sahibhuma,
Sahibuhu, Sahibetihi, As'hab and As'habehum.) These forms were repeated
ninety seven times in the Holy Quran.

The raised point is that there in no existence for the forms (Sahaba and
Suhbe) in the Holy Quran.

By conjuring these words up, we find out that they are forming a perfect
coverage of the entire lexical meaning previously referred to. This
idiom may take a single face or aspect, or various faces and aspects. It
may bear an ideal face representing the total rims of good and, in the
same time, it may

bear a face so ugly that it represents the gross rims of evil.

### D. Lexical Aspects of the Idiom

Suhbe may hint at relationship between two believers.[1]It may hint at
relationship between a man and his parents who are opposing his
belief.[2] It may hint at relationship between two companions in a
journey.[3] It may hint at relationship between a master and his
slave.[4] It may hint at relationship between a believer and a
disbeliever.[5] It may hint at comprehensive relationship between an
individual disbeliever and a group of disbelievers.[6]It may hint at
relationship between a prophet and his disbelieving people who are
aiming for pulling their prophet to the shed of evil.[7] It may be
compulsory.[8] It may be a pursuing companionship that leads to an ill
deed on which a general conduct is based.[9]It may be a matter of
submitting to a divine doctrine and an absolute loyalty to the political
leadership of that doctrine. An example on this sort of companionship is
the Prophet's family's submission and loyalty to the divine doctrine and
the Prophet's political leadership, along with their notable sacrifices.
Another example is the Prophet's virtuous choicest companions'
submission and loyalty to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family).

Pivot of companionship is comprehensive, based upon a doctrine, a
leadership, goals and supreme idealities to the achievement of which the
leader and his companions are working for submitting the whole society
to the domination of that doctrine.[10]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Kahaf, Verse 26, and bn­Kutheir's Tafsir, part.3, page92­3.
[2] Surah Luqman, Verse 15, and bn­Kutheir's Tafsir, part.3, page444.
[3] Surah Nisa, Verse 36, and bn­Kutheir's Tafsir, part.1, page494. [4]
Surah Tawba, Verse 40, and bn­Kutheir's Tafsir, part.2, page358. [5]
Surah Kahaf, Verses 34 and 37, and bn­Kutheir's Tafsir, part.3, page83.
[6] Surah Qamar, Verse 29, and bn­Kutheir's Tafsir, part.4, page265. [7]
Surah Najm, Verse 2, and bn­Kutheir's Tafsir, part.3, page543. [8] Surah
Saba, Verse 41, and bn­Kutheir's Tafsir, part.4, page246. [9] Surah
Thariyat, Verse 59, and bn­Kutheir's Tafsir, part.2, page238. [10] The
series of our essays published in Al­Liwa, the Jordanian journal, in
1992­3.

2. Terminological Meaning of Sahaba
-----------------------------------

The following are the words of bn­Hajar Al­Asqalani, the Shafi'ite:

“A Sahabi includes all those who met the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) and believed in him till death.[11]

### A. An Explanation of bn­Hajar's Definition

The following categories are registered under the title of Sahaba:

1. Those who met the Prophet for a considerable or a brief period.

2. Those who reported the Prophet's traditions and those who did not.

3. Those who participated in battles led by the Prophet and those who
did not.

4. Those who saw the Prophet, even without a meeting.

5. Those who could not see the Prophet for an accidental obstacle; such
as blindness.

The following are excluded from the list of Sahaba, for the bound of
believing:

1. Those who met the Prophet while they were believing in other
prophets; such as the faithful Scriptuaries before Mohammed's divine
envoy.

2. Scriptuaries who met the Prophet and believed that that would be the
anticipated prophet are probably included with the Sahaba. An example is
Bahira, the priest and his likes.

3. Every mandate human being and jinn are included in bound of believing
in the Prophet.

4. Ibnul­Atheer's objection on Abu­Musa's excluding some of the jinn
mentioned in the list of the Sahaba is not unacceptable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[11] bn­Hajar Al­Asqalani's Al­Isabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba, page10.

5. bn­Hazm says: “They lied to the Islamic nations those who claim of
unanimity. God, the Elevated, informed us that a group of jinn had
believed and listened to the Quran recited by the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family). Hence, they are Sahaba.”

6. Reckoning the angels with the Prophet's companions is a subject of
discrepancy. As Fakhruddin Ar­Razi, in his Asrarur­Tenzil, reported the
unanimous claim that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had
not been sent to the angels, a many scholars disagreed to him. Providing
a number of arguments, Sheik Teqiyyuddin As­Sebki alleged that the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had been sent to the angels,
too.

7. By bound of (believing till death), the apostates who denounced their
disbelieving in the Prophet's divine message after they had met him, are
excluded from the list of Sahaba. An example is Ubeidullah­bn­Jahsh.
With his wife, Ummu­Habiba, he declared his being Muslim and immigrated
to Abyssinia. Unfortunately, he embraced Christianity there till his
death. Abdullah­bn­Khatl who was killed while he was hanging to curtains
of Ka'ba is another example.

8. Muslims who defected their apostasy are reckoned with the Sahaba
according to bound of (believing till death), even if they had never
seen or met the Prophet. Regarding the earlier part of this category,
there is unanimity on the ruling that apostates who return to Islam
before their death are Sahaba, while some scholars had preservations
against this class. Relying upon the hadithists' agreement on reckoning
bn­Qeis, who returned to Islam in Abu­Bakr's reign after he had
apostatized, with the Sahaba and recording his reports in the most
remarkable books of hadith, the earlier preservations are not
satisfactory.

### B. bn­Hajar's Estimation of this Definition

bn­Hajar's definition is extracted from the most authentic opinions
adopted by supreme scholars, such as Al­Bukhari and his tutor,
Ahmed­bn­Hanbal and their followers. There are, however, many disorderly
opinions appertained to identifying the Prophet's companions. Among
these is the opinion that institutes four conditional qualifications of
Sahaba. A Sahabi is only that who enjoyed a considerable period of
companionship with the Prophet, and his reports, regarding the Prophet's
traditions, were taken into account, and participated in the Prophet's
battles or was martyred with him (peace be upon him and his family.)
Others instituted maturity and sitting

with the Prophet as provisories of regarding companionship. A group
named every single individual who had seen the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) as a Sahabi. Pursuant to the rule that capability of
seeing cannot be imputed to the undiscerning, the previous opinion
includes discerning individuals only. At any rate, those undiscerning
individuals are Sahaba since they were seen by the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family.) Regarding those whose dead bodies had been
seen by the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), like Abu­Thuweib
Al­Hutheli, the poet, there is a discrepancy about reckoning them with
the Sahaba. It is more acceptable to exclude them.

### C. Means of Recognizing the Sahaba

Means of proving a Sahabi is a successive narration that is well
publicized and well­known. In addition, there must be a report of a
Sahabi respecting reckoning that individual with the Sahaba. A single
Sahaba's follower's report depending upon a Sahabi's nomination is
acceptably taken into consideration of being a Sahabi. Lastly, a decent
man's declaration of being a Sahabi is considered.

Al­Amudi and others put decency as a provisory condition of admitting a
Sahabi. Since the entire Sahaba are decent it is imperative to admit an
individual's claim of being a Sahabi. Thus, a claim of being a Sahabi is
measured in the very balance of claiming of decency. This is, however,
unacceptable.

Coinciding in time of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) is
an essential base of deciding a Sahabi. That time is limited by one
hundred and ten years after the Prophet's immigration to Yathrib. On
that account, the Imams disavowed claims after that period. A group of
people were discredited in their claims of being Sahaba since their
appearances proved forgery of their claims. Al­Amudi, however, decided
inadmissibility of regarding such individuals as Sahaba.

### D. The Entire People are Sahaba

Unanimously, Mohammed's advocacy resulted in establishing the state led
by him for about a decade. During this period, he (peace be upon him and
his family) planted regulations of the Islamic political system and
clarified thoroughly the belief of Islam by applying the total
hypotheses that led to propounding the general spirit of Islam.

Constitutionally, any government consists of people, a province on which
those people settle and a power policing those people. Pursuant to
bn­Hajar Al­Asqalani's definition of the Sahaba, the following two
points are bases on which a Sahabi is considered:

1. Meeting the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) by
associating, talking or viewing him. He whomever saw or was seen by the
Prophet, including unweaned babies, is regarded as a Sahabi.

2. Believing in prophesy of Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family.)

Considering bn­Hajar's opinion, it is obligatory to scrutinize
everyone's creed. This matter, still, is out of humans' capacity.
Al­Asqalani should have discriminated between real and ostensive
believing. Abdullah­bn­Ubey, for instance, is one of the Sahaba
agreeingly. Yet, he is chief of the hypocrites. The Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) addressed at those who suggested that Abdullah
would be crucially killed: “I swear we are to respect his accompanying
us as long as he is among us.”[12] Abdullah­bn­Abi­Sarh, as another
example, was the Prophet's registrar, but he forged lies against the
Prophet who, as a penalization, legalized killing him whenever found
even hanging to curtains of Ka'ba. At conquest of Mecca, Othman
interceded to gain cancellation of that decision. Hence, that man
embraced Islam for saving his soul. Such an individual is undiscussibly
a Sahabi.[13] The same is said about Al­Hakam­bn­Al­Aas who had been
banished by the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family.) After the
Prophet's decease, the man asked Abu­Bakr and Omar respectively to annul
the Prophet's decision. They rejected his demand. Othman, when became
the caliph, allowed him to be in Al­Madina with full honor and dignity.
As a compensation, he gifted him one hundred thousand dirham, as he was
a Sahabi.[14]

Briefly, it is not a condition to regard the real believing in the
Prophet's mission in consideration of the Prophet's companionship. It is
acceptably sufficient to dissemble to be believing in him or keep such a
pretense all the lifetime since the Prophet does not care for the hidden
on any. Hiddens, however, is God's concern!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[12] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat, part.2 page56, and our An­Nidhamus­Siyasi
Fil­Islam page103. [13] bn­Quteibeh's Al­Me'arif, pages 131 and 141.
[14] bn­Quteibeh's Al­Me'arig, pages 45 and 131, and our
An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam page232 and on.

Totally, everybody had the opportunity to meet the Prophet through the
solicitation, government, battles, declaration of fealty, ritual
pilgrimage and Visitations, especially the Welfare Pilgrimage, and the
complete domination of the Arab Peninsula. All of citizens of Mecca and
At­Ta'if declared their being Muslims and witnessed the Farewell
Pilgrimage with the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). that was
in 10A.H. The same could be said about tribes of Aws and Khazraj. Hence,
when the Prophet was dead, no single individual was showing disbelieving
in his mission.[15] Babies, as their fathers used to take them to the
Prophet for seeking blessing, became Sahaba according to the fact that
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had seen them. Reports
appertained to this matter are many. (Babies were taken to the Prophet
for seeking blessings.) (Whenever a baby was born, it would be taken to
the Prophet.)[16]

The authentic reports regarding the Prophet’s being wont to walk in
streets, during his leading the government he had established, without
being accompanied by any guardian or the like, and wont to practice his
activities himself, lead to the inevitable fact that every citizen in
his state had full option to see, communicate and attend at any meeting
he held. This means that the entire citizens could meet, see, hear and
sit with their president.

The other Islamic sects agree with Sunnis on the lexical and
terminological meanings of Sahaba. They differ with them on significance
of qualifications of decency. While Sunnis generalize and
unexceptionally decide the entire Sahaba as decent, the other sects
figure certain justifiable prerequisites and topical qualifications for
decency. Decency is imputed to those individuals who enjoy such
prerequisites and qualifications only. Depending on evidences elicited
from Book of God and the Prophet's traditions, they rule of those who do
not enjoy such prerequisites and qualifications as indecent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[15] bn­Hajar Al­Asqalani's Al­Isabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba, page16. [16]
bn­Hajar Al­Asqalani's Al­Isabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba, page7.
