Chapter 3 - the Wali Is the Master, the Imam and the Leader
===========================================================

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) stated: "Allah revealed
to me three attributes imputed to Ali exclusively. He is the master of
the Muslims, the Imam of the God­fearing and the leader of the
bright­faced, the shining."[26]

On another occasion, the Prophet said to his companions: "Allah has
revealed to me that Ali is the master of the Muslims, the guide of the
God­fearing and the leader of the bright­faced, the shining."[27]

Before the attendee, the Prophet addressed at Ali: "Welcome, master of
the Muslims and Imam of the God­fearing."[28]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

page71. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, page115. Ar­Razi's book of
Tafseer, part.12 page26. bn­Kutheir's book of Tafseer, part.2 page71.
Al­Jassas' Ahkamul­Qur'an part.4 page102. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu
Nahjil­Belagheh, part.13 page277. bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah,
page24. Al­Belathiri's Ansabul­Ashraf, part.2 page150. An­Nesfi's book
of Tafseer, part.1 page289. As­Suyouti's Al­Hawi Lil­Fetawi part.1
page139. Kenzul­Ummal, part.15 page146.  Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the
margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.5 page38. Jami'ul­Ussoul, part.9
page478. Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page173. Al­Muraja'at, The Index
page134. [26] At­Tabarani's Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer, part.2 page88.
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page65 hadith 93 and
page104 hadiths 146 and 147. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page235.
Az­Zerendi's Durarus­Simtein page114. Ibnus­Sebbagh's
Al­Fusoulul­Muhimmeh page107. Majma'uzzawa'id, part.9 page121.
Usdul­Ghabeh part.1 page69 and part.3 page116. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu
Dimeshq, chapter: The Life Account Of Ali, part.2 page257.
Fedha'ilul­Khamseh Mines­Sihahis­Sitteh, part.2 page100. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, page81. Ihqaqul­Haqq, part.4 page11.
Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 page143. Al­Muraja'at, The Index, pages 141­2.
[27] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, chapter: The Life Account Of Ali,
part.2 page257 hadith 772. Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira, part.2 page234.
At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page70. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the
margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.5 page34. [28] Abu­Na'eem's
Hilyetul­Awliya part.1 page66. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, chapter: The
Life Account Of Ali, part.2 page440 hadith 949. Kenzul­Ummal part.15
page157 hadith 443. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.9
page170. Az­Zerendi's Durarus­Simtein page115. bn­Talha's
Mettalibus­Sa'ul part.1 page46. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, page181
and 313. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin of Ahmed's Book of
Hadith), part.5 page55. Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 page141.

Once, while he was convening his companions, the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) foretold: "The coming man, who will enter from this
door, is the Imam of the God­fearing, the master of the Muslims, the
principal of the religion, the last of the (prophets') inheritors and
the leader of the bright­faced, the shining." Presently, Ali entered
from that door. The Prophet stood up and embraced him.[29]

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) explicated Ali's standing
before his companions. He said: "Allah has surely bound me to a covenant
respecting Ali. As I asked Him to show it to me, He, the Elevated, said:
Ali is indeed the banner of guidance, the Imam of My confidants and the
illumination of My obedient ones."[30]

In a speech addressed at the Ansar, the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) said: "O the Ansar! Should I guide you to what shall protect
you against deviation for good if only you adhere to?" "Yes, you should,
Allah's Apostle!" they answered. "It is this Ali. You should love him
for your loving me. And you should honor him for your honoring me. It
was most surely Gabriel, the Angel, who conveyed to me this God's
mandate I have just ordered you of." the Prophet expressed.[31]

One day, the Prophet asked the attendees to summon "Ali, the master of
the Arabs." "Is it not you the master of the Arabs?" wondered A'isheh.
"I am the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[29] bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.9 page169. Abu­Na'eem's
Hilyetul­Awliya part.1 page63. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page42.
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, chapter: The Life Account Of Ali, part.2
page487 hadith 1005. bn­Talha's Mettalibus­Sa'ul part.1 page60.
At­Thehbi's Al­Mizan part.1 page64. Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib, page212.
Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, page313. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh
Mines­Sihahis­Sitteh, part.2 page253. Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 page145.
[30] Abu­Na'eem's Hilyetul­Awliya part.1 page67. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu
Nahjil­Belagha part.9 page67. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page215 and 220.
Az­Zerendi's Durarus­Simtein page114. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq,
chapter: The Life Account Of Ali, part.2 page189 hadith 672.
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page46.  Al­Kinji's
Kifayetut­Talib, page73. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, page312.
bn­Talha's Mettalibus­Sa'ul part.1 page46. Ihqaqul­Haqq, part.4 page168.
Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 pages 144 and 151. [31] bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu
Nahjil­Belagha part.9 page170. Abu­Na'eem's Hilyetul­Awliya part.1
page63. Majma'uzzawa'id, part.9 page132. Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib,
page210. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, page313. Kenzul­Ummal part.15
page126. Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira, part.2 page233. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh
Mines­Sihahis­Sitteh, part.2 page98. bn­Talha's Mettalibus­Sa'ul part.1
page60. Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 page197 hadith 154.

master of Adam's children, and Ali is the master of the Arabs."
commentated the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). When Ali
came, the Prophet summoned the Ansar and addressed at them: "O the
Ansar! Should I guide you to what shall protect you against deviation
for good if only you adhere to?" "Yes, you should, Allah's Apostle!"
they answered. "It is this Ali. You should love him for your loving me.
And you should honor him for your honoring me. It was most surely
Gabriel, the Angel, who conveyed to me this God's mandate I have just
ordered you of." the Prophet expressed.[32]

While a good number of the Sahaba - the Prophet's companions - were in
attendance, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) addressed at
Ali: "Looking at your face, Ali, is - a sort of - worshipping. You are a
master in this world and a master in the hereafter. He is bearing
devotion to me that whoever bears devotion to you. My devotee is, in
fact, God's devotee. Your enemy is my enemy. My enemy is, in fact, God's
enemy. Woe is those who bear malice against you."[33]

The Most Consequential Objective Qualifications Enjoyed By the Leader Succeeding the Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As an indication to Ali's knowledgeability, the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) stated before his companions: "I am the city of
knowledge, and Ali is the door. He should see the door first, that
whoever seeks knowledge."[34]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[32] This form of the hadith is related by Abu­Na'eem in his
Hilyetul­Awliya, and bn­Abil­Hadid in his Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.3
page251. [33] Ahmed's book of hadith. At explicating this hadith,
bn­Abbas used to say: "He whoever looked at him­Ali­, said surprisingly:
'Praised be Allah! What a knowledgeable one this man is! Praised be
Allah! What a courageous one this man is! Praised be Allah! What an
eloquent one this man is!'" This hadith is also recorded by
bn­Abil­Hadid in his Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.3 page253. [34]
References that record this hadith are actually uncountable. As
examples, the following are mentioned: bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq,
chapter: The Life Account Of Ali, part.2 page464 hadiths 984­97.
As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa page170. Al­Khawarzmi's Maqtelul­Hussein
part.1 page43. bn­Abdil­Berr's Alisti'ab (in the margin of bn­Hajar's
Al­Issabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba) part.3 page38. At­Thehbi's Al­Mizan
part.1 page415. An­Nebhani's Al­Fetihul­Kabeer part.1 page176.
As­Suyouti's Al­Jami'us­Sagheer part.1 page93. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal
(in the margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.5 page30.
bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.7 page219.

Once, the Prophet said to his companions: "I am the house of wisdom, and
Ali is the door."[35] For several times, the Prophet asserted: "I am the
city of wisdom, and Ali is the door."[36] He (peace be upon him and his
family) also asserted: "Ali is the door to my knowledge. After me, he
shall be settling questions of what I have been asked to communicate to
my people. Cherishing him is creed. Despising him is hypocrisy."[37]

Before the Sahaba, the Prophet addressed at Ali: "Next to me, You shall
be settling questions of what my nation will dispute about."[38]

Showing Ali's standing, the Prophet said: "At me, Ali enjoys the same
degree I enjoy at my Lord."[39]

The Prophet also said: "My hand and Ali's are the same with respect to
justice."[40]

Ali was wont to say: "By Allah I swear, there is no single revealed
Verse I lack the information regarding the purpose, the place and the
point of its revelation. My Lord has bestowed me a (perfect) heart and
intellect and a speaking honest tongue."[41]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[35] Tens of books of hadith record this narrative. As examples, the
following are written down: At­Tirmithi's book of Hadith, part.5 page301
hadith 3807. Abu­Na'eem's Hilyetul­Awliya part.1
page63.Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page87 hadith 129. 
Is'afur­Raghibin (In the margin of Nourul­Absar) page140. At­Tabari's
Thekha'irul­Uqba page77. bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah, page120.
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, chapter: The Life Account Of Ali, part.2
page459. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh Mines­Sihahis­Sitteh, part.2 page248.
Al­Baghawi's Messabihus­Sunneh part.2 page275. As­Suyouti's
Al­Jami'us­Sagheer part.1 page93. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin
of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.5 page30. [36] Ibnul­Meghazili's
Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page86 and Fetihul­Melikil­Aliy.. page26.
[37] This hadith is recorded in Fetihul­Melikil­Aliy.. page18 and
Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.3 page96. [38] See bn­Asakir's Tarikhu
Dimeshq, chapter: The Life Account Of Ali, part.2 page488 hadiths
1008­9. Al­Khawarzmi's Maqtelul­Hussein part.1 page86. Al­Khawarzmi's
Al­Menaqib page236. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, page182. Muntakhabu
Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.5 page33.
Al­Muraja'at, The Index, pages 146. [39] At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba
page64, Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira, part.2 page215, bn­Hajar's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah, page106 and Ihqaqul­Haqq, part.7 page217. [40]
Kenzul­Ummal part.6 page153 hadith 2539. [41] As­Suyouti's
Tarikhul­Khulefa page185.

He was also used to stating: "Inquire me about the Book of Allah. There
is no single Verse I lack the information about its revelation; whether
it was at night, at daylight, in a plain or on a mountain."[42]

Ahmed­bn­Hanbal, the Imam of the Hanbalite sect, said: "No one of the
Prophet's companions was enjoying merits as much as Ali's."[43] bn­Abbas
said: "No one was intended by Verses of Allah's Book as much as Ali." On
another occasion, bn­Abbas said: "Three hundred Quranic Verses were
purposed at Ali." He also said: "Ali was the prince and the celebrity of
every (O Ye who believed!) revealed by Allah. Abu­Bakr, as well as Omar,
was composing poetry. But Ali was the most experienced in this
field."[44]

Let us close this paragraph by mentioning the following hadith:

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) stated: "Ali is being
with the Quran, and the Quran is being with Ali. They shall never be
separated till they join me on the Divine Pool."[45]

Ali's Leadership and Succeeding the Prophet is A Religious Question that Belongs to Believing in this Religion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here is the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) stating:
"Ali­bn­Abi­Talib is the door of 'forgiveness'! He is reckoned as
believer that whoever enters from that door. While those who find a way
out of it, are disbelievers."[46]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[42] This hadith is related by bn­Sa'd. See As­Suyouti's
Tarikhul­Khulefa page185. [43] This saying is recorded in Al­Hakim's
Al­Mustedrak page107. He relates it to Ahmed's book of Hadith. At­Thehbi
neglect scrutinizing it. [44] This hadith is recorded by bn­Asakir. It
is also written down in bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah, As­Suyouti's
Tarikhul­Khulefa and our An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam, One. [45] This
hadith is recorded by At­Tabarani in his Al­Mu'jamul­Awsat and
Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer. As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa page173. [46]
Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, page185, 247 and 284. As­Suyouti's
Al­Jami'us­Sagheer part.2 page56. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin
of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.5 page30. bn­Hajar's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah, page75.

Let us take a deep glance at this decisive doctrinal text:

The Prophet said: "Ali is a part of me. I am a part of Ali. None should
carry my charges saving me or Ali."[47]

Before his companions, the Prophet addressed at Ali: "O Ali! He whoever
desists from me is decided as desisting from Allah. Those who desist
from you, Ali, are desisting from me."[48]

He (peace be upon him and his family), also states: "I am the
forewarner, and Ali is the guide. By you, Ali, the guided - to the right
path - shall be led."[49]

The Prophet spoke to his companions: "This, Ali, and I shall be the
attesters on this people on the Day of Resurrection."[50]

The Prophet said: "On the portal of the Paradise there is inscribed:
There is no god but Allah. Mohammed is the Apostle of Allah. Ali is the
brother of His Apostle."[51]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[47] bn­Madgeh's book of hadith, part.1 page44 hadith 119. At­Tirmithi's
book of hadith, part.5 page300 hadith 3805. An­Nisa'i's Al­Khassa'is,
page20. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, chapter: The Life Account Of Ali,
part.2 page378 hadiths 875­80. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib. bn­Hajar's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah, page120. As­Suyouti's Al­Jami'us­Sagheer part.2
page56. Al­Baghawi's Messabihus­Sunneh part.2 page275. Ibnul­Atheer's
Al­Ussoul, part.9 page471. Al­Omari's Al­Mishka, part.3 page243 and many
other references. [48] Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3 page146.
At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page66. Majma'uzzawa'id, part.9 page135.
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, part.2 page268. At­Thehbi's Al­Mizan part.2
page18… and many other references. [49] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq,
part.2 page417. Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh, page107.
Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu Dureris­Simtein, page90. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, page99. Nurul­Absar, page71. Al­Hassakani's
Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.1 page293. Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib, pages
233. Ihqaqul­Haq, part.4 page301. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin
of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.5 page34. Al­Hamawini's
Fera'idus­Simtein, part.4 page148. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh
Mines­Sihahis­Sitteh, part.1 page66. As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour,
part.4 page45. Ibnul­Jawzi's Zadul­Maseer Fi Ilmit­Tafseer, part.4
page207. Al­Alusi's Rouhul­Me'ani, part.13 page97. Ashawkani's
Fetihul­Qadir, part.3 page70. At­Tabari's Book of Tafseer, part.13
page103. bn­Kutheir's Book of Tafseer, part.3 page502 and many other
references. [50] Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib, page45,
hadiths 67 and 97. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, part.2 page273, hadiths
793­5. At­Thehbi's Al­Mizan, part.4 page138. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in
the margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.5 page34. Ahmed's book of
hadith, part.5 page94.

Similarly, the Prophet said: "On the leg of the Divine Throne, there is
inscribed: There is no god but Allah. Mohammed is the Apostle of Allah.
I support him by Ali. I aid him by Ali."[52]

It is deserving to take a deep glance at the last words of the Prophet's
harangue at the Ansar: "…It was most surely Gabriel, the Angel, who
conveyed to me this God's mandate I have just ordered you of."[53]

### Allah's Confidant and the Apostle's Successor is the Knight of Islam

During the entire armed conflicts between the believers and the
disbelievers, the star of Ali was highly twinkling. He became the unique
knight of Islam. He was totally unprecedented. Few moments before the
breakout of the battle of Jamal, Ali spoke with Talha and Az­Zubeir so
that he would provide his argument against them. He said: "I adjure
A'isheh, by God and the Apostle of God, to witness believably for the
following four matters; is she able of naming a single man from Quraish
having a claim greater than that I have towards the Prophet? Is she able
of naming a single man preferred to me in the concern of precedence to
Islam. Is she able of naming a single man preferred to me in the concern
of protecting the Prophet against the disbelievers of the Arab, using
this very sword and this very spear…"[54]

Hamzeh­bn­Abdil­Muttelib was the first Muslim to whom the first pennon
in Islam had been given. During the entire battles of Islam, the bearers
of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[51] Abu­Na'eem's Hilyetul­Awliya part.7 page256. Ibnul­Meghazili's
Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page91 hadith 134.  Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib
page88. Al­Khawarzmi's Maqtelul­Hussein part.1 page38. As­Sibt
Al­Jawzi's Tethkiretul­Khawass, page22. At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba
page66. At­Thehbi's Al­Mizan part.2 page76 and part.3 page399.
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, chapter: The Life Account Of Ali, part.1
page119. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin of Ahmed's Book of
Hadith), part.5 page35. Kenzul­Ummal part.15 page121… and many other
references. [52] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, part.2 page353.
Majma'uzzawa'id, part.9 page121. Abu­Na'eem's Hilyetul­Awliya part.3
page36. (The margin of) Ahmed's book of hadith part.5 page35.
Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira, part.2 page227. Fera'idus­Simtein, part.1 page236.
[53] Abu­Na'eem's Hilyetul­Awliya part.1 page63, bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu
Nahjil­Belagha part.9 page170, Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib page210,
Kenzul­Ummal part.15 page26 and many other references. [54]
bn­Quteibeh's Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh pages 70­2.

pennon were either Hamzeh or Ali. This was all over the lifetime of the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).[55] The first men who
forwarded for fighting in Badr, the first battle of the Muslims, were
Hamzeh, Ali and Ubeidullah. Ali was the headmost knight after the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) in the entire battles of
Islam. Hence, the Prophet stated: "Tomorrow, I will be handing the
pennon to a man whom is liked by God and His messenger, and likes God
and His messenger. God shall conquer by his hands."

People passed that night in excitement. The next morning, the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) asked for Ali­bn­Abi­Talib. "He is
sightless." Some answered. "Lead him to me." the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) ordered. As Ali was before the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family), he asked him to be close to him. He salivated
at his eyes and wiped them with the hand. Ali stood up as if he had
never been affected by ophthalmia. Hence, Ali was given the pennon and
he conquered Kheiber.[56]

Close to Kheiber fortress, Ali dislodged the great portal and used it as
an armor. He kept it in his hand while he was fighting. He threw it only
after the conquest of Kheiber. Eight individuals could not even move
that portal.[57]

In the battle of Khandaq, none, other than Ali, could answer Amr­bn­Abdi
Wudd who was shouting at the Muslims: "My voice has gone due to my
numerous frequent calls for a combatant from the Muslims' party." Who
could taste that hero death other than Ali­bn­Abi­Talib?[58]

Ask Badr, Uhud, Kheiber, Hunein and the whole places at which the
Muslims battled the disbelievers. You shall never find a single event at
which Ali or any individual belonging to the Prophet's immaculate
household, abscond or retard from defending Islam. He is definitely a
liar that whoever claims of having been standing in the face of Ali,
offering

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[55] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat, pages 8, 9, 29, 31, 49, 58, 59, 74, 16 and
150. [56] This narrative is recorded by Muslim, Al­Bukhari, At­Tabarani
and most of the historians and the hadithists. [57] This report is
recorded by Al­Bukhari, Muslim and As­Suyouti in his Tarikhul­Khulefa
page167. [58] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat, part.2 page68.

sacrifice more than him or fighting in a way better than that adopted by
him in the whole conflicts.

The heroism Ali had enjoyed made him the most twinkling star and the
preferable knight of Islam.

It was Ali who killed Al­Aas­bn­Sa'd­bn­Al­Aas, Handhala­bn­Abi­Sufian,
Al­Aas­bn­Husham­bn­Al­Mugheera and the maternal uncle of
Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab!![60]

It was Ali, Hamzeh and Ubeidullah, the Prophet's relatives, who faced
Utbeh, Sheibeh and Al­Waleed, the masters of the Umayids, and killed
them. This might have been one of the greatest reasons beyond the
Umayids' bearing malice against Ali and the Prophet's household.

As an example on God's evaluating the deeds of this unprecedented
knight, the Prophet stated: "Certainly, Ali­bn­Abi­Talib's combating
Amr­bn­Abdi Wudd on the day of Khandaq is indeed favorable to the entire
good deeds done by my commonalty till the Day of Resurrection."[60]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[59] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat, part.2 pages 17­8. [60] Fera'idus­Simtein,
part.1 page259 hadith 198, Al­Khawarzmi's Maqtelul­Hussein part.1
page45, Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page58, Al­Hassakani's
Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.2 page8 and Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3
page27.
