Chapter 4 - Allah's Marrying His Confidant and His Apostle's Successor
======================================================================

Fatima­bnt­Mohammed is the mistress of the ladies of the world[61] and
the nearest to the Prophet whose satisfaction is attained only when she
is satisfied, and whose ire is arisen when she is irate. This matter is
unanimously agreed upon by the entire Muslims.[62] Every noble and
celebrity wished if he could have had her in marriage. She was the
exemplar of the ideal woman. Numerous suitors asked for her hand, but
the Prophet refused. The same thing happened with Abu­Bakr and Omar[63]
who said, referring at the Prophet in this regard: "He is waiting for
his Lord's instruction."

The Good Tidings
----------------

One day, the good tidings of Fatima's marriage came to the Prophet who
conveyed it to his companions: "A good tidings I have received from my
Lord concerning my brother and cousin, and my daughter; God has married

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[61] bn­Abdil­Berr's Alisti'ab (in the margin of bn­Hajar's Al­Issabetu
Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba) part.4 page377, 284 and 285, bn­Hajar's Al­Issabetu
Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba part.4 page378, Ibnul­Atheer's usdul­Ghabeh part.5
page437, At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page44, Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawadda…ect. [62] bn­Quteibeh's Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh page5
Chapter: Fatima's argument with Abu­Bakr and Omar. [63] In addition to
the following references, many other books referred to this fact:
Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­talib, pages 302 and 304. Al­Heithami's
Majma'uzzawa'id, part.9 page205­6. An­Nisa'i's Al­Khassa'is page114.
bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah page139. Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu
Duraris­Simtein page148. At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page27.
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page346. Ibnul­Jawzi's
Tethkiretul­Khawass page306. Ibnul­Atheer's Usdul­Ghabeh, part.1 page38.
bn­Hajar's Al­Issabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba part.1 page347. Ibnul­Atheer's
Jami'ul­Ussoul part.9 page474. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha
part.3 page261. Zeini Dehlan's As­Seeretun­Nubawiya (In the margin of
As­Seeretul­Halabiya) part.2 page7. Al­Khatib Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu
Baghdad part.1 page363. bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat part.2 page240…

Fatima to Ali."[64] On many occasions, the Prophet reminded Fatima of
this divine grace. He also spoke about it many times before his
companions. He (peace be upon him and his family), once, addressed at
Fatima: "Are you not satisfied that God has selected two men from among
people of the earth; the first is your father and the other is your
groom?"[65]

She, once, complained to her father for marrying her to Ali while he was
poor. The Prophet answered her: "Are you not satisfied that God has
selected two men from among people of the earth; the first is your
father and the other is your groom?"[66]

The Prophet visited his diseased daughter and asked her about her
manners. "By God, my grief has been increasing, my destitution has been
expanding and my ailment has been continuing." whimpered Fatima. Here,
the Prophet said: "Are you not satisfied that I have married you to the
principal Muslim, the most knowledgeable and the most
self-possessed?"[67]

The Blessed Progeny
-------------------

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) declared before the
Muslims: "God has created each prophet's progeny from his own flank. My
progeny is originated from Ali's."[68] "Every female's sons are belonged
to their lineage saving Fatima's sons. I am their warden and I am their
lineage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[64] Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page246. Al­Khawarzmi's
Maqtelul­Hussein, part.1 page60. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda page304.
Ibnul­Atheer's Usdul­Ghabeh, part.1 page206.  bn­Hajar's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah, page171. [65] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq
Chapter: The Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.1 page249.
Ibnul­Jawzi's Tethkiretul­Khawass page308. Kenzul­Ummal part.15 page95.
At­Tabari's Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page240… [66] Al­Hakim's
Al­Mustedrak part.3 page129. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The
Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.1 page249. Ibnul­Jawzi's
Tethkiretul­Khawass page309. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda page421.
Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib, page297. Kenzul­Ummal part.6 and 5 page391
and 95. Ihqaqul­Haqq part.5 page266. Al­Khatib Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu
Baghdad part.4 page195­6. [67] Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu Duraris­Simtein
page188, bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.3 page261,
Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (In the margin of Ahmed's book of Hadith) part.5
page31 and At­Tabari's Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page55… [68]
Kenzul­Ummal part.6 page152 hadith 5210.

and I am their father."[69] "Regarding you, Ali, you are my brother and
the father of my sons…"[70] "This - Ali - is my brother and the son of
my brother and my cousin and my son­in­law and the father of my
sons…"[71]

It is not a matter of chance that the Prophet's progeny is restricted to
Fatima's sons. The whole nation did realize well that the Prophet had no
sons but Fatima's. With great pride, the Prophet was always repeating
this saying before his companions: "This is Al­Hassan, my son. This is
Al­Hussein, my son. It was God Who has chosen their names. They are the
masters of the youth of the Paradise, and my basils among this nation."

In spite of the surpassing endeavors of terminating the Prophet's
offspring, including the processes of poisoning Al­Hassan and
assassinating Al­Hussein, twelve Imams, the last of whom was Al­Mahdi
the messiah, descended from this blessed progeny.

The Habitation of the Prophet and His Successor
-----------------------------------------------

Even the matter of the lodging of the Prophet and his successor was
organized by the Divine Care that attracted people's attention to this
point for the purpose of discernibility.

In one of his harangues, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
spoke: "I see there are some men feel something about the matter that I
have lodged Ali in the mosque and displaced the others. By God I swear,
it was not I who displaced them out of the mosque and lodged Ali. It was
Allah Who displaced them and lodged Ali. Allah, the Elevated, revealed
to Moses to take for their people houses to abide in Egypt and make
these houses places of worship and keep up prayers. To me, Ali is indeed
enjoying the same standing of Aaron to Moses. He is my brother. Except
for him, none of you is licit to copulate with women in this mosque."
[72]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[69] At­Tabarani records this hadith. It is the hadith 22 written down
in bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, part.2 page112. [70] Al­Khawarzmi's
Al­Menaqib page27. [71] Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.3 page119. [72]
Al­Muraja'at pages 161­75 and Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, Chapter:
The Prophet's Household's Merits, 18.

Al­Abbas wondered his nephew, the Prophet, how he should take him out of
the mosque and lodge Ali. "It was not I who displaced you out of the
mosque and lodged Ali. It was Allah Who displaced you out and lodged
Ali."[73]

A number of the Sahaba's houses had doors having prospect over the
mosque. The Prophet ordered: "All these doors are to be crossed out
except that of Ali's house." People, however, showed dislike against
this procedure. Accordingly, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) ascended the pulpit and orated:

"Praised and thanked be Allah".

As I ordered of eradicating these doors except that of Ali's house, you
criticized. It was not I who closed or opened. It was but an instruction
I was asked to carry out.[74] I have neither taken you out of the mosque
out of my desire, nor have I neglected this order. I am but a restricted
servant to be carrying out what I am ordered of. I follow only what is
revealed to me.[75] Allah did reveal to Moses, His prophet, to construct
a sanitary mosque in which none should lodge saving Moses and Aaron.
Correspondingly, Allah did reveal to me to construct a sanitary mosque
in which none should lodge saving Ali, my brother, and I.[76]

Ali is the Prophet's Disciple
-----------------------------

Assertively, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) declared
that Ali should be his disciple. He said: "This one is my brother,
disciple and successor." The familiar hadith of Ad­Dar has been decided
as one of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[73] bn­Madgeh's book of Hadith part.1 page92, At­Tirmithi's book of
Hadith and An­Nisa'i's book of Hadith. It is the hadith 2531 recorded in
Kenzul­Ummal part.6 page153. It is also registered in Ahmed's book of
Hadith part.4 and 1 page164 and 151. [74] This hadith is recorded by
Ahmed in his book of Hadith part.4 page369 and Ad­Diya Al­Meqdisi and
At­Tabarani. It is also recorded in Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (In the
margin of Ahmed's book of Hadith) part.5 page39. [75] According to
Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (In the margin of Ahmed's book of Hadith) part.5
page29, At­Tabarani records this hadith. [76] bn­Hajar's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah, Aim 5 Verse 4.

most authentic traditions.[77] The Prophet, repeatedly, emphasized on
Ali's being his disciple. He said: "Every prophet had a disciple and an
heir. Ali is my disciple and heir."[78] "Every prophet had a disciple
and an heir. My disciple and heir is Ali­bn­Abi­Talib."[79] "Indeed, my
disciple and my trustful person and the best of whom I should allocate
to fulfilling my promises and settling my debts is
Ali­bn­Abi­Talib."[80]

A similar oration the Prophet addressed at Anas­bn­Malik: "O Anas! The
coming man who shall enter from this door is the prince of the
believers, the master of the Muslims, the leader of the bright­faced,
the shining and the last of the prophets' disciples." Not too long after
that speech, Ali entered… There is a considerable continuation of this
hadith.[81]

The Prophet addressed at Fatima an alike speech: "O Fatima! Have you not
been acquainted of the matter that Allah, the Elevated, scrutinized
people of the earth and elected your father as the messaged prophet. And
scrutinized them again and elected your groom. Then, He revealed to me
to marry Ali to you and betake him as my disciple."[82]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[77] At­Tabari's book of history part.2 pages 319­21. Ibnul­Atheer's
Al­Kamilu Fit­Tarikh part.2 pages 62­3. As­Seeretul­Halabiya part.1
page311. Ahmed's book of Hadith part.5 page41­2. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu
Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.1 page85 and
many other references. [78] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The
Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.3 page5. Ibnul­Meghazili's
Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page200. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page42.
At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba. At­Thehbi's Mizanuli'tidal part.2 page273.
Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda page232 and 273… and many other
references. [79] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account
Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.3 page5, Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page42,
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page200 and At­Thehbi's
Mizanuli'tidal part.2 page273… besides many other references. [80]
Majma'uzzawa'id part.9 page113, Kenzul­Ummal part.6 page154 and Ahmed's
book of hadith part.5 page32. [81] Abu­Na'eem's Hilyetul­Awliya part.1
page63. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.9 page169.
Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page42. Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­Talib, page212.
At­Thehbi's Mizanuli'tidal part.1 page64. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh
Mines­Sihahis­Sitteh part.2 page254. bn­Talha's Metalibus­Sa'ul page21.
[82] Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­talib, page296. Al­Heithami's Majma'uzzawa'id,
part.8 page253. Ibnus­Sebbagh's AL­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh page281.
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page101. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawadda page92. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.3 page23.
Al­Muraja'at, the Index page244.

Just after the Prophet's decease, Al­Hassan used the characteristic of
discipleship in his argument when he spoke: "…I am the son of the
Prophet and the son of his disciple."[83]

Ali's discipleship has been commonly mentioned in literature, especially
in poetry and prose.[84] Jabir was used to saying: "I was informed by
the disciple of the disciples…" referring to Ali.[85]

Denial of the Prophet's Nominating Ali As His Inheritor
-------------------------------------------------------

Muslim and Al­Bukhari denied that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) had willed of Ali's being his inheritor. They rested upon the
report imputed to A'isheh, Ummul­Mu'minin. She claimed that the Prophet
had not willed of anything, since he died while he was laying between
her breast and neck, and was placed on her thigh. The familiarly
authentic reports assert that the event of the Prophet's decease had not
occurred in the previous form. Mentally, this event should not occur in
this form. As a matter of fact, the Prophet died while he was on Ali's
breast. Besides, tremendous efforts were exerted for the purpose of
preventing the Prophet from explicating the general situation to his
people. These efforts, however, succeeded in occluding him from
recording what he was intending to. Al­Bukhari himself relates the
following narrative to bn­Abbas:

"The Prophet willed of three matters; taking the disbelievers out of the
Arab Peninsula, permitting the delegation in the same way he had adopted
and …I forgot the third!!" In this very form, Al­Bukhari records this
narrative.[86]

In addition, the form imputed to A'isheh about the Prophet's decease is
not true. In fact, he departed this world while he was placed to Ali's
chest. This fact is recognized by Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab. During his reign,
the Sahaba were attendant when Ka'b asked about the last words the
Prophet had said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[83] At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page138. [84] Nasr Bin Muzahim's
Waq'atu Siffine pages 227, 382 and 436, and Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib
pages 38, 65, 134 and 288, and Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb part.2
page238 and bn­Abdi Rabbih's Al­Iqdul­Fareed part.4 page411 and
Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh page8 and Al­Muraja'at The Index
page284. [85] At­Thehbi's Mizanuli'tidal part.1 page83 and Al­Muraja'at
The Index page284. [86] Al­Bukhari's book of hadith, Chapter: The
Prophet's Missive To Khosrow And Ceasar, and Chapter: The Prophet's
Final Disease And Decease part.5 page137.

"You should address this question at Ali." answered Omar. Hence, Ali
narrated the way of the Prophet's decease and the last words he had
uttered… When the Prophet was moribund, he ordered: "Summon my brother!"
They, consequently, summoned Ali. "Come near to me." the Prophet asked
Ali and went on wording to him till his blessed soul went out.[87]

In brief words, the Prophet did not depart the life in the form imputed
to A'isheh and taken as an evidence on denying the Prophet's will.

The Endowments Exclusively Enjoyed By the Leader and the Prophet's Successor
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the attendance of the Sahaba, the Prophet said: "O Ali! I am distinct
from you in the matter of prophesy. Indeed, there shall be no prophesy
after me. You are distinct from people in seven singularities about
which no Quraishi individual can dispute you. They are: your being the
foremost to believing in Allah, the most loyal to the covenant of Allah,
the best accomplisher of mandates of Allah, the finest equalizer, the
greatest upright, the most intelligent in issues and the most preferable
to Allah."[88] "Ali is being with the Quran, and the Quran is being with
Ali. They shall never be departed till they join me at the Divine
Pool."[89] "Ali is being with the right, and the right

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[87] This narrative is recorded in bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat part.2 page262­4
and 51. Kenzul­Ummal part.4 page55 hadith 1106­8 and part.6 page392
hadith 1009. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.2 page196 and
Vol.2 pages 561, 207 and 509. The very narrative is related by Ali,
bn­Abbas, Ummu Selemeh, Abdullah Bin Omar, Ali Bin Al­Hussein and the
other imams of the Prophet's household. [88] Abu­Na'eem's
Hilyetul­Awliya part.1 page65­6. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter:
The Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.1 page117 hadith 160.
At­Tabari's Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page262. bn­Talha's
Metalibus­Sa'ul part.1 page95. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha
part.9 page173. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page71. At­Thehbi's
Mizanuli'tidal part.1 page313. Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­talib, page270.
Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.3 page96. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda
page315. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (In the margin of Ahmed's book of
Hadith) part.5 page34. Fera'idus­Simtein part.1 page223 hadith 174. [89]
Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page110. At­Tabarani's Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer
part.1 page55. Al­Kinji's Kifayetut­talib, page399. bn­Hajar Al­Kifayeh
pages 122 and 124. As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa page173.
Is'afur­Raghibin (In the margin of Nourul­Absar) page157. Nourul­Absar
page73. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.3 page180. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawadda pages 40, 90 and 185… Ghayetul­Maram page540.
As­Suyouti's Al­Jami'us­Sagheer part.2 page56…

is being with Ali. They shall never be departed till they join me at the
Divine Pool on the Day of Resurrection."[90]

The Immunization of the Leader and the Prophet's Successor
----------------------------------------------------------

In the presence of his companions, the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) addressed at Ali: "O Ali! He whoever desists from me is
decided as desisting from Allah. Those who desist from you, Ali, are
desisting from me."[91] "He is reviling at me that whoever reviles at
Ali." [92] "Reviling at Ali is reviling at me. Reviling at me is
reviling at Allah. He whoever reviles at Allah shall be forcibly cast
off on his nasals in the Hell­fire." [93] "He is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[90] Al­Khatib Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu Baghdad part.41 page321,
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi
Talib part.3 page119 hadith 1162, Ghayetul­Maram page539, bn­Quteibeh's
Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh part.1 page73 and Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (In the
margin of Ahmed's book of Hadith) part.5 page30. [91] Al­Hakim's
Al­Mustedrak, part.3 page146. At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page66.
Majma'uzzawa'id, part.9 page135. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, part.2
page268 hadith 789. Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib
page241. At­Tabari's Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page220. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawadda page91. At­Thehbi's Mizanuli'tidal part.2 page18…etc
[92] An­Nisa'i's Al­Khassa'is page24. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page82.
At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page66. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq
Chapter: The Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.2 page184.
Al­Heithami's Majma'uzzawa'id, part.9 page130. As­Suyouti's
Tarikhul­Khulefa page73. Mishkatul­Massabih part.3 page245. An­Nebhani's
Al­Fetihul­Kabeer part.3 page196. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (In the margin
of Ahmed's book of Hadith) part.5 page30. [93] At­Tabari's
Thekha'irul­Uqba page66. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib, page81­2.
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page83. Ibnus­Sebbagh's
AL­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh page111. At­Tabari's Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2
page219…

hurting me that whoever hurts Ali."[94] "He is cherishing me that
whoever cherishes Ali. And he whoever despises him is despising me."[95]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[94] Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak part.3 page122. At­Thehbi's
Talkhissul­Mustedrak. Ahmed's book of Hadith part.3 page483. bn­Asakir's
Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.1
page389. Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzil part.2 page98.
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi Talib page52. bn­Abdil­Berr's
Alisti'ab (in the margin of bn­Hajar's Al­Issabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba)
part.3 page37. At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page65. bn­Hajar's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqah page73. Al­Belathiri's Ansabul­Ashraf part.2
page146. As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa. Al­Muraja'at, the Index pages
151­2… [95] bn­Abdil­Berr's Alisti'ab (in the margin of bn­Hajar's
Al­Issabetu Fi Tamyizis­Sahaba) part.3 page37. At­Thehbi's
Mizanuli'tidal part.2 page128. Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi
Talib page109. At­Tabari's Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page165. Ahmed's
book of Hadith part.5 page30. Al­Muraja'at, the Index pages 153…
