Chapter 5 - Crowning Ali the Leader and the Prophet's Successor
===============================================================

1. When: the Farewell Pilgrimage
--------------------------------

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) pointed that that
pilgrimage would be the last. Hence, the Muslims all over the world
readied themselves to join him for acquiring the rewards of that ritual
pilgrimage and the honors of the Prophet's companionship and farewell.
The number of the Muslims attained 90000 individuals. Some related that
it was 114000, 120000 or more. The most authenticated matter was that
such a number had actually accompanied the Prophet in Ghadeer Khum.[96]

2. Where: Ghadeer Khum
----------------------

Hutheifeh­bn­Useid Al­Ghefari spoke: “After he had accomplished the
rites of the Farewell Pilgrimage, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) ordered his companions not to abide near some trees in the
desert. He, afterwards, bid some to uproot thistles found under these
trees. Just as he reached that place, he performed a prayer and ascended
a place for sermonizing…”[97]

Zaid­bn­Arqam narrated the following: “When the Prophet went back from
the Farewell Pilgrimage and resided at Ghadeer Khum…”

Al­Bera­bn­Azib related it in the following form: “We were accompanying
the Prophet to Ghadeer Khum where we resided. A proclamation for a
collective prayer was declared. The ground of two trees was swept for
the Prophet…”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[96] Ibnul­Jawzi's Tethkiretul­Khawass page30. As­Seeretul­Halabiya
part.3 page257. Zeini Dehlan's As­Seeretun­Nubawiya part.3 page3.
Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer page9. [97] This narration is recorded by
At­Tabarani, in his Al­Mu'jamul­Kabeer.

Sa'd­bn­Abi­Waqqas reported: “On one Friday, I saw the Prophet seize Ali
from the hand and sermonize…”

Sa'd also related the following: “We were accompanying the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) who ordered people to halt as soon as
we reached Ghadeer Khum. He ordered the crowds preceding him to come
back and ordered those retarding to catch him. As people gathered, he
(peace be upon him and his family) sermonized…”

These narratives assert the fact that the place of crowning was Ghadeer
Khum.

The Divine Mandate of Nominating the Leader and the Prophet's Successor
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

As a matter of fact, people of Al­Madina and the surrounding villages
had full acquaintance of Ali's having been the Prophet's successor. This
cognizance were obtained according to the consecutive statements
repeatedly addressed by the Prophet in the attendance of individuals as
well as groups.

Al­Madina is the capital of the Islamic state. Its people and their
neighbors are the ones legally and actually concerned in the affair of
nominating the leader and the Prophet's successor.

As the Lord willed that Muslims should apperceive congregationally that
the next leader and the Prophet's successor would be Ali, He ordered His
Prophet of acquainting them of this matter during the Farewell
Pilgrimage so that none would disremember. This declaration occurred
near a spring which carried the core of life at that deserted peninsula;
water. That place which was called Khum was too distinct to be having an
alike all over the Arab Peninsula. Besides, that was the only place
which carried the name Khum. Thousands of wonderments and probabilities
are arisen from the declaration of that grand event that occurred before
such a huge number of people in proportion of population of the world at
that time. The attendants were of different degrees of faith, knowledge
and cognition. This truth was taken in consideration during the
Prophet's preparing and readying for delivering the divine mandate.
Hence, the Lord willed to fasten the Prophet's heart and find an excuse
and regiment for conveying this divine mandate

respecting nominating the coming leader and the Prophet's successor.
Hence, the Verse of Tabligh — conveyance — was revealed.

The Verse of Tabligh
--------------------

Instantly, the Angel Gabriel descended carrying the Verse of Tabligh to
the Prophet: (O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your
Lord; and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and
Allah will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people. 5:67)

The future of the Islamic mission depended upon this conveyance. On the
eighteenth of Dhul­Hijja, this Verse was revealed in Ghadeer Khum. It
was the same day on which the Prophet designated Ali as people's head,
leader and his successor. That was on Thursday.[98]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[98] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account Of Ali Bin
Abi Talib part.2 page86. Siddiq Hassan Khan's Fetihul­Beyan Fi
Meqassidil­Qur'an part.3 page63. Al­Hakim Al­Hassakani's
Shawahidut­Tanzil part.1 page187 hadiths 243­50. Al­Wahidi's
Asbabun­Nuzoul page115. Ad­Durrul­Manthour part.2 page298. Ashawkani's
Fetihul­Qadeer part.2 page60. bn­Talha Ashafi'i's Mettalibus­Sa'ul
part.1 page44. Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh page25.
Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda pages 120 and 249. Ashahristani's
Al­Milelu Wen­Nihel part.1 page163. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.1
page214. At­Tabari's Al­Wilaya Fi Hadithil­Ghadeer. bn­Hazm's Al­Fasl
part.1 page220. Fera'idus­Simtein part.1 page158. Abu­Bakr Ashirazi's.
Atha'alibi's Al­Keshfu Wel­Bayan. An­Nisapuri's book of Tafseer part.6
page160. Abdul­Wahhab Al­Bukhari's book of Tafseer; God's saying: "Say:
I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near relatives."
Jamalud­din Ashirazi's Al­Arba'in. Bedkheshti's Miftahun­Neja page41.
Al­Alusi's Rouhul­Me'ani part.2 page248. Mohammed Abduh's
Tafseerul­Menar part.6 page463. Ubeidullah Al­Hanafi's Arjahul­Metalib,
pages 66­8, 566­7 and 570. Regarding Shias, they, congregationally,
agree upon the fact that the Verse involved was revealed in Ghadeer Khum
on the eighteenth of Dhul­Hijja where Allah ordered His Prophet of
nominating Ali as the imam and his successor. See Al­Muraja'at page717.

The Style of the Decision of Nominating the Leader and the Prophet's Successor
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. The Text Related By Hutheifeh­bn­Useid Al­Ghefari And Recorded in At­Tabarani's Al­Kabeer

Hutheifeh says: The Prophet, then, stated: “O people! The Aware, the
Knowing informed me that prophets attain only the half of the age of the
succeeding ones. I do conclude that I am to be soon invited, and I am to
answer. I, as well as you, shall be questioned. What will you reply?”
“We do confirm that you have conveyed, done well and advised. God may
reward you with good.” They answered.

Thence, the Prophet said: “Do you maintain there is no God but Allah,
and Mohammed is Allah's slave and apostle, and the Paradise is true, the
Hell­fire is true, death is true, the post­earthly life resurrection is
true and the Hour is coming, there is no doubt about it; and Allah shall
raise up those who are in the graves?” “Yes, we do maintain so.” they
answered. “O Allah! Be the witness.” supplicated the Prophet, and added:
“O people! Allah is surely my Master. I am the master of the believers.
I am preceded to the believers' souls. He whomever I was his master,
this — Ali — is being his master. O Allah! Accede to whom accedes to
him, and oppose whom opposes him.”[99]

The Prophet then added: “O people! I will be preceding you to the
Heavenly Pool and you shall be following me. It is a pool of an area
larger than the distance between Busra — Syria — and San'a — Yemen. In
it, there shall be cups as numerous as stars. When you shall be coming
to me on that Pool, I will ask you about the two weighty things. Suppose
how should you esteem me in these two. The major weighty thing is the
Book of Allah, the Elevated. It is a cord, one of its brims is at
Allah's hand while the other is at yours. Cling to it and deviate not
and distort not. The other is my clan; my

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[99] bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa. Al­Haithemi's Majma'uzzawa'id
part.9 page164. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, part.2 page45, hadith 545.
Kenzul­Ummal part.1 page168 hadith 959. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.1
page26­7. Nawadirul­Ussoul page289. (In this book, the sinful hands of
the printers intentionally erased this hadith. They kept an indication
only. Ar­Rekhshi, in his Nuzulul­Abrar page18, relates the whole hadith
to Nawadirul­Ussoul. Abaqatul­Anwar, vol.Hadith of Athaqalein
part.1page156 and 312. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawaddeh, pages 30­1, 249.
Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh, page24. Ibnul­Meghazili's
Menaqibu Ali page16 hadith 23. Kenzul­Ummal part.1 page168 hadith 958.

household. The Aware, the Knowing has informed me that they shall never
separate until they shall join me on the Pool.”

### 2. The Text Related By Zaid­bn­Arqam

Zaid relates: When the Prophet went back from the Farewell Pilgrimage
and resided at Ghadeer Khum, he ordered of sweeping the ground under
some bushes there. He, then, sermonized: “I do conclude that I am to be
soon invited, and I am to answer. I am leaving among you the two weighty
things, one of whom is greater than the other. It is the Book of Allah,
the Elevated, and my clan; my household. Suppose how you should esteem
me in these two. Certainly, they shall never separate until they shall
join me on the Pool. Allah, the Exalted, is surely my Master. I am the
master of the believers.” He then took Ali from the hand and declared:
“He whomever I was his master, this — Ali — is being his master. O
Allah! Accede to whom accedes to him, and oppose whom opposes him.”[100]

### 3. The Text Related By Al­Bera­bn­Azib

Al­Bera narrates: We were accompanying the Prophet to Ghadeer Khum where
we resided. A proclamation for a collective prayer was declared. The
ground of two trees was swept for the Prophet who performed the Dhuhr
prayer there and, afterwards, took Ali from the hand and asked: “Have
you known that I am preceded to the believers' souls?” “Yes, we have.”
they answered. “Have you known that I am preceded to every believer's
soul?” questioned the Prophet. “Yes, we have.” they answered.
Immediately, he took Ali from the hand and declared: “He whomever I was
his master, this — Ali — is being his master. O Allah! Accede to whom
accedes to him, and oppose whom opposes him.”

Not too long after that, Omar met Ali and addressed at him:
“Congratulations, son of Abu­Talib! You became the master of every male
and female believer.”[101]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[100] An­Nisa'i's Al­Khassa'iss pages 93 and 21. Al­Khawarzmi's
Al­Menaqib page93. Al­Qanduzi's Yenabi'ul­Mawadda page32. Al­Amini's
Al­Ghadeer part.1 page30. Kenzul­Ummal part.15 page91 hadith 255.
Abaqatul­Anwar part.1 pages 117, 121, 144, 152 and 161. [101]
At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page67. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh part.1 page350.
Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page23. Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh page24.
Jalaluddin As­Suyouti's Al­Hawi Lil­Fetawi part.1 page122. Kenzul­Ummal
part.15 page117.

### 4. The Text Related By Sa'd­bn­Abi­Waqqas

On one Friday, I saw the Prophet seize Ali from the hand and sermonize:

“Praised and thanked be Allah.

O people! I am your master.” “You have said but the truth, Allah's
Apostle!” they confirmed. The Prophet, then, raised Ali's hand and
declared: “This is my successor. He shall be settling my debts. I am
acceding to whomever accedes to him and opposing whomever opposes
him.”[102]

### 5. The Text Related By Sa'd In Another Form

Sa'd also relates: We were accompanying the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) who ordered people to halt as soon as we reached Ghadeer
Khum. He ordered the crowds preceding him to come back and those
retarding to catch him. As people gathered, he (peace be upon him and
his family) sermonized: “O people! Who are your masters?” “Allah and His
Apostle are.” they confirmed thrice. The Prophet, soon, took Ali from
the hand and raised him and declared: “He whomever Allah and His
Apostles were his masters, this — Ali — is being his master. O Allah!
Accede to whom accedes to him, and oppose whom opposes him.”[103]

The Perception of the Decision and Receiving Congratulations
------------------------------------------------------------

As they could totally perceive the significance of the decision, the
attendants in Ghadeer Khum, proceeded towards the leader and the
Prophet's successor for offering him congratulations on this divine
grace. Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Al­Muraja'at the Index page176. The following references record the
hadith with little difference: bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The
Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.2 page47 hadiths 549­50.
Al­Belathiri's Ansabul­Ashraf part.2 page215. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib
page94. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.1 page18­20. Fera'idus­Simtein part.1
pages 64­5 and 71. Al­Muraja'at the Index page176. [102] An­Nisa'i's
Al­Khassa'iss page101. Fedha'ilul­Khamseh part.1 page365. Al­Bidaya
Wen­Nihaya part.5 page212. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.1 page38 and 41.
Al­Muraja'at the Index page176. [103] An­Nisa'i's Al­Khassa'iss page101,
Fedha'ilul­Khamseh part.1 page365, Is'afur­Raghibin (In the margin of
Nourul­Absar) page149, Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page282 and
Al­Muraja'at the Index.

who could never forget that day, was in the top of the list of the
congratulators. “Be felicitate, son of Abu­Talib! You became the master
of me as well as every Muslim.”[104] Omar addressed at Ali as he offered
congratulations. In another occasion, he said to him” “Congratulations,
son of Abu­Talib! You became the master of every male and female
believer.”[105]

While Omar was the caliph, some wondered the reason beyond his having
estimating Ali particularly. “He is my master.”[106] answered Omar.

Omar asked Ali to judge in a case between two Bedouins. “Is it this man
who will judge?” said one of them. Immediately, Omar jumped to him,
hanged from the dress and said: “Do you not know this one. He is your

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[104] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account Of Ali Bin
Abi Talib part.2 page57 hadiths 575, 577, 578. Ibnul­Meghazili's
Menaqibu Ali page18 hadith 24. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page94.
Al­Khateeb Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu Baghdad part.8 page290. Al­Hakim
Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzil part.1 page158 hadiths 213. Abu­Ahmed
Al­Ghezali's Sirrul­Alemin page21. Ihqaqul­Haq part.6 page256.
Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.1 page132. Fera'idus­Simtein part.1 page77.
[105] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq part.2 page50 hadith 548, 549 and 550.
Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page94. Ahmed Bin Hanbal's book of Hadith
part.4 page281. Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fussoulul­Muhimmeh page24.
As­Suyouti's Al­Hawi Lil­Fetawi part.1 page122. Thekha'irul­Uqba page67.
Fedha'ilul­Khamseh part.1 page350. As­Sam'ani's Fedha'ilus­Sahaba.
At­Thehbi's Tarikhul­Islam part.2 page197. Khawaja's Ilmul­Kitab
page161. Az­Zernedi's Nudhumu Duraris­Simtein page109. Al­Qanduzi's
Yenabi'ul­Mawadda, page30, 31 and 249. Ar­Razi's book of Tafseer, part.3
page63. As­Sibt Ibnul­Jawzi's Tethkiratul­Khawass page29.
Mishkatul­Messabih part.3 page246. Abaqatul­Anwar, hadith of Athaqalein,
part.1 page285. Al­Hamawini's Fera'idus­Simtein. Al­Ghadeer part.1
page272. bn­Abi Sheibeh's Al­Mussennef. Ibnul­Abbas Asheibani's
Al­Musnedul­Kabeer. Abu­Ya'li Al­Mousuli's Al­Musned. bn­Merdawayih's
book of Tafseer. Atha'labi's Al­Keshfu Wel­Bayan. At­Tabari's
Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page169. Ashenqiti's Kifayetut­Talib page28.
Ibnul­Jawzi's Al­Menaqib. An­Natnazi's Al­Khassa'isul­Alawiya. Omar Bin
Al­Mulla's Wasiletul­Mute'ebbidin. bn­Kutheir's Al­Bidaya Wen­Nihaya
part.5 page169. Al­Miqrizi's Al­Khuttat page223. Al­Azra'i's
Badi'ul­Me'ani page75. Al­Meibidi's Sharhu Diwani Ameeril­Mu'minin
page406. Kenzul­Ummal part.6 page397. As­Semhoudi's Wefa'ul­Wefa part.2
page173. Mahmud Asheikhani's As­Siratus­Sawi…etc. [106] bn­Hajar's
As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa page26. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The
Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.2 page82. Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira
part.2 page224. Al­Muraja'at the Index page212.

master, and my master, and the master of every male and female master.
He is not a believer that whomever Ali is not his master.”[107]

Texts Quoted from the Immortal Decision of Nominating Ali for the Leadership
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unanimously, Sunnis relate that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) referred to Ali in Ghadeer Khum by stating:

1. “He whomever I was his master, this — Ali — is being his master. O
Allah! Accede to whom accedes to him, and oppose whom opposes him, and
champion whomever champions him and deject whomever dejects him.”[108]

2 “He whomever I was his master, this, Ali, is being his mater.”

3 “He whomever I was his master, Ali is being his master. O Allah!
Accede to whomever accedes to him and oppose whomever opposes him.”[109]

It is obvious that the previous texts have been excerpted from the
decision of nominating Ali for the leadership. The texts involved told
of the place of occurrence, which was Ghadeer Khum. They also fitted the
size of the crowds that heard the decision and that it occurred during
the Prophet's last pilgrimage; the Farewell Pilgrimage. The decision was
so strong that it

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[107] bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa page107. At­Tabari's
Thekha'irul­Uqba page68. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page98.
Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page224. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.1
page382. Al­Muraja'at the Index page212. [108] the following:
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi
Talib part.2 page13 hadith 508 and 513­5. Kenzul­Ummal part.6 page403.
An­Nisa'i's Al­Khassa'iss pages 96. bn­Hazm's Al­Fasl part.1 page260.
The margin of bn­Hazm's Al­Fasl part.1 page260. Ahmed's book of Hadith
part.5 page32. The margin of Ahmed's book of Hadith. Al­Belathiri's
Ansabul­Ashraf part.2 page112. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page294.
Al­Muraja'at the Index page183…etc. [109] At­Tirmithi's book of hadith
part.5 page297. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account Of
Ali Bin Abi Talib part.1 page213. Al­Haithemi's Majma'uzzawa'id part.9
page103. An­Nisa'i's Al­Khassa'iss pages 94. Ibnul­Atheer's
Jami'ul­Ussoul part.9 page468. Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak part.3 page110.
(In this reference, the compiler decides the authenticity of the
hadith.) Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page79. At­Thehbi's
Talkhissul­Mustedrak part.3 page110. Hilyetul­Awliya part.5 page26.
As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour part.5 page182. At­Thehbi's
Tarikhul­Islam part.2 page196. Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu Baghdad part.8
page290.…etc.

imposed itself on others. Despite the fact that reviling at Ali was an
official act obligatorily burden on the Umayid state's people, and that
this state had the full actual dominion on the state's imports,
capacities and mass media, they showed total dearth to shade this
decision. The compact of the decision, however, remained along with
days. It became the evident witness on this nation's deceiving the real
leader and the Prophet's successor. Allah's, however, is the consequence
of affairs.

The Hadith of Ghadeer and the Event of the Nomination is A Certitude
--------------------------------------------------------------------

This hadith is related by Ahmed­bn­Hanbal from forty different ways of
narration. bn­Jarir relates it from seventy two different ways of
narration. Al­Jizri Al­Miqerri relates it from eighty different ways of
narrations. bn­Uqda relates it from 105 different ways of narration.
Abu­Sa'eed As­Sejistani relates it from 120 ways of narration. Abu­Bakr
Al­Hassabi relates it from 125 different ways of narration. Mohammed
Al­Yamani claims of relating it from 150 different ways of narration.
Abul­Ala Al­Attar Al­Hamadani relates it from 250 different ways of
narration.[110]

The entire Shias believe in the authenticity of the hadith of Ghadeer in
an indisputable way. They do believe undiscussibly in the ceremonies of
nominating Ali for leadership and succession of the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) that occurred in Ghadeer Khum.

The entire Sunnis admit the authenticity of the Ghadeer hadith. They
acknowledge of the Prophet's uttering that hadith. They, however,
adopted the misrepresentation of the hadith and the event of the
nomination originated by the rulers who regarded the hadith as a mere
merit imputed to Ali. They discarded the actual meanings and purports of
the hadith and the event. Thus, Sunnis inherited this misrepresentation.
They reckoned it with the traditions of the ancestors that it is illicit
to be neglected. Supposing Sunnis adopted other than this opinion, they
would drag the rug of legality on which the Umayids, the Abbasids and
the Ottoman stood. Other would be included in this process of dragging;
the matter that would prove the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[110] Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.1 pages 14­213, Abaqatul­Anwar,
Ghayetul­Maram, bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account Of
Ali Bin Abi Talib part.2 page5­90 and Al­Muraja'at the Index page182.

rightfulness of Shias. This would contravene the tradition of Shias have
been the enemies of this religion!!

### The Ghadeer Festivity

In the former times, Muslims appraised the anniversary of the Ghadeer
day as a festivity. They were wont to celebrate on this anniversary.
When the enemies of the Prophet's household came to power, the Muslims
stopped celebrating it. Hence, because of the pressure imposed by the
rulers, the next generations overlooked that anniversary. For Shias,
they still celebrating it.[111]

### Fasting On The Day Of Ghadeer

Abu­Hureira sates: He whoever fasts on the eighteenth of Dhul­Hijja,
Allah shall record for him the reward of a sixty month fasting. This
anniversary is the Ghadeer Khum day when the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) took Ali from the hand and said: “He whomever I was his
master, this — Ali — is being his master. O Allah! Accede to whom
accedes to him, and oppose whom opposes him and champion whomever
champions him.” Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab commentated: “Be felicitate, son of
Abu­Talib! You became the master of me as well as every Muslim.”[112]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[111] Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.1 page267, Al­Beiruni's
Al­Atharul­Baqiya Fil­Qurounil­Khaliya page334, bn­Talha's
Mettalibus­Sa'ul part.1 page44, bn­Khillekan's Wefiyatul­A'yan part.1
page90, Al­Musta'li Bin Al­Mustensir's book of the famed's life account,
part.1 page223 and Al­Muraja'at the Index page92. [112] bn­Asakir's
Tarikhu Dimeshq Chapter: The Life Account Of Ali Bin Abi Talib part.2
page75 hadiths 575­7, Al­Hakim Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzil part.1
page157 hadiths 210­3, Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer, part.1 page402, Al­Khateeb
Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu Baghdad part.8 page290, Fera'idus­Simtein part.1
page77 13 and Al­Muraja'at the Index page192­3.
