Chapter 6 — the Perfection of the Religion and the Completion of the Grace By Nominating the Imam
=================================================================================================

After the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had designated
Ali­bn­Abi­Talib as the Imam and his successor in front of that great
population, the religion was perfected and the divine grace was
completed. The doctrinal jurisprudential formulation became perfect and
the Prophet did nominate his heir apparent; therefore, he can leave this
world with full satisfaction of the affairs of his religion and nation.
The mission of the nominated successor, Ali, would be nothing more than
continuing the progression originated by the Prophet, following the
course he received for twenty three years. The Verse of Perfection was
revealed immediately after the ceremony of the nomination. (This day
have I perfected for you your religion and completed My favor on you and
chosen for you Islam as a religion. 5:3)[113]

Had the Prophet departed this world without nominating the Imam and the
successor, this would have been opposing the religion's perfection and
the grace's completion. The Imam is the representative of the Prophet
who is the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[113] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq part.2 page75 hadiths 575, 578 and
585. Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzil part.1 page157 hadiths 211­5.
Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali page19 hadith 24. Al­Khateeb
Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu Baghdad, part.8 page290. As­Suyouti's
Ad­Durrul­Manthour part.2 page259. As­Suyouti's Al­Itqan part.1 page21.
Al­Khjawarzmi's Al­menaqib page80. As­Sibt Ibnul­Jawzi's
Tethkiretul­Khawass page30. bn­Kutheir's book of Tafseer part.2 page14.
Al­Khawarzmi's Meqtalil­Hussein part.1 page115. Al­Hamawini's
Fera'idus­Simtein part.1 page72, 74 and 315. Al­Ya'qubi's book of
history, part.2 page35. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer part.1 page230. bn­Jarir
At­Tabari's Kitabul­Wilaya. Al­Bedkheshti's Miftahun­neja. Abu­Na'eem
Al­Isbahani's Ma Nazala Minel­Qur'an Fi Ali. Abu­Sa'eed As­sejistani's
Kitabul­Wilaya. Abul­Fetih An­Natnazi's Al­Khassa'issul­Alawiya.
Shihabuddin Ahmed's Tawdhihud­Dela'il. bn­Kutheir's book of Tarikh
part.5 page210. Ubeidullah Ashafi'i's Al­Menaqib page106. At­Tha'labi's
Al­Keshfu Wel­Bayan. Al­Alusi's Rouhul­Me'ani part.6. Page55.
Ibnul­Atheer's Al­Bidaya Wen­Nihaya part.5 page213 and part.7 page349.
About Shias, they are unanimously agreeing upon the authenticity of this
question. See Al­Muraja'at, the index pages 188­9.

base of the mundane and heavenly regulations and the center of every
single movement.

The rulers descried this point. Hence, no single ruler died before he
had appointed his heir apparent. “This is an ultimate right for them.”
some defended. Describing the caliph, bn­Khuldoun says: “He — the caliph
— is their warden and custodian. He has to select, the coming caliph, on
behalf of people in his life and, sequentially, after his death. He also
has the right of designating the one who should be in charge of their
affairs in the same way he — the current caliph — himself is doing. They
should trust him in this affair like they did in others…”[114]

The caliph should be blamed if he neglected nominating the heir
apparent. Let us take a look at Abdullah­bn­Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab's
statement. While his father was dying, Abdullah stood before him and
said: “O Amirul­Mu’minin! Nominate a successor for leading Mohammed's
nation! You should certainly reproach the supervisor of your camels or
sheep if he left the animals without appointing a supervisor as his
representative. You would blame him for missing his depository. How
would you, Amirul­Mu’minin, then do it with Mohammed's nation?”[115]

Let's take another look at A'isheh's following advice:

A'isheh addressed at Abdullah, the son of Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab: “O son!
After carrying my greetings to Omar, tell him that he should never leave
Mohammed's nation without a guide. He should nominate a successor, lest,
they shall be dispersed. I anticipate that they shall be engaged in
seditious matters.” Abdullah carried Ummul­Mu'minin's message to his
father. [116]

The entire caliphs of the history could realize the fact that leaving
the nation without assigning an heir apparent had been an act opposing
wisdom and opening the doors of sedition and leading to reproach as same
as a shepherd's being reproached when he leaves his cattle without
appointing a supervisor. Even A'isheh, Ummul­Mu'minin, the woman, could
recognize so!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[114] bn­Khuldoun's Muqaddima chapter 30 page120. [115] Al­Mas'udi's
Muroujut­Theheb part.2 apge 353. [116] bn­Quteibeh's Al­Imametu
Wes­Siyaseh page23.

In Title Three: The Authority, this matter has been indicatively
debated.

How did, then, all those individuals recognize this matter while the
prophet of Islam did not? Alas! What misfortune occurred to Islam?! How
should every ruler be confided in the question of nominating an heir
apparent while the Prophet of Allah should not?

The blind imitators had one of two courses to follow; either Mohammed's
religion as exactly as he had explicated, or the religion adopted by the
rulers. They opted for the latter choice since they decided that they
should be with the dominant party. “We are being with the dominant
party.” This statement, uttered by Abdullah­bn­Omar, has been changed
into a lawful rule. Alas! The matters became submissive to this form;
the coming ruler is that whom is nominated by the current one. The
dominant should be the ruler whatever he was! Allah's, however, is the
sequences of affairs.

The Divine Disposition of the Transference of Imamate After the Leader's Decease
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Allah has revealed the Quran as a missive and a divine doctrine to
mankind. It is also representing one of the necessities of explicating
this doctrine. The Quran was revealed to Mohammed, none else, since this
man was the divinely prepared for being the most knowledgeable of this
doctrine, the keenest of the rulings of this operative lawful
collection, the most favorable among the followers of the doctrine and
the fittest for leading these followers presently and in the future.

On that account, the Prophet was seen as the guide of the solicitation.
He also was the head of the state originated from that solicitation.
Mohammed's conducts; words, deeds and signature are contemplated as a
part of the doctrine. During his blessed lifetime, none should represent
or supplant Mohammed in this mission. He is the center of the circle and
the leader of the nation in both political and religious affairs.

The Specialist in Nominating the Prophet and the Imam
-----------------------------------------------------

Allah, the Elevated, is the Authority exclusively having the right of
nominating Imams. Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family) was the
first leader, Imam and president of the Islamic state. He was selected
by

Allah for this position. This was by the reason that he had been the
most knowledgeable of the doctrine, the keenest of perceiving its
rulings, the most favorable among the followers of the doctrine and the
fittest for leading and applying the regulations. God, gave himself the
exclusiveness of having the right of selecting the Imam, the authority
and the leader since He, the Elevated, is the only One Who has the
propensity, based upon certitude and conviction, of recognizing the
fittest. It was He, the Exalted, Who gave the conscript Imam, in every
time, the right of explicating the divine doctrine, enjoying authority,
joining political and religious leadership and issuing verdicts on the
light of this doctrine.

The Conscript Imam
------------------

In every period of time, the head of the Prophet's household is the
nation's Imam. The reason beyond dedicating leadership to the Prophet's
progeny is their being the other weighty thing beside the Quran, the
greater weighty thing. And guidance cannot be attained and deviation
cannot be evaded unless these two weighty things are clung. This rule is
inferred from doctrinal texts of the Quran and the Prophet's traditions
with its three classes; words, deeds and signature.[117] God has also
showed us that the Prophet's household, are the like of Noah's ark, he
shall be certainly saved that who takes it at any epoch, while those who
eschew shall certainly sink.[118] They are also the security against
engaging in discrepancies.[119] They

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[117] At­Tirmithi's book of hadith part.5 page328. Muslim's book of
hadith: chapter: Ali's Merits, part.2 page326 and part.15 page181.
bn­Kutheir's book of Tafseer part.4 page113. Al­Baghawi's
Messabihus­Sunneh page206. Ibnul­Atheer's Jami'ul­Ussoul part.1 page187.
As­Suyouti's Ihya'ul­Meyt (In the margin of Al­Itihaf) page114.
An­Nebhani's Al­Fetihul­Kabeer part.1 page503. bn­Hajar's
Assawa'iqul­Muhriqa page147 and 226. As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour
part.6 page306. At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page16. At­Tabarani's
Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer part.1 page135. Kenzul­Ummal part.1 page154.
bn­Sa'd's At­tabaqat part.2 page194. As­Siretul­Halabiya part.3 page321.
An­Nisa'i's Khassa'issu Amiril­Mu'minin… [118] At­Thehbi's
Talkheesul­Mustedrak, page184. bn­Hajar's As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa, page234.
As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa. As­Sabban's Is'afur­Raghibin, page109.
Al­Heithami's Majma'uzzawa'id part.9 page168. At­Tabarani's
Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer part.2 page22. Abu­Na'eem's Hilyetul­Awliya part.4
page306. As­Suyouti's Al­Jami'us­Sagheer part.2 page132. Ahmed's book of
hadith part.5 page92...etc. [119] bn­Hajar's Assawa'iqul­Muhriqa
page140. As­Suyouti's Ihya'ul­Meyt. At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page17.
As­Suyouti's Al­Jami'us­Sagheer part.2 page161. An­Nebhani's
Al­Fetihul­Kabeer part.3 page367. Ahmed's book of hadith part.5 page92.
As­Sebban's Is'afur­Raghibin page182…etc.

are prepared by God for this mission. They are also Mohammed's progeny.
Saving Mohammed whose progeny is the offspring of Ali and Fatima, the
prophets' progenies were their direct sons.[120]

Except for Allah, the Elevated, none can recognize, so certainly and
convictionally, the most knowledgeable, the keenest, the most favorable
and the fittest for understanding, applying and leading the doctrine's
followers. Hence, He, the Elevated, has been the specialist of
nominating the Prophet's successor. He did opt for Ali­bn­Abi­Talib for
the Muslims' leadership and the Prophet's succession. The Apostle was
ordered to prepare and arrange the grounds for his successor. Hence,
this successor became the most knowledgeable, the keenest, the most
favorable and the fittest after the Prophet. He also became the only
authority enjoying the right of practicing the entire political and
religious missions previously practiced by the Prophet. Prophesy,
however, is excluded since no prophet should come forth after Mohammed
(peace be upon him and his family). Through the instructions of the
Prophet, God, the Exalted, showed us that the right shall be invariably
with Ali, and Ali shall be with the right which follows Ali wherever he
turns. Therefore, Ali is ‘trustful’ as bn­Khuldoun figures out in
Chapter: 30 of his Muqaddima.

The Authority in Charge of Nominating the Successor of the Prophet's Successor
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ali­bn­Abi­Talib is the direct successor of the Prophet. The right is
always with Ali and Ali is always with the right which follows him
wherever he turns. Similarly, the Quran is with Ali and Ali is with the
Quran so continuously that they shall never be separated till they join
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) on the Heavenly Pool. Ali
is the most favorable and the fittest among the followers of the Islamic
doctrine, and the most knowledgeable and the keenest according to the
statements of Allah and His Apostle. For all these reasons, he is being
the authorized of nominating his successor. In due course, every Imam
should nominate his successor. They are, pursuant to the Holy Quran, the
Prophet's sons. The Verse of Mubahala — supplicating God to curse the
liar party — blows every obstinate on the face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[120] As­Sawa'iqul­Muhriqa page112. Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3
page164. Kenzul­Ummal part.6 page152. Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib
page27…etc.

Unanimously, the Islamic hadithists agree upon the fact that the Verse
of Mubahala: (But whoever disputes with you in matter after what has
come to you of knowledge, then say: Come on let us call our sons and
your sons and our women and your women and our near people and your near
people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of
Allah on the liars. 3:61), was revealed in the favor of the Prophet,
Ali, Fatima, Al­Hassan and Al­Hussein (peace be upon them).[121]
Accordingly, Al­Hassan and Al­Hussein are the only sons of the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family). Which statement, after this, will
make you believe?! Which language, other than this, will make us affront
partisan imitation and follow the right and the intellectual results?!

They are, at least, from Quraish, the Prophet's clan. According to
authentic traditions, the Muslims' leadership should be from Quraish.
[122] The Hashemites are the forehead of Quraish. The Abdul­Muttelib’s
are the forehead of the Hashemites. The forehead of the Abdul­Muttelib’s
is Mohammed and his progeny. [123] They are purified by Allah. The Verse
of Tatihir — purification — is so evident. Considering they claim that
the Verse concerned the Prophet's women, we ask: how should a man's
women

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[121] An­Nawawi's Muslim's Book of Hadith, Chapter: Ali's Merits, part.2
and 15 page360 and 176. At­Tirmithi's Book of Hadith, part.4 page293.
Al­Hassakani's Shawahidut­Tanzeel, part.1 page120­9. Al­Hakim's
Al­Mustedrak, part.3 page150. (The compiler rules of the authenticity of
the hadith.) Ahmed's book of hadith part.1 page185. bn­Kutheir's book of
Tafseer part.1 page370­1. Al­Hakim's Ma'rifetu Uloumil­Hadith, Type 17.
At­Thehbi's Talkhissul­Mustedrak. Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali Bin Abi
Talib. Al­Kelbi's At­Tasihil part.2 page109. Ibnul­Jawzi's Zadul­Masire
part.1 page399. bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, Chapter: Imam Ali Bin Abi
Talib's life account, part.1 page21. At­Tabari's Book of Tafseer, part.3
page299­301. Az­Zemekhshari's Al­Kheshaf (Book of Tafseer), part.1
page368­70. Ibnus­Sebbagh's Al­Fusoulul­Muhimmeh page110. Ibnul­Atheer's
Usdul­Ghabeh part.4 page26. As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa page196.
Al­Jassas's Ahkamul­Qur'an part.2 page295­6. Al­Qurtubi's Book of
Tafseer, part.4 page104. Al­Wahidi's Asbabun­Nuzoul, page59. bn­Arabi's
Ahkamul­Qur'an, part.1 page275. Ashawkani's Fetihul­Qadir, part.1
page347. Al­Omari's Mishkatul­Messabih. Ar­Razi's Book of Tafseer,
part.2 page699. bn­Hajar's Al­Issabeh part.2 page509. On page45 of
Al­Muraja'at; the index, about 90 other references recording this
narrative are written down by Hussein Razi, the revisor…etc. [122] In
Kenzul­Ummal, part.12 page25, the compiler records this hadith and
relates it to Ahmed, in his book of hadith, At­Tabarani, in his
Al­Mu'jamul­Kabeer, Al­Beihaqi, in his book of hadith, and Al­Hakim, in
his Al­Mustedrak. About a hundred narratives appertained to the matter
involved are written down by the compiler of Kenzul­Ummal, who relates
them to the grand hadithists. See hadiths 33789­890. [123] See
Kenzul­Ummal part.2 page43. The compiler relates this hadith to
At­Tabarani, in his Al­Mu'jamul­Kabeer, Al­Beihaqi, in his book of
hadith, Al­Hakim, in his Al­Mustedrak and bn­Asakir. Refer also to
Kenzul­Ummal, part.12 page24.

be purified while his sons be not?! At the minimum, they should be
esteemed for their having been blocked in Cols Abu­Talib for three
years!

Those Imams, however, are twelve in number.[124] It is they that are the
purified Imams, not the prevailing Quraishi rulers who were more than
one hundred.[125]

The Wisdom of Dedicating Imamate to Mohammed's Progeny
------------------------------------------------------

The Prophet's progeny were given the Imamate because Allah has purified
them — mentally and physically. Hence, they shall be forming no
dangerous on this nation. Another reason is that discrepancies and
rivalry about leadership shall be excavated. When others hold the
position of Imamate and leadership, the prevailing, apart from regarding
his religiousness, knowledgeability and honesty, shall be ruling. In
case the position of Imamate is dedicated to the Prophet's progeny,
everybody's satisfaction is attained. Settlement shall be achieved and
selves shall be affable and avarice shall be detained if the ruler is
Mohammed's son.

People's Role in the Process of Nominating the Imam
---------------------------------------------------

When people are faithful, honest and broad-minded, they are, naturally,
to scrutinize the most knowledgeable and the keenest of the divine
doctrine and its rulings since this doctrine is the heavenly
jurisprudential systemization that is the operative law, and the Imam is
the responsible for applying this law. Anticipated dangers shall
certainly occur if the leader is an individual other than the most
knowledgeable and the keenest.

In addition, every nation is, absolutely, to search for the most
preferred among individuals. It is for everybody's good and pride that
the most preferred is the ruler. In a like manner, the intellectual,
faithful, and broad-minded nation should seek the fittest for leading to
the course of Allah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[124] See kenzul­Ummal part.12 page24. The compiler relates this hadith
to Al­Bukhari and Muslim. [125] For recognizing the names of the
Quraishi rulers, see Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb.

It is not attainable for any individual, group or nation as a whole, to
recognize, in certitude and conviction, the most knowledgeable, the
keenest, the most favorable and the fittest.

It is none but Allah, the Elevated, Who has the aptitude of recognizing
such attributes so certainly and convictionally. For His grace, mercy
and comprehension, God directs His servants to their very acquaintance
they are searching for, and refers to the most qualified to leading the
march towards Him.

Having enjoying intellectuality, faithfulness and broad-mindedness, the
nation should embrace the divine contribution of nominating the
qualified individual for leadership. The nation should also be blissful
as the one for whom they are searching is already provided by God.
Consequently, people should swear their allegiance satisfactorily, not
coercively, to this Imam and leader. When this declaration of fealty is
accomplished, the Imam selected by God becomes the legal and actual
leader of the nation. He should, then, aid the nation in applying the
heavenly jurisprudential systemization.

Disintegration Between Actuality and Legality
---------------------------------------------

In case people reject the heavenly contribution of nominating the most
knowledgeable, the keenest, the most favorable and the fittest for
leadership, and probe, according to personal inference, another, then a
process of disintegration shall be occurring between actuality and
legality. Thus, the actual ruler who holds fast on power shall be an
individual other than that nominated by God. Hence, the latter shall be
powerless and incapable of directing people who will not accede to him.
As a matter of fact, this individual selected by God shall be impotent
to practice illegal ways to come to power since he is the bearer of
ethics imposed upon him by his religion. Later on, the prevailing
illegal ruler shall be having the entire power in the hand and claiming
of his being the Prophet's successor and representative. The stick of
sovereignty will be shaken in the faces of those who may oppose.

Al­Hussein­bn­Ali­bn­Abi­Talib is the Imam, the leader, the authority
and the guide of people of his time. He attained such attributes by
categorical doctrinal texts. Voluntarily or coercibly, people swore
allegiance to Yazeed­bn­Muawiya. Hence, the latter became the actual
ruler. Al­Hussein, the legal ruler, became unable to practice his
competencies since force and

usurpation were the two aspects due to which Yazeed came to power.
People shunned this matter. Deliberately or forcibly, they declared
their fealty to this ruler and turned aside from the legal one,
Al­Hussein, who had to opt for one of two situations; either to submit
to the actuality or confront the prevailing power that had the ability
of pressing on him through means and material media that might reached
to executing death penalty. Authority, in fact, stands for a legal wife
of Al­Hussein, the Imam. This wife loves her husband and is sincere to
him since she sees him be the very one who deserves her.

By means of force, prevalence and arrogance, the actual ruler usurped
that wife and compelled her to live with him. This ruler, in fact,
realizes that he owns only the body of that wife whose soul is clung to
her legitimate husband. Hence, he shall never be contented unless he
gets rid of that husband. By achieving so, the ruler shall be seizing
this wife's heart and she shall never be back to her beloved.

The Legal Imams
---------------

The legal Imams are:

1. Ali­bn­Abi­Talib.

2. Al­Hassan­bn­Ali­bn­Abi­Talib.

3. Al­Hussein­bn­Ali­bn­Abi­Talib.

4. Zainul­Aabidin­bn­Al­Hussein­bn­Ali.

5. Mohammed Al­Baqir­bn­Zainul­Aabidin­bn­Al­Hussein.

6. Ja'far As­Sadiq­bn­Mohammed­bn­Zainul­Aabidin.

7. Mousa Al­Kadhim­bn­Ja'far­bn­Mohammed.

8. Ali Ar­Ridha­bn­Mousa­bn­Ja'far.

9. Mohammed Al­Jawad­bn­Ali­bn­Mousa.

10 Ali Al­Hadi­bn­Mohammed­bn­Ali.

11 Al­Hassan Al­Askari­bn­Ali­bn­Mohammed.

12 Mohammed Al­Mahdi­bn­Al­Hassan­bn­Ali.

Exposing the Future for the Leader and the Prophet's Successor
--------------------------------------------------------------

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) fulfilled the trust,
conveyed the mission so successfully, explicated everything, carried out
his Lord's mandate of nominating his successor, familiarized the entire
individuals and groups of his nation with this decision and,
subsequently, declared this decision before one hundred thousand
Muslims. Headed by Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab, the entire present individuals
offered congratulations to Ali on this occasion. It seemed that
everything would be in its proper place, and matters would go so
relaxedly and openly. Being not sufficed with all these procedures, the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) revealed some of the morrow
issues before his companions. In the presence of the grand Sahaba, like
Abu­Bakr and Omar, the Prophet foretold: “From among you there shall be
an individual who will fight for the sake of safeguarding the correct
interpretation of the Quran as same as I have fought for the sake of its
revelation.”

The attendants expected themselves to be the intended. “Is it I?” asked
Abu­Bakr. “No.” answered the Prophet. “It is I, then.” stated Omar.
“No.” answered the Prophet, “He is the repairer of the sandal.” The
Prophet referred to Ali. Abu­Sa'eed Al­Khidri commentated: “When we
carried this good tidings to him, Ali did not even raise his head, as if
he had already heard it.”[126]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[126] bn­Talha's Mettalibus­Sa'ul part.1 page64. Al­Khawarzmi's
Al­Menaqib page183. Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu Duraris­Simtein page115.
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq part.3 page137. An­Nisa'i's Khassa'issu
Amiril­Mu'minin page131. Ahmed's book of hadith part.5 page37.
Abu­Na'eem's Hilyetul­Awliya part.1 page67. Ibnul­Atheer's Usdul­Ghabeh
part.3 page282. At­Tabari's Ar­Riyadhun­Nedhira part.2 page252­3.
At­Tabari's Thekha'irul­Uqba page67. Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali
page298. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.2 apge 277.
Al­Heithami's Majma'uzzawa'id part.9 page33. As­Suyouti's
Tarikhul­Khulefa page173. bn­Hajar's Assawa'iqul­Muhriqa page47.
bn­Hajar's Al­Issabeh part.2 page392. Kenzul­Ummal part.15 page94.
Al­Muraja'at the Index pages161­2…etc.

The Prophet exhibited a general view of his successor's future. He
addressed at him: “Surely you shall be facing arduous matters after me.”
“Shall this happen while I am saving my religion?” asked Ali. “Yes
indeed. Your religion is saved.” asserted the Prophet.[127]

He also foretold his successor of the nation's betraying him soon after
his — the Prophet — decease.[128]

The most important matter Ali had been foreseen was that he should be
fought. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) addressed at Ali:
“You shall be battled by the despotic faction. You shall be the right.
He whomever will not support you on that day, shall not be reckoned with
my people.”[129]

The Prophet spared no efforts for cautioning his nation against the
matter falling in the morrow. He addressed at one of his companions: “O
Abu­Rafi! After me there shall be some people fighting Ali. Conflicting
these people is one of Allah's obligatory duties. If it is helpless to
fight them with hands, tongues should be used. When these are also
unworkable, fight them with your hearts.”[130]

The Collapse of the Jahilite Political Form
-------------------------------------------

A total collapse occurred to the Jahilite — pre­Islamic — political
form. This collapse was rendered by the divine arrangements appertained
to the position of the Islamic state's leadership. For Islam's
viewpoint, nominating the leadership is a total disciplinary process
dedicated to specialists. It must

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[127] Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak part.3 page140, At­Thehbi's
Talkheesul­Mustedrak, Az­Zerendi's Nudhumu Duraris­Simtein page118,
Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin of Ahmed's Book of Hadith),
part.5 page34, Fedha'ilul­Khamseh part.3 page53 and Al­Muraja'at, the
index page161. [128] bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha part.6
page45, Ibnul­Atheer's Al­Bidaya Wen­Nihaya part.6 page218,
Fedha'ilul­Khamseh part.3 page51, At­Tusi's Talkhissus­Shafi part.3
page51. [129] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq part.3 page171, Al­Amini's
Al­Ghadeer part.3 page193 and Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (in the margin of
Ahmed's Book of Hadith), part.5 page32. [130] Majma'uzzawa'id part.3
page134 and bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq part.3 page123. (The compiler,
in this reference, relates this hadith to Ihqaqul­Haq part.7 page343).
See Al­Muraja'at, the index page164.

be exclusively conferred to the most knowledgeable, the keenest, the
most favorable and the fittest among the followers, disregarding clans
and tribes.

The Jahilite political form, on the other hand, is based upon surmising
leadership as a common practice headed by each clan in definite shares.
These clans concluded a political form grounded on partitioning the
honor of the political positions including headship, the pennon, the
assemblies, watering the pilgrimages, hosting the guests... etc.

Congregationally, they esteemed this political form as the best
attainable system at which the highest level of equity could be
achieved. Accordingly, the political positions were seen as a fate
common among these clans and it is for nobody's good that any change
occurs. This made this form the title of a political belief and an
impossibly passable tradition. The Meccan tribes attempted at stopping
the advent of the Hashemite prophet, but they failed although they had
spared no efforts at all for achieving so. Hence, the Hashemite's
prophesy was proved to be an inescapable fortune. Considering the
Hashemite's prophesy has been an unfailing destiny, is it, then,
practicable to regard their enjoying leadership and the Prophet's
succession as an unfailing destiny, too? It is infeasible that God
grants them prophesy and leadership altogether! Correspondingly, the
Quraishis were enraged due to the divine arrangements appertained to the
Prophet's succession. This spite had been the architect of the slogan:
“It is impracticable for the Hashemites to join leadership to prophesy.”
In the presence of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), this
slogan was behind bars. Yet, there has been an appropriate opportunity
for it to emerge. For achieving a methodological coherence of this
thesis, I am to provide the historical debate anew, so that the portrait
should be perfected and the topic comprehended.
