Chapter 8 — Introductories To the Rebellion
===========================================

With the Prophet in His Final Disease
-------------------------------------

The Prophet was in his final moments. The Angel Gabriel visited him
ceaselessly. He had full knowledge of the future of his nation. He did
his mission so completely, conveyed his Lord's missives and explicated
every thing totally and was familiar with the surrounding incidents. He
realized the current silence should be followed by an explosion that
would destroy the political legality and the doctrinal authority. This
destruction would certainly disarm Islam and cripple the central
originator of the divine solicitation and government.

For his nature, the Prophet should never be inclined by storms, and
should never be occluded from keeping his deep pathos of kindness and
mercy towards these peoples. In addition to the completion of the
religion, the perfection of the divine grace and the comprehensive
explication of every thing needed by people including ways of
appropriate defecation and urination, the Prophet insisted on condensing
the entire situation for people. By this, he intended that people would
be guided and would never be deviated or affected by the imminent
pitfalls waylaying for them and waiting for the Prophet's decease so
that they — the pitfalls — would be opening their mouths for troubling
Islam's pureness, hampering its movement and digressing its course.

The Prophet's blessed house was suffocated with the grand Sahaba. It was
the best opportunity to disclose. He importunately persisted on
summarizing the situation and reminding of the future course of the
march of Islam. The Prophet said: “Fetch me a paper so that I will
record a decree after which you shall never be deviated.”

What is the wrong with such a prophetic cognizance? Who would reject
preservation against deviation? For what is this matter rejected? For
whose good is it rejected? Moreover, considering Mohammed as an ordinary
Muslim, not a prophet and a leader of the nation, it is rightful for
every

Muslim to record his will and say whatever he wants, specially just
before his final departure. It is optional for the receivers to apply or
discount that will or saying.

Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab interfered and addressed at the retinue: “The
Prophet is dominated by his pains. You have the Quran. We are sufficed
by God's Book.”

The retinue were engaged in discrepancy. Some supported the Prophet's
demand with recording a decree after which deviation shall be thoroughly
suspended, while others supported Omar's request of standing against
that demand. When their dispute attained its climax, the Prophet
dismissed them.[144]

According to another narrative, when the Prophet demanded with a paper
on which he would record a decree protecting against thorough deviation,
the retinue disputed. It is disapprovable to dispute in the attendance
of a prophet. They claimed that the Prophet had been speaking out of
dotage. “Quit me!” the Prophet said, “The pains I am engaged in are more
favorable than the deeds you are drawing me to.”[145]

According to a third narrative; The Prophet said: “Fetch me a paper and
an inkpot so that I will record a decree protecting you from deviation
for ever.”

They said: “The Prophet of God is speaking out of dotage.”[146]

According to a fourth narrative ascribed to Al­Bukhari, the Prophet
said: “Fetch me a paper so that I will record a decree protecting you
from deviation for ever.” Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab commented: “The Prophet is
affected by his pains. We have, sufficiently, the Book of God.” So, they
were engaged in litigious dispute. “Quit me.” the Prophet settled the
divergence, “Before me it is disapprovable to engage in dispute.”[147]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[144][144] Al­Bukhari's, Book of Sick, Chapter: The diseased's
dismissing the visitors: part.7 page9. Muslim's, the last of Book of
Will, pare 5 page75. An­Nawawi's Muslim's Sahih, part.11, page95.
Ahmed's, part.4 page356, hadith 2992. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu
Nahjil­Belagha, part.6, page51. [145] Al­Bukhari's, part.4, page31 and
Muslims' part.1, page222 and part.3, page286. [146] Muslim's, part.2,
page16 and part.11, page94­5, and Ahmed's, part.1 page355, and
At­Tabari's Tarikh, part.2, page193 and Ibnul­Atheer's Al­Kamil,
page320. [147] Al­Bukhari's, part.1 page37.

According to a fifth narrative of Al­Bukhari, the Prophet said: “Fetch
me a paper so that I will record a decree protecting you thoroughly from
deviation.” They were engaged in dispute. It is disapprovable to dispute
before a prophet. “What is the wrong with him? Has he been speaking out
of dotage? Ask him.” they commented. Some faced him with these questions
frequently. “Quit me,” he said, “the pains I am engaged in are more
favorable than the deeds you are drawing me to.”[148]

According to a sixth narrative reported by Al­Bukhari, the Prophet said:
“Fetch me a paper so that I will record a decree protecting you
thoroughly from deviation.” They were engaged in dispute. It is
disapprovable to dispute before a prophet. “What is the wrong with him?
Has he been speaking out of dotage? Ask him.” they commented. “Quit me,”
he said, “the pains I am engaged in are more favorable than the deeds
you are drawing me to.”[149]

As to a seventh narrative of Al­Bukhari, the Prophet said: “Let me
record a decree according to which you shall never be deviated.” “The
Prophet has been affected by his pains. You have the Quran. We are
sufficed by the Book of Allah.” Omar commented.

The attendants were engaged in litigious dispute. Some supported the
Prophet's demanding with a record protecting against deviation for ever.
Some supported Omar's suggestion. “Quit me.” The Prophet said as their
divergence attained its climax.[150]

According to another report, Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab said: “The Prophet is
speaking out of dotage…”[151]

Al­Faruq declared that he had occluded the Prophet from recording that
decree so that he would prevent him from nominating Ali for the
leadership.[152]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[148] Al­Bukhari's, part.5 page137 and At­Tabari's Tarikh, part.3,
page192­3. [149] Al­Bukhari's, part.2 page132 and part.4 page65­6. [150]
Al­Bukhari's part.8 page161. [151] As­Sibt Al­Jawzi's
Tethkiretul­Khawass, page62, and Abu­Hamid Al­Ghezzali's Sirrul­Aalemine
We Keshfu Ma Fid­Darein, page21.

The Encounter: Parties and Preliminary Results
----------------------------------------------

The first party: Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family), the
messenger of Allah, the last of the prophets and the Imam (president) of
the Islamic state.

The adversary party: Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab; one of the grand Sahaba and
the most remarkable viziers of the Islamic state and the second
successor of the Prophet.

Place of encounter: The Prophet's house.

Witnesses of the encounter: the grand Sahaba (pleased be them).

### 1. Dissension

The attendants dissented on two groups. The first supported Al­Faruq in
preventing the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) from recording
that decree. This group argued that Al­Faruq had been one of the most
considerable Sahaba and the Prophet's viziers. He cared for Islam. He
thought that there had been no incentive to annoy the diseased Prophet
by allowing him to record that will. The Quran is sufficient in this
regard. It is the security against deviation. Hence, it is
inconsequential to have the decree the Prophet would write.

The second group rejected originally any sort of encounter between the
followers and their leaders; a believer and a prophet whose mission is
acceptably satisfactory; an apostle who directly receives instructions
from God and an applier of such instructions; a prophet that is a head
of a government and one of his ministers. The group members determined
the imperativeness of giving the Prophet a chance to say or record
everything he intends since he is still a prophet and the head of the
government till the last moment of his life and till someone occupies
his place. From another face, he is a Muslim who lawfully enjoys the
freedom to speak out and record whatever he intends. Lastly, he was the
master of the house at which these incidents had occurred. So, every
individual has the right to say anything in his own house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[152] bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha, part.3 page113 Line 27,
First edition; Egypt and Beiruit, and part.12 page79 Line 3 by the
revision of Mohammed Abul­Fadhl, and part.3 page803, Edit; Daru
Mektebetil­Hayat and part.3 page167, Darul­Fikr.

### 2. The Emanation Of A New Huge Trend

Al­Faruq proved his being a new huge trend that had the capability of
preventing the Prophet from recording his will. A many supporters was
attracted by this new trend in the case of encountering the Prophet
directly.[153] Decorously, he could move and lead the coming incidents.
Till this time, none could certainly identify the individual who advised
the Ansar to hold a meeting in the Bani­Sa'ideh's Saqeefa­shed.
Similarly, none could understand the way by which this meeting was held.
None also understood how Omar had lonlily known of it. The most
authentic matter is that Abu­Bakr, Omar and Abu­Ubeideh had been the
only Muhajirs who attended that meeting. The most authentic report is
that Abu­Bakr (pleased be him) had been helping the Prophet's immaculate
household establish their decedent’s funeral. A most authentic matter,
also, is that it was Omar who had called Abu­Bakr and told of the
meeting of the shed. Another most authentic report is that Abu­Bakr and
Omar had taken Abu­Ubeideh with them as they accidentally found him in
their way to Bani­Sa'ideh's Saqeefa.[154]

Al­Faruq, therewith, lived in the core of these incidents. He shadowed
the situation so scrupulously and continuously. In the meeting of the
Ansar, he was the star who could steer the results to his wishes. He
would have been the caliph had he intended to. Just after the cessation
of that meeting and the majority's declaring fealty to Abu­Bakr, Omar
himself led the completion of the fealty declaration process. He
promoted that the Muhajirs should swear allegiance to Abu­Bakr whom had
just been elected, by the Ansar and Omar himself, as the new leader. The
Umayids, led by Othman, hurried to declaring their fealty to As­Siddiq.
It was Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab who enlisted, from the voters of Abu­Bakr, a
phalanx that took Ali and his companions out of Fatima Az­Zahra's house
by force for forcing them to swear allegiance to the nominated
caliph.[155] It was Omar who menaced to kill Ali if the latter would
refrain from swearing allegiance[156] It was Omar who advised Abu­Bakr
to gift Abu­Sufian the alms for guaranteeing his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[153] the references of the calumnious day. The sayer of "We are
sufficed by the Book of Allah" was Al­Faruq. [154] bn­Quteibeh's
Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh, pages 5 and on. [155] the references of flaming
Fatima's house numerously mentioned. [156] Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh,
page13.

loyalty to the new government[157] It was Omar who suggested to Abu­Bakr
assigning Yazeed­bn­Abi­Sufian as the commander of the army of
Syria[158] that became the tremendous power that helped in the
settlement of Abu­Bakr's government. Soon after that, As­Siddiq was
deceased. Omar inherited that stable government easily and without any
sort of opposition. This inheritance was a step followed by another.
Sooner or later, the researchists of history shall perceive that
Al­Faruq had an immense unprecedented capacity of planning and
hypothesizing.[159] He played the role of the constituent body of the
post­prophesy era. He arranged the essentialities of the coming ruling
of Islam. He decided not to let the Hashemites join leadership to
prophesy. Thus, caliphate should be inherited far away from them. It
should be a pure right of the predominant individuals apart from the
legality or the illegality of means of predominance.

### 3. Emergence Of The Ideas Of Predominance And Preferring The Follower To The Master

By the previously mentioned encounter, the ideas of predominance,
preferring the follower to the master and the equality between masters
and their followers were originated. Moreover, states of confusedness
and perplexity of discerning the right were emanated.

Al­Faruq argued that a hazardous question might have been arisen from
the diseased Prophet's recording his will. A group of Sahaba supported
this claim. This argument was created out of doubt.

The other party argued that Mohammed had been still a prophet till his
last respiration and till his immaculate soul leaves to the Creator.
They believed he had never been speaking out of desire. This is an
ascertained fact. Consequently, it is irrational to depend upon doubts
and disdain the ascertained fact. Disease is not an obstacle against
speaking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[157] bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagheh, part.1 page306­7. [158]
At­Tabari's Tarikh part.3 page209­10, and Al­Qasimi's Tarikhul­Hukm
page152. [159] Ibnul­Atheer's Al­Kamilu Fit­Tarikh, part.3 page24 and
bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagheh, part.3 page107.

#### Two Similar Occurrences

1. When Abu­Bakr was arduously affected by his disease, he sought the
celebrities' advice. After that, he summoned Othman alone. “Write down:”
Abu­Bakr asked Othman just before he was fainted. During these moments,
Othman wrote: “I do use Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab as my successor to
caliphate.” When he regained consciousness, Abu­Bakr ordered Othman to
read what he had written down. “So, you did so since you anticipated
that people would be engaged in discrepancies if I passed away during my
previous syncope. Did you not?” said Abu­Bakr. “Yes, I did.” asserted
Othman. “God reward you for Islam and its people.” blessed Abu­Bakr.
This form was agreed upon by Abu­Bakr.[160] This is an unanimously
authentic fact.

2. When Omar was in his final disease, the physician surprised him that
he would not catch that evening. “Fetch me that paper, son.” Omar asked
Abdullah. As the paper was between his hands he erased it and shouted
out of the pains he was suffering: “By God I swear, I would sacrifice
what is all found on this globe for the horror of the coming stage.”
Abdullah, the son, rejected his dying father's demand with fixing his
cheek to the ground. “Woe is your mother. Put my cheek to the ground.
Woe is Omar and Omar's mother if God will not forgive him.” said Omar to
his son.[161]

In spite of the harsh pains Abu­Bakr and Omar were suffering in their
final diseases, they could record their wills. Omar could arrange the
matter of the six­member advisory board in a form that he was assured of
Othman's being the caliph. He also guaranteed that a Hashemite would
never be elected for leadership whatever his qualifications were.
Scrupulously, the two wills were implemented. Although the two were
suffering unbearable pains, they were allowed to speak out their wills.
During recording their wills, Abu­Bakr and Omar were ceremoniously the
caliphs of the Muslims. Thus, they enjoyed the right of practicing their
duties since they were still alive and operative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[160] At­Tabari's Tarikh part.3 page429. Al­Qasimi's Nidhamul­Hukm
page176. Ibnul­Jawzi's Seeretu Omar page37. bn­Khuldoun's Tarikh part.2
page85. An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam page120. [161] Al­Imametu
Wes­Siyaseh pages 21­2. bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat. An­Nidhamus­Siyasi pages
120­1.

By common consent, this is an indisputable fact. How was it allowable
for Abu­Bakr and Omar to record their wills while they were suffering
pains of their final diseases harsher than those suffered by the Prophet
during his final disease? Nevertheless, the Prophet was prevented from
recording his will.

Supposing Mohammed is equated to Abu­Bakr and Omar; had it not been
rightful for him — Mohammed — to practice what they — Abu­Bakr and Omar
— practiced thereafter? At any cost, the supposition of equating
Abu­Bakr and Omar to Mohammed is topically and positively inoperative.
This is by the fact that Mohammed was an Imam and a prophet messeged by
God, while Abu­Bakr and Omar were only fellows. Mohammed was speaking
out of God's revelation. In several occasions, the Prophet asserted that
the revelation had been coming to him during periods of physical
complaint.[162] God, in the Quran, says: (And whatever the Apostle gives
you, accept it, and from whatever he forbids you, keep back.) (And your
companion is not gone mad.) (Nor does he speak out of desire.) (It is
naught but revelation that is revealed.) How should a man with such
divine qualifications and attributes be instantaneously changed into a
dotard? How should he be irreliable even in recording his own will?

Despite that this occurrence is an undeniable and indefensible fact that
exploded the entire future of Islam and was the seed from which the
total tragedies and catastrophes that acted upon Islam were originated,
Sunnis are still paying no attention to it. They are neglecting
inclusively and regarding it as an ordinary narrative.

Thus, the scale of the follower was practically weighed against the
leader. The follower became an authority while the leader stood
watching. The follower achieved his layout and his volition, around
which people circumambulated, became the prevailing. The idea of
prevalence was applied and fruited. Later on, the principal of
prevalence was legislated. It became licit for people to watch the
combat before they opt for being in the predominant's line, aside from
regarding qualifications, legibility and religion of that
predominant.[163] Hence, the follower contained his master and the less
favorable preceded the most.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[162] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat part.2 page193. [163] Al­Qasimi's
Nidhamul­Hukm pages 344­5, and An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam page153.

Thereupon, it is not surprising to see Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian, the
‘released’ and the son of the ‘released’ and one of the heart­inclined
class, come to power and contend with the foremost Muslim and Allah's
devotee and the master of every male and female Muslim, according to
divine texts, for the caliphate. It is not astonishing to see him exert
efforts to persuade the Muslims of his being fitter and more preferred
than Ali. As well, it is not remarkable to see many people in the
various eras of Islam reckon the two in the same degree considering them
as equally authorities and people of the Paradise.

It is also not inconceivable to see Marwan, the son of
Al­Hakam­bn­Al­Aas who had been banished from Al­Madina all the times of
the Prophet, Abu­Bakr and Omar, demand with the position of caliphate
since Othman had assigned him as his prime minister and his son­in­law
after he had permitted his father to enter Al­Madina city with exquisite
reverence and honor.

The differences between the followers and their masters, the favored to
Allah and Islam and the retarded were rendered null and void.
Al­Waleed­bn­Aqaba, who led the collective Fajr prayer and performed it
in four Rak'as — units of prayer — while he was drunk and wondered if
people asked for more, became the leader of
Al­Hussein­bn­Ali­bn­Abi­Talib who should, according to the Umayid
criteria, listen to the sermons of that drunkard governor and ask his
advice in his mundane and religious questions!!

#### 4. Success And Mastery Of The Prevalent

The prevalent, whatever he was, became the predominant and the master.
He became the Imam and the president of the Muslims and their state, and
the only one to whom they should refer in mundane and religious
questions. He was the holder of power means and in whose hands was the
perfect control on the imports of the state. He enjoyed the right of
giving or depriving any of their rights. Except for Allah and his
religion, none had been the supervisor of that prevalent. He was the
general leader of the Muslims' armed forces, and he had full competency
to use these forces for achieving internal or external security and for
submitting his people whether voluntarily or coercively. He had full
control on the mass media and the ability of changing the white into
black and the opposite. By controlling the mass media, the predominant
had the capability of making the dwarf seem to be giant and the
opposite. The supporters of such a predominant ruler

were reprogrammed to be the front of their master who had extensive
ground in directing the policy of that state. Later on, they became
authorities to whom people should refer. Their duties were adopting that
predominant's viewpoint and using his methods for their impressive
authorities. Hence, they were regarded as celebrities of the society and
the gleaming stars. They were leading to the concentration point; the
predominant's viewpoint. Ordinary people played on the same cord. This
became the formulation to which people had been unitedly submitted. With
the pass of years, this formulation were devoted. With the pass of
decades, it was radically planted in the ground of factuality. Finally,
it became a public opinion and a political persuasive belief.

### 5. Dismissing The Prophet's Immaculate Progeny

In the midst of the previous circumstances, the Prophet's immaculate
progeny demanded with the prevalence of legality. They called for their
right. People, however, stood against their legality. Abul­Hassan's
style of opposing Abu­Bakr was ultimately civilized and logic. This
matter was supported by Bashir­bn­Sa'd, the first man who declared
loyalty to Abu­Bakr as a leader. When he listened to Ali's argument,
Bashir said: “The Ansar would have referred to you totally if they had
listened to your words before they swore allegiance to Abu­Bakr.”[164]

At any rate, the power and the opposition are of customary situations.
Naturally, it is impractical for the rulers or their supporters to trust
politically the opposition or to handle their achievements to them in
any consequence. In the case involved particularly, it was decided not
to do away with Ali since Fatima, the daughter of Mohammed, was backing
him. Still, he was threatened to be killed if he would disdain swearing
allegiance to Abu­Bakr. It was also decided not to coerce him to declare
his fealty to the new leadership, for the sake of Fatima.

Besides, while Imam Ali and his wife, Fatima Az­Zahra, were passing by
the sessions of the Ansar at night and asking for support, the
authorities took no influential procedures against them. The Ansar said:
“O daughter of God's messenger! We have already declared loyalty to that
man. We would not have elected other than your husband and cousin had he
come to us before Abu­Bakr.” Ali answered them: “Should I have left the
Prophet's

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[164] Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh page12.

body in his house without burying him and gone out for contesting people
in his government?” Fatima commented: “Abu­Hassan did exactly what was
required from him. They did what Allah shall penalize and amerce
for.”[165]

By this logical result, Imam Ali and his supporters were dismissed just
after the decease of Fatima. The ruling authorities' inclination of
isolating Imam Ali from the Hashemites became evident due to their
endeavors of dragging Al­Abbas towards their power by urging his progeny
and him on holding positions in their government. Al­Abbas refused such
endeavors so strictly and rejected their offers so antiseptically.[166]

It is a categorical standard that ordinary people, in case they are
given the alternative to choose either the side of the ruling authority
or the opposition side, to opt for the earlier. Consecutively, the
Prophet's progeny's attitudes were about to dissect the rope of intimacy
with the ruling authorities thoroughly after Omar's intendment to put
Fatima's house on fire while there was a number of people inside it.
God, however, saved against so.[167]

As a means of stopping the Hashemite march, the ruling authorities were
converted that it is illicit for the Hashemite to join leadership to
prophesy. They also believed that people of Quraish had been right when
they applied this principal.[168] Moreover, a provisory decision that
any Hashemite individual, apart from qualifications and legibility,
should not be held any position in the government, was enacted. In the
reigns of Abu­Bakr and Omar, this decision was literally implemented.
Besides, Omar asserted practically that any supporter of the Hashemites
should not hold any position in the government.[169]Accordingly, Ali and
his party were secluded.

Imam Ali and his party could live peacefully with the two
Sheiks­Abu­Bakr and Omar. The Prophet's progeny were preceded in
distributing the imports of the state among people. Their souls and
properties were secured in that period. The two Sheiks were wont to
refer and seek the advise of Imam Ali

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[165] Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh page12. [166] Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh pages
15­6. [167] references regarding Omar's intending to put Fatima's house
on fire. [68] Ibnul­Atheer's Al­Kamilu Fit­Tarikh part.3 page24 (the
last lines of Omar in 23 A.H.), and bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu
Nahjil­Belagheh and An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam page149 and on. [169]
Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb part.2 page353.

in many questions. Affairs of the state were stable owing to the
conquests and the two Sheiks' scorning their own caprices.

Not too long after Othman's being the caliph, the Sahaba left him
gradually and the Umayids supplanted them. Othman's palace was
suffocated with the Umayids who, actually, did not add anything new. The
positions from which the Prophet's progeny were forbidden during the two
Sheik's reigns, were not allowed for them during Othman's. The
difference was that since Ali and his party were not to shun the flaws
of Othman's men; the Umayids, the ruling authorities reckoned Ali's
enjoining good and forbidding evil with the banned activities of the
opposition. Therefore, they regarded Ali and his party as unwelcomed
persons. In addition to the past throngs of hostility between the
Hashemites and the Umayids, these motives were extended till they
attained the climax when a military combat occurred between Muawiya, the
governor of Syria, and Ali, the Imam and the leader of the Islamic
nation. Power overcame legality. Muawiya was assigned as the actual king
of the nation. That occurred in the year called later on ‘year of
congruity’. A new era of persecuting Mohammed's progeny started. It was
teary and bloody. Mohammed's progeny, hence, were almostly terminated.
Maligning and reviling at them became a legislative imposing precept all
over the state. People were the chorus whose job was repeating the
ruler's slanderous words. Mohammed's progeny were banished. Their
testimonies were decided as inadmissible. Names of those who showed any
sort of loyalty to Ali and his sons were erased from the general
register of the state. Salaries and rights of such individuals were cut
off.[170]

### 6. Seizure of the Power

#### 1. Recollection And Reconnection Of Events

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) asked the attendants to
fetch him a paper so that he would record a will due to which they
should never be deviant in the future. As immediate as the Prophet
uttered this statement, Al­Faruq addressed at the retinue that the
Prophet had been dominated by his pains, and that they have to be
sufficed by the Quran between their hands. Forthwith, the attendants
became two parties; one called for fetching the Prophet a paper to
record that protective — against

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[170] bn­Asakir's Tarikh, part.3 page407. Al­Aqqad's Muawiya Fil­Mizan,
page16. Mahmud Abu­Raya's Sheikhul­Madhira, page180.

deviation — will, while others adopted Omar's opinion. These party were
so stiff that they claimed of the Prophet's mental decline!! “Quit me!”
the Prophet said, “The pains I am engaged in are more favorable than the
deeds you are drawing me to.”[171]

#### 2. The Conclusive Success

Al­Faruq achieved his great victory by portioning the attendants into
tow groups; a group supporting him — while he was mere a follower of the
Prophet — and another supporting the Prophet, the actual leader. Hence,
Omar could eliminate the distinct differences between leaders and their
followers. Omar and his backers, however, could occlude the Prophet from
recording his will.

The Two Choices
---------------

Had the Prophet insisted on recording his will, Omar and his group would
have accused him of speaking out of senility. This should certainly
bring a disastrous misfortune to this religion. Had the Prophet
overruled the idea of recording his will, this would have made Omar's
party rule of the Prophet's having been dominated by his pains and
deciding the idea of being sufficed by the Quran. The Prophet opted for
the latter. As he was effectively shocked by their claim of mental
declination, the Prophet addressed at them: “Quit me! The pains I am
engaged in are more favorable than the deeds you are drawing me to.”

Dress of Legality
-----------------

Formally, Al­Faruq did not vacate the frame of legality. He was not
calling for a wrong matter. He was saying: “You have the Quran. We
should be sufficed by the Book of Allah. The Prophet is dominated by his
pains.” Thus, he was caring for stopping the Prophet from recording his
will. In the same time, he was caring for providing the ceremonial
program of respect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[171] Sunnis regard Al­Bukhari's book of hadith (Sahih), and Muslim's
book of hadith (Sahih) as the most authentic references in this field.
This grievous event is recorded by Al­Bukhari in six different
narratives of the same content. The same is recorded by Muslim.
Al­Bukhari's book of hadith part.7 page5 and part.4 page85, and Muslim's
book of hadith part.5 and 11 page75 and 95.

“The Prophet is dominated by his pains.” he said. He was caring for
adhering to the Quran considering it as the only thing that is
acceptably sufficient. So, the Prophet's will should be needless, then.
These conducts, however, are totally dressing the wear of legality. This
was the very situation adopted by Omar, Amirul­Mu'minin.
