Chapter 9 — Aims and Objects of Al-faruq
========================================

The total Quraishi clans exerted any possible efforts for resisting the
Hashemite prophesy. They used every possible weapon for conflicting
them. This was not for the favor of their pagans, neither was it for
their malice against Islam. Islam, however, is too even to be opposed.
The celebrities of Quraishi clans worked for the permanence of the
political form based upon distributing positions of honor among them.
They also disliked the idea that the Hashemites would be distinctively
preferred to others. They understood the Hashemites' extreme defense and
encompassment around the Prophet as their desire to precede others.
Hence, the total clans of Quraish confined the Hashemites and prepared
cabals to assassinate the Prophet. They also agreed upon combating the
Prophet congregationally. Their blockade and cabals, after all, failed.
They also were defeated in their conflicts against the Prophet. Hence,
they gave up after they had been surrounded. Finally, they realized that
the Hashemite prophesy has been an inescapable fate. Quraishi clans
conceived their disability to face the Hashemite prophesy; hence, they
decided to stop this Hashemite march towards the other clans' rights at
this point. The Prophet was preparing Ali and his progeny for leadership
regarding them as the most knowledgeable of Islam, the keenest of its
rulings, the most favorable among the followers, the fittest for leading
this nation and the most acceptable at the public.

The Ideal Solution
------------------

Actually, the entire Quraishi clans embraced Islam that effaces what all
is preceding. It is for the good of legality to unify the Quraishi clans
under the shades of Islam. This unification is, in fact, seen as one the
essential bases of the mastery, extension and commonness of Islam. These
matters can be achieved only by consecrating prophesy totally to the
Hashemites, and consecrating the successive leadership to the other
Quraishi clans totally. It is not iniquitous for the Ansar and the
slaves to enjoy a position in the leadership intended, since this
participation will not serve the Hashemite precedence and distinction.
The saying of the impracticability of the Hashemites' joining leadership
to prophesy settled in the mentalities of these

groups so deeply that it had been changed into a fixed prevalent trend.

Probing the Solution
--------------------

Unanimously, the Quraishi clans had to submit to the Hashemite prophesy
considering it as an unfailing destiny. They wished they had had the
potential of achieving their dream of carrying through their ideal
solution of preventing the Hashemites from having leadership beside
prophesy. These dreams were unrealizable as long as the Prophet was
alive. The probability of making these dreams come true is workable and
operable only after his decease.

Al­Faruq's Adopting and Developing the Saying
---------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, Al­Faruq perceived the Quraishi saying of the
impracticability of the Hashemites' joining leadership to prophesy as a
categorical fact. This meant that he had taken the same course taken by
the predominant trend mentally lived by the Quraishis and prepared to be
emerged just after the Prophet's eternal departure. Coloring this
conception with legality, Al­Faruq described it as the most proper and
the most prosperous thing. He also stated that he had only aimed at
ceasing the Hashemites' inequity against the other Quraishi clans. In
this very way, Al­Faruq succeeded in developing this conception and
attiring it wear of legality. As a result, this conception found its way
easily forwardly, and walked flaunting with its new legal garment hiding
its Jahilite feelings. This slogan, however, is totally Jahilite. In the
Jahilite political form, based upon the principal of distributing
positions of honor among the Quraishi clans, which was prevailing in
Mecca before the arising of Islam, the roots of the impracticability of
the Hashemites' joining leadership to prophesy conception are seemingly
settled. In addition, the leader suggested by the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) was namely Ali, that hero who aggrieved the entire
Quraishi clans. Each clan had individuals killed by Ali. He was the
killer of the Umayids' celebrities in the battle of Badr. Besides, it
was Ali who did away with Handhala­bn­Abi­Sufian,
Al­Aas­bn­Husham­bn­Al­Mugheera, cousin of Omar. It was he whose sword
and spear were the protectors of the Prophet against the Arab
disbelievers. How should Abu­Sufian, then, accept the killer of his son
and cousins? How should Hind and Muawiya, her son, accept the headship
of

those who killed her lovers and dearest ones? Omar, however, might
welcome the killer of his maternal uncle. [172] Others might not. The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) was not in the face of blame,
it was not he who killed with his hands. It was Ali's hands that shed
those individuals' blood. Therefore, the Quraishis prepared for avenging
from Ali to whom they faced their blame and malice. In the midst of this
feelings, they kept their Islamic identity and their loyalty to the
Prophet. Had they, the Quraishis, committed themselves to the merits
imputed by the Prophet to Ali, and submitted to his morrow leadership,
they should have never united under the shade of his leadership. On the
contrary, they should have been engaged in numerous discrepancies,
divergences and hostilities. These matters, however, should have been
reflecting oppositely on the future of Islam and the Prophet's loyalty.
Besides, seditious matters should have been occurring in a way causing
inconveniences to Islam and Muslims.

This is the only explanation we can provide to exonerate the tremendous
progression practiced by Al­Faruq towards this tendency. It also
interprets the aim of the close conformity between the other Quraishi
clans and him involving the slogan of the impracticability of the
Hashemites' joining leadership to prophesy. This progression reached the
extent that Omar became the only actual planner and hypothesizer of this
trend.

Like their Alliance Against the Prophet, People of Quraish Allied Against His Successor
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The concert of the essential views was the main cause beyond the
Quraishis' unification under implementing the slogan of the
impracticability of the Hashemites' joining leadership to prophesy.
Unexceptionally, the entire Quraishi clans stood in the face of the
Hashemite prophesy and participated practically in the three year
blockade for eradicating this prophesy.[173] This blockade, however,
proved its failure. They also planned congregationally for assassinating
the Prophet. Each clan opted for a man to participate in the process of
assassination. This cabal failed, too. The Prophet could escape. The
Quraishi clans enlisted armies for battling the Prophet. They did, but
they, as usual, failed. Finally, they gave up as they were surrounded.
In

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[172] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat part.2 page17­8. [173] bn­Quteibeh's
Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh page70­2.

which case, they realized that prophecy had been an inescapable destiny.
They, accordingly, submitted to the Hashemites. They, nevertheless,
importunately decided to prevent the Hashemites from joining leadership
to prophesy. Hence, they stood altogether against Ali in the same way
they had stood against the Prophet. Their aim had been always the same;
preventing the Hashemites from joining leadership to prophesy and
keeping the Islamic identity and loyalty to the Hashemite prophesy in
the same time. This was provided that this loyalty should be in an
amount attesting the success of that conception.

The Quraishis Were Planning While the Hashemites Were Drowned in their Grief
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Quraishi people realized the Prophet's near death during that final
disease. They had been already foretold of this truth by the Prophet
himself whom they trusted. They also realized that the unavoidable
result would be Ali's gaining headship if matter were left to go
naturally. Only then, the eminent danger shall be occurring and the
Hashemites shall be having headship beside prophesy. Hence, it is
indispensable to move furtively towards occluding the occurrence of such
a danger.

Expecting that the others are sharing the same misfortune, the
Hashemites were continuously engaged in their calamity of the Prophet's
death. He was their prophet and master, and they were his sincere
adherents. He was the unprecedented brother, the unique kinsman, the
ideal cousin and the unequaled dearest. Hence, they all committed
themselves to working according to this disastrous event, leaving
everything else behind.

The Punctilious Planning
------------------------

How did Omar limit the very hour at which the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) would utter his will? By whom was he told? How did the
assemblage who supported Al­Faruq's immediate opinion of depending on
the Book of Allah and deferring the Prophet's expected record gather,
since, as Omar explained, it had been spoken out of pains? Furthermore,
this assemblage added: “Allah's Apostle is speaking out of dotage! Ask
him a clarification! He is mentally affected, indeed!!”

As a matter of fact, the Prophet's demand would not be so strange that
it might have created such an instantaneous loathing. Similarly, Omar's
reply of “The Prophet is highly affected by his pains! We should be
sufficed by the Book of Allah we have between our hands.”, would not be
so strong that it might have originated that instantaneous satisfaction.

The matter nearest to the mentality, logic and intellect is that the
group who issued such an instantaneous satisfaction, spoke badly,
disputed and engaged in discrepancy before the Prophet, had been already
acquainted of the contents of the Prophet's will to be recorded. It is
also clear that there was a sort of a previous arrangement for
preventing the Prophet from recording this will, even if this practice
would result in being involving in a direct confrontation against him,
or accusing him of mental senility or the like. It is also reasonable to
adjudge that there was a strong correlation or agreement among this
group that guaranteed their coalition and unity in situations even those
inviting to facing the Prophet directly. Allah, the Elevated, lonelily
realizes whether such a coalition had been a fruit of a punctilious
planning or it had been an arbitrary serendipity. The most accurate
thins is that this confrontation had indeed broken the spine of
legality.

### The First Fruit Of The Planning

This group succeeded in occluding the Prophet from recording his will.
Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab was seen as the strongest man in this trend. It was
he who spoke at the attendants: “The Prophet is surely prevailed by his
pains. We have the Book of Allah. We should be sufficed by the Book of
Allah.” This statement indicated that they had had not been in need of
the Prophet's will, since they had the Book of Allah that was acceptably
sufficient. Hence, redundancy is what all is behind sufficiency. This
suggestion incited the supporters of this trend to dare to impute dotage
to the Prophet. Far away is the Prophet from such an accusal!

Precisely, succeeding in preventing the Prophet from recording his will
was the first fruit of that punctilious planning. Supposing,
dialectically, the Prophet had insisted on his demand and said: “Forget
not the order of Ali's being the next leader!”, this would have meant
that the mission of that party would be so complicated that they should
prove the Prophet's speaking out of mental affection afterwards. This
would surely bring calamitous misfortunes and adversities to this
religion. Islam itself would have been in danger if those party had
called for the slogan of the Prophet's senility and, consequently, it
would have been so arduous to distinguish the words said

during full saneness from those said during misalleged senility. Thus,
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) preferred to provide the
important — Ali's leadership — as a sacrifice for the most important —
Islam. “Quit me! The pains I am engaged in are more favorable than the
deeds you are drawing me to.” By these words, the Prophet settled that
dispute. The refractory group went out thinking of their victory,
yielding the fruit of their cabal and celebrating of removing the hugest
rock laying in the way of hitting their target.

### Planning for Defeating the Hashemites

Occurrences of history proved the Hashemites' overcoming in every combat
they were engaged in against people of Quraish. The blockade practiced
upon the Hashemites for three years, by the entire clans of Quraish
proved its failure. At a second attempt, the entire Quraishi clans
participated in assassinating the Prophet congregationally by selecting
a man from each clan to take a part in the process so that the Hashemite
should be too short to avenge their killed. This endeavor failed, too.
Hence, the Prophet was saved, and the Hashemites were triumphed.

As a third endeavor, the Quraishi clans enlisted numerous armies for
battling Mohammed and the Hashemites. The end was the triumph of
Mohammed and the Hashemites, and the defeat of the entire Quraishi
clans. Finally, they had nothing other than submitting and admitting of
Mohammed's prophesy as they were surrounded. They realized this prophesy
had been an inescapable destiny. Therefore, they aimed at acknowledging
the prophesy of Mohammed and admitting the Hashemites' enjoying it
exclusively, provided that headship should be turned among them apart
from the Hashemites. In order that any Hashemite would never come to
power or enjoy any sort of headship, they decided that they would accept
the headship of a non­Quraishi individual. They believed that if
leadership went to a Hashemite, it would be impossible to take it out of
them anew. Hence, they would join leadership to prophesy. However,
events proved the triumph of the Hashemites at any confrontation.

### Benefiting the Same Preponderancies for Achieving Aims

The Quraishi clans conceived that the secret beyond the Hashemites'
consecutive victories and superiority had been the existence of a
preponderancy contributing in outweighing them over others.
Preponderants due to which the Hashemites achieved triumph over the
Quraishi clans had

been, first, the support of God and, secondly, His objectives of
preponderancy. The congregational blockade applied upon the Hashemites
was such a discernible wrong that it caused an error in guideline. God's
upholding the Hashemites by supplying them with patience and guiding
individuals from the other clans for supporting them and demanding with
canceling the decision of that blockade; all these were reasons resulted
in the failure of the blockade.

In due course, the cabal of assassinating the Prophet was a process of
vitiation on the earth and an inexcusable homicide. Ali­bn­Abi­Talib's
sleeping in the Prophet's bed, that led to his escape and resettlement
in Yathrib, was a preponderant reason that led to the failure of the
assassination.

Correspondingly, enlisting armies for battling the Prophet and chasing
him continuously was a deed of wrongful perseverance and insisting on
inequity. The Ansar’s encompassing, embracing and defending the Prophet,
and being in the same front with the Hashemites, on the other hand, was
a preponderant reason that resulted in the failure of the total
aggressions led by the Quraishi clans against the Prophet. These clans
were defeated to termination that their headship was inclusively
foundered and, accordingly, they had to submit to the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family).

### Equality, Opportunity and Objectivity

The Hashemite conception shall certainly prevail and prove its being the
most correct and the most favorable if there is any sort of equality in
the opportunities granted to it and to that of the Quraishi clans. By
the same token, the fascinating argument provided by the prophetically
nominated leader shall certainly nullify the others' arguments if there
is an objective opportunity to provide both arguments obviously. This is
by the reason that the prophetically nominated leader is, according to
categorical doctrinal texts, being with the Quran and the Quran is being
with him. Similarly, the right is being with the prophetically nominated
leader and he is being with the right. This prophetically nominated
leader shall certainly win at any unadulterated combat. This is because
he is being the victorious by God's will. However, the Prophet's
successor is not ready at all for plotting in darkness, planning for
cabals nor is he ready for disobeying God.

### The Authority Capable of Defeating the Divinely Elected Leader, and the Flawless Cabal

Finally, the Quraishis could snare the decisive party; the Ansar. The
ultimate victory and the supreme aim — of withholding the Hashemites
from joining leadership to prophesy — shall be assuredly attained and
achieved if only the Ansar’s loyalty to Quraishi clans is guaranteed.
They conceive that as soon as the divinely elected leader, Ali, holds
the position of headship, he shall positively nominate Al­Hassan as the
heir apparent. Al­Hassan, however, is previously nominated by Allah and
His Apostle for leadership. Supposing this nomination occurs, none shall
have the courage to object against Al­Hassan for the highest standing he
is enjoying. He is, at least, the son of the Prophet's daughter. In a
like manner, Al­Hassan shall nominate Al­Hussein, his brother, as his
heir apparent. None shall have the courage to protest against so, for
the standing enjoyed by that nominated individual. Thus, affairs of
leadership will be kept in the hands of the Hashemites for ever, and
they will enjoy headship as well as prophesy. This will be seen as the
greatest defeat of the other Quraishi clans.

Three points are the only means of standing against the occurrence of
the previous affairs:

1. Existence of an authority. Actually, the Ansar are seen as the
premium authority that can play the greatest role in the process of
leadership. Supposing they support Ali, the Quraishi clans, pursuant to
their criteria, shall be absolutely defeated and the matter of the
Hashemites' having headship and prophesy together shall be occurring. If
they support the other party; the Quraishi clans, in achieving their
aim, only then the Hashemites and the divinely elected leader shall be
certainly quelled according to the criteria posited by that party.

If the Ansar adopt a non­allied situation, this will be considered as a
prosperous achievement for the Quraishi clans. As a result, the
possibility of consummating the Quraishis' aim will also be attainable
by the whole objective criteria.

2. Vacuity of equal opportunities. In case the divinely nominated leader
stands in equal positions with the heads of Quraishi celebrities,
triumph shall certainly be his share as he will provide the most
convincing arguments. The most important matter in this question is that
the Quraishi head should be the spokesman of his allies; the public, the

Muhajirs or the majority of the nation. Pursuant to their criteria, in
this case only, he may defeat the divinely elected leader.

3. Maximum promptness practiced for consummating the subject of next
leadership. This should occur during the Prophet's household's being
engaged in the funeral of their deceased. Thus, none of them would
attend the furtive ceremonies of electing the leader in order that they
would lack any argument to provide later on. Sedition and confrontation
of an actual government having a president, a prime minister, an army
and followers would be the result of any objection against such
ceremonies.

The Saqeefa Meeting
-------------------

By the decease of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), the
illuminating moon, whose gleam covered everything, has departed. As soon
as this news was publicized, the populace of the capital formed
undeviatingly a circle around the Prophet's house. They were weeping
their grand prophet and Imam. The honorable household, headed by the
divinely nominated leader, were totally engaged in their calamitous
misfortune. They were preparing for the funeral. Meanwhile, a meeting
was held in Bani­Sa'ideh's Saqeefa.

Unanswerable Questions
----------------------

Why was the meeting held in these very hours? Who called for it? How had
it been possible to hold a meting in such an embarrassing time? When had
the arrangements been commenced? Which individuals, from the Ansar,
attended that meeting, while the Saqeefa — shed — was too narrow to
include the great numbers of the Ansar most of whom were encompassing
the Prophet's house? Rationally, it is impossible that no single
individual from the Ansar was attending at the Prophet's funeral. Who
arranged for that meeting? How much time did these arrangements take?
Why was it only Omar who had acquaintance of that meeting? By whom was
he informed? Omar was in a place remote from the Prophet's house. He
knew that Abu­Bakr had been necessarily at the Prophet's house. He came
near the house and called for Abu­Bakr. “I am busy now.” answered
Abu­Bakr. “It is a matter too dangerous to be neglected.” told Omar. As
Abu­Bakr was before him, Omar informed: “Are you not informed that the
Ansar are

holding a meeting in Bani­Sa'ideh's Saqeefa for nominating
Sa'd­bn­Ebadeh for leadership? They are so firm in this affair that the
least suggestion one of them provides is electing two princes one of
whom should be a Quraishi.” Hence, the two hurried up to the place.
Abu­Ubeideh­bn­Al­Jarrah accompanied them.[174]

Who Conveyed the News of the Meeting?
-------------------------------------

“Omar was the first man who had known of the meeting of the Ansar.”
At­Tabari states.[175] Another narrations tells that it was Abu­Bakr who
informed him of the news. A third one related by bn­Husham tells that
somebody came to Abu­Bakr and Omar and informed of the meeting. No
historian at all could recognize the name of that reporter. It seemed
that his name had been lost.[176]

Two Men from the Ansar
----------------------

In their way towards the Saqeefa, Abu­Bakr, Omar and Abu­Ubeideh met
Uweim­bn­Sa'ideh and Ma'an­bn­Edi.[177] These two men are reckoned with
the celebrities of the Ansar. At­Tabari relates the following report:
“…they were met by Asim­bn­Edi and Uweim­bn­Sa'ideh; the two Sahaba who
participated in the battle of Badr.” Another narrative affirms: “The two
men advised Abu­Bakr, Omar and Abu­Ubeideh to settle this affair
secretly away from the Ansar.” Another narrative, however, claims: “The
two men advised the three to turn back since they would never achieve
any of their demands.”

Despite the fact that these two men were reckoned with the Ansar and the
warriors of the battle of Badr, they were neither attendants at the
Prophet's funeral nor were they addressing at there while they were
aware of the current occurrence of the meeting. They were walking
oppositely to the three men's direction. They only chatted with those
three men and each group took their way. There is no indication that
those five individuals took the same way towards the Saqeefa afterwards.
There are contrary narratives regarding these two men's sayings. Once,
they advised the three to settle

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[174] At­Tabari's book of history part.3 page219. [175] At­Tabari's book
of history part.3 page219. [176] Al­Qasimi's Nidhamul­Hukm page126.
[177] At­Tabari's book of history part.3 page206.

their affairs secretly away from the Ansar who had no relation at all
with the whole question. Another narrative affirms that they advised the
three to evade fatigue since the Ansar should never grant them any share
in this question. Which one is likely true?
