Chapter 11 — Depriving the Hashemites of Their Political Rights
===============================================================

Not only did the Quraishi clans stand against Ali’s enjoying the
position of leadership, but also they deprived any Hashemite of enjoying
any formal position. Abu­Bakr, Omar and Othman had never used a
Hashemite in a governmental position.[204]

Abdor­Rahman­bn­Awf said: “I declare my fealty to you provided that you
should never place any Hashemite on people’s shoulders.” This means that
he should not use any Hashemite for a governmental position. Ali
immediately replied him: “What is the advantage you are to gain from
such a provision. My duty is only exerting efforts for the good of
Mohammed’s nation. I am to use any man, whether Hashemite or not, if I
realize his firmness and sincerity.” “Nay, by God! I am not to declare
it before you agree upon this provision.” insisted Abdor­Rahman. “By
God, I will never agree upon this.” answered Ali.[205]

### What is the Idea of Deferring the Hashemites

What is the idea of deferring the Hashemites? This question was answered
by Al­Faruq. He was hesitated in designating bn­Abbas for a governmental
position. As bn­Abbas sought an explanation, Al­Faruq answered: “O
bn­Abbas! I am afraid that you will keep this position till my decease.
You may, then, refer to yourselves for leadership. It is illicit for you
to enjoy this position exclusively.”[206]

This means that Al­Faruq aimed at being sure that caliphate — leadership
— should not march towards Ali or any other Hashemite after his death.
This is, in fact, the climax of adherence to the impracticability of the
Hashemites’ joining leadership to prophesy slogan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[204] bn­Quteibeh's Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh page24. [205] bn­Quteibeh's
Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh page26­7. [206] Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb
part.2 page353­4.

Disclosure of Hiddens
---------------------

As they distributed positions among them, the Quraishi clans decided not
to give the Hashemites any role in the next leadership since they
enjoyed prophesy alone. They, however, were perplexed whether they
should bind all the others to this decision. Since they were tardy in
embracing Islam, they were lacking the awareness of the method to be
followed for applying this decision. In the midst of this perplexity,
Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab, the loyal son of Quraish, took great steps in the
way of expressing the Quraishis’ consciousness and applying their
decision using legal argumentation. Hence, he was the most meritorious
of the name ‘the faithful son of Quraish.’

Omar checked the Prophet against recording his will, stating that the
man had been affected by his pains and that Book of Allah had been
acceptably sufficient. From this cause, the Prophet’s will should be
valueless and unneeded. Omar’s fellows adopted and insisted on this
opinion so importunately that they accused the Prophet of senility.
Furthermore, they quarreled against the adversary party. Without their
absolute confidence of Omar and his certain knowledge of that will’s
contents, this party would have never been to utter such an embarrassing
statement. Owing to his cunning, Omar could realize that the Prophet had
aimed at renewing and reminding of the leadership of Ali. Therefore, he
prevented him from recording that will, using the excuse that he had
been influenced by the pains he was suffering. Comparatively, Al­Faruq
himself ruled of the flawlessness of Abu­Bakr’s recording his will in
the same circumstances. He himself recorded his will in the same
circumstances. As a matter of fact, Abu­Bakr and Omar, in their final
diseases, had been suffering pains heavier than those suffered by the
Prophet. The event of preventing the Prophet from recording his will is
too authentic to be denied or vindicated. In a like fashion, the events
of the wills of Abu­Bakr and Omar are as clear as sunlight. They are
regarded as the bases of the historical system of caliphate.

### Al­Faruq’s Expressing the Reasons

The following conversation occurred between Al­Faruq and bn­Abbas:

Omar: How is your cousin?

bn­Abbas: He is well. He is with his associates.

Omar: I do not mean Abdullah­bn­Ja’far. I meant your head; the Prophet’s

house.

bn­Abbas: I left him striking heavily while reciting the Quran?

Omar: O Abdullah! I adjure you by blood of the sacrificed animals not to
reveal the truth. Is he still caring for caliphate?

bn­Abbas: Yes, he is.

Omar: Is he still claiming that the Prophet had nominated him for that
position?

bn­Abbas: Yes, he is. Besides, my father supported Ali’s claim of the
Prophet’s nominating him for the position.

Omar: Well, the Prophet had assuredly referred to Ali in a form too
exaggerated to prove an argument or provide an excuse. For a
considerable period, he studied the scope of people’s accepting this
matter. In his final disease, the Prophet did aim at referring to Ali by
the name. But, I stopped against this.”[207]

### Al­Faruq’s Impression on the Impracticality of the Hashemites’ Joining Leadership to Prophesy Slogan

Once, in his reign, Omar argued bn­Abbas:

“O bn­Abbas! Do you realize the reason beyond your people's neglecting
your nominating for managing the Islamic state?” Evading the anticipated
consequences, bn­Abbas escaped from the answer. “Well, Amirul­Mu’minin!
If I ignore the answer, you are definitely in full awareness of it.”
commented bn­Abbas. “Your people disliked the matter that you would have
prophesy and authority altogether. Then you shall be unjust to your
people. People of Quraish selected for themselves. Indeed, they
succeeded as they opted for the right one.” expressed Omar. “O
Amirul­Mu’minin!” bn­Abbas worded, “May I speak provided that you shall
not be irate?” “Yes, you may.” permitted Omar. Here, bn­Abbas signified:
“Regarding your saying (People of Quraish selected for themselves.
Indeed, they succeeded as they opted for the right one.), they would
have been right

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[207] bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagha vol.3 page105. The compiler
relates this narrative to Al­Khatib Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu Baghdad.

absolutely and without litigation if only they had clung to what God had
opted for. Regarding your saying: (Your people disliked the matter that
you would have prophesy and authority altogether.), God, the Exalted,
described a people who disliked so. He said: (That is because they hated
what Allah revealed, so he rendered their deeds null.)” “Far it is,
bn­Abbas!” replied Omar, “I have been informed of some news, but I do
not like to discipline you about so that your status would not be
lessened.” bn­Abbas answered: “O Amirul­Mu’minin! My status at you must
not have been lessened in case these new were true, otherwise, I am one
of those who obviated the ill deeds from approaching towards their
entities.” Omar said: “Well, I was informed of your claim that the
general authority had been taken away from you, Mohammed's clan, due to
envy, aggression and injustice.” “Respecting the injustice,” responded
bn­Abbas, “it had been realized by the level­headed, as well as the
ill­minded. Respecting envy, Adam was envied, and we are his envied
sons.” “Far it is. Far it is.” expressed Omar, “Your hearts, sons of
Hashim, are filled in with an immovable envy.” bn­Abbas answered: “Slow
down, Amirul­Mu’minin! Do you impute such a description to hearts that
God has (kept away uncleanness from them and purified them a thorough
purification?)[208]

#### The Exaggeration In Loyalty To The Slogan

In addition to working for effecting the impracticality of the
Hashemites’ joining leadership to prophecy slogan all over his lifetime,
Al­Faruq spared no efforts for making the application of this slogan
operative even after his death. He worked hard for preventing Ali or any
Hashemite from having an advanced governmental position after his death
in the same way he had used for casting the Hashemites, disregarding
their capability and fitness, out of the governmental circle. The
provision of ostracizing the Hashemites, including the strong and the
honest, from official positions was not proceeded by
Abdor­Rahman­bn­Awf. It was a literal implementation of Al­Faruq’s will
he had recorded while he was in his final hours. We are, here, to review
excerpted items of Al­Mas’udi’s narrative:

Omar summoned Abdullah­bn­Abbas for designating him for the governorship
of Hims immediately after the decease of the governor. He,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[208] Ibnul­Atheer's Al­Kamilu Fit­Tarikh, part.3, page24.
bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagheh, part.3, page107. Tarikhu
Baghdad, recorded by Ahmed Abul­Fadhl Bin Abit­Tahir. bn­Abil­Hadid's
Sharhu Nahjil­Belagheh, vol.2, page97. An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam,
page141.

however, canceled this decision; “O bn­Abbas! I am afraid that you will
keep this position till my decease. You may, then, refer to yourselves
for leadership. It is illicit for you to enjoy this position
exclusively.”[209]

Al­Faruq, therewith, intended to be sure that after his decease no
governor would call for and support the idea of the Hashemites’
leadership of the Islamic state. Forthwith, he instituted the provision
of ostracizing the Hashemites, including the strong and the honest, from
official positions. This is indeed the ultimate loyalty to the
impracticality of the Hashemites’ joining leadership to prophecy slogan,
that none of the Quraishi clans could attain. This provision, however,
was imposed upon the Hashemites only.

#### Was The Slogan Allah’s Order?

From all of the sides, this slogan was extremely Jahilite. Neither Allah
nor did His Apostle order of such a matter. It is not admitted by the
Islamic doctrine as well. On the contrary, this slogan is thoroughly
contrasted to the divinely words and deeds. It is contrasted to
doctrinal texts appertained to nominating Ali­bn­Abi­Talib as the leader
and the Prophet’s successor. These texts have been previously provided
and debated. It is also contrasted to the doctrinal texts regarding
asserting on adhering to the Prophet’s progeny as considered as one of
the two weighty things. Likewise, it is contrasted to the texts relating
estimating the Prophet’s progeny as ship of safety, security against
discrepancies, the religious and the political leaders of this nation.
For maintaining this truth, Allah, the Elevated, ruled of seeking God’s
blessings and mercy upon Mohammed and his progeny as a pillar part of
the obligatory prayers.

#### What for was Al­Faruq, then, Adherent and Sincere to the Slogan?

For answering this question, it is to say that Al­Faruq perceived
granting the Hashemites prophesy exclusively and keeping leadership to
the other Quraishi clans, exclusively too, had been the absolute
fairness. He also believed that Quraishi people had been surely right
when they opted for this contribution. He believed that the Hashemites
would have been extremely unjust to the other Quraishi clans had they
joined leadership to prophesy. Injustice, however, is opposite to
Islamic regulations. Regarding Ali, in addition to his being
middle­aged, he is unqualified to being the Muslims’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[209] Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb part.2 page353­4.

leader after the Prophet. In due course, Al­Faruq adopted this slogan
due to his caring for Islam in addition to the previous factors.

### Al­Faruq’s Situations Towards the Divinely Nominated Leader and the Prophet’s Household

During the entire stages of his life, Al­Faruq was greatly caring for
Islam. He understood that the Prophet’s will would be forming an eminent
danger against Islam and Muslims; therefore, he himself opposed that
noble Prophet’s idea and could gather a good deal of supporters. They
opposed so exaggeratedly that they accused the Prophet of speaking out
of senility!!

Al­Faruq arranged for the question of electing a caliph. He inspected
the events so accurately till he achieved triumph by nominating the new
caliph while the Quraishis, the Prophet’s household and the divinely
nominated leader were absent. This was intended for caring for the good
of Islam and Muslims’ unity. It was also purposed for preventing the
Hashemites from joining leadership to prophesy, so that they would not
be unjust to their people. Al­Faruq, naturally, hated injustice and
inequity.

Al­Faruq should not be lenient to those whomever tried to injure
security and unity of the state and the nation. These two matters,
pursuant to his conception, were the most elevated among all
considerations. It would not be problematic for him to set fire in
Fatima’s house and its dwellers if this house, according to his belief,
formed any sort of danger against security and unity of the state and
the nation. Law, however, is prevailing upon everyone, including Fatima,
the daughter of Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family). Al­Faruq
intended to set that house and its occupants on fire after he had
fetched firewood. He vacated that idea only after the opposers had left
that house. In spite of the above, it was Al­Faruq who suggested to
As­Siddiq to see Az­Zahra and offer her apology.

He was brave enough to face any individual, including the divinely
nominated leader, that retarded from swearing allegiance to the new
authority. When Ali objected declaring his fealty to Abu­Bakr, Al­Faruq
threatened of assassinating him if he was to keep that attitude,
although he addressed at that who tried to degrade Ali: “This is my
master and your master, and the master of every male and female
believer.” Furthermore, he was wont to refer to Ali in great deal of
questions. He used to say: “O Allah! I seek Thy protection against any
quandary from which Abul­Hassan is remote.”

All these facts have been debated in this survey and in our survey
called ‘An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam’.

It was also Al­Faruq himself who instituted the provision of ostracizing
any Hashemite, including the strong and the honest, from enjoying any
governmental position. He assumed that the Hashemites should never join
leadership to prophesy so that they would not be unjust to the other
Quraishi clans.

From another side, Al­Belathiri, in his Futouhul­Buldan, mentions that
Al­Faruq was wont to prefer Mohammed’s household to others, including
himself, in questions regarding distributions of gifts and imports of
the state.

Al­Faruq had his own course and style in understanding the religion. He
enjoyed audacity in declaring his course, even that he had followed in
facing the Prophet, commonly. The event of the calamity — as bn­Abbas
named — is a good example.

He also opposed the Holy Quran, even. For instance, according to the
following Quranic text; (Alms are only for the poor and the needy, and
the officials appointed over them, and those whose hearts are made to
incline to truth and the ransoming of captives and those in debts and in
the way of Allah and the wayfarer, an ordinance from Allah; and Allah is
Knowing, Wise.), these classes are to be dedicatedly benefiting the
alms. Like any other divinely obligation, this dedication is an
obligation. Al­Faruq, however, perceived the unnecessity of the
heart­inclined share since such class had not been meritorious. So, he
presumed that defraying this share to such a group had been reckoned
with squandering since Allah had backed Islam and maintained His
religion. Therefore, he, simply, issued a decision of canceling this
share. He, in fact, deprived such individuals of the right God had
already determined. He did realize that the Prophet had not ceased
defraying this share to such persons although the conquest and God’s
triumph were achieved. The one­fifth rate (Khums) is another example on
Omar’s inferring in questions determined by the Quran. Regarding the
Mut’a — short­termed marriage — of the ritual pilgrimage, this matter
was legislated by the Prophet till it was canceled by Al­Faruq. In the
reigns of the Prophet and Abu­Bakr, the times of divorce were separated.
When Omar came to power he issued this verdict: “The Muslims are
prompting this question. The divorce, hence, should be thrice.” Since
then, the form of the (legal) divorce was changed into this new one:
“You are divorced thrice.

” Many other questions appertained were issued by Al­Faruq.

Like a cyclone, Al­Faruq pushed himself forwardly in uttering whatsoever
he thought the right, destroying anything standing in his way, and
neglecting anything that may face. The supreme word in the reign of
Abu­Bakr was his. This was by the reason that the previous had owed him
the position he was occupying. Omar could have been the caliph, instead
of As­Siddiq, had he wanted. Naturally, he had the supreme word in his
reign since he was the caliph. At the entire Quraishi clans, Omar’s word
was the prevalent. They cognized that he had been the only one who had
the ability of preventing the Hashemites from joining leadership to
prophesy. For the Umayids, Omar’s words were highly respectful. It was
he who assigned Yazeed­bn­Abi­Sufian and Muawiya, his brother, as the
governors of Syria. Practically, it was also he who delivered caliphate
to Othman, the Umayid. Hence, Omar’s reverence found its way easy in the
hearts of Quraishi people. It extended to the society of Muslims. “The
factor that helped in establishing this reverence was the fact that Omar
had never been engaged in a personal craving.” Sharafuddin Al­Amili
says.

On the Intersection of Courses
------------------------------

### Collapses

The Prophet was still bed­ridden when the ground was quaked and moved
under the believers’ feet. A series of consecutive collapses started
just after the Prophet’s decease. Necessarily, each collapse should be
followed by another. Thus, the ultimate one shall be indisputably
occurring. The hour at which this ultimate collapse shall occur is known
by God alone. This series of collapses was originated when they
prevented the Prophet from recording his will. Before the Prophet was
put in his tomb, those who stood against recording his will had finished
the matter and held fast on power while neither people of Quraish, the
Prophet’s household, their head nor were the majority of Muslims
present. All those classes were faced by the actuality of an integral
government wearing dress of legality so thoroughly.

### The Ruling Authority And The Opposition

The ruling authorities came forth as if they were real rulers in whose
hands were mastery and power. They held fast on that position. Their
fellows swore allegiance to them and submitted to their sovereignty and
authority.

 

Thus, they were seen as the actual rulers and the prevalent of a real
power.

On the other hand, the divinely nominated leader found himself alone
with the Quran that is turning wherever he turns[210], the right that is
turning wherever he turns[211], the divinely issued decision of his
being the guide[212], the divinely issued decision of his rightfulness
to explicate when people are engaged in discrepancies after the
Prophet,[213] his being a witness like the Prophet on the Day of
Resurrection[214] and his being enjoying the entire standings enjoyed by
prophets except prophesy.[215] With all these specifications, the
divinely nominated leader found himself alone. He was abandoned to
practice any of his authorities. None was listening to him. He became
not more than an ordinary citizen with no supporters except the
Prophet’s honorable progeny and the Hashemites who were fatigued by
their battling the Arab. These were the essential components of the
opposition. It was not expected from such an opposition to do so much.
At any rate, they were elected and supported by God for explicating the
reality of this religion.

### Two Choices Before the Opposition

The opposition had either to mollify or to challenge. If fact, challenge
was seen as a categorical suicide owing to the situations people were
engaged in.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[210] Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page110. At­Tabarani's
Al­Mu'jamus­Sagheer part.1 page55. As­Suyouti's Al­Jami'us­Sagheer
part.2 page56. As­Suyouti's Tarikhul­Khulefa part.2 page65…etc. [211]
Al­Khatib Al­Baghdadi's Tarikhu Baghdad part.14 page321. bn­Asakir's
Tarikhu Dimeshq; Chapter: The Life Account Of Imam Ali part.3 page119
hadith 1162. Ghayetul­Meram page539. Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (In the
margin of Ahmed's book of hadith) part.5 page30. [212] bn­Asakir's
Tarikhu Dimeshq; Chapter: The Life Account Of Imam Ali part.2 page417.
Muntakhabu Kenzil­Ummal (In the margin of Ahmed's book of hadith) part.5
page34. At­Tabari's book of Tafseer part.13 page108. bn­Kuthier's book
of Tafseer part.2 page502. Ashawkani's part.3 page70. Ar­Razi's part.5
page271. Al­Mustedrak part.3 page129­30. As­Suyouti's Ad­Durrul­Manthour
part.4 page45…etc. [213] Al­Khawarzmi's Al­Menaqib page236. Muntakhabu
Kenzil­Ummal (In the margin of Ahmed's book of hadith) part.5 page33.
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq; Chapter: The Life Account Of Imam Ali
part.2 page88 hadith 1008­9. [214] bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq; Chapter:
The Life Account Of Imam Ali part.3 page273 hadith 793­5. Ahmed's book
of hadith part.5 page94. Ibnul­Meghazili's Menaqibu Ali. At­Thehbi's
Mizanuli'tidal part.4 page128. [215] This hadith has been previously
referred to. Muawiya relates this hadith even.

Due to such a challenge, the religion might have been injured totally,
the divinely nominated leader assassinated and the blessed household of
the Prophet massacred. Thus, the divinely nominated leader preferred the
most important to the important. He himself took the way of pacification
while he worked hard for advising and showing the religion.

### Two Choices Before the Nation

As if they saw a nightmare, people, after the Prophet’s decease, woke up
terrified as they faced these two things:

1. A ruling authority and an actual power led and directed by the band
who were the most remarkable viziers of the Prophet. They were declaring
their being the right.

2. An impotent opposition led and directed by the genuine Prophet’s
successor, supported by the Prophet’s household and the Hashemites who
spent twenty three years of confrontation against the Arab. They were
also declaring their being the right.

### Discrepancy of People

#### 1. Sunnis

People, accordingly, were engaged in discrepancies and various parties,
one of which (Sunnis) made approaches and showed fealty to the ruling
authorities regarding them as the powerful competent custodians who
represented unity of this nation. The year at which Muawiya overcame Ali
and, hence, power defeated legality, was called ‘year of congruity’. The
party that acceded to Muawiya were called Sunnis — people of the
traditions. This party, however, was of various sects and groups who
showed variety in the scope of loyalty to the ruling authorities and
finding excuses for their misdeeds. They also showed variety in the
scope of their condolence to the opposition and understanding their
situation. At any rate, they, finally, agreed upon the conception that
the two parties; the ruling authorities and the opposition, were Sahaba
that should be in the Paradise. They ruled of the capability of
inference of the all. Correspondingly, they should be rewarded whether
they were right or wrong. These sects and groups, however, welcomed this
solution; therefore, their fate was connected to the ruling
authorities’. Not for favoring them, these sects and groups attempted at
saving the ruling authorities from any criticism so that they

themselves should not be reproached in the same way. Because of their
loyalty to them, they should naturally have a share of the ignominy
faced to the rulers. Regarding headship of the Islamic state, this party
agreed unanimously on bearing the slogan: “We are being with the
prevailing.” Consequently, they were showing fealty to the prevailing
party no matter what qualifications he had. The evidence they provided
for excusing this course was Abdullah­bn­Omar’s saying during the
conflict of Al­Harra: “We are being with the prevailing.” This saying,
however, was reckoned as a legal reliable ruling.

#### 2. Shias

They are those who showed fealty only to the divinely nominated leader
and the Prophet’ successor. They believed in the fact that the right and
the Quran are pursuing this leader wherever he goes. Thus, they showed
fealty to this leader and the Prophet’s household. They gave credence to
the Prophet’s saying that the Quran is the prior weighty thing, and the
Prophet’s household are the minor. They also believed that guidance — to
the right path — is unattainable unless these two weighty things are
adhered together. All over ages, they betook the head of the Prophet’s
progeny as their leader and legal Imam. They accede to those to whom the
Imam acceded and oppose those whom are opposed by the Imam. Those heads
attained twelve in number. Shias, however, committed themselves totally
to the absolute legality disregarding circumstances and costs. Their
grand aim is uniting the Islamic nation under the banner of the Imam,
from the Prophet’s progeny, who shall be in charge of explicating and
applying the divine doctrine rulings in order that he should transfer
mankind from darkness to illumination by conveying the immaculate
mission of Islam all over this world. Shias’ path, nonetheless, was
always that of pains and misfortunes. These were the levy they should
defray for attaining the divine satisfaction through the auspicious rank
the Prophet had given to them exclusively. Whilst Allah revealed the
Verse: (As for those who believe and do good, surely they are the best
of men.), the Prophet addressed at Ali: “O Ali! They are you and your
followers.”

Because of their being the opposition, Shias suspect the legality of
every ruling authority except those whose chief is the head and the Imam
of the Prophet’s progeny. Accordingly, a state of mistrust occurred
between Shias and the ruling authorities. This state was so deepened
that it was developed into a rivalry and antagonism that originated a
reciprocal malice.

Individually and collectively, Shias aimed at proving tyranny and
despotism of the ruling authorities. They claimed that those ruling
authorities had usurped their power from its genuine people and imposed
their rule upon this nation by means of strength and intensity. They
also claimed that because of the ruling authorities’ fondness of
reputation, predominance and favoring this world to the other, they
deprived Muslims and mankind of enjoying the divine mastery. Since the
ruling authorities confiscated their freedom, Shias used individual and
veiled means for proving their viewpoints. They were constantly chased
and disturbed by the ruling authorities.

On the other hand, the ruling powers who seized everything in that
society, expropriated Shias’ franchise of providing their viewpoints,
and accused them of being mutineers. Occasionally, Shias were charged of
being apostates, dissidents, miscreants and even atheists. This ruling
authorities’ viewpoint was provided so publicly before the entire
sectors of society. The mass media, totally, were broadcasting these
viewpoints, and the pro­rulers scholars intensified these misallegations
illustrated by the ever ugliest pictures. Hence, cavity between Shias
and other sects of the nation were ceaselessly augmented. The succeeding
generations perceived the authenticity of these accusations clung to
Shias by the ruling authorities; therefore, they went on repeating and
playing on the same cord since they commit themselves to partisan
imitation. All these and Shias were undertaking tolerance for the sake
of Allah. They also took the course of endurance and composure believing
that the day on which facts shall be revealed is not that far.
