Chapter 2 — Sunnis' Conception of the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency
===============================================================

There is an assent among the Sunni Scholars upon the decency of all of
the Prophet's companions. Except for some heretic individuals, as
bn­Hajar Al­Asqalani expresses, none has any dispute about this view. It
is essential to believe in their honesty, since it has been proved that
all of them shall be in the Paradise and none, among them, shall be sent
into the hell­fire.[17] The very conception of Sahaba we have referred
to during inspecting bn­Hajar Al­Asqalani's definition of this term, is
meant in the previous statement.

The Sunni Scholars’ Argument Regarding this Conception
------------------------------------------------------

Al­Khateeb mentions that the Sahaba's ultimate decency is evidently
proved through Allah's ruling, informing and opting for their decency
and integrity. The following Verses are among such credentials:

(You are the best of the nations raised up for (the benefit of)
men;..)\*

(And thus we have made you a medium — just — nation.)

(Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore
allegiance to you under the tree, and He knew what was is their
hearts..)

(And as for the foremost, the first of the Muhajirs and Ansar, and those
who followed them in goodness, Allah is well pleased with them and they
are well pleased with Him..)

(O Prophet! Allah is sufficient for you and for such of the believers as
follow you.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[17] Al­Issabeh Fi Tamyizis­Sehabeh, page9­10. The Quranic texts are
literally quoted from M.H. Shakir's translation of the Holy Qur'an

(It is for the poor who fled, those who were taken out from their homes
and their possessions, seeking grace of Allah and His pleasure, and
assisting Allah and His Apostle: These it is that are the truthful..
Surely Thou art Kind, Merciful)

Besides, there is a great number of Verses and hadiths pertaining to
this topic.

Tenor of Sunnis' Conception of the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency
------------------------------------------------------------

The literal meaning of the Sahaba's ultimate decency is that it is
impermissible to impute fabrication, forgery or any flaw to any of those
who lived or was born during the Prophet's lifetime, even if such an
individual perpetrated a massacre or committed numerous evil deeds.
Accordingly, the first class of the Umayids, including Abu­Sufian and
his progeny, and the entire sons of Marwan, including those who were
banished by the Prophet, and Al­Mugheera­bn­Shu'beh and Abdullah, his
son who, though was only ten year old at the Prophet's decease, had
written a number of the Prophet's hadiths in a volume called ‘As­Sadiqa’
— the most truthful — , are included under name of Sahaba.

Thusly, all those and others are decided as decent, and their reports in
respect to the Prophet are reckoned with the most authentic hadiths even
though such reports ascribe perfidiousness to Ali and the Prophet's
progeny, and refer acclamation and saintliness to
Abdor­Rahman­bn­Muljim.

According to the conception involved, it is imperative to embrace such
reports and, thus, it is unauthorized to repudiate since reporters were
among the decent who should never prevaricate tenaciously. Depending on
the claim that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had said:
“The like of my companions — Sahaba — is the stars; whomever is
followed, guidance — to the right path — is the result.”, the groups who
pursued and kept in line with Muawiya for about three decades, including
those who poisoned Al­Hassan­bn­Ali to death and murdered Al­Hussein and
his companions, and perpetrated abundant crimes in Kufa and other
cities, all

those are rightful and followers of the true guidance.[18] The saying
concerned, however, is ruled as doubtful by the most well­versed
hadithists. Furthermore, bn­Teimiyeh ruled of falsification of this
saying imputed to the Prophet. Hence, it is unconvincing as a proof.

Punition of Dissents of the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception
----------------------------------------------------------------

Disbelievers in the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception, in least of
all, are, according to the Sunni scholars, described in the following
judgments:

(He should certainly be one of the miscreants, that whoever maligned any
of the Prophet's companions. They are surely miscreants those who malign
any of the Prophet's companions at all. Abuse is the least form of
treating them.)

(It is illegal to share those who malign or vilify at the Prophet's
companions in a food or a drink, or to perform the ritual funeral prayer
for them.)[19]

The Mystery Beyond Such An Extreme Harshness
--------------------------------------------

According to judgment of the Sunni scholars, the Prophet is a true, and
the Holy Quran is a true, and whatever in it is a true, and all these
facts were communicated to us by the Prophet's companions. Those who
vilify at any of them, are aiming at expelling our witnesses in order to
repeal the Holy Quran and the Prophet's traditions. Consequently,
casting aspersions on such individuals should be an essential procedure.
Besides, they should be treated as miscreants.

Recall
------

The Sunni Scholars mean by the term ‘Sahaba’, all those who fall under
bn­Hajar’s definition, commencing with Khadijah, Ali, Zaid­bn­Haritha
and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[18] Seyyid Murteza Ar­Razawi's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimeene Fit­Teqiyyeti
Wes­Sehabeti We Siyanetil­Qur'anil­Karim, page81­2. [19] Ad­Dehbi's
Al­Keba'ir and Seyyid Murteza's Aara'u Ulema'il­Muslimeen, page85.

Abu­Bakr, to the last child who saw or was seen by the Prophet. At any
rate, it is favorable to take another look on bn­Hajar's definition of
Sahaba.

An Attempt for Mitigating Such A Hyperbole
------------------------------------------

In his Sharhul­Burhan, Al­Maziri says: “Not all those whom were seen,
visited or met by the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), even
for an interest or the like, are falling under our conception of the
ultimate decency of Sahaba. We, in fact, dedicate the term only to those
who accompanied the Prophet, (and honored him and helped him, and
followed the light which has been sent down with him, these it is that
are the successful).”

Denying and Eradicating this Attempt
------------------------------------

As a matter of fact, the above expression refers to the general idea;
lest, only those who had spent or fought for sake of God are named
Sahaba. Confirmed by none, Al­Maziri's opinion was denied by a group of
respectful scholars.

The following is Salah Al­Illani's replication:

“This opinion is extremely unfamiliar. Accordingly, a great number of
well­known Sahaba, like Wa'il­bn­Hajar, Malik­bn­Al­Huweirith,
Othman­bn­Al­Aas and many others who visited the Prophet as formal
delegations without residing for a considerable period, will be excluded
from list of the Prophet's companions. Besides, those who related only a
single hadith­the Prophet's tradition — and Bedouins whose period of
residence — at the Prophet's — is not defined, are also excluded.
Precisely, opinion of generalization — regarding all those seen, visited
or met by the Prophet as the Sahaba — is the most considerable and
acceptable since most of the scholars have adopted for.

Effects of this Opinion of Generalization
-----------------------------------------

First of such effects is senseless equality. According to Sunnis'
conception, the Sahaba, entirely, are enjoying an equal decency. Hence,
all of them are decent in the very same degree. The fighter — for the
sake of God — is not

different from the withdrawer. The perfectly satisfied Muslim is not
different from those embraced Islam due to fear of death. The foremost
is not different from the dilatory. The distributor out of his fortune
for sake of God is not different from the miser. The obedient is not
different from the mutineer. The well­minded is not different from the
discerning child. Correspondingly, Ali (peace be upon him) who had
fought for Islam and missed no single battle, is not different from
Abu­Sufian who had led battles against Islam, and is not different from
Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian. Hamzeh, in the same way, the master of martyrs,
is not different from Wahshi, his killer. Othman­bn­Affan, who had been
already foretold of being in the Paradise, is not different from
Al­Hakam­bn­Al­Aas, his uncle, the father of the Umayid caliphs, who was
banished by the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) and his two
companions. This man, as well as his son, was cursed by the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family).[20] In the same way,
Abdullah­bn­Abi­Sarah, who forged lies against Allah and apostatized
and, thus, was sentenced to death penalty in absentia even if he hangs
to curtains of Ka'ba, is not different from Abu­Bakr.[21]
Abdullah­bn­Ubey, chief of the hypocrites, is not different from
Ammar­bn­Yasir. These examples are quite true according to the Sahaba’s
ultimate decency conception. They all are decent. They all shall be in
the Paradise. None of them shall be in the hell­fire at all!!

Wonderment and End Result
-------------------------

How is it reasonable to regard the knowledgeable as same as the
ignorant, the fighter as same as the retiree and the perfectly satisfied
Muslim as same as the embracer of Islam for saving his soul? Is it
rational to regard the killer as same as his victim? Is it rational to
regard the foremost as same as the dilatory, the distributor as same as
the miser, the obedient as same as the disobedient, the true faithful as
same as the ostentatious, and the honest as same as the hypocrite? Is it
reasonable to regard Muawiya as same as Ali?

Neither doctrine, sense nor does logic accede to such an equality. It
is, as a matter of fact, an excessive unfairness and disastrous fusion
that intellect denies and sound human nature does reject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[20] See Kenzul­Ummal, part.11, Page358­61 and bn­Quteibeh's Al­Me'arif,
page131, 42, 54. [21] See An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam, page106.

Criticism of the Conception
---------------------------

### Unanimity and Discrepancy

Considering lexical and terminological meanings of the term Sahaba, the
entire Islamic sects have no choice other than accepting, unanimously,
the fact that the term does refer to individuals who embraced Islam,
whether satisfactorily or ostentatiously, and those who heard,
accompanied or saw the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).
Discrepancy, in fact, is in the opinion of generalization. While Sunnis
rule of the ultimate decency of the entire Sahaba, the other sects do
neither acknowledge such an opinion nor do they agree upon such a
generalization.

### An Endeavor for Reconciling

Generally, Sahaba are the entire people of the Prophet's state, or the
Islamic nation that lived under dominion of the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family). This denotation is adopted by Sunnis. Hence, those
Sahaba are the very individuals at whom Verses of the holy Quran were
addressed and laws were applied. He whoever declares his being Muslim
and speaks out the two creeds of Islam, is reckoned with Muslims and
citizens of the Prophet's state. This is by reason that it is only God
Who does realize hidden intendments, and it is none but Him who shall
reward for embracing Islam. On bases of this belief, the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) was used to regarding only appearances,
apart from real intendments and purposes. He left hidden aims to God.
Behaviors, however, are postponed to the future, God's mercy and effects
of the Islamic society, as well as situations to battles of Islam
against the unbelieving groups, under commandment of the Prophet himself
or the mandate leader. Evading naming any hypocrite declaratorily, the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) wont to supplicate God to
cover up His creatures' flaws and lead them to prosperity and the right
path. Tens of Quranic Verses, however, are harshly reproaching
hypocrites spreading all over Al­Madina, the capital, and the
surrounding villages. Such Verses have evidently uncovered concealments
and disclosed their hidden malice and treated with actual events of
Al­Madina.

Furthermore, there was a number of individuals, regarded as Sahaba,
whose private states were identified by the Quran and, thus, they were
sentenced to doctrinal provisions.

Substantial attributes for good and evil deeds were subjected by the
Islamic Doctrine. Belonging to any of these two groups is depending upon
individual qualifications and practices. Actualization of such
attributes is their bearer's concern. All over the Prophet's life,
conflict against atheism was ceaseless. As a nature, individuals always
reflect their beliefs through their behaviors sooner or later.

After the Prophet's decease, each Muslim realized perfectly his
situation in fields of devotion or hypocrisy. Despite the fact that the
Islamic society, specially in Al­Madina, was a society of Sahaba in its
terminological and lexical meaning, people did realize each other's
standing. Who, however, should have secured feeling against God's
penalty? What is, moreover, the meaning of (Situations are as to their
latest)?

We should have no choice other than classifying the honorable Sahaba
into two groups:

1. The virtuous Sahaba: They are the righteous on whose shoulders the
Islamic state was built and established. It is they who suffered mockery
and harm of the unbelieving majority until God's right was manifest.
They adhered themselves to God's concerns and acceded to the Prophet and
those he ordered of acceding to. They kept on holding on God's line till
their last moments. They are unanimously decent. This ruling is
indisputably adopted by the whole sects of Islam.

2. The rest of Sahaba: They are uneven. It is only Allah Who
distinguishes them. Among them there is the boys and the hypocrites. God
has ruled of siting the evil hypocrites in the lower class of the
hell­fire, although they were showing being Muslims and classified as
the Prophet's companions (Sahaba) according to subjective standards
established by Sunnis.

### The Benefit of Such A Classification

In fact, recognizing the virtuous Sahaba is a matter of a highly
considerable importance. Dedicatedly, they are those who swear
exceptional allegiance to the Imam. besides, they are a notable pillar
of the Islamic Consultance. In addition, they are the actual
accomplishers of the Islamic orders. They are the Imam's descriptive
government whose mission is establishing bases for accepting God's
instructions and applying the Islamic Shari'a and declaring public
loyalty to the Imam. It is essential for the public to follow them in
satisfaction and displeasure. By achieving so, survival of the masses,
as well

as such Sahaba, is gained, while doom shall certainly be the fate if
this is not attainable.

Advantage of such a classification in such a late stage is attaining a
substantial review of the past for sake of inspecting mystery beyond the
Muslims' present discrepancy, dissipation of attitudes and collapse of
their government. This is taken as a commencing step towards
enlightening their morrow and ensuring their stepping, keeping them in
circle of the legal course as the only one leading to their
reunification and reestablishing of a government on bases of Islamic
Shari'a, the only way for achieving eternality and evading another
collapse.

It is apt to add that discrimination is necessary for recognizing the
most virtuous and the most meritorious for occupying public offices.

Regarding the holy Verse, (Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts
to their owners), At­Tabari points to the following idea as exegesis. He
mentions that making over trusts to their owners aims at referring
authorities to the most meritorious. How, then, is it possible to
deliver such responsibilities to the fittest without recognizing the
best and the most meritorious? It is most certainly that none preceded
the Sahaba to acquainting this idea, and it is none but them whom are
concerned!

### Discrimination is A Divine Norm

Discrimination is a divine custom and one of the general constitutions
of life. It is looked upon as an incentive to advancing in this life
that is naturally formed, due to variance in creation, abilities, powers
and understanding. It is also imposed by achievement of political and
functional justice in field of finding the fittest. The legal
discrimination issued by Islam is the only course for achieving such a
justice, considering that discrimination as a Divine reward and
encouragement.

#### Evidence of Legal Discrimination

By both the Shari'a and the general spirit of Islam, means of legal
discrimination is affirmed. God says: (Allah has made the strivers with
their property and their persons to excel the holders back a high
degree, and to each class.) (We have made some of these apostles to
excel the others.)

The legal discrimination is also determined by God even over families
and

tribes. In this manner God addresses at the Israelis: (In fact that I
made you excel the nations.) (And certainly we have made some of the
prophets to excel others, and to Dawood — David — We gave a Scripture.)
(And Ismail and Al­Yasha and Yunus and Lut, and every one We made to
excel in the worlds.) (See how we have made some of them to excel
others, and certainly the Hereafter is much superior in respect of
excellence.) (Not alike among you are those who spent before the victory
and fought and those who did not: They are more exalted in rank than
those who spent and fought afterwards; and Allah has promised good to
all.).

Legal discrimination is necessary for identifying the fittest and the
most meritorious for occupying general centers of the government. This
is becoming to the Prophet's saying: (It is a treachery to God and His
Apostle to assign a man as a leader of a group among whom there is a
fitter.)

#### Classes of Sahaba

Logically, legally and actually Sahaba as a group are not of the same
level. Even among the faithful, there is a variance in degree of
faithfulness. There are different levels among the powerful Sahaba, and
there are variant levels among the feeble ones. Even hypocrites are
enjoying different levels of hypocrisy.

As an instance, we may cite the Prophet's following saying to those who
suggested to sentence Abdullah­bn­Ubey to death penalty: (We will treat
him politely so long he is among us.)[22]

According to this text, Abdullah­bn­Ubey, chief of the hypocrites, is
reckoned with Sahaba. He is Sahabi on the grounds unanimously
established by Sunnis. We would have accepted the life stillness and the
rational deadlock if we had concurred with such a conception. Although
they agreed or declared their agreement upon the Sahaba's ultimate
decency conception, Sunnis had to confess, even partly, of inactiveness
and illogicality of the conception that is, according to their
declaration also, contradicting the Shariite intendment.

One of the clearest evidence on such a confession is their classifying
the honorable Sahaba into several classes. Belonging to any of these
classes covers the lawful and political role in accordance with the
Shari'a. Question

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[22] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat, part.6, page65, and An­Nizamus­Siyasiyi
Fil­Islam, page103.

of classification is not a discretionary effort. Qualifications of such
classes are cited by the Quran and the Prophet's traditions. Exploiting
this point, bn­Sa'd identified five classes of the Sahaba, while
Al­Hakim, in his Al­Mustedrak, classified them into twelve classes.

Classification Of The Sahaba As Posited By Al­Hakam In His Al­Mustedrak
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

1st class: Individuals who embraced Islam before Hijra — The Prophet's
immigration to Yathrib. The four caliphs are cited as examples.

2nd class: The Prophet's companions of Darun­Nidwa.

3rd class: The immigrants to Abyssinia.

4th class: The Prophet's companions of the first Aqaba.

5th class: The Prophet's companions of the second Aqaba.

6th class: The first group of immigrants who arrived in Al­Madina after
the Prophet.

7th class: The warriors of the battle of Badr.

8th class: Individuals who immigrated in the period between battle of
Badr and the treaty of Hudeibiyeh.

9th class: Individuals of the Razwan declaration of fealty.

10th class: Individuals who immigrated in the period between the treaty
of Hudeibiyeh and conquest of Mecca. Khalid­bn­Al­Waleed and
Amr­bn­Al­Aas are cited as examples of this class.

11th class: The ‘released’ who embraced Islam only on the day of
conquest of Mecca. Abu­Sufian and Muawiya, his son, are cited as
examples of this class.

12th class: Juveniles and children who saw the Prophet on the day of
conquest of Mecca.

Hence, the first Muslim is Khadija followed by Ali (peace be upon him).
(On Monday, the Prophet, peace be upon him and his family, was

prophesied. On Tuesday, Ali, Zaid­bn­Haritha and Abu­Bakr embraced Islam
respectively.)

As a matter of fact, classification of the Sahaba into various classes
is seen as an actual entry to legal discrimination. Indeed, it will be
unreasonable to regard the foremost in embracing Islam as same degree of
decency as a ‘released’ who declared his being a Muslim on the say of
conquest of Mecca. Al­Faruq — Omar­bn­Al­Khattaab — directed attention
towards this very point during distributing the grants among Muslims. He
took the classes to which each individual belonged in consideration. So,
he neither treated the foremost in Islam as equal to the latest nor did
he equate those who spared no single arts in field of fighting against
Islam till they were surrounded in the island of polytheism, with those
who missed no single battle for the sake of Islam till God fortified His
religion. Moreover, evidence of the Muhajirs — immigrants from Mecca —
against the Ansar — supporters of Al­Madina — in the question of the
most meritorious to leadership of Muslims after the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family), which was arisen in the Saqeefa of
Bani­Sa'ideh, is that they, the Muhajirs, had been the foremost in
worshipping God by Islam. They also stated that they had been the
Prophet's backers, clan, and hence, the most meritorious of his
heritage. They also stated that it should be unjust for any to dispute
them in this question since the Arab should be dissatisfied if the Ansar
would take leadership while the Prophet of the nation is belonging to
another group. They stated that the Arab should not be satisfied unless
leadership would be the Prophet's clan's.

Is it not acceptable to conclude from Omar's saying: (Who dares to
dispute us in Mohammed's heritage and authority while we are his people
and clan?!), in the Saqeefa of Bani­Sa'ideh, backed by Abu­Bakr, that it
is an accurate conceptual application of legal discrimination and, in
turns, it is a radical blast to the Sahaba's ultimate decency
conception?[23]

Back to the story, the Ansar could find nothing other than submitting to
this indisputable evidence; therefore, they declared that they would
accept none but Ali.[24]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[23] As­Suyuti's Tarikhul­Khulefa, page227. [24] At­Tabari's, part.7,
page198, and bn­Quteibeh's Al­Imameh Wes­Siyaseh, and Sharhu
Nahjil­Belagha, part.2 and An­Nizamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam, page126­7.

As Imam Ali faced them in his substantial evidence after their declaring
fealty to Abu­Bakr as the caliph, Bashir­bn­Sa’d, who was the main
reason beyond the Ansar' discordance, addressed at Ali: “No any two
would have litigated about your rightfulness — in matter of leadership —
if only you had made the Ansar hear your previous words before they
declared fealty to Abu­Bakr.) Without applying legal discrimination as a
means of preceding the most learned, the best and the fittest in the
entire fields of life, such contentment should never be attained.
Absolutely, legal discrimination policy contravenes the Sahaba's
ultimate decency conception since such a policy and a course would be
nonexistent when the all are equally decent.

#### Approach of Discrimination in Islam

In order to evade dissension and discrepancy, discount the role of
temper and fancies and deprecate any tyrant essay to be imposed on the
nation, Islam, through undeniable and artless texts, defined the basic
pillars of approach of discrimination. These bases are circumscribed in
five pillars for the purpose of defining paths to virtue and justice and
courses to fields of goodness. Throughout such points, Muslim's
position, role and size shall be evidently outlined. Besides, these
points shall be the legal answer of any question appertained to
individuals' standings and values. They are, then, the only way through
which the most learned, the most favorable and the fittest shall be
apparently recognized. What is the objective, then, beyond issuing
approach of discrimination when the Prophet's companions as a whole are
unexceptionally equal? What is the objective beyond instituting
doctrinal provisions and issuing rulings and judges, then?

#### Pillars Of Discrimination And Courses Of Decency

Throughout an extrapolative study of the Islamic divine belief, it is
clear to conclude that approach of discrimination is grounded on five
pillars considered as legal standards exhibiting the estimation and the
status of each Muslim:

1st pillar: The immaculate kinship to the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family). It is, by undiscussible legal texts, the spiritual and
political successive leadership of the nation. Concerning the answer of
the wonderment why they have been dedicatedly selected, we can say
nothing more than it is the grace of Allah that He grants to whomever He
desires. In the same way, alike questions can be put about Mohammed's
being chosen for the divine revelation and mission. The same can be said

about Moses' being chosen as prophet. The answer will be the same; it is
the grace of Allah that He grants whomever He desires. These are,
anyhow, concerns of God.

The kinship involved is regarded, according to divine texts, as the
center, ‘the saving boat’, ‘the door of forgiveness’, ‘the stars of
guidance to the right’, ‘the foremost to faithfulness’, ‘the godliest’,
‘the most knowledgeable’ and ‘the most misfortunate’. They are,
according to divine texts too, those whose commitment is imposed upon
everybody. Their chief is the legal leader of the nation at any time he
is in. He is, thus, the authority of people. This is according to the
logic fact that the prophet is preferred to the mission with which he is
sent, and the guide is preferred to the matter he is guiding to. How
should God send a messenger without a message? At which situation did
God reveal a Divine Book to other than one of His slaves? This is to be
proved later on. They, the Prophet's progeny, are the core and the
essence of the divine leadership.

2nd pillar: Precedence to believing in the Prophet.

3rd pillar: Devoutness.4th pillar: knowledgeability.

5th pillar: Prophet's — or the legal leader's — nominating his
successor. He is the one elected by the masses fully satisfactorily,
without coercion, inducement or duplicity!

#### Estimating the Criteria

These criteria are actually topical, originated, exclusively, from the
Divine Islamic law. They are manifestation of each individual's
credentials of decency. Respectfully, other criteria are not more than a
form of harmony between an imposed actuality and a divine ordained
ensample. The criteria involved are recognized by every body. In the
historical policy of caliphate, these criteria were the foremost and
most acceptable argument. The following situations of Abu­Bakr, Omar and
Abu­Ubeideh, in the conference of Saqeefa, are good examples of our
discussion.[25] These three individuals expressed their precedence in
succeeding Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family) since:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[25] Al­Imameh Wes­Siyaseh, pages 5­8.

1. The Arab reject delivering leadership to people other than those from
among whom prophesy appeared.

2. Mohammed's people and clan are the most preferable in his heritage
and authorities. This is the very criterion of kinship.

3. They claimed of their being the first individuals who had worshipped
Allah in this world. This is the criteria of precedence to believing and
devotion...etc.

Omar's course in distributing the imports can be added to examples of
taking the previous five criteria in consideration.[26]

#### Wonderment

Considering the Sahaba, as a whole, are equally decent, shall be in the
Paradise, none of them shall be in the hell­fire at all and are equally
treated by God; what, then, intercepted the Ansar from having leadership
of the Muslims? Why did most of them satisfactorily concede leadership
to the three Muhajirs? Why did Omar, the just caliph, follow a policy of
discrimination in distributing imports of the state on the Muslims? Why
were some of Sahaba sentenced to various doctrinal provisions? Lastly,
how should the just decent individual, whose pass to the Paradise is
already guaranteed, thieve?!

You, who embrace the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception, are not more
knowledgeable than the two Sheiks — Abu­Bakr and Omar. For you, their
opinions are ruled as sufficiently satisfactory. I challenge each of you
to find, or to try to find, answers to the previous questions. How
should the impetuous pursuance be a path to the right? God did learn us
that the impetuous pursuance should be the way to the Fire. He, the
Exalted, graces us with the intellect so that we will use in obedience
and exploring aims of the Islamic laws.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[26] Al­Belathiri's Futouhul­Buldan.
