Chapter 4 — the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception At Shias
=============================================================

1. Shias' acceding to the Sahaba:
---------------------------------

Seyid Murteza Ar­Razawi says: “Shias accede to Mohammed's companions who
did their best for the sake of supporting this religion and strove with
their souls and wealth. Accusing Shias of maligning and regarding the
entire companions of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) as
apostates, is null and void. It is to rule of such an incorrect accusal
as an informing of an unforeseen matter. It is resulted from subjection
to fanaticism and sectarian extremism. Finally, it is a matter stemmed
from seeking illusions and falsities.”

2. for Shias, Who are the Sahaba?
---------------------------------

All those who accompanied, saw or heard from the prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) are included in the term of Sahaba. This is to mean
that believers, hypocrites, the decent, the dishonest...etc., are
included. The mere companionship of the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) is not a matter that protects against misguidance or
indecency. Ranks and standings of the Prophet's companions are to be
measured pursuant to individual acts and conduct. There are adequate
evidences on our claim inferred from the Holy Quran and the Prophet's
traditions. Besides, events are good witness of our trend of
comprehensiveness of the Prophet's companionship and variant standings
of such companions among whom there are the decent, who attested their
covenant to God, fastened their feet in the Doctrine, made the belief
flow in their arteries and acted sincerely to God. Such companions could
attain the acme of perfection. They are described, by Allah, in the
following Verse:

(Mohammed is the Apostle of Allah, and those with him are firm of heart
against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves — each other;
you will see them bowing down, prostrating themselves, seeking grace

from Allah and pleasure; their marks are in their faces because of the
effect of prostration; that is their description in the Tavrat — Torah —
and their description in the Injeel — Bible — like as seed produce that
puts forth its sprout, then strengthens it, so it becomes stout and
stands firmly on its stem, delight on the sowers that He may enrage the
unbelievers on account of them; Allah has promised those among them who
believe and do good, forgiveness and a great rewards.)

Surely they are the true believers; (The believers are only those who
believe in Allah and His Apostle then they doubt not and struggle hard
with their wealth and their lives in the way of Allah; they are the
truthful ones.)

God issued ordinance of following and pursuing such true believers; (O
you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and be with the true
ones.)

It is those who are the decent companions of Mohammed (peace be upon him
and his family), as Shias believe.

Shias push themselves in the midst of debate on conducts of the aberrant
Sahaba by means of free conviction. Each is measured according to his
deeds. Shias never respect those who oppose God and His messenger. They
declare their repudiation from those who betook their oaths as a
protection against their acts of occluding others from taking path of
God. Adopting this style, Shias are not contradictory to the Holy Book
of Allah, the Prophet's traditions and the virtuous predecessors, in
matter of discriminating the Sahaba.

3. The Basic Difference Point
-----------------------------

Sunnis rule of decency of the entire Sahaba, according to both
terminological and lexical meaning of this word. Shias rule of decency
of those who were described as decent from among the Prophet's
companions.

4. Shias' Supplication for Mohammed's Companions
------------------------------------------------

The most decisive evidence on Shias' sincere loyalty and allegiance to
the Prophet's companions is their famous supplication they have
inherited from their Imams. They supplicate God for the benefit of the
entire followers of apostles of God, and for Mohammed's companions
especially.

### The Most Well Memorized Supplication of the Shiite

In the well known As­Sahifa As­Sajjadiya, Imam Zainul­Aabidin renders
this famous supplication:

Blessings upon the Followers of, and Attesters to, the Messengers: O
God, as for the followers of the messengers and those of the people of
the earth Who attested to them unseen (while the obstinate resisted them
through crying lies). They yearned for the emissaries through the
realities of faith, in every era and time in which Thou didn't send a
messenger and set up for the people a director from the period of Adam
down to Mohammed (God bless him and his Household) from among the Imams
of guidance and the leaders of the God­fearing (upon them all be peace)
remember them with forgiveness and good pleasure! O God, and as for the
companions of Mohammed specifically, those who did well in
companionship, who stood the good test in helping him, responded to him.
When he made them hear his message's argument, separated from mates and
children in manifesting his word, fought against fathers and sons in
strengthening his word, fought against fathers and sons in strengthening
his prophecy, and through him gained victory; those who were wrapped in
affection for him, hoping for a commerce that comes not to naught in
love for him; those who were left by their clans when they clung to his
handhold and denied by their kinsfolk when they rested in the shadow of
his kinship; forget not, O God, what they abandoned for Thee and in
Thee, and make them pleased with they good pleasure for the sake of the
creatures they drove to Thee while they were with Thy Messenger,
summoners to Thee for Thee. Show gratitude to them for leaving the
abodes of their people for Thy sake and going out from a plentiful
livelihood to a narrow one, and [show gratitude to] those of them who
became objects of wrongdoing and whom Thou multiplied in exalting Thy
religion. O God, and give to those who have done well in following the
companions, Who say, Our lord, forgive us and our brothers who went
before us in faith, Thy best reward; Those who went straight to the
companions road sought out their course, and proceeded in their manner.
No doubt concerning their sure insight diverted them and no uncertainty
shook them from following in their tracks and being led by the guidance
of their light. As their assistants and supporters, they professed their
religion, gained guidance through their guidance, came to agreement with
them, and never accused them in what they passed on to them. O God, and
bless the Followers, from this day of ours to the Day of Doom, their
wives, their offspring, and those among them who obey Thee, with a
blessing through

which Thou wilt preserve them from disobeying Thee, make room for them
in the plots of Thy Garden, defend them from the trickery of Satan, help
them in the piety in which they seek help from Thee, protect them from
sudden events that come by night and day except the events which come
with good, and incite then to tie firmly the knot of good hope in Thee,
what is with Thee, and refrain from ill thoughts [toward Thee] because
of what the hands of Thy servants' hold. Thus Thou mayest restore them
to beseeching Thee and fearing Thee, induce them to renounce the plenty
of the immediate, make them love to work for the sake of the deferred
and prepare for what comes after death, make easy for them every
distress that comes on the day when souls take leave from bodies,
release them from that which brings about the perils of temptation and
being thrown down in the Fire and staying forever within it, and take
them to security, the resting place of the God-fearing.
