Chapter 5 — Grounds of Consideration of Sahaba
==============================================

Bn­Abbas describes the Sahaba before Muawiya
--------------------------------------------

After he had asked bn­Abbas about various matters, Muawiya asked about
the real Sahaba: bn­Abbas answered:

“O Muawiya! God, the Almighty, granted His Prophet, Mohammed (peace be
upon him and his family) exclusively, with companions who gave priority
to him upon themselves and their riches. They sacrificed themselves for
him in every situation. In His Book, God described them: (Mohammed is
the Apostle of Allah, and those with him are firm of heart against the
unbelievers, compassionate among themselves — each other; you will see
them bowing down, prostrating themselves, seeking grace from Allah and
pleasure; their marks are in their faces because of the effect of
prostration; that is their description in the Tavrat — Torah — and their
description in the Injeel — Bible; like as seed produce that puts forth
its sprout, then strengthens it, so it becomes stout and stands firmly
on its stem, delighting the sowers that He may enrage the unbelievers on
account of them; Allah has promised those among them who believe and do
good, forgiveness and a great reward.)

They secured traces of the religion and advised for Muslims to excess
till paths of the religion became neat, and its pillars became rigid,
and God's graces became manifest, and His religion became stable, and
His signs became evident. By those persons, God humiliated polytheism,
beheaded it, erased its signs and, hence, God's word became the most
elevated, while the disbelievers' is the most downcast.

God's peace, mercy and blessings be on these immaculate souls and
elevated pure spirits. In their lives, they were favorite to God, and
after their death, they have been alive. They were the advisors of God's
slaves. Before they

attain the other life, they migrated to it. While they were still it
this world, they fled it..” “O bn­Abbas! Change the subject!” Muawiya
interrupted.[49]

The Will of Hutheifeh­bn­Al­Yeman, the Sahabi
---------------------------------------------

While he was ill in Kufa, in 36A.H., Hutheifeh was informed of Othman's
having been killed and Ali's having been elected for caliphate. He asked
the attendants to take him out and gather people in the mosque.

After he had been reached to the pulpit, Hutheifeh orated:

“Praised and thanked be Allah. Blessed be Mohammed and his household.

O people of Kufa! Ali has been elected for caliphate. I call you for
being wary of God and acceding and supporting Ali. By God I swear, he is
the bearer of truth from the beginning to the end. He is definitely the
ever best personality after the Prophet.”

Hutheifeh, then, put his right palm over the left and went on saying: “O
Allah! Be the witness that I do declare fealty to Ali.” He, soon
afterward, asked his two sons, Safwan and Sa'd, to take him back. He
asked them to be always in the line of Ali. He foretold them that there
would be a number of wars broken out during which a many people would be
perished. “Waste no single opportunity for sacrificing yourselves for
Ali in these wars. He is, by God, the right. They are the wrong those
who will oppose him.” Hutheifeh advised his sons.

Seven days, or forty according to some reports, later, Hutheifeh was
deceased. His two amenable sons did implement his will. They were
martyred in battle of Siffine while they were fighting in the line of
Ali (peace be upon him).[50]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[49] Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb, vol.3, page65­6 and 425­6. [50]
Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb, vol.3, pages 65­6, and pages 425­6.

Az­Zubeir and the End Result
----------------------------

Bearing no piece of arms and putting nothing on his head, Imam Ali
himself came to the battle field, riding on the pack animal of the
Prophet; “O Zubeir! Come out before me.”

Heavy armed, Az­Zubeir came before Imam Ali. As she was told of this
situation, A'isheh cried: “O Asma! Ready for wailing for your husband!”
She was relaxed only when she was told of Ali's having been bareheaded.

The two had hanged each other. Ali said: “Woe is you, Zubeir! What has
made you come out against me?” “It is Othman's revenge.” answered
Az­Zubeir. “God may kill the nearer to Othman's murder.” Imam Ali said,
“Do you remember the day when you were accompanying the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) on his pack animal in quarters of
Banu­Beyadha. It is when he, as well as you, smiled in my face as I met
you both. It is then when you said: ‘Ali will never give up his
elation!’ The Prophet answered you: ‘No, he does not enjoy any elation.
O Zubeir! Do you cherish him?’ ‘Yes, I do cherish him, by God.’ you
answered. The Prophet, then, foretold: ‘It is indeed that you shall be
wronging him on that day when you shall fight him!’” Az­Zubeir, here,
said: “I do seek my God's forgiveness. I would have never come out for
this conflict only had I remembered this foregoing situation!”

Imam Ali, then, asked him to return back to his homeland. “How come
should I withdraw now, while the two opposing bows are to be forming
ring of the war. This shall certainly be the unacceptable shame!”
Az­Zubeir expressed his embarrassing situation. “O Zubeir! Withdraw
before you will be having the hell­fire besides the shame!” advised Imam
Ali.

Concisely, Az­Zubeir withdrew from that sinful assemblage. Amr­bn­Jurmuz
killed him few hours later.

Talha and the End Result
------------------------

After Az­Zubeir's withdrawal, Ali (peace be upon him) shouted at Talha:
“O Abu­Mohammed! What for have you mutinied against me?” “It is for
Othman's revenge.” answered Talha. “May God kill the nearer to his
killing.” said Imam Ali (peace be upon him) and went on, “O Talha! Have
you not heard the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: ‘O

Allah! Accede to whomever accedes to Ali, and oppose whomever opposes
him.’ O Talha! You were the foremost in declaring fealty to me, and the
foremost in breaking that fealty. God says: (..Therefore whoever breaks
his faith, he breaks it only to the injury of his own soul.)”

Talha sought God's forgiveness and withdrew.

Confederates Kill Each Other
----------------------------

Having been shocked by withdrawal of Az­Zubeir and Talha,
Marwan­bn­Al­Hakam­bn­Al­Aas threw his spear and hit Talha's capillary,
saying: “I do not care whether I hit this or that man.” While he was
dying, Talha showed his great remorse for his past misdeeds.

Some mentioned that Abdul­Melik had injured Talha in the forehead, and
Marwan­bn­Al­Hakam hit his capillary due to which he was killed.

Ammar­bn­Yasir's Satisfactory End Result
----------------------------------------

In battle of Siffine, Ammar­bn­Yasir said: “I can obviously see faces of
brave people who will fight against falsehood, until its followers will
fall in doubt. By God, we are the right and they are the wrong even if
they may defeat us and take us back to Hajr.”

After he had fought in the heart of the battle field, Ammar went back to
a certain place for drinking some water. A woman from the Sheiban
offered him a honey mixed with milk. He shouted: “Allah is the greatest!
Allah is the greatest! It is the day I am to see my lovers under these
sharp spears. He had said but the truth; that honest who foretold me of
this day.”

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had foretold Ammar of his
being killed by the tyrant faction, and that his last drink in this
world would be milk with honey. “O people!” cried Ammar, “Any one to
direct to the Paradise under these dragging spears? By He, the
Prevailing of my soul I swear, we shall be fighting them for the
interpretation of the Quran just like that when we fought them for its
revelation.”

Both Abul­Adiyeh and bn­Jawn As­Saksaki killed Ammar. As they litigated
about whose rightfulness in Ammar's spoils, the two nominated

Abdullah­bn­Amr­bn­Al­Aas, the Sahabi, as arbiter.

Muawiya's Argument
------------------

Muawiya mutinied against the legal ruler. He demanded the Imam with
penalizing killers of Othman, the previous caliph. “Submit to obedience
of this legal leadership so that I will issue a judgment against those
people who killed Othman.” Imam Ali suggested to Muawiya who rejected
and betook the case of Othman's assassination as bridge to royalty. He,
however, could achieve his goal. He was crowned as the Muslim's king.
The whole souls were submissive to his monarchy whether by terrorism or
pleasure.

### Muawiya Penalizes Othman's Assassinators

In Al­Madina, Muawiya entered Othman's house where he was received by a
groan from A'isheh, Othman's daughter.

“O my brother's daughter!” he addressed at her, “People gave us their
submission, and we gave them our secure. We showed them a tranquillity
stuffed with range. They showed us a compliance stuffed with abhorrence.
Each man has his sword and realizes his supporter's place. They will
break their allegiance if we break our promises. Then, we cannot
guarantee the consequence. Being Amirul­Mu'minin's cousin will be
certainly better than being an ordinary lady.”[51]

### Al­Hassan Al­Basri's Impression on Muawiya

At­Tabari mentions that Al­Hassan Al­Basri used to say: “Four ill deeds,
any of which is sufficiently periling, are Muawiya's. They are his using
the ill­minded ones, with the existence of the Prophet's companions and
virtuous individuals, as rulers of this nation till he could dominate
and cancel principal of consultancy. His nominating Yazeed, his son, the
drunkard who dresses silky clothes and plays on drums, as his successor.
His avowing Ziyad as his brother, whereas the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) had said: ‘Babies are for the bed, and the prostitutes'
share is the stones.’ His killing Hijr and his companions. Woe will be
him due to killing

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[51] Al­Jahiz's Al­Beyanu Wet­Tebyin, vol.3, page300, and Mahmud
Abu­Rayyeh's Sheikhul­Madhira, page182.

Hijr and his companions. Woe will be him due to killing Hijr and his
companions.”[52]

### Muawiya's Zenith of Glories

As if this (decent) Sahabi was not convinced of these previous acts, he
attained the acme by cursing Imam Ali, the favorite of God. He led his
people to this act. He issued orders of cursing Ali­bn­Abi­Talib from
the pulpits.[53]

### Muawiya's Officials Revile At Ali

Seeking Muawiya's satisfaction, officials were reviling at Ali (peace be
upon him).[54]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[52] At­Tabari's­the events of 51. Ibnul­Atheer's, page202­9.
bn­Asakir's, vol.2, page379. Mahmud Abu­Rayyeh's Sheikhul­Madhira,
page184­5. [53] bn­Abd Rebbihi's Al­Iqdul­Farid, vol.4, page, 366.
bn­Abil­Hadid's Sherhu Nahjil­Belagheh, vol.1, page, 356, vol.3,
page258, and vol.4, page56. Muslim's, part.2, page360. At­Tirmithi's
part.5, page301­80. Al­Hakim's Al­Mustedrak, part.3, page109.
bn­Asakir's Tarikhu Dimeshq, Chapter: Imam Ali. Ashafi'i's part.1,
page206. An­Nisa'i's Khessa'issu Ameeril­Mu'mineen, page48. Az­Zernedi's
Durerus­Simttein, page107. Al­Kinji's Kitabutt­Talib, page84­6.
Al­Khawarizmi's Al­Menaqib, page59. Ibnul­Atheer's usdul­Ghabeh, part.1,
page134, part.4, page25­6. bn­Hajar Al­Asqalani's Al­Isabeh, part.2,
page509. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer, part.1, page257, part.3, page300. Nasr
Bin Muzahim's Waq'atu Siffine, page82­92. Al­Jawzi's Tethkiretul­Khawas,
page63. AL­Amili's Al­Muraja'at. [54] At­Tabari's part.5, page167­8.
Ibnul­Atheer's Al­Kamilu Fit­Tarikh, part.3, page413. Al­Hakim's
Al­Mustedrak, part.1, pag 385, part.2, page358. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sherhu
Nahjil­Belagheh, vol.1, page, 356 61. As­Suyouti's tarikhul­Khulefa,
page190. Al­Iqdul­Farid, part.4, page365. Al­Amini's Al­Ghadeer, part.1,
page264. Al­Qastalani's Sharhul­Bukhari, part.4, page368. Al­Ansari's
Sharhul­Bukhari, part.4 page368. Al­Amili's Al­Muraja'at, page218.
