Chapter 6 — the Right Course To Recognizing the Decent Sahaba
=============================================================

Topical Introductory
--------------------

A majority of historians mentioned the following:

Just before the beginning of battle of Badr, the first armed encounter
between polytheism and monotheism, Abu­Jahal raised his hands towards
the heavens and pray to God: “O God! The further from Thee and the most
involved in cutting relations; Thou involve him in calamities of this
battle..”

At the same time, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) raised
his hands towards the heavens and supplicated: “O God! Thou shall never
be worshipped on this earth if my small party is defeated today. O God!
Fulfill Thy promise..”

### Inspecting the 2 supplications

It is recognizable that both raised their hands towards the heavens..
Both implored “O God.” Both carried slogan of truth.

Abu­Jahal claimed of being the nearest to God and the keeper of
relations. Mohammed, in the other side, affirmed that his followers were
the real protectors of the truth and the ideal connection between the
Creator and His creatures. He declared that there had been promises and
covenants between his Creator and him.

### A wonderment

Considering both were claiming of being the truth, what for, then, were
they about to fight each other? Considering both were together on the
same course of Allah, which is only a united way, what for, then, were
they so discrepant that they faced each other with arms?

### Prospects

In accordance with criteria of mere topical debate, we have to opt for
one of these three prospects or views:

1. The two parties were right. This prospect, however, is inapplicable
since there is only one undoubtable course which is the right path of
Allah. According to sameness of both parties' bases, they should have
followed each other.

2. One of the two was the right. This prospect is expedient.

3. The two parties are wrong. For a prophet fortified by arguments and
heavenly miracles, this prospect is unacceptable.

### Explication

For recognizing the mere reality, it is essential to achieve the
following:

1. Identifying the right.

2. Identifying the wrong.

3. Identifying the right party by means of the right itself.

4. Identifying the wrong party by same means and criteria of the right.

### The solving method

1. The existence of the right and its jurisprudential formulation. The
right, here, is Islam; the Quran and the Prophet's traditions; words,
deeds and signature. The jurisprudential formulation of the right is
Quranic texts and the Prophet's traditions that falsehood should not
come to it from any side. It is God's formulation and revelation.

2. An intellect so apt that it can consume the divine jurisprudential
formulation.

3. Objectivity and pertinence. The aim should be framing thoughts with
legality and achieving the very intendment of the divine texts and
general spirit of the jurisprudential formulation.

4. The existence of a personality of a divine authority before whom
fruits of the intellectual comprehension should be provided. This
personality should be the judge in case of suggestive discrepancies.
Besides, he is the organizer of capacities, guide of privileges and the
true director to the right. This personality is the prophet, in reign of
prophesy, and the virtuous Imam defined by legal and jurisprudential
bases, in succeeding reigns. He is, however, the objective criterion of
right and wrong. Those who accede to Mohammed, comply to his orders and
follow his instruction are the right party. Those who accede to others
are the wrong party, even if they recite and retain the Holy Quran,
perform the ritual prayers, fast and establish mosques. This is by
reason that the constant criterion of identifying the right and the
wrong in any time is affability — to the leader of the right course.

#### Obstructions Of The Solving Methods

1. Carnal desire: It is the aspiration that all matters and all texts
are going and elucidated for one's benefits.

2. Partisan imitation: It is the adaptation of the out­of­date
conceptions with rejection and denial of any attempt of renewing or
alteration.

3. Despotic attitude: This means the belief of justifiability and
appropriateness of one's conception, and that those who disagree with
such a conception are the Satan's supporters whom should be intercepted,
resisted and reckoned with foes.

4. Canceling or supplanting the legitimate leadership. This occurs by
opting for a leadership other than the one God has ascribed. By such an
act, the dominion leader will be supported even though he is wrong.

Conclusive Judgment of the Sahaba's Decency — Recall and Abstract of the Views of Sunnis and Shias
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As it has been previously mentioned, we could prove that the lexical and
the terminological meaning of ‘Suhba’ — the Prophet's companionship —
includes all those who met, believed or showed their believing in the
Prophet's mission, provided that they kept on such an appearance all
their lifetime. Sunnis, unanimously, ruled of decency of the entire
Sahaba without exception. We could see also that the Sahaba's ultimate
decency

conception is contradictory to words, deeds and signatures of the
Prophet, and the decisively jurisprudential texts of the Holy Quran.
Furthermore, we could prove, by examples and means of conceivable
simplification, that the conception is contradictory to the cause
finale, logic of beings and the general spirit of Islam.

As a conclusion and according to legality and essentiality, we could
apprehend that there are two categories of Sahaba:

1. The righteous Sahaba: These individuals are indisputably and
unanimously decent.

2. The other Sahaba: There is a controversy regarding such individuals.
Sunnis rule of the ultimate decency of the entire Sahaba, with no
difference between the foremost to Islam and a boy saw or was seen by
the Prophet. They are, the Sahaba, are entirely and unexceptionally
decent. It is illicit to mention them in any way leading to any sort of
criticism or maligning. He whoever takes in such a course is a sinful
miscreant that every one is mandated to avoid sharing him in a drink or
a food or offer the ritual funeral prayer for his soul.

Respecting Shias, they believe that the decent Sahaba are only those
whose decency is judged by Allah and His Apostle. The objective legal
truth is the believer's aim. The doubtless Shari'a of Islam demonstrates
and guides to means of detecting the objective legal truth. Intellectual
qualifications helping in achieving the aim are also gifted by the
Shari'a, provided that fancies are abandoned. In consideration of their
claim that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), may do right
or wrong; what, then, would intercept an ordinary boy saw or was seen by
the Prophet, from making a mistake or forging a lie? What is the
location of that doctrinal judgment of interdicting the intellect from
inspecting the truth here and there? Certainly there were those who
murdered a number of Sahaba, thieved, fabricated, committed fornication
and those who were submitted to juristic questions after the Prophet's
decease. How should we delve into the facts of such deeds? How should we
institute justice? How should people take stock of the past experiences
for evading the wrong and taking in the right?

On that account, Shias give credence to decency of the virtuous
companions of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
exclusively. They beg God's mercy for such individuals at every ritual
prayer. Regarding the other

companions, every person is measured as to his beliefs and conduct in
field of the doctrinal duties. They, the Shias, believe that the
Sahaba's ultimate decency conception is a completely political
representation, originated, with all its grounds, under custody of the
Umayid regime; the ‘released’. The ruling regime’s mass media helped
greatly in publicizing and impressed bases of that conception which,
imitatively and with variant intentions, was transferred to the
succeeding generations.

Shias add: Concerning the penalization issued by the jurisprudents, as
one of means of supporting the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception, it
is, in fact, a groundless chastisement. It is unauthorized for any to
condemn a Muslim unless there is a doctrinal text legalizing such a
condemnation. Hence, this chastisement is unjust and void according to
the entire doctrinal standards. It does result in giving stability to
the state of discrepancy in which the Islamic nation is involved, and
intercepting the current generation from applying past lessons and
examples for discovering obstacles dug in course to the bright future
and the mentally and practically illuminated unification of this nation.

### Confusion

If the entire Sahaba had been decent:

Those seditious matters would not have occurred. The Islamic nation
would not have been engaged in discrepancies. They would not kill each
other since the decent should not commit murders. The concern of
leadership would not have been robbed. Finally, caliphate would not have
become a regime of royalty dominated by the strongest.

Believing in decency of the entire Sahaba is a matter of confusion,
darkening and interdicting people's intellects. It is reasonable that
any parties in conflict cannot be the right together. The right is
opposite to massacres, seditious matters, discrepancies and assigning
positions to other than their rightful.

It is inaccurate for us to accept invitations of making a new beginning
after elapse of a thousand years, neglecting recognizing the rightful
party so as to follow, and the wrong so as to avoid their paths. This
leads to the fact that we are to waste the thousand year experiment and
have a very new bare beginning. This is the exact confusion we mean. In
the past, such a confusion resulted in benefiting and covering up a
certain authority or

individual. Now, what shall we gain from adopting such a confusion and
covering up. What shall we gain from canceling a 1390 year experiment,
especially when we realize that consequences of such a confusion,
covering up and canceling will directly befit our religion since such
operations are implemented under Islamic slogans.

### An Event for the Shariite Disclosure

After a longtime indecision, enraged groups of people rebelled against
Othman­bn­Affan, the third caliph, claiming of his having deviated from
courses of his former associates, As­Siddiq and Al­Faruq. Thus, people
of Al­Madina swore fealty to Ali (peace be upon him). Saving people of
Syria governed by Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian who did not show fealty to the
new caliph claiming that he should punish Othman's killers, the other
provinces declared their allegiance. Muawiya rejected Imam Ali's
invitation to show obedience provided that justice should be issued in
the case of Othman's being killed. He used his province, Syria, as a
fortress from which he began to arrange for trickeries against the Imam,
declare his mutiny, shake security and constancy of the state and
contrive for breaking unity up. For using so, Muawiya exploited the
wealth of that province in an illegal way. He went on his trickeries
causing blood to be shed and people to be scattered. At length, the Imam
was assassinated. Muawiya could come to power by force. He became head
of the nation within whose people there were the foremost in Islam and
the Sahaba who fought against his father and him for the sake of Islam.
Furthermore, he forgot or feigned forgetfulness of Othman's killers. He
appointed his son, Yazeed, the notorious drunkard and monkeys breeder,
the drummer, as his crown prince. Since then, power became in the hands
of the strongest. Considering the saying that “Old things are old.”,
domination became a Shariite means for coming to power. “We are being
with the dominion.”

### The Entire Sahaba's Decency

It is a matter of surprising and a difficult issue to believe that those
who supported Ali (peace be upon him) and those who supported Muawiya
were decent Sahaba whom should never be sent to hell­fire, and are
sinless religious authorities. It is illicit to malign or criticize
them. He is a miscreant whom should be avoided in drinking, eating or
offering a ritual prayer, that whoever reviles at any Sahabi. These
rules are issued by Sunnis. Moreover, it is to say that they agree upon
applauding any of those Sahaba in any form

or style; but you should be ruled as miscreant if you impute a flaw to
any.

This impetuous contemplation had changed into a factual tradition as if
being the norm of Allah and His Apostle.

### Logical Characterization

Depending on criteria of scientific research, we have to opt for one of
the following three prospects or view.

1. The two parties are right. (Ali and his group and Muawiya and his
group.) This prospect, however, is irrational since there is only one
undoubtable course to the right.

2. The two parties are wrong. (Ali and his group and Muawiya and his
group.) this is also irrational since Ali, according to doctrinal texts,
is the devotee of Allah. Ali is being with the right, and the right,
being with Ali, moves wherever Ali moves.

3. A party is the right and the other is the wrong.

### Wonderment

The two parties would not have fought each other and been engaged in
discrepancies if had they both been the right. For as much as they were
engaged in discrepancy, they should never have reached stage of fighting
and killing each other. Such discrepancies might have been solved
depending on legal grounds. There, hence, would not have been such a
large number of victims.

### Abstract

In this manner, it is indispensable that one party was the right while
the other was the wrong. Ruling of decency and sinlessness of both
parties is a decision stemmed from artlessness and inadvertence. The
option of armed fighting should not be adopted before achievement of the
Shariite certitude. Murder is crime. Breaking up the nation is a crime.
Rebellion against Shari'a is a crime too. It is impossible to regard
those who commit assassinations due to conjecture or fancies, as decent
who do never lie, mistake or disobey. Since the Prophet's companionship
is not a divine prophesy, the general frame does not occlude the Sahaba
from mistaking.

### How should we discriminate the indecent Sahaba?

1. Existence of the right and its jurisprudential formulation the
mission of which is covering areas of deeds and intendments.

The right is present. The jurisprudential formulation of the right is
Islam; the Holy Quran and the Prophet's traditions; words, deeds and
signature. These things, all told, form the jurisprudential formulation
that is “falsehood does not come to it from face or back.” It is the
religion of Allah. He has accepted for His slaves. It is His revelation
and formulation.

2. Existence of a divine authority who listens to the whole opinions
and, in turn, whose decision is the conclusion at discrepancies. He
should be the guide of liberties, coordinator of activities and director
to the right. He is the leader.

This role was played by the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
in epoch of prophesy. He nominated Ali as his successor. He stated: “He,
Ali, is your leader after me. He is the leader of every male and female
believer. He whose leader was I, Ali is his. O Allah! Accede to him that
who accedes to Ali, and oppose him that who opposes Ali.” This is a
factual truth none at all, including Muawiya himself, can deny. Later
on, documentation of this truth is to be proved.

3. Inspecting the occurrences and events so objectively and topically
that researchist's very goal is same as God's.

4. The intellect that can well assume the jurisprudential formulation,
apply it and provide fruits of this process to the divine authority.

### Submission to the Authority Nominated By the Prophet is the Clue to Decency

Ali­bn­Abi­Talib was the first man who embraced Islam. He is the
favorite to Allah and His Apostle's brother. He is father of the
Prophet's grandsons and husband of Al­Betoul. He is commander of the
military operations against polytheism, the unprecedented knight of
Islam and the killer of foes of the religion. He is the grand veracious
and the leading distinguisher — between right and wrong, as I am to
prove by divine texts. He is son of Abu­Talib, the only one who
protected the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) before the
immigration, and head of the Hashemites who was

blocked by the entire Arab tribes in Cols Abu­Talib for three continuous
years. This was done for a single purpose. The Hashemites should give up
the Prophet and withdraw from protecting him against people of Quraish.

Muawiya, on the other side, is the ‘released’[55] son of the ‘released’,
Abu­Sufian, who led the parties and fought the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) in all of battles. He tried to assassinate the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) and led armies and waves of
hostility against him. He is son of Hind, the lady who, in addition to
cogitating the perfidious assassination of Hamzeh, tore his abdomen and
deformed his corpse. Altogether with his father, Muawiya spared no art
for sake of fighting against the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) till the conquest of Mecca. In that conquest, those individuals
were surrounded and could find no way other than surrender. He was one
of those who are classified as the inclined­hearted category who were
given a part of the alms for the sake of encouraging them to embrace
Islam.

### The Decent Sahaba

All the Sahaba who supported Ali are decent. Thanks to God, they are
forming majority of the Prophet's companions and those who regretfully
opposed him, such as Talha and Az­Zubeir who obeyed him satisfactorily
before their decease. It is a sufficient honor for Islam to declare that
there were only two persons from among the Ansar who supported Muawiya.
Were Abu­Bakr alive, he would support him. Were Omar, who said: “He is
my master and the master of every male and female believer.”, alive he
would join him. O Allah! Be pleased to them and reward them what they do
desire.

Regarding supporters of Muawiya and his father, they are those involved
in this research debated with the doctrinal means. They are, at any
rate, the lowest class of the Sahaba, terminologically and lexically.
For none but them, the Sahaba's ultimate decency conception was
invented. This was for finding legal excuses to their deeds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[55] The released are groups of people of Mecca who insisted on
polytheism till the conquest of Mecca when they were released by the
Prophet after they had been captured.

### Models of the Sluggish Iraqi and Syrian Individuals

Al­Mas'udi records: A Syrian man was asked about Abu­Turab whom is
continuously cursed by the Imam — Muawiya — from the pulpits. “I see he
is one of the robbers!!”

Al­Jahizh records: During his journey to the ritual pilgrimage, a man
was advised to be as near as possible to the Holy House of God. “So, who
will come out and speak to me then?”

A man asked his companion who was saying ‘Bless be upon Mohammed and his
household.’: “Who is that Mohammed? He is our Lord, isn't he?”

Thumameh­bn­Ashres records: I was passing by in Baghdad when I noticed a
man encompassed by a great assemblage. I rode off to see the matter. It
was a man advertising for a kind of alcohol. He was alleging that that
alcohol is the effective remedy of any eye disease. As I glanced at the
man, I found that he had been diseased in his two eyes. “O man! Your
eyes would have been cured had your advertisement been true!” I shouted
at him. He looked at me and said: “O you ignorant! My eyes were not
diseased here. They were diseased in Egypt!” The whole assemblage
expressed their full believing in the advertiser's argument. So, I could
hardly escape from their sandals that played on my body!

Another narrative: People used to attend our sessions during which we
were discussing affairs of Abu­Bakr, Omar, Muawiya and Ali. One day, the
head and the most knowledgeable among those people showed his disgust
from daily repetition of that subject. “What about your opinion, sir?” I
asked the man. “About which one of them?” he asked. “About Ali.” I
defined. He said: “Is he not that man, the father of Fatima?” he
wondered. “Which Fatima?” I shouted. “She was the Prophet's wife,
A'isheh's daughter, Muawiya's sister.” The man declared. “Well, what
about Ali, then?” I asked. “A man killed in battle of Hunein with the
Pro phet (peace be upon him and his family)!” The man said.[56]

### Those Who Complied to Muawiya

“They obeyed him so sincerely that he led them in the collective Friday
Prayer held on Wednesday just before they reached Siffine, the battle
field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[56] These narratives were quoted from Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb,
vol.3, page, 39­41.

They borrowed him their heads making them the fortress against him. They
referred to Amr­bn­Al­Aas in the claim that Ammar­bn­Yasir had been
killed by Ali since the latter sought his support in the battle. This
obedience transferred among their generations and attained the acme when
they made course of cursing Ali a norm at which they were brought
up.”[57]

This is the style adopted by such decent Sahaba in elucidating facts. It
was Ali­bn­Abi­Talib who killed Ammar­bn­Yasir!! This is the style
adopted by such decent individuals for teaching people their religion
and identifying Mohammed's virtuous companions; men on whose shoulders
Islam was established!!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[57] This statement is quoted from Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb, vol.3,
page39.
