Part 2 — Chapter 1— the Tribal Root — the Impermissibility To Combine Caliphate and Prophesy
============================================================================================

### A. the Clans of Quraish

The Quraish consist of twenty five clans.[1] The best and the most
honorable clan is the sons of Hashim­bn­Abd Menaf.[2] They are directly
followed by the sons of Abdul­Muttelib­bn­Abd Menaf,... Al­Harith­bn­Abd
Menaf,..., Umaya­bn­Abd Shams­bn­Abd Menaf and Nawfel­bn­Abd Menaf
respectively. The Hashemites are the celebrities of Quraish. They
succeeded their father in management. They are named ‘Al­Mujebbirun —
The healers’. They are regarded as the foremost in holding peace
treaties with the kings of that time. Hashim held a peace treaty with
the kings of Syria. Abd Shams held an alike one with Nejashi, the king
of Abyssinia. Nawfel held an alike one with the kings of Persia.
Abdul­Muttelib held an alike one with the kings of Himyer; Yemen.
According to such treaties, people of Quraish could settle in various
areas of this world. For the high standing and the mastery of the
Hashemites upon the Arabs, they were called ‘Aqdahun­Nedhar — Cups of
Gold.’[3]

### B. the Political Form

The Quraishi clans concluded a political form respecting distributing
positions, such as the leadership, the pennon, the assemblies, watering
the pilgrimages, hosting the guests... etc. This form was the furthest
thing the clans could achieve. They, as a whole, were convinced that
that had been too satisfactory to abuse any one's rights. The political
positions are estimated as the fate of those clans that it is none's
benefit to alter or change, since it is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1]Al­Mas'udi's Muroujut­Theheb, Vol.2, Page291. [2] Burhanud­Din
Al­Halabi's As­Seeretul­Halabiyeh, part.1, page3­4. Ali Nasseef's
Al­Jami'u Lil­Ussoul Fi Ahadithir­Rassoul, vol.3, page419 and on.
bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagheh, Sermon 185, part.2. [3]
bn­Sa'd's Tabaqat, part.1, page75. An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam, page93.

impossible to recognize the consequences of such attempts of altering or
changing. It might, at least, result in losing what had been achieved.
The entire clans, in addition, were pleased to such a form that arranged
the affairs of the pilgrimage and the Holy House. Gradually these
positions and missions became a significance of a political belief and a
heritage of the forefathers. It became impermissible for any to stand
against such missions.

### C. Endeavors for Shaking the Form

In the years of starvation, Hashim was the only individual who committed
himself to providing food to people. He was named the master of Bat'ha.
His food­tables were spread in times of amenity and distress. He was
wont to host the guests and the passersby and secure the troubled.[4]
Umaya­bn­Abd Shams feared and envied him. He failed in imitating Hashim;
therefore, the other Quraishi people criticized and imputed dishonor to
him. Hashim rejected his challenge to argue about the more honorable of
them. Owing to Umaya's insistence, he accepted it. They agreed that the
loser should undergo fifty she­camels and banished. As the arbiter ruled
of Hashim's being more honorable, fifty she­camels of Umaya were
slaughtered and he was deported to Syria. This was the first seed of
hostility between the sons of Hashim and those of Umaya. It seems that
the motive beyond Umaya's challenge was his envying Hashim and the
apprehension that he would be a serious danger against the political
form according to which the sons of Abd Shams had been the leaders.
Furthermore, He might have realized that the fame of Hashim would shake
the form as a whole and would, as a result, cause people to follow
him.[5]

### D. the Augury of Prophesy

In Mecca, it was commonly spread that soon there would be a prophet to
be assigned by God, and that he would be a successor of Abd Menaf.
Abu­Sufian was one of those who believed in this foretelling and worked
depending on it. He established distinguishable relations with
Abdullah­bn­Abis­Salt. According to his conception, Abu­Sufian was
certain that the intended prophet should cancel the political form — of
the Quraishi clans, the leadership of which was in his hand. Hence, this
prophet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[4] At­Tabari's Tarikh, part.2, page180. As­Seeretul­Halabiyeh, part.1,
page5. bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat, part.1, page76. [5] As­Seeretul­Halabiyeh,
part.1, page15, and An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam, page170­1.

would be forming the most hazardous factor against the sons of Umaya.
After a long period of panic and suffering, he could have a term of
tranquillity since he believed that the prophet would be a successor of
Abd Menaf, and there was none, from among the successors of Abd Menaf,
fitter than him in undergoing such a mission.[6] On that account, he
should certainly be the very one intended.

### E. the Declaration of Prophesy

Mohammed, the successor of Hashim, declared his being the anticipated
prophet whom had been favored by God for leading the Arabs and the
mankind to the right path. He declared that the evidence of his prophesy
had been God's words. A little group of eloquent individuals and those
who were harshly treated in this world, followed Mohammed.

### F. the Hashimites' Guarding Mohammed

With all their forces, the Hashemites embraced Mohammed. The leaders of
Quraish threatened that they would kill him. In fact, they spread a
rumor of Mohammed's being killed. Abu­Talib gathered the Hashemite men
and gave each a hard bar. Walking with the sons of Hashim and his,
Abu­Talib raised his voice at the people of Quraish: “O people of
Quraish! Do you realize what I am to do?” “No, we do not.” they
answered. Abu­Talib ordered his people to show what they were keeping in
their hands. Each showed the hard bar he had. Abu­Talib commented: “By
God I swear, if you kill him — Mohammed — I will never keep any of you
alive unless we both are terminated.” Accordingly, people of Quraish
were defeated. Abu­Jahal countered the largest share of that defeat.[7]

### G. Not for the Favor of the Pagans, It Was Envy, and Preserving the Political Form

Led by Abu­Sufian, the other clans of Quraish exerted all their efforts
for the sake of facing Mohammed. Nevertheless, they could not intercept
him. For countering the importunity and the rejection of the Hashemites,
the clans of Quraish unanimously agreed on the following decisions:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[6] As­Seeretul­Halabiyeh, part.1, page80. [7] bn­Sa'd's At­Tabaqat,
part.1, page202­3.

1. Issuing a total boycott against the Hashemites. The Quraishi clans,
including Teim and Edi, ostracized the Hashemites. They restricted them
in the Cols of Abu­Talib for three continuous years. The Hashemites,
during that period, had to have from the leaves of the trees due to the
starvation they suffered. Their children, likewise, had to suck the
sands due to their thirstiness. This is an indisputable fact that is as
clear as sunlight. Neither Mohammed nor did the Hashemites submit to the
Quraishi people. Finally, God refuted the trickeries of the Quraishi
people and leaders. After a three year boycott, the blockade proved its
failure.

2. As they realized that Mohammed would soon immigrate to Yathrib, where
he could find supporters and could establish a base for his advocacy,
the clans of Quraish decided unanimously to kill him. They selected a
man from each tribe so that they would strike him together that his
blood would be distributed among the entire tribes equally. The purpose
beyond such a cabal was obliging the Hashemites to miss out any
opportunity to revenge Mohammed. They believed that Mohammed would
achieve his goals and, in sequence, divest them from their leadership
and authority, if he reached in Yathrib.

They applied this cabal so accurately, but they were astonished when
they found Ali­bn­Abi­Talib sleeping in Mohammed's bed. The leaders of
Mecca became so perturbed that they offered big prizes as a remuneration
for those who would be able to capture Mohammed, alive or dead.

In the other side, Mohammed, his companion and the guide were pushing
their way to Yathrib in safe, by God's will. This is an indiscussible
fact that is as clear as sunlight.[8]

### H. Not for the Favor of the Pagans, the Wars Were Due to Envy and Preserving the Political Form

Neither the Quraishi clans led by the Umayids, nor were the Hashemites,
Mohammed and his group despondent from achieving triumph against the
adversary party. The Arabs were three parties; one was supporting people
of Quraish and their joint commandment. The other, even few, was
supporting Mohammed. The third was waiting for the outcome for
supporting the victorious. In Badr and Uhud, wars broke up between the
two parties. A

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[8] As­Seeretul­Halabiyeh, part.1, page80 and 332.

third war broke out when the leadership of the Quraishis raised armies
and allied the Jews forming the multipartite army. They advanced towards
Al­Madina, the Prophet's capital. Precisely, these multipartite armies
failed. A while later, the Quraishi were surprised by the armies of God
in Mecca, their capital. Hence, the leaders of Quraish were submitted
and they had to embrace Islam. Owing to this submission, the entire
Arabs were dominated by the Prophet's government and, consequently, they
embraced Islam in groups.

### I. the Hashemite Prophesy is An Inescapable Fate

Sparing no single sort of rejection and resistance, the clans of
Quraish, led by the Umayids, opposed the religion established by
Mohammed, the Hashemite. Apart from their loyalty to their pagans, the
main reason beyond this resistance was their abhorrence that a Hashemite
would be the one to whom this religion had been revealed. They disliked
the Hashemites’ leadership. The shade of the old political form was
another motive towards their resisting this advocacy.

Finally, Abu­Sufian was surprised by God's soldiers on the doorsteps of
Mecca. Al­Abbas detains him so that he should see God's soldiers with
his own eyes. “I have never seen such a domination alike of which is not
existed neither at Khosrow, Caesar nor the Romans.” expresses
Abu­Sufian.[9] Before the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family),
Abu­Sufian is dragged by Al­Abbas. “O Abu­Sufian! Woe is you! Is it not
the appropriate time to realize that there is no god but Allah?” the
Prophet addresses at him. “I do conceive that Allah would not affect me
in any sort if there was another god besides Him.” answers Abu­Sufian.
“O Abu­Sufian!” the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) reasks,
“Is it not the proper time to realize that I am the messenger of God?”
“Regarding this, my soul, by God, cannot receive it completely!” admits
Abu­Sufian. Al­Abbas shouts: “Woe is you, Abu­Sufian! Declare your being
Muslim and admit that there is no god but Allah and Mohammed is surely
the messenger of Allah, lest you shall be beheaded.” Only after
mentioning beheading, surrounding and hopelessness, Abu­Sufian declares
his being Muslim for nothing other than saving his soul. He was gazing
at the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) surprisingly when he
said to himself: “By which weapon did this man

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[9] As­Seeretul­Halabiyeh, part.3, page79 and on. An­Nidhamus­Siyasi
Fil­Islam.

overcome?” God, informed His Apostle of Abu­Sufian's wonderment;
therefore, he came to him and said: “By Allah I overcame.”[10]

Thus and so, the Quraishi clans realized the following facts:

The Hashemite prophesy is an inescapable and determined fate.

They, as clans, had no role, at all, in this preference. They would
never agree upon this option if only they had any role in the operation.

The prophesy is a one time phenomenon.

No single clan of Quraish will be catching or joined to the Hashemites.

The political form was not only shaken, but also was it completely
blasted.

Hence, the Quraishi clans worked furtively for occluding this
(Hashemite) advancement towards governing the royalty besides the
prophesy, the matter which results in gaining the integrity as a whole.

### J. the most enthusiast clan towards occluding the Hashemite advancement

The clans of Quraish, altogether, believed that the Hashemite prophesy
had certainly shook the political form of distributing roles of
celebrity among them in an unprecedented form. Saving the
Al­Muttelib­bn­Abd Menaf who supported the Hashemites, the Quraishi
clans, as a whole, rejected this Hashemite prophesy. The Umayids,
however, were the most enthusiast and denying against this Hashemite
advancement. They did their best for the sake of intercepting the
Hashemite from joining headship to the divine prophesy. The following
are some of the reasons beyond such an enthusiastic situation:

1. Before Islam, the Umayids were engaged in considerable hostility,
enmity and envy against the Hashemites.

2. Owing to the Hashemites' prophesy, the Umayids lost the headship they
had enjoyed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[10] ibid.

3. It was the Hashemites who killed the chiefs of the Umayids. Utbeh,
Al­Waleed and Sheibeh were killed by Hamzeh, Ali and Ubeidullah. In
addition to their abhorrence, the Umayids bore malice to the Hashemites.
The amount of this malice is evidently reflected by Hind, Muawiya’s
mother and Abu­Sufian’s wife. Being not sufficed by killing Hamzeh, she
corrupted his celibate corpse. On account of the victory and the
expansion of Mohammed's prophesy, besides the Umayids retardation to
join Islam and their long and famous history in antagonizing, they could
not have any opportunity to declare their plan of intercepting the
Hashemites from gaining the authority, beside the prophesy, of this
nation.

### K. The Preeminent Trend

The notion of the unacceptability for the Hashemites to join headship to
prophesy became the preeminent trend, although it was stable only in the
hidden because of the presence of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family), the dominion of legality and the unification of the Prophet's
virtuous companions. As soon as any of these three factors is missed,
the legality will be shaken and the virtuous companions will be (the
like of a single white hair in a black bull's skin) as Muawiya
describes. The authority, then, will be the prevailing's.

### L. The Immaculate Kinship is the Statutory Base of Caliphate

The following is the argument of the three Muhajirs — immigrants to
Yathrib — in the Saqeefa of Bani­Sa'ideh:

Abu­Bakr stated: “We are the Prophet's clan while you are his
supporters. Thus, you are our supporters in this religion.”

Omar stated: “Two swords cannot be put in the same sheath. Nay, by God.
The Arab shall never accept your being the leaders while the Prophet is
another clan's. The Arab should never select but those from whom the
prophesy came forth. The evident argument and the manifest evidence is
ours against our opposers. Who dare to litigate with us about the
authority and the heritage of Mohammed while we are his backers and
people? None but the wrong, the sinful or the involved in a disaster may
do so.”[11]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[11] Al­Imametu Wes­Siyaseh, pages 6, 7, 8.

The Ansar — the supporters; people of Yathrib who supported the Prophet
and his followers — shouted in one voice: “We shall select none other
than Ali.” Ali, however, was absent. Some of the Ansar shouted: “We
shall select none other than Ali.”[12]

Without any respite, the matter of Mohammed's succession became in the
hands of As­Siddiq, Abu­Bakr. As he was called for declaring his fealty
to Abu­Bakr, Ali stated: “I am the most rightful in this affair. I am
not to submit to your leadership. It is you whom are to be submitted to
my leadership. You seized it from the Ansar claiming of the Prophet's
kinship. Now, you intend to seize it from the Prophet's household
coercively?! Have you not argued before the Ansar that you are more
rightful in holding this affair of leadership due to your relation to
the Prophet? And they complied to your claim and gave it to you. Now, I
do provide the very same argument before you; we are the most rightful
in enjoying the Prophet's authority and heritage in and after his life..
etc.”

### M. The Rebellion and the Dissipation of the Preeminent Trend

Bed­ridden, Omar were engaged in planning for the future of Mohammed's
nation. Evading no single face, he stated: “Had Abu­Ubeideh,
Me'ath­bn­Jabal, Khalid­bn­Al­Waleed or Salim the slave of Abu­Hutheifeh
been alive, I would have nominated as my successor.

Salim is a non­Arab slave whose lineage is unknown. Me'ath is one of the
Ansar whom were not permitted to have the authority in the meeting of
Saqeefa. Khalid is from Bani­Makhzum. He is a ten class companion since
he immigrated in the period between the Hudeibiyeh peace treaty and the
conquest of Mecca.

Once, in his reign, Omar argued bn­Abbas: “O bn­Abbas! Do you realize
the reason beyond your people's neglecting your nominating for managing
the Islamic state?” Evading the anticipated consequences, bn­Abbas
escaped from the answer. “Well, Amirul­Mu’minin! If I ignore the answer,
you are definitely in full awareness of it.” commented bn­Abbas. “Your
people disliked the matter that you would have the prophesy and the
authority altogether and then, you would have been unjust to them.
People of Quraish selected for themselves. Indeed, they succeeded as
they opted for the right

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[12] At­Tabari's At­Tarikh, part.3, page, 198. bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu
Nahjil­Belagheh, part.2, page266.

one.” expressed Omar. “O Amirul­Mu’minin!” bn­Abbas worded, “May I speak
provided that you shall not be irate?” “Yes, you may.” permitted Omar.
bn­Abbas signified: “Regarding your saying (People of Quraish selected
for themselves. Indeed, they succeeded as they opted for the right
one.), they would have been right absolutely and without litigant if
only they had clung to what God had opted for. Regarding your saying:
(Your people disliked the matter that you would have the prophesy and
the authority altogether.), God, the Exalted, described a people who
disliked; saying: (That is because they hated what Allah revealed, so he
rendered their deeds null.)” “Far it is, bn­Abbas!” replied Omar, “I
have been informed of some news about you, but I do not like to
discipline you about so that your status would not be lessened.”
bn­Abbas answered: “O Amirul­Mu’minin! My status at you must not have
been lessened in case these news were true, otherwise, I am one of those
who obviated the ill deeds from approaching towards their entities.”
Omar said: “Well, I was informed of your claim that the general
authority had been taken away from you, Mohammed's clan, due to envy,
aggression and injustice.” “Respecting the injustice,” responded
bn­Abbas, “it had been realized by the level­headed, as well as the
ill­minded. Respecting envy, Adam was envied, and we are his envied
sons.” “Far it is. Far it is.” expressed Omar, “Your hearts, sons of
Hashim, are filled in with an immovable envy.” bn­Abbas answered: “Slow
down, Amirul­Mu’minin! Do you impute such a description to hearts that
God has (kept away uncleanness from them and purified them a thorough
purification?)”[13]

The event recorded by Al­Mas'udi in his Muroujut — Theheb, regarding the
conversation of Omar and bn­Abbas, does reveal the intellectual
rebellion and the disclosure of the preeminent trend which was hidden
during the Prophet's lifetime before the foundation of the caliphate.
The following is a literal quotation of this narrative:

The literal quotation of this narrative
---------------------------------------

bn­Abbas related: I responded Omar's summon. I was before him when he
addressed at me: “O bn­Abbas! The governor of Hims has just died. He was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[13] Ibnul­Atheer's Al­Kamilu Fit­Tarikh, part.3, page24.
bn­Abil­Hadid's Sharhu Nahjil­Belagheh, part.3, page107. Tarikhu
Baghdad, recorded by Ahmed Abul­Fadhl Bin Abit­Tahir. bn­Abil­Hadid's
Sharhu Nahjil­Belagheh, vol.2, page97. An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam,
page141.

one of the rare virtuous people. Except for the matter I have against
you, I do regard you with those rare virtuous ones. Do you accept my
offer to be the governor of Hims?” “I will not work for you unless you
tell of the matter you have against me.” I said unto him. “What for are
you asking so?” asked Omar. “I do desire to know it. I will be cautious
if it is a real thing, and if not, I will realize that I do not have it.
Then, I will accept your offer. I noticed you have hardly asked for a
matter with respite.” I answered. Omar expressed: “O bn­Abbas! I
anticipate that I will face my fatal chance while you are keeping your
position, then you may call people to select you as the new leader. I
noticed the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had neglected
assigning you, his household, in any position.” “Yes, by God. I noticed
so, too. Do you realize the reason?” I wondered. “I do not know exactly.
Was it for the reason that he had been too cautious to give you official
positions to which you are certainly authorized, or was it for that he
anticipated that you would be elected for the leadership because of your
relation to him? Only then, blame would fall. Inevitably, blame shall
fall. That is it. What do you see now?” commented Omar. “I see I should
not accept this position.” I said. “What for?” questioned Omar. “I shall
be a permanent mote in your eyes as long as you bear this opinion...”

Even after his decease, Omar, the excessively careful for the Muslims'
interests, must be sure that the Hashemites shall never be having
dominion over people, and shall never be ruling Mohammed's nation.

In general, the saying of the abomination of the Hashemites' joining
headship to prophesy was changed into a preeminent trend. This trend
could find a ground to show and impose itself as a common conception
adopted by the authorities and the priority of people. It is considered
as the ultimate way against the Hashemite injustice and the apt course
that enables the Quraishi clans to enjoy headship respectively as a
compensation to be undergone by the authorities of the Hashemite
prophesy. As Al­Faruq describes: “This conception is one of the
appearances of the divine discrimination of Quraish. By inducing
Abu­Sufian to the ruling regime, giving him the right to dispose in the
alms he had levied, nominating Yazeed, his son, as the commander of the
army of Syria and nominating Muawiya, his other son, as a commander and,
then, as the governor of Syria; all these procedures resulted in the
formation of a factual alliance between the ruling regime and the
‘released.’ Both parties have the same access to intercept the
Hashemites from joining headship to prophesy. This alliance eradicated
the opposition and worked seriously for rehearsing the conception of the
impermissibility

of the Hashemites’ joining headship to prophesy.

Thus, the Prophet's immaculate household, besides their having been
completely deposed and blocked, lost every thing including the privilege
of honorability granted by the political form according to which Mecca
was ruled before Islam. This seems clear in Al­Faruq's saying to
bn­Abbas: “By God, we did not refer to you due to need, but we disliked
you to object against the matter on which people agreed unanimously.
That would cause them, as well as you, suffer catastrophic
consequences.”

The degree of humiliating the Prophet's progeny attained such a great
level that even Abdullah­bn­Az­Zubeir menaced to put the Hashemites'
houses on fire with their inhabitants. Without the intercession of some
virtuous individuals, this would have happened.

This proposes that every clan among those who imposed a blockade on the
Hashemites in the Cols of Abu­Talib for three continuous years, and
participated in the congregational cabal of assassination against the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), became in a state better
than that enjoyed by the Hashemites themselves. Likewise, every
individual of such clans became more rightful in coming to power than
the Hashemites. Headship and authority is practically licit for every
one except the Hashemites. All these procedures were taken for one goal
only; occluding the Hashemites from joining headship to prophesy. Is the
reward of goodness ought but goodness?!

### N. Statutory Ground of Intercepting the Hashemites from Joining Headship to Prophesy Conception

Totally, the conception is uncivilized. It is completely contradictory
to the divine texts and the political regulations derived from the
divine beliefs. The Prophet David, was inherited by Solomon, his son.
Both joined headship to prophesy. None objected against the prophets and
their progenies who had been gifted judiciary, prophesy and divine
manuscripts. Privilege is in God's hand. Caliphate is a religious and,
in the first place, mundane position. A Caliph is the prophet's
representative. Stating arguments and setting forth rules that are
completely methodological processes, are the main missions of prophets.

It is effortlessly probationary for the aware of the basic components of
the Islamic political strategy, to recognize that the conception of
intercepting the

Hashemites from joining headship to prophesy has entirely blasted that
strategy, as being divine, and has totally extricated its constituents.
It is also proved that the conception involved has practically changed
it into an ordinary positive strategy that is different from others in
the political form only. Moreover, the leadership of the state became a
prey obtained exclusively by the prevailing whoever he was. After
achieving prevalence, that one occupies the Prophet's chair (reed mat,
in fact), attires the cloak of Islam and, hence, becomes the new caliph.
In case any one of the ‘released’ who fought against Islam as much as
possible till he was surrounded and had to show his being Muslim to save
his soul, prevails, he will openly impose his orders upon the Muhajir
who participated in every battle supporting the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family). Similarly, God's representative who is, according
to divine regulations and texts, the president of the Islamic state will
become an ordinary citizen under the authority of such a ‘released’.
Thus, for the sake of seeking justice of the other clans and
intercepting the Hashemites from joining headship to prophesy or, in
other words, reviving the old political form of distributing missions in
a new dress, the illiterate ruled and the learned's mouth was shut up.

As the old political form distributed missions among the clans, the new
one, when applied, ranted such clans to come to power in turn and, in
the same time, to share positions of headship. Regarding the divine
regulations appertained to the Islamic political strategy, they were
reckoned with other irrelevant topics since they were unfitting the
political form established before Islam.

### O. Effects of Practicing the Conception of Intercepting the Hashemites from Joining Headship to Prophesy

#### The First Effect

The first effect was the total disappearance of the discrimination
between those who fought against Islam and those who fought for its sake
till triumph was achieved. From the political side, the two categories
are Muslims of the same credit. Consequently, the all shall be in the
same Paradise. The Hashemite individual, in a like manner, who was
occluded in Cols of Abu­Talib for three years, is not different from
that previously polytheist who imposed this blockade upon him since he
declared his being Muslim!! Islam does erase what precedes it! Had
Hamzeh been alive again, he should have been as same as Wahshi — his
killer. This is from the

practical political side. The killer and his victim are enjoying the
very same rank. The Muhajir and the ‘released’ are enjoying the very
same rank, too. The same is said about the illiterate and the most
learned. Supposing this illiterate predominates, it shall be politically
obligatory upon that most learned to obey and comply to. This is not
regularly; on the assumption there is a most learned Hashemite, like
Ali­bn­Abi­Talib, to compete with an Ansari with a less degree of
knowledge, the latter will certainly be preferred. This is evident from
Al­Faruq's following saying: “Had Me'ath­bn­Jabal or Khalid­bn­Al­Waleed
been alive, I would have nominated as the caliph.” This was said with
the presence of Ali­bn­Abi­Talib! Besides the battle of Uhud, Khalid
fought against Islam in many positions, while Ali fought for the sake of
Islam in all of its positions. Nonetheless, Khalid is preferred.
Al­Faruq, also would have opted for Salim, the slave of Abu­Hutheifeh,
if only he had been alive. He would have made this non­Arab slave the
chief of Ali­bn­Abi­Talib who is “the master of Omar, Abu­Ubeideh and
every male and female believer,” as Al­Faruq himself had declaratorily
confessed.

#### The Second Effect

The second effect was seeding and sheltering the unceasing discrepancy.
As long as there is no discrimination between the Muhajir and the
‘released’ or the killer and his victim, and it is rightful for every
one to take in Islam according to his idiosyncratic elucidation, this
will result in the existence of various sources of jurisconsultance,
notions and independent impressions. Hence, every party claims of being
the right, and takes a path not taken by others. With the absence of a
leading jurisconsult, whose judgments are followed by the all
considering it as juristic doubtless evidences, the seed of
discrepancies was planted in a fertile land. Supposing Ali and one of
the ‘released’ judge in a certain issue, the receiver of these two
judgments will be having the full prerogative to opt for any. This is by
the reason that practically they, Ali and the ‘released’, are
indiscriminately Muslims of the same rank. They both shall be in the
same Paradise. So, both are Sahaba. Practically also, there is no
statutory preference for Ali's judgment; how, then, is it to make
preference between the equal, or how is it to make a distinction between
the completely alike? In the same manner, to take any of the two pieces
of gold that are having the very same size, shape, amount and value, is
practically acceptable. Making any discrimination is a cautioned matter.
The harmony involved is external, while the discrepancy is developing
under that exterior. Sooner or later, this discrepancy will certainly be
grown into a fatal malignancy that shall tear the unification of

this nation and pull them out of their frame into mystery and the
unknown.

#### The Third Effect

The third effect was excluding the Hashemites particularly from coming
to power. This meant that there was no obstacle at all against any
Muslim to have the leadership of the Islamic state, provided that this
position could be attained by any means including the illegal. This
gives the opportunity to come to power using any methods if it becomes
liable to subject people. A condition that forms an obstruction against
this process is the belongness to the Hashemites, whom were exclusively
granted with prophesy. So, they are fully sufficed with prophesy.

This general privilege turned the avarice for authority into a horrible
nightmare and an irksome approach that made the nation lose their
decision and settlement, and an experimental program for all those who
looked forward to coming to power. Owing to such a privilege, the
constitutional political strategy of the Islamic state became off.
Regarding discerning this new ruler's lineage, knowledgeability, beliefs
or preference to Islam; these matters became a second class affairs that
are practically valueless and no­good since the predominating ruler has
already prevailed, and the prevailed's satisfaction is a matter of an
idiosyncratic interest.

Thus, what should prevent Yazeed, the notorious lascivious, from being
the head of the state since he is the son of Muawiya, the former chief?
What should prevent Al­Hussein­bn­Ali­bn­Abi­Talib who is, according to
categorical divine texts, (the master of the youth of the Paradise,)
(the dweller of the Paradise,) (the Prophet's basil) and (the
constitutional Imam of this nation), from being an ordinary citizen in
Yazeed's state? Both, Al­Hussein and Yazeed are Muslims of the same rank
that shall be in the Paradise. Yazeed, the murderer, and Al­Hussein, the
victim, will both be in the same Paradise. Both are Sahabi!! Those who
criticize this notion are miscreants whom should be neither shared in
food or drink nor offered the funeral Prayer when they perish!!

#### The Fourth Effect

The fourth effect is confusedness. The good has been confused with the
bad, the right with the wrong, the sweet with the bitter. The precedent
became as same rank as the tardy, the attacker as same rank as the
absconder, the killer as same rank as his victim and the supporter of
Islam as same rank as the

antagonist. They all embraced Islam and saw or were seen by the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family); therefore, the all are Sahaba, the
all are in the Paradise.

The virtuous ones hid themselves in the numerous provinces of the state
and became “the like of a single white hair in a black bull's skin”, as
Muawiya describes. The Islamic political strategy collapsed. The
preferred became tardy and the tardy preferred. (And Allah's is the end
of affairs.)
