Chapter 2 — Political Roots of the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception
=======================================================================

Islamic political system
------------------------

### A. Contradiction Between Idealism and Reality

There is a complete difference between the Islamic political system
adopted since the Prophet's decease till the period of the last Ottoman
caliph, and the divine political system constituted by God's revelation
to Mohammed, His slave, for managing Muslims' affairs in every time.

Insisting on the factual existence of such a difference, we, hereby, are
to prove that there is a diversity among persons and reigns regarding
size of this difference. It is trivial to assert on existence of this
difference since it is a matter facilely realized by every sane provided
that partisan imitation is abandoned. If the Islamic political system,
with its divine form and contents, had been literally applied after the
Prophet's decease, the Islamic state would not have collapsed; those
seditious matters and massacres would not have occurred; the Islamic
nation would not have been engaged in discrepancies; the glorious
Islamic extension would not have stopped at this mass and, finally,
Islam would have prevailed this whole globe causing a radical changing
in the mankind history. In his An Experiment In The General History, the
English Philosopher, Wales, one of the most notable thinkers of modern
history, says that Islam would have conquered the whole world if only it
had been kept on its first procession and the seditious matters
avoided.[14] While the Arab scholars — as far as they could conceive —
misthink of caliphate system as the factual Islamic political system
and, hence, they demand with re applying it. It is proved that the
factual Islamic political system is only that applied in the Prophet's
reign. This occurred before the formation of the caliphate system, since
it means succeeding the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).
Considering the Islamic system

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[14]Mahmud Abu­Raya's Sheikhul­Madheera, page173.

is caliphate; what was, then, the system applied in the Prophet's reign?
Certainly, the political system applied in the Prophet's reign was the
actual divine Islamic political system. This was utterly applied before
the formation of caliphate. It is the origin and the ideal. Other
strategies are not more than branches or forms of that ideal, which can
be extended or acclimatized according to remoteness or closeness to the
original.

### B. the Islamic Political System

The Islamic political system is that applied by the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) during his divine solicitation for organizing
relations with his followers. As this solicitation was developed into a
government, the Prophet applied the same system during his leadership
which lasted for ten years.

God perfected the religion and completed His grace upon people and
explicated absolutely everything before the Prophet's decease. By
extrapolating this system, it is believable to describe it as a divine
system that is prepared and formulated to be the ideal international
system leading to an ideal world. It is indeed divine in its ideal form
and ultimate composition.

### C. Pillars of the Islamic Political System

The Islamic political system is based upon four pillars connected to
each other in such a way that any is impossibly separated from the
others. In case any separation occurs, the system entirely loses its
Islamic characteristics. This is by the reason that these pillars are
the distinguishing feature of the system. Perfection of such pillars is
the only method by which fruits of application of the system are given.

#### 1st Pillar — Political Leadership

As a matter of fact, political leadership in every divine doctrine,
among which is Islam, is nominated or elected directly by God. Applied
to this fact is the prophets David, Solomon and Mohammed. It was none
but God, the Elevated, who selected them as prophets and presidents of
states of God's oneness. This divine decision is notified directly or
indirectly. An instance on the indirect notification of God's selection
is Saul, when elected as the Israelites’ political leader. One of the
Israelite prophets declared God's decision of electing Saul as the
assigned king. They protested claiming that

Saul had not been fit enough for such a position. God revealed the many
reasons owing to which this man was elected. Among these was Saul's
superlative objective and physical competence. In addition, preference
is God's concern; he, the Elevated, does know to whom He should give.
Another example — on the indirect notification of God's selection — is
God's nominating Ali­bn­Abi­Talib as the successor of Mohammed, the
leader of the nation. This preference had been widespreadly declared by
Mohammed in the sight and hearing of one hundred thousand Muslims. That
was in the Prophet's last ritual pilgrimage; the Farewell Pilgrimage.

#### Purpose Of The Divine Election For Political Leadership

As regard to the question of leadership, the pure impeccable necessity
of ordinary people is having the most learned, the most favorable and
the fittest in positions of authority. Realizing such an individual with
such qualifications, that are hidden for everybody, is an impracticable
matter. Hence, God, as a sort of His mercy to His believing creatures,
has shown them the very intended individual provided that they are
honest in their searching for the most qualified. Leadership, as a
matter of fact, is a technical process of specialization. In most cases,
it is succession of prophesy. Guidance, advocacy, solicitation,
wide­heartedness and decisive judgments parallel to the exact divine
purpose beyond the entire rules of the divine juristic policy, are
considerable qualifications of prophesy. It is not pertinent to commit
these affairs to people's various fancies and tempers.

This pillar, in truth, is the only practical factor that demarcates the
Islamic political system among other positive ones. Allowing conjecture
and guess, positive strategies decide according to people's intents and
humors in matter of electing the fittest for political leadership. This
election will not be resulted from perfect precision that is exclusively
gained by following the divine approach.

#### 2nd Pillar — Organic Relationship Between Divine Doctrine And Selected Leaders

Thoroughly every divine manuscript is revealed to an individual, every
divine guidance is committed to a director and every divine missive is
revealed to selected messenger. Depending on so, relation between the
divine manuscripts, guidance and missives, from one side, and the
individuals, directors and messengers, from the other side, is organic
in such

a way that it cannot be incoherent.

It is inevitable to substantiate divine manuscript, explicate guidance
and display missive for enabling followers to pursue, as well as
altering the space between the beginning and the end result into a
calling of interpretation and a field of application of the texts
contents. By this operations, a fertile probation that betters and
demonstrates the divine missive, manuscript and guidance will be
progressed. Unless process of prophesy is technical and specialized, God
may convey a copy for each individual. Mohammed, none else, is the
qualified skilled in this field. He is the unique expert in field of
calling for Islam in such a way that is fully concurrent to the divine
intendment of the whole texts. He is the most learned of the divine
missive, script and guidance, the superior follower and the fittest
political leader who directs his followers pursuant to policies of the
divine revelation. He whom is nominated by the Prophet, according to
God's divine order, is the unshared authorized for keeping perpetuity of
the organic relation between the divine doctrine and its political
leadership.

#### 3rd Pillar — The Divine Jurisprudential Formulation

According to the Islamic political system, the Imam — political leader —
is restricted to the divine jurisprudential formulation. Hence, he does
not enjoy any sort of self-determination in the field of issuing
judgments. The Imam's judgment, however, must be fully and identically
concurrent to the divine will in both characterization and components.
The jurisprudential formulation is God's making. It is the operative law
to which every individual under leadership of the Imam — political
leader — is submitted. Repeatedly, the jurisprudential formulation is
not the constituting of the Imam or the mandate people, it is God's
making. As a matter of facts, Mohammed's sayings are not more than forms
of explicating and expounding upon the divine revelation. This is
regarded as another difference between the Islamic political system and
positive ones which are issued and organized by some individuals and
imposed upon followers. The jurisprudential formulation of the Islamic
political system, on the other hand, is made by Allah, and imposed upon
both leaders and followers in the same degree under the supervision of
the Maker, Allah. Those submitted to, implementing and judging the
Islamic system are, on even terms, slaves of God, the Maker. Both are
imposed to the system. Both are to submit to God only.

#### 4th Pillar — The Commonalty's Contentment

The public, usually, count on having an ideal jurisprudential
formulation that is capable of determining general, as well as private,
goals, and capable of delving into the apropos means for attaining such
goals. They, as well, look forward to having the most favorable and
fittest political leader that is most knowledgeable of constituents of
the jurisprudential formulation. In favor of saving people from this
grievance, the Divine Care provided the solution by explicating the most
agreeing jurisprudential formulation. The solution was Islam with all
its components; the Holy Quran and the Prophet's traditions; words,
deeds and signature. The leader who is most familiar with that
jurisprudential formulation, as well as the most favorable and the
fittest, was Mohammed. After Mohammed's decease, the succeeding leader
must be the one nominated by Mohammed according to God's command through
revelation. The same is repeated after the decease of the current
divinely assigned leader.

The public's contentment to this divine characterization of the
jurisprudential formulation, as well as the political leadership, shall
lead to sublime welfare and guidance to the right path. This result is
attained only by accepting the divine characterization which means
applying the formulation and acceding to the leadership. In adversary
conditions, God shall certainly leave the public for undergoing and
suffering penalty of disobedience if they reject the divine mandate,
formulation and leadership by opting for one not assigned and decided by
Allah.

Simplicity of the Islamic System
--------------------------------

How can one realize that he is on the divine right path? It is an
undiscussible rule that he whoever accedes to political leadership
assigned by Allah is with Allah. In a like manner, it is logic that
those who supported Mohammed are forming the party of Allah, while those
antagonizing are the party of the Satan even if they continuously adhere
themselves to performing the duties God has imposed. This is by reason
that acceding and following the divine leadership is the criterion with
respect to which is membership of any of the two previous parties is
determined. The very same thing is said about those who pursue or
antagonize the divine successor of Mohammed.

Following Mohammed was the exact distinction between the truthful and
the liar. There was a great deal of people who performed ritual prayers,

established mosques, gave alms and could find excuses for their failing
to appear in fields of battles led by the Prophet. Yet, they were
decided, by Allah, as hypocrites. This was for nothing other than the
fact that their following Mohammed had been incorrect.

Political Circumstances of Inventing the Sahaba's Ultimate Decency Conception
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Othman­bn­Affan held leadership of the Islamic nation after the
assassination of Al­Faruq. Othman, as a nature, was fond of caring for
his relatives. The Umayids began their journey to throne consecutively.
The caliph himself accredited their being his men and consults; so, he
gathered them around him. Practically, the entire affairs of the state
became in the hands of Marwan­bn­Al­Hakam who, later on, issued the
orders of assassinating Mohammed­bn­Abi­Bakr and his associates, using
the caliph's seal without seeking permission or authorization. This
situation is precisely described in Ali's saying: “After his being
old­aged, Othman, the previous companion of the Prophet, handed his
sword to Marwan directing it as he liked.”

Who was Marwan? He is one of the ‘released’ and classified with the
inclined­hearted group. Those are individuals given a share of the alms
for making their hearts attached to Islam. His father,
Al­Hakam­bn­Al­Aas, was deported out of Al­Madina all over the reigns of
the Prophet, Abu­Bakr and Omar. When Othman came to power, Al­Hakam was
permitted to return to Al­Madina with full respect and dignity. Besides,
he was gifted one hundred thousand dirhams as a compensation.

Abdullah­bn­Abi­Sarh was one of those who played a considerable role in
establishing the Umayid state. He was the governor of Egypt; that rich
province. Who was Abdullah­bn­Abi­Sarh? He was the very one who had
forged lies against God. Therefore, the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) sentenced him to death penalty in absence. It was fully
legally to kill that man whenever found even if he hangs to the Ka'ba's
curtains. (This is recorded in As­Seeretul­Halabiyya, Section: Mecca
Conquest.) On the day of conquest of Mecca, Othman accompanied the man
as he was seeking the Prophet's canceling the death penalty. For a
considerable period, the Prophet kept silence hoping that the man would
be killed by any. None could implement the Prophet's will; thus, he had
to secure him. It is not

unacceptable to say that the seed; Muawiya, that had been planted by
Abu­Bakr — by assigning him as the governor of Syria — had been rooted
in the land firmly. For twenty years, Muawiya kept the position of
governing Syria. He had full authority to do anything in that valuable
land. So, he levied and gifted without supervision.

Marwan, Muawiya, Abdullah­bn­Abi­Sarh and Al­Waleed­bn­Aqaba, the
governor of Kufa who performed the Fajr prayer with four Rak'as — units
of prayer; those four released’ persons were the best students of
Abu­Sufian's school. Even Othman, the caliph, was about to be given a
graduating certificate from that school.

Al­Jawhari records the following: When Othman was named for caliphate,
Abu­Sufian addressed at him: “This affair — authority — was Taim's. They
were originally unfitting. Then, it became in the hands of the Edi's.
They were more unfitting than the previous. Only then it returned to its
proper place and settled for its original people. Yes, like a ball,
receive it and hand it to one another.”

On another occasion, Abu­Sufian addressed at Othman: “My father and
mother I do sacrifice for you! Spend over and do not be the like of
Abu­Hajar. O sons of Umaya! Hand it one another, just like children's
handing a ball one another. By God I swear, there is no Paradise and no
Hell.” Az­Zubeir was attendant in this situation; therefore, Othman had
to rebuke Abu­Sufian. “Is any body else here, my son?” wondered
Abu­Sufian. Az­Zubeir shouted: “Yes, there is. By God I swear, I will
never keep it secret!!”

Precisely, In his Al­Kamil Fit­Tarikh, part3, Chapter: Events Preceding
Othman's Assassination, Ibnul­Atheer records: (Once, Marwan­bn­Al­Hakam
shouted: “Deformed be your faces! Do you intend to strip our
sovereignty?”)

In the last quarter of Othman's caliphate, authoritarian affairs became
absolutely in the hands of the Umayids. It became hardly to see a
province ruled by other than the Umayids, if not the ‘released’. Thus,
it became reasoning that any who would succeed Othman should certainly
be an instrument operated by the Umayids, lest he should engage himself
in a lightless night and an uneven mined land.

As a result of large expansion of the Islamic state, owing to the
conquests,

numbers of the fresh Muslims and pocket beneficiaries of the state
became greatly large. In a like manner, number of the honorable Sahaba
on whose shoulders the Mohammedan government was established was in
continuous deficiency. Thus, the foremost Sahaba became as sparse as a
single white hair in a black bull's skin. As Imam Sharafuddin Al­Amili
expresses: “Sahaba, in that period, became the like of alarmed sheep in
a winter night.” This was because of the abundant catastrophic
misfortunes they had to encounter sooner or later. Muawiya, the crafty,
had full acquaintance of these matters. Before assassination of Othman,
he menaced the Sahaba: “You are as scanty as a black spot in a white
bull's skin.”

The situation became in this form; the whole provinces were loyal to or
governed by the Umayids. Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian, son of the previous
leader of the parties conflicting the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family), and the one suckled by Hind bnt­Utbeh, became the only leader.
He was governor of Syria, center of the circle and guardian of the
Umayids. Besides, he granted himself the right of avenging Othman. In
fact, demanding with taking vengeance of Othman was not more than a game
plan aimed at guaranteeing continuity of the Umayids' rule. It was
certainly a case of continuity of the Umayids' rule which, actually and
practically, began on the day when Abu­Bakr assigned
Yazeed­bn­Abi­Sufian as a governor. All matters went well after
assassination of Omar, and none demanded with taking vengeance. This
rule became firmer and firmer till it attained climax in the last of
Othman's reign. It was turned into a decided sovereignty. This is the
very meaning intended by Marwan's saying: “Deformed be your faces! Do
you intend to strip our sovereignty?”

It became proved that Othman's assassination was forming no crux at all.
So, insistence on condemning the assassinators was not pivot of the
case. This is confirmed by the fact that Muawiya, when became the
authoritative caliph, did not demand with condemning Othman's
assassinator. As a matter of fact, it was a case of domination! For the
Umayids, killing blameless people is not that incompatible matter.
Marwan­bn­Al­Hakam issued a decision of sentencing Mohammed­bn­Abi­Bakr
and his group to death penalty without being condemned to anything.
Muawiya did kill Al­Hadrami whom was accused, by bn­Ziyad, of acceding
to Ali. It was Muawiya who killed Amr­bn­Al­Hamq whose face was
distorted due to his distinctive worship. It was Muawiya who killed
Hijr­bn­Edi and his associates; those godly pious groups who enjoined
good and forbade evil. It was Muawiya who gave authority to bn­Ziyad in
massacring people and crucified them on trunks of date palm trees.
Hence, Muawiya's most important concern is

sovereignty and taking revenge for killing his grandfather, maternal
uncle, cousin and his brother.

Seizing the opportunity of Al­Jamal battle, Muawiya goaded Talha,
Az­Zubeir and A'isheh. He promised Talha and Az­Zubeir to be assigned as
rulers of Basra and Kufa. When they were defeated in this conflict,
Muawiya enlisted for breaking a war against Ali.[15]

In his Muawiya­bn­Abi­Sufian Fil­Mizan, Abbas Mahmud Al­Aqqad says: “A
certain trickery by which wonderful achievements were attained, was
frequently practiced by Muawiya against Muslim, as well as non Muslim,
rivals. This trickery was mainly depending upon ceaseless work of
creating discrepancies and despondency among the adversary party. This
was carried out by throwing seditious matters and arising malice in the
lines of the adversary party. The same trickery was actually used
against people of his family and relatives. He could not tolerate
noticing any concord between any two individuals. The natural
competition between his most remarkable enemies could support him in
accomplishing the trickery of throwing animosity among them.”[16]

Muawiya went on practicing this easygoing plan. He would spare no effort
for creating as much as possible variant trends and parties. He would be
surely described as the sower of discord if he was accurately balanced
historically. The authentic signification of men and deeds is determined
by the straight readers of history especially in matters like some
historians’ accounting the year of Muawiya's full domination of the
Islamic state as ‘year of congruity’. This was because he had been the
direct and main reason beyond Muslim's discrepancies and discord. Owing
to so and the like, it is so unfamiliar to constitute forms of agreement
with the existence of such claims. Being not sufficed by seeding
discrepancies, Muawiya left people in plenteous discrepancies; each
follows a definite norm.[17]

He used Bishr­bn­Arta'a and sent him to Al­Madina where he terrified and
humiliated the Sahaba.[18]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[15] Mahmud Abu­Raya's Sheikhul­Madheera, page174­5. [16] Abbas Mahmud
Al­Aqqad's Muawiya in the balance, page64­6. [17] Al­Qasimi's
Nidhamul­Hukm, and An­Nidhamus­Siyasi Fil­Islam. [18] Mahmud Abu­Raya's
Sheikhul­Madheera, page187­8.

Precisely, by means of killing, destroying, firing, creating
discrepancies and reviling at the Prophet's supporters and companions,
Muawiya could gain people's swear of allegiance. He used the wealth he
had illegally levied and expended in Syria for twenty years, for
solidifying his dominion. One of his strategies was naming a definite
salary to be given to the military officials of the state at nominating
the new caliph.

Disregarding the Announced Goal for Dissenting the Legality
-----------------------------------------------------------

Muawiya and A'isheh, Ummul­Mu'minin, mutinied against the legitimate
caliph demanding with condemning Othman's assassinators. When Muawiya
came to power by force, neither Ummul­Mu'minin nor did he practice or
demand with this affair.

Renaissance After Inadvertence
------------------------------

Although his father and he were among the ‘released’ and they led
conflicts against Islam with an unexampled enthusiasm till they had to
profess Islam for saving their souls, Muawiya, the son of Abu­Sufian,
became the authoritative leader, the representative and the successor of
Mohammed on people.

How had such a revolution occurred? How had the right been defeated? How
had the right become retarded while the wrong advanced? How had the
‘released’ become preferred to the Muhajir? How had those who restricted
Islam become favored to those on whom this restriction fell, for the
sake of Islam?

The most astonishing matter is that the year in which strength defeated
legality has been named ‘year of congruity.’ Thus and so, the virtuous
people failed. They were heavily depressed as they felt of deep sorrow
and nonsuccess. Anyhow, it was too late to repent. They had matters
within their hands. As is they were living in an inadvertence, they wake
up on effects of a horrible nightmare. When they opened their eyes and
minds, they found the nightmare a reality.

Hypotheses Serving the Factuality
---------------------------------

People were engaged in analyzing what had been occurring. A great deal
of variant hypotheses and conception were come forth. For instance,
Sufism, the conception of imputing matters — good and evil — to Allah,
fatalism and the Sahaba's ultimate decency; these faiths were
originated. The Umayids, together with their supporters, were the main
incentive beyond emanation of such conceptions. They were used as a high
quality weapons for defending the Umayid royalty. Besides, they were
used for dispersing the rivals' efforts for the sake of establishing
pillars of the Umayid royalty and substantiating its false legality.
