Humans and Nature in the Qur’an
===============================

The Qur’an presents natural phenomena as signs (*āyāt* ) pointing to the
existence of God (16:66, 41:53, 51:20-1, 88:17-20). The value of nature
is therefore primarily symbolic. Scientific inquiry which aims to
understand the workings of the universe thus constitutes, for Muslims, a
sacred quest. Nature is perfectly proportioned and without any flaws
(67:3), a reflection of the qualities of its Creator. It has a divinely
ordained purpose (3:191, 21:16, 38:27) and is neither random nor
meaningless. The “environment” is nothing less than God himself, since,
according to the Qur’an, “whithersoever you turn there is the presence
of God” (2:115).

Within the hierarchy of Creation, the Qur’an accords humans a special
status, that of God’s*khalīfa* (2:30, 6:165), which has been generally
understood by Muslims to mean “vice-regent,” thus one of stewardship or
trust (*amānat* ). Recently Idris has criticized this as a later
interpretation, however, arguing that the original meaning of*khalīfa*
was “successor”; according to this view, humans are not the “deputies of
God” but simply the “successors to Adam.”[^1]

Nevertheless, the Qur’an states that “all that is in the earth” has been
subjected (*sakhkhara* ) to humans (22:65) and that “It is He who has
created for you all things that are on earth” (2:29). Yet ultimately, it
is God “in whose hands is the dominion of all things” (36:83; cf. 2:107,
24:42). And though humans are said to have been created “in the best of
forms” (*fī ahsanī taqwīm* ), the Qur’an goes on to caution that
“Assuredly the creation of the heavens and the earth is [a matter]
greater than the creation of human beings: Yet most people understand
not!” (40:57).

Humans are described in the Qur’an as being more like other beings than
unlike them. All creation is said to worship God (22:18), even if their
praise is not in expressed in human language (17:44, 24:41-2). Non-human
communities are said to be like human communities (6:38), and non-human
animals are explicitly said to possess speech (27:16). Non-human animals
are said to have received divine revelation, as when God instructs bees
on how to make honeycombs and honey (16:68). The earth was created for
the benefit of all living beings (*anām* ), not for humans alone
(55:10). In fact, the only significant difference between humans and
other beings is that humans alone possess consciousness (*taqwa* ), and
are thus accountable for their actions.

Humans will accordingly be held accountable for any acts of wanton
destruction committed against the earth (2:205, 7:85). Wastefulness and
overconsumption are also prohibited (7:31), as is hoarding. Water,
arguably the most vital natural resource, is to be kept as common
property (54:28). Balance (*mīzan* ) is to be maintained in all things,
including, presumably, natural systems (13:8, 15:21, 25:2). Failure to
do so, consequently, may be argued to be un-Islamic.


