In the Hadiths
==============

The Arabs to whom the Qur’an was revealed in the early seventh century
CE had a long familiarity with the ecological constraints posed by their
native desert environment. Reports about the words and deeds of Muhammad
(*hadīth* s) indicate that the Prophet of Islam possessed both an
awareness of these constraints and a sensitivity to the duties of humans
towards the rest of Creation.

Muhammad received the first of his revelations while meditating in a
cave on a mountain outside of Mecca. Thus, as in the case of numerous
other seminal religious figures, his insights came within the context of
immersion in the natural world. Perhaps the most illuminating of the
hadiths in this regard is the one which states, “The earth has been
created for me as a mosque [i.e., as a place of worship], and as a means
of purification” (*Sahīh Bukhārī* , 1:331). According to another hadith,
Muhammad said, “The world is green and beautiful and Allah has appointed
you His stewards over it.”

A well-known hadith has Muhammad prohibiting his followers from wasting
water, even when it is found in abundance and when it is used for a holy
purpose such as ritual ablutions (*Musnad ibn Hanbal* , ii, 22).
Muhammad also decreed that no more than an ankle-depth of water (i.e.,
sufficient for one season) could be taken for irrigation. Essential
resources are to be common, not private property: “Muslims share alike
in three things - water, pasture and fire” (*Mishkat al-Masābih* ).

Numerous hadiths speak to Muhammad’s concern for the interests of
non-human animals. In regard to the killing of domestic animals for food
he called for swift and conscientious slaughter with a sharp knife
(*Sahīh Muslim* , 2/11, “Slaying,” 10:739), and not to slaughter an
animal within view of its kin. He forbade hunting for sport, and
frequently reprimanded his followers for abusing or neglecting their
camels and donkeys. He urged his followers to plant trees and cultivate
land not only to provide food for humans, but for birds and other
animals as well (*Sahīh Bukhārī* 3:513). In a hadith which is strikingly
similar to a well-known rabbinical saying, Muhammad is reported as
saying “When doomsday comes if someone has a palm shoot in his hand he
should [still] plant it” (*Sunān al-Baīhaqī al-Kubrā* ).


