In Islamic Law
==============

The legal corpus known as the*sharī‘a* , codified by Islamic jurists
during the Classical period (8th-10th centuries CE), was meant to be
all-encompassing and thus includes aspects which could be said to deal
with environmental protection and management of natural resources. The
jurists applied the four principles of Qur’anic injunctions, the example
of Muhammad as attested in the hadiths, analogical reasoning, and their
own consensus of opinion, to the pre-existing customary practices of the
Arabs and the Persians in particular, and to some extent of other Muslim
peoples.

The aspect of*sharī‘a* law with the most explicit environmental
applications may be the institution of the protected zone (*harīm* ),
which prohibited the development of certain areas, mainly riverbanks,
for purposes of protecting watersheds. A related institution is that of
the preserve (*hima* ), which usually entailed the protection of trees
and wildlife. Some traditional*harīm* s and*hima* s still exist today,
notably in Saudi Arabia, but they are much diminished from former times
and continue to disappear. The legal texts go into some detail about the
distribution of water resources, and also devote sections to the
“bringing to life” (*ihyā* ) of “dead” lands (*mawāt* ), including the
conditions and rights pertaining to one who engages in such
“development.”

Islamic law also extends many legal protections to non-human animals,
including the “right of thirst” (*haqq al-shurb* ), which states that
they cannot be denied drinking water (Qur’an 91:13). A
thirteenth-century work by ‘Izz al-din ibn ‘Abd al-salam,*Qawā’id
al‑ahkām fī masālih al‑anām* (*Rules for Judgment in the Cases of Living
Beings* ), includes what might be called in contemporary terms “an
animals’ bill of rights.” Among the provisions are that animals should
be properly cared for, not overburdened, kept safe from harm, given
clean shelter, and allowed to mate.

Although there is little in the classical legal corpus that could be
explicitly categorized as environmental law, there exist within it
several basic principles which could, if so interpreted, serve to
mitigate the some of the main causes of global environmental degradation
today. In particular one may cite the principles of minimizing damage,
the primacy of collective over individual interests, and the giving of
priority to the interests of the poor over those of the rich. While some
contemporary Muslims - notably Mawil Izzi Dien and Uthman Llewellyn -
have attempted to provide such interpretations, these have not yet found
their way into the legal codes of any existing Muslim societies.


