In Islamic Philosophy
=====================

From around the tenth century CE Muslim philosophers, familiar with
Classical works, appear to have been the ones to coin the Arabic
term*tabī‘a* to represent the Latin and Greek equivalents*natura*
and*physis* . (The word*tabī‘a* does not appear in the Qur’an.) The
derivatives*tab‘* and*matbū‘* may, on the other hand, have been the
source of the Latin pairing*natura naturans* and*natura naturata* .[^2]
In Islamic philosophy the distinction between the Creator and Creation
is represented by the terms*haqq* (lit., “Divine Truth”) and*khalq* .
The laws of the universe exist not in and of themselves but rather as
expressions of the Divine will, understood in Aristotelian terms as the
First Cause. There are no “secondary” causes; thus, what appear to be
the laws of nature are merely the “habits” of created things, which God
could alter if he chose. Miracles, accordingly, are seen simply as
instances where God chooses to cause things to happen in other than
their familiar, habitual manner.

Yet the relationship of the infinite (the Creator) to the finite
(Creation) is neither entirely one of immanence (*tashbīh* ) nor one of
transcendence (*tanzīh* ), since both extremes are incompatible with the
ultimate oneness (*tawhīd* ) of God. Neither can Creation be divine
alongside the Creator, nor can there exist separate realities for each;
either case would represent a kind of polytheism (*shirk* ) unacceptable
in Islam.

The Muslim philosophers largely followed the Greek model of the cosmos,
which they understood to be spherical in shape and bounded by the
stellar field. The planets, the Sun and the Moon occupy the middle
layers, with the Earth constituting the center. The heavenly world
(*al-‘ālam al-ā‘la* ), though made up of ether in contrast to the lower
world (*al-‘ālam al-asfāl* ) which is comprised of the four elements,
shares with it the qualities of heat, cold, moistness and dryness and
acts upon it accordingly. The earth’s geography was most often
understood in terms of the pre-Islamic Iranian divisions of seven
concentric climes (*keshvar* s), although the fourfold division of the
Greeks and the ninefold version of the Indians were also known.

The Islamic philosophers affirm the position of humans near the top
within the hierarchy of created beings, below angels but above other
animals, plants, and minerals. Humans are the mediators between the
heavenly and earthly realms and a major channel for divine grace. The
human body, furthermore, is perceived as a microcosm of the universe,
with specific parts of the body being identified with parts of the
zodiac and thus subject to their influences.

The so-called Pure Brethren of Basra (*Ikhwān al-Safā* ), in their
tenth-century treatises collectively known as the*Rasā’il* , write that
the study of nature offers proof of God: “Know that the perfect
manufacturing of an object indicates the existence of a wise and perfect
artisan even when he is veiled and inaccessible to sense perception. He
who meditates upon botanical objects will of necessity know that the
beings of this reign issue from a perfect artisan.”[^3] For the Ikhwan,
who considered themselves Pythagoreans, numbers were an important means
of insight into the ordering of nature. In one section of their treatise
the Ikhwan present a fictitious court

case in which non-human animals complain of their treatment by humans.
Goodman has drawn attention to the similarity of ecological vision
evoked in this tenth-century tract with that of contemporary
ecologists.[^4] The Ikhwan were a marginal group, however, and their
views should not be taken to represent the mainstream Islamic thought of
their time.


