In Sufism
=========

Muslim mystics, known as Sufis, have tended to interpret Qur’anic
references to the oneness of God (*tawhīd* ) as indicating an underlying
unity to all reality. The Andalusian mystic Muhyi al-din ibn ‘Arabi
(1165-1240) described Creation in terms of “unity of being” (*wahdat
al-wujūd* ), an idea which won wide popularity among Sufis especially in
South Asia where his work remains highly influential. Many mainstream
Muslims have found this belief to verge dangerously close to pantheism,
however; the seventeenth-century Indian Sufi teacher Shah Waliullah
preferred the term “unity of witness” (*wahdat al-shuhūd* ) as more
clearly maintaining the distinction between Creator and Creation.

The Sufi notion of the “Complete Man” (*al-insān al-kāmil* ), also
elaborated by Ibn ‘Arabi, expands the conception of the human being as
microcosm of the universe. For Sufis, cultivation of the individual is
analogous to cultivation of the cosmos as a whole; thus, one’s personal
spiritual development can affect the entire world.

To Sufis such as Jalal al-din Rumi (1207-1273), not just animals and
plants but the entire universe of Creation is alive.[^5] “Earth and
water and fire are His slaves,” he writes in the*Masnavī-yi ma‘navī* ;
“With you and me they are dead, but with God they are alive” (1.838).
Nature also speaks, though only the mystics realize this: “The speech of
water, the speech of the earth, and the speech of mud are apprehended by
the sense of them that have hearts” (1.3279). The conversations of
nature are indicative of affective relationships: “You yourself know
what words the sun, in the sign of Aries, speaks to the plants and the
date palms/You yourself, too, know what the limpid water is saying to
the sweet herbs and the sapling” (6.1068-69). Moreover, the Sufis often
employ the symbolism of love (*‘ishq* ) to describe the relationship of
mutual attraction between the Creator and his Creation. Yunus Emre, a
thirteenth-century Turkish poet, composed the famous line, “We love all
creation for the sake of its Creator.”

Many Sufi tales, such as those found in the works of Rumi, Attar, and
others, include animal characters, though these are almost always
stand-ins for human characteristics associated with particular species.
Non-human animals are seen as occupying a level below humans and the
“animal soul” of the philosophers is equated by the Sufis with the
“lower self” (*nafs* ), or one’s own baser instincts which along the
path of spiritual development one strives to overcome.


