Contemporary Islamic Environmental Ethics
=========================================

While it is important not to romanticize the past - Muslims, like people
of all cultures, have not always followed the spirit or the letter of
their sacred laws - it would appear from the above that pre-modern
Islamic societies possessed something that might be considered in
contemporary terms as having constituted an environmental ethic. And
while one may likewise remain skeptical of arguments that Western
imperialism alone is to blame for the erosion of traditional norms
throughout the Muslim world, it does seem to be the case that
traditional Islamic directives enjoining care and restraint in regard to
the use of resources have become less apparent in the modern period.

In short, not only are Muslim societies today*not* models of
environmental consciousness, in many cases they provide examples of the
worst sorts of environmentally-destructive lifestyles and development
policies. Many of the most severely degraded environments in the world
today are those in which Muslims constitute a majority of the
population. While overall per capita consumption and pollution rates are
generally less than in Western industrial societies, Muslim countries
mostly suffer from acute environmental problems connected with poverty,
overpopulation, and outmoded technologies.

Unfortunately, it is also true that Muslim societies today are faced
with so many severe problems of all kinds - political, social, and
economic - that environmental protection often seems at best a secondary
concern. Few Muslims have yet come around to the way of thinking
expressed by Stanford biologist Paul Ehrlich, when he stated that “the
environmental crisis is the playing field on which all other problems
are played out,” or the popular environmentalist image in which the
various human struggles going on in the world today are like “fighting
over deck chairs on the Titanic.” We are so preoccupied with dealing
with the threats approaching us head-on that we fail to notice what is
happening under our feet.

To be fair, Westerners too have been extremely slow to recognize the
severity of the threat posed by global environmental degradation. This
is more true than ever today, as the government of the United States of
America, the world’s number one polluter, holds ever more firmly to a
Pollyanna-esque notion that environmental concerns are overstated and
trumped by the unrivaled importance of permanent economic growth. It
seems significant that in March 2005, the publication of the so-called
“Millennium Ecosystem Assessment”[^6] in which a five-year study by
1,360 scientists from 95 countries concluded that human activities have
severely compromised two-thirds of the earth’s ecosystems in only the
past fifty years, made front page headlines in Europe and elsewhere in
the world but was almost completely ignored by the mainstream media in
the US.[^7]

The US is the world’s richest country, and environmental degradation is
typically less worrisome to the rich who can mostly shield themselves
from its effects, than it is to the poor who suffer from environmental
problems most immediately and most severely. In the developing world the
environmental crisis if often experienced most profoundly by rural
women, who are the primary users of natural resources (and whose
husbands may

quite disconnected by comparison, away working in urban factories). At
the same time rural women tend to be the most disempowered members of
traditional societies, thus the least able to react to the crisis.

Ironically the United States, while remaining the world’s major agent of
environmental destruction as well as the leading proponent of
unsustainable economic policies and practices, is also the original home
of environmentalism in its modern sense. Environmental consciousness, in
its contemporary form, emerged in the late nineteenth century among
Americans such as Henry David Thoreau, John Muir, and Theodore
Roosevelt. Revisionist philosophies which placed humans within and not
above natural systems were articulated by Americans such as Aldo Leopold
in the 1940s and Edward Abbey in the 1970s. Contemporary
environmentalism, as exported to the rest of the world, is thus largely
an American product.

This point has not gone unnoticed by environmentalists elsewhere. In a
1989 article in the US-based journal*Environmental Ethics* , Indian
sociologist Ramachandra Guha argued that whatever its inherent merits,
an environmentalism derived within the particular history and culture of
North America cannot simply be applied as a one-size-fits-all model to
the rest of the world. The attempt to do so - seen in such examples as
the creation of national parks from which human inhabitants are forcibly
expelled - too often constitutes a “direct transfer of resources from
the poor to the rich.”[^8]

It hardly comes as a surprise, then, that environmentalist policies and
initiatives in the Muslim world are often seen as merely another example
of Western imperialism, an attempt by foreigners, foreign interests, or
foreign puppets to meddle in the affairs of Muslim communities for
purposes of exploitation and control. It would seem that under such
circumstances, environmentalism in Muslim societies would have to
develop in an indigenously-derived form seen as locally-relevant, if it
hopes to take root and flourish. Unfortunately examples of home-grown
environmentalism are not yet easy to find in the Muslim world, though
they are not non-existent.

Probably the credit for first beginning to think about the environmental
crisis in Islamic terms should go to Seyyed Hossein Nasr, an
Iranian-American academic who has been preoccupied with the effects of
human activities on natural systems since before Rachel Carson, during
his student days in Massachusetts during the 1950s when he would trace
Thoreau’s footsteps around Walden Pond.[^9] A historian of philosophy
and science, Nasr was struck by how much had changed since Thoreau’s
time, and began to feel that there was a marked difference between
Islamic science, in which the pursuit of understanding nature was seen
as a sacred undertaking, a way of better knowing the mind of God, and
the de-sacralized scientific approach of the post-Enlightenment West in
which nature was seen as mechanical, devoid of life or inherent meaning,
and existing only to serve human ends.

Nasr spelled out this distinction in his book*Science and Civilization
in Islam* and other works, even preceding by several months Lynn White,
Jr.’s famous critique of human exceptionalism in Western religions, a
1967 paper titled “The Historical Roots of Our Ecologic Crisis,”[^10]
with a similar argument in a lecture series Nasr gave at the University
of Chicago in the

summer of 1966.[^11] Over the past four decades Nasr has continued to
describe the environmental crisis as one that originates as a crisis of
values; his works are cited widely by Muslim environmentalists, and as a
representative authority by Westerners seeking to include “the Islamic
perspective” in discussions on the environment.

The main shortcoming of Nasr’s contribution has been that he has always
written predominantly for a Western audience of non-Muslims, serving
first and foremost as an apologist for Islam. Those Muslims who have
read him, have almost always read him in English, as his works have been
little translated into Arabic or even his own native Persian. His case
exemplifies the paradox that, even among Muslims seeking to derive an
environmentalism from within their own tradition, the initial impetus
and context is often the West.

The first specifically Islamic treatise on environmental protection,
composed by a team of Islamic scholars in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia in 1983,
was commissioned by a Swiss-based environmental organization, the
International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
(IUCN).[^12] The resulting tract, which consisted of only thirty pages
of text, was very poorly distributed, and its authors have since
acknowledged that their efforts to have its findings adopted by
policy-makers in Muslim countries have largely failed.

A second effort to articulate Islam-based environmental values came at
the instigation of another Western organization, the Worldwide Fund for
Nature (WWF). The WWF organized a symposium in Assisi, Italy in 1986 on
environmental values in world religions, to which a Muslim
representative was invited and who composed a one-page statement on
Islam and the environment.[^13] Later, the WWF expanded their project to
commission short edited books of articles on religion and the
environment, one book for each major religion. To edit the Islam volume
they approached Fazlun Khalid, a British Muslim of Ceylonese origin who
had developed a strong interest in environmental issues through reading
the works of Nasr and a number of Western environmentalists.

The WWF volume edited by Khalid and published in 1992 under the
title*Islam and Ecology* , contained a half dozen brief essays by
practicing Muslims which took note of Islamic teachings on the
environment and offered explanations for the environmental crisis based
on such things as Islamic critiques of the global economy (which, being
based on the taking of interest and the unlimited creation of credit,
they claimed as fundamentally un-Islamic).[^14] Again, this little book
was poorly circulated - though it has since been issued in Turkish and
Indonesian translations - and was known and used mainly by Western
environmentalists as a statement of “the Islamic position” on
environmental protection.

The most sophisticated attempt yet to discuss environmental values
through the lens of the world’s religious systems was undertaken in the
late 1990s by two professors at Bucknell University, Mary Evelyn Tucker
(a specialist in Confucianism) and her husband John Grim (an expert on
Native Americans). Tucker and Grim obtained funding from a variety of
sources which enabled them to organize a series of ten international
conferences on

religion and ecology, which were held at Harvard University Divinity
School from 1996 through 1998. For the Islam conference, which occurred
in May 1998, Grim sought out the organizational assistance of Fazlun
Khalid, who drew on his growing international network of Muslims
concerned with the environment to come up with a list of participants.

The Harvard conferences, perhaps to be expected of an initial foray into
a new field, provided mixed results. At the Islam conference it was hard
not to feel that many of the participants were less interested in saving
the environment that they were in taking advantage of an all-expense
paid trip to Harvard. In their presentations many referred to the
environment only passingly, some not at all. Though other axes were
ground, no hard questions were asked about the treatment of the
environment in contemporary Muslim societies, and all problems were
blamed on Western interference, Western values, and the erosion of
traditional Islamic norms. The dominant theme of the conference was that
Islam provides everything necessary for the appropriate management of
natural resources, and that if Islam were widely and properly practiced
then there would be no environmental crisis to talk about. Issues such
as human population control, lifestyles of overconsumption, and animal
rights, when briefly raised were loudly dismissed out of hand by certain
vocal participants and not revisited.

Nevertheless, a number of genuinely committed Muslim environmentalists
did attend the conference, even if their voices were not prominently
heard there. The event at least resulted in both the publication of an
edited book, like its predecessor titled*Islam and Ecology* but at 584
pages much more extensive,[^15] and in the strengthening of a global
network of Muslim environmentalists which continues to expand today.
Among them can be counted in addition to Fazlun Khalid, Uthman Abd
al-Rahman Llewellyn, an American convert who has spent many years
working as an environmental consultant for the government of Saudi
Arabia; Turkish theology professor İbrahim Özdemir, author of several
books on environmental ethics and now Undersecretary of Education for
the Turkish government; Safei El-Din Hamed, professor of landscape
architecture at Texas Tech and former consultant to the Egyptian
government and the World Bank; and Mohammad Aslam Parvaiz,
founder-director of the Islamic Foundation for Science and Environment
in Delhi. Özdemir has since arranged for a Turkish translation of the
Harvard*Islam and Ecology* volume, while Parvaiz has commissioned an
Urdu version for use in the Islamic seminaries of India. Another
longtime Islamic environmentalist, Iraqi-born law professor Mawil Izzi
Dien, who did not attend the conference but who submitted a paper for
the published proceedings, has been attempting to establish a Centre for
Islam and Ecology at the University of Wales. (Izzi Dien contributed to
the 1983 Jeddah tract, and is the author of the first book-length
treatment of Islam and the environment, titled*The Environmental
Dimensions of Islam* , which was published in 2000.[^16] )

By far the most significant efforts in disseminating an Islamic ethic of
the environment on a global scale have been by Fazlun Khalid. Beginning
with the establishment of the organization he founded in the early
1990s, the Islamic Foundation for Ecology and Environmental Sciences
(IFEES),

based in Birmingham, England, this former British civil servant has
spent the last decade of his retirement endlessly traveling around the
world conducting environmental education seminars in Muslim communities
from Saudi Arabia to Indonesia.[^17] A project conducted by Khalid among
the Muslim fishermen on the East African island of Zanzibar was
described by BBC News in early 2005 as a remarkable success.[^18]

Such efforts by practicing Muslims who happen to be environmentalists
and therefore seek to articulate their environmentalism in Islamic
terms, may be weighed against initiatives in countries where the
environmentalists concerned just happen to be Muslims.[^19] The
international environmental organizations WWF and IUCN, for example,
both have offices in a number of Muslim countries. (The IUCN Karachi
office is the largest in the developing world).

As might be expected, organizations that are Western in their origins,
outlook, and approach, are likely to attempt projects which reflect
their Western orientation. Equally predictably, their successes have
been mixed, when they have not - as in IUCN Pakistan’s attempt to enlist
Pathan religious scholars in teaching environmental ethics in religious
schools - been acknowledged failures. One significant aspect of the
constraints faced by international environmental organizations operating
in Muslim countries, is that they tend necessarily to be grant-driven.
That is to say, because they rely heavily on grants to carry out their
works, they must devise projects which may reflect more the interests of
granting agencies than they do the actual needs of the societies in
question.[^20]

An exception to this phenomenon can be found in Iran, where NGOs are
severely restricted in their ability to solicit or obtain external
funding because of a longstanding US-led economic embargo. As a result,
environmental organizations in Iran have emerged in a context of
independence and localism. Indeed, Iran would seem to offer the most
successful example in the world today of a truly home-grown
environmentalism.[^21]

Civil society in Iran benefited greatly from the election of reformist
president Mohammad Khatami in 1997. Since then, over two hundred new
environmental organizations have been officially recognized by the
Iranian government. The government of the Islamic Republic itself has
promoted an environmentalist rhetoric which is among the most
sophisticated and progressive in the world, even explicitly calling for
an Islamic approach to environmental ethics, although its rhetoric has
not been backed up by action in many cases.

Environmentalism in Iran is seen most tangibly in the proliferation of
environmental NGOs, many of which, such as the Green Front of Iran
(GFI), have been remarkably effective in raising public awareness and
carrying out environmental protection campaigns. And while the
government continues to be seen by most Iranians as all talk and no
action, Iranian environmentalists at least enjoy the theoretical support
of the Islamic state.

While Iran’s home-grown environmentalism seems to hold unique promise in
the Muslim world today as proof that indigenous, non-Western

models can indeed succeed, paradoxically the conditions of enforced
independence which gave rise to Iran’s unique environmental movement are
little appreciated by most Iranians, who are eager to overcome their
twenty-five years of forced isolation and climb aboard the juggernaut of
economic globalization. With Iran’s entry into the WTO newly on the
table for discussion and a new reactionary president for whom
environmentalism seems a lesser priority than taunting the West, the
future independence of Iranian environmentalism may be in question.

In conclusion, a plurality of models currently exists for
environmentalism across the Muslim world. Unfortunately, none yet
appears up to the task of reducing the momentum of
ecologically-devastating modernity, which continues its headlong plunge
toward global catastrophe. But if there is any hope at all for the
world’s environmental movements to play a role in slowing the present
destructive trends and steering human society towards more just and
sustainable alternatives, the planet’s 1.2 billion Muslims demonstrably
have cultural resources to draw upon which are both compatible with
their traditions and hold promise for meeting emerging needs.


