From the Editorial Desk
=======================

The original Light magazine started off as a cyclostyled paper for
community students living abroad, especially in the western countries.
This then turned into a magazine with a selection of articles of diverse
contemporary as well as religious issues.

The readership also spread over the world amongst Muslims and non-
Muslims in countries such as West Africa, Latin America and remote parts
of the world catering for their scholarly needs. The aim at that time
was Tabligh and this continues to be our mission but in different times
and circumstances.

We re-launch this magazine in an era of globalization, bearing in mind
the revolution in information technology and major events such as the
revolution in Iran, formation and consolidation of World Federation and
the extensive role of media in covering issues touching upon the Muslim
world, which have significantly contributed towards increasing awareness
worldwide towards our Islamic faith and its role in shaping events.

The need to adapt in this evolving environment is a necessity to
maintain the scholarly standards of this magazine which we shall aspire
to do.

Brother Latif Ali of British Guyana once mentioned at the World Ahlul
Bayt League Conference, "I lived alone as a Shia Ithnaasheri with
literature of Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania and the Light magazine as
my sole companions".

With Light's sister Swahili magazine, Sauti Ya Bilal, let us hope that
these magazines continue their companionship from the remotest village
of Tanzania to the busiest metropolis of the world.

The pioneering efforts and support of Maulana Syed Saeed Akhtar Rizvi,
Marhum Mulla Asgher Jaffer, Marhum Ahmed Sheriff and Marhum Mohamed
Rafik Somji are a continuing beacon of inspiration for us. Let us pray
for their souls and request a Sura e Fateha.

A humble servant of Ahlul Bayt a.s Fidahusein A. Hameer


**Memoirs**

As a young kid, I was always fascinated to watch my late grandfather,
Yusufali G.M Dharsi writing articles and helping in the typesetting for
The Light magazine.

Like Sayid Akhtar Rizvi and other writers in those days, he was also a
regular contributor for the magazine, researching hours on end to get
everything meticulously correct.

Everything was first written on draft paper initially in pen, corrected
or edited and proofread using pencil and red ink pens, the paper from
which the article was usually typed out, looked like off white paper
that had confetti scratches all over it. I could have never deciphered
it.

The rhythmical clicking of type writer keys and the bell depicting the
end of the line were a very regular sounds at home, in those days it was
still a manual typewriter, not the fancy electrical ones, and by the
time computers came in, my grandfather had stopped writing.

Growing up with the sounds of keys hitting the paper and the times
where he would ask me to roll back the red and black ribbon, always made
me a part of the process, and the request made me happy that I could
help.

By: Sameer Kermalli

The process I remember vividly was the one where, the typesetter, Mr.
Mohamed Namwanga used to come home and painstakingly took letters and
words that were needed for the next issue, cut and pasted them on a
marked paper, cut to the end books size.

This was a tedious job using the old magazines that were then printed
by Jamana, located near the corner of Uhuru Street and now Indira Gandhi
street then. Lots of man hours went into that. The dedication of
Fidahusein Hameer, who till today plays an active role in The Light
magazine, can only be deemed as very commendable work, cause I remember
him since those days.

There are things that are embedded in our brains, and amongst them for
me, is the experience to see, learn and partially understand the process
of printing. Today I work for a printing company, DTP and I am grateful
to The Light magazine for the printing process knowledge it imparted to
me, a past that is fruitful to date.


