The Human Ear: Masterpiece of Engineering
=========================================

The study of the human being has long been a fascinating task for
philosophers, physicians and poets. With the recent advances in science
and technology our knowledge about ourselves is increasing rapidly.

Now to appreciate wonders of the Creator Allah, let us take one example
only:

the human EAR and see its wonders. In this article, we will look at the
amazing human ears and see how clearly their construction points to a
designer.

The First Sense: The Hearing The first sense to develop in a developing
human embryo is HEARING. The foetus can hear sounds after the 24th
week.

Subsequently, the sense of SIGHT is developed and by the 28th week, the
retina becomes sensitive to light.

Consider the following Qur'anic verses related to the development of
the senses in the embryo:

"And He gave you (the faculties of) hearing And sight and feeling (and
understanding)." (Qur'an 32: 9) "Verily We created man from a drop of
mingled sperm; in order to try him: so Contributed by Mehtaab Ismail We
gave him (the gifts), of hearing and sight." (Qur'an 76: 2)

"It is He who has created for you (the faculties) of hearing, sight,
feeling and understanding: little thanks; It is ye give." (Qur'an
23:78)

In all these verses, the sense of HEARING is mentioned before that of
SIGHT. Thus 1400 years ago the Glorious Qur'an has alluded to the order
of the senses in the developing foetus. First HEARING develops;

thereafterSIGHT.Modern embryology has only discovered this fact
centuries later. Subhaanallah ! GLORY BE TO THE CREATOR.


The Organ Equilibrium Of Balance And Humans are the only creatures that
can stand upright naturally and have large complex brains that they can
use to synthesize sounds into speech. No other creature has this
capability.

The human ear is unique since, besides processing sounds, it is also
the organ of balance and equilibrium.Our ability to stand upright and
walk on two legs has brought many advantages - specifically the
opportunity to develop manual skills such as reading, writing, driving
and operating equipment.

Without our eyes and ears and the ability to stand up, even the most
modern communication systems will not work, since the eyes and ears have
to prepare the input and interpret the output.

Why was the human being endowed with these attributes? Since we are the
most intelligent species and dominate this earth, it behooves us to
reflect on this. Each part of the human is uniquely and beautifully
constructed in the most efficient design.

Human ears are not much to look at, yet behind these flaps of skin and
cartilage lie structures of such delicacy that they shame the most
skillful craftsman, and of such reliable automatic operation that they
inspire awe in the most ingenious engineer.

Working together, the structure of the outer, middle, and inner ear
perform acts of amazing range and virtuosity.

The reason we have two ears is because they form a stereo system
allowing us to identify the place from which the sound originated and
also to identify whether the source is moving.

The processing of sound by the ear and brain is so accurate that clicks
presented to one ear and then the other can be distinguished as separate
Plain But Perfect!

sounds when the time interval between them is as small as thirty
microseconds.

You Could Hear A Pin drop...

If the, sensitivity of the ear was further increased, we would be
conscious of the continual bombardment of the eardrum by air molecules.
Even at the present limit it is surprising that we do not hear our own
blood flowing through the tiny vessels in the eardrum.

This is so because the ear can ignore signals which are constantly
present. In fact, a normal ear can discriminate among some 400,000
sounds. We can reject the hubbub of a function while picking out a
single familiar voice.

Even during sleep the ear continues to function with incredible
efficiency: because the brain can interpret and select signals passed to
it by the ear, a person can sleep soundly through noisy traffic and the
blaring of a neighbor's television, and yet awaken promptly at the
gentle urging of an alarm clock.

A barking dog, a squealing tire, a footstep - can all be identified.

All This And More! Of all the organs of the body, few can accomplish as
much in so little a space as the ear.

If an engineer could duplicate its functions, he would have to compress
into approximately one cubic inch a sound system that includes an
impedance matcher, a wide range mechanical analyser, a mobile relay and
amplification unit, a multichannel transducer to convert mechanical
energy to electrical energy, a system to maintain a delicate hydraulic
balance and an internal two- way communication system.

Even if he could perform this miracle of miniaturization, he would be
unable to match the ear's performance. Many birds and animals have
learned to signal one another by their voices, both for warning and
recognition, but we, the humans, with our ears, our mobile tongues and
throats, and our large complex brains have learned to speak.

We have learned to be articulate, to attach arbitrary and abstract
meaning to sounds, synthesize words, and create a language which we then
use as a tool to communicate our experiences of the past and also our
ideas and plans for future action.

We now have innumerable languages across the world. Humans are the only
creatures capable of achieving all this. The great strides we are making
in every field are evidence of this fact. Why All This?

Is there a lesson to be learned from all this? Is there a purpose? And
if so, what is it? What is our responsibility? It seems abundantly clear
to me that our main responsibility is to use our ears and eyes and brain
to recognize Allah, the Creator of all these wonders; to recognise the
role of the Almighty God; and to understand the purpose of our
existence: TO
SERVEHIMANDHIS CREATION.

Using our God given senses and our unique ability to explore this vast
Universe we have learnt a great deal about the physical laws that govern
it.

We know that these laws are fixed and consistent; that they apply
equally at all points through out the Universe, without differentiation.
This attests to the fact that there is one Creator and His system is
unchangeable.

Let us be appreciative of Him by using our senses in the only way they
should be used - to recognize Him as the absolute God and pledge our
allegiance to Him alone, the Creator of mankind.

"Verily We created man from a drop of mingled sperm; in order TO TRY
HIM: so We gave him (the gifts), of hearing and sight." (Qur'an 76: 2)

"It is He who has created for you (the faculties) of hearing, sight,
feeling and understanding: little THANKS; It is ye give." (Qur'an 23:
78)

".... Surely every act of Hearing, and Seeing and Feeling (of hearts),
all of these shall be QUESTIONED." (Qur'an 17:36).


