Is Humility the Essence of Greatness?
=====================================

By Ismat Mukhtar

A Muslim Reflects on the Prophet's Conductâ€¦ (By Sariya Islam a convert
of more than 13 years. She holds a Master's in Business Management and
is an experienced Human Resource Professional) Who Is the Perfect
Leader?

As I read this description, I realized that effective leaders are those
who work for their people, those who are humble, and those who neither
flaunt their status nor exploit their power.

It is hard to come by such individuals in real life, and you rarely
come across the perfect combination of humility, knowledge, and charisma
that is required of the perfect leaders.

I sat back looking out into the garden and tried to identify an
individual who fitted this role. I thought for a while and then slowly
smiled to myself; I had found the perfect leader!

I thought of a man who rose to be the initiator of a new way of life
that today has about 1.8 billion adherents spread across the world, a
man who at the height of his success maintained the humility displayed
in his youth.

His wisdom, he asserted, was never his own but rather was divine
revelation; at the height of his success, he proclaimed, "I am but an
ordinary man."

Let me introduce you to Muhammad (peace and blessings be upon him), the
prophet of Islam. Charles de Secondat, a French political philosopher
and social critic, said, "To become truly great, one has to stand with
people, not above them."

This reminded me of the building of the first mosque in Madinah: The
Prophet had recently completed a tiring and stressful journey, but when
he saw his people enthusiastically laying bricks for the mosque, he
insisted he would join them; thus laying the foundations of a society in
which nobody's status was too high and no work was too menial.

Through his actions that day, he taught his people enduring lessons on
equality, companionship, and respect: [Verily the most honoured of you
in the sight of God is the one who is the most righteous of you]
(Al-Hujurat 49:13).

Sharing Chores and Errands The Prophet ate with his people - he shared
the same bread and drank from the same flask - and when his people went
hungry, he starved too.

He lived with his Companions as one of them and their problems were his
own: He laughed with them when they were happy, and he cried with them
when they were sad. On the battlefield, he was always with his soldiers,
and at home he helped his wives with their chores.

The Prophet was once traveling with a group of people and it was time
to rest and cook food. As work was divided and everybody was assigned a
task, the Prophet insisted he would contribute too and began to collect
firewood.

brother, a husband, a friend, and also a Prophet of God.

He could have used this passion that his followers had for him in
whatever manner he pleased. He could have had luxury and deserved it
too. Yet he slept on a crude straw mat that left his back marked, he
prayed on the bare earth which left his forehead stained, and he wore
clothes that had torn many times over and that he himself had mended.

Making Compromises Is a Tough Call Another wonderful example of the
Prophet's humility occurred at the signing of the treaty of Hudaibiyah
between the Muslims and the leaders of Makkah at the time.

The Muslims, led by the Prophet, had journeyed toward Makkah in order
to perform the pilgrimage at the Ka'bah, but the leaders of Makkah did
not want this to happen.

To prevent the impending conflict, the Prophet agreed to a treaty with
the leaders of Makkah that stipulated the Muslims to go back that year
without entering Makkah; however, they would be given the right to enter
Makkah for three days every year for the next 10 years.

His Companions argued that there was no need for the Prophet to work;
after all, he was the Prophet of God, how could they let him collect
firewood!

But he remained adamant saying that since he was part of the traveling
party, he too would participate in the work to be done, for he hated to
be privileged. For most of his followers, the high status of the Prophet
is unquestionable.

While he lived, he was considered even by his detractors to be a man of
truth and honesty.

The genuineness of the message he bought was authenticated by the
millions who accepted the new faith he preached with such great passion,
willing to sacrifice all they had for their religion and for the man who
led them to it.

He was their leader not just in all spheres of life in this world but
in the life of the hereafter too - a man of religion, a general, a
father, an elder This treaty, especially some of its other clauses,

were seen as a step backward by many Muslims who felt that there was no
need for them to compromise when they had both political strength and
military prowess, but the Prophet wanted to avoid unnecessary violence
and agreed to the treaty.

One incident that highlights the Prophet's modesty occurred at the
actual signing of this treaty: He was mentioned in the document as
"Muhammad, the Messenger of God", a fact that the leaders of Makkah took
offence to, saying that if they had recognized the Prophet as the
Messenger of God, there would have been no need for the treaty at all.

Tempers flared in the Muslim camp, this was too much of an insult. So
to me, this man epitomizes within himself unimaginable humility, yet he
is one of the greatest leaders in history.

He preached the word of God and continued to conquer the hearts and
souls of millions. But even today he is remembered, by the same title he
insisted be used when he was alive, simply as 'Abd Allah (Arabic for the
Slave of God).

To end, it is apt to quote Mahatma Gandhi, another simple man and the
father of the Indian nation. What he said captures the essence of the
Prophet's character and his dedication to both his ideals and his
people. It captures the love of not just the 1.8 billion Muslims but
also the respect thatcountlessacademics,

philosophers, and thinkers have for the man called Muhammad. Gandhi had
this to say:

I wanted to know the best of the life of one who holds today an
undisputed sway over the hearts of millions of mankind...

I became more than ever convinced that it was not the sword that won a
place for Islam in those days in the scheme of life. It was the rigid
simplicity, the utter self- effacement of the Prophet the scrupulous
regard for pledges, his intense devotion to his friends and followers,

his intrepidity, his fearlessness, his absolute trust in God and in his
own mission. These and not the sword carried everything before them and
surmounted every obstacle.

The Prophet, however, reacted calmly and wisely, and asked for the part
"Messenger of God" to be removed and had his father's name written
instead (a common way of referring to people at the time). He was simply
"Muhammad son of Abdullah"

Gentleness Sets the True Leader Apart On another occasion, a man new to
the Muslim gathering came to visit the Prophet. The man was filled with
awe that made him nervous and anxious; this was natural for the man as
his belief told him he was visiting the Prophet of God and the leader of
the powerful Muslim nation.

When the Prophet realized the man's uneasiness, he comforted him
saying, "Brother, don't be afraid; relax and be at ease. I am not a
great monarch or king. I am only a son of a lady who ate cured meat."


