A Tribute To Human Kindness
===========================

a Lifeline from Britain to Gaza What happens after the bombs stop
falling? Does a country under siege for fourteen month period, go back
to the way it was? Do children stop crying for their dead parents,

do mothers stop weeping for their lost children? Where do they live,
now that their houses are destroyed, and how do they survive after
loosing almost everything?

Many have already forgotten about Palestinian cries for help. The Media
started looking for a new story, as soon as the country no longer had
illegal weapons tearing apart their homes, and killing their children.

What people don't realize is that now, the people of Gaza are pulling
out the bodies, from underneath the ruins left by Israeli army. Dead are
still being counted, and the homeless shiver in the cold of winter.

In Palestine's darkest hour George Galloway a member of the British
House of Commons, took a step forward, and awakened the world, not to
forget the people of Gaza.

Leaving on February 14, 2009, with 300 extraordinarily kind people of
several ethnicities and faiths, George Galloway, lead his convoy which
consists of a fire engine, 12 Contributed by Shahista Dharsi The convoy
is already supported by the Stop the War Coalition, which organized the
largest demonstrations in British history,

as well as the Anglo- Arab Organization, several British trade unions
and a large number of Muslim organizations. Fundraising for the convoy
is taking place all over Britain.

Also accompanying the convoy is Yvonne Ridley, who, along with a team
from Press TV, has ambulances, a boat and trucks packed with medicines,
cash, tools, clothes, blankets and gifts for children living under the
Israeli blockade.

Traveling through several countries, France, Spain, Morocco, Algeria,
Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt raising the banner of Palestine, as symbol of
solidarity, and trying to arouse consciousness, for the people in
Palestine still suffering through immense hardship. The convoy will go
through Rafah and into Gaza, some thirty days after it's departure.

The message due to be delivered is an important one, "We truly care and
we've driven across continents to prove it". For the rest of us it
surely signifies the goodness of human nature and the strength of people
power, which if correctly directed, can move mountains.

traveled with the convoy since Day One. As she was driving through the
snow-capped mountains of eastern Algeria, she described the experience,
thus far, as "absolutely amazing" and said that everywhere they
journeyed they were greeted by smiling well wishers carrying goodwill
letters addressed to the people of Gaza. They have also been overwhelmed
with gifts of money, bottled water and food.

a brand new van to replace one that had broken down and insured it as
well. In Morocco, a private individual erected a marquee and prepared on
a feast for all consisting of 22 lambs. And after refueling in Algeria,
they were astonished to discover that an Algerian businessman had picked
up the entire fuel tab; which was no small sum.

GregGallowaymadethis statement," The time for talking is over and the
time for action is now. The Viva Palestina convoy has struck a chord
with thousands who wish to express their solidarity with the people of
Gaza.

But we need more money to purchase the aid so desperately needed by a
people living under siege."

Donations are still needed; every penny goes to the convoy already on
its way to Palestine. You still have a chance to help those who cannot
alone help themselves. The Holy Prophet (pbuh) said "God is not merciful
to him who is not so to humankind. He who is not kind to God's creation
and to his own children, God will not be kind to him."

These self-sacrificing individual's confidence in the seemingly
impossible has already produced a miracle. Their sincerity has melted
the hearts of Moroccan and Algerian politicians who agreed to open their
common border, which closed since 1994, something the then US Secretary
of State Condoleezza Rice tried to achieve, but failed.

Their commitment to people who are less fortunate has been commendable.
How many of us would dig into our own pockets and convince our families,
friends and complete strangers to do the same so that we could take off
in the middle of winter on a mission with an unknown time period, and
unsure of the welcome we would receive on the way?

These individuals had no idea where they would sleep or shower or how
they would get back home once they had donated their vehicles. They have
found that acts of kindness are rewarded by other acts of kindness.


