Medical References At the Shadows of Surat Al Kahf
==================================================

The Quranic chapter 18: "The Cave" (Al Kahf) was revealed to answer few
questions which the mushriks (unbelievers) of Makkah, had put to the
Prophet Mohammad (PBUH) in order to test him.

One of the questions was: Who were "the Sleepers of the Cave"? The
disbelievers of Makkah were told that the story of the Sleepers of the
Cave was a clear proof of the creed of the Hereafter, as it shows that
Allah has the power to resurrect anyone He wills even after a long sleep
of death as He did with the Sleepers of the Cave (they slept over 300
years).

Allah the Almighty says in this chapter: "Then We smote their ears in
the Cave many years." (18:11)

Contributed by Neelam Ismail equilibrium (position and movement of the
head).

In the case of Cave Sleepers the physiological function of both hearing
and equilibrium did stop, therefore, the Quranic verse uses the
expression "Smote their ears.." rather than their hearing.

The other bodily functions were veiled, and the eye did not see though
open: "You would have thought them awake, as they lay sleeping" (18:18)
And their muscles did not move, although they were alive: "While We
turned them now to the right, now to the left" (18:18)

Their shape did not change although many years elapsed as they did not
notice real changes on their faces when they woke up: "They said: "We
have tarried a day, or part of a day" (18:19) The sense of hearing is a
physiological one that does not stop functioning at the time of sleep
(the sleeper can wake up at a nearby sound).

As the 8th cranial nerve (which passes in the inner part of the ear)
has two divisions: one for hearing and the other for Their conditions as
such are like that of preserving organs through cooling to cause
metabolic inhibition, which is used extensively in the medical field to
preserve donated organs (heart, kidneys,cornea,etc)before
transplantation into another body.

Therefore, the sun inclines towards the right when rising up and
towards the left when setting down, so that it will not strike them,
while they are in a gap in the cave:

"And you would have seen the sun, when it rose, inclining from their
Cave towards the right, and when it set, passing them by on the left,
While they are in a gap therein, Such are among the Signs of Allah"
(18:17), would have thought them awake, as they lay sleeping". (18:18)

And did not say; "You would have thought them dead, as they lay
sleeping," as the sign of awakening is 'eye wink'. Allah preserved their
eyes from blindness through blinking, as the eye if kept closed for a
long period of time will be blind, because the optic nerve will shrink
and die, and if it is kept open, the cornea will be affected with
corneo-xerosis, and blindness.

So, coolness in this gap in the Cave away from the heat of the sun that
did not touch them, was sufficient to inhibit bodily metabolism for the
preservation of their bodies all this long period.

Had they been only asleep, they would have needed water and food to
survive, and would have been awaken by the need to urinate after some
hours.

But Allah inhibited all their biological functions and preserved their
bodies in a living shape. So, He said: "You Therefore, this rare status
of theirs would have aroused terror, if seen, as they were not alive or
dead. They were asleep, yet their eyes were blinking: "Had you observed
them surely you would have turned your back on them in flight, and been
filled with terror of them." (18:18)

As Allah preserved their eyes through blinking, He also preserved their
bodies from ulcers through constant turning: "While We turned them now
to the right, now to the left" (18:18)w So that they would not be
affected with pressure sores.


