Introduction
============

The image of God as presented in the Qur’an is one that speaks of Him in
personal terms. God has a personal relationship with every individual.
In what follows, we will try to present a detailed account of the
attributes of God as portrayed in the Qur’an. Efforts have been made to
take every name or attribute of God that is mentioned in the Qur’an into
account. Muslims believe that both the meaning and the wording of the
Qur’an belong to God and that even slight differences in the letters or
the frequency of words are significant.

Therefore, divine qualities are given different terms and are separately
introduced even though they may look similar. Moreover, the number of
times each quality is attributed to God is registered. It must be noted
that sometimes the same term may have been applied to beings other than
God, so every verse is carefully studied to find the exact number of
cases in which a given quality is attributed to Him. When it was
grammatically impossible to differentiate a case as related to God or to
someone else, the Qur’anic commentaries were consulted and the view that
seemed more plausible was followed.

Certainly, this survey is subject to all types of human mistakes and
limitations and therefore, it is hoped that other researchers will
complete it. For example, future research must also take into account
those verses in which information about God is given, but not directly
as a name or attribute of God. For example, there are many verbs that
are used in the Qur’an for God and they constitute a very important
source for understanding the image of God in the Qur’an.

The other thing that falls beyond the limits of this paper, but will
hopefully be dealt with by others, is an elaboration of the concepts
attributed to God. For example, when we talk about divine knowledge or
divine mercy there are many more details to be learnt from the Qur’an
about their nature and functions.

There are different ways of classifying the divine attributes among
Muslim theologians. For example, one way of classification is to divide
them into the attributes of beauty (*jamal*) and glory (*jalal*). The
former includes those attributes that indicate divine perfections in an
affirmative way, such as knowledge, mercy and power. These attributes
are also called, “*al-sifat al-thubutiyyah*” (the Affirmative
Attributes). The latter includes those attributes that describe God in a
negative way, that is, by indicating divine freedom from imperfections
and deficiencies. Examples are that God is not a body and has no place,
God has no part or partner and He neither begets nor is he begotten.

The other way of classifying divine attributes is to divide them into
the attributes of essence and action. Attributes of essence (*al-sifat
al-dhatiyyah*) are those attributes that describe divine essence and do
not depend on any being other than God Himself, such as power and life.
Attributes relating to action (*al- sifat al-fi‘liyyah*) are those
attributes that describe divine acts and, indeed, inform us of a
relationship between God and other beings.

For example, divine creatorship describes a very specific relationship
between God and His creatures. This attribute becomes actual when there
is something that is created by God. Another example is forgiveness.
There must be someone who is forgiven for us to be able to say that God
has forgiven. Of course, to create or to forgive depends on certain
essential qualities of God.

In what follows, we will try to avoid sophisticated theological
discussions and instead, will just classify divine names and attributes
that are mentioned in the Qur’an according to their similarities.


