Allah, Ilah and Rabb
====================

Allah
-----

**Allah (**ﷲ**)**: This is the main name for God in the Qur’an. Indeed,
this is the main name of God in Arabic used by Muslims and non-Muslims
alike. For example, in an Arabic edition of the Bible, the word ‘Allah’
is used for God. In the Qur’an, Allah is mentioned 2816 times (including
its variations such as *lillah*, *tallah*, *billah* and *Allahuma*).
There are different views about the origin of this term.

The most plausible view seems to be that it is the abbreviated form of
*al-ilah*. In Arabic, *al-* is the definite article and *ilah* means
god. To be more precise, ilah is derived from the root "*a-la-ha*",
which means ‘worship’. Thus, ilah means what is worshipped or worthy of
being worshipped, just like kitab, which means what is written or what
can be written.

The standard formulation of faith in Islam involves the declaration of
two facts: *La ilaha illallah* and *Muhammadur- Rasulullah*. (There is
no god but God and Muhammad is His messenger). As indicated in the
Qur’an, it is clear that there have always been false gods. So when it
is said, ‘There is no god but God’ it is obvious that it means, ‘There
is no real god or no one worthy of worship but God’.

Ilah
----

**Ilah** (**إِلهَ**): This is mentioned 120 times. In 37 cases, it is
used for false gods. In the rest, it is either used for God specifically
or in the general sense. For example, the Qur’an says:

***“Were you witnesses when death approached Jacob, when he said to his
children, ‘What will you worship after me?’ They said, ‘We will worship
your god (God), and the god (God) of your fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and
Isaac, the one god (One God), and to Him do we submit.’”*** (2:133)

and

***“Your god (God) is the one god (One God), there is no god except Him,
the All-beneficent, the All- merciful.”*** (2:163)

Rabb
----

**Rabb (**رَب**)**: In Arabic, the term *rabb* means lord. It is mostly
used for God, but it may also be used in a broader sense to be
synonymous with master, guardian or owner. In the Qur'an, this term has
been used for God 963 times. This shows the utmost importance of this
quality of God. The only word that is used more frequently to denote God
in the Qur’an is Allah.


