Preface
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و صلَّى الله عليك يا ولي العصر أدرِكنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

The booklet in your hands is based on discussions concerning the ‘Golden
Era of Reappearance’ that took place at an exhibition held on the
auspicious occasion of 15th Shaban, the birth of our master and the
Divine Proof of our time, Imam Mahdi(a.t.f.s.).

In this exhibition, there were various sections. Each section discussed
a particular facet of the golden era.

It was well lit up, well decorated and there was a subtle and touching
explanation elaborating the facet. It had beautiful and apt pictures
that complemented the explanation in a splendid and fabulous manner. All
in all, it left the audience spell-bound and mesmerized.

They were seen expressing their desire to witness this “heaven on
Earth”. They were fervently beseeching Almighty Allah to hasten the
reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) so that they could see for
themselves this marvelous, glorious and beautiful epoch.

Topics dealt in the exhibition were:

• Originality of Mahdaviyat.

• Belief in Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)

• Establishment of justice and equity

• Harmony with nature

• Economic welfare

• A Happy society

• Unparalleled Universal government

• Ascendancy of Shiaism

• Widespread inclination towards religion

• Government of the righteous till resurrection

• Characteristics of the rulers

• Companions of Imam az-Zamana (a.t.f.s.)

• Advancement of knowledge

• General hygiene

• Safe world

• Excellent morality

• End of disputes and prevalence of love

• Universal contentment: hallmark of Imam Mahdi’s (a.t.f.s.) government

• Invoking Imam az-Zamana (a.t.f.s.)

Thus the remembrance of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) , along with the subtitle
ambience prevalent therein and the beautiful posters with Quranic verses
and traditions imprinted on them left an indelible impression of the
audience.

Since a majority of them earnestly requested a print copy of the matter
discussed, it was decided to compile the same along with their sources
and references for the visitors.

It is hoped that the lovers and awaiters of Hazrat Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)
will approve of this novel and creative method of discussing about our
beloved Imam (a.t.f.s.). Moreover, they are expected to try and set up
similar exhibitions in their own respective areas, which will make more
and more Shias aware about their awaited Imam (a.t.f.s.).

It is expected that this small and humble offering finds acceptance in
the honorable presence of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

O Allah! Hasten the reappearance of our beloved master (a.t.f.s.) and
enumerate us among his companions and helpers! Aameen!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليك يا سبيل الله الذي من سلك غيره هلك
  </p>
</blockquote>


