9. Glad tidings of the Prophets (a.s) and their Successors
==========================================================

• Prophets (a.s) and their Successors are awaiting the Government of
Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.).

• The belief in a savior is innate and natural.

• Tidings of Imam Mahdi’s (a.t.f.s.) government are not restricted to
Islam. Rather, all earlier divine scriptures have made a mention of
it.[^1]

• There is no dispute in the Islamic Ummah vis-à-vis the belief in Imam
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). But there are numerous differences concerning his
name, tiles and genealogy . When the name mentioned in the heavenly
books of the other nations were not found to be apparently compatible
with that of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). people set out storing the books
themselves. The fact is that everybody is waiting for a universal
savior.

• Islam, in general, and Shiaism in particular, have discussed about
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) in a most clear and unambiguous manner.[^2] For
the Ahlal – Sunnah too, the belief in Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is an
irrefutable one.

• It was the duty of every Prophet (a.s) to give the glad tidings
concerning the advent of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) to their nation.[^3]

• Allah the Almighty, has promised all the nations regarding the
reappearance of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.).[^4]

• All Prophets (a.s) and their successors have been awaiting the
reappearance and just government of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s).[^5]

[^1]: (Muntakhab al-Asar, p. 171, quoting from Dalaael al-Imaamah. As
examples, we have mentioned below the glad tidings of the past Prophets
(a.s) from the Old Testament (Torah) and the New Testament ( Injeel).)
Psalms of Dawood (a.s) , Psalm No. 37, verses 1-39. Psalms of Sulaiman
(a.s) , Psalm No. 72, verses 7-18. Book of Prophet Ash’eyaa (a.s), chap.
11, verse 3-9. Book of Prophet Danial (a.s) , chap. 12, verses 2-4 and
10-13. Bible of Mathew, chap. 24, verses 34-51 Bible of Marks, chap. 13,
verses 30-37. Bible of Luke, chap. 12, verses 35-48 Bible of Luke, chap.
21, verses 22-36.

[^2]: (For details refer ‘Al-Imam al-Mahdi l’nda Ahlal-Sunnah’ by Mahdi
Fawih Eemaani. In this book, 70 books of the ahl al- Sunnah have been
used for reference. Either the entire book has been reproduced or only
the part related to Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). Significantly, the references
cited are the original works of the Ahl al-Sunnah.)

[^3]: (Mikyaal al- Mukaarim, vol. 1, p. 49.)

[^4]: (Behar al – Anwar , vol.1,p.102)

[^5]: ( Al-Ghaybah of No\`maani, p. 194; Behaar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
136; E’qd al-Dorar, P. 61; Behaar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 143; Mikyaal
al-Makaarim, vol. 2,p.150.)


