18. Characteristics Of The Rulers
=================================

A. Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)
----------------------------

• Allah, the Almighty, has equipped Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) with the
perfections of all the Prophets (a.s.) and their successors.[^1]

### 1. Knowledge of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)

• Allah, the Almighty, has endowed the treasure-chest of His unseen
knowledge (Ilm-e-Ghaib) to Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.). [^2]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will act as per divine inspirations. Of course,
these inspirations will not be in the form of a new shariah or a new
religion.[^3]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the preserver of the treasure-chest of
knowledge, the heir of the sciences of all Prophets (a.s.) and is aware
of everything.[^4]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will judge in concordance with divine knowledge.
He will recognize the people through their realities and their inner
selves. Like the verdicts of Prophet Dawood (a.s.) and Prophet Sulaymaan
(a.s.), his judgments too will be needless of witnesses.[^5]

### 2. Infallibility of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is free and pure from all sins, defects,
uncleanness and errors.[^6]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is truth personified. Truth shall always be with
him.[^7]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) has never disrespected divine commandments. He
(a.t.f.s.) has never altered any of Allah's orders.[^8]

### 3. Morality of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)

• The morality of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is that of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.). Allah, the Almighty, has addressed the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) as 'the great morality'.[^9]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) possesses the forbearance of Prophet Dawood
(a.s.) and the patience of Prophet Ayyub (a.s.).[^10]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is extremely large-hearted. Dignity and poise
are his hallmarks.[^11]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the most calm, forbearing, pious, generous,
brave and devoted of all people.[^12]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will distribute large amounts of wealth. He will
be very lenient towards the poor and the needy but exceedingly strict
with his workers.[^13]

### 4. The Approach of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)

• The approach and style of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) will be exactly
like those of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and Ameer al-Momineen,
Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.).[^14]

• The tradition (sunnah ) of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) will be that of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).[^15]

• Like Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) too will wear
coarse clothes.[^16]

• The diet of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) will be dry barley-bread.[^17]

### 5. The Power of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)

• Allah, the Almighty, has delegated all the affairs of this world to
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).[^18]

• He (a.t.f.s.) has been granted a light through which he can see as
well as hear all things, far and near.[^19]

• For Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), the universe is as clear as his palm.[^20]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) has the power to traverse the earth within
moments (tayy al-arz).[^21]

• All the miracles of the previous Prophets (a.s.) are with Imam
az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.).

• Through these, he (a.t.f.s.) will complete the arguments against his
enemies.[^22]

• Imam az-Zamaan (a.t .f.s.) has the heavenly staff of Prophet Moosa
(a.s.),which was brought to him by Jibraeel (a.s.). Through this staff,
Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) can perform the miracles of Prophet Moosa
(a.s.) like the staff becoming a python in the hands, gushing forth of
water from the stones and providing for food.[^23]

• Like Prophet Ibraaheem (a.s.), Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will emerge safe
andsecure from blazing fire.[^24]

• Skeletal bones, more than a thousand years old, will converse with
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).[^25]

• Like Prophet Dawood (a.s.), iron will soften like wax in the hands of
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).[^26]

• Physically, Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will be so strong that he can uproot
a tree with his hands. If he addresses a mountain in a stern tone, it
will crumble into pieces.[^27]

### 6. Divine Help for Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)

• Allah, the Almighty, will iron out all difficulties for Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.). Factors of success and victory will be in his control.[^28]

• Including Hazrat Jibraeel (a.s.) and Hazrat Mikaaeel (a.s.), forty six
thousand (46,000) angels will be amongst the helpers and companions of
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).[^29]

• The first person to kiss his hands and pay allegiance to him will be
Hazrat Jibraaeel (a.s.).[^30]

• Six thousand (6000) Jinns will be among the self-sacrificing
companions of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.), who will pay allegiance to him
after the angels.[^31]

• Awe and fear will strike the hearts of the enemies in such fashion
that victory will be facilitated for Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).[^32]

• The standard brought by Hazrat Jibraeel (a.s.) for the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) during the battle of Badr will be hoisted by Imam
az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.). The special feature of this standard will be that
it will instill fear in the hearts of the enemies in all the four
directions equaling a distance of a month's journey. Correspondingly, it
will increase the contentment and solidity of the believers'
hearts.[^33]

• Air, clouds, lightning, etc. will be submissive and obedient to Imam
az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.).[^34]

• A number of his enemies will be swallowed by the earth.[^35]

• Boulders will inform him of his enemies hiding behind them.[^36]

• The sun and the moon will respond to his call.[^37]

• Hazrat Jibraeel (a.s.) will present Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) with a
heavenly steed called Boraaq.[^38]

B. Companions of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)
------------------------------------------

• The nature of his (a.t.f.s.) companions will be pure and immaculate.
They will be free from hypocrisy and all other contaminations.[^39]

• Their hearts will be untainted and unadulterated from malice, jealousy
and enmity.[^40]

• The companions of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) will not have an iota of
doubt concerning Allah, the Almighty and they will recognize Him as He
ought to be recognized.[^41]

• They will shudder due to divine fear.[^42]

• Their souls are lit like lamps and their hearts are lighted as
well.[^43]

• They will submit completely before Allah, the Almighty.[^44]

• They will be worshippers through the night and roam like lions during
the day.[^45]

• Instead of passing their nights in comfort, they will spend it in the
worship of their Lord.[^46]

• All of them will be sincere and loyal.[^47]

• Through them, Allah will help and assist Imam az-Zamaan
(a.t.f.s.).[^48]

• They will always accompany him (a.t.f.s.). During the battles, they
will defend Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.), fulfill his desires and will be
more obedient and submissive before him than a slave-maid to her
master.[^49]

• The companions of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) will be braver than lions
and sharper than lances.[^50]

• If they attack the mountains, they will uproot them.[^51]

• Their hearts will be stronger than steel. Each one of them will be
equal to forty (40) powerful men.[^52]

• They will be so strong and powerful that they will scorch the earth
beneath their enemy.[^53]

• In whichever direction they turn, fear and awe will be struck in the
hearts of the enemies one month prior to their arrival.[^54]

• Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) will rub his hands between their chest and
shoulder by which they will not hesitate in any judgment. No decision
will be difficult for them.[^55]

• Nothing from the earth will be hidden from them.[^56]

• The companions of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) will be noble, learned and
rulers of the earth.[^57]

• With Allah's permission, they will enliven the dead, walk on water and
ride on clouds. They will have the power to traverse the entire earth
within moments.[^58]

• Everything on the earth, including wild beasts and birds, will be
obedient and submissive to them. Not only obedient, they shall even
crave and strive to acquire his satisfaction.[^59]

• The part of the earth on which they tread shall take pride over other
parts.[^60]

• His (a.t.f.s.) companions will be 313 in number, including 50
women.[^61]

• Most of these companions and associates are young while the old are
very few and far between.[^62]

• Prophet Eesaa (a.s.) will descend from the sky to help Imam az-Zamaan
(a.t.f.s.), pay allegiance to him and perform prayers behind him.[^63]

• Allah will resurrect some of the believers (from their graves) for
helping Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.).[^64]

C. Deed of Allegiance
---------------------

• Imam Mahdi (a. t . f .s.) will accept allegiance from his companions
and helpers on the following conditions:

• They shall not commit adultery

• They shall not steal

• They shall not commit homosexuality

• They shall not shed blood unjustly

• They shall not attack anybody's house (unjustly)

• They shall not disgrace anybody

• They shall not assault anybody unjustly

• They shall not create road blocks for others

• They shall not spread insecurity on the streets

• They shall not injure anybody

• They shall not cheat anybody

• They shall not breach trusts

• They shall not violate their promises

• They shall not abuse the Muslims

• They shall not kill the one who seeks shelter with them

• They shall neither usurp the wealth of the orphan nor perpetrate
Injustice on him

• They shall not provide testimony without certitude

• They shall side with goodness and distance themselves from filth and
contamination

• They shall not hoard gold, silver, wheat and barley

• They shall not bow down before gold and silver (i.e. not be lured by
worldly wealth)

• They shall be content with little

• They shall not trade in usury

• They shall cook barley bread

• They shall not drink alcohol

• They shall not adorn themselves with impermissible things

• They shall not wear robes of silk and fur

• They shall wear coarse clothes

• The earth shall be their pillows

• They shall not destroy the mosques

• They shall struggle in the way of Allah as is the right of struggle

After they have agreed to these conditions, Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)
will make the following things obligatory on himself in their respect:

• He shall walk on their paths

• He shall wear clothes like them

• He shall travel on mounts just like theirs

• He shall act on their desires

• He shall be content with little

• He shall not appoint any gate keeper or watchman

• He shall worship Allah as is the right of worship

With the help of Allah, he shall fill the earth with justice and equity
as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression.[^65]

[^1]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 305-306; vol. 53, p. 9; vol. 102,
p. 346; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 167-168; Kefaayah al-Asar, p.
43.)

[^2]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 43, p. 187.)

[^3]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 339, 389 & 390; vol. 102, p. 47;
Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 49, 90, 215.)

[^4]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 95, p. 378; vol. 102, p. 67 & 117; Mikyaal
al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 49.)

[^5]: (Al-Amaali of Shaykh Sadooq (a.r.), Session 92, p. 504; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 18, p. 341; vol. 52, p. 325 narrating from Kamaal
al-Deen & p. 339 & 389; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 6, 83-84 & 145.)

[^6]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, p. 187.)

[^7]: (Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, p. 371; Behaaral-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 321;
Mo'jam Ahaadees al-Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 136.)

[^8]: (Jamaal al-Usboo', the acts of Cellar (Sardaab). Imam Reza (a.s.)
taught this supplication to Yunus Ibn Abd al-Rahmaan.) \_ Imam az-Zamaan
(a.t.f.s.) is absolutely truthful in speech. (Yanaabee' al-Mawaddah, p.
406.)

[^9]: (Surah Qalam : Verse 4; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 84; E'qd
al-Dorar, p. 31; A'laam al-Waraa, p. 291; Muntakhab al-Asar, p. 183
narrating from Al-Malaahem wa al-Fetan.)

[^10]: (Kefaayah al-Asar, p. 43)

[^11]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 319; E'qd al-Dorar,p. 41.)

[^12]: (Ehqaaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 367.)

[^13]: (Muntakhab al-Asar, p. 311.)

[^14]: (Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, p. 350-351; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51,
p. 223-224; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 95,)

[^15]: (Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, p.411; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, p. 73;
Muntakhab al-Asar, p.183.)

[^16]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 102-103.)

[^17]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 103.)

[^18]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 95, p. 378 narrating from al-Balad
al-Ameen.)

[^19]: (Al-Kharaaej, vol. 2, p. 930-931.)

[^20]: (Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, p. 674; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p.
328.)

[^21]: (Al-Kharaaej, vol. 2, p. 930-931; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p.
283; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 144)

[^22]: (Isbaat al-Hudaat, vol. 7, p. 357; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1,
p. 167.)

[^23]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 324-325 narrating from Kamaal
al-Deen; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 204, 206 & 208.)

[^24]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 181.)

[^25]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 223-224.)

[^26]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 214.)

[^27]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 322 narrating from Kamaal al-Deen;
Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 27; Muntakhab al-Asar, p. 221.)

[^28]: (Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, p. 369; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, p.
150; vol. 52, p. 283; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 34.)

[^29]: (Al-Amaali of Shaykh Sadooq (a.r.), Session 92, p. 504;
Al-Ghaibah by No'mani, p. 56; Tafseer al-Ayyaashi, vol. 1, p. 197;
Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 19, p. 284; vol. 52, p. 326 narrating from Kaamil
al-Ziyaaraat; vol. 52, p. 356; vol. 53, p. 14, 87; Tafseer al-Burhaan,
vol. 1, p. 313; Al-Burhaan Fi Alaamaat-e-Mahdi Aakher al-Zamaan (a.s.),
p. 77; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 29, 73-74. 2. Behaar al-Anwaar.)

[^30]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 285-286 narrating from Kamaal
al-Deen; vol. 53, p. 8; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 95.)

[^31]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, p. 8, 14, 35 & 187 narrating from
al-Ikhtesaas.)

[^32]: (Al-Ghaibah by No'mani, p. 5-6; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 343
narrating from Tafseer al-Ayyaashi; vol. 52, p. 347-348; Al-Mahajjah Fi
Maa Nazala Fi al-Qaaem al-Hujjah (a.s.), p. 115; Mikyaal al-Makaarem,
vol. 1, p. 71 & 198.)

[^33]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, p. 135; vol. 52, p. 328 narrating
from Kaamil Al-Ziyaaraat; vol. 52, p. 360 narrating from Al-Ghaibah by
No'mani; vol.78, p. 391; Yawm al-Khalaas, p. 288; Mikyaal al-Makaarem,
vol. 1, p. 241.)

[^34]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 321; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1,
p. 199 & 285.)

[^35]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 293-294.)

[^36]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 324 narrating from Kamaal al-Deen;
vol. 52, p. 388.)

[^37]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 144.)

[^38]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 328 narrating from Kaamil
al-Ziyaaraat; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 283.)

[^39]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 35.)

[^40]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 35.)

[^41]: (Al -Bayaan Fi Akhbaar-e-Mahdi Aakher a l -Zamaan (a. s . ) ,
chapter 5; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 65.)

[^42]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 65.)

[^43]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 65.)

[^44]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 35 & p. 311 narrating from
Oyoon-o-Akhbaar al-Reza (a.s.).)

[^45]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 65.)

[^46]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 65.)

[^47]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 283 narrating from Kamaal
al-Deen.)

[^48]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 65.)

[^49]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 65.)

[^50]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, p. 372 narrating from al-Ikhtesaas.)

[^51]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 327 narrating from Kamaal
al-Deen.)

[^52]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 327 narrating from Kamaal al-Deen;
Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 148.)

[^53]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 318; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1,
p. 148 narrating from Basaaer al-Darajaat.)

[^54]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 65.)

[^55]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 345; Al-Malaahem wa al-Fetan, p.
205; Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 144 & 235.)

[^56]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 235-236.)

[^57]: (Al-Malaahem wa al-Fetan, p. 205.)

[^58]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 144; Hilyah al-Abraar, vol. 2,
p. 635 narrating from Dalaael al-Imaamah, p. 241.)

[^59]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 327 narrating from Kamaal al-Deen;
Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 117.)

[^60]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 327 narrating from Kamaal al-Deen;
Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 117.)

[^61]: (Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 279.)

[^62]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 334.)

[^63]: (Al-Amaali of Shaykh Sadooq, Session 39, p. 181; E'qd al-Dorar,
p. 157 & 230.)

[^64]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, p. 91-92 narrating from Al-Ghaibah by
Shaykh Toosi (a.r.); Mikyaal al-Makaarem, vol. 1, p. 213.)

[^65]: (Muntakhab al-Asar, p. 469; Al-Malaahem waal-Fetan, p. 149; E'qd
al-Dorar, p. 96.)


