1. The Pivot of Life
====================

• Engulfed with darkness. In the quest of the center of light, we are
searching for the sun[^1].

• We are the travelers of midnight. To tread the path, we are gazing at
the stars.[^2]

• Thirst is killing us. Harried, we search for the elixir of life while
only a few moments of life remains.[^3]

• In the dark and chilly night, we are lost in the desert of calamity
and misfortune, striding towards the luminous bonfire on the mountain
peak.[^4]

• In the barren salt desert, we are looking towards the dark clouds
hovering over us and offering a cool shade.[^5]

• During the occultation, we are the orphans of Imam (a.s). We are
searching for the loving hand of the kind father.[^6]

• We are insignificant particles but have heard about the sun. Although,
with scarce recognition that we have about him, we are advancing towards
it[^7]. We are Muslims . To prevent the death of ignorance (i.e. a death
of apostasy and hypocrisy), every moment we are in quest of words that
will grant us further recognition of our Imam(a.t.f.s.).[^8]

• The cold and killing winter of occultation has already set in our
hearts. We beseech Allah to send the beautiful spring and invigorating
breeze of Imam’s (a.t.f.s.) reappearance.[^9]

• We know that Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) is like the Holy Ka’bah, around
whom we must circumambulate[^10].

[^1]: السلام على شمس الظلام “peace be on the sun of the darkness.”-
Rabee’ al- Anaam, p. 364, 381)

[^2]: يا أبن الانجم الزاهرة “ O son of the brilliant
stars.”-Dua-e-Nudbah, Rabee’al-Abaan, p. 153)

[^3]: (It is an indication towards the last verse of Surah Mulk. In the
traditions, Imam Mahdi (a.s.) is referred to as ماء معين “ flowing
water.”)

[^4]: ( الامام، النار على اليفاع، الحار لمن اصطلى به و الدليل في
المهالك، من فارقه فهالك “The Imam is a bonfire on the mountain, warm for
the one who seeks warmth from him and a guide in places of destruction.
Whoever separates from him is destroyed.”- Kamaal al – Deen, vol. 2,
p.677, Tr. No.31)

[^5]: (“The Imam is sweet water for the thirsty ones.” – Kamaal al-Deen,
Vol. 2, p. 677. Tr.NO.31)

[^6]: (Imam Hassan Askari (a.s) states, أشد من يتم اليتيم، يتيم أنقطع عن
إمامه، لا يقدر على الوصول إليه... “The greatest orphan is he who is
isolated from his Imam and does not have access to him...”-Munyah
al-Mureed, p. 114, part 4.)

[^7]: (Imam Reza (a.s) says الامام.... الشمس المضيئة “The Imam...is like
a brilliant sun.” – Kamaal al –Deen, vol. 2, p. 677, Tr. No.31.)

[^8]: (This refers to the reliable and authentic tradition of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a) “He who dies without recognizing the Imam
of his age, dies the death of ignorance.)

[^9]: ( السلام عليك ياربيع الانام “ Peace be on you. O Spring of
Mankind. “Ziyaarat of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) in the Celler ( Sardaab) at
Saamarra.)

[^10]: ( مثل الامام كمثل الكعبة، إذ يؤتى و لا يأتي “ The likeness of
Imam is like that of the Ka’bah. He is approached and he does not
approach. “ – Behaar al – Anwaar, vol. 36, p. 358)


