25.  Involking Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.)
========================================

O Mahdi! O Braveheart! O Lion of God!

The righteous are awaiting you. Please come!

O Mahdi! O Ark of Salvation! The world is engulfed by storms. Ships have
been wrecked. The eyes of your loved ones are fixed at you. They are
awaiting your arrival.

O Mahdi! O Center of Hope!

Darkness has enveloped the hearts. The helpless and the weak are
orphans. Please come and stroke the hand of benevolence on their heads.

O Mahdi! O Shore of Deliverance!

The hearts of believers are awaiting you restlessly. Please come and
grant them tranquility.

O Mahdi! O Morn of Hope!

The night of separation is painfully long. While most lie in the deep
slumber of negligence, a few of your lovers and adorers await your
luminous reappearance with restive eyes and restless hearts. Please come
that the flowers of hope may blossom.

Please come that wilted gardens may bloom again.

Please come that the nightingales may sing the song of your victory and
triumph.

Please come that the meadows and pastures may get a fresh lease of life.

O Mahdi!

O fountain of virtues! O loftiness of the righteous! O standard of
liberty! The world is replete with sorrow. Now, please raise the veil of
occultation.

O Mahdi!

O Power of God! O the one with (the sword) Zulfiqar in his hands! The
oppressors have become extremely haughty and arrogant.

O Mahdi!

O the Treasurer of Divine Knowledge!

Hoist the flag as the darkness of ignorance has engulfed the world.

O Mahdi!

O the Aware Eye of God! The ark of humanity is whirling in crises. Only
the breeze of your reappearance can save it.

O Mahdi!

O Heir of Ali! Our begging bowl is empty.

May the poor receive the same royal generosity once again!

O Mahdi!

O Legatee of Prophet Yusuf! Despair is striking the hearts. May the
hearts gain the soul of hope!

O Mahdi!

O Messiah of the Soul! Sickness and helplessness is rampant and
widespread.

Only you can grant cure to the sick.

O Mahdi!

O Inheritor of Imam Reza's (a.s.) knowledge! The hearts are devoid of
real knowledge. Please quench the thirst (of knowledge) of parched
throats.

O Mahdi!

O Obedient Servant of Allah! The essence of worship has abandoned the
hearts. Please give the life of belief to the dead hearts.

O Sun of Life!

Till when will you remain concealed behind the clouds of occultation?

O Bright Moon!

Till when will you hide behind the clouds in the dark night?

O Spring of Life!

Till when will rubbish sweepings adorn the gatherings?

O Sharp Sword of Allah!

Till when will the tyrants be let loose?

O Pen!

What has happened to you? Stop!

He (a.t.f.s.) himself is awaiting divine orders.

Since ages, he (a.t.f.s.) has been raising the cry, 'Is there a helper?'

There is none to respond to his cry but a few righteous believers. For
centuries, he (a.t.f.s.) is praying for his early reappearance. But
there are few of true character and truthful ones to say 'Amen'.

In the House of Allah, on all four sides of the center of monotheism, in
the presence of the Almighty, the tongue is in total harmony with the
hand while supplicating,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم انجز لي ما وعدتني
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O Allah! Fulfill for me what You have promised me."

Come!

Let us take a pledge of mastership, obedience, love and sacrifice at the
threshold of Imamat.

Let us purify our contaminated hearts, cleanse them of sins and prepare
them to listen to his enlivening and enriching teachings.

Let us pray for his earliest reappearance every morning and evening.

From the depth of our hearts and with utmost righteousness, let us call
out,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم عجِّل لوليك الفرج
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O Allah! Hasten the reappearance of your Friend”

Aameem!


