3. The Hope Of All Ages
=======================

“He” will definitely arrive, sooner or later. He will positively come
with the Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.) standard on his shoulder and the sword of
Ameer al- Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s) in his hands. The caravan of
joys and pleasures shall accompany him. He will be carrying an enormous
burden of the light of guidance of human bliss, both in this world as
will as the hereafter.

“He” will certainly come, a standard of virtue and nobility, a
fountainhead of deliverance and mastership. He will infuse a fresh lease
of life in the dead humans, the lone rider of the field of faith.

When “He” arrives, he will enliven the forgotten realities of the Holy
Quran. In the age of excessive and vain talks, lacking substance and
eloquence, he shall give life to the meaning of the words and revitalize
spirituality.

“He” will come for sure. His advent is a divine promise. And Allah the
Almighty never reneges on His Promise.[^1]  
 The promise of his reappearance is associated with the true assurance
of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). Even if a day remains from the
life of the earth, Allah the Almighty would extend that day till this
great personality emerges[^2].

His reappearance is a divine promise, the guarantee of which is taken by
none other than Allah Himself.[^3]  
 His advent is sure and definite. He is Allah’s treasure, through whom
He will honour His friends and disgrace His enemies[^4].

His reappearance is certain. He is Allah’s Light that the apostates
desire to extinguish. But Allah, the subduer will perfect His light,
notwithstanding the displeasure and discontent of the disbelievers and
the infidels.[^5]

[^1]: ( Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s) says, أن القائم من الميعاد و الله لا
يخلف الميعاد “ Surely the Qaim is from Allah’s promise and Allah does
not violate His promise.”-Al Ghaibah by No’mani, p. 303, Ch. 18, Tr. No.
10; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 250.)

[^2]: ( و الذي بعثني بالحق نبياً، لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحدة لطول
الله عزَّ و جل ذلك اليوم حتى يخرج فيه ولدي المهدي The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) prophesied, “( I swear) by the One who raised me as a Prophet
with the truth ! Even if one day remains for the earth’s destruction,
Allah the Almighty will prolong that day, until He brings my son
Mahdi.”- Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, p.71)

[^3]: (السلام عليك يا وعد الله الذي ضمنه “ Peace be on you. O the
Promise of Allah, for whom He has taken guarantee.” Ziyaarat
Aal-e-Yaasin.)

[^4]: (المدخر لكرامة أولياء الله و بوار أعدائه “The stored one for
honoring the friends of Allah and destroying His enemies.” Rabee’ al-
Anaam, p.377

[^5]: (النور الذي أراد أهل الكفر إطفائه، فأبى الله “ The light which the
infidels wish to extinguish but Allah thwarts ( their attempts).”-
Rabee’ al-Anaam, p.377, 378.)


