4. Paradise Of The Inhabitants Of The Earth
===========================================

When the light of this reappearance will emerge, it will be a different
world. Then the earth will be a kind of paradox. Dead with oppression
and apostasy of its inhabitants, it will get a new lease of life. The
glorification and exaltation of Allah on earth will be with recognition.
At that time, the earth will come alive due to the presence of Imam
az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s[^1]

His reappearance is a sign of the Major Resurrection ( Qayamat- e-
Kubra), the day on which the earth shall transform to a condition very
different from that of today[^2]

Imam Sajjad(a.a) informs us,

*“ The earth , which will not be tainted with the sins of the creatures,
will be a different earth. This earth will be distinct from the earth
prior to the reappearance*[^3]*. “*

Some commentators and interpreters have explained the above concept
thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و من نسل علي (ع) القائم المهدي (ع) الذي يبدل الارض غير الارض
  </p>
</blockquote>

“ And from the progeny of Hazrath Ali(a.s.) will be the Qaem, the Mahdi,
who will change the earth with ta different one.” ( Al-Ghaibah by
No’mani, p. 146, Chapter 10, Tr. No.4)

For the infants in the cradles to the corpses buried in the graves,
everybody will get a new life. And all of them will desire to take a
step in the direction of their master.[^4]  
 The Sincere followers of the Messenger of Allah( s.a.w.a) and the Imams
(a.s) In this nation will hasten towards their master just as the bees
take shelter in its leader and the beehive[^5].”

Such things are not improbable or unlikely for Allah Who has absolute
power overall things. [^6]

The same Allah, Who destroys His enemies with His Might and Subjugation,
confers His boundless marvels and bounties on His friends. At that
moment, He will convert this world into a completely different one.
Simply listening to its characteristics and traits gives a new light to
the mind and the soul.

[^1]: ( Allah the Almighty emphasizes in Hadith al-Qudsi بالقائم منكم
أُغمر أرضي بتسبيحي و تهليلي و تقديسي و تكبيري و تمجيدي “ With the Qaem
(a.t.f.s.) amongst you, I will fill the earth with My glorification, My
exalting and My extolling. “ – Al-Amaali of Shaigh Saduq (r.a), P. 504,
Session 92: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 23, p.504, Session 92; Behaar
al-Anwaar, vol. 23, p. 128. If we pay attention to this tradition, we
find that the words, بالقائم منكم has come before the verb أُغمِر. In
Arabic grammar, this denotes confinement i.e. it is only and only
through Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) that Allah, the Almighty will inhabit
this earth with His glorification, exaltation and extolling.

[^2]: (يوم تبدَّل الارض غير الارض “ On the day when the earth shall be
changed into a different earth’ Surah Ibraheem(14): verse 48)

[^3]: ( Under the Quranic verse, Imam Sajjad(a.s) explains, يعني بأرض لم
تكسب عليها الذنوب “ It means that He will change it with an earth on
which there will be no sins. “ – Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 7 , p. 110.)

[^4]: (The meaning of this statement in all books is ‘universal harmony
after the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) about the establishment
of his government.’)

[^5]: (Al-Malaahem wa al-Fetan, p. 70; Muntakhab al-Asar, p. 488, Part
7, Chapter 7, Tr. No.2)

[^6]: (أن الله على كل شيء قدير “ Surely Allah has power over all things.
"- Surah Baqarah (2): Verse 148


