5. Fervor and Supplication
==========================

After the reappearance, the world will be a new and amazing place.

• The Messenger of Allah(s.a.w.a) will be joyous and glad on seeing him
( a.t.f.s).[^1]

• Ameerul Momineen Ali Ilb Abi Taalib (a.s) displayed eagerness to him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شوقاً الى رؤيته
  </p>
</blockquote>

“How I desire to see him[^2].”  
 • The beloved daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a), Hazrat
Fatemah al-Batul (s.a) , while remembering that golden era, used to say,
“It will be a time when no two people would dispute over a matter
because the right of the oppressed will be restored to him.”[^3]

• When the people objected to the peace treaty of Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba
(a.s), he (a.s.) gave them the glad tidings of the illustrious era of
reappearance.[^4]

• On the eve of Aashoora, the Chief of the Martyrs, Imam Husain (a.s)
prophesied to his self-sacrificing and loyal companions that they would
be among the helpers and companions of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). (Shaikh
Ja’far Shustari (r.a.) has narrated this tradition in Fawaaed al-
Mushaahed. )

• On the day of Arafah, Imam Zain al-Aabedeen (a.s) used to supplicate
for the companions of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s). (Al-Sahaeefah
al-Sajjadiyyah, Supplication No. 47.

• Imam Muhammad al-Baqer (a.s) informed Umm Hani, “If you attain his
era, your eyes will be cooled.”[^5]

• Imam Ja’far al-Sadeq (a.s) used to beseech Allah after the Zohr
prayers of hastening the reappearance.[^6]

• Imam Moosa al-Kaazem (a.s) , after the Asr prayers, invoked for his
early reappearance.[^7]

• Imam Ali al-Reza (a.s) has recommended a supplication to be recited in
the Qunoot of the Friday prayers for the reappearance of Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.).[^8]

• Imam Muhammad Taqi al-Jawaad (a.s) suggested praying for the
reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s) after Namaz and considered it as a
comfort for his heart and cure for the hearts of the believers.[^9]

• Imam Ali al-Naqi al-Hadi (a.s) taught Ziyaarat-e-Jaameah in which he
(a.s) narrates, “My eyes are fixed in the way of your reign. I am always
ready to help you till Allah grants you authority and sovereignty over
the earth.”[^10]

• Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s) foretold that the only way of deliverance
from disputes and destruction during the occultation is steadfastness on
the Imamat of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s) and praying for his early
reappearance.[^11]

• Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s) , in his first speech after his birth, prayed for
his reappearance [^12]

[^1]: (اللهم و سر نبيك محمداً (ص) برؤيته “O Allah! Grant joy to your
Prophet Muhammad ( s.a.w.a) by his vision.” – Dua-e-Ahad.

[^2]: (Behaar al – Anwaar, vol. 51, p.115)

[^3]: (Kefaayah al-Asar, p. 199; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 36, p. 353)

[^4]: (Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1 , P.316, ch.29, Tr. No. 2)

[^5]: (فإن أدركت زمانه قرَّت عينك Al-Kaafi, vol. 1, p. 276)

[^6]: (Rabee’ al-Anaam, p. 127)

[^7]: (Rabee’ al-Anaam, p. 128)

[^8]: (Jamaal al-Usboo, part 30 : Mo’jam al-ahaadees al-Imam al- Mahdi
(a. s), vol.4 , p. 171)

[^9]: (Mo’jam al-Ahaadees al-Imam al-Mahdi (a.s) , vol. 4, p. 189)

[^10]: (Ziyaarat-e-Jaameah-e-Kabeerah, Behaar al-Anwaar, vol.102,p.129.)

[^11]: (Mo’jam al-Ahaadees al-Imama al-Mahdi (a.s), vol. 4, P. 267, Tr.
No. 1299)

[^12]: (Sahifa-e-Mahdiyyah compiled by Sayyed Murtuzaa Mujtahidi.)


