6. A Magnificent Sight
======================

The distance between the current social order and the promised one is
extremely vast but at the same time, it is also very short.

The distance is wide like the duration of the long night of negligence
for those unmindful of the light, so much so that their hearts were
numbed and they felt needless of the Imam of their time (a.t.f.s). We
ignore the source of life and our hearts are content with the thirst of
ignorance.

Caged in unawareness, we think darkness to be light and even brag about
it arrogantly!

We have distanced ourselves from the fountainhead of guidance and are
passing our lives in the ocean of perplexity and amazement and are even
happy about it!

How vast is this distance! This is the distance from darkness to light.

But from another aspect, this distance is very less.

Those who have submitted their hearts to the pivot of faith and the
center of life;

Those who always feel the necessity to maintain contact with their Imam
az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s) and realize him (a.t.f.s) with their entire
existence;

Those who believe that life without the remembrance of the essence of
live (a.t.f.s.) is tantamount to a barbaric and useless existence;

Those who have experienced the thirst with their entire being are
searching for the elixir of life in this world’s dry salt-pan;

It is for such people that the distance between these two societies is
very little. Despite living in this society, their hearts are firmly
ensconced in that world. They actually live in and for that world.

Talking about such people, Imam Sajjad (a.s) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأن الله تبارك و تعالى أعطاهم من العقول و الافهام و المعرفة ما صارت به
الغَيْبَة عندهم بمنزلة الشهادة
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This is because Allah has granted them such intellect, understand and
recognition that for them occultation is the same as witnessing.”[^1]

It is our duty to strive our utmost to reduce this distance to the
maximum possible extent and to be unhappy with the prevalent
circumstances; we must look forward to the divine, golden and bright
future and wait for it with our entire being.

[^1]: (Kamaal al- Deen, vol. 1, p. 320, Chapter 31, Tr. No.2)


