8.  Divine Proof
================

It is necessary that we pay attention to the following:

Whatever we have highlighted here is just one dimension from the
innumerable aspects of Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.), that is, a glimpse of
his universal government after his reappearance.

Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the last link in the sequence of guidance and
light. He is the inheritor of the perfections of the past Prophets(a.s),
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w), Janabe Fatema (s.a) . This aspect has been
mentioned in Dua an-Nudba and other reliable supplications. In dua
an-Nudba we address Imam (a.s) thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يابن الهداة المهديين، يابن البدور المنيرة، يابن السبل الواضحة، يابن
الدلائل المشهودة، يابن الصراط المستقيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“ O son of the divinely guided leaders, O son of the illuminating moons,
O son of the clear paths, O son of the witnessed proofs, O son of the
straight path.”

Tens of such modes of addressing Imam (a.t.f.s.) can be seen in
supplications and ziyaraat. These terms not only underline the personal
inheritance but also highlight the spiritual and religious legacy of
Imam (a.t.f.s.).

Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the heir of the perfections of the preceding
infallibles (a.s). Perfections of the preceding infallibles (a.s)
Virtues and merits ascribed to these exalted personalities are equally
applicable for Imam az-Asr (a.t.f.s.).

Allah, the Almighty, has conferred a boundless ocean of perfections and
virtues, which has wrecked the ship of human intellects and thoughts.
(That is, to fathom their virtues and station is beyond human
understanding).

Who is the Divine Proof?
------------------------

Indeed, this is a critical question that needs to be addressed. The
(innumerable) traits of sunlight (that is, Allah’s proof) cannot be
descried by a particle. There is only one way and that is to seek its
description from the sun itself.

• The Imam (a.t.f.s.) is a human being with celestial qualities,
heavenly physique, divine command, holy soul and a great secret of
Allah. His essence is angelic and his attributes are divine. His
characteristics are endowed by Allah and he has been selected by the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). He is aware of the unseen. All these
traits are specific to the holy Ahlul Bayt (a.s). None can equal the
progeny of Muhammad (s.a.w.a) in these qualities and perfection.[^1]

• From our (Ahlul Bayt (a.s)) virtues and excellence, nothing has been
related to you but a single alphabet from all the alphabets.[^2]

• (O Ahlul Bayt (a.s))! Indeed, Allah, the Almighty, has placed you at a
station inaccessible to others. Your virtues are unprecedented and none
can overwhelm you in them. None can scale the heights that you have
scaled and none can hope to rise to the rank that you have ascended.
(Imam Ali Naqwi (a.s) in the Ziyaarat –e – Jaamea’h Surely, man’s power
of comprehension and conception are simply incapable of perceiving their
exhorted status. Therefore, let us bow our heads before the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s) (in submission and expression of our helplessness) and enrich our
hearts with the words of Imam Sadeq (a.s):

“ One who desire that his faith attains perfection, must sincerely
confess, ‘My belief in all instances and under all circumstances is in
conformity with the teachings of th Ahlul Bayt (a.s), explicit or
otherwise. I acknowledge absolute faith in all those things that have
reached and that which have not reached unto me from them (a.s).[^3]

From the garden of Light and Knowledge of the Pure Ahlul Bayt (a.s), we
present a bouquet of fragrant flowers to their lovers. It should be
borne in mind that the dimensions and facets of Imam’s (a.t.f.s.)
government are too diverse for man to grasp. The things that have
reached unto us in the form of reliable and authentic tradition are just
a few from among the thousands.

We beseech the Almighty Allah to increase our faith and certitude in our
master, Imam Zamaan (a.t.f.s.), every moment. Light up the eyes of the
believing friends with the sight of his (a.t.f.s.) government. Accept
their supplications. Let the invocation taught by the Imam (a.t.f.s.),
who is concealed from the eyes but close to the heart, flow on their
tongues:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إنّا نرغب إليك في دولة كريمة، تعزز بها الاسلام و اهله، وتذل بها
النفاق و أهله، و تجعلنا فيها من الدعاة الى طاعتك، و القادة الى سبيلك،
و ترزقنا بها كرامة الدنيا و الآخرة، آمين رب العالمين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah! Surely we are inclined to you concerning the noble government
(of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)).

Though which you will honour Islam and its followers.  
 And though which you will degrade hypocrisy and its followers.  
 And make us in it among those who invite (others) towards your
obedience.  
 And the leaders towards your path.  
 And through which you will bestow upon us the nobility of this world
and the hereafter.  
 Aameen! O Lord of the worlds![^4]

[^1]: (For the detailed traditions from Ali ibn Abi Taalib (a.s)
addressing Taariq ibn shahaab, refer Behaar al-anwaar, vol. 25, pg-
172-173)

[^2]: (Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 25, pg. 283, Tr. No.30.)

[^3]: (Al-Kaafi, vol.1, pg. 391.)

[^4]: (Last few sentences from Dua al-Iftetah. This supplication was
instructed by Imam az-Zamaan (a.t.f.s.) himself and has ordered us to
recite it every night during the holy month of Ramazan.)


