Chapter 91 : the Conditions of the Imams in the Matters of Age H 992, Ch. 91, H 1
=================================================================================

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from ibn Mahbub from Hisham ibn Salim from Yazid al-Kunasiyy who has
said the following.

"I asked abu Ja'far (a.s.), 'Was Jesus at the time he spoke to people
from the cradle a Divine authority over the people of his time?" He
said, "At that time he was a prophet, a Divine authority over the people
but not a Mursal (Messenger). Have you not heard the words of Allah that
say, "He said, "I am the servant of God.

He has given me the Book and has appointed me to be a Prophet (19:30).
He has blessed me no matter where I dwell, commanded me to worship Him
and pay the religious tax for as long as I live." (19:31)

I then said, "Was he the Divine authority over Zackaria at the time
that he was in the cradle?" He said, "At that time Jesus was a sign from
Allah and a blessing to Mary (Maryam) when he spoke on her behalf.

He was a prophet and a Divine authority over all those who heard his
words at that time. Thereafter he did not speak until he was two years
old. At Such time Zackaria was the Divine authority of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious, over the people after the silence of Jesus.
Zackaria then died and his son Yahya (John) inherited the book and
wisdom and he was a small child. You can hear it in the words of Allah,
the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, "We commanded John, Zachariah's
son), "O John, follow the guidance of the Lord with due steadfastness.

We gave knowledge and wisdom to John during his childhood." (19:12)
When Jesus became seven years he then spoke as a prophet and a messenger
until Allah, the Most Holy sent him inspiration. Thus, Jesus was the
Divine authority over John and over all the people. The earth is never
left without the presence of a Divine authority over the people, O abu
Khalid, from the day Allah created Adam and settled him on earth."

I then said, May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, "Did Ali
(a.s.) possess Divine authority from Allah and His Messenger over this
nation (Muslims) during the life time of the Messenger of Allah?" He
said, "Yes, but he kept silent and did not speak along with the
Messenger of Allah. At that time, during the lifetime of the Messenger
of Allah, obedience was of the rights of the Messenger of Allah over the
'Umma (nation) and over Ali (a.s.).

Obedience on the authority of Allah and the Messenger of Allah over the
people as a whole was obligatory to Ali (a.s.) after the death of the
Messenger of Allah. Ali (a.s.) was a very wise and knowledgeable
person."

H 993, Ch. 91, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Safwan ibn Yahya who has said the following. "Once I said to abu Ja'far
(a.s.), 'Before Allah would grant you the blessed birth of abu Ja'far we
would ask you the question and you would say that Allah will soon grant
you a son. Allah, now, has blessed you with such a favor and may He make
him to be the delight for your heart.

We wish not to experience a single day without you but, Allah forbid,
if something would happen to you from who must we seek guidance?" He
pointed with his hand to abu Ja'far (a.s.) and he was standing before
him.

I then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, he is
only a child of three years old." He said, "That does not matter in his
case at all. Jesus rose with Divine authority when he three years old
only."

H 994, Ch. 91, h 3 mmd ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad
from Ali ibn Sayf from certain persons of our people from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) al-Thani (the second). The narrator has said that I said to him
"They speak about (and question) your very young age. He said, "Allah
informed David through inspiration to appoint Sulayman as the executor
of his will and successor while he was just a child minding sheep.

The worshippers and scholars of the Israelites disliked it. Allah then
inspired David to take the staff of those who have objections and that
of Sulayman and place them in a room and seal them with each one's
seals. On the next day whichever staff would be found that has grown
leaves and fruits the owner thereof would be the successor. David
informed them of this matter and they all agreed."

H 995, Ch. 91, h 4

Ali ibn Muhammad and others have narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from
Ya'qub ibn Yazid from Mus'ab From Mas'da from abu Basir who has said the
following. "Once I went to see him. Along with me there was a of five
years old boy who had not yet attained puberty.

The Imam (a.s.) said, "How would you feel if people will debate you
about the divine authority of someone of his age? Or he said about the
Divine authority of one who will come and will be of the same age as
his."

H 996, Ch. 91, h 5

Sahl ibn Ziyad has narrated from Ali ibn Mahziyar from Muhammad ibn
'Isma'il ibn Bazi' who has said the following. "I asked abu Ja'far
(a.s.) of an issue of the Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) and
I said, "Can the Imam be a boy less than seven years old?" He said,
"Yes, he can even be less the five years old." Sahl has said that ibn
Mahziyar narrated this to me in the year two hundred twenty one."

H 997, Ch. 91, h 6

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Khayrani from his father
who has said the following. "Once I was standing in the presence of abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) in Khurasan and someone said to him, 'O my master if
something will happen to you to who must we then turn for guidance?" The
Imam (a.s.) said, "You must turn for guidance to abu Ja'far (a.s.), my
son." The person asking the question seemed to have thought of his (abu
Ja'far (a.s.) age very small.

Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) then said, "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
sent Jesus (a.s.) son of Mary as a Messenger and a prophet being the
author of a whole system of law. He began this task in an age much
smaller than the age of abu Ja'far (a.s.)."

H 998, Ch. 91, h 7

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Asbat who has said the following. "Once I saw abu Ja'far (a.s.) who
had come out to me and I began to look at him from head to his toes so I
can describe him to our people in Egypt.

I was looking until he sat down and said, "O Ali, Allah has supported
His argument against the people in the case of Imamat (Leadership with
Divine Authority) just as He has done so in the case of the prophets. He
has said, "We gave authority to him (John) over the people during his
childhood (19:12)..

When he attained maturity, God gave him strength, wisdom and knowledge.
Thus, do We reward those who do good." (12:22) "When he grew-up to
manhood and became forty years old,. . ." (46:15). It come to pass that
wisdom comes to a prophet when he is just a child or it may come to a
prophet when he is forty years old."

H 999, Ch. 91, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father who has said the
following. "Once abu Ali ibn Hassa'n spoke to abu Ja'far (a.s.) saying,
"My mater, people refuse to accept your Imamat (Leadership with Divine
Authority) because of you very young age." He said, "Why do they not
refuse to accept the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious. Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has said to His
prophet, "

(Muhammad), say, "This is my way. I and all my followers invite you to
God with proper understanding.. . ." (12:108) By Allah, only Ali (a.s.)
followed him at that time and he was only nine years old. I also am nine
years old.


**Chapter 92 : Only an Imam has the Authority to Wash the Body of an
Imam for Burial H 1000, Ch. 92, h 1**

al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'Umar al-Hallal or someone
other than him who has said the following. "I said to al-Rida (a.s.),
'They argue with us that no one has the authority towash the body of an
Imam for burial except."

The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) then said, "How they would
know who has washed him for burial? What did you say to them?" The
narrator has said that I then said, May Allah take my soul in service
for your cause, I told them that if my Imam would say that he has washed
his body under the throne of the Lord he has told the truth.

If he would saay that he has washed it at the center of the earth he
has told the truth." The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is not that way." I then
asked him, "What then should I say to them (al-waqifiyya sect)?" The
Imam (a.s.) said, "Tell them that I (al-Rida ) washed his body for
burial." I then asked, "must I tell them that you have washed his body?"
He said, "Yes, I have done so."

H 1001, Ch. 92, h 2

It is narrated from him from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn
Jumhur from Yunus from Talha who has said the following. "Once I said to
al-Rida (a.s.), 'Is it true that only an Imam has the authority to wash
the body of an Imam for burial?"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Do you know who comes to wash his body for
burial? One who is better than the one who is absence from his presence
comes to wash. Those who came to Joseph in the well to help when his
parents and family were absent from him."


