Chapter 109 : Notable Points and Comprehensive Ahadith About Wilaya (leadership With Divine Authority) H , Ch. 109, H 1
=======================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn ya'qub al-Kulayni has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan
and Ali ibn Muhammad from Sahl ibn Ziyad from ibn Mahbub from ibn
Al-Ri'ab from Bukayr ibn 'A'yan who has said the following.

"Abu Ja'far (a.s.) used to say, "Allah made our Shi'a (followers) to
acknowledge our Wilaya Leadership with Divine Authority) when they were
only in the realm of small particles. It was the day when Allah made the
small particles to acknowledge Him as the Lord and Muhammad (s.a) as His
prophet."

H , Ch. 109, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il ibn Bazi' from Salih ibn 'Uqba from 'Abdallah ibn
Muhammad al-Ja'fari from abu Ja'far (a.s.) and 'Uqba from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"Allah created the creatures. He created whatever He loved from
whatever He loved. The most beloved to Him He created from the clay of
paradise. He created whatever He disliked from whatever He disliked.
Thus, the most disliked to Him He created from the clay of fire. Then He
sent them to the shadow." I asked him, "What is the shadow?"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Have you not seen your own shadow in the sun
that when look at it is nothing. Allah then sent to them the prophets
who called them to acknowledge Allah as the creator. This is the meaning
of His words. "(Muhammad), if you ask them, "Who had created them
(idols)?" They will certainly say, "God has created them.. . ."? (43:87)
Then He called them to acknowledge the prophets.

Some of them acknowledged and other did not acknowledge. Then He called
them to acknowledge our Wilaya. Those whom He loved, by Allah,
acknowledged and those whom He disliked did not acknowledge as He has
said, "However, how could the people believe what they had previously
called lies?. . ." (10:74) Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then said, "Refusal to
acknowledge was then and there."

H , Ch. 109, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Salma ibn al-Khattab from Ali
ibn Sayf from al-'Abbass ibn 'Amir from Ahmad ibn rizq al-Ghumushani
from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al- Rahman from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following. "Our Wilaya is the Wilaya of Allah without which no
prophet was ever send."

H , Ch. 109, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il ibn Bazi' from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu
al-Sabbah al-Kinani who has said the following. "I heard abu Ja'far
(a.s.) say, "By Allah, in the heavens there are seventy lines of angles.
Even if all the inhabitant of earth would try to count them they will
not be able to count them. All of these angels acknowledge our Wilaya
(Leadership with Divine Authority)."

H , Ch. 109, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu al-Hassan (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) (Leadership with Divine Authority) is
written in all the lines of the prophets. Allah never sent any of His
messengers who would not acknowledge the prophet-hood Muhammad (s.a) and
Ali (a.s.) as the executor of his will."

H , Ch. 109, h 6 Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Muhammad ibn Jumhur who has said that Yunus narrated to
him from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from al-Fudayl ibn yasar from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious has appointed Ali (a.s.) as a light house between His-self and
His creatures.

Whoever would recognize him he will be a believer and whoever would not
recognize him will be an unbeliever. Those who would be ignorant of him
they would be lost. Those who would consider others like would be
Mushrik (considering those who do not have any Divine Authority as
having Divine Authority). Those who would come with his Wilaya they
would be admitted in paradise.

H , Ch. 109, h 7

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan from abu Hamza who has said the
following. "Iheard abu Ja'far (a. s.) say, "Ali (a.s.) is a door that
Allah has opened. Those who would enter this door will be true believers
and those who would go out of it they would unbelievers. Those who would
neither go out nor enter they will be of the category about whom Allah
has said, "I have a decision to make."

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from ibn al-Ri'ab from Bukayr ibn 'A'yan who has said the following.
"Abu Ja'far (a.s.) would say, "Allah made our Shi'a to make a covenant
to acknowledge our Wilaya (Leadership with Divine Authority) when they
were small particles. It was the day when He made all particles to make
a covenant to acknowledge Him as the Lord and Muhammad (s.a) as the
Prophet.

Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, presented to Muhammad his
'Umma (followers) in clay and they were shadows. He created them from
the clay out of which Adam was created. Allah created the spirits of our
Shi'a two thousand years before their bodies were created. He presented
them to the Holy Prophet (s.a) and the Messenger of Allah recognized
them. Ali (a.s.) recognized and we recognize them by their accent."


**Chapter 110 : The Imams (a.s.) know their friends and that they are
the in charge of their affairs H , Ch. 110, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from Salih ibn Sahl from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the following. "A man came
to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) when he was in the company of his
companions. The man offered greetings and said, "By Allah, I love you
and acknowledge your Wilaya (Leadership with Divine Authority)." Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) said to him, "What you say is not true."

He said, "Yes, by Allah, I love you and acknowledge your Wilaya. He
repeated it three times." Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) said, "What you
say is not true. You are not what you say you are. Allah created the
spirits two thousand years before creating the bodies. He then presented
to us those who love us. By Allah, I did not see your spirit among those
presented to us. Where were you." The man remained silent and did not
talk back."

In an other hadith it is said that abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "He was
in thefire."

H , Ch. 110, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan
ibn Sa'id from 'Amr ibn Maymun from 'Ammar ibn Marwan from Jabir from
abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "We know men when we see
them through the reality of faith and the reality of hypocrisy."

H , Ch. 110, h 3

Ahmad ibn Idris and Muhammad ibn Yahya havenarrated from al-Hassan ibn
Ali al-Kufi from 'Ubays ibn Hisham from 'Abdallah ibn Sulayman who has
said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the Imam. Has
Allah made him the in charge of the and in full control (over the
affairs of the people) as Sulayman ibn Dawud was?" The Imam (a.s.) said,
"Yes, he is given control. It is because a man asked him a question and
he gave the answer.

Another person asked the same question and he gave him a different
answer (although the question was the same). A third person asked him
the same question and he gave an answer that was different from both the
previous answers. Then he said, "This is Our gift to you so give them
away free or keep them as you like." (38:39). This is charity from us
enjoy it with thanks or ( give to others) without being questioned.

This is according to Imam Ali's recitation." The narrator has said that
I said to him, "May Allah grant you well being, when the he gives such
answers does the Imam know them?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Glory belongs
to Allah. Have you not heard Allah words? " In this there is evidence
(of the Truth) for the discreet ones. (15:75) (Such people are the Imams
(a.s.) That town lies on a road which still exists (15:76) (It will
remain there for ever)."

Then The Imam (a.s.) said to me, "Yes, when the Imam look at a person
he recognizes him and his color. On hearing his words even from behind
the wall he recognizes him and what he is. Allah has said, "Other
evidence of His existence are the creation of the heavens and the earth
and the differences of languages and colors. In this there is evidence
(of the truth) for the worlds (mankind)." (30:22)

The Imams are the scholars. Whatever they would hear that is spoken
they recognize it, the one who has received salvation or one who is
destroyed. For this reason they answer them as they answer them."


