Chapter 111 : the Birth of the Holy Prophet (s.a) and His Demise
================================================================

The Holy Prophet (s.a) was born on the twelfth of the month of Rabi'
al-Awwal, in the year of Elephant on a Friday at noon. Also it is
narrated that it was at dawn forty years before his receiving Divine
messages. His mother conceived with him on the days of Tashriq (1, 12,
13) of dhul Hajj near the middle Jamara (a pillar of stones) and she was
in the house of 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib. She gave birth in the
Sha'b of abu Talib (a.s.) in the house of Muhammad ibn Yusuf at the left
far corner of the house as you would enter.

al-Khayzuran made that house into a mosque and people use for prayers.
After receiving Divine commands to work as the Messenger of Allah he
remained in Makka for thirteen years. Thereafter he migrated to Madina
wherein he lived for ten years. He passed away on Monday the twelfth of
the month of Rabi' al-Awwal at the age of sixty three. His father
'Abdallah ibn 'Abd al- Muttalib died in Madina among his maternal uncles
when he (Muhammad) was only two months old. His mother, 'Amina daughter
of Wahab ibn 'Abd Manaf, ibn Zuhra ibn Kilab ibn Murra ibn Ka'b ibn
Luway ibn Ghalib, died when he was a boy of four years old.

'Abd al- Muttalib died when the Holy Prophet (s.a.) was about eight
years old. He married khadija when he was twenty and some years old.
From Khadija before receiving the Divine commands of his children biorn
were al-Qasim, Ruqiyya, Zaynaband 'Umm Kulthum. Of his children born
after he received Divine commands were al-Tayyib, al-Tahir and Fatima
(a.s.).

It is also narrated that after he received Divine commands no other
children besides Fatima (a. s.) and that al-Tayyib and al-Tahir were
born before he received divine commands. Khadija (a.s.) died at the time
the Holy Prophet (s.a.) came out of Sha'b of abu Talib. This was one
year before his migration to Madina.Abu Talib died one after the death
of Khaija.

When the Messenger of Allah lost these two people at became very
difficult for him to live in Makka. He became extremely sad and
complained it to Jibril. Allah then send him the message to leave the
town, the town of the unjust people because after abu Talib there is no
one in Makka to support you. He was commanded to migrate.

H , Ch. 111, h 1

md ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Faddal from
'Abdallah ibn Muhammad son of the brother of Hammad al-Katib from
al-Husayn ibn 'Abdallah who has said the following. "I asked abu
'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Was the Messenger of Allah the mater of the children
of Adam?" The Imam (a.s.) said, 'By Allah, he was the master of all whom
Allah has created. Allah has not created any creature better than
Muhammad (s.a.)."

H , Ch. 111, h 2

om Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hajjal from Hammad from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. When mentioning the the Messenger of
Allah he said, "Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) has said, "Allah has not
created any creature better than Muhammad (s.a.)."

H , Ch. 111, h 3

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated al-Husayn ibn 'Abdallah from Muhammad ibn
'Isa and Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Ali ibn Hadid from Murazim from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, has said, "O Muhammad I have created you and Ali a ligh, a
spirit, without body before I created My heavens, My earth, My Throne,
and My ocean.

You continued acknowledge Me as you're the Lord and speak of My glory.
I then collected the spirits of both of you and made it one spirit. This
spirit continued to speak of My Glory, My Holiness and acknowledge Me as
the Lord. I then divided it into two and two which became four: one
Muhammad one Ali, al-Hassan and al-Husayn the two of them. Then Allah
created Fatima (a.s.) from the spirit that was created first without a
body. He then wiped us with his right hand to allow his light reach us
all.

H , Ch. 111, h 4

Ahmad has narrated from al-Husayn from Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from
Muhammad ibn al- Fudayl from abu Hamza who has said the following. "I
heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say, "Allah, the Most High sent revelation to
Muhammad (s.a.) saying, "O Muhammad I created you.

You did not exist. I blew into you from My spirit. It was an honor with
which I honored you when I made it an obligation on all My creatures to
obey you. Whoever would obey you has obeyed Me and whoever would dis
obey you has disobeyed Me. I made this an obligation in the case of Ali
and those of his descendants whom I have chosen for My-self."

H , Ch. 111, h 5

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Asha'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from abu al-Fadl 'Abdallah ibn Idris from Muhammad ibn Sinan
who has said the following "Once I was in the presence of abu Ja'far
(a.s.), the second and I mentioned the differences among the Shi'a. The
Imam (a.s.) said, "O Muhammad, Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, is
One eternally. He created Muhammad, Ali and Fatima (a.s.).

They were there for a thousand Dahr (a turn). Then He created all other
things. He made them towitness the creation of all other things, made
obedience to them obligatory and gave control of the affairs of the
creation. They can, thus, make lawful whatever they would wish and
unlawful whatever they would wish and they would never wish anything
unless Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, would wish.

He then said, "O Muhammad, this is a religion that if exceeded it would
lead to extremism and if ignored it would be degradation and those who
would hold to it properly would have proper contact. Keep it with you, O
Muhammad."

H , Ch. 111, h 6

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
Muhbub from Salih ibn Sahl from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Certain persons from Quraysh asked the Messenger of Allah,
'By what means did you excel the prophet while you ended them as the
last prophet?"

The Messenger of Allah said, "I was the first to believe in my Lord,
and the first to answer Allah when He called the prophets to make a
covenant and beat testimony against their own souls that had answered
positively when asked them, "Am I not your Lord? They all had answered,
'Yes, You Are our Lord." I was the prophet that said, "Yes, You Are our
Lord." I, thus, excelled them in the acknowledgment that Allah is the
Lord."

H , Ch. 111, h 7

from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim from Ali ibn
Hammad from al- Mufaddal who has said the following. "I asked abu
'Abdallah (a.s.), "How did you exist when you existed in the shadows?"
The Imam (a.s.) said, "O Mufaddal, we were in the presence of our Lord
and there was no one else in the green shadow.

We would speak of His Glory, Holiness, acknowledge Him as the Lords and
speak of His Majesty. There was no angel even of the ones close to Allah
or a living being except us in His presence until He decided to create
all things. He then created whatever He wanted, in the He wanted of the
angels and others. The knowledge of that then came to us."

H , Ch. 111, h 8

Sahl ibn Ziyad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Walid who has said
that he heard Yunus ibn ya'qub narrated from Sinan ibn Turayf who has
said the following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'We are the first
family whose names Allah has exalted. When He created the heavens and
earth He commanded an announcer to proclaim.

"I testify that there is no lord besides Allah three times. I testify
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, three times and that Ali is the
Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) (Leader with Divine Authority) in all truth,
three times."

H , Ch. 111, h 9

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from al-Husayn ibn 'Abdallah al-Saghir
from Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Ja'fari from Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn
'Abdallah ibn 'Umar ibn Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Allah was and no was.

He created the was and the place and created the light of lights from
which all lights lighted up. He made to flow to it (light of lights)
from His own light which lighted up all lights. He was the light from
Muhammad and Ali were created. They both continued to be the first two
lights because nothing had come into being before them. They continued
to flow pure and clean through the clean generations until they
separated in two clean persons; 'Abdallah and abu Talib (a.s.)."

H , Ch. 111, h 10

Al-Husayn has narrated from (Muhammad) ibn 'Abdallah from Muhammad ibn
Sinan from al-Mufaddal from Jabir ibn Yazid who has said the following.
"Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said to me, 'O Jabir, the first thing that Allah
created was Muhammad (s.a) and his offspring who are the rightly guided
guides. They existed in 'Ashabah (form ) of light in the presence of
Allah." I then asked,

"What is 'Ashabah?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is the shadow of light,
the lighting bodies without the spirit. It was supported by one spirit
which is the Holy spirit. In that state he and his offspring worshipped
Allah and for this reason He created them forbearing scholars,
conscientious pure one who worship Allah through prayer, fasting,
prostration, speaking of His Glory and the acknowledgment that He is the
only Lord. They perform prayers, perform Hajj and fast."

H , Ch. 111, h 11

Ali ibn Muhammad and others have narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from
Muhammad ibn al- Walid Shabab al-Sayrafi from Malik ibn 'Isma'il
al-Nahdi from 'abd al-Salamibn Harith from Salim ibn abu Hafsa al-'Ijli
from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "The Messenger of
Allah had three qualities that no one else had. He did not have any
shadow. Whatever path he would walk even after two or three days one
could still notice his passing thereby due to his fragrance that
remained along the path. Whatever stones and trees that he would pass by
it would prostrate for him our of respect."

H , Ch. 111, h 12

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from from his father from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from abu Basir from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "When the Messenger of
Allah was taken for the ascension Jibril took him to place and left him
there alone. He said, "Jibril, How would leave me in such a condition?"
Jibril said, "Go on. By Allah, you have stepped at a place whereat no
human has ever stepped and no human had ever walked on before you."

H , Ch. 111, h 13

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad al-Jawhari from Ali ibn
abu Hamza who has said that abu Basir asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) when I
was also present. He said, May Allah take my soul in service for your
cause, how many time the Messenger of Allah was taken for ascension?"
The Imam (a.s.) said, "It happened twice. Jibril asked him to stop at a
place saying wait right there O Muhammad, you have stood at a place
whereat no angel or prophet has ever stood before you. Your Lord Is
praying."

He asked, "O Jibril, How does He pray?" Jibril said, "He says, 'the
Glorious, the Holy, I am the Lord of the angels and the Spirit. My mercy
exceeds my anger." The Holy Prophet (s.a) then said, "O Lord, I beg Your
forgiveness, I beg Your forgiveness." The Imam (a.s.) said, "it was as
Allah has said, ". . . until he was as close to him as the distance of
two bows, or even less." (53:9)

Abu Basir then asked, May Allah take my soul in service for your cause,
what is ". . . the distance of two bows, or even less."? (53:9) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It is the distance between the ark and the head of the
bow." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "Between the two there was a barrier
that shined and oscillate that I do not know except that he said it was
Zabarjad (chrysolite). He looked into the light of Greatness of the size
of needle's eye or so that Allah willed. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, said, "O Muhammad."

He replies, Yes, my Lord." He asked, "Who will be after you to guide
your followers?" He replied, "Allah knows best." He said, "Ali ibn abu
Talib (a.s.) will be Amir al- Mu'minin (a.s.) ( the Leader with Divine
Authority), the master of the Muslim, the leader of the ones marked with
brightness on their foreheads." The narrator has said the then abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) said to abu Basir, "O abu Muhammad, by Allah, Wilaya of
Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) did not come form earth but it came from
the heavens by words clearly spoken."

H , Ch. 111, h 14

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Sayf from 'Amr ibn Shimr from Jabir who has said the following. "I
asked abu Ja'far (a.s.), 'describe to me the Prophet (s.a) of Allah."
The Imam (a.s.) said, "The Holy Prophet (s.a) has a white reddish
complexion, large balck eyes, the eyebrows almost joined, chubby hands
and feet as if gold molded as to the form of his fingers and toes and
with manifest shoulder bones.

When he would turn to a person he would so with the whole of his body.
Due to kind and tender heartiness. A line of hair extended from the
front cavity of his neck down to his bellybutton as if it was a clear
and pure silver lining.

His neck was tall and clear, his nose would almost touch the water when
he wanted to drink and when walking he would somehow lean forwards as if
walking on a downward slope. No one similar to him was seen before or
after the Holy Prophet (s.a) of Allah."

H , Ch. 111, h 15

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Faddal
from abu Jamila from Muhammad al-Halabi from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following. "The Messenger of Allah has said, 'Allah
presented my 'Umma (followers) to me in the realm of clay and taught me
their names jus as He had taught all the names to Adam.

The people of flags passed by and I prayed to ask forgiveness for Ali
(a.s.) and his followers. My Lord has promised me a quality for the
Shi'a of Ali (a.s.)." It was asked, "What is that quality O The Holy
Prophet (s.a) of Allah?" He replied, "It is forgiveness for those of
them who have faith and that no minor or major sins from them will be
left without being changed to good deeds."

H , Ch. 111, h 16

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from father from al-Hassan ibn Sayf from
his father from those he mentioned from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following. "Once the Holy Prophet (s.a) addressed the people
and he raised his right hand while holding his fingers closed and said,
'Do you know, O people, what is in my hand?" They said, "Allah and His
Messenger know best." He then said, "In my hand there are the names of
the people of Paradise, the names of their fathers and the names of
their tribes up to the Day of Judgment. He then raised his left and
asked,

'O people, do you know what is my hand?" They said, "Allah and His
Messenger know best." He then said, "In my hand there are the names of
the people of Hell, the names of their fathers and the names of teir
tribes up to the day of Judgment." Then he said, "Allah has decreed and
He has done justice. Allah has decreed and He has done justice. One
group will go to Paradise and the other group to Hell."

H , Ch. 111, h 17

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from Ishaq ibn Ghalib from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following in a special sermon in which he has described the
The Holy Prophet (s.a) and the Imams (a.s.) and their qualities.

"Despite the great sins and their bad deeds it did not prevent Our Lord
due to His forbearance, considerate and kindness to chose for them the
best of His prophets and most respectable to Him who is Muhammad ibn
'Abdallah who was born in an honorable environment and a noble family.
His association was suspicious and his lineage was not unknown to the
people of knowledge to describe.

The glad news of his coming was mentioned in the books of the prophets
and spoken of in the words of the scholars and whose qualities were
discussed in the thinking of the people of wisdom. No person of Hashimit
descent has ever reached the level of his discipline to become parallel
to him and no person of the inhabitants of Abtah has ever climbed to his
high position. Restraint was of his attributes and generosity was part
of his nature.

He was made with the dignity of prophet-hood and its discipline. His
nature was formed out of the qualities of Divine messenger and its
wisdom. The means and measures of Allah brought him to the appointed
time and the decree by the commands of Allah continued to their goals.

The determined decision of Allah delivered him to their objects. Every
nation would gave the glad news about him to the one thereafter and
every father would deliver to the next one from one generation to the
next. No indecency ever mixed his element and no conjugal relation ever
made him unclean from Adam to his father 'Abdallah. He was in the best
group and most honorable descent, the tribe of glory, in the well
preserved womb and in the best protective hands.

Allah had chosen him as it pleased Him, selected him, gave him the keys
to knowledge and the sources of wisdom. He raised as the mercy and
blessings for His servants and as the season of spring for His lands.
Allah sent to him the Book in which there is communication and
explanations. It is a reading in Arabic free of complexities so that
they may perhaps observe piety (before Allah).

He has explained to people. He has arranged it into a system with the
knowledge that explains in details and a religion that he has clarified
its obligations, determined his limits for the people and has clarified
them. There are matters that He has stated to His servants openly. In it
there is guidance to salvation and evidence to show the right guidance.
The Messenger of Allah has preached the message that he had brought and
demanded obedience to what he was ordered to preach and delivered the
responsibilities of a prophet towards his followers.

He exercised patience for the sake of his Lord and strove hard in the
way of the Lord. He gave good advise to his followers and called them to
salvation. He exhorted them in the matters of al-Dhikr (reminder) and
showed them the right guidance. He did so with systems and potentials
that he established on certain foundations for the servants (of Allah)
and with the sources of light for which he raised proper beacons. He did
so, so that they will not be mislead after him and he was very
compassionate and kind to them." for .warned . made clear e in
accordance with His been a parallel of him."

H , Ch. 111, h 18

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah from a group of
our people from Ahmad ibn Hilal from 'Umayya ibn Ali al-Qaysi who has
said that narrated to me Durust ibn abu Mansur who has said the
following.

" I once asked abu al-Hassan (a.s.), 'Did the Messenger of Allah
receive any authority from abu Talib (a.s.) ?" The Imam (a.s.) said,
"No, but abu Talib was the trustee of certain (items) that he delivered
to the Holy Prophet (s.a.) ." I then asked, "What was the condition of
abu Talib?" The Imam (a.s.) Imam said, " He acknowledged the Holy
Prophet (s.a.) and his Divine message. He delivered to him the (Items
of) will and died on that day."

H , Ch. 111, h 19

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Asha'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Mansur ibn al-'Abbass from Ali ibn Asbat from Ya'qub ibn
Salim from a man from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.
"When the Messenger of Allah passed away the family of Muhammad (s.a.)
experienced the longest night. They thought there is no sky to provide
them shadow or earth to hold them up.

The Messenger of Allah had united all people just for the sake of
Allah. In such a condition sommeone came to them whom they would not see
but would hear his words. He offered them greetings say, "Peace be with
you, O members of the family of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and may Allah's
mercy and blessings be with you. With Allah is the best of condolences
for all kinds of suffering and the salvation from all forms of
destruction and a remedy for the losses.. He then read the words of
Allah .

"Every soul is destined to experience the agony of death. You (Muslims)
will receive the recompense for your deeds on the Day of Judgment.

To be saved from the fire and admitted to Paradise is certainly a great
triumph. The worldly life is no more than a deceitful possession."
(3:185) He the continued, "Allah hass selected you, granted you
distinction, purified, and made members of the family of His prophet. He
has entrusted you with His knowledge and has made you to inherit His
book He has made you the chest (ark) of His knowledge and the staff of
His Majesty. He has given for an example of His light and has protected
you from all sins and mistakes.

He has protected you against all forms of mischief. Accept the
condolences of Allah. Allah has not withdrawn His blessings away from
you and He will never remove any of His bounties from you. You are the
people of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious, through whom the
bounties increase, different groups become united and words receive
harmony. You are His friends . Those who would love you they achieve
success and those who has said the following would do injustice to you
will banish.

To love you is obligatory because of the commands of Allah in His book
on His believing servants. Besides, Allah is full power to help and
support whenever He would wish. Exercise patience against the
consequences of the matters because they all proceed to Allah.. Allah
has accepted you as the Holy Prophet (s.a.) has entrusted you with Him
and He has entrusted you with to His faithful friends on earth. Whoever
would be truthful to the trust with him Allah will give him the reward
for his truthfulness.

You are the entrusted trust and to love you is made obligatory on
people and obedience to you is a duty. Allah has taken His Messenger
away from this world and He has completed the religion for you. He has
explained to you how to come out of (difficulties). He has not left any
excuse for any one. Whoever, would not know or pretend to be ignorant,
deny, forget or pretend to forget will be held accountable before Allah.
Allah will always pursue to fulfill your needs. I entrust you with
Allah. May peace and blessings be with you."

The narrator has said that then he asked the Imam (a.s.), " From who
did the condolences came?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It came from Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High."

H , Ch. 111, h 20

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Muhammad ibn Sinan from ibn Muskan from Isma'il
ibn 'Ammar from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following "When
one would look at the Messenger of Allah in the dark night a light like
that from the moon could be seen from him."

H , Ch. 111, h 21

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from al-Husayn ibn 'Ubaydallah from abu
'Abdallah al-Husayn al-Saghir from Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Ja'fari from
Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah ibn 'Umar ibn Ali ibn abu Talib
from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and Muhammad ibn Yahya from Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah
from Ya'qub ibn Yazid from ibn Faddal from certain persons of his people
from abu 'Abdallah who has said the following "Jibril came to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.) and said, "O Muhammad, Allah offers you greetings and
says,

"I have prohibited the fire to harm the man and woman who carried your
seed and the man whose lap provided you protection and guardianship. The
man who carried your seed is 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd al- Muttalib and the
woman whose womb carried you is 'Amina daughter of Wahab and the man
whose lap provided you protection and guardianship is abu Talib." In the
hadith of ibn Faddal it say Fatima daughter of Asad."

H , Ch. 111, h 22

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
ibn abu 'Umayr from Jamil ibn Darraj from Zurara ibn 'A'yan from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "On the Day of Judgment
'Abd al-Muttalib will be resurrected as a whole nation and he will have
the complexion like those of the prophets and the majestic presence like
those of the kings."

H , Ch. 111, h 23

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd
al-Rahman al-'Asamm from al-Hatham ibn Waqid from Muqarrin from abu
''Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. " 'Abd al-Muttalib is the
first one who believer in Bada' (Allah's revised will). He will be
resurrected as a whole nation. He will have a august presence like kings
and an countenance like the prophets."

H , Ch. 111, h 24

Certain persons of our people have narrated from ibn Jumhur from his
father from ibn Mahbub from ibn al-Ri'ab from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn
al-Hajjaj (and) from Muhammad ibn Sinan from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar all
from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "'Abd al-Muttalib
will be resurrected as a whole nation (one 'Umma) with the grandeur of
the kings and the complexion of the prophets. It is because he was the
first one who believed in Bada' (Allah's revised will).

Once 'Abd al-Muttalib sent the Messenger of Allah to the shepherds of
his camels to help them with a runaway camel. He collected them all but
had delayed to return home. 'Abd al-Muttalib out of anxiety was holding
the ring of the door of Ka'ba. He kept saying, "O Lord, will destroy
your own people.? If You would do so then it means that You have revised
you decision."

The Messenger of Allah came with camels and 'Abd al-Muttalib had sent
people to search him in all directions and valleys of (Makka). He would
keep crying, "O Lord, will you destroy Your own people? If would do so
then You may have revised Your decision." When saw the Messenger of
Allah he held him to kiss and said, "Son, I will not sent thereafter for
anything. I am afraid for you to be kidnapped and killed."

H , Ch. 111, h 25

Has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Muhammad ibn Humran from Aban ibn Taghlib who has said the following.
"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said, 'When the fellow from Ethiopia marched
with horse and elephants to destroy the Ka'ba they passed by the camels
of 'Abd al-Muttalib and they herded them together. When 'Abd al-
Muttalib learned about it he went to the man from Ethiopia and asked
permission for a meeting.

His man told him that 'Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hashim asks permission for a
meeting. He said, "What does he want?" The translator said, "He has come
asking that his camels be released." The king of Ethiopia said to his
people, "This is the leader and the chief of the people here. I have
come to destroy his house of worship but asks me to order the release of
his camels. Had he asked me not to destroy the house I would have done
so. Release his cameels." 'Abd al-Muttalib asked the translator. "What
did the king say?" When the words of the king were explained to him he
said, "I am the owner of the camels. The house has an owner who is to
protect it.

His camels were release and 'Abd al-Muttalib returned home. He passed
by the elephant on his way home. He said to the elephant, "O Muhmud. The
elephant shock his head. Then he said, "Do you know why have they
brought you here?" The elephant said by shaking his head, "No, I do not
know." 'Abd al-Muttalib said, "They have brought you to destroy the
house of your Lord. Will you do so?" The elephant by shaking his head
said, "I will not do so." 'Abd al-Muttalib returned home.

Next morning they tried the elephant to enter the Holy precinct to
destroy it but the elephant refused. 'Abd al-Muttalib at that time said
to some of his servants, "Climb up the hill and see if you observe
anything." He said, "I can see black spots in the direction of the sea.
He asked, "Do you see all of it" He said, "Not all of it but almost.

When the black spots came closer he said, "They are great many birds. I
can see that every bird has a pebble in his beak of the size thrown with
a finger." 'Abd al- Muttalib said, "By Allah, the Lord of 'Abd
al-Muttalib that the birds aim only those people." When the birds
arrived over their heads they threw the pebble on their heads and every
pebble fell on top of their scales and pierced its way down to their
bottom end and left them dead. Only man was left alive who went with the
news to the others. When he gave them the new a pebble fell on his head
and killed him."

H , Ch. 111, h 26

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn abu Nasr from Rifa'Abdallah from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following. "At a certain place around the Ka'ba 'Abd al-Muttalib's
people would spread house furnishings for him only and for no one else.
His sons would stand around him for protection. Once the Messenger of
Allah, then a small child who had just began to walk came to 'Abd
al-Muttalib and sat in his lap. One of the people standing as a guard
came to remove the child away but 'Abd al- Muttalib said, "Leave my
child alone. The angel has just come to him."

H , Ch. 111, h 27

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah from Ibrahim
ibn Muhammad al- Thaqafi from Ali ibn Mu'alla from his brother, Muhammad
from Durust ibn abu Mansur from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu Basir from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "When the Holy Prophet
(s.a) was born he remained for days without milk. Abu Talib himself
breast fed him and Allah sent milk through his nipples. It continued for
several days until abu Talib found Halima al-Sa'diya and the child was
given to her"

H , Ch. 111, h 28

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hisham ibn Salim from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.
"The case of abu Talib islike the case of the people of the cave who hid
their faith and expressed polytheism. Allah gave them twice as much
reward."

H , Ch. 111, h 29

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn Yahya have narrated from Ahmad
ibn Ishaq from Bakr ibn Muhammad al-Azdi from Ishaq ibn Ja'far from his
father (a.s.) who has said the following. "They think that abu Talib was
an unbeliever. They speak lies, how could he be an unbeliever when he
would say such worlds as herein below.

"Do they not know that we found Muhammad as a prophet like Musa (Moses)
whose name is written in the ancient books."

In another hadith he has said, "How could abu Talib be an unbeliever
when he would say, "They certainly know that our child is not a liar to
us and the false words are not paid any attention to. The (beautiful)
white face that prays for rain from the clouds, is the helper of the
orphans and the protector of the widows."

H , Ch. 111, h 30

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hisham ibn al-Hakam from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Once when the Holy Prophet (s.a) in the sacred Mosque
wearing new clothes the pagans threw the contents of the stomach of
camel on him and his new clothes was messed up. Allah knows how hard it
was for him. He went to abu Talib and asked, "How is mannerism and
discipline among you?" He asked what is the matter, O son of my
brother?" The Holy Prophet (s.a) informed him of the incident.

Abu Talib called Hamza and pickup a sword. He asked Hamza to pick up
the stomach of the camel and they came to the peole along with the Holy
Prophet (s.a). They found people of Quraysh around the Ka'ba. When the
saw him they read trouble from his face.

Abu Talib asked Hamza to level of the contents of camel stomach against
everyone's mustache and Hamza did so to the last person. Abu Talib then
turned to the Holy Prophet (s.a) and said, "Son of my brother, this is
how much we value your mannerism and discipline (face such great
risk)."

H , Ch. 111, h 31

Ali has narrated from his father from ibn abu Nasr from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Ash'ari from 'Ubayd ibn Zurara from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following. "When abu Talib (a.s.) passed away, Jibril came
to the Messenger of Allah and said, "O Muhammad, migrate from Makka.
There is no one to help you. Qurash revolted against the Holy Prophet
(s.a) and came out of Makka running away until he reach one of the
mountains of Makka. Called al-Hajun. He went there."

H , Ch. 111, h 32

Ali ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah and Muhammad ibnyh have narrated from
Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah who in a in a marfu' manner has narrated it from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Abu Talib acknowledged
Islam through the expression of (al-Jummal). (It is a system wherein
each letter of the alphabet is given a certain numerical and instead of
a letter its numeric value is used for secrecy or other reasons.)"

H , Ch. 111, h 33

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Ahmad and 'Abdallah sons of
Muhammad ibn 'Isa from their father from 'Abdallah ibn ;a-Mughira from
'Isma'il ibn abu Ziyad from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Abu Talib acknowledged Islam through the expression of
al-Jummal. He formed number sixty three with his hands."

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
al-Faddal from al- Husayn ibn 'Ulwan al-Kalbi from Ali ibn al-Hazawwar
al-Ghanawi from Asbagh ibn Nubata al-Hanzali who has said the following.
"I saw Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) on the day of victory in Basra while
he was riding the on the mule of the Messenger of Allah (then) he said,
"O people do you want me to tell who the best of the creatures of Allah
will be on the Day when He will bring all of them at one place?"

Abu Ayyub al-Ansari stood up and said, "Yes, O Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.)
please explain to use. Your were present and we were absent." The Imam
(a.s.) then said, "The best of the people on the day of resurrection
when will bring all people together are seven people from the descendant
of 'Abd al-Muttalib whose distinction no one except an unbeliever would
deny and no one would reject except a deviant." 'Ammar ibn Yasir (may
Allah grand him blessings) then stood up and said, "O Amir al-Mu'minin
(a. s.) tell us their names so we can recognise them properly.."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "The best in the creatures of Allah on the Day
when He will bring all creature together are the messenger and the best
of the messengers is Muhammad (s.a). The best after the prophet in his
'Umma (followers) is the executor of his will until the prophet would
come.

There is no doubt that the best among the executors of the wills of the
prophets is the executor of the will of Prophet Muhammad (s.a). There is
also no doubt that the best among the people after the executors of the
will of the prophets are the martyrs and the best of the martyrs is
Hamza ibn 'Abd al- Muttalib and Ja'far ibn abu Talib who were given two
fresh wings with which they fly in Paradise. No one else besides him
from this 'Umma. With this Allah honored and granted dignity t Muhammad
(s.a). Also of the seven people are the two grand sons of the Holy
Prophet (s.a) and al-Mahdi (a.s.).

Whoever Allah would want will al-Mahdi from us Ahl al- Bayt. The he
read this verse of the Holy Quran. "One who obeys God and the Messenger
is the friend of the Prophets, saints, martyrs, and the righteous ones
to whom God has granted His favors. They are the best friends that one
can have (4:69). The favors of God are such, and He knows very well (how
to reward you)." (4:70)"

H , Ch. 111, h 34

Muhammad ibn al-Husayn has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from ibn
al-Faddal from Ali ibn al-Nu'man from abu Maryam al-Ansari who has said
the following. "I asked abu Ja'far (a. s.),"How was the prayer for the
dead body of the Holy Prophet (s.a)?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "When Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) washed his body and he placed him in the shroud
and covered his body then ten persons came in and they walked around
him. Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) then stood in the middle of them and
said, "God showers His blessings upon the Prophet and the angels seek
forgiveness for him. Believers, pray for the Prophet and greet him with,
"Peace be with you." (33:56) The group also said what the Imam (a.s.)
had said until the people of Madina and people of 'Awali also said
so."

H , Ch. 111, h 35

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Salma ibn al-Khattab from Ali
ibn Sayf from abu al-Maghra' from 'Uqba ibn Bashir from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following. "The Holy Prophet (s.a) said to Ali
(a.s.), O Ali, bury me in this place, raise the surface of my grave from
the ground by the width of four fingers and sprinkle water on it."

H , Ch. 111, h 36

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hammad from al- Halabi from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Al-'Abbass came to Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) and said, "O
Ali, people have come in a group to bury the Messenger of Allah in
Baqi', the prayer place. Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) them came out to
the people and said, "O people, the Messenger of Allah is the Imam
whether dead or living. He had said that he must be buried in the place
where he died.. He then stood at the door and prayed for him. Then he
commanded every ten people to come in and pray for him and come out"

H , Ch. 111, h 37

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Salma ibn al-Khattab from Ali
ibn Sayf from 'Amr ibn Shimr from Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has
said the following. "When the Holy Prophet (s.a) passed away, the
angels, the immigrant Muslims (al-Muhajirun) and the helping Muslims
(al-Ansar) prayed over his body group after group."

The narrator has said that Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) has said, "I
heard the Messenger of Allah say in good health, "This verse is revealed
to me about praying for after I Allah will take me away from this world.
""God showers His blessings upon the Prophet and the angels seek
forgiveness for him. Believers, pray for the Prophet and greet him with,
"Peace be with you." (33:56)

H , Ch. 111, h 38

Certain persons of our people have narrated from in a in a marfu'
manner have narrated from Muhammad ibn Sinan from Dawud ibn Kathir
al-Raqqi who has said that he asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the following.
"What is the meaning of 'peace be with the Messenger of Allah'?" The
Imam (a.s.) said, "When Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, created His
Prophet, the executor of the will of His Prophet, the daughter of His
Prophet, their two sons, all the Imams (a.s.) and their Shi'a
(followers) He made them to form a covenant to exercise patience, help
to exercise patience, establish good relations and live piously before
Allah.

He promised them to give to them the blessed land and sacred sanctuary
and to bring down to them the constructed house (al-Bayt al-Ma'mur) and
to manifest to the raised ceiling (alsaqf al-Marfu') and grant them
relief against their enemies. Also He grant them the earth that He will
change with peace and protect all that is therein for them without any
quarrels therein against the enemies and there will exist all that they
would love.

The Messenger of Allah made all the Imams and their Shi'a to form a
covenant similarly. Offering of peace to him is to remind of that
covenant and renew it before Allah. that pehaps He, the Most Majestic,
the Most gracious, would allow that peace to take place soon for all of
you with all that is therein."

H , Ch. 111, h 39

Ibn Mahbub has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan who has said the
following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'O Lord, grant blessings
up on Muhammad, Your chosen one, Your friend and Your selected one who
manages Your affairs."


