Chapter 114 : the Birth of Al-zahra', Fatima (a.s.)
===================================================

Fatima (a.s.) was born five years after the Messenger of Allah declared
his message. She died when she was eighteen years and seventy five days
old. She lived for seventy five days after the death of her father
(s.a)."

H , Ch. 114, h 1

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
Mahbub from ibn al-Ri'ab from abu 'Ubayda from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following. "Fatima live for seventy five days of the death
of the Messenger of Allah. She has become extremely sad for her
father.

Jibril would come to her for condolences because of the death of her
father and to provide solace. He would inform her about her father about
the where he was and about what would happen after her death to her
descendants and Ali (a.s.) would down such information."

H , Ch. 114, h 2

Muhammad in Yahya has narrated from al-'Amrakiy ibn Ali from Ali ibn
Ja'far from his brother from abu al-Hassan (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Fatima is truthful and a martyr. The daughter of the prophet
do not experience menses."

H , Ch. 114, h 3

Ahmad ibn Mihran, may Allah grant him blessing, has narrated from
narrated in a in a marfu' manner and Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from
Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar al-Shaybani has said that narrated to me
al-Qasim ibn Muhammad al-Razi who has said that narrated to him Ali ibn
Muhammad al-Hurmuzi from abu 'Abdallah al-Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.) who has
said the following.

"When Fatima (a.s.) passed away Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) buried her
secretly, camouflaged her grave site he then stood up facing the grave
of the Messenger of Allah said, "O the Messenger of Allah may He grant
you blessings on behalf of me the on behalf of your daughter who is
visiting you and will pass this night in the soil in your location whom
Allah chose to make join you the fastest.

O the Messenger of Allah of my patience has reached to the brims and I
miss so much your chosen one (daughter) and my self-control is banished
for the departure of the leader of the ladies of the worlds. The only
solace for me is to follow your tradition and be mournful for your own
departure from us. A little while ago I placed you in your grave and
your spirit left your body between my own throat and chest.

Yes, in the book of Allah (for me) there is the best form to express
acceptance of Allah's decision ""We are the servants of God and to Him
we shall all return." (2:156) The trust is returned and the commit is
recalled amd al-Zahra' is taken away from us. How sad, O the Messenger
of Allah, the green skies and the dusty earth seem to us. My sadness has
become perpetual and my night have become sleepless. There is an anxiety
that will not relieve my heart until Allah will chose for me the
dwelling like that where you are.

I have a heart bleeding sorrow and a restless anxiety. How quickly the
separation took place? To Allah I raise my complains and your own
daughter will explain to you how your 'Umma (followers) succeeded in
committing injustice against her. You may ask her questions and find
information about the case from her.

How great was the sorrow that she will find a place and an ear to
express to. She would say Allah will judge because he is the best judge.
I offer my prayer to Allah to grant you blessings as a note of farewell
but not because of disappointment and despaired. If I return it is not
that I have become tired and if I will stand up it will not be because
of pessimism in the promise of Allah to those who exercise patience.
Indeed to exercise patience is more safe and fruitful.

Had not been for the mischief of the enemies I would have turned the
place a place of worship andd would have kept my worship continuous and
would cried like the mothers for the death of their son for the great
loss. In the sight of Allah your daughter is buried secretly, her rights
are taken away unjustly, her inheritance is withheld for no valid
reason.

It all has happen just after you left and your memories are still
fresh. To Allah O the Messenger of Allah we complain and from youu O the
Messenger of Allah we seek condolences. May Allah grant blessings to you
and to her. May the peace and happiness of Allah be with you."

H , Ch. 114, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Salim from
al-Faddal who has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.),
"Who washed Fatima (for burial)?" he said, "Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.)
did." My impression from his words seemed to be an extraordinary one. He
said, "You seem to be constrained from what I said."

The narrator has said that I replied, "Yes, May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, it is so." The narrator has said that the Imam
(a.s.) then said, "Do not be constrained. She was the all truism person
and no one has the authority to wash an all truism person but another
all truism person. Did you not know that no one could wash Mary but
Jesus."

H , Ch. 114, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il fmSalih ibn 'Aqaba from 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad
al-Ju'fi from abu Ja'far (a.s.) and abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following.

"During the time of their doing (setting the door on fire) what they
did Fatima held 'Umar by his collar and pulled (down) saying, "By Allah,
O son of al-Khattab, had I not disliked to inflicting calamity up on the
innocent people, you would have learned how quickly my swearing up on
Allah would have brought the swift response (with the wrath of Allah up
on you)."

H , Ch. 114, h 6

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Salih ibn
'Aqaba from Yazid ibn 'Abd al-Malik from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said
the following. "When Fatima (a.s.) was born Allah sent an angel to make
the tongue of Muhammad (s.a) call her 'Fatima'. Then he said, "I set you
free (from ignorance) with knowledge and set you free from menses." Abu
Ja'far (a. s.) then said, "By Allah, He had set her free with knowledge
(from ignorance) and from menses at the time universal covenant
(al-Mithaq)."

H , Ch. 114, h 7

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Salih ibn
'Aqaba from 'Amr ibn Shimr from Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has
said the following. "Once the Holy Prophet (s. a) said to Fatima, "Rise
and bring that tray." She went and took out the tray with fresh bread
and steaming meat on it. The Holy Prophet (s.a), Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan
and al-Husayn (a.s.) continued to have their meals from it for thirteen
days. Then 'Umm Ayman saw al-Husayn with certain things with him.

She asked, "Where from did you get it?" He replied, "We are having this
for our meal for the past thirteen days." 'Umm Ayman came to Fatima and
said, "O Fatima, "If 'Umm Ayman would have anything it is all for Fatima
and her sons but if Fatima would have anything then there is nothing in
it for 'Umm Ayman. She (Fatima) then took out from the tray food for her
and 'Umm Ayman ate but the food from the tray banished.

The Holy Prophet (s.a) said, "Had you not fed her (a non-infallible)
from it you and your descendants would have had food from it up to the
Day of Judgment." Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then said, "The tray is with us and
our Al-Qa'im (the one who will rise with Divine Authority) will take it
out at his time."

H , Ch. 114, h 8

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ali from Ali ibn Ja'far who has said the
following. "I heard abu al-Hassan (a. s.) say, 'Once when the Messenger
of Allah was sitting an angel who had twenty four faces came to him. The
Messenger of Allah said to him, "My friend Jibril, I had not seen you in
this form before."

The angel said, " Iam not Jibril, O Muhammad. Allah, the Most Majestic,
the Most gracious, has sent me to join in marriage the light with the
light." He then asked, "Who with who?" The angel said, "Fatima and Ali
(a.s.)." The Imam (a.s.) said, "When the angel turned back on his
shoulder it said, "Muhammad the Messenger of Allah, and Ali (a.s.) the
executor of his will." The Messenger of Allah asked, "Since when this
has been written on your shoulder?" The angel replied, "It was there
twenty two thousand year before Allah created Adam."

H , Ch. 114, h 9

Ali ibn Muhammad and others have narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr who has said the following. "I asked
al-Rida (a.s.) about the grave of Fatima (a.s.). He said, "She was
buried in her own house. When the Amawids enlarged the Mosque it became
part of the Mosque."

H , Ch. 114, h 10

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from al- Khaybari from Yunus ibn Zabyan who has said the
following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'Had Allah not created
Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) for Fatima, there would been no match on
earth for her from Adam to the end."


**Chapter 115 : The Birth of al-Hassan ibn Ali (a.s.)**

Al-Hassan ibn Ali (a.s.) was born in the month of Ramadan in the year
that the battle of Badr took place, the second year after Hijra (AH)
(migration of the Holy Prophet (s.a) from Makka to Madina). It is also
narrated that he was born in the third year. He passed away in the end
of the month of Safar in the year forty nine AH. He lived for forty
seven years and a few months. His mother was Fatima, daughter of the
Messenger of Allah.

H , Ch. 115, h 1

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from al-Husayn ibn Ishaq from Ali ibn
Mahziyar from al- Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from
'Abdallah ibn Sinan from the one who heard from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who
said, "When al-Hassan was about to die he wept.

"He was asked, "O son of the Messenger of Allah, why would you weep,
when you have such a position with the Messenger of Allah such as you
have? And all the (good things) said about you. You have performed Hajj
twenty times on foot and distributed all of your belongings among the
needy three times exactly." He replied, "I weep for two reasons, It is
the fear of resurrection and separation from the loved ones."

H , Ch. 115, h 2

Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah and 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far have narrated from Ibrahim
ibn Mahziyar from his brother. Ali (ibn Mahziyar) from al-Hassan ibn
Sa'id from Muhammad ibn Sinan from ibn Muskan from abu basir from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Al-Hassan ibn Ali (a.s.)
passed away at the age of forty seven up to the year fifty (AH). He
lived forty years after the death of the Holy Prophet (s.a)."

H , Ch. 115, h 3

A number of our people has narrated has narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from Ali ibn al-Ni'man from Sayf ibn 'Amira from abu Bakr
al-Hadrami has said that Jumhu'ada daughter of 'Ash'th ibn Qays al-Kidi
poisoned al-Hassan ibn Ali (a.s.) and a female servant of the Imam
(a.s.). The female servant, however, vomited the poison but in the case
of al-Hassan (a. s.) the poison remained his digestive system and caused
swelling that killed him."

H , Ch. 115, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya and Ahmad ibn Muhammad have narrated from Muhammad
ibn al- Hassan from al-Qasim al-Nahdi from 'Isma'il ibn Mihran from
al-Kunasi from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Once
al-Hassan (a.s.) went out side the town with a man from the children of
al-Zubayr who believed al-Hassan to be the Imam. They stopped for rest
on one of the oasis under a palm tree that had dried up because of lack
of water.

A furnishing was spread for Imam al-Hassan (a.s.) under that tree and
for al-Zubayri the furnishings were arranged under a tree just next to
it. The narrator has said that al-Zubayri looked up the tree and said,
"It had fruits so we could eat from them." Al-Hassan (a.s.) asked, "Do
you wish to have dates?" He said, "Yes, I do wish to have dates."

He (al-Hassan (a.s.) raised his hands to the sky and spoke certain
words that I did not understand. The tree turned green then it returned
to its normal condition and its leaves grew and it became loaded with
dates. The man from they had hired camels begun to say, "It by Allah, is
magic." Al-Hassan (a.s.) said, woe is you. It is not magic but it is a
prayer of the son of a prophet that is answered." They climbed the tree
and picked the dates that were there and it provided enough for their
needs."

H 1250, Ch. 115, h 5

Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn Yahya have narrated from Muhammad
ibn al- Hassan from ya'qub ibn Yazid from ibn abu 'Umayr from his people
from abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) who has said the following. "Al-Hassan (a.s.)
has said, 'Allah has two cities. One is in the east and the other is in
the west.

They have a boundary around them that is made of iron and each one has
a million doors. Seven thousand different languages exist therein and
know all those languages and all that is therein. There is no one who
would possess Leadership with Divine Authority except me and my brother,
al-Husayn (a.s.).'

H 1251, Ch. 115, h 5

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Ni'man from Sandal from
abu 'Usama from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "One
year al-Hassan ibn Ali left for Makka on foot. On the journey his feet
swell and his servants said, "If you would ride the swelling will go
away."

He said, "I will not do so up to the coming place for rest where you
will a black person who has oil with him buy from oil without trying to
reduce the price." The servant said, "May Allah take my soul and the
souls of my parents in service for your cause, we have never up to a
place of rest where anyone would sell such medicine." The Imam (a.s.)
said to him, "Yes, there are such people right in front of you before
reaching the place for rest." They walked for a mile and they met the
black person.

Al-Hassan (a.s.) said to his servant, "There is the man. Take the oil
from him and pay him." The blck man asked the servant, "For who do you
want this oil?" He replied, "I want it for al-Hassan ibn Ali (a.s.)." He
said, "Take me to him." They came to the al-Hassan (a.s.) and the man
said, May Allah take my soul and the souls of my parents in service for
your cause.

I did not know that you need this. If you would like tohave it you have
it free of charges. I am only one your servants. Just pray for to Allah
to grant me a healthy son who would love you, Ahl al-Bayt. When I left,
my wife was about to give birth." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Go to your
place. Allah has gifted you with a healthy son who is of our Shi'a
(followers)."


