Chapter 116 : the Birth of Al-husayn Ibn Ali (a.s.)
===================================================

Al-Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.) was born in the third year AH. He left this
word in the month of Muharram in the year sixty one AH. He lived for
fifty seven years and few months. 'Ubaydulla ibn Ziyad murdered him (may
Allah condemn him) during the Caliphate of Yazid ibn Mu'awiya (may
Allah's condemnation be up on him. He was the governor of Kufa.

The horse men who murdered him were lead by 'Umar ibn Sa'd (may condemn
him) in the plain of Karbala. It took place on Monday the tenth of the
month of Muharram. His mother was Fatima, daughter of the Messenger of
Allah .

H 1252, Ch. 116, h 1

Sa'd and Ahmad ibn Muhammad together have narrated from Ibrahim ibn
mahziyar from his brother, Ali ibn Mahziyar from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id
from Muhammad ibn Sinan from ibn Muskan from abu Basir from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Al-Husayn (a. s.) passed
away on the day of 'Ashura' and he was fifty seven years old."

H 1253, Ch. 116, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from 'Abd al-Rahman al-'Arzami from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who has said the following. "The time between the birth of al-Hassan and
the conception for al-Husayn was like one menstuaral cycle and the time
between the birth of the two was six months and tendays."

H 1254, Ch. 116, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' and al- Husayn ibn Muhammad from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'A'idh from abu Khadija from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "When Fatima (a.s.) conceived
al-Husayn (a.s.) Jibril came to the Messenger of Allah and said, "Fatima
will soon give birth to a son. Your 'Umma (followers) will kill him
after you will die."

When Fatima had conceived al-Husayn she was unhappy and when she gave
birth she was unhappy. Then The Imam (a.s.) said, "No mother has ever
been seen in the word to bear a child that she would not like. However,
she was unhappy because she knew that he will be killed." The Imam
(a.s.) has said, "It is this case for which the following verse of the
Holy Quran came.

"We have advised the human being to be kind to his parents; his mother
bore him with hardship and delivered him while suffering a great deal of
pain. The period in which his mother bore and weaned him lasted for
thirty months. . . ." (46:15)."

H 1255, Ch. 116, h 4 Muhammad ibnyh has narrated from Ali ibn 'Isma'il
from Muhammad ibn 'Amr al-Zayyat from a man from our people from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Once Jibril came to
Muhammad (s.a) and said tohim, "O Muhammad, Allah gives you the glad
news of the birth of a son from Fatima. Your 'Umma (followers0 will kill
this child after you will die." He said, "O Jibril peace is from my
Lord.

I do not need a child from Fatima who will be killed by my 'Umma after
I will die." Jibril ascended and then descended back and said to him the
same thing. He said, "O Jibril peace is from my Lord. I do not need a
child who will be killed by my 'Umma after I will die."

Jibril ascended to the heavens and then descended back and said, "O
Muhammad (s.a), your Lord sends you greetings and gives you the glad
news of His placing Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority), the
guardianship and the executor-ship of the will in the descendants of
this child." Then he said, "I agree and accept the deal." He then sent
the message of the glad news of the birth of a child from her who will
be killed by his 'Umma.

She returned the answer that she would not need a child who will be
killed by your 'Umma after you will die. He then sent the message to her
that Allah will place Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority),
Guardian-ship and the executorship of the will in the descendants of
this child.

She then sent back with the answer that she has agreed to the deal. ".
. . his mother bore him with hardship and delivered him while suffering
a great deal of pain. The period in which his mother bore and weaned him
lasted for thirty months. When he grew-up to manhood and became forty
years old, he then said, "Lord, inspire me to give You thanks for the
bounties you have granted to me and my parents, and to act righteously
to please You. Lord, make (people of) my offspring virtuous.. . ."
(46:15).

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Had he not said, '. . . Lord, make (people of)
my offspring virtuous. . . Â´(46:15) all of his offspring would have been
Imams." Al-Husayn (a.s.) did not have any milk from Fatima (a.s.) nor
from other females.

They would bring him to the Holy Prophet (s.a) and he would place his
thumb in his mouth and he would suck from it that much that would
suffice him for three days. The flesh of al-Husayn (a.s.) grew from that
of the Holy Prophet (s. a) and his blood from his blood. No one has ever
been born after six months except Jesus son of Mary and al-Husayn ibn
Ali (a.s.)."

In another hadith from abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) it is said that the
Holy Prophet (s.a) woulld come to al-Husayn and would place his tongue
in his mouth and it would suffice him (as food) and that he did have any
milk from any female.

H 1256, Ch. 116, h 5

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from in in a marfu' manner from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following about the words of Allah,
the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. ". . . Then he looked at the stars
(37:88) and said, "I am sick!" (37:89). The Imam (a.s.) said, "He
calculated and found what had t happen to al-Husayn (a.s.) then he said,
"I am sick for what will happen to al-Husayn (a.s.)."

H 1257, Ch. 116, h 6

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn 'Ubayd from Ali ibn Asbat from Sayf ibn 'Amira
from Muhammad ibn humran who has said the following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said, 'When all that happened to al-Husayn
had happened, the angels wept and cried before Allah and said, "How such
thing would happen to al-Husayn Your chosen one and the grand son of
Your Prophet?" The Imam (a.s.) has said that Allah then showed to them
the shadow of Al-Qa'im (the one who will rise with Divine Authority) and
said, "Through him I will take My revenge."

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Ali ibn al- Hakam from Sayf ibn 'Amira from 'Abd al-Malik ibn
'A'yan from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "When (Divine)
support came to al-Husayn ibn Ali so much so that it filled from to
heavens and then he was given the choice to have victory or meet Allah,
he chose to meet Allah."

H 1258, Ch. 116, h 7

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has said that abu Kurayb and abu Sa'id al-Ashja'
narrated to him that 'Abdallah ibn Idris narrated to themfm his father,
Idris ibn 'Abdallah al-'Awi who has said the following. "When al-Husayn
(a.s.) was murdered the people wanted to make the horses run over his
(al-Husayn's) body.

Fizzah then said to Zaynab, "My lady, there was a shipwreck and Safina
came out on an Island face to face with a lion. He said to the loin, "O
abu al-Harith, I am a the slave of the Messenger of Allah." The loin
murmured in front of him and showed him the way. There lives a loin in
this area allow me to go and inform him of what the people intend to do
to al-Husayn (a.s.) tomorrow."

The narrator has said that she went to the loin and said, "O abu
al-Harith, and the loin raised his head and she said, "Do you know what
these people intend to do to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)? They intend to make
the horses run over his body.. The narrator has said that the loin
walked and placed both of his hands over the body of al-Husayn (a.s.).
When the horse men came they found the lion in that condition and 'Umar
ibn Sa'd ( may Allah condemn him) told them, "It is is mischief. Do not
bother and turn back and turned back.

H 1259, Ch. 116, h 8

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn
Ahmad from al- Hassan ibn Ali from Yunus from Masqala al-Tahhan who has
said the following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'When al-Husayn
was murdered his wife who was from the tribe of al- Kalb began to
organize a mourning gathering.

She wept and the ladies and servants wept until their tears dried up.
There was one female servant (slave) who would weep and her tears would
not stop. She called her and said, "How is it that our tears have dried
up and your tears have not?" She said, "When I suffer I drink Sawiq, (a
kind of soup made of wheat and or barley)." She then ordered to prepare
Sawiq and food. She drink and eat and give others to drink and eat and
would say, "We find energy to weep for al-Husayn."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Certain birds were given to al-Kalbia lady to
help her in her mourning for al-Husayn (a.s.). When she saw them she
asked, "What are these?" They told her that they were a gift to help her
in mourning for al-Husayn (a.s.)." She said, "We are not in a wedding.
What do we do with them?" She told her servants to take them out of the
house. When they were taken out of the house they just disappeared as if
they did not exist or flew between the heavens and earth and afterwards
no trace of them were found in the house."


**Chapter 117 : The Birth of Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.)**

Ali ibn al-Husayn was born in the year thirty eight AH. He passed away
in the year ninety five at the age of fifty seven. His mother was Slama
daughter of Yazdjurd ibn Sharyar ibn Shiruwayh ibn kisra 'A Perwiz.
Yazdjurd was the last Persian king.

H 1260, Ch. 117, h 1

al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan al-Hassani may grant him blessings and Ali ibn
Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah all of them from Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Ahmar from
'Abd al-Rahman ibn 'Abdallah al-Khuza'i from Nasr ibn Muzaham from 'Amr
ibn Shimr from Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.
"When the daughter of Yazdjurd was brought to before 'Umar the girls of
Madina would love to see her.

When entered the Mosque it become all delightful and bright. When 'Umar
looked at her she covered her face and said in her own language, "'Uff,
bay ruj ba' da Hurmuz (May, the life of Hurmuz turn black)." 'Umar
asked, "Is she abusing me and he turned to her. Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.) said, "That is not for you. Give her the chance to chose whoever
of the Muslims she likes and then count as his share of the booty.

He allowed her to choose and she came all the way to placed her hand on
the head of al- Husayn (a.s.). Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) asked her,
"What is your name?" She said, "It is Jahan Shah." Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.) said, "In fact, it is Shahra Ba'nuwayh." He then said to
al-Husayn (a.s.), "O abu 'Abdallah, she will give birth to a son for you
who will be the best of the inhabitants of earth. She gave birth to Ali
ibn al-Husayn (a.s.).

Ali ibn al-Husayn was called the son of the two best. The chosen from
Arabs was the tribe of Hashim and from none Arab was Persains. It is
narrated that abu al-Aswad al-Du'ili said about it. "A boy from Kisra
and Hashim the most noble one on who sacred symbols are stitched for
safety."

H 1261, Ch. 117, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
al-Faddal from ibn Bukayr from Zurara who has said the following. "I
heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say, 'Ali ibn al- Husayn (a.s.) had a she camel.
He had taken this camel twenty two times to Hajj (pilgrimage to Makka)
and had not used the whip against not even once.

The Imam (a.s.) has said that the camel came after he passed away and
we were not aware but we noticed only when one of the servants or slaves
came and said, "The she camel has went out all the way to the grave of
Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) and sat on the grave. She rubs her neck against
the grave and moans. I then asked them to quickly get to her before they
would know about her or see her. The Imam (a.s.) has said, "She had
never seen the grave before."

H 1262, Ch. 117, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has narrated from his fatherfm Muhammad ibn
'Isa from Hafs ibn al-Bakhtari from the persom he mentioned from abu
Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. " When my father, Ali ibn
al-Husayn (a.s.) passed away the she camel that belonged to him came
from the pasture and placed her neck against his grave and role her body
on the ground.

I commanded to return her back to her pasture. My father would take her
for the journey to Hajj and 'Umra (pilgrimage to Makka) and had never
used the whip against her."

Note: The last words of this hadith that read 'Ibn Babu wayh'. The
interpreters have assumed that it is the name of the well know narrator
of hadith. These words indicate that the following hadith is recorded in
the copy of this book that belonged to ibn Babuwayh and other's copies
do not have it. There is also the possibility of misprint.

The difference of 'Babu' and 'Banu' is only a dot above or below
without a change in the main body of the word. If the word is 'Banu'
then it is part of the previous hadith and the whole phrase 'Ibn Banu
wayh' would mean, "He was the son of the noble lady 'Banu wayh,
(daughter of the King of Persia),' after all. There is not wonder why he
was so kind to the she camel."

H 1263, Ch. 117, h 4

al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn 'Amir has narrated from Ahmad ibn Ishaq ibn
Sa'd from Su'dan ibn Muslim from abu 'Imara from a man from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "When it was the night
wherein Ali ibnhy (a.s.) would pass away he asked his Muhammad (a.s.),
his son, "Son bring me water for Wudu (cleaning for prayer). Muhammad
has said, "I then brought water for him." He said, "I do not like this
water. There is something dead in it." I then brought the water in the
light and found a dead mouse in it.

I then brought him other water. He said, "Son this is the night in
which I am promise to be taken out of this world. He explained his
recommendations about his she camel and that a stable be prepared for
her and that she is fed properly and I personally did so. Very shortly
there after she came out of the stable and reached the grave, placed her
neck on it, rolled her bodyon the ground and her eyes had become full of
tears.

Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) was informed that the she camel had gone. He
came to her and said, "Control your emotion and get up, may Allah grant
you good fortune. She would not do so. The Imam (a.s.) has said, "When
he would take the camel to Makka, he would hang the whip from the
luggage and would not use it until he would return to Madina."

The Imam (a.s.) has said, "Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) would come out in
the dark night with a sack containing Darahim and Dananir ( units of
money) and would go door to door, knock them and gave a certain amount
to the person that would come. When Ali ibn al-Husayn died these people
would see the person with money and then they realized that Ali ibn
al-Husayn (a.s.) must have been the distributor of money among them."

H 1264, Ch. 117, h 5

Muhammad ibn Ahmad has narrated from his uncle, 'Abdallah ibn al-Salt
from al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn bint al-Yahya's who has said the following.
"I hear abu al-Hassan (a.s.) say, 'When Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) was
about 'Uthman pass away he passed out then he opened his eyes and
recited chapters 48 and 56 from the Holy Quran and said, "All praise
belongs to Allah Who has fulfilled His promise to us and made us to
inherit the earth passed out and chose from Paradise whatever we would
like and thus, is the reward for those who work. Within the hour he
passed away and did not say any thing."

H 1265, Ch. 117, h 6

Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah and 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far al-Himyari have narrated
from Ibrahim ibn Mahziyar from his brother, Ali ibn Mahziyar from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Muhammad ibn Sinan from ibn Muskan from abu
Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Ali ibn
al-Husayn (a.s.) passed away at the age of fifty seven in the year
ninety five. He lived for thirty five years after al-Husayn (a.s.)."


