Chapter 118 : the Birth of Ja'far, Muhammad Ibn Ali (a.s.)
==========================================================

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) was born in the year seventy five AH. He passed away
in the year one hundred fourteen at the age of fifty seven. He was
buried in al-Baqi' cemetery in Madina near the gave of his father, Ali
ibn al-Husayn (a.s.). His mother was 'Umm 'Abdallah daughter of
al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn abu Talib, may Allah grant him and his rightly
guided offspring blessings.

H 1266, Ch. 118, h 1

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Muhammad ibn Ahmad from
'Abdallah ibn Ahmad from Salih ibn Mazid from 'Abdallah ibn al-Mughira
from abu al-Sabbah from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.
"Once my mother was sitting next to a wall. The wall began to break and
we heard a intense crumbling noise.

She pointed out with her hands saying, "No, for the sake of al-Mustfa
(one of the titles of the Messenger of Allah) Allah has not granted you
permission to fall." The wall remained hanging in the air until she
passed that spot. My father gave one hundred Dinars as charity in
appreciation and an expression of gratitude for Allah's favor."

Abu al-Sabbah has said, "Once abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) mentioned his
grandmother and said, 'She was a truthful person. No woman was ever
found in the descendants of al-Hassan (a.s.) like her (in
excellence)."

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Ahmad has
narrated a similar hadith.

H 1267, Ch. 118, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Sinan from Aban ibn Taghlib from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following. "Jabir ibn'Abdallah al-Ansari was last surviving
of the companions of the Messenger of Allah. He was a devoted follower
of us, Ahl al-Bayt. He would sit in the Mosque of the Messenger of
Allah, wearing a black turban.

He would call, "O Baqir al-'Ilm, O Baqir al-'Ilm, (a person of deep
knowledge)" The people of Madina would say, "Jabir is hallucinating." He
would say, "No, by Allah, I do not hallucinate, but I heard the
Messenger of Allah say, "You will soon meet a man from me whose name
will be as my name and his manners would be as my manners. He will dig
very deep in knowledge"' This is what maakes me say what I say."

The Imam (a.s.) has said, "Jabir would still come and go and one day in
one of the roads of Madina when passing he found a few of the school
children among who Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) was also present (for a
reason other than schooling. Imams are not heard of as attending
schools). He looked at him and called him (Muhammad ibn Ali) to himself.
The boy came to him and then he said, "Go back." The boy went back.

Then he said, "I swear by the One in Whose hand is my life, (that I
see) manners as the manners of the Messenger of Allah. O boy, What is
your name?" He replied, "My name is Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn
(a.s.). Jabir came forwards and began to kiss his head and say, "May
Allah take my soul and the souls of my parents in service for your
cause, your great-great grandfather told me to convey his greetings and
Salam to you and would say all of that. The Imam (a.s.) has said,
"Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn came to his father and he was anxious.

He explained to him about Jabir. His father asked, "Did Jabir really do
this?" He replied, "Yes, he did so." The Imam (a.s.) said, "My son, stay
home (and do not expose yourself to the enemy because Jabir will
maintain secrecy)." Jabir thereafter would come to him mornings and
evenings and the people of Madina would say, "It is so strange that
Jabir, the only surving companion of the Messenger of Allah would come
to a boy on both ends of the day everyday."

Very shortly Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) passed away Muhammad ibn Ali
(a.s.) would go to visit Jabir out of respect for his being a companion
of the Messenger of Allah and would speak to people from Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High. The people of madina would say, "We have not seen
anyone as bold as he is." On hearing this from them he began to speak to
them from the Messenger of Allah.

The people of Madina began to say, "We have not seen a greater liar as
he is because he speaks from one whom he has never seen." On hearing
this from them he began to narrate to them from Jabir. The Imam (a.s.)
has said, "They would accept what he would narrate from Jabir ibn
'Abdallah. However, Jabir would come to him and would from him (Muhammad
ibn ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.))."

H 1268, Ch. 118, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from al-Muthanna al-Hannat from abu Basir who has said the
following. "Once I went to see abu Ja'far (a.s.) and asked him, "Are you
the heirs of the Messenger of Allah?" He said, "Yes, we are his
heirs."

I then asked, "Was the Messenger of Allah the heir of the prophets and
knew all that they knew?" He said to me, "Yes, it is true." I then
asked, "Do you have the power to bring the dead back to life and cure
the lepers, and the blind?" He said, "Yes, we do have such powers by the
permission of Allah." The he said to me, "Come closer to me, O abu
Muhammad."

I went closer to him and he rubbed my face and my eyes and saw the sun,
the skies, the earth, the houses and all things in the town. Then he
said to me, "Do you like to live this way and will have what others have
and be responsible for whatever they will be held responsible on the Day
of Judgment or like to live as before and will have paradise purely?"

I said, "I would like to live as I lived before." He rubbed my eyes and
I found myself as before." The narrator has said that he told it to ibn
abu 'Umayr who said, "I testify that this is true just as the day is
true."

H 1269, Ch. 118, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad from Muhammad
ibn al- Husayn from Muhammad ibn Ali from 'Asim ibn Hamid from Muhammad
ibn Muslim who has said the following. "One day I was in the presence of
abu Ja'far (a.s.) that a pair of turtledove came and sat on the wall and
exchanged voices as they usually do. Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then also
exchanged voices with them for a while.

They then flew away and on the other wall the male sounded to the fame
for a while and then both of them flew away. I then asked The Imam
(a.s.), "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, "What were
these birds?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "O ibn Muslim, all that Allah has
created, such as birds, animals or other things that have life they obey
us better than people.

The male dove was suspicious about the female and she denied it on oath
which the male did not accept. Then she asked if he would abide by the
decision of Muhammad ibn Ali? He agreed and told him that he had wronged
his pair then he believed her."

H 1270, Ch. 118, h 5

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Asbat from Salih ibn Hamza from his father from abu Bakr al-Hadrami
who has said the following. "When abu Ja'far (a.s.) was taken to al-Sham
(Damascus) to the court of hisham ibn 'Abd al- Malik.

When arrived at his door he (Hisham) instructed his people from the
Amawids, "When I will finish exasperating Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) and
stop then each of you one after the other should reprimand and level
blames on him." He then ordered to allow Muhammad ibn Ali to come to his
presence. When abu Ja'far (a.s.) arrived he made a gesture with his hand
to all of them and offered a general greeting. He then sat down.

This increased the disappointment of Hisham because he did not he did
not address him as the caliph and sat down without his permission.
Hisham then began to reprimand and scold him and said to him among other
things, "O Muhammad ibn Ali, why is it that one or the other from cause
disunity among the Muslims and call people to follow him thinking that
he is the Imam because of his ignorance and foolishness.

He scolded him as much as he wanted. When he became quite others one
after the other began to annoy and nag him. When they all became quite,
he rose and stood up and said, "O people, what is that you want and
where are you headed? Through us, Allah granted you guidance to the
first one of you and through us the last of you can receive guidance.

If you have a temporary power to us belongs the future power and there
will be no power after our power because to us belong the consequences
as Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has said, "The final
victory is for the pious ones." (7:128)." He ordered to imprison him.

In the prison to whoever that he spoke he would sympathize with him.
The guard came to Hisham and said, "O Amir al-Mu'minin, I am afraid for
from the people al-Sham (Damascus). They may remove you from this
position. He gave him the full report. Hisham then ordered to escort the
Imam (a.s.) and his people to Madina. He ordered his people not to allow
the Imam and his people to go to marketplaces.

They were denied food and water. They traveled three days without food
and water until they arrived at Madyan. They were left behind the locked
doors therein. People of the Imam complained to him for hanger and
thirst. The Imam (a.s.) has said the he then climbed a hill above them
and said loudly, "O people of Madyan, the town of unjust people.

I am Baqiyat Allah (the power that Allah has kept in reserve) as He has
said, "If you are true believers then know that the profit (the reserved
power) which God has left for you is better for you (than what you may
gain through deceitful ways). I am not responsible for your deeds."
(11:86) The Imam (a.s.) has said that among them there was an old man
who went to them (people of the town) and said, "By Allah, this is the
call of Shu'ayb the Prophet of Allah. If you would not go to this man in
the marketplaces, you will be seized from the above and below.

Believe me and obey me this time but you may reject me next time. I am
giving you a good advise." The Imam (a. s.) has said, 'They came out
quickly to Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) and his people in the marketplace.
The news reached Hisham ibn 'Abd al-Malik who summoned the old man and
he was taken to the court but it is not known what did he do to him."

H 1271, Ch. 118, h 6

Sa'd. ibn 'Abdallah and al-Himyari all have narrated from Ibrahim ibn
Mahziyar from his brother, ali ibn Mhaziyar from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id
from Muhammad ibn Sinan from ibn Muskan from abu Basir from abu
'Abdallah who has said the following. "Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir passed
away at the age of fifty seven, in the year one hundred fourteen AH. He
lived for nineteen years and two months after Ali ibn al-Husayn
(a.s.)."


**Chapter 119 : The Birth of abu 'Abdallah Ja'far ibn Muhammad
(a.s.)**

Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) was born in the year eighty three AH. He passed
away in the month of Shawwal in the year one hundred forty eight at the
age of sixty five. He was buried in al- Baqi' cemetery in Madina in the
grave yard where his father and grandfather and al-Hassan ibn Ali were
buried. His mother was 'Umm Farwa daughter of al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn
abu Bakr and her mother was 'Asma' daughter of 'Abd al-Rahman ibn abu
Bakr.

H 1272, Ch. 119, h 1

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from 'Abdallah
ibn Ahmad from Ibrahim ibn al-Hassan who has said that Wahab ibn Hafs
narrated to me from Ishaq ibn Jarir who has said the following. "Abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) has said, 'Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib, al- Qasim ibn md ibn
abu Bakr and abu al-Khalid al-Kabuli were of the trusted and reliable
companions of Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.)."

The Imam (a.s.) has said, "My mother was a true beliver, pious and a
person of good deeds. Allah loves the people of ggod deeds." He has
said, "My mother has said that my father said, "O 'Umm Farwa, I pray to
Allah to forgive the sins of the sinners of our Shi'a (followers) a
thousand times a day because we exercise patience knowing well the facts
of reward but they exercise patience in that of which they have no
knowledge."

H 1273, Ch. 119, h 2

Certain persons of our people have narrated from ibn Jumhur from his
father from Sulayman ibn Sama'a from 'Abdallah ibn al-Qasim from
al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has said the following. "Once abu Ja'far
al-Mansur ordered his governor of Makka and Madina, al-Hassan ibn
al-Zayd, to set fire to the house of Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) to burn
him to death.

The house of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) was set on fire and it burned the
door and the corridor. Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) came out walking in the fire
and stepping on it and would say, 'I am the son of 'A'raq al-Thara
('Isma'il), I am the son of Ibrahim, (Abraham) the beloved friend of
Allah."

H 1274, Ch. 119, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Barqi from his father from those he mentioned from Rufayd, slve of
Yazid ibn 'Amr ibn Hubayra who has said the following. ":Once Hubayra
became angery with me and swore to kill me. I ran away from him in fear
and sought refuge with abu 'Abdallah (a.s.).

I informed him of my story and he said, "Go back and convey my
greetings to him and say to him, on my behalf, "I haven given refuge and
protection against you to your slave, Rufayd. Do not harm him with your
anger." I said to him, May Allah take my soul in service for your cause,
he is a Shami, (from Damascus) and his filthy opinions." He said, "Go to
him and say what I have told you to say."

I them returned back and on the way in the wilderness I met an Arab man
who asked me, "Where are you going? I see the face of man to be killed."
He then said, "show me your hand." I showed him my hand. He said, "The
hand of a person to be murdered."

He then said, "Show me you foot." I showed him my foot. He said, "The
foot of a person to be murdered." He then said, "show me your tongue." I
showed him my tongue. He said, "Go on. Nothing will happen to you. On
your tongue there is a message that if you would take to the tall
mountains they will obey you." The narrator has said, "I then went on
until I was at the door of ibn Hubayra and I asked permission to see him
and then I went in his presence." He said, "The traitor has come on his
one legs.

"O slave, get the leather rope and the sword." He shouted. He ordered
to tie up my hands and head. The sword man stood over my head to cut off
my head. I said, "O commander, you have not capture me just like that. I
came to you from a living person. There is a certain matter that I want
to mention to you thereafter it would be up to you to do whatever you
may chose."

He said, "Say it." I said, "First, you must allow me to speak to you in
private." He ordered everyone go out of the room and they went out. I
said, "Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) asked me to convey his greetings to
you. He also said, "I have given protection against to your slave,
Rufayd. Do not harm him with your words." He thensai, "I swear you to
Allah, did Ja'far (ibn Muhammad), really say these words and conveyed
greetings to me?" I then swore before him and he asked Allah to grant
Ja'far ibn Muhammad peace.

He did so three times. Then he opened my hands and then said, "This
does not convince me until you do to me what I just did to you." I said,
"My hands will not move for such things and my conscience will not
accept it." He said, "By Allah, my conscience will not agree unless you
do what I asked." I then did what he done to me and then released him.
He then gave me his own seal and said, "All of my affairs will be in
your hands to manage as you would like."

H 1275, Ch. 119, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from 'Umar ibn
'Abd al-'Aziz from al-Khaybari from Yunus ibn Zabyan and al-Mufaddal ibn
'Umar and abu Salama al-Sarraj and al-Husayn ibn Thuwayr ibn abu Fakhita
who have said the following. "Once we were in the presence of abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) and he said, "We have the key to the treassures of the
earth.

If I would say to one of my foot to say to the earth, 'Let out whatever
all the gold that is there in you, it will do so." The narrator has said
that he then said to one of his feet and made aline withit on earth, the
earth rapped open then said to his hand that took out a brick of gold
that was of the size of a hand." He then said, "Watch carefully."

We then looked again and saw many such pieces of gold one over the
other shining. A certain one of us said, May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, "You have been granted whatever there is but
your Shi'a are needy." The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) then
said, "Allah will soon grant us and our Shi'a the bounties of both this
and the next life. He will admit them in Paradise and its blessings.
There will be hell for our enemies."

H 1276, Ch. 119, h 5

Al-Husayn ibn me has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from certain
persons of his people from abu Basir who has said the following. "I had
a neighbor who followed the Sultan and he gains certain properties. He
would arrange parties and invite female singers. They would drink wine
and would disturb me.

I complained to the man several times but he would not pay any
attention. When I insisted he said, "O man, "I am an addicted man and
you are sober. I wish you take me to your master and hope Allah will
save me through him. His words impressed me a great deal. When I went to
see abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and mentioned the condition of the man to him.
The Imam (a.s.) said, "When you will go back to Kufa he may come to you,
say to him, "Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) said to you, "Stay away from
what are involved in I guarantee that Allah will admit you in
Paradise."

When returned to Kufa he came to me. I kept him with me until just two
of us were let alone. I then said to him, "O man, I mentioned you to abu
'Abdallah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (a.s.) and he said to me, "When
you will return to al-Kufa, the man will soon come to you. Say to him,
'Ja'far ibn Muhammad said to you, "Stay away from what you are involved
in and I will guarantee that Allah will admit you in Paradise.

'" The narrator has said that the man then wept and said to me, "I
swear you to Allah, did abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) really say this to you?"
The narrator has said that swore before him that abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
did really said so." He said, "This is enough for you and he left. After
few days he called me while he was behind his house naked and said to
me, "O abu Basir, by Allah, there is nothing left in my house.

I gave all of them away and I am left as you see". The narrator has
said, "I then went to our people and collected for him to clothe him.
Shortly afterwards he sent someone to me that he was ill and that I must
see him. Thereafter I would come and go to him and provide him treatment
until he was about to die. I was sitting near to him and was
experiencing the agony of dieath.

He fainted and then regained conscience and said to me, "O abu Basir,
your master has fulfilled his promise to me." He then passed away. May
Allah grant him blessings. When I went for Hajj I went to see abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) and asked permission for a meeting. As I was about to
enter to his presence, one step in the corridor and one inside, the Imam
(a.s.) before I would say anything, said from the inside, "O abu Basir,
we fulfilled our promise to your friend."

H 1277, Ch. 119, h 6

Abu Ali al-Ash'ari has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya from Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn al-'Ash'ath who said to me
following. "Do you know the reason that we came in this matter (became
Shi'a) and recognized it even though there was no mention of it among us
and we had no knowledge of what other people (Shi'a) had?"

The narrator has said that I asked him, "What then is the reason for
it?" He said, "Abu Ja'far, abu Dawaniq once said to abu Muhammad ibn
al-'Ash'ath, 'O Muhammad, I want a person of reason who has said the
following. can represent me." My father said, "I have found one for you.
He is so and so ibn Muhajir, my maternal uncle." He said, "bring him to
me."

He has said that he brought him to abu Dawaniq. Abu Ja'far, abu Dawaniq
said, "O son of Muhajir, take this property to Madina and gave it to
'Abdallah ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Hassan and a number of the people of his
family among who is Ja'far ibn Muhammad and say to them, "I am from
Khrasan and an stranger in this area. One of your Shi'a (followers) from
Khurasan gave me this property to deliver to you. Then gave to each of
them from the property with such and such conditions. When they take the
property than ask them for a receipt our people has narrated who for the
amount and kind of the property you have received."

He then took the property and went to Madina and came back to abu
Dawaniq when Muhammad ibn al-'Ash'th was also present. Abu Daqwaniq
asked, "What did you leave behind?" He said, "I met the people and this
is the receipt in their hand writings for what they received accept
Ja'far ibn Muhammad.

I went to see him when he was praying in the Mosque of the Messenger of
Allah. I sat behind him t wait until he would finish and then I would
give him the message as I had done with the others. He hurried up and
finished and then turned to me and said, "O you, have fear of Allah and
do not deceive Ahl al-Bayt (family members) of Muhammad (s.a). They have
just experienced the government of the sons of Marwan and they all are
needy."

I then asked, "What are you talking about, may Allah grand you well
beeing?" He said, "Then he brought his head closer to me and told me
about all that had passed between me and you as if he has the third
person with us." He has said that abu Ja'far, al- Dawaniq said, "O ibn
Muhajir take notice and pay attention that there has never been the
family of a prophet without a Muhaddath (a person to whom angels would
speak) among them. Today the Muhaddath among us is Ja'far ibn Muhammad."
This was the reason for our receiving guidance and acceptance of this
matter and faith."

H 1278, Ch. 119, h 7

Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah and 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far all have narrated from
Ibrahim ibn Mahziyar from his brother Ali Mahziyar from al-Husayn ibn
Sa'id from Muhammad ibn Sinan from ibn Muskan from abu Basir who has
said the following. "Abu 'Abdallah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) passed
away at the age of fifty bsix in the year one hundred forty eight AH. He
lived after abu Ja'far (a.s.), his father for forty three years."

H 1279, Ch. 119, h 8

Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah has narrated from abu Ja'far ibn 'Umar ibn Sa'id
from Yunus ibn ya'qub from abu al-Hassan, the first (a.s.) who has said
the following. "I shrouded my father with two pieces of winter clothes
that he had used as the clothe for Ihram (special clothes used during
performing Hajj). Also a shirt of his shirts and the 'Amama (turban)
that belonged to Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) and a gown that he had bought
for forty Dinars were used."


