Chapter 120 : the Birth of Abu Al-hassan Musa Ibn Ja'far (a.s.)
===============================================================

Abu al-Hassan Musa (a.s.) was born in Abwa' in the year one hundred
twenty eight AH. Certain historians have said that it to be the year one
hundred twenty six. He passed away on the sixth of the month of Rajab in
the year one hundred eighty six at the age of fifty four of fifty five
in Baghdad in the prison of al-Sindi ibn Shahik.

Haarun has summoned him from Madina on twentieth of the month of
Shawwal in the year one hundred seventy nine. Harun went to Madina on
his way back from 'Umra (pilgrimage to Makka) in the month of Ramadan.
Thereafter Harum went for hHajj and took abu al-Hassan Musa ibn Ja'far
(a.s.) with him to Baghdad. He then imprisoned him in the control of
al-Sindi ibn Shahik and in his prison he (a.s.) died. He was buried in
Baghdad ingrave yard of Quraysh. His mother was 'Umm walad, called
Hamida."

H 1220, Ch. 120, h 1

al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Ali ibn al-Sindi al-Qummi who has said that narrated to us
'Isa ibn 'Abd al-Rahman from his father the following. "Once ibn
al-'Ukkasha ibn Muhsin al-Asadi went to see abu Ja'far and abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) was present with him. Grapes were offered to him.

The Imam (a.s.) said, "The old man and the small boy eat grasps one
piece at a time and one who is anxious for filling himself up eats
several pieces at a time but you should take two pieces at a time
because it is mustahab (preferable) to do so."

He then asked abu Ja'far (a.s.), "Why do you not arrange a marriage for
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has grown up already?" He has said that before
abu Ja'far (a.s.) there was a bag filled with money and he said, "Very
soon traders will come from Barbar and find accommodation in the house
of Maymun and with the money in this bag we will buy for him a slave
girl."

The narrator has said that time went by and one day we went to see abu
Ja'far (a.s.) and he said, "Do you want me to tell you about the traders
of whom I spoke to you a few days ago? He has just arrived. Go and with
the money in this bag buy a slave girl from him."

The narrator has said, "We went to the trader but he had sold all of
his slave girls accept two of them who were ill and one of them was more
beautiful than the other. We said that we would like to see them. Then
we saw them and asked as to for how much he would sell the more
beautiful one."

He said, "Seventy Dinars is the price." We asked him to reduce the
price but he said that he will not accept anything less than seventy
Dinars. We then said, "We will give all the money that is in the bag but
we do not know how much is in it." There was a man with gray hair and
beard who, said, "Open the bag and weigh it." The trader said, "Do not
open because if it would be less then seventy Dinars I will not accept."
The old man said, "Come close and we went closer and opened the bag and
weighed the Dinars in it and there were exactly seventy Dinars no more
and no less.

We brought the slave girl to abu Ja'far (a.s.) and Ja'far (a.s.) was
also there. We informed abu Ja'far (a.s.) of the whole story and he
offered thanks to Allah and praised Him and then he asked the girl,
"What is your name?" She said, "My name is Humayda." He said, "You are
Humayda in this world and a praised one in the next life. Tell me more,
"Are you virgin or not virgin?" She said, "I am virgin." He said, "How
can that be true?

The traders corrupt whatever may come in their hands." She said, "He
would come to me and would sit next to me just as man and woman would do
but Allah would make a man with gray hairs and beard would appear and
would slap him until he would go away from me. This happened several
times on his part and on the part of the man with gray hairs and beard."
The Imam (a.s.) said, "O Ja'far (a.s.) take her for yourself." She then
give birth to the best person on earth who was Musa ibn Ja'far
(a.s.)."

H 1221, Ch. 120, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Muhammad ibn Ahmad from
'Abdallah ibn Ahmad from Ali ibn al-Husayn from ibn Sinan from Sabiq ibn
al-Walid from al-Mu'alla ibn Khunays who has said the following. "Abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "Humayda is clean of uncleanliness like purified
gold. The angels continuously guarded her until she reach me due to
Allah's regards for me and the possessor of Leadership with Divine
Authority after me."

H 1222, Ch. 120, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Ali ibn
Ibrahim from his father all from abu Qatada al-Qummi from Ali ibn Khalid
al-Zabali who has said the following "When abu al-Hassan Musa (a.s.) was
brought before al-Mahdi the first time he was accommodated in Zabala and
I talked to him.

He found me depressed and asked, "O abu Khalid, why is it that I see
you are depressed?" I said, "How can I be not depressed when you are
being take to this transgressor and I do not know wha will happen to
you." He said, "I will be alright. In so and so month and day come to me
on one mile's distance." I then had no worries but count the months and
days pass by until that particular day. I then went up to a mile's
distance and spent the day there until it was almost sun set. Suddenly,
Satan caused temptations to my heart and I was afraid to doubt in what
he had said. At this point I saw figures coming from the direction of
Iraq.

I went to meet them and abu al-Hassan (a.s.) was in front of them on a
mule. He said, "Is it you O abu Khalid" I said, "Yes, grand son of the
Messenger of Allah." He said, " Do not doubt; Satan loved that you had
doubts." I then said, "Thanks to Allah Who saved you from them." He
said, "I will have a return to them in which I will not find any
safety."

H 1223, Ch. 120, h 4

Ahmad ibn Mihran and Ali ibn Ibrahim all have narrated from Muhammad
ibn Ali from al- Hassan ibn Rashid from Ya'qub ibn Ja'far who has said
the following "I was in the presence of abu al-Hassan Musa (a.s.) that a
Christian man came to see him. At this time we were with him in
al-'Urayd. The Christian man said, "I have come to you from a far away
place after a difficult journey.

I have been praying to my Lord for thirty years to guide me to the best
of the religions and to the best of the servants (of Allah) and the most
knowledgeable among them. I saw a person in my dream who described to me
a man who lived in 'Ulya' (upper) of Damascus. I went to see that man
and I talked to him. He said , "I am the most knowledgeable one among
the people who follow my religion but other than me is more
knowledgeable than me I then asked him to guide me to the one who is
more knowledgeable than him because I like traveling and I can endure
difficulties.

I have read the whole Gospel, the Psalms of David and the four parts of
Torah. I have read the apparent text of the whole Quran. The scholar
then said to me, " If you would like Christianity I am the most
knowledgeable person in it among the Arab and none Arab people.

If you would like the knowledge of Judaism then Bati ibn Shurahbil
al-Samari is the most knowledgeable person in that religion today.
However, you may like to learn the knowledge of Islam, the knowledge of
Torah, the knowledge of the Gospel, the knowledge of Psalms, the book of
Hud and all that is revealed to any of the prophets in your time or in
the times of the others. You may like to learn all that has come from
the heavens in the form of information.

People may have learned or not learned such information. In such
information there is the explanation for everything, the cure for the
worlds, the spirit for those who wish to have comfort, understanding in
what Allah has willed to be for their good and seek intimacy with the
truth. I can guide you to a person who can teach you all such things).
Go to him even if you would have to walk to him on foot. If would not be
able to walk then you must crawl to him on your knees.

If you would be able to do that also then you must drag yourself on
your hips. If you would be able to reach him that way you must move to
him on your face." I then said, " No, none of these is necessary. I can
walk to him. Physically I am capable and financially I am capable." He
then said, "Go on to him without any delay until you will reach
Yathrib." I said, "I do not know where Yathrib is?" He said, "Go until
you reach Madina of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) who was raised among the
Arabs.

He was a prophet from the Arabs, from the tribe of al-Hashim. When you
will arrive there ask for banu Ghanam ibn Malik ibn al-Najjar who is
near the door of the Mosque in that city.

Show your self to him in the Christian dress because their governor is
strict on them and the caliph is even stricter on them. Thereafter ask
for the tribe of banu 'Amr ibn Mabdhul that is in the area of al-Zubayr.
Then ask for Musa ibn Ja'far and his house and that where he himself is
that is he on a journey or at home.

If he would be on a journey then you must reach him because his
destination is shorter than the distance you have to travel. When you
will meet him say that the chief monk of al-Ghuta, Ghuta of Damascus
guided me to you. That he asked me to convey his great deal greetings of
peace to you and has said to you the following. "I pray to my Lord very
often to make my Islam take form in your hands."

The Christian man told this story of his dream while he was standing
and supporting himself with his staff. Then he said, my master, if you
would grant me permission I would like to fold my hands before you and
sit down." He said, "I you have my permission to sit down but I will not
give permission to fold your hands before me" He sat down and removed
his hat and said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause,
will you grant me permission to speak?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, you
have come just for it."

The Christian man said, "Return the greetings to my friend. Do you not
return the greetings of peace?" Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) said, "The answer
to your friend is that he must accept Islam. The greeting of peace will
be returned when he will accept our religion." The Christian man then
said, "I like to ask you questions, may Allah grant you well being." The
Imam (a.s.) said, "Ask your questions." He said, "Tell me about the book
that Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has revealed to Muhammad that
he read to people and introduced it to them the way he did. And said,
"Ha. Mim (44:1).

I swear by the illustrious Book (44:2) that We have revealed the Quran
on a blessed night to warn mankind (44:3). On this night, every absolute
command coming from Us becomes distinguishable." (44:4) What is its
intrinsic interpretation and meaning?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Ha Mim
stands for Muhammad (s.a.) who is mentioned in the book of Hud which was
revealed to him and its letters are shortened.

The 'illustrious book' stands for Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) The
blessed night stands for Fatima (a.s.).". . . absolute command coming
from Us becomes distinguishable." (44:4) It means that in that night
there comes a great deal of good. There is the man of wisdom, the man of
wisdom and the man of wisdom.

(a reference to the first three Imams from the descendants of Fatima
(a.s.)" The man then said, "Describe to me the first and last of these
men." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Qualities are similar.

However I will describe the third of these people and his descendants
and he is mentioned in your books revealed to you. If you have not
altered and changed and reject them as you have been doing so for a long
time."

The Christian man said, "I will not hide from you what I know and will
not lie to you and you already know what I will say is true and what is
false. By Allah, He has granted you through His grace so much
distinction and has given the opportunity through His bounties so much
that people can not even think how much they are? No one can hide them
and falsify them even those who reject (the truth). My words in the
matter are true as I mentioned and it is as such that I said."

Abu Ibrahim then said to him, "I can tell you a news that only very few
people who read books know." Tell me what was the name of the mother of
Mary and when the spirit was blown in Mary and in which hour of the day?
What was the date when Jesus was born and during which hour of the day?"
The Christian man said, "I do not know."

Abu Ibrahim then said, "The name of the mother of Mary was Martha and
'Wahayba' in Arabic. The day Mary conceived with Jesus was a Friday at
noontime. It was the day in which the trusted spirit descended and among
the Muslims there is no holiday of greater preference than this. Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, has advanced it with greatness and
Muhammad (s.a) has venerated it with greatness. He commanded it to be
observed as a holiday, thus, it is the day of congregation. The day in
which Mary was born was a Tuesday four and a half hour before noon. Do
you know the river on the side of which Mary gave birth to Jesus?"

The Christian man said, "No, I do not know it." The Imam (a.s.) said,
"It was Euphrates that has palm trees and vineyards on its banks. No
other place is like Euphrates for vineyards and palm trees. Have you
noticed the day in which her tongue was curtained in speaking and Qaydus
(the king of Israel) called his sons and subjects for support to take
the family of 'Imran out and look at Mary? They said to her, "What has
Allah told you in His book and against us in His book?"

The Christian man said, "Yes, I have read about the day of suffering."
The Imam (a.s.) then said, "Therefore, you will not rise from this
meeting before Allah will grant you the right guidance." The Christian
man asked, "What was the name of my mother in Asyrian language and in
Arabic." The Imam (a. s.) said, "In Asyrian it was 'Anqalia. 'Unqura was
the name of your grandmother from your father's side. The name of your
mother in Arabic was Mayyata. The name of your father was 'Abd al-Masih
and it is 'Abdallah in Arabic.

Al-Masih (Messiah) did not have any servant." The Christian man said,
"You have spoken the truth and did a good deed. Would you tell me what
the name of my grandfather was?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "The name of your
grandfather was Gibrael and I call him 'Abd al-Rahman in this our
meeting." The Christian man asked, "Was he a Muslim?" Abu Ibrahim (a.s.)
said, "Yes, he was a Muslim and he was martyred.

Soldiers attacked him and murdered him in his home senselessly and the
soldiers were from the people of Damascus." The Christian man asked,
"What was my name before my Kunya (such as 'abu' so and so or 'ibn' so
and so)?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It was 'Abd al-Salib." The Christian
man asked, "What name would you like to give me?"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "I will call you 'Abdallah." The Christian man
said, "I then declare my faith in Allah the great and testify that there
is no lord besides Allah Who is One and no one is His partner. He is
One, Self-sufficient. He is not like what the Christians describe Him.
He is not like what the Jews describe Him. He is not a genus of the
categories of polytheism. I testify that Muhammad is His servant and His
Messenger. He has sent him with all truth. He has manifested the truth
to the people of truth and has turned the people of falsehood blind.
That Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah to all mankind, red and black
all alike.

Thus, those who have understanding have understood and those who sought
guidance have received guidance. The people of falsehood have turned
blind and have lost what they were calling. I testify that His
representative His Wali (the Leader with Divine Authority) have spoken
with His wisdom. That all the prophets before him had spoken with pure
wisdom, supported each other in obedience to Allah and stayed away from
falsehood and the people of falsehood and filth and the people of
filth.

That they kept aloof from error and that Allah supported them through
obedience to Him and kept them infallible and sinless. Thus, they were
the Awliya' of Allah, possessing Divine Authority and the protectors of
religion. They encouraged others to do good and commanded them to do so.
I declare my faith in the small ones among them and greater ones among
them, those of them whom I have mentioned as well as those that I have
not mentioned. I declare my faith in Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, the Lord of the worlds"

He then cut off his necktie and the cross that was made of gold and
hanged from his neck. He then said, "Command me as you would wish as to
who must I pay charities due on me.' The Imam (a.s.) said, "There is one
of your brethren in religion and he is of your own people, from Qays ibn
al-Tha'laba and is doing well financially like your self. You must
cooperate with each other and be lenient to each other and I will not
allow that your rights in Islam be ignored."

He then said, "By Allah,-may Allah grant you well being- I am doing
very well financially. In my town I have three hundred horses male and
female and a thousand camels. Your rights in them is more than mine."
The Imam (a.s.) said, "You are the slave of Allah and His Messenger and
your lineage is natural." He improved himself in Islam and married a
lady from the tribe of Fihr. Abu Ibrahim (a.s.) paid her dowry (marriage
gift) which was fifty Dinars from the charities of Ali ibn abu Talib
(a.s.). He hired for him a servant and provided him accommodation until
abu Ibrahim (a.s.) was taken (to Baghdad). Thereafter he died only after
twenty eight days."

H 1224, Ch. 120, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim and Ahmad ibn Mihran all have narrated from Muhammad
ibn Ali from al- Hassan ibn Rashid from ya'qub ibn Ja'far who has said
the following. "Once I was in the presence of abu Ibrahim (a.s.) that a
monk and a nun from the people of Najran, Yemen came to see him. al-Fadl
ibn Sawwar sought permission for them and the Imam (a.s.) said,
"Tomorrow bring them to the well of 'Umm Khaayr."

The narrator has said that on the next day we went to see him and we
found the people also there. The Imam (a.s.) ordered to spread a mat
that was made of palm tree fibers. He then sat down on it and the people
sat down on The Imam (a.s.).The nun began asking questions. She asked
may questions. The Imam (a.s.) answered them all. Abu Ibrahim (a.s.)
asked her certain questions but she could not answer. She then accepted
Islam.

The monk then began to ask questions and the Imam (a.s.) would answer
whatever he would ask. The monk then said, "I was very strong in my
religion and no one of the Christians was as knowledgeable as I am. I
heard of man from India who could go for pilgrimage to the Holy House in
one day and one night and then go back to India to his home.

I asked as to where did he live? I was told that he lived in Sibdhan.
The one who informed me about him said that he knew the knowledge with
which Asaf, the companion of Solomon brought the throne of Sheba before
Solomon. He is the one whom Allah has mentioned in your book and in the
books of the followers of the Bible." Abu Ibrahim (a.s.) then said, "How
many are the names of Allah that if invoke would not leave one without
the desired result?" The monk said, "They are many but the ones with
perfect effects that do not leave the person invoking them without the
desired results are seven."

Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) asked him, "Tell of whichever that you know." The
monk said, "By Allah, who has sent the Torah to Moses and has made Jesus
to be a lesson for the worlds and a trial for the thankfulness of the
people of reason, Who has made Muhammad (s.a.) to be a blessing and
mercy and has made Ali (a.s.) a lesson and the source of understanding,
Who has made the executors of his will from his descendants and the
descendants of Muhammad (s.a.) that I do not know."

Had I known them you would not have to ask me, I would not have come to
you and would have asked you questions." Abu Ibrahim (a.s.) then said,
"Tell me more about the man from India." The monk said, "I have heard
certain names but I do not know their meanings and interpretations. I do
not know what they are and how they are and how they are read? I
journeyed until I reached Sidhan in India. I asked about the man and I
was told that he has built a monastery in the mountain and can only be
seen twice a yea. The people of India believe that Allah has made a
stream flow through his monastery. They think that a different
kincheloe, MI 49784 of farming is done for him therein and that all is
done for him without normal labor.

I then went to his door and waaited for three days without knocking and
trying to open the door. On the fourth day Allah opened the door. A cow
loaded wth fire wood came. Her breast was so heavily filled with milk
that it would almost touch the ground and the milk would almost to come
out.

The cow pushed the door open and I followed her. I found the man in a
standing position looking towards the sky and would weep. Then he would
look to the earth and weep. He would look at the mountains and would
weep. I said, "Glory belongs to Allah. How few are the people like you
in our times." He said, "By Allah, I am only one good of the deeds of
the one whom you have left behind you." I then said, "I am told that you
know certain names of the name s of Allah through which you can reach
every day and night the Holy house that is in al-Sham (Syria).

Is it true?"He asked me, "Do you recognize the Holy House?" I replied,
"I do not know any other Holy House besides that in al-Sham." He said,
"Not Bayt al-Maqdis (the mosque in Jerusalem). The Holy House that is
the House of the family of Muhammad (s.a.)." I then said, "What I have
heard up to this day is the Holy House that I just mentioned." He said,
"That is the place where the prophets worshipped Allah.

It had been called the center of the places of worship until the period
between the time of Jesus and the coming of Muhammad (s.a.) in which the
calamities approached the pagans and misfortune entered the houses of
Satan. They moved, changed and transferred those names as Allah has said
in His words whose intrinsic meaning stand for the family of Muhammad
and apparently stand as a proverb, "These are only names given by
yourselves and your fathers. God has not given them any authority. . .
."(53:23). I then said, to him, "I have come to your from a far away
land. On the way I crossed , oceans, sadness, anxieties and fear.

I have passed days and night in despair for falling to reach my goal."
He said to me, "I do not see that your mother conceived with you at any
time without a noble angel with her. I never found your father without
formal purification whenever he would go to bed with your mother. He
went to bed with her in purified condition. I do not think there was any
other reason except his reading the fourth part of the Torah during his
nightly vigil, thus, arrived with him to the good end.

Go back jus as you came. Leave until you reach Madina of Muhammad
(s.a.) which also called the pure and clean. In the age of darkness of
ignorance they called it Yathrib. Then go a place therein called
al-Barqi'. Then ask for a house called the house of Marwan. Logde there
for three days. Then ask for a black old man who works with the fibers
of the palm tree (to make mats and other such things) that they call
al-Khasf. Be kind to him and tell him, "I am sent to you by your guest
who would stay with you in the corner of the house wherein there are the
four pieces of woods. Then ask him about so and so son of so and so. Ask
him where he forms his gathering and what time he passes thereby.

He will show him to you or will give full description and dyou
recognize him through the description and I also describe him for you."
. I said, "After meeting him what would I do?" He said, "Ask him of
whatever happened and whatever will happen. Ask him about religious
guidance of those past and those yet to come." The narrator has said
that abu Ibrahim (a.s.) said to him, "Your friend who you met has given
you very good advise." The monk then asked the Imam (a.s.),

"What is his name, may Allah take my soul in service for your cause,?"
The Imam (a.s.) said, "His name is Mutammim ibn Firuz from the people of
Persia. He established faith in Allah Who is only One and has no
partners and worshipped Him sincerely with certainty and devotion. He
ran away from his people when was afraid of them. His Lord granted him
authority and guided him to the way of right guidance and progress.

He made him to be of the pious ones and granted him the knowledge of
who the His sincere servants are. Every year he he visits Makka for Hajj
and performs 'Umra at the beginning of every month once. He comes from
his place in India to Makka because of the distinction that Allah ahs
granted to him and His support and thus Allah rewards those who give
thanks."

The monk then asked him many questions. The Imam (a.s.) answered them
all. He asked the monk certain questions which he could not answer but
the Imam (a.s.) himself answered them..

The monk then said, "Tell me of the eight letters that were revealed
out of which four were manifested on earth and the other four remained
in space. To who the four were sent thhe fpur that remained in space?
Who will interpret them?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "He will be our al-
Qa'im (the one who will rise with Divine authority). Allah will sent
them to him and he will interpret them. He will sent to him what has not
even been sent to the truthful ones, the messengers and the rightly
guided ones." Then the monk said, "Tell me about the of the four that
were sent to earth.

What are they?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "I will tell you about all four.
The first one was 'there is no lord except Allah Who is One and has no
partners that He is eternal '. The second was, 'Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah purely'. The third one was we the Ahl al-Bayt
(infallible members of the family of Muhammad (s.a.). the fourth one was
our Shi'a (followers) who are from us and we are from the Messenger of
Allah and the Messenger of Allah is from Allah through means."

The monk then said, "I testify that there is no lord except Allah and
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and that whatever he brought
from Allah is true and that your, Ahl al-Bayt (the infallible members of
the family of Muhammad (s.a.) are the chosen of Allah from His creatures
and that you Shi'a are pure who are the replacement (of those who oppose
you). They will have the good end.

All thanks are due to Allah, Lord of the worlds." Abu Ibrahim (a.s.)
called to bring for him a gown, a shirt made in Gha'in Khurasan, a
scarf, a shoe and a hat. He gave them to him and prayed the noon time
prayer and asked him to circumcise. He said, " It had been done when he
was seven years old."

H 1225, Ch. 120, h 6 om Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn al-Hakam from
'Abdallah ibn al-Mughira who has said the following. "The pious servant
of Allah passed in Mina by a woman who was weeping and her children
around her also were weeping because her cow was dead. He went close to
her and asked, "What has caused you t weep O slave of Allah ?" Sshe
said, "O servant of Allah, we have orphan children. Our cow that was
them means for our living has died and we are left without any means of
living."

He said, "Will you be happy if will b;ring your cow back to kife?" She
was just inspired to say, "Yes, O servant of Allah I will be very
happy.." He stepped aside and said two Rak'at prayers. He then raised
his hands gently has said the following and moved his lips. He then
stood up and called the cow to get up. He pushed the cow with his foot
or a staff and she was up straight and standing. When the woman looked
at the cow she cried and said, "Jesus, son of Mary, I swear by the Lord
of the Ka'ba. Many people gathered around and he disappeared among them
and went."

H 1226, Ch. 120, h 6

Ahmad ibn Mahziyar, may Allah grant him blessings, has narrated from
mmmd ibn ali from Sayf ibn 'Umayra from Ishaq ibn 'Ammar who has said
the following. "Once I heard the pious servant of Allah giving the news
of his own death to a man. I thought that he might or might not know
when a person from his Shi'a (followers) would die. He turned to me as
if angry and said, "O Ishaq, if Rashid al-Hajri possessed the knowledge
of deaths and suffering, the necessity for such knowledge for the Imam
is much greater."

Then he said, "O Ishaq, do whatever you may like. Your life is
destroyed and you will die within two years. Your brothers and family
will very soon after you will scatter in disunity turn as traitors
against each other so much so that even their enemies would scold them.
Was this in your mind?" I said, "I seek refuge to Allah for what went in
my center (heart or chest)." After that meeting Ishaq, did live for very
long time.and he died. And very soon after banu (children of) 'Ammar
began to live on loans and they became very poor and destitute."

H 1227, Ch. 120, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Musa ibn
al-Qasim al-Bajali from Ali ibn Ja'far who has said the following.
"Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il came to me when we were still in Makka after
completing our 'Umra in the month of Rajab. He said, "Uncle, I intend to
go to Baghdad but I want to say farewell to my uncle, abu al-Hassan Musa
ibn Ja'far (a.s.) aand I would like that you also come with me." I came
with him to my brother and he was in his house in al-Hawba It was just
after sun set.

I knocked the door and my brother answered the door asking, "Who is
it?" I replied, "It is Ali." He said, "I am just coming." He would do
his Wudu very slowly. I said, "Be quick please." He said, "I will be
quick." He came out wearing dyed clothe that he secured around his neck
and sat down just below the door steps.

I, Ali ibn Ja'far leaned over him and kissed his head and said, "I have
come for a matter to find out if you would agree then Allah may grant
him success, if you would not agree then it is one of those mistake that
we make." He asked, "what is it?" I said, "This is the son of your
brother. He wants to say farewell to you because he wants to go to
Baghdad." He said to me, "Call him." I called him and he had kept some
distance.

He came close to him and kissed his head and said, "May Allah take my
soul in service for your cause, please advise me." The Imam (a.s.) said,
"I advise you to be pious before Allah and spare my life." He in answer
said, "Whoever would have bad intentions towards you, may Allah have the
same for him." He continued to pray against those who would have bad
intentions towards the Imam (a. s.).

He them kiss the head of the Imam (a.s.) again and said, "Please advise
me." The Imam (a. s.) said, "I advise you to be pious before Allah and
spare my life." may or not." He in answer said, "Whoever would have bad
intentions towards you, may Allah have the same for him." He kissed the
head of the Imam (a.s.) and said, "Please advise me." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "I advise you to be pious before Allah and spare my life."

He prayed against those who would have bad intentions towards the Imam
(a.s.) and moved away and I left along with him. My brother called me
and said, "O Ali, wait where you are." I waited and he went inside and
then called me inside. I went inside and he gave me a bag with a hundred
Dinars in it and said, "Tell your cousin to use it during his
journey."

The narrator has said, "I secured the money in my dress and he gave me
another hundred Dinar to give to him also and then he give me one more
bag to give to him. I said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your
cause, "When you are afraid of him so much then why do you give him all
this money and why do you support him to against your own self?." He
said, "When I would maintain good relations with him and would cut off
such relationships Allah will cut his life short." Then he gave to me a
pillow with three hundred pure Dirhams (units of money) in it and asked
to give him also."

The narrator has said, "I then left and gave him the first one hundred
and he became extremely happy and prayed for his uncle. I then gave him
the other money and he became so happy that I thought he might not go to
Baghdad any more.

I then gave him all the Dirhams and he left for Baghdad. He greeted
Harun as the Caliph and said, "I did not think that there can be two
caliphs on earth at the same time. I also saw my uncle Musa ibn Ja'far
being greeted as the Caliph." Harun sent him one hundred thousand
Dirhams. He fell sich with Diphtheria or scrofulous and died before
seeing or touching any of those money."

Sa'dibn 'Abdallah and 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far all have narrated from
Ibrahim ibn Mahziyar from his brother Ali ibn Mahziyar from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from Muhammad ibn Sinan from ibn Muskan from abu Basir who has
said the following. "Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) died at the age of fifty
five in the year one hundred eighty three. He lived for thirty five
years after Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.)."


