Chapter 121 : the Birth of Abu Al-hassan Al-rida (a.s.)
=======================================================

Abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) was born in the year the one hundred forty
eight AH. He passed away in the month of Safar in the year two hundred
and three at the age of fifty-five. All the views about this date are
not the same but it is more accurate, if Allah would so will. He died in
Tus in the town called Sanabad, that is within the reach of human voice
from Nawqan.

He was buried there. Al-Ma'mun had summoned him from Madina to Marw via
Basra to Persia. When al-Ma'mun left for Baghdad he took The Imam (a.s.)
he passed away in this town. His mother was 'Umm Walad called 'Umm
al-Banin.

H 1228, Ch. 121, h 1

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from Hisham ibn Ahmar who has said the following.

"Once abu al-Hassan, the second asked me, "Do you know if anyone from
Morocco (or the west) has arrived?" I replied, "No, no one has come." He
said, "Yes, a man has come. Come with us." He rode and also rode and
went until we reached the man. He was a man from Madina who had a few
slaves with him for sale. I asked him to show the slaves for sale and he
showed me seven slave-girls. Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) said, "I do not need
any of these." Then he asked, "Show us more." The man said, "There is no
more except one who is ill."

The Imam (a. s.) said, "Why do you not show her to us?" The man refused
and the Imam (a.s.) returned. The next day he sent me and said to ask
him for how much is the girl who is ill and if he said for so and so
amount say, "I pay." I went to him and he said, "I will not accept less
than so and so amount for her." I said, "I take her." He said, "She is
yours but tell me who was the man with you yesterday?" I said, "A man
from the clan of banu Hashim." He asked from which family is he?" I
said, "That is all I have." He said, "I like to tell you about this
girl.

I bought her in the far corner of the west (or Morocco). A woman from
the followers of the Bible came and said, "What is she doing with you?"
I said, "I have purchased her for my self." She said, "This girl should
not be with one like you. This girl should be with the best of the
people on earth. With such a one she will not live very long before
giving birth to a boy whose like will not be born in the west or east of
the earth." The narrator has said, "I brought her to the Imam (a.s.) and
shortly afterwards she became the mother of Imam al-Rida (a.s.)."

H 1229, Ch. 121, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from those he
mentioned from Safwan ibnyh who has said the following.

"when abu Ibrahim (a.s.) passed away abu al-Hassan (al-Rida) (a.s.)
spoke (about his Imamat) and we became afraid for him because of it. It
was said to him, "You have declared a very great issue and we are afraid
for you from this rebel." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Let him strive his best
but he will find way against me."

H 1230, Ch. 121, h 3

Ahmad ibn Mihran, Allah grant him blessings, from Muhammad ibn Ali from
al-Hassan ibn al-Mansur from his brother who has said the following.

"Once I went to see al-Rida (a.s.) in a house inside his house in the
middle of the night. He raised his hand and it was as if there were ten
lamps inside the house and a man asked permission for a meeting. He
lowered his hand and then gave him permission."

H 1231, Ch. 121, h 4

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from ibn Jumhur from Ibrahim ibn
'Abdallah from Ahmad ibn 'Abdallah from al-Ghifari who has said the
following.

"I owed money to a man from the family of abu Rafi', slave of the Holy
Prophet (s.a), called Tays. He demanded payment and pressed me hard and
people also assisted him. When I found myself in such condition I prayed
the morning prayer in the Mosque of the Messenger of Allah and then
headed to al-Rida (a.s.) who was in al-'Arid those days. When I almost
reached his door he appeared on his donkey wearing a shirt and a gown.
When I looked at him I felt shy. When he approached me he looked at me
and I offered him the greeting of peace. It was the month of Ramadan. I
said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, I owe money to
your slave, Tays and he has defamed me.

I thought he will order him to stop pressuring me and by Allah, I did
not tell him how much I owed nor I mentioned any amount. He ordered me
to sit until he will return. I remained there until said my sun set
prayer and I was fasting. I became depressed and I thought of returning
home. At that time he appeared before me with people around him. He was
surrounded by the beggars and would give them charity. He passed by and
entered his house.

Then he came out and called me inside. We both sat down and I began to
speak to him about ibn al-Musayyib, the governor of Madina as I would
speak to him about the governor often. When I finished he said, "I do
not think you had any break fast yet. I said, "No, I did not break fast
yet." He asked for food and ordered the boy to join me at the table. I
and the boy had our meal and when we finished he said to me, "Lift up
the furnishing and pick up whatever is underneath." I lifted it up and
found Dinars therein. I picked them up and place in my pocket.

He ordered four of his slaves to escort me to my house. I said, "May
Allah take my soul in service for your cause, the spies of ibn
al-Musayyib check around all the time and I do not like them to see me
with your slaves. He said, "You are right, may Allah keep you rightly
guided."

He ordered them to return whenever I wanted them to do so." When almost
reached my house and felt safe I asked them to go back I went home and
asked for a lamp. I looked at the Dinars and there were forty-eight of
them, I owed twenty eight to the man. Among them one Dinar caught my
sight and picked it up and brought near the lamp. I found a clear mark
on it that said, "Payment to the man twenty-eight Dinars and the rest
for your self." By Allah, I did not know how much I owed him. All praise
belong to Allah Who has granted honor to those who He has give
authority."

H 1232, Ch. 121, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from certain person of our
people who has said the following. " Abu al-Hassan al-Rida came out of
Madina in the year that Harun wanted to performed Hajj. When he arrived
near the mountain called Fari' on the left going to Makka, abu al-Hassan
looked at it and then said, "The builder at Fari' and he who would
demolish will be cut in pieces." We had no idea what it meant.

When he returned Harun arrived and camped at that place. Ja'far ibn
Yahya climbed the mountain and ordered to build a resting place for him.
When he returned from Makka he climbed there and ordered to demolish
what was built there. When he returned to Iraq he was cut in pieces."

H 1233, Ch. 121, h 6

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Muhammad ibn Hamza ibn al-Qasim from Ibrahim ibn
Musa who has said the following.

"I would urge abu al-Hassan al-Rida in a matter that I would demand
from him and he would ask to give him time. One day he went out to
receive the governor of Madina and I was with him. He came near the
castle of so and so and stopped for rest among a few trees. Just the two
of us and not a third was there.

I said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, this holy is
upon us, by Allah, all I have is one Dirham only and nothing else." He
scratched the earth with his whip firmly and with his hand picked up a
mold of gold and said, "Use it and keep secret what you just saw."

H 1234, Ch. 121, h 7

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from from Yasir al-Khadim and al-Rayyan
ibn al-Salt all have said the following.

"When the matter of the deposed Caliph (Amin) ended and it was
established for al-Ma'mun he wrote to al-Rida asking to come to
Khurasan. Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) in reply presented certain reason to
justify his disagreement to the proposal but al-Ma'mun continued writing
until The Imam (a.s.) found it out to be unavoidable and that will not
leave him alone. He (a. s.) then left for Khurasan when abu Ja'far was
only seven years old.

Al-Ma'mun wrote to him, "do not travel through the mountains and Qum.
Take the road through Basra, al-Ahwaz and Persia. The Imam (a.s.)
arrived at Marw. Al-Ma'mun offered him to command and lead the task of
Khilafat (Leadership) but abu al-Hassan (a.s.) declined. He then offered
the Imam (a.s.) to accept the post of the crown prince . The Imam (a.s.)
said that he may accept it under certain conditions. Al-Ma'mun said,
"Say whatever conditions you like."

The Imam (a.s.) wrote, "I will assume this post with the conditions
that I will nor issue any order or prohibitions nor issue any fatwa or
judgment nor any appointment or dismissal of officers or change anything
in the current system. You must excuse me in all such matters. Al-Ma'mun
agreed to all such conditions.

The narrator has said that Yasir narrated to me saying, "When it was
'Id (the holiday) al-Ma'mun asked al-Rida to attend the program, lead
the prayer and deliver the sermon. Al-Rida (a.s.) replied him saying,
"You know the conditions between us. They did not consist of any such
matters. Al-Ma'mun sent the message, "I only want there by to build
confidence in the people and they would know your distinction."

He continued insisting until the Imam (a.s.) said, "O Amir al-Mu'minin,
I would appreciate much if you would excuse me from such task and if you
would still insist then I will out for this task in the manner that the
Messenger of Allah and Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) would do." Al-Ma'mun
then said, "You may do as you would chose. Al-Ma'mun ordered the
servants guides to lead a procession to the door of abu al-Hassan (a.s.)
saying 'Allahu Akbar' Allah is great. The narrator has said that Yasir
al-Khadim narrated to me this. "People lined up waiting for the Imam
(a.s.) on the roads and roof tops, men women and children.

The guides and people from the army gathered at the door of abu
al-Hassan (a.s.). At sun rise the Imam (a.s.) took a shower, wore a
white turban made of cotton. He let one end of the turban hang over his
chest and the other end between his shoulder on his back. He tied his
belt and asked his followers, "Do as I have done." He picked up an arrow
shaped staff and came out and we were along with him. He was bare foot
and his gown was raised half way between his feet and knees and so were
his other (long) clothes. When he walked and we walked along with him he
raised his head towards the sky and Allahu Akbar (Allah is great) four
times.

It seemed to us as if the sky and the walls responded to him. the
guides and the people at the door were ready and armed and decorated
with the best dresses. When we appeared before them in such fashion and
al-Rida (a.s.) appeared to them he stood at the door shortly and then
said, "Allahu Akbar (Allah is great). Allahu Akbar (Allah is great).

Allahu Akbar (Allah is great). Allahu Akbar (Allah is great) for
guidance that He has granted us. Allahu Akbar (Allah is great) that has
granted us the cattle. All praise belongs to Allah that He has granted
us blessings. We all would raise our voices. Yasir al-Khadim has said
that the whole Maw shock with the weeping, cries and shouts when they
looked at abu al-Hassan (a.s.).

Many of the guides fell from their horses who would kick and throw
their boots when they saw abu al-Hassan barefoot. He would walk about
ten steps and pause and say Allahu Akbar three times. Yasir al- Khadim
has said that to us it seemed as if the sky, earth and mountains would
respond to him. The whole Marw had become one voice loud and tearful.

Information of this was reported to al-Ma'mun and Sahl ibn al-Fadl, who
had two official posts, said to him, "Amir al-Mu'minin, if al-Rida would
reach the place of prayer in this manner people will into his devotees.
Ask him to return home." Al-Ma'mun sent his people to ask abu al-Hassan
to return home. He asked to bring his shoes and wore them and rode back
home."

H 1235, Ch. 121, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Yasir al-Khadim who has said the
following. "When al-Ma'mun left Khurasan for Baghdad along with him came
Fadl, Dhu al-Al- Ri'asatayn and we came out with abu al-Hassan (a.s.)

Fax l ibn Sahl had received a letter from his brother Z assan, while we
were on our journey. Hassan had said in the letter, "I studied the
Zodiac changes this year according to the astrological calculations. I
found out in the month of so and so on a Wednesday you will feel the
test of iron and fire. I urged you to go to a Turkish bath with Ma'm7 n
and Imam ooo2 (a.s) and perform phlebotomies and stain your hands with
blood which, will help remove this misfortune from you.

Fax l ibn Sahl wrote about it to al-Ma'mun requesting him to request
His Holiness Imam Ali ibn o7 o2 al-ooo2 (a.s) to also join them on the
appointed day. Al-Ma'm7 n informed the Holy Imam of the contents of that
letter and demanded the consent of His Holiness. In reply to the
caliph's letter Imam al-oooo (a.s) wrote, "I will not go to the Turkish
bath tomorrow. You and Fadl also must not go there tomorrow." He sent
that letter to the Imam (a.s.) twice. Abu al- Hassan (a.s.) wrote to
him, "O Amir al-Mu'minin, "I will not go to the Turkish bath. I have
seen in a dream the Holy Prophet (a.s) enjoining me not to go to that
Turkish bath.

You and Fadl also must not go to the Turkish bath." Al-Ma'mun replied
the letter saying, "You have spoken the truth and so has the Messenger
of Allah. I will not go to the Turkish bath tomorrow and Fadl knows
best." The narrator has said that Yasir said, "When the night fell al-
Rida (a.s.) told us to say, "We seek refuge in Allah against the
misfortune in this night. We continued saying the expression. When
al-Rida (a.s.) prayed the Morning Prayer he asked me to climb at the
roof and to listen if there is anything. When I climbed I heard a great
deal of commotion and crying and it was increasing.

We saw al-Ma'mun enter from the door that opened to his quarter from
the quarter of abu al-Hassan (a.s.) and he said, "My master, abu al-
Hassan, may Allah grant you good reward for the death of Fadl. He
refused to cancel his decision for the bath and he went to the Turkish
bath. A group of people attacked him with swords and killed him. Three
of the attackers were arrested and one of them was the son of his
maternal uncle, the son of Dhul al-Qalamayn.

He then said that the police and the guides and the people of Fadl
present at the door of al-Ma'mun said, "He has murdered him." They
killed him. They meant al-Ma'mun thereby." "We revenge him." They set
the door on fire." Al-Ma'mun said to abu al-Hassan (a.s.), "My master,
please come out to them to calm them down and ask them to disperse."

The narrator has said that Yasir said, "Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) rode and
asked me to ride also. When we were out of the door of the house he
looked at the people who were crowded. He made hand gestures to asked
them to disperse." Yasir has said, "People began to fall one on the
other and to whoever, that he would make a hand gesture he would run and
pass by."

H 1236, Ch. 121, h 9

al-Husayn ibnmmd has narrated from Mu'alla ibnmd from Musafir and from
al-Washsha' from Musafir who has said the following.

"When Harun ibn al-Musayyib decided to fight Muhammad ibn Ja'far, abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) told me to go to him and say, "Do not go our tomorrow.
If would do so you will be defeated and your people will be killed." If
he would ask, "How do youknow that?" Say, "I saw it in my dream." The
narrator has said that he went to him and said, "May Allah make of
service to you, do not go out tomorrow to fight.

If would do so you will be defeated and your people will be killed." He
asked, "How do you know this?" I said, "I saw it in my dream." He said,
"A slave goes to sleep (to dream) and his behind is not even washed." He
went out to fight. He was defeated and his people were killed." The
narrator has said that Musafir narrated, "I was in the presenceof
al-Rida (a.s.) in Mina, Makka that Yahya ibn Khalid passed by and he
covered his head from the dust. The Imam (a.s.) said, "Poor people do
not know what will happen to them this year." I, by Allah, could not
understand themeaning of his statement until we buried him (Yahya ibn
Khalid)."

. H 1237, Ch. 121, h 10

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ali ibnmd
al-Qasani who has said the following.

"A Certain person of our people has said that he wanted to deliver an
amount of propertyto al- Rida (a.s.). It was a large amount. When he saw
it he did not become happy. I became depressed and said to myself, "I
delivered this property to him but he did not become happy." The Imam
(a.s.) called, "O boy, bring water and the receptacle."

The narrator has said that the Imam thensat on the chair and made a
hand gesture to the boy to pure water on his hand." The narrator has
said that from his hand gold began to fall in the receptacle. He then
turned to me and said, "One who would be as this he does not become
happy for what you would deliver to him."

H 1238, Ch. 121, h 11 Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah and 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far all
have narrated from Ibrahim ibn Mahziyar from his brother Ali ibn
Mahziyar from al-Hassan al-Husayn ibn Sa'idfm Muhammad ibn Sinan who has
said the following.

"Ali ibn Musa (a.s.) died at the age of forty nine and few months in
the year two hundred and two AH. He lived for nineteen years and two or
three month after the death of Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.)."


