Chapter 122 : the Birth Ofabu Ja'far, Muhammad Ibn Ali, the Second (a.s.)
=========================================================================

Abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) was born in the month of Ramadan in
the year one hundred ninety five and passed away in the year two hundred
twenty at the end of the month of Dhu al-Al-Qa'da at the age of twenty
five and two months and eighteen days. He was buried in Baghdad in the
grave yard of Quraysh near the grave of his grandfather, Musa ibn Ja'far
(a.s.).

Al-Mu'tasam had summoned him to Baghdad at the beginning of the year in
which he left this world. His mother was 'Umm Walad, called, Sabika
Nuwbiyya. It is also said that her name was Khizuran. It also is
narrated that she was from the family of Maria, mother of Ibrahim, son
of the Messenger of Allah."

H 1239, Ch. 122, h 1

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn Hassa'n from ali ibn
Khalid who has said the following.

"Muhammad who belonged to Zaydi sect said to me this. "I was in the
army camp and I was told that there was a prisoner brought from the area
of al-Sham (Syria) tied up and that he has proclaimed himself a
prophet." Ali ibn Khalid has said, "I went to him and found my way
through the guards until I reached him. I found him to be a man of
understanding. I asked him, "O you, what is your story and your case?"

He said, "I am a man from al-Sham, worshipping Allah at a place called
the 'place of the head of al-Husayn'. During my worshipping a man came
to me and said, "Come with me." I went with him and I found myself in
theMosque of al-Kufa. He asked me, "Do you recognize this Mosque?" I
replied, "Yes, I recognize it."

He said, "He prayed and I prayed with him. Then I found us in the
Mosque of the Messenger of Allah in Madina. He offered greeting of peace
to the Messenger of Allah and I did the same. He prayed and I prayed
with him. He offered the special prayer for the Messenger of Allah. I
was with him and found us in Makka. I continued to find myself with him
until we finished all the acts to be perform there. Then I found myself
with him at the place that I would worship in al-Sham. The man left. The
next year I was with him again and we did as in the year before.

When we finished all of the forms of worship and returned me back to my
place of worship in al-Sham and was about to leave I asked him this. "I
swear you the one who has given all these capabilities, tell me who are
you?" He said, "I am Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa (a.s.)." The news spread
and it reached Muhammad ibn 'Abd alMalik al-Zayyat. He sent his people
who arrested me and tied me up in chains and transferred me to Iraq."

The narrator has said, "I asked him to send a petition to Muhammad ibn
'Abd al- Malik. He did so explaining the whole story but the answer to
his petition bearing the signature of Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Malik said,
"He should ask the one who took him from al-Sham to al-Kufa, then to
al-Madina then to al-Makka then back to al-Sham to release him from
prison also."

I felt very sad for him with a great deal of sympathy. I tried to cheer
him up and asked him to exercise patience. Next early morning when went
to see him I found people from the army, the chief of the security men
and the prison guard and the crowd of people around and in the area. I
asked, "What is thematter?" They said, "The prisoner from al-Sham who
had proclaimed himself as a prophet has disappeared and no one knows if
the earth has swallowed him or the birds have snatched him away."

H 1240, Ch. 122, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has said that a shaykh from our
people called 'Abdallah ibn Razyn narrated to me the following. "I lived
in al-Madina of the Messenger of Allah. Abu Ja'far (a.s.) would come
every day to the mosque at noon time. He would enter the compound and
would turn to the shrine of the Messenger of Allah and offer his
greeting of peace. He would then turn to the house of Fatima (a.s.),
take off his shoes, stand up and pray. Satan induced temptation in my
heart and said, "when he (the Imam (a.s.) would come go and pick up from
the dust on which he has just stepped."

I waited that day for that purpose. When it was noontime he came on his
donkey but he did not dismount at the place that he would do so before.
He came and dismounted on the rock in front the door of the Mosque. He
then entered the Mosque, turned to the Shrine of the Messenger of Allah
and offered his greeting of peace to the Messenger of Allah. his
disembark."

The narrator has said that then he then turned to the place where he
would pray. He did the exact thing for several days. I then said to
myself, "When will come this time and will remove his shoes I will go
and pick up from the gravel on which he has jus stepped.."

When he came next day at noontime he dismounted on the rock then
entered the Mosque, turned to the Shrine of the Messenger of Allah and
offered his greeing of peace then came to the place where he would pray
but prayed without removing his shoes and did the same thing for several
days.

I then said to my self, "I could not succeed this way but now I must
find which public bathhouse he uses to take a shower. I must wait at the
door of the place and when he would come to enter the public bathhouse I
will pick up the dust from the spot on which he has just stepped. I
asked about such public bathhoue and found out that it is such a place
in al-Baqi' that belongs to man from the family of al-Talha. I found out
about the day that he would go this bathhouse. I then on that day went
to the place and met the man from the family of al-Talha and began to
talk to him while waiting for him (the Imam (a.s.) to come.

The owner of the place said to me, "If you want to use the bathhouse
you must do now because latter on it will not be available." I asked,
"Why is that?" He said, "Ibn al-Rida will come to use it." I then asked,
"Who is ibn al- Rida ?" He said, "A man from the family of Muhammad
(s.a.). He is very pious and well discilpined." I then asked, "Is it
unlawful to use the public bathhouse at the time that he is there?" He
said, "We just vacate the place and leave it just for him."

The narrator has said that at that time he came with a few of his
slaves. In front of him there was a slave who carried a piece of mat and
brought it in all the way to the dressing-room where he spread it down.
He (the Imam) also came in offered his greeting of peace and entered the
dressing-room while stile riding on the donkey. He then dismounted on
the mat. I then said to the man from the family of al-Talha, "Is this
the one whom you mentioned with all the superlatives?" He said, "O you,
by Allah, he had never done this before.

It only has happened today." I said to my self, "This is because of
what I have committed against my own soul." I then said to myself, "I
will wait until he comes out perhaps I will succeed in my plan." When he
came out he asked his people to bring the donkey. The donkey was brought
in the dressing-room and he rode on the donkey from the top of the mat.
And left. I said to my self, "By Allah, this is enough I have troubled
him so much and I will not do any such thing again and will not even
thing about doing such things."

My decision was complete and solid. When it became noontime of that day
he came to the Mosque while riding on his donkey and dismounted on the
spot in the compound of the Mosque where he had usually been doing. Then
he turned to Shrine of the Messenger of Allah and offered his greeting
of peace and went to the place where he prayed in the house of Fatima
(a.s.). He took off his shoes and stood for prayer."

H 1241, Ch. 122, h 3

al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Asbat who has said the following "He (abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Rida (a.s.) came out to me and I looked at his head and legs so I
would be able to describe him physically to our people in Egypt. I kept
looking until he sat down and said, " O Ali, Allah's presentation of
proofs in support of Imam's Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) is
the same as those in support of the prophet-hood of a prophet. Allah has
said, ". . .

We gave knowledge and wisdom to John during his childhood (19:12). ". .
. When he attained maturity, God gave him strength, wisdom and
knowledge. Thus, do We reward those who do good. (12:22) ". . . When he
grewup to manhood and became forty years old,. . ."(46:15). Allah may
give authority to a child and He may do so when he is a fortyb years old
man."

H 1242, Ch. 122, h 4

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from certain persons of our people from
Muhammad ibn al- Rayyan who has said the following "Al-Ma'mun did all he
could to prove that abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn Ali al-Rida (a.s.) was only
a young man of worldly desires. However Al- Ma'mun could not succeed.

When he became frustrated he gave his daughter in marriage to abu
Ja'far, Muhammad ibn Ali al-Rida (a.s.). For the ceremony he sent two
hundred most beautiful entertaining girls each with a bowl in her hand
with a precious pearl in it to well come abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Rida (a.s.) when he would sit on the special seat prepared for him.
They, however, were not of any attraction to the Imam (a.s.) to disturb
him.

There was a man called Mukhariq who had a voice, musical skills, a
guitar and a tall beard. Al-Ma'mun called him and he said, "O Amir
al-Mu'minin, if he is a worldly man I will prove myself as dealing him
deadly blows on your behalf." He sat in front of abu Ja'far, Muhammad
ibn Ali al-Rida (a.s.) and began to bray a hee-haw that made all the
people of the house gather around him. He began to play his guitar and
sing. He did it for an hour but abu Ja'far (a.s.) did not pay any
attention to the right or left. Then he (a.s.) raised his head and said,
"O you, tall bearded one, be pious before Allah."

The narrator has said that the musical instrument and guitar fell off
his hand and he could not use his hands thereafter until he died. When
Al- Ma'mun asked him about his condition he said, "When abu Ja'far
(a.s.) expressed his disappointment at me it struck me with a huge
degree of fear from which I have not been able to relieve myself ever
since."

H 1243, Ch. 122, h 5

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn zd from Dawud ibn al-Qasim
al-Ja'fari who has said the following "Once I went to see abu Ja'far
(a.s.) and I had a few questions on three pieces of materials with
proper markings and they were mixed as such that I could not
distinguish. I felt sad. He picked one and said, "This is the letter of
Ziyad ibn Shabib." Then he picked up the other one and said, ".This is
the letter of so and so."

I became awe struck. He looked at me and smiled." The narrator has said
that the Imam (a.s.) then gave me three hundred Dinars and asked me to
deliver them to the certain persons of the sons of his uncle and said,
"He will ask you to show him a professional person who would help him to
buy goods, help show him one." The narrator has said that I then went to
him and gave him the Dinars and asked me, "O abu Hashim, can you show me
a professional person who would help me to buy goods." I said, "Yes, I
can do so."

The narrator has said that a camel man asked me to speak on his behalf
to abu Ja'far (a.s.) to take part in certain matters of his affairs. I
went to see him (abu Ja'far (a.s.) to speak to him but he was having
meal with a group of people and I did not get a chance to speak to him.
He (abu Ja'far (a.s.) said, "O abu Hashim, eat. He placed food before
me. Then he said, initiating and without any question from me, "O slave,
take good care of the camel-man that abu Hashim has brought for us. Keep
him with you."

The narrator has said that one day I entered a garden along with him
and said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, I am
addicted to eating fig. Pray to Allah for me." He was quite and then
after three day on his own initiation he said, "O abu Hashim, "Allah has
removed your addiction." Ever since it is the thing that I hate most."

H 1244, Ch. 122, h 6

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn Ali
from Muhammad ibn Hamza al-Hashimi from Ali ibn Muhammad or Muhammad ibn
Ali al- Hashimi who has said the following " I went tot see abu Ja'far
(a.s.) in the morning of his marriage to the daughter of
al-Ma'al-Ma'mun. The night before I had taken medicine and I was the
first to meet him that morning. I was thirsty but did not like to ask
for water. Abu Ja'far (a.s.) looked at me and said, "I think you are
thirsty." I said, "Yes, I am thirsty." He called, "O Ghulam (male slave
or servant) or Jariya (female slave orservant) bring us water."

I said to myself, "They may poison the water. For this reason I became
depressed. The servant then came with water. He (abu Ja'far (a.s.)
looked at me with a smile and, "O Ghulam, give the water." He drank from
it and gave the rest to me and I drank. I became thirsty again and did
not like to ask for water. He then did as he had done before. When the
Ghulam (servant) came with the bowl of water I thought as I thought
before. He then took the bowl, drank from it and gave the rest to me
with a smile." Muhammad ibn Hamza has said that this Hashimi told me, "I
think what they (Shi'a ) say (that Imams possess Divine Authority) about
him is true."

H 1245, Ch. 122, h 7

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father who has said the
following. "Once a group of Shi'a from the suburbs asked permission to
meet abu Ja'far (a.s.). He granted them permission and they came in his
presence. In one meeting they asked him thirty thousand questions. He
answered them all and at that time he was ten years old."

H 1246, Ch. 122, h 8

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Salj ibn Ziyad from Ali ibn al-Hakam
who has said the following. "Di'bil ibn Ali once went to see abu
al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) and he ordered his people to give him a certain
gift but he did thank Allah." The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.)
said to him, "Why did you not thank Allah?" The narrator has said that
then I went to see abu Ja'far (a.s.) and ordered his people to give a
gift and I said, "All praise belongs to Allah." The Imam (a.s.) said,
"You just demonstrated your discipline."

H 1247, Ch. 122, h 9

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Muhammad ibn Sinan who has said
the following. "Once I went to see abu al-Hassan (a.s.). He said, "O
Muhammad, has something happened to the family of al-Faraj (the governor
of al-Madina )?" I said, "Yes, 'Umar (a member of al-Faraj family) has
died." The Imam (a.s.) said, "All thanks and praise belongs to Allah."
He said it twenty four times. I then said, "My master, had known it
would make you this happy I would have come to running and bare foot
with the news (to congratulate you)."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Do you not know what he -may Allah condemn him-
once had said to Muhammad ibn Ali, my father?" The narrator has said
that I said, "No, I do not know it." The Imam (a.s.) said, "He spoke to
my father about an issue and then said to him, "I think you are drunk."
My father then had said, "O Lord, if you know that I have been fasting
this day, then make him test the taste of al-A 'war, and the humiliation
of captivity."

By Allah, in just a few days his belongings were looted and he was
captured and know he is dead-may Allah deprive him of His mercy. Allah,
the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has exacted revenge from him and
He continues to exact revenge for His friends from His enemies.

H 1248, Ch. 122, h 10

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from from Muhammad ibn Hassa'n from abu
Hashim Ali- Ja'fari who has said the following. "Once I prayed with abu
Ja'far (a.s.) in the Mosque of Ali- Musayyib. He lead the prayer with us
and as to the direction of Makka he stood up facing straight. He also
has said that a berry tree that was in the Mosque had dried up and had
no leaves. The Imam (a.s.) asked for water and prepared himself under
that tree for prayer. The berry tree came alive with leaves and fruits
in that year."

H 1249, Ch. 122, h 11

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
Ali-Hajjal and 'Amr ibn 'Uthman from a man of the people of al-Madina
from Ali-Mutrifiy who has said the following. "Abu al-Hassan al-Rida
(a.s.) passed away and owed my four thousand dirhams. I said to myself,
"My money is lost."

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) sent me a message to come to him the next day and
bring with me a balance and weighing stones." I went to see hiom and he
said, "Abu al-Hassan has passed away. Did he owe you four thousand
Dirhams?" I said, "Yes, he did." He then lifted up his prayer rug on
which was sitting and there were Dinars and he give them to me."

H 1250, Ch. 122, h 12

Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah and Ali-Himyari all have narrated fom Ibrahim ibn
Mahziyar from his brother Ali from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Muhammad ibn
Sinan who has said the following. "Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) passed away
at the age of twenty five years, three months and twelve days. He died
on a Tuesday on the sixth of Dhil Hajj in the year two hundred twenty
AH. He lived nineteen years less twenty five days."


