Chapter 123 : the Birth of Abu Al-hassan Ali Ibn Muhammad (a.s.)
================================================================

He was born on Dhil Hajj fifteen in the year two hundred twelve. It is
said that he was born in the month of Rajab in the year two hundred and
fourteen AH. He passed away on twenty sixth of Jamadi al-Akhir in the
year two hundred fifty two. It is narrated that he passed away in the
month of Rajab in the year two hundred fifty four AH.

He lived for forty one years and six months. According to the
previously mentioned date he lived for forty years. Ali- Mutawakkil had
summond him from al-Madina with Yahya ibn Harthama ibn 'Ayan to Surra
man Ra'Abdallah. He left this world therefrom and he was buried in his
house. His mother was 'Umm Walad, called Samana.

1

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Khayrana Ali-Asbati who has said the following. "Once I
went to al-Madina to see abu al-Hassan (a.s.). He asked me, "What is the
news from Ali-Wathiq (Abbassid ruler)?" I said, may Allah take my soul
in service for your cause, I left him in good health and I am of all
people the latest who met him. I met him just ten days ago." The
narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) then said, "People of al-Madina
say that he has died." When he said, "people say' I understood that it
is he himself. He then said, "What has Ja'far (Mutawakkil Abbassid)
done?" I said, "I left him in the worst condition of all people.

He was in prison." The narrator has said that he then said, "He has
become the ruler. What has ibn Ali-Zayyat (the vizir of Wathiq) has
done?" I said, may Allah take my soul in service for your cause, people
are with him and whatever he says it goes." The narrator has said that
he then said, "His progress has proved to become a misfortune for
him."

The narrator has said that he then paused for a while and said to me,
"The measures of Allah, the Most High and His decrees must go on. O
Khayaran, al-Wathiq has died and Ali-Mutawakkil , Ja'far has replaced
him and ibn al-Zayyat is killed." I then asked, "May Allah take my soul
in service for your cause, when this has happened?" He said, "After six
days from the time you left."

2 Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Muhammad ibn Yahya from Salih ibn
Sa'id who has said the following. "Once I went to see abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) and I said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, in
all matters they wanted to extinguish your light and be unjust towards
you. So much so that they have lodged you in this disgraceful place for
the homeless." He said, "O ibn Sa'id, here. He pointed out with his hand
and said, "Look there."

When looked I saw gardens. I saw very delightful gardens. There lived
lovely boys and girls as if they well protected and secure pearls. There
lived birds and beautiful deer. It have fountains and rivers that pur
out and gush forth. My sight bewildered and my eyes turned dull. He then
said, "Wherever we may live these are for us. We are in the lodging for
the homeless."

3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Ali ibn Muhammad from Ishaq
al-Jallab who has said the following. "Once I bought a large number of
sheeps for abu al-Hassan (a.s.). He called and admitted me into the barn
area of his house into a vast location that I could not recognize. He
ordered me to distribute the sheep among certain people and of such
people were abu Ja'far and his mother and others.

Thereafter I requested permission to leave for Baghdad to see my
father. It was the day of Tarwiya (eighth of the month of Dhi al-Hajj).
He wrote to me, "Stay with us tomorrow thereafter leave." I stayed that
day and then it was the day of 'Arafa (ninth of Dhi al-Hajj but I stayed
with them that day as well as the tenth night in the balcony of his
house. At dawn he came to me and said, "O Ishaq, wake up." I then got
up."

The narrator has said that I then opened my eyes and found myself at my
own door in Baghdad. I went inside and met my father and I was among my
people and I told them I spent the day of 'Arafa (ninth of Dhi al-Hajj)
in the army camp (Samarra) and for 'Id (tenth of Dhi al-Hajj) I am in
Baghdad."

4 Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Tahiri who
has said the following. " Al-Mutawakkil became ill because of a boil so
seriously that he was about to die and no one would have the courage to
touch to operate him. His mother vowed to sent a large sum of money to
abu al-Hassan (a.s.) from her own property if her son would recover.
Fath ibn Khaqan had advised him to ask him (the Imam (a.s.) about it. He
might know something that would help relieve you.

He sent the message to him and explained his illness. The messenger
returned with a message that said, "Warm up oil from sheep mixed with
water and place it on the boil." When the messenger explained it to them
they laughed at his words. However, al-Fath said, "He, by Allah, knows
best about what he has said." They brought the oil and prepared it as
explained and placed it on the boil.

The patience soon after was fast asleep and his acting pain had calmed
down. Afterwards it opened up and the substance in it was discharged and
his mother was given the glad news of his recovery. She sent ten
thousand Dinars to him (abu al-Hassan (a.s.) marked with her own seal.

He had fully recovered from his illness, al-Batha'i al-'Alawi acting as
a spy said to him, "Large sums of money and weapons are delivered to him
(abu al-Hassan (a.s.)." He (Al-Mutawakkil) ordered Sa'id the police
chief to search his house during the night and confiscate whatever money
and weapons you would find therein and bring hem to him
(Al-Mutawakkil)." Ibrahim ibn Muhammad has said, "Sa'id, the chief of
police told me that when I went to his house during the night and I had
a ladder to climb over the wall and when I climbed on the roof and then
climbed down few steps in the dark I did not know how to reach the
house. He (abu al-Hassan (a.s.) called me, "O Sa'id, hold on until they
bring you candles.

In a little while they brought me a candle and I climbed down and found
him with woolen gown on him and woolen cap and before him there was
prayer rug with a mat on it. I then had no doubt that he was praying. He
said to me, "There are the rooms." I then searched them and did not find
anything there but I found the bag of money in his house that was sealed
with the seal of the mother of Al- Mutawakkil on it and another sealed
bag of money. He said to me, "There is the prayer rug." I lifted it up
and there was a sword underneath in a sheath.

I took them to Al-Mutawakkil. When saw the seal of his mother on it he
called her for inquiry and she came to him. Private servants informed me
that she said to him, "When you were very ill, I had vowed out of
frustration that if you would recover I will pay him ten thousand Dinars
from my own properties. I paid him and this is my own seal. He opened
the other bag and there was a four hundred Dinars in it.

He added an other bag of money to it and asked me to deliver them to
him (abu al-Hassan (a.s.) I returned the sword and the bags of money to
him saying, "My master, (I wish you knew) how much this assignment has
depressed me." He said, "The unjust ones will find out very soon to what
kind of destination they will end up."

5 Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Ali ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali who
has said the following. "Muhammad ibn al-Faraj told me that abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) has written to him this.

"O Muhammad, organize you affairs and be careful." He said that he
began to organize his affairs and did not know what the Imam (a.s.)
meant thereby until police came to me and took me out of Egypt as a
captive. All of my belongings were confiscated and I remained in prison
for eight years. In the prison I received a letter from him that said,
"O Muhammad, do not reside in the western location." I read the letter
and said to my self, "He writes me this and I am in prison. This is
strange." Shortly afterwards, I was released, thanks to Allah.

The narrator has said that Muhammad ibn al-Faraj wrote to him about his
properties. The Imam (a.s.) wrote to him in response, "Your properties
will soon be returned to you and even if they are not returned to you it
will not harm you." When Muhammad al-Faraj left to the army camp
(Samarra) an order was issued to release his properties but he died
before receiving them.

The narrator has said that Ahmad ibn al-Khadib wrote to Muhammad ibn
al-Faraj asking him to come to the army camp. He wrote to the Imam
(a.s.) for his advise in the matter and the response was this. " Go out.
In it there will be happiness and relief for you, by the will of Allah,
the Most High.." He left for the journey but very shortly afterwards he
died."

6 Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from a man from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad who has said the following. "Abu ya'qub informed me saying, ' I
saw him (Muhammad) before his death in the army camp in an evening. Abu
al-Hassan received him and looked at him and he became ill the next day.
After several days I went to visit him during his illness and his
illness was worsening. He informed me that he (abu al-Hassan (a.s.) has
sent him cloths which he had folded to use as a pillow. The narrator has
said that he was shrouded in that cloth."

Ahmad has said that abu ya'qub said, "I saw abu al-Hassan (a.s.) with
ibn al-Khadib who said to him, "May Allah take my soul in service for
your cause, go ahead." The Imam (a.s.) said, "You go first." Only after
four days he was put in shackles and the news of his death was given
out.

The narrator has said that it is narrated that when ibn al-Khadib
insisted in his demand from him the house he sent him this messages. "I
will ask Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, to place as such
that not even your traces would be found." Allah, the Most Majestic, the
Most gracious, took him away in those days."

7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from a number of our people the
following. "I took a copy of the letter of Al-Mutawakkil to abu
al-Hassan (a.s.), the third from Yahya ibn Harthama in the year two
hundred forty three that read as follows. "In the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful. Thereafter, Amir al-Mu'minin acknowledges your
positions, takes good care of you as a relative, deems it obligatory to
observe your rights.

He pays attentions towards your well fare and the well being of your
family through the means with which Allah will grant well being to you
and to them and establish your honor and honor to them, grant blessing
and security to you and to them. He seeks thereby the pleasure of his
Lord and to fulfill his obligations towards you and to them.

Amir al-Mu'minin, believes that it is best to remove 'Abdallah ibn
Muhammad as commander of the army and prayer leader in al-Madina of the
Messenger of Allah since you have mentioned his ignorance and his
disregard of your rights. That he has not respected you properly.

Also it is because of his accusing you of matters that Amir al-Mu'minin
has learned is unfounded and he acquits of such charges. It is because
of your sincere intentions in not leading a attempt to achieve what you
consider yourself unfit for. Amir al-Mu'minin has replace him ('Abdallah
ibn Muhammad) with Muhammad ibn al-Fadl and has ordered him to honor and
revere you and abide by your orders and opinions. He must seek nearness
to Allah and to Amir al-Mu'minin in this way.

Amir al-Mu'minin looks forwards to see you and loves to see you soon to
look at you. If you would like to visit him and stay with him as long as
you would like along with whoever of the members of your family and
friends and servants you may do so whenever convenient for you and
desirable. You may start your journey whenever you would like, stop on
the way whenever and wherever you would like. If you would like, Yahya
ibn Harthama, the slave of Amir al-Mu'minin and the elements of the army
will escort you.

They will travel as you would like them to do so. All the matters will
be up to you to decide until you would arrive at Amir al-Mu'minin's
place. No one of his brothers, sons, family members and persons special
to him would be deserving more kindness, respected position, more praise
worthy and preferable to him than you do. He will not be more caring,
compassionate and helpful to them and more happy with any of them than
he will be with you. If Allah would so will. May peace be with you and
the kindness and blessings of Allah.

Written by Ibrahim ibn al-'Abbass. May Allah grant blessing up on
Muhammad and his family.

8

al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan al-Hassani has said that narrated to me abu
al-Tayb al-Muthanna ya'qub ibn Yasir the following. "Al-Mutawakkil would
say, "Woe is you, the ibn (the son of) al-Rida, (Ali al-Hadi (a.s.)) has
frustrated me. He refuses to share a drink (liquor) with me and
associate with me and I never get a chance in it."

They (his associates) told him, "If he does not give you a chance his
brother, Musa plays music, sings, eats, drinks and seeks carnal love."
He asked them to call him so that we may confuse people with ibn al-Rida
(Musa considered as Ali al-Hadi) has become an associate of
Al-Mutawakkil. He wrote to Musa and invited him with honorably. All the
people from the clan of Hashim present, the officials and people
received him with the condition that on his arrival a piece of land will
be given to him on which proper accommodations will be build for him.
People who love to drink liquor and the singers will come to meet him
there. He (Al-Mutawakkil) maintained good relations with him, cared for
him and prepared a gorgeous lodging for him where he would visit him
therein.

When Musa arrived abu al-Hassan (a.s.) met him at al-Qantra Wasif, the
place where the visitors were being received. He met him, offered him
the greeting of peace and observed his rights. Then he said to him,
"This mman has invited you to insult and humiliate you. Do not confess
to him that you have ever drank any liquor." Musa said, "If he has
invited me for this purpose then what should I do?" The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Do not humiliate yourself and do not drink any liquor because he
wants to insult you."

He (Musa) refused and he (abu al-Hassan (a. s.)) repeated his advise.
When he found out that he (Musa) does not agree he said, "Remember, this
is a place where you will never be able to meet him (Al-Mutawakkil)." He
(Musa) lived there for three years. Everyday he would wake up and his
people would tell that Al-Mutawakkil is busy today you can meet him next
time. He would go and they would tell him that he (Al-Mutawakkil) is
drunk. He would go again and they would say he (Al- Mutawakkil) has just
had medicine. It continued this way for three years until Al-Mutawakkil
was killed and Musa had never had a chance to meet him."

9 Certain persons of our people have narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali who
has said the following. "Zayd ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Zayd narrated to
me as follows. "I became ill and a doctor came to see me at night. He
prescribed a medicine for me to be taken at night for so and so many
days. I could not find the medicine that night.

The physician was still there that Nasr came in with a bottle that
contained the medicine that the physician had prescribed for me and
said, "Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) sends you the greeting of peace and has
asked you to take this medicine for so and so many days." I took the
medicine and recovered from my illness." Muhammad ibn Ali has said that
Zayd ibn ail told me, "The critics would refuse to accept this hadith
saying, "Wherefrom the extremist have brought this hadith?"


