Chapter 93 : the Birth of the Imams (a.s.) H 1002, Ch. 93, H 1
==============================================================

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Ishaq al-'Alawi from
Muhammad ibn Zayd al-Rizami from Muhammad ibn Sulayman al-Daylami from
Ali ibn Hamza from abu Basir who has said the following. "Once we went
for Hajj with abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) in the year that his son Musa (a.s.)
was born.

When we arrived at al-Abwa lunch was served . When he would serve food
to his people he would serve good and plentiful food. At such time the
messenger of Hamida, (his wife), came saying, "Hamida says, "I have
almost lost my self and I have found what I was to find, I am about to
give birth. You had commanded me not to do anything to this child
without you." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) left with the messenger.

When he came back his companions congratulated him and said, "May Allah
take our souls in service for your cause, what did you do to Hamida?" He
said, "Allah granted her good health and gifted me with a boy whom He
has formed as the best in His creatures. Hamida informed me of a matter
about him that she thought I did not know.

I, however, knew it better than her." I then asked him, May Allah take
my soul in service for your cause, what was it that Hamida told you
about the child?" He said that she informed him about the baby's actions
as soon as he fell on the ground. "The baby placed his hands on the
ground and raised his head to the sky." I explained to her that it was a
sign like that of the Messenger of Allah and a sign of the executor of
his will after him."

I then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, what
sign is the sign of the Messenger of Allah and the sign of the executor
of his will after him?" He said to me, "In the night that the mother of
my grandfather conceived him someone came to my great grandfather with a
drink finer than water, softer than butter, sweeter than honey, cooler
than ice and whiter than milk. He was asked to drink it and then go to
bed with his wife. He went to bed with his wife and she conceived with
the baby.

In the night that the mother of my father conceived him someone came to
my grandfather with the same kind of drink as that brought to my
great-grandfather. He was asked to drink it as my greatgrandfather had
done. He was commanded to do as my great grandfather had done.

He then went to bed with his wife and she conceived with my father. In
the night that my mother would conceive with me someone came to my
father with the same kind of drink as that brought for my
great-grandfather and grandfather and made him to drink as they had done
and commanded him as he had commanded them before him.

He then went to bed with his wife and my mother conceived with me. In
the night that my wife was to conceive with my son someone came to me
with the same kind of drink as that for my great grandfather, my
grandfather and my father. He did to me as he done to them. I then went
with the knowledge of Allah and with joy for what Allah had granted to
me to bed with my wife and she conceived with the baby that is just
born.

The newborn is with you and he, by Allah, will be your companion after
me. The seed of the Imam is from what I just explained to you. When the
seed is accommodated in the womb for four months and the spirit is
established therein Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, then send an
angel.

This angel is called Haywan (animal or living). He then writes on his
right shoulder ". . .in all truth and justice, your Lord's Word has been
completed. No one can change His Words. He is All-hearing and
Allknowing.".

(6:115) When he comes out of his mothers womb he places his hands on
the floor and raises his head to the sky. Placing his hands on earth is
an indication of his taking possession of all the knowledge of Allah
that is sent from the heavens to earth. Raising his head to the sky is
that because a caller from inside the Throne calls him from the high
horizon with his name and the name of his father.

It is for (on behalf of) the Lord, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious, saying, "O so and so, son of so and so. Be firm so that you
would be established. For the great purpose that I have created you, you
are my chosen one in my creatures. You are the keeper of My secrets, the
container of My knowledge, the trustee of My inspiration and My deputy
and representative on earth.

I have made it necessary for My blessings and mercy to reach you and
those who would love you (and acknowledge your Divine Authority). I have
gifted My paradise and given a place near Myself to you and to them.
Also, by My Majesty and Grace, I will make your enemies to feel the heat
of My punishment even though I may have given them expanded prosperity
in My world such as prosperity in their livelihood.

When the call of caller ends he responds to it by placing his hands on
the ground and raising his head to the sky and says the following. "God
Himself testifies that He is the only Lord. The angels and the men of
knowledge and justice testify that God is the only Lord, the Majestic,
and All-wise." (3:18)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "When he says this, Allah grants him the
knowledge of the fist and the knowledge of the last the qualification to
be visited by the spirit in the nights of destiny." I then said, may
Allah take my soul in service for your cause, is the Spirit different
from Jibril?" He said, "The Spirit is a creature greater than Jibril.
Jibril is of the angels. The Spirit is a creature greater than the
angels.

Is it not true that Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "On
this Night, the angels and the Spirit descend . ." .(97:4)

Muhammad ibn Yahya and Ahmad ibn Muhammad have narrated from Muhammad
ibn al- Husayn from Ahmad ibn al-Hassan from al-Mukhtar ibn Ziyad from
Muhammad ibn Sulayman from his father from abu Basir a similar hadith.

H 1003, Ch. 93, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from mmd ibn al-Husayn from Musa ibn
Sa'dan from 'Abdallah ibn al-Qasim from al-Hassan ibn Rashid who has
said the following. "I Heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'When Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, would love to create the Imam He would command
an angel to take a drink of water from under the Throne and his father
to drink it and from this He creates the Imam.

for the first forty days and nights in his mothers womb he would hear
anything. After that he would hear the words. When he is born that angel
comes and writes between his eyes, ". . .in all truth and justice, your
Lord's Word has been completed. No one can change His Words. He is
All-hearing and Allknowing."

(6:115) When the preceding Imam passes away a light house made from
light is prepared for him and this light house he examines the deeds of
the creatures. By this means Allah establishes His authority over the
creatures."

H 1004, Ch. 93, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn
Hadidfrom Mansur ibn Yunus from Yunus ibn Zabyan who has said the
following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'When Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious, decides to create the Imam from another
Imam He sends an angel with a drink of water from under the Throne.

Then the angel would make the Imam to drink it and would give it to him
to drink. For the first forty days he would not hear any words and
thereafter he would hear words. When his mogthor would give birth Aallah
would send the same angel who had brought the water.

The angels would on his right should, ". . .in all truth and justice,
your Lord's Word has been completed. No one can change His Words. He is
All-hearing and All-knowing.". (6:115) When he would rise to execute the
task of an Imam Allah would raise a light house for him in every town
through which he would examine the deeds of the servants of Allah."

H 1005, Ch. 93, h 4

A number of our people has narrated Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from al-Rabi' ibn Muhammad al-Musalli from Muhammad ibn Marwan who has
said the following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'The Imam hears
in the womb of his mother and when he is born these words of Allah will
be written between his shoulders, ". . .in all truth and justice,

your Lord's Word has been completed. No one can change His Words. He is
All-hearing and All-knowing.". (6:115) When the matter (Leadership with
Divine Authority) is delivered to him Allah establishes a pillar of
light for him through which he can see the deeds of the people of every
town."

H 1006, Ch. 93, h 5

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from ibn Mas'ud from 'Abdallah ibn
Ibrahim al-Ja'fari who has said the following. "I heard Ishaq ibn Ja'far
say that he heard his father say as herein below. "When the mothers of
the executors of the will conceive them she will go through a condition
as if she has fainted for the rest of day if it would take place during
the day or for the rest of the night if it would take place at night.

She then would see in her dream a man congratulating her with the birth
of a son, very knowledgeable and very forbearing. The condition then
goes away annnd she wakes up and from her right side in the house she
hears a voice. It says, "You have conceived with good, you are changing
into good and you have come up with good. Congratulations to you for a
son who is very forbearing and very knowledgeable.

She then would feel light and thereafter she would feel no discomfort
from her sides or from her belly. After nine months she would hear
(something) intensely in the house On the night of the birth of the
child a light would appear to her in the house that only she and the
father of the child can see. When the child would born he would be found
in a sitting position. There would be enough opening for the child to
come out with both thighs and legs folded.

The child would turn on the ground so as not to miss facing the
direction of Makka. He will sneeze three time and would point with his
fingers for the words of blessings said up on sneezing. He would be born
his umbilical cord already cut off and circumcised.

Both of his Ruba'ia (molar) teeth from the upper and lower jaws, both
of his (Na'b) canine teeth and both of his Dahika (bicuspids) would have
already grown. In front of him there would a light shine like flowing
gold. For the next day and night a golden light would flow from his
hands. This is how the prophets are when they are born. The executors of
their will are the only ones who are the attachments of the prophets."

H 1007, Ch. 93, h 6

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Hadid from Jamil ibn Darraj who has said the following. "Several
persons of our people have narrated that The Imam (a.s.) has said, "Do
not speak about the Imam.

The Imam (a.s.) hears the words while he still is in the womb of his
mother. When she would give birth the angel write between his eyes, ". .
.in all truth and justice, your Lord's Word has been completed. No one
can change His Words. He is All-hearing and All-knowing.". (6:115) When
takes charge of the matter (Leadership with Divine Authority) in every a
light house will be established for him through which he would examine
the deeds of the servants (of Allah)."

H 1008, Ch. 93, h 7

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn 'Ubayd who has
said the following. "I and ibn Faddal were sitting tha Yunus came and
said, 'I went to see abu al- Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) and said to him, "May
Allah take my soul in service for your cause, "People speak so much
about pillar."

He said to me, "O Yunus, what do you see? Do you see it as a pillar of
iron that you would raise for your friend?" The narrator has said that
he said, "I do not know." The Imam (a.s.) said, "In fact, it is an
appointed angel in every town. Through him Allah raises the deeds of
that town."

The narrator has said that ibn Faddal then stood up and kissed his head
and said, "May allah grant you blessings, O abu Muhammad, you continue
to bring us true hadith with which Allah grants us relief and
comfort."

H 1009, Ch. 93, h 8

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from some of our people from ibn abu
'umayr from Hariz from Zurara from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Imam has ten signs. He is born clean and circumcised.

When falls on the earth his palms reach the ground first while he
raises his head to the sky and loudly says the two testimonies. He does
not experience wit dream. His eyes sleep but not his heart. He does not
yawn and stretch. He sees behind just as he sees in front. His excretion
would smell like musk.

The earth is made to conceal and devour it. When he would dress up with
coat of arms of the Messenger of Allah it would perfectly fit him.
However, when other people, taller or shorter would try it would be
taller on them by a hand stretch of thump and pinkeye. He is a Muhaddath
(the one spoken to by angels) up to the time of his passing away."


**Chapter 94 : The Creation of the bodies, spirits and the Hearts of
the Imam (a.s.) H 1010, Ch. 94, h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from abu
Yahya al-Wasiti from some of our people from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the
following. "Allah has created us from 'Illiyin (high above) and He has
created our spirits from above that. He has created the spirit of our
Shi'as (followers) from 'Illiyin and their bodies from below that. For
this reason there is relationship among us and among them and their
hearts are affectionate towards us."

H 1011, Ch. 94, h 2

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn 'Ubayd from Muhammad ibn Shu'ayb from 'Imran Ishaq
al-Za'farani from Muhammad ibn Marwan who has said the following.

"I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say as herein below. "Allah has created
us from the light of His greatness. Thereafter He shaped our form from a
preserved and hidden clay under the Throne. Then He made that light to
reside in that clay. We then were a spiritual creature of the human
being species. He has not placed anything as a share from that which we
were created in anyone else.

He has created the spirits of our Shi'a from our clay and their bodies
from a preserved and hidden clay from below that clay. Allah has not
placed anything as a share of that which they are created in anyone
except the prophets. Therefore, we and our followers became the people.
The rest of the people became riffraff for the fire and to the fire."

H 1012, Ch. 94, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Ali ibn Hassa'n and Muhammad ibn
Yahya from Salma ibn al-Khattab and others from Ali ibn Hassa'n from Ali
ibn 'Atiyya from Ali ibn Ri'ab who has narrated it in a marfu' manner
from Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) who has said the following. "Allah has a
canal below His Throne. Below the canal that is below His Throne is a
light that has lighted it up. On both rims of the canal there are two
created spirits.

One is the holy Spirit and the other is the Spirit from His command.
Allah has ten (kinds) of clay. Five from paradise and five from earth."
He then explained the earth and the Paradise. Then he said, "There is no
prophet or angel that He has formed (Jabala) but that He has blown into
them from one of those spirits. He has formed the Prophet (s.a) from one
of those clays."

The narrator has said, "I asked abu al-Hassan the 1st , "What is
Jabala?" He said, "It is the creatures exclusive of us Ahl al-Bayt
(family of Prophet Muhammad). Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious, has created us from ten clays and has into us from both the
Spirits and has added fragrance to fragrance."

Others have narrated from abu al\_Samit who has said the following. "He
said, "Clay of paradise is the paradise of Eden, Jannat
al-Ma'al-Washsha', Jannat al-Na'im, firdaws and al- Khuld.

The clay from earth is from Makka, al-Madina, al-Kufa, Byat al-Maqdis
and al-Ha'ir. 4 A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from Muhammad ibn Khalid from abu Nahshal who has said that
Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il narrated to me from abu Hamza al-Thumali who has
said the following. "I heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say as herein below.

"Allah has created us from A'la 'Illiyin (above the high above). He has
created the hearts of our Shi'a from what He has created us and He has
created their bodies from below that, thus, their hearts incline towards
us because they are created from what we are created. Then he recited
this verse of the Holy Quran, "However, the records of the deeds of the
virtuous ones will certainly be in ? illiy4 n (83:18).

Would that you knew what ? illiy4 n is! (83:19). It is a
comprehensively written Book (of records) (83:20). The ones nearest to
God will bring it to public." (83:21) Our enemies are created from
Sijjin aand the hearts of their followers are created from what they are
created and their bodies are created from below that, thus, their hearts
incline to them because they are created from what they are created.
Then he recited this verse of the Holy Quran.

"Let them know that the records of the sinner's deeds are in Sij4 n
(83:7).Would that you knew what Sij4 n is!? (83:8). It is a
comprehensively written Book (of records)." (83:9)."


