Chapter 124 : the Birth of Abu Muhammad Al-hassan Ibn Ali (a.s.)
================================================================

Abu Muhammad al-Hassan ibn Ali (a.s.) was born in the month of Ramadan
(in an other copy it is in 'the month of Rabi' al-Awwal) in the year two
hundred thirty two. He died on a Friday on the eighth of the month of
Rabi' al-Awwal in the year two hundred sixty at the age of twenty eight.
He was buried in the house where his father was buried in the city of
Surra man Ra'a (Samarra).her was 'Umm Walad, called Hudayth (or
Sawsan).

1 Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Asha'ari and Muhammad ibn Yahya and others
have narrated the following. "Ahmad ibn 'Ubayd Allah ibn Khaqan was in
charge of collecting property and other taxes in the city of Qumm. One
day in his presence the 'Alawids and their beliefs were mentioned. He
was a staunch Nasibi (abusive of 'Alawids).

He said, "In the city of Surra man Ra'a a man from the 'Alawids like
al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Rida in guidance, calmness, piety,
nobility and generosity to his family and among banu Hashim. They all as
well as the official, the ministers and all common people all would give
preference to him over their elders and the noble ones.

One day I was standing next to my father (as a assistant or guard) and
it was the day of his meeting people. His guards came and said, "Abu
Muhammad ibn al-Rida is at the door." He said loudly, "Allow him to come
in."

I was surprised at their mentioning so boldly someone with his Kunya
(i.e. father of so and so) before my father while only a Caliph, a crown
Caliph or one who by the command of the Sultan would have to be
addressed that way could have been treated as such. A man with a fair
complexion came in. His hieght was good and his face looked handsome,
physically very good and young. He looked majestiic and awesome.

When my father looked at him he stood up and walked towards him several
steps. I had not seen him doing this to a person from the clan of banu
Hashim and the officers. When he approached him he embraced him kissed
his face and cchest and holding his hand lead him to sit on his own
place for prayer and himself sat nest to him turning his face towards
him.

He would talk to him and would say often, "May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause." I was surprised at what I would see.

At this time the servant came and said, "Al-Muwaffaq (brother and
commander in chief of the Caliph) has come." When he (Al-Muwaffaq) would
come to my father he would receive preference over the officers and
other personalities. They stood up in the presence of my father between
the door and the seat of my father until he would come in and leave. My
father was still paying attention to abu Muhammad and was talking to him
until he looked at his special servants and said, "May Allah take my
soul in service for your cause, now you may if you would so wish." ".

He then said to his guards to lead him to through the backside so that
he (Al-Muwaffaq) would not see him. He stood up and my father also stood
up and embraced him and he left. I asked the guards of my father and his
servants, "Woe is you, who was the man whom you addressed by his Kunya
before my father and my father treated him as he ddid?" They said, "This
'Alawid man is called al-Hassan ibn Ali, know as ibn al-Rida ." This
surprised me even more. The whole day I thought anxiously about his
affairs and the behaviors of my father and I did not see him until it
was night.

He would usually say his 'Isha (late evening) prayer and would study
the things that he would need of the issue to present before the Sultan.
When prayed and began to study I went and sat before him while he was
alone. He asked, "Oahmad, do you need something?" I said, "Yes, my
father. If you would allow me I would like to ask." He said, "You have
permission, my son, say whatever you would like."

I said, "Father, who was the man you met this morning and behaved with
him the way you did towards him with so much glorification, greatness
and reverence with such expressions as, 'May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause'?" He said, "My son, he was the Imam ((Leadership
with Divine Authority) of the al-Rafida (those who refuse to accept the
leadership people other than (Ali and his infallible descendants). He is
al-Hassan ibn Ali, known as ibn al-Rida. He remained quite for a while
and then said, "My son if the Imamat leadership would be removed from
the Abbassid Caliphs no one from the clan of banu Hashim would deserve
to become the Imam except this man.

He deserves it because of his distinctions, piety, guidance, safety
(from mistakes), his chastity, his worship, his beautiful moral
characteristics and perfection. Had you had a chance to see his father
you would have seen a man of great intelligence, nobility and
excellence."

This increased my anxiety, thinking and anger towards my father and I
thought his dealing and behavior towards him and his words for him were
excessive Thereafter, there was nothing more important to me than to ask
more about him and investigate his affairs. Whoever of the members of
Hashite clan or the guards, the clerks, the judges, the scholars of the
law (Fuqha') and other people that I would ask I would find him being
glorified, mentioned with greatness and high position.

I would hear very beautiful words about him and see him given
preference over all members of Hashimite clan, their elders. The feeling
of greatness for him increased in my heart because I would not find
anyone of his friends or foe that would not speak good of him and praise
him." A certain person from the al-Asha'ari beliefs present asked him,
"What is the news about his brother, Ja'far, O abu Bakr?"

He said, "Who is Ja'far that you would ask about him or compare him
with al-Hassan (a.s.). Ja'far was an evil doer in public, polluted with
sins, an addict drukered, the lowest of all man and the most humiliating
of his own self among men. He was worthless and little to his own self.
What happened durinng the time of the death of al-Hassan ibn Ali to the
Sultan and his people astonished me and I did not think such thing can
happen. When became ill. My father was informed that ibn al-Rida has
become ill. He immediately rode to reach the capital of the Caliphate.
He came back in hurry with five people of the servants of the Amir
al-Mu'minin.

They all were of his confidants and trustworthy ones among whom one was
Nihriyr. He (my father) commanded them to stay close to the house of
al-Hassan (a.s.) to learn about him and his conditions. He called a few
physicians and commanded them to maintain contact with him and be around
him mornings and evenings.

After two or three days he was informed that he (the patient) is
weakening. He commanded the physicians to remain around his house and
sent for the chief judge who came in his presence. He then commanded the
him (judge) to select ten persons from his most trust worthy in the
matters of their religion, trust and restraint. They were called in his
presence and he sent them to house of al-Hassan (a.s.). He commanded
them to be there day and night and they were there until he (a.s.)
passed away.

The city of Surra man Ra'a turned into one huge voice of weeping and
lamentation. The Sultan sent people to search his house and search all
the rooms therein and seal the contents thereof.. They searched for his
son and called certain women with knowledge to deal with pregnancy. They
examined his ladies. A certain woman had said that one of the ladies is
pregnant. She was accommodated in a certain quarter and Nihrir,
al-Khadim and his people and the women with him were ordered to stay
guard around her.

Thereafter they began to prepare for the burial. The markets were to
remain closed. Members of the clan al-Hashim, the guards, my father and
other people formed the burial procession. The city of Surra man Ra'a on
that day had turned into a day similar to the Day of resurrection. When
the body was readied for burial the Sultan sent message to abu 'Isa ibn
al-Mutawakkil and commanded him to lead the prayer.

When the body was placed at the prayer area abu 'Isa went close and
uncovered his face. He then asked all members of al-Hashim clan of the
'Aliwid and 'Abbassid branch, the guards, the clerks, the judges and
juries to bear witness that al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Rida
(a.s.) his died a natural death in his own bed. That this has taken
place in the presence of the servants of Amir al-Mu'minin, his
confidants, so and so persons of the judges and so and persons of the
physicians.

He (abu 'Isa) then covered his face and ordered to pick up the body.
The body was then picked up from the central area of the house and was
buried in the room where his father was buried.

After his burial the Sultan and people began to search for his son. The
search was carried out extensively. All the houses and rooms were
searched. The distribution of his legacy was suspended. The people
appointed to guard one the ladies who was thought of as pregnant
continued their task until it was found out that such thought was
invalid.

When pregnancy was proved invalid they distributed his legacy between
his mother and brother, Ja'far. His mother claimed to be the executor of
his will and her claim was confirmed before the judge. The Sultan, even
after searching so much for his son continued his search to find traces
of his son.

Thereafter, Ja'far came to my father and asked, "Assign the position of
my brother to me. I will pay you twenty thousand Dinars every year." My
father treated him harshly and rebuked him saying, "You are a fool. The
Sultan puts to the sword whoever he just thinks is a Shi'a, follower and
supporter of your father and brother to stop them from holding such
belief but he fails to achieve such goal. Had you been considered an
Imam among the Shi'a of your father and brother you would not need any
help from the Sultan or others to give you such position as that of your
father and brother.

If you are not considered an Imam among the Shi'a of your father and
brother you will not have such position from us." My father belittled
him considered him weak and ordered his people to keep him away from his
office. My father did not give him permission for a meeting as long as
he lived. We left and he remained in the same condition. The Sultan
still would search for the traces of the son of al-Hassan ibn Ali (a.
s.)."

2

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il ibn Ibrahim
ibn Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Once abu Muhammad (a.s.) wrote to abu al-Qasim Ishaq ibn Ja'far
al-Zubayri before the death of al-Mu'tazz by about twenty days as herein
below. 'Stay home until what is to happen will happen.' When Burayha was
killed he wrote to him, "A happening has happened. What would you
command me to do?" He wrote back, "This is not the happening. It is
another happening." Then there was the case of al-Mu'tazz the way it
was."

It is narrated from the same narrator that the Imam (a.s.) wrote to
another person. "Muhammad ibn Dawud ibn 'Abdallah will be killed." It
was ten days before his murder. On the tenth day he was killed."

3

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ibrahim, known as ibn
al-Kurdiy, from Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.)
who has said the following. "We were under pressure and constraint. My
father said, "Let us go to abu Muhammad (a.s.). People describe him as
very generous and considerate." I asked, "Do you know him?" He said,
"No, I do not know him and I have not seen him before.

" We decided to go and meet him. My father said on the way, "I wish he
would grant us five hundred Dirhams. Two hundred for clothes, two
hundred for to pay the debts and two hundred for expenses. We need this
much very badly." I then said to myself, "I wish he will grant me three
hundred Dirhams, one hundred to buy a donkey, one hundred for expenses
and one hundred for clothes to go to the mountains."

The narrator has said that when we arrived at the door a slave came out
and said, "Ali ibn Ibrahim and his son Muhammad come inside." When we
were in his (the Imam's (a.s.) presence we offered the greeting of peace
and said to my father.

"O Ali, what held you back from coming to us until now?" He said, "My
master, I felt shy to come to you in this condition." When we left him
his slave came to us and gave a bag of money to my father saying, "This
is five hundred Dirhams, two hundred for clothes, two hundred to pay
debts and two hundred for expenses." He gave me a bag and said,

"This is three hundred Dirhams, one hundred for the donkey, one hundred
for clothes and one hundred for expenses. Do not go to the mountains. Go
to Sawra'. He then went to Sawra' and marriage a woman and now his
income from properties is a thousand Dinar despite this he belongs to
the waqifi sect in matters of beliefs. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim has said
that I said to him, "Woe is you! What more clear proof do you want to
believe in him as your Imam?" He said, "This (belief in Waqifi sect) is
habit that has been with us (and it ddoes not go away)."

4

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from abu Ali Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim
who has said that narrated to me Ahmad ibn al-Harith al-Qazwini who has
said the following. "I was with my father in the city of Surra man Ra'a.
My father was a veterinarian at the animal farm of abu Muhammad (a.s.).
Al-Musta'in had a mule the like of which in beauty and size has not been
seen.

No one could touch that mule to ride, saddle or harness. He had called
all the trainers and they had faild to ready the mule for riding.
Certain people close to him had said, "O Amir al-Mu'minin, "Why do you
not ask al-Hassan, ibn al-Rida who would either ready it for riding or
get killed in which case it will be a great relief for you?" The
narrator has said that he sent for abu Muhammad, al-Hassan (a.s.) and my
father went with him (a.s.) My father has said, "When abu Muhammad
entered the room I was with him.

Abu Muhammad looked at the mule that was standing in the compound of
the facility. He went towards the mule and placed his hand over the rear
of the mule. The narrator has said that I saw the mule perspire so much
that it began to flow. Then he went to al-Musta'in. He offered him
greeting of peace and he well come him and asked him to sit just next to
him and said, "O abu Muhammad, harness mule (that has become
obstinate)." Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said to my father, "Young man harness
the mule."

Al-Musta'in said, "You must harness the mule. The Imam (a.s.) took off
his gown and harnessed the mule and returned back to his place. Al-
Musta'in asked him to saddle the mule but he said to my father, "Young
man, saddle the mule." Al-Musta'in asked him to himself saddle the mule.
He stood again, saddled the mule and returned back to his place and said
do you want that I ride it also?" He said, "Yes, please do so." He rode
the mule without any resistance.

The mule ran in the facility and then he took the mule for a amble
which the mule performed in the best way that can be. He came back and
dismounted. Al-Musta'in said to him, "O abu Muhammad, how was the mule?"
he said, "O Amir al-Mu'minin, I had not seen like it before in beauty
and skill. Only Amir al- Mu'minin deserves to have such a mule." The
narrator has said that Al-Musta'in then said, "O abu Muhammad, Amir
al-Mu'minin wants you to ride it" Abu Muhammad (a.s.) then said to my
father, "O young man take the mule with you and he lead the mule
away."

5

Ali has narrated from abu Ahmad ibn Rashid from abu Hashim al-Ja'fari
who has said the following.

"I requested abu Muhammad for something that I needed. He scratched the
earth with his whip. The narrator has said that I think he then covered
it with a handkerchief and then took out five hundred Dinars. He then
said, "O abu Hashim take it and grants us pardon."

6

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from abu 'Abdallah ibn Salih from his
father from abu Ali al- Mutahhar the following.

"He wrote to him (abu Muhammad (a.s.) in the year of Qadisiyya, the
year of draught that forced people to returned home without performing
Hajj for fear of thirst. He wrote back in reply, "continue your journey
and you will have no fear by the will of Allah." They continued their
journey to Hajj safely and thanks to Allah."

7

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Fadl
al-Yamani who has said the following.

" Al-Ja'fari from the family of Ja'far was attacked by such a large
number of people that seemed impossible for them to defend themselves.
He wrote to abu Muhammad (a.s.) about his dangerous condition. He wrote
back to him in reply, "You will be adequately defended by the will of
Allah, the Most High. He came out with just a few people to defend
themselves against the attackers who were in excess of twenty thousand
while on his side there were fewer than a thousand but the attackers
were all vanished."

8

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il al-'Alawi who
has said the following.

"Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was imprisoned under the supervision of Ali ibn
Narmasha who was extremely hostile towards the descendants of abu Talib.
He was told to treat him (abu Muhammad (a.s.) as he (the guard) wished.
He stayed with him only for day and the guard who was hostile towards
him became so submissive before him that he would not even dare to look
up into his face out of glorification and reverence. He (abu Muhammad
(a.s.) came out from his prison and he (the guard) had turned into
having the highest degree of understanding of him and would speak the
best words about him."

9

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah have narrated from
Ishaq ibn Muhammad al-Nakha'i who has said that narrated to me Sufyan
ibn Muhammad al-Duba'i who has said the following.

"I wrote to abu Muhammad and asked him about the meaning of the word
al-Walija (relied) in the words of Allah, the Most High. "Do you think
that God will not make any distinction between those of you who have
fought for His cause and have relied on no one other than God, His
Messenger, and the faithful ones, and other people?. ." . (9:16) I said
to myself, not in the letter, "To who does the believers refer in this
verse "? The answer came as this.

The Walija refers to a person who would be appointed in place of the
Leader with Divine Authority. You have said to yourself "To who the
believers refers in this verse"? They are the Imams who ask Allah to
grant security to the people and He grants their request."

10

Ishaq has said that abu Hashim al-Ja'fari has said the following.

"I complained to abu Muhammad (a.s.) about the constraining cell of the
prison and the weight of the shackles on me. He wrote back in reply to
me. "Today you will pray your noontime prayer in your own home." I then
was released that day and prayed the noontime prayer in my own home as
he had said." I was under financial constrains and I decided to ask him
for a certain amount of Dinars in writing but I felt shy. When was going
to my home he sent me a hundred Dinars and had written to me this. "If
you need anything do not feel shy or embarrassed. Ask and you will find
it as you wanted, by the will of Allah."

11

Ishaq has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Aqra' who has said that
narrated to me abuhz Nasir al-Khadim the following.

"I had heard many times that abu Muhammad (a.s.) to each of his Roman,
Turkish and Saqaliba slaves in their own languages. It was astonishing
to me and I would think that he is born in al-Madina and has not exposed
to anyone until abu al-Hassan passed away and no one saw him. How is
this that he speaks such languages? I talking to myself that he came to
me and said,

"Allah, the Most High, the Most Holy, grants distinction to Leader with
Divine Authority over the other creatures in all matters. He give them
distinction in the matters of languages, knowledge of the genealogical
issues, of the duration of lives and events. Without such distinctions
there will be no difference between Leader with Divine Authority and
others."

12 Ishaq has narrated from al-Aqra' who has said the following. "I
wrote to abu Muhammad (a.s.) asking him if Imams experience wet dreams?
I said to myself after the letter had gone, "Wet dream is something
Satanic, and Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has protected those
whom He has given authority against such things." The answer came. "The
conditions of the Imams when asleep is the same as when they are awake.
Sleep does not change anything in them. Allah has given protection to
those whom He has given authority from Satanic encounters as you spoke
to yourself."

13

Ishaq has said that al-Hassan ibn al-Zarif narrated to me the
following. "Two issues would poke in my chest which made me to write to
abu Muhammad (a.s.). I wrote about Al-Qa'im (the one who will rise with
Divine Authority). "When he rise by what means he will judge among the
people and where will be his court house?" I also wanted to ask him
about alternating fever but I had missed to mention it in writing.

The answer came. "You had asked about Al-Qa'im. When he will rise he
judge among people through his own knowledge just the way David would
judge. He would not call any witness to testify. You also wanted to ask
about alternating fever but you forgot to do so. Write this on a sheet
(of material) "We said to the fire, 'Be cool and peaceful (with
Abraham)'" (21:69).The narrator has said that we did just as he had said
and the suffering person was relieved."

14

Ishaq has said that narrated to him 'Isma'il ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn
'Isma'il ibn Ali ibn 'Abdallah ibn 'Abbass ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib who has
said the following. "Once I sat on the side of the road waiting for abu
Muhammad (a.s.) to pass by so that I can present before him my complain
against a need. When he was passing by I presented my complain before
him and swore that I did not have even a Dirham, nothing for lunch or
dinner." The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) said, "You falsely
swore by Allah. You have buried two hundred Dinars.

These my words are not to deny you any grants. Young man, give him
whatever is with you. His servant, give me one hundred Dinars. He then
turned to me and said, "You will be deprived of it in your worst days."
He meant those Dinars that I had buried for a difficult day. What he
said was true. I had buried two hundred Dinars thinking that they would
only be used in a very difficult day.

When I faced such a difficult day and all the ways to find a living was
closed I went to take out the two hundred Dinars but soon I found that
there was not even a single Dinar. In fact, my son had learned about
where the Dinars were buried and he had taken them and had ran away. I
could not benefit from any of those Dinars."

15

Ishaq has said that narrated to me Ali ibn Zayd ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn
ibn Ali (a.s.) the following.

"I had a horse that I liked very much and I would admire it often in
gatherings. One day I went to see abu Muhammad (a.s.) and he said, "What
has your horse done?" I said, "I still have it and it is in front of
your. I just dismounted it." He said, "Change it before this evening if
you can if you would find a buyer and do not delay." Someone came in and
our conversation discontinued. I then left anxiously for home and
informed my brother about it and he said, "I do not know what to say
about it."

I felt covetous about it procrastinated in offering for sale until it
was evening we had just prayed the late evening prayer that the horse
trainer came in saying, "My master your horse has died." I became sad
and realized that this was abu Muhammad (a.s.) meant. After several day
I went to see abu Muhammad (a.s.) and I was saying to myself, "I wish he
would replace my horse with another one. It was his words that made me
so sad." When I sat down he said, "Yes, we will replace your horse.
Young man, give to him my dark brown nag which better than your horse to
ride and will live longer."

16

Ishaq has said that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan Shammun has said that Ahmad
ibn Muhammad narrated to me the following.

"I wrote to abu Muhammad (a.s.) when al-Muhtadi had began to kill the
Turkish Mawali (slave or supporters). My master, we thank Allah for
diverting his (al-Muhtadi's) attention from us. I have heard that he had
threatened you and has said, By Allah, I will wipe them out from the
face of the earth." Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent in response with his own
signature. "This will be much shortening to his life. Count five days
from today. On the sixth day he will be killed with humiliation and
insults that he will go through." It then happned exactly as he had
said."

17

Ishaq has said that Muhammad ibn al-Hassan Shammun narrated to me the
following. "I wrote to abu Muhammad (a.s.) requesting him to pray for
because of the pain that I suffered in my eyes. One of my eye had gone
and the other was about to go. He wrote back to me in reply, "Allah has
kept your eye for you."

My painful eye then recovered. He had signed at the end with these
words, "May Allah, grant you good rewards and best recompense." I became
sad and I did not know anyone just passed away from my family. After a
few days I received information of the death of my son, Tayyib. I then
realized what for his condolences to me were."

18

Ishaq has said that narrated to me 'Umar ibn Muslim the following.

"We were in the city of Surra man Ra'a that a man, called Sayf ibn
al-Layth, from Egypt came with a complain to al-Muhtadi against Shafi'
al-Khadim who had usurped his property and expelled him from the city.
We gave a hint to write to abu Muhammad (a.s.) and request him to
facilitate this affairs. Abu Muhammad (a.s.) wrote back to him, "You
will be all right.

Your property will given back to you. Do not forward your complains to
Sultan. Go and meet the agent (of Shafi' al-Khadim) who has your
property and frighten him with the power of the Greatest Sultan, Allah,
Lord of the worlds." He met the agent. The agent who had the property
with him said, "It was written to me at the time of your leaving Egypt
to find you and return your property to you.

He returned the property by the order of the judge, ibn abu al-
Shawwarib in the presence of witnesses and he did not have to present
his complains to al- Muhtadi. He procured his property and nothing was
heard about him thereafter. The narrator has said that this is Layth who
has said the following also.

"When left Egypt one of my sons was ill and my elder son was the
executor of my will and the supervisor over my family in case I would
die. I wrote to abu Muhammad (a.s.) requesting him to pray my son who
was ill.

He wrote back to me in reply, "Your son has recovered but your elder
son, the executor of your will and the supervisor over your family has
died. Pay thanks to Allah, do not be impatient lest your rewards will be
withheld." The news came to me that my son who was ill has recovered and
my elder son died on the day I received the reply letter from abu
Muhammad (a.s.)."

19

Ishaq has said that narrated to me Yahya ibn al-Qushayri from the town
called Qir the following.

"Abu Muhammad (a.s.) had an agent who lived in a room in the house with
white servant of the Imam (a.s.). the agent invited the servant to have
evil activities with him and the servant refused to do so unless he
brought him wine. The agent managed to find wine and take it to him.
There were three closed doors between them and the quarters of the Imam
(a.s.).

The narrator has said that the agent narrated to me that was awake and
I saw the doors open until I saw the Imam (a.s.) in person standing at
the door. He then said, "O you have fear of Allah and be pious before
Him. In the morning he ordered to sell the servant and discharge me from
the job."

20

Ishaq has said that narrated to me Muhammad ibn al-Rabi' al-Sa'i has
said the following. "I debated a man who believed in dualism in Ahwaz
them went to Surra man Ra'a. However, his words were stuck to my heart.
I was sitting in front of the door of Ahmad al-Khadib that I saw abu
Muhammad (a.s.) coming from the house for public gathering. It was the
house wherein on a certain day the Sultan would allow the common people
to visit him. The Imam (a.s.) looked at me and made a gesture with his
forefinger say One, single and only One. I fainted and fell on my
face."

21

Ishaq has narrated from abu Hashim al-Ja'fari who has said the
following. "One day I went to see abu Muhammad (a.s.) and I wanted him
to give me a certain amount of silver so I can make a ring out of it and
keep for blessing. I sat down but forgot to ask what I had come for.

When was leaving and said farewell to him he threw a ring to me and
said, "You wanted silver and we gave you and profited the gems and the
cost of the goldsmith works. May Allah grant you blessings O abu
Hashim." I then said, "I testify that you are the Wali of Allah, (one
who possesses Divine Authority) and my Imam through my obedience whom I
follow the religion of Allah." He then said, "May Allah grant you
forgiveness, O abu Hashim."

22

Ishaq has said that narrated to Muhammad ibn al-Qasim abu al-'Ayna'
al-Hashimi, the slave of 'Abd al-Samad ibn Ali 'Ataqa the following.

"Often time I would go to see abu Muhammad (a.s.). When in his presence
I would feel thirsty but I would feel shy, out of respect for him, to
ask for water but he would call the people of his household to bring
water for me. Often times I would think to myself of leaving and he
would say, "Young man, bring his horse."

23

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il ibn Ibrahim
ibn Musa ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) from Ali ibn 'Abd al-Ghaffar who
has said the following. "When abu Muhammad (a.s.) was imprisoned, the
'Abbassids, Salih ibn Wasif, Salih ibn Ali and others who were not
Shi'as all came to Salih ibn Wasif asking him to exert more pressure on
abu Muhammad (a.s.).

Salih told them, "What should I do? I managed to find two people who
were of the harshest manners and appointed them to guard him they both
turned into most assiduous worshippers in prayers and fasting. When I
asked them about their behaviors they replied, "What would you say about
a man who fasts every day, worships the whole night and does not speak
or busy himself with anything? When we look at him a feeling of
trembling and shivering over takes us and we lose control over our own
selves." When they heard this they returned in despair."

24

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Hassan ibn al-Husayn who both
have said that narrated to us Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Makfuf that
Certain persons of our people have narrated from a Christian cupping
expert who served in the army the following. "One day at noontime abu
Muhammad (a.s.) sent for me at the time of noon prayer and told me to
perform cupping on this vein. He showed me a vein that was not know to
me as one of the veins used for cupping.

I thought to myself, "I have not seen anything more strange than this.
To perform cupping at noon time which is not the time for it and on a
vein that I do not know." He then told me, "Wait in the house. When it
was evening he called me and said, "Open the vein." I opened the vein.
He said, "Hold it" I held the vein and stopped the blood." He then told
me to remain in the house. At might night he called me and said to open
the vein. He has said that it increased my astonishment, but I did not
like to ask him.

I opened the vein and white blood like salt came out. He has said that
he told me to stop it and I stopped it. He has said that he told me to
remain in the house. In the morning he ordered his clerk to pay me three
Dinars. I took the Dinars and left. I then went to see Bakhtishu' who
was a Christian and told him the whole story. The narrator has said that
he said, "By Allah, I do not understand what you say and I do not know
anything about medicine.

I have not read any such thing in the books. I do not know anyone more
knowledgeable in Christianity than so and so, a Persian man. Go to him"
He has said that I then hire a boat and went to Basra then to Ahwaz and
to Persia to the man I was looking for. I explained to him the story. He
has said that he asked me to give him time. I waited for few days and
then went to him for an answer. He said, "What you say this man did is
something that Jesus had done only once in his life."

25

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from certain persons of our people who
have narrated the following.

"mmd ibn al-Hujr once wrote to abu Muhammad (a.s.) complaining against
'Abd al-'Aziz ibn Dulf and Yazid ibn 'Abdallah. He wrote back in reply,
"As far as 'Abd al-'Aziz is concerned I have relieved you from his
troubles. As far as Yazid is concerned for each of you there is position
before Allah." 'Abd al-'Aziz died and Yazid killed Muhammad ibn Hujr."

26

Ail Muhammad has narrated from certain persons of our people saying as
follows.

"Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was placed under the supervision of a zoo-keeper
who would cause constraints suffering to him. He has said that his wife
told him, "woe is you, be pious before Allah. Do you not know who is in
your house?" She then explained to him the good manners of the Imam
(a.s.) and said, "I am afraid for you from him." He then said, "I can
throw him to the beasts." He inf act, did so and the Imam (a.s.) was
seeing standing among them for prayer and the beast circled around
him."

27

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Ishaq who has said the
following. "Once I went to see abu Muhammad (a.s.) and asked him to
write for me few lines so that whenever I would see his hand writing I
would recognize it. The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, and then said, "O Ahmad
the writing with a fine pen and with thick pen will look different to
you. Do not have doubts He then asked for a pen and ink pot and began
writing. He would make the pen to have ink from the bottom of the ink
pot.

I thought to myself when he was writing, "I will request him to gift me
the pen with which he is writing." When he finished writing he turned to
me and began speaking while he was wiping the pen with the handkerchief
of the ink pot for a while and then said, "Here, O Ahmad it is for
you."

He gave it to me. I then said, may Allah take my soul in service for
your cause, I am sad about something that is in my soul. I wanted to ask
your father about it but I did not have the chance. He asked, "What is
it, O Ahmad?" I said, "My master, it is narrated to us from your holy
ancestors that the prophet sleep on their backs, the true believers
sleep on their right side, the hypocrites sleep on their left side and
Satans sleep on their belly." He (a.s.) said, "That is how it is."

I then said, "My master I struggle to sleep on my right side abut I can
not do so and I do not go to sleep on my right side." He remained quite
for a while and then said, "O Ahmad, come close to me." I went close to
him and he said, "put your hand hand under your clothes." I did so. He
then took his hand from under his clothes and place under my clothes.

He wiped with his right hand my left side and with his left hand my
right side three times. Ahmad has said that ever since I have not been
able to sleep on my left side and can not go to sleep on my left
side."


