Chapter 125 : the Birth of the Possessor (of Divine Authority) (a.s.)
=====================================================================

He was born on fifteenth of the month of Sha'ban in the year two
hundred fifty five AH.

1

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Ahmad ibn Muhammad who has said the following.

"When al-Zabayri was killed this letter came from abu Muhammad (a.s.).
'Such as this is the retribution for those who lie against Allah in the
matters of those who possess authority from Him. He thought that he will
kill me and I will leave no children behind. How then he has experienced
the power of Allah? " A child was born to him -that he named M.H.M.D- in
the year two hundred fifty six AH."

2

Ali ibn Muhammad has said that narrated to me Muhammad and al-Hassan
sons of Ali ibn Ibrahim in the year two hundred seventy nine saying that
narrated to them Muhammad ibn Ali ibn 'Abd al-Rahman al-'Abdi of 'Abd
Qays from Daw' ibn Ali al-'Ijli from a man from Persia, whose name he
mentioned, who has said the following.

"I went to the city of Surra man Ra'a and kept myself at the door of
abu Muhammad (a.s.). He called me inside without any request from me.
When I went inside and offered greeting of peace he said to me, "How are
you, O father of so and so?" Then he told me, "Sit down O so and so." He
then asked me about a group of men and ladies from my family.

He then said to me, "What brings you here?" I said, "The desire to
serve you." The narrator has said that he said, "All right, be around
the house." I then remained in the house with the servants. Then I would
do the purchases for them from the market.

I would go in his presence without first requesting permission when he
would haven been present in the man's quarters One day I went to him
when he was in the men's quarters. I heard the sound of movement in the
house and he said, "Do not move from your place." I could not dare to go
out or inside.

Then a female servant came out to me who had something with her which
was covered. He then called me inside and I went inside. He called the
female servant and she came back. He told her to uncover what she had
with her. She uncovered the very good looking face of a white baby boy.
And she uncovered his chest.

A line of hairs had grown from his neck down to his bellybutton which
seemed to be greenish color and not totally black. He said, "This is
your Leader with Divine Authority." He then ordered her to take the baby
inside and ever since I could not see him until abu Muhammad (a.s.)
passed away." Daw' ibn Ali has said, "I asked the man from Persia, 'How
old do you think he was?" He said, "Two years old." Al-'Abdi has said,
"I asked Daw', "How old do you think he was?" He said, "Fourteen years
old." Abu Ali and abu 'Abdallah have said that we think he is twenty one
years old."

3

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from more then one person of our people
of Qumm from Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-'Amiri from abu Sa'id Ghanim
al-Hindi who has said the following.

"I lived in interior Kashmir, India. My friends would sit on chairs on
the right and left of the King. They were forty people and all of them
would read the four books, Torah, Gospel, Psalms and the books of
Abraham. We would judge among the people and provide them understanding
of their religion and issue fatwas for them in the lawful and unlawful
matters.

All people would seek assistance from us including their King. Once we
discussed about the Messenger of Allah and said that this prophet who is
mentioned in the books has remained obscure to us. We must investigate
about him and lead a fact finding task in his affairs. We agreed that I
should go out and lead the fact finding task.

I then left out with large amount of money and journeyed for twelve
months until I reach near Kabul. Turkish bandits rubbed wounded me
seriously. They pushed me to Kabul where their King saved me when he
learned about me he sent me to Balkh which was under the control of
Dawud ibn al-'Abbass ibn abu al-Aswad.

Information about me had reached him that I have come out of India in
search for religion and that I have learned Persian and have debated the
scholars of law and theology. Dawud ibn al-'Abbass sent for me and
summoned me to his presence. He gathered the scholars of law against me.
They debated me.

I then informed them that I have come to find about the prophet about
whom we have learned in the books" He asked, "Who is he and what is his
name?" I said, "His name is Muhammad." They said, "He is our prophet
that you search for." I asked them about his laws and they informed me
about them. I said, "I know that Muhammad is the prophet but I do not
know the one you describe to me is he or not.

You should show where he is so I can go and find out whether the signs
that I have about him is found in him or not. If he would the one I am
looking for I will accept his religion." They said, "He has passed
away." I asked them, "Who is the executor of his will and his
successor?" They said, "Abu Bakr is his successor." I asked them, "Tell
me about his name. Is this (Abu Bakr) his Kunya?" They said, "It is
'Abdallah ibn 'Uthman."

They ascribed him to Quraysh." I then asked them to tell me about the
genealogy of Muhammad. They informed me of his genealogy. I said this is
not the person I am looking for.

The one I am searching for is the one whose successor is his brother in
religion and his cousin genealogically, the husband of his daughter and
the father of his sons. This prophet will have no children on earth
except the sons of this man who is his successor." He has said that they
attacked me and said, "O commander, this man has come out polytheism and
has entered disbelief. It is lawful to spill his blood." I said to them,
"O people I already have a religion and I strongly believe in it. I do
not want to give it up until I can find a religion stronger than this.

I have found the description of this man in the books that Allah has
revealed to His prophets. I came out of my country, India leaving behind
all the honor and respect that I had only to find him. When examined
your prophet the way you described him to me I found out that his
description as you presented does not match the description of the
prophet mentioned in the books. So leave me alone." The agent sent for a
man called al-Husayn ibn Eshkib and said to him, "Debate this Indian
man." He said, "May Allah grant you well being.

There are the scholars of the law and the other scholars. They know
better how to debate him." He said to him, "Debate him as I say, and you
can meet privately and be kind to him." Al-Husayn ibn Eshkib said to me
after our consultations, "The prophet that you are looking for is the
one these people have described for you but their description of his
successor is not the way they have described. This prophet is Muhammad
ibn'Abdallah ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib.

His successor is Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib. He is
the husband of Fatema, daughter of Muhammad (s.a) and the father of
al-Hassan and al-Husayn, the grandsons of Muhammad (s.a)."

Ghanim abu Sa'id has said, "I then said, "Allahu Akbar." (Allah is
great). This is the one I have been looking for." I then returned to
Dawud ibn al-'Abbass and said to him, "O commander, I have found what I
was searching for. I testify that there is no lord besides Allah and I
testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah." The narrator has said
that he treated and helped me with kindness and asked al-Husayn to look
after me."

The narrator has said that thereafter I went to him until we were
acquainted properly and he taught me understanding of the law of the
matters that I needed such as prayer, fasting and the obligations."

The narrator has said that I said to him, "We read in our books that
Muhammad (s.a) is the last of the prophets and there will be no other
prophets after him. The task of leadership after him will be with the
executor of his will, his successors and heirs and thereafter it will be
with the executor of the will of the previous one and so on in their
descendants until the end of the world.

Who is the executor of the will of the executor of the will of Muhammad
(s.a) ?" He said, "They are al-Hassan then al-Husayn the grandsons of
Muhammad (s.a)." He then continued speaking of the executors of the will
of the Holy Prophet (s.a) until the Sahib al-Zaman (the one who
possesses Divine Authority today).

Then he explained to me what had happened (with the Imams). Thereafter
I hand no other goal but to search for the holy location. He ('Amiri)
has said that he came to us in Qumm. He sat with our people in the year
two hundred sixty four AH. He then left with them and arrived in Baghdad
with his friend from al-Sind who had accompanied him in religion.

'Amiri has said that Ghanim said to me, "I disliked certain things
about my companion and I departed him and went out to al-'Abbassia and
prepared my self for prayer. I began the prayer but I was anxious and
thoughtful about my goal. At this time someone came to me and called me
with my Indian name. I replied, "Yes, it is I." He said, "Your master is
calling you." I went with him and he would walk from this to that street
until he came to house and a garden and I saw him (a.s.) sitting." He
said, "Well come, O so and so, in Inddian language.

How are you? How was so and so until he mentioned all the forty people.
He then asked me about every and each of them. Then he told all that had
happened among us all in Indian language. Then he asked, "Did you want
to perform Hajj with people of Qumm?" I said, "Yes, my master." He then
said, "Do not go to Hajj with them this year. Go back and perform Hajj
in future." He then gave me a bag of money that was in front of him and
said to me, "Spend it for your needs and do not go to Baghdad to so and
so." He mentioned his name and said, "Do not tell him anything."

'Amiri has said that he came to us at Qumm. He then informed us of the
triumph and that our people had returned from al-'Aqaba. Ghanim went
'Uthman Khurasan. Next year he went for Hajj and sent us souvenirs from
Khurasan. He lived there for sometimes and then he died. May Allah grant
him blessings."

4

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sa'id ibn 'Abdallah who has said the
following. "Al-Hassan ibn al-Nadr and abu Sidam and a group of people,
after abu Muhammad (a.s.) had passed away would discuss about the
property (of religious dues) in their possession and how to find out (as
to who should they give it). Al-Hassan ibn al-Nadr came to abu Sidam and
said, "I want to go for Hajj this year." Abu Sidam said, "Postpone it
this year." Al-Hassan ibn al-Nadr said, "I experience nightmare in my
sleep. I must go this year for Hajj."

He prepared his will and appointed Ahmad ibn Ya'li ibn Hammad as the
executor of his will. He said in his to pay a certain amount of money to
the holy location with his own hand into his (the Imam's) own hand after
he would appear in public. The narrator has said that al-Hassan has
said, "When I arrived in Baghdad I rented a house and certain persons of
the representatives came to me with cloths and Dinars and left them with
me.

I asked them, "What is it?" He said, "It is as you know what it is."
Others also came to me with such properties until the house was filled
up. Then Ahmad ibn Ishaq came with all that was with him. I was
astonished and remained thinking. A letter came to me from the man
(a.s.) that said, "When it will be come such and such hours of the day
then take all (money/ property) is with you."

I then left with that was with me and on the way there was a robber
that looted the travelers with his sixty men thieves. I passed him
safely by the help of Allah. I arrived at the army camp and stopped
there. A letter came that told me to take everything along with me. I
loaded every thing in the carriages of the porters and when I reach the
corridor a black man standing there. He asked, "Are you al-Hassan ibn
al-Nadr?"

I said, "Yes, I am he." He then said, "Enter." I then entered the house
and then a room and unloaded the goods from the carriages of the porters
therein. In a corner of the room there was a large quantity of bread. He
gave two loaves to each of the porters and told them to leave. Then I
found out that there was a room behind the curtain and someone called me
therefrom.

"O al-Hassan ibn al-Nadr, thank Allah for the favor that He has done to
you and do not complain. Satan loves that you would doubt. He gave me
two pieces of cloths and said, "Take these because you will soon need
them." I took them and left." Sa'd has said, "Al-Hassan ibn Nadr came
back, died in the month of Ramadan and was shrouded in the pieces of
cloths."

5

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Hamawayh al-Suwaydawiy
from Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Mahziyar who has said the following.

"At the time abu Muhammad (a.s.) passed away I had doubts. Large
quantities of commodities (of religious dues) were accumulated with my
father. He loaded them in a boat and himself also embarked. I was with
him to say farewell to him. He began to feel severe fever and asked me
to take him back home because he said, "It is death." He then said to
me, "Be pious before Allah about these commodities."

In his will he appointed me over see the commodities. He then died. I
then said to my self, "My father was not such a person to make a will
for an incorrect cause. I must take these commodities to Iraq and rent
an accommodation on the bank of the river and I will not tell anyone of
anything with me.

If the matter will become clear to me as it was at the time of abu
Muhammad (a.s.) I will deal accordingly otherwise throw them into the
river." I then went to Iraq, rented a place on the bank of the river and
stayed there for a several days. Then I received a letter with a
messenger. The letter said, "O Muhammad, there is so and so thing inside
so and so thing with you.

It explained to me every thing in details even about the things of
which I hand no knowledge. I then submitted everything to the messenger
and remained there for several more days. No one would ask who I was. I
became depressed and sad. Then a letter came that said, "We have
appointed you in the place of your father. Therefore give thanks to
Allah."

6

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah has narrated from abu 'Abdallah al-Nisa'iy
who has said the following.

"I delivered certain items from al-Marzabani al-Harithi to the holy
location. One item was a gold bracelet. Other items were accepted but
the bracelet was returned. I was ordered to break it. When I did so
inside there were certain amounts of iron, brass and zinc. I took them
out and sent the gold back. It was accepted."

7

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Fadl al-Khazzaz al-Mada-'ini, the
slave of Khadija daughter of Muhammad abu Ja'far (a.s.)who has said the
following "Certain people of the city of al-Madina that belonged to
al-Talibiyin group believed in the truth (about Ahl al-Bayt).

They would receive their financial grants regularly on time. When abu
Muhammad (a.s.) passed away a few of them disregarded the belief that
abu Muhammad (a.s.) has behind a son. The financial grants thereafter
would come only to those who still believed in son of abu Muhammad
(a.s.) and stopped coming to the others. They no more are mentioned
along with those who are mentioned. All praise belongs to Allah, Lord of
the worlds."

8

Ali ibn Muhammad has said that a man from Bedouins sent a certain
quantity of commoditiy (as religious dues) but it was returned to him
and he was told, "Pay first the rights of the children of your uncle. It
is four hundred Dirhams." The property of the children of his uncle was
in his possession in sharing manner and he had withheld their property.
When he did the accounting their rights in that shared property was four
hundred Dirhams. He paid that amount and sent the rest (to the Imam
(a.s.) and it was accepted."

9

Al-Qasim ibn al-'Ala' has said the following.

"Several boys were born to me and each time I would write and request
for prayer. Nothing would have been written to me about them. They all
died. When my son al-Hassan was born I wrote and requested for prayer.
The answer came, "He lives and all praise belongs to Allah."

10

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated 'Abdallah ibn Salih who has said the
following "I lived in Baghdad and one year I requested permission (from
the twelfth Imam (a.s.) to travel out but permission was not granted. I
waited for twenty two days and the caravan had already left for
al-Nahrawan then I was granted permission. It was a Wednesday and I was
told to leave.

I then left but I did not have any hope of reaching the caravan. I
arrived at al- Nahrawan and the caravan was still there. I then had
enough time to only feed my camels and then the caravan left. I
journeyed with the caravan and he had prayed for my safety. I did not
face any difficulties. All praise belongs to Allah."

11

Ali has narrated from al-Nadr al-Bajali from md ibn Yusuf al-Shashi who
has said the following "A boil had grown on my heaps. I sought treament
from several physicians and spent money but they said that they knew of
no medicine for it. I then wrote a letter to him (the twelfth Imam
(a.s.) requesting him to pray. He wrote back to me with his signature,
"May Allah grant you good health and place you with us in this life and
in the life hereafter."

The narrator has said that before the coming of the Friday the boil was
gone and it became like the palm of my hand. I then called one of the
physicians and showed him the place of the boil and he said, "We had no
knowledge of any medicine to cure it."

12

Ali has narrated from Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Yamani who has said the
following "I lived in Baghdad. Once the caravan for the people of Yemen
was about to live. I also decided to leave with them. I then wrote to
him (the twelfth Imam (a.s.) requesting his permission. The response
came, "Do not leave with them. There is nothing good for you in leaving
with them. Stay in al-Kufa." The narrator has said, " I stayed in
al-Kufa and the caravan left but the tribe of Hanzala attacked and
looted them.

I then wrote for permission to leave by ships on water. Permission was
denied. I then found out that of the ships that had traveled that year
none reached the destination safely. Indian groups called al-Bawarij had
pirated. I then visited the army camp. Near sun set I went to the door
(of the shrine of the Imams) quitely.

I did speak to anyone and nor introduced myself to anyone. I was
praying in the mosque after offering my greeting of peace (to the Imams)
that a servant came and said, "Rise up and come with me." I told him,
"Where should we go?" He said, "We will go home." I then asked, "Do you
know who am I? Perhaps you are sent for someone else."

He said, "I have been sent onlyy for you. You are Ali ibn al-Husayn,
the messenger of Ja'far ibn Ibrahim." He took to the house of al-Husayn
ibn Ahmad. He then spoke to him secretly that I did hear what the spoke
about. Every thing that I needed was brought for me. I stayed with him
for three days. I asked his permission to offer my greetings of peace
from inside the house. He granted me permission and I offered my
greeting of peace dduring the night."

13

Al-Hassan ibn al-Fadl ibn Yazid al-Yamani has said the following.

"My father wrote in his own had writing he received back a response. I
then wrote in my own hand writing I also received back a response. One
of our Fuqaha' (scholar of law) wrote in his own hand writing but he did
not receive any response. We then began to think about it and we found
out that the man had changed his belief into that of the Qirmati sect.

Al-Hassan ibn al-Fadl has said, "I visited (the holy places in ) and
arrived at Tus. I decided not to leave until I will experience evidence
in support of my belief and success in achieving my needs even if it
would take me to stay until I will receive confirmation." He has said,
"In the mean time I felt depressed because of fear that I might lose the
opportunity to perform Hajj."

He has said, "One day I went to see Muhammad ibn Ahmad for help." He
said to me, "Go to so and so mosque. A man will meet you there." I then
went to the mosque and a man came to me. He looked at me and laughed and
said, "do not be sad and depressed.

You will perform Hajj this year and will return back to your wife and
children safely." The narrator has said, "I gained confidence and my
heart felt at peace and I say that is how my wish came true."

The narrator has said, "I then went to the army camp (city of Surra man
Ra'a ) and a bag of money with few Dinars and a piece of clothes were
sent to me (from the Imam's office). I felt depressed and said to my
self, "Is this how these people treat me and this is how much my reward
is with them?" I used ignorance and returned the gift and wrote a
letter.

The person who brought them to me did not explain or say any thing. I
then felt regretful; very strongly and said to myself, "I have turned
ungrateful to my master in rejecting his gift. I wrote a letter and
begged for forgiveness of my misbehavior. I confessed to my sins and
begged for pardon. I sent the letter and remained rubbing my hands
against each other. In such condition I was thinking and say to myself,
"If the money will be sent to me I will not open the bag and will not
say anything about it. I will take it to my father.

He knows more than me and will do whatever he would like. At that time
a letter had come to the messenger who had brought the bag of money. He
was told, "What you did was wrong. You did not inform the man that we
sent gifts to our friends and followers and sometimes they ask us for
such gift for blessings."

A letter came to me also and it said, "You made a mistake in rejecting
the gift but when you asked Allah to forgive you Allah will forgive you.
Since your intention was not to open the gift or spent it we have spent
it on your behalf. However, you must take the cloth so you can use it
for Ehram (during performing certain acts of Hajj)."

The narrator has said, "I wrote him about two issue and I wanted to
write about a third issue but I did not do so for fear that it might not
like it." The answer for the two issues came back and the meaning of the
third one was also explained. All praise belongs to Allah.

The narrator has said, "I made a contract with Ja'far ibn Ibrahim
al-Naysaburi in Naysabur to ride share on our journey to Makka. When we
arrived in Baghdad I decided to change our agreement. I then went around
to find another person for ride sharing.

Ibn al-Wajna'.came to see me after that I had already proposed to him
ride sharing and hiring a ride and he had expressed his dislike to my my
proposal. He said, "I am looking for you and I am told, "He will
accompany you. Treat him kindly, find for him ride sharing and hire for
him a ride."

14

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Hassan ibn 'Abd al-Hamid who has
said the following.

" I had doubts in the case of Hajiz (as whether the had authorized him
or not). I then collected a few items and left for the army camp (the
city of Surra man Ra'a The notification that came to said, "There is no
doubtfulness in us nor in those who has said the following. who
represent us in our affairs. Whatever is with you take them to Hajiz ibn
Yazid."

15

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Salih who has said the
following. "When my father died and the task (of working is
representative of the Imams) was left to me with my father there were
promissory notes from those who has said the following. owed (religious
dues). I wrote to him (the Imam (a.s.) about the case.

He wrote back to me, "Demand from them and make them pay." People paid
what they owed except one man who had signed a promissory note for four
hundred Dinars. I went to demand from him what he owed but he
procrastinated and took it lightly and his behaved foolishly. I
complained to his father and he said, "So what!" I then hold him by his
beard and leg and pulled him towards the center of the house and kicked
him many times. His son went out and cried for help from the people of
Baghdad saying, "He is a Qummi, Rafidi (derogatory name for Shi'a) he
has killed my father." From the people of Baghdad many gathered around
me.

I rode my equine animal and said, "Very nice of you people of Baghdad.
You support the unjust against a lonely stranger. I am a man from the
sunni sect and he calls me a man from Qumm and a Rafidi so that he can
destroy my rights." The narrator has said that people then turned
against him and they wanted to enter his store.

I then calmed them down. The signatory in the promissory note called me
and set upon himself a stipulation with an oath that said, "His wife
will be divorced if he did not pay his dues." My part of the stipulation
was to ask the people to leave his place."

16

Ali has narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn al-Hassan
and al-'Ala' ibn Rizq Allah from Badr Ghulam Ahmad ibn al-Hassan who has
said the following.

"I began to live in al-Jabal (a town between Baghdad and Azarbayjan)
and I did not believe in Imam (the Divine authority of al-Mahddi (a.s.)
but I loved them (descendants of Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.). When
Yazid ibn 'Abdallah (a representative of al-Mahdi (a.s.) died he said in
his will that I must give his Shahri Samand (famous Persian) horse,
sword and belt to his master (al-Mahdi (a.s.).

I was afraid that if I would not give the horse to Edhkutakin (a
Turkish official of 'Abbassid rulers) he will harm me. I by myself then
evaluated the items for a seven hundred Dinars and no one knew about it.
A letter then came from Iraq that said, "Send us our seven hundred
Dinars that are with you for the Shahri (famous Persian horse), the
sword and the belt."

17

Ali has narrated from the one who narrated to him the following.

"A boy was born to me. I wrote to him (al-Mahdi (a.s.) for his
permission to give the baby a special bath for the ceremony on the
seventh day of his birth. The answer came back and it said, "Do not do
so." The boy died on the seventh or the eighth day. I then wrote to him
about the death of the boy. He wrote back to me, "He will be succeeded
by another and an other. Let his name be 'Ahmad' and the name for the
one after Ahmad will be Ja'far." It came to be as he had said."

The narrator has said, "I made preparation for the journey to Hajj,
said farewell to the people and I was about to leave. The message came
to me that said, "We do not like it but it is up to you." I felt
depressed and sad and I wrote, "I am steadfast to obey you commands and
listen your words except that I feel for missing Hajj." He then had
signed (a note to me) that said, "Do be depressed. You will soon perform
Hajj by the will of Allah." The next year I wrote to ask his permission
and the permission came.

I then wrote that I have chosen Muhammad ibn al-'Abbass as a ride
sharing partner and that I trusted him for his religion and safety. The
message that then came said, "Al-Asadi is a good ride sharing partner.
If will come do not chose anyone else besides him. Al-Asadi came and I
chose him as the ride sharing partner."

18

Al-Hassan ibn Ali al-'Alawi has said the following.

"Al-Majruh left a certain amount of commodities that was of the dues to
the holy location with Mirdas ibn Ali. With Mirdas there was already
such commodities that Yatim ibn Hanzala had left. Amessage came to
Mirdas and it said, "Send (to us) the commodities of Yatim and whatever
al-Shirazi (Majruh) has left with you."

19

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Hassan ibn 'Isa al-'Uraydi abu
Muhammad who has said the following.

"When abu Muhammad (a.s.) passed away a man from Egypt came to Makk
with a certain amount of commodities that were due to the holy location
(office of the Imam (a.s.) People expressed different opinions on the
issue. Certain persons said, "Abu Muhammad (a.s.) has passed away and
has left no one behind as his successor.

Ja'far is his successor. Others said, "Abu Muhammad (a.s.) passed away
and he left his successor behind.. A man called abu Talib was sent to
the army camp (the city of Surra man Ra'a) with a letter. He went to see
Ja'far and ask him for the evidence to prove that he is the successor of
abu Muhammad (a.s.), Ja'far said, "It is not available at this time."

He then went to the door and gave the letter to our people and the
response that came said, "We present our condolences to you for the
death of your friend (the man from Egypt). He has died and he has a will
in which he said that the commodities must be given to the trust worthy
person to deal with in a proper manner. His letter was answered. When
came back to Makka it was just the way he was informed by the holy
location (the office of the Imam (a.s.) "

20

Ali ibn Muhammad has said the following.

"From A'ba (name of a town) certain items of property that belonged to
the holy location (office of the Imam (a.s.) were to deliver to him
((the Imam (a.s.) but a sword that was part of such property was
forgotten and remained in A'ba. When the delivery was made a letter came
to him that said, "What about the sword that you forgot and left in
A'ba?"

21

Al-Hassan ibn Khafif has narrated from his father who has said the
following. "Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) had sent certain servants to al-Madina
of the Messenger of Allah and among them were two servants. He had
written to Khafif to leave with them. He then left with them and they
reached al-Kufa where one of the two servants had consumed alcohol.
Before the would al-Kufa a letter came to them from the army camp (city
of Surra man Ra'a) that said, "Send back the servant who has consumed
alcohol and remove him from the service."

22

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ahmad ibn abu Ali ibn Ghiyath from
Ahmad ibn al- Hassan who has said the following.

" Yazid ibn 'Abdallah has said in his will to sent a horse, a sword and
certain other properties to holy location (office of the Imam (a.s.).
The money from the sale of the horse and other properties were delivered
to the holy location but the sword was forgotten. A message then came
that said, "With the items that you sent there was a sword that has not
reached us." Or the message was in similar words."

23

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Shadhan
al-Naysaburi who has said the following.

"Five hundred Dirhams less twenty was collected with me. I decided to
sent them but I did not like to send five hundred less twenty. I then
added twenty Dirhams to it from my own money and sent them to al-Asadi
without any mention of what was therein. The message that came to me
said, "Five hundred Dirhams of which twenty were yours have reached
(us)."

24

It is narrated from al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari who has said the
following. "The letters of abu Muhammad (a.s.) would come about the
matters related to al-Junayd, who killed Fars, abu al-Hassan and others.
When he passed away letters about the issues related to abu al-Hassan
and his friend continued coming from (Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) but there was
no mention of al-Junayd. I became depressed about it. Thereafter, the
news of the death of al- Junayd reached us."

25

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Salih who has said the
following. "I had a female slave that had attracted my attention. I
wrote to him (Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) requesting permission to have a child
from her. The answer came, "You may do so but Allah does whatever He
wants." I went to bed with her and she became pregnant. The fetus fell
off prematurely and she died."

26

Ali ibn Muhammad has said the following.

"Ibn al-'Ajami in his will had set aside one third of his properties
for the holy location (office of the Imam (a.s.) and had written the
deed for it. Before he would take the one third out of his properties he
gave a certain amount to his son, abu al-Miqdam, of which no one had any
knowledge. He (Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) wrote to him, "Where is the property
that you set aside for abu al-Miqdam?"

27

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from abu 'Aqil 'Isa ibn Nasr who has said
the following. "Ali ibn Ziyad al-Saynari wrote a letter to request for a
shroud. He (al-Mahdi (a.s.) wrote back to him, "You will need it in the
year eighty." He died in the year eighty and the shroud was sent to him
a few days before his death."

28

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Harun ibn 'Imran
al-Hamadani who has said the following.

"I owed five hundred Dinars to the holy location (office of Imam
al-Mahdi (a.s.). I felt extremely depressed about it. I said to myself,
"The stores that have bought was for five hundred thirty Dinars. I will
set them aside for the holy location (office of Imam al-Mahdi (a. s.)."
However I had not said anything in words. He wrote to Muhammad ibn
Ja'far, "Take possession of the stores from Muhammad ibn Harun as
payment for the five hundred Dinars that he owed us."

29

Ali ibn Muhammad has said the following.

"Ja'far (the impostor) sold of the items that he sold a Ja'fari
(descendants of Ja'far ibn abu Talib) female child that they (family of
abu Muhammad (a.s.) had brought up. A certain 'Alawi person informed the
buyer about the female child. The buyer said, "I will be glad to return
if someone will pay me what I have paid." He then informed the people of
the holy location (office of Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.). They sent forty one
Dinars to the slave trader and asked him to return her back to her
people."

30

Al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan al-'Alawi has said the following.

"A man who was an informer for Ruz Hassani with another man with him
once said to Ruz, "This man (al-Mahdi (a.s.) is out there. Money is
collected for him. He has representatives in many places. They mentioned
his representatives by their names in different areas. This news reached
'Ubaydallah ibn Sulayman, the vizier. The Vizier decided to arrest these
representatives. The Sultan said, "Find out. Where is this man? This is
a serious matter."

'Ubaydallah ibn Sulayman then said, "We will arrest the
representatives, the agent." The Sultan said, "No, you must send your
undercover agents who would pose to them as devotees ready to pay their
dues to their Imam. If they accepted the funds then arrest them." The
narrator has said that message came out from the holy location (office
of Imam al-Mahdi (a. s.) to inform all the representatives not to accept
any dues from anyone, deny knowing anything about the Imam (a.s.) and
say that they have no information.

A man who was an undercover agent came to Muhammad ibn Ahmad whom he
did not know. The undercover agent spoke to him privately and said, "I
have certain funds with me and I want it to be delivered to the holy
location (office of Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.)." Muhammad said to him, "You
have made a mistake. I do not know anything about it.

He would insist and try to show kindness and Muhammad would deny having
any knowledge of it. The spies spread to all places but the
representatives refuse to accept any funds because of the message that
was dilivered to them before hand."

31

Ali ibn Muhammad has said the following. "A prohibition to visit the
Quryash cemetery and al-Hira (Karbala) came out of the holy location
(office of Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.). After a few months the Vizier (abu
al-Fath Ja'far ibn Furat) summoned al-Baqtia, and said to him, "Meet the
clan of bnu Furat and al-Bursiyin and tell them not to visit Quraysh
cemetery because the Caliph has decide to see all those who would visit
these places be arrested."


