Chapter 126 : the Statements and the Explicit Texts On Leadership With Divine Authority) of the Twelve Imams (a.s.)
===================================================================================================================

1

A number of our people has narrated Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi from
abu Hashim Dawud ibn al-Qasim al-Ja'fari from abu Ja'far al-Thani who
has said the following. "Once Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) came with
al-Hassan and al-Husayn and he was holding the hand of Salman for
support. He entered the sacred Mosque in Makka and sat down. Then a good
looking and well dressed man came.

He offered the greeting of peace to Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) who
answered his greetings likewise and he sat down. He then said, "I will
ask you three questions. If you would answer them I will acknowledge
that the people who have acted against you in the matters of leadership
after the Holy Prophet (s.a) they have acted against their own selves.

Their actions have taken away peace from them in this world as well in
the next life. If it would be otherwise, (you can answer) then you and
those people will be the same."

Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) said, "Ask whatever you would like."

He said, "Tell about the man who sleeps. Where does his spirit go?"
Tell about the man, how he remembers and forgets? Tell me about the man
how do his children become similar to the aunts and uncles.?"

Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) turned to al-Hassan and said, "O abu
Muhammad, answer him." The narrator has said that al-Hassan answered his
questions. The man then said, "I testify that there is no lord besides
Allah and I continue to testify to this fact.

I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and I continue to
testify to this fact I testify that you are the executor of the will of
the Messenger of Allah and that you are the in charge of this task
((Leadership with Divine Authority) with His authorization." He pointed
out to Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) with his hand. He then said, "I continue
to testify to this fact."

"I testify that you are the executor of his (Amir al-Mu'minin's (a.s.)
will and the in charge of this task ((Leadership with Divine Authority)
by His authorization after him (Amir alMu'minin (a.s.) " He pointed out
with his hand to al-Hassan (a.s.). Then He then said, "I continue to
testify to this fact."

"I testify that al-Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.) will be the executor of the
will of his brother and the in charge of this task ((Leadership with
Divine Authority) with His authorization after him. "I testify in
support of Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) that he will be the in charge of the
task of al- Husayn after him.

"I testify that Muhammad ibn Ali will be the in charge of the task of
Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) after him.

"I testify that Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) will be the in charge of the
task of Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.).

"I testify that Musa will be the in charge of the task of Ja'far ibn
Muhammad after him.

"I testify that Ali ibn Musa will be the in charge of the task of Musa
ibn Ja'far (a.s.).

"I testify that Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) will be the in charge of the
task of Ali ibn Musa (a.s.) after him.

"I testify that Ali ibn Muhammad will be the in charge of the task of
Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) after him.

"I testify that al-Hassan ibn Ali (a.s.) will be the in charge of the
task of Ali ibn Muhammad (a.s.) after him.

"I testify in support of a man from the children of al-Hassan who will
not be mentioned by his Kunya (father or son of so and so) or his name
until he will rise with Divine authority to fill the earth with justice
after being filled with injustice.

"I offer you my greeting of peace O Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and praay
to Allah to grant you blessings and holiness."

He then stood up and left.

Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) said, "O abu Muhammad follow him and see where
went." Al- Hassan ibn Ali (a.s.) went out to find out (and came back)
and said, "As soon as he stepped out of the Mosque I could not figure
out in which direction of the earth of Allah ddid he disappear. I
returned to Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and informed him." He said, "O abu
Muhammad, do you know him?" I said, Allah, the Messenger of Allah and
Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) know best." He said, "He was al-Khidr (a.s.) "

2

Also Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan
al-Saffar from Ahmad ibn abu 'Abdallah from abu Hashim a similar hadith.
Muhammad ibn Yahya has said, "I said to Muhammad ibn al-Hassan, "O abu
Ja'far I wish this would have been narrated through a chain of narrators
other then Ahmad ibn 'Abdallah ." He said, "He Ahmad ibn 'Abdallah had
narrated this to me ten years before the confusion."

3

Muhammad ibn Yahya and Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah have narrated from
'Abdallah ibn Ja'far from al-Hassan ibn Zarif and Ali ibn Muhammad from
Salih ibn abu Hammad from Bakr ibn Salih from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Salim
from abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following
"Once my father said to Jabir ibn 'Abdallah al-Ansari, 'I need your help
in certain issue.

When do you think it will be convenient for you we meet privately and I
will ask you about it.?" He said, "Whenever you would like will be all
right for me." One day when they met each other he said, "O Jabir, tell
me about the tablet that you saw in the hand of my greatgrandmother,
Fatima (a.s.), daughter of the Messenger of Allah. Tell me of what she
said toyou about the tablet and the writing on it?"

Jabir then said, "I ask Allah to testify (to the truth of what I
experienced that day). Once I went to see your great grandmother Fatime
(a.s.) in the life time of the Messenger of Allah. I congratulated for
the birth of al-Husayn (a.s.).

I saw in her hand a green tablet that I think was made of Emerald
(precious gems). I saw on it a white writing that was shining like the
color of sun. I then said to her, "May Allah take my soul and the souls
of my parents in service for your cause, O daughter of the Messenger of
Allah, what is this tablet?" She said, "This is a tablet that Allah has
given as a gift to His Messenger.

In it there is the name of my father, the name of my husband, the names
of my two sons and the names of the executors of the wills of my
(special) descendants. My father gave it to me as a gift and glad news."
Jabir then said, "Your great grandmother (a.s.) then gave the tablet to
me.

I read it and made a copy of it." My father then said, "O Jabir can you
show that copy (that made from the tablet) to me?" He said, "Yes, I can
show it to you." My father went with him to his house and he brought to
light a tablet of parchment.

He then said, "O Jabir, look carefully at your writing to see how read
it for you." Jabir then kept looking at his handwriting while my father
read and his reading was exactly letter by letter the same as what Jabir
had in his copy. Jabir theen said, "I ask Allah to testify to the truth
of my words that this is what I saw was written on the tablet."

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the merciful

This a document from Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Wise, for
Muhammad, His Prophet (s.a), His light, His embassador, His barrier and
His guide (for people). Jibril, the trusted spirit has brought from the
Lord of the worlds. "O Muhammad acknowledge the greatness of My names
and pay thanks for My bounties. Do not hide My favors. I am the Allah
and there is no lord besides Me. I break down the transgressors and
grant wealth to the oppressed.

I am the One Who has established the religion. I am Allah. There is no
lord besides I. Whoever would expect to receive any distinction from
someone other than Me or have fear of the justice of someone other Me I
will cause him to suffer a torment the like of which I would cause no
one else of the creatures of the world to suffer. I must be worshipped
and in Me you must trust.

I have not sent any prophet without, up on the completion of his days,
appointing the executor of his will. I have given preference to you over
the prophets and I have given preference to the executor of your will
over the executors of the wills of the other prophets.

I have granted you honor through your two brave grandsons, al-Hassan
and al-Husayn. I have made al- Hassan to be the treasure of my knowledge
after the completion of the time of his father. I have made al-Husayn to
be the keeper of My revelation. I have granted him nobility through
martyrdom and made his end triumphant.

He will be the best of the martyrs and of the highest degree in the
rank of the martyrs. I have kept My perfect word with him and My
extremely clear authority and proof available for him. Through his
descendant I will give good rewards or cause people to suffer torments.
The first of them will Ali ibn al-Husayn, master of the worshippers, and
the beauty of My friends of the past then his son who will be very
similar to his grand father, the praised one, Muhammad al-Baqir, the one
who will be very deeply founded in My knowledge and the source of wisdom
from Me.

Those who will have doubts about Ja'far will soon be destroyed. Whoever
would reject him would be like one who would reject Me. The true words
have already come from Me that I will dignify the position of Ja'far and
will grant him joy and happiness for his followers, supporters and
friends.

After him Musa will live at the time of a blind, confusing and dark
mischief. (He will live among the people) because the system of
obedience to Me does not break down and my authority (proof of My
existence) does not remain obscure. The thirst (for knowledge and
guidance) of my friends will be quenched with sufficient measure.
Whoever would reject any of them he has rejected my favors. Whoever
would change my signs and verses of my book he has excused with lies.

Woe is to those who would fabricate lies and reject (the truth) after
the completion of the time of Musa, My servant, My beloved, My chosen
one about Ali (al-Rida ). (Ali al-Rida) who is My wali (the one who
possesses Divine Authority) My supporter, the one on whom I will place
the task of prophet-hood and examine how he would deal with it. An
arrogant devil will murder him. He will be buried in the city build by
the virtuous servant (of Allah) next to the worst of My creature.

The words of truth have already been established that I will grant him
joy and happiness with the birth of his son, Muhammad, his successor and
the heir of his knowledge. He is the the mine of My knowledge, the right
place for My secrets and My authority over My creature. Whoever would
believe in him I will make paradise his dwelling and will grant him the
ability to intercede for seventy people from his family of whom everyone
would have become subject to Hellfire.

I will make the end for his son, Ali, to arrive at salvation. Ali, is
My wali (the one who possesses Divine Authority), My supporter, the
testimony in My creatures and My trustee in My revelation. From him I
will make to come out a preacher to My way and a treasure of My
Knowledge, al-Hassan. I will complete it with his son (M.H.M.D.) a
blessing for the worlds.

In him will be found the perfection of Musa (Moses) the beauty of Jesus
and the patience of Ayyub. My friends in his time will become weak.
Their heads will be sent as gifts like the heads of the Turks and
Daylam. They will be murdered and burned. They will live in fear,
frightened and fearful.

The earth will be stained with their blood and wailing and lamentations
will become wide spread in their women. These will possess My authority
and through them I will remove the blind and dark mischief. Through them
I will remove uncertainties, sufferings and shackles. These are the ones
upon whom the blessings and forgiveness of their Lord descend and they
are the ones who provide guidance.

'Abd al-Rahman ibn Salim has said that abu Basir said, "Even if you
would hear no other Hadith expect this it will be enough for you.
Protect it against everyone except the deserving people."

4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn 'Isa from
Ibrahim ibn 'Umar al-Yamani from Aban ibn abu 'Ayyash from Sulaym ibn
Qays and Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn abu 'Umayr
from 'Umar ibn 'Udhayna and Ali ibn Muhammad from Ahmad ibn Hilal from
ibn abu 'Umayr from 'Umar ibn 'Udhayna from Aban ibn abu 'Ayyash from
Sulaym ibn Qays who has said the following.

" I heard 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far al-Tayyar say, 'we were in the court of
Mu'awiya I al-Hassan, al-Husayn, 'Abdallah ibn 'Abbass, 'Umar ibn 'Umm
Salama and 'Usama ibn Zayd. A conversation started between me and
Mu'awiya, and I said to Mu'awiya', 'I heard the Messenger of Allah say,
'I have more authority over the believers' souls than they themselves
do.

Then my brother Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) will have more authority over
the believers' souls than they themselves will have. When Ali (a.s.),
will become a martyr al-Hassan ibn Ali will have more authority over the
believers' souls than they themselves will have.

Thereafter my son al-Husayn after him (al-Hassan) will have more
authority over the believers' souls than they themselves will have. When
he will become a martyr, his son Ali ibn al-Husayn after him (al-Husayn)
will have more authority over the believers' souls than they themselves
will have. O Ali, you will see him. Thereafter his son Muhammad ibn Ali
will have more authority over the believers' souls than they themselves
will have. O al-Husayn, you will see him.

Then the twelve will complete the number of Imams. Nine will be of the
descendants of al- Husayn." 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far said, "I asked
al-Hassan, al-Husayn, 'Abdallah, ibn 'Abbass, Umar ibn 'Umm Salama and
'Usama ibn Zayd to bear witness. They all bore witness for me before
Mu'awiya." Sulaym ibn Qays has said, "I heard such Hadith from Salman,
abu Dharr and al- Miqdad who said that they heard such Hadith from the
Messenger of Allah."

5

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
his father from 'Abdallah ibn al-Qasim from Hanan ibn al-Sarraj from
Dawud ibn Sulayman al-Kisa'i from abu al-Tufayl who has said the
following.

"I was present in the funeral procession of abu Bakr the day ittook
place. I was also present when 'Umar took oath of allegiance and Ali
(a.s.) was sitting on the side. A young, good looking, well dressed
Jewish boy came. He was a descendant of Harun and he stood (on a place
that was) above 'Umar and asked, "O Amir al-Mu'minin, are you the most
knowledgeable person in this nation in their book and the commands of
their prophet?" The narrator has said that 'Umar kept his head down. He
then said, "I meant you."

He repeated his words. 'Umar said, "Why is that?" He said, "I have
doubts about my relgion and I have come to you for guidance." He ('Umar
said, "Go to this young man." He said, "Who is this young man?" He said,
"He is Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.), the cousin of the Messenger of Allah
and he is the father of al-Hassan and al-Husayn the grandsons of the
Messenger of Allah and he is the husband of Fatima daughter of the
Messenger of Allah." The young Jewish man then went to Ali (a.s.) and
said, "Are you such a person?" He said, "Yes, I am such a person."

He said, "I want to ask you about three and three and one." The
narrator has said that Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) then smiled a
different smile and said, "O Haruni, what prevents you from saying
'seven'?" He said, "I ask about three.

If you answered me then I will ask you about the rest. If you could not
answer then will assume that there is no scholars among you." Ali (a.s.)
said, "I swear you to the Lord in whom you believe, if will answer
whatever you will ask, will then leave your religion and accept our
religion?" He said, "I have come for no other reason but that." Ali
(a.s.) said, "Ask your questions."

He said, "Tell me about the first drop of blood that was spilled on
earth what drop was that? Tell me about the first fountain that gushed
out of earth which one was it?" Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) answered
him. He then said, "Tell me about the other three. Tell me about
Muhammad. How many Imams who possess the quality of justice will be
there as his successors? In which paradise he will be? Who will be with
him in paradise?" He said, "O Haruni, there will twelve just Imams as
successors of Muhammad.

No one's betrayal will harm them and they will not feel frightened
because of people's opposition to them. In the matters of religion they
will be stronger than the firm mountains on earth. In Paradise Muhammad
will dwell with the twelve Imams who possess the noble quality of
justice." He then said, "You have spoken the truth by Allah, besides
whom there is no lord. I find them in the book of my father Harun. He
has written it in his own hand writing. My uncle Moses had dictated to
him." He then said, "Tell me about the 'one'.

Tell me about the executor of the will of Muhammad. For how long he
will live after him? Will he die or will he be killed?" He Ali (a.s.),
"O Haruni, he will live after him thirty years, not one day less and not
one day more. Then he will be hit with an strike here -meaning over his
headand then this will be stained with this."

The jJewish man screamed loudly and broke his Kustija (a Jewish
religious object) and he would say, "I testify that there is no lord
besides Allah Who is One and has no partner and I testify the Muhammad
is His servant and His Messenger and that you are the executor of his
will. You must be above all and no one must be above you. Your greatness
must be acknowledged and you must not be weakened."

The narrator has said that Ali (a.s.) then took him to his house and
taught him the Divine guidance."

6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad from Muhammad
ibn al- Husayn from abu Sa'id al-'Usfuriy from 'Amr aaand ibn Thabit
from abu Hamza who has said the following.

"I heard Ali ibn al-Husayn say, 'Allah created Muhammad , Ali and the
eleven Imams from his descendants out of the light of His greatness. He
then placed them as figures in the brightness of His light where they
worshipped Him before the creation of the creatures. They would speak of
the Glory of Allah and of His Holiness. They are the Imams from
descendants of the Messenger of Allah." 7 Muhammad ibn Yahya has
narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad al-Khashshab from ibn Sama'a from
Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Ribat from ibn 'Udhayna from Zurara who has said
the following. "I heard abu Ja'far say, 'The twelve Imams all from the
family of Muhammad (s.a) are the ones to whom (the angles) speak. They
all are from the descendants of the Messenger of Allah and the
descendants of Ali . the Messenger of Allah and Ali (a.s.) are their
ancestors." Ali ibn Rashid has said that Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) had a
brother from his (foster mother's / not his real mother the Persian
princes) side who did not believe in the Hadith expressed denial. The
Imam (a.s.) said to him loudly, "The son of your mother is one of
them.." 8 Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn
from Mas'ada ibn Ziyad from abu 'Abdallah and Muhammad ibn al-Husayn
from Ibrahim from ibn abu Yahya al- Madyani from abu Harun al-'Abdi from
abu Sa'id al-Khudriy who has said the following. "I was (in the city of
al-Madina) when abu Bakr was no more and he appointed 'Umar as his
successor. Once one of the great Jewish men of Yathrib came to 'Umar.
The Jewish people of the city of al-Madina thought that he ('Umar) was
the most knowledgeable person of his time.

He came to 'Umar and said, "O 'Umar, I have come to accept Islam if you
would answer what I will ask. Are you the most knowledgeable person
among the companions of Muhammad in the matters of the book, the Sunnah
(his traditions) and all that I like to ask from you." The narrator has
said that 'Umar than said to him, "I am not the one you are looking
for.

However, I can guide you to the one who is the most knowledgeable
person in our nation in the matters of the book, the Sunnah (traditions
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and all that you like to ask." He pointed out
to Ali (a.s.). the Jewish man then said, "If what you say is true then
why have you taken the oath of allegiance from people? The most
knowledge among you is that man." 'Umar then treated him harshly.

The Jewish man went to Ali (a.s.) and said, "Are you as such as 'Umar
has said?" He (Ali (a.s.) then asked, "What has 'Umar said?" He then
informed him of what 'Umar had said. The Jewish man said, "If are as has
said you are, I like to ask you certain questions toknow if anyone of
you knows the answer so I would know that your claim is true that you
are the best, the best and the truth among the nations. In such case I
will accept your religion, Islam." Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) said, "Yes, I
am as 'Umar has I am. Ask whatever you would like to ask.

I will give the answer by the will of Allah." He said, "Tell me about
three and three and one." Ali (a.s.) said, "O Jewish man, why do not
say, "Tell me about seven?" The Jewish man then said, "If you would tell
me the answer to the three then I will ask you other questions,
otherwise, I will abstain. If you would provide me the answer to these
seven you then you are the most knowledgeable person on earth, the best
of them and have more authority over the people than they themselves do"
he then said, "Ask your questions O Jewish man." .

He said, "Tell me about the first stone that was placed on the face of
earth, the first tree that was planted on earth and the first water
fountain that gushed out of earth." Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) answered his
questions. The Jewish man then said to him, "Tell me how many Imams
(Leaders with Divine Authority) will this nation have? Tell me about
your Prophet as to where will be his place in paradise and who will be
with him therein?" Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) said, "This nation will have
twelve Imams ((Leaders with Divine Authority).

All of them will be from the descendants of the the Holy Prophet (s.a.)
of this nation. They will be from my descendants. The place of out the
Holy Prophet (s.a.) in paradise will be the best and holiest of them in
Eden. Those who will be with him therein in his dwelling will be these
twelve people from his descendants. Their mother and grand mother and
the mother of their mother and their descendants will live with them
therein. No one else will live therein as their partner."

9

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from ibn
Muhbub from abu al-Jarud from abu Ja'far from Jabir ibn 'Abdallah
al-Ansari who has said the following "Once I went to see Fatima (a.s.)
(daughter of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and I saw with her a tablet in
which the names of the executors of the wills of (Leaders with Divine
Authority) were written. I then counted them to twelve. The last one's
name was al-Qa'im (the one who will rise with Divine authority). The
names of three of them was Muhammad and the names of another three was
Ali."

10

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn 'Ubayd from
Muhammad ibn al- Fadl from abu Hamza from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said
the following

"Allah sent Muhammad (s.a.) to all Jinn and manand appointed twelve
executors of the will .

Of these people are those who have left this world and there are those
who will have to complete their task. All the executors of the wills (of
the prophets) experience certain traditions, Sunnah. The executors of
the will after Muhammad (s.a.) experienced the traditions, Sunnah of the
executor of the will of Jesus who were twelve in number. Amir al-
Mu'minin (a.s.) experienced the tradition of Jesus."

11

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa and
mdd ibn abu 'Abdallah and Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Sahl ibn Ziyad all
from al-Hassan ibn al-'Abbass ibn al-Jarish from abu Ja'far al-Thani
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) said to ibn 'Abbass, "Layla al-Qadr (the
night of destiny) comes every year and that night the command for the
whole year descend down. To receive that command are the Leaders with
Divine Authority after the Messenger of Allah." Ibn 'Abbass then asked,
"Who are they?" He said, "I and the eleven persons from my descendant
who all are Imams, (Muhaddathun) such persons to whom angles speak."

12

Through same chain of narrators the following is narrated.

"the Messenger of Allah once said to his companions, 'You must believ
in the Layla al-Qadr (night of destiny). It is Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.)
and his eleven descendants after me."

13

Through the same chain of narrators the following is narrated.

"Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) one day said to abu Bakr, "Do not think of
those slain for the cause of God as dead. They are alive with their Lord
and receive sustenance from Him." (3:169).I testify that Muhammad, the
Messenger of Allah died as a martyr. He by Allah, comes to you and do
have any doubts when he will come to you. Satan can not appear in his
disguise." Ali (a.s.) took the hand of abu Bakr and showed the Holy
Prophet (s.a) to him who said to him, "O abu Bakr, believe in Ali and in
the eleven Imams from his descendants.

They are all like me except prophet-hood. Repent before Allah because
of what you involvement in what you are involved. You have no right in
it." The narrator has said that then he went and was not seen around."


14

Abu Ali al-Ash'ari has narrated from 'Ubaydallah from al-Hassan ibn
Musa al-Khashshab from Ali ibn Sam'Abdallah from Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn
Ribat from 'Udhayna from Zurara who has said the following.

"I heard abu Ja'far say, 'There will be twelve Imams from the family of
Muhammad and they all will be (Muhaddathun), persons to whom angles
speak. They will of the descendants of the Messenger of Allah and Ali
ibn abu Talib (a.s.). The Messenger of Allah and Ali are their
anscesters."

15

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from ibn abu 'Umayr from Sa'id ibn Ghazwan
from abu Basir who has said the following.

"I heard abu Ja'far say, 'after al-Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.) there will be
nine Imams. The ninth of them will be Al-Qa'im (the one who will with
Divine Authority)."

16

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn mmd from
al-Washsha' from Aban from Zurara who has said the following.

"I heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say, 'We are twelve Imams. Al-Hassan and
al-Husayn are of them then are the Imams from the descendants of
al-Husayn (a.s.)."

17

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad from Muhammad
ibn al- Hassan from Sa'id al-'Usfuriy from 'Amran ibn Thabit from abu
al-Jarud from abu Ja'far (a. s.) who has said the following.

"the Messenger of Allah has said, ' I and twelve persons from my
descendants and you O Ali, are the securing anchor of the earth, that
is, the pillars thereof and its ropes. Through us Allah has secured the
earth from devouring the inhabitants. If all the twelve persons from my
family will no longer be there, the earth will devour her inhabitants
without delay."

18

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from abu Sa'id in a
marfu' manner from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The Messenger of Allah has said, "From my descendants there will be
twelve noble supervisors, who are (Muhaddathun) persons to whom angles
speak and very intelligent. The last of them will be Al-Qa'im (the one
who will rise with Divine Authority) and with truth who will fill the
earth with justice after being filled with injustice."

19

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from mmd ibn al-Hassan ibn Shammun from 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd
al-Rahman al-Asamm from Karram who has said the following.

"I took an oath with my self that I will not any food during the day
until the rise of Al-Qa'im (the rise of al-Mahdi with Divine Authority).
I then went to see abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)." The narrator has said, "A man
from you Shi'a (followers) has imposed on himself on oath not to eat any
food during the day until the rise of Al-Qa'im from the family of
Muhammad (s.a) (the rise of al-Mahdi with Divine Authority)." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Fast, then O Karram. Do not fast on the two 'Id days and
the three days of Tashriq (11,12,13) of the month of Dhil Hajj. Also do
not fast when you are on a journey or when you will have an illness.

It is because when al-Husayn was murdered the heavens and the earth and
all the angles in them mourned and lamented before the Lord. They said,
"Lord, grant us permission to destroy the creature and purge the earth
from them because of their disregard of you reverence and their
murdering your chosen people. Allah then inspired them, "My angels, My
heavens and My earth be patient and relieved..

He then removed a barrier of the barriers and there appeared Muhammad
and the twelve executors of his will. He then held the hand of so and
so, Al- Qa'im (the one who will rise with Divine Authority) from among
them and said, 'O My angels, My heavens and My earth through this I will
grant support for this." He said it three times."

20

Muhammad ibn Yahya and Ahmad ibn Muhammad have narrated from Muhammad
ibn al- Husayn from abu Talib from 'Uthman ibn 'Isa from Sama'Abdallah
ibn Mihran who has said the following.

"Once I, abu Basir and Muhammad ibn 'Imran the slave of abu Ja'far
(a.s.) were in his house in Makka. Muhammad ibn 'Imran said, "I have
heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'We all twelve of us are Muhaddath (the
ones to whom angels speak)." Abu Basir then said, "Did you hear abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) say so? He made him to swear one or twice that he has
heard so. Abu Basir then said, "However, I have heard it from abu Ja'far
(a.s.)."


