Chapter 127 : Something Said About a Man and It Is Not in Him But Is Found in His Sons Or Grand Sons Than It Is As If It Is in Him
==================================================================================================================================

1

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Ali ibn
Ibrahim his father all from ibn Mahbub from al-Ri'ab from abu Basir from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Allah sent revelation to 'Imran saying, "I will grant you a perfect
and holy son who would cure the blind and the lepers and bring the dead
back to life by Allah, the permission of Allah and I make him a
messenger to the israelites." 'Iran than told it to his wife, Hanna,
mother of Mary all about it When she conceive with the baby Mary and she
thought to herself that the baby will be a boy.

When she give birth to Mary she said, "Lord, I have given birth to a
girl and boys are not like girls. A girl can not be a messenger. Allah,
the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has said, "Allah knows to who have
you given birth. When Allah, the Most High, granted Jesus to Mary he was
the boy promised to 'Imran. He promised Jesus to 'Imran. When we would
say something about a man from us and that thing would be fount in his
sons or grand sons then you must not deny it."

2

Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Hammad
ibn 'Isa from Ibrahim ibn 'Umar al-Yamani from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following. "If we would say something about a man and it
would not be found in him but it would be found in his sons or his
grandsons you must not reject it. It is because Allah does what he
wants."

3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'A'idh from abu Khadija who has said the
following.

"I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'Sometimes a man is considered as
practicing justice or acting unjustly and such acts are ascribed to him
even if he may not have committed them but such acts are found in his
sons or his grandsons after him then he will be it (the one who has in
reality his practiced such acts)."


**Chapter 128 : All the Imams (a.s.) rise for and with authority of
Allah, the Most High and guide to Him Allah**

1

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Ali ibn al- Hakam from Zayd ibn abu al-Hassan from al-Hakam ibn abu
Nu'aym' who has said the following.

"I went to see abu Ja'far (a.s.) when he was in the city of al-Madina
and I said to him, "I decided to make a vow and a covenant, while I was
between the corner of the Ka'ba and the place where Abraham had prayed,
that when I would meet you I would not leave al-Madina until I would
know with certainty that you are Al-Qa'im (the one who will rise with
Divine Authority). The Imam (a.s.) did not say anything.

I then stayed in the city of al-Madina for thirty days. One day he came
face to face on a road. He said, "O al-Hakam, are you still here?" I
said, "Yes, I am still here. I had explained to you about my vow and
commitment and you did not command me anything or prohibited from
anything nor did you answer me with anything." The Imam (a.s.) then
said, "Early tomorrow come to my house."

Next morning I went to see him and he said to me, "Ask what you need."
I said, "I have a commitment of vow, of fasting and paying charity. I
had decided to fulfill it, while I was between the corner of the Ka'ba
and the station of Abraham. Its object was that when I would meet you I
would not leave until I would know with certainty that you are Al-Qa'im
(the one who will rise with Divine Authority) or not.

If you would be him I would then maintain relations with you,
otherwise, I would go in the land to find how to make a living." The
Imam (a.s.) said, "O Hakam, we all are Al-Qa'im (the one who will rise
with Divine Authority) for the commands of Allah."

I then said, "Are you al-Mahdi?" He said, "We all guide to Allah." I
said, "Are you the owner of the sword?" He said, "We all are owners of
the sword the heir of the sword." I said, "Are the one who would do away
with enemies of Allah, through whom honor will come to the friends of
Allah and with whom the religion of Allah would stand supreme?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "O Hakam how could I be him. I have already become forty
five years old while the master of this task would be much younger than
me and much light for saddle of the horse."

2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from alWashsha' from Ahmad ibn 'A'idh from abu Khadija from abu
'Abdallah who has said the following.

"He said, when he was asked about Al-Qa'im, "We all Al-Qa'im ((the one
who will rise with Divine Authority) with the command of Allah one after
the other until the time when the owner of the sword will rise. When the
owner of the sword will rise he will rise with the command other than
what it was."

3

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan ibn Shammun from 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd al-Rahman from 'Abdallah
ibn al-Qasim al-Batal from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan who has said the
following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of , 'On the day when
We will call every nation with her Imam (leader) . . ." (17:71) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It refers to the Imam who is with them and he is al-Qa'im
of the people of that time."


**Chapter 129 : Compensation and Imam (a.s.)**

1

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn 'Amir through his chain of narrators has
narrated in a marfu' manner saying, "Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said the
following.

"Whoever would think that imam is needy to what people own he would
become an unbeliever. It is the people who need that Imam accept from
them. Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has said, "Collect
religious tax (zakat) from them to purify and cleanse them and pray for
them;. . ." (9:103)

2

A number of our people has narrated Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Washsha'
from 'Isa ibn Sulayman al-Nahhas from al-Mufaddl ibn 'Umar from
al-Khaybari and Yunus ibn Zabyan who both have said we heard abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following.

"There is nothing more beloved to Allah than the Dirhams taken out (of
one's property) to pay to the Imam (a.s.). On the Day of Judgment Allah
will his Dirham as big as the mountain of 'Uhud." He then said, "Allah,
the Most High has said in His book, "One who generously lends to God
will be paid back in many multiples of the loan. . . ." (2:245) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "This is a special reference to the payment made to the
Imam."

3

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from md ibn sn from Hammad ibn abu Talha from Ma'adh Sahib
al-Akyisa who has said the following "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say,
'Allah does not ask His creatures to lend Him from their properties
because He needs it. In fact, Whatever such rights Allah has they are
for His appointed guardian (over His creatures)."

4 Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ali ibn al-Hakam from abu
al-Maghra' from iq ibn 'Ammar from abu Ibrahim (a.s.) who has said the
following "The narrator has said that he asked abu Ibrahim (a.s.) about
the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious, 'Whoever gives
a virtuous loan to God will receive double from Him in addition to an
honorable reward." (57:11).The Imam (a.s.) said, "It was revealed about
the payments to Imam."

5 Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from al-Hassan
ibn Mayyah from his father who has said the following "Once abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) said to me, "O Mayyah, one Dirham paid to the Imam is
greater in weight than the mountain of 'Uhud."

6

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from
certain persons of his people have narrated from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
the following. "One Dirham paid to the Imam earns more reward than two
million Dirhams paid for other charities."

7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Faddal
from ibn Bukayr who has said the following

"I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'I procure payment of one Dirham
from a person of you when I am the wealthiest of the people of the city
of al-Madina . I accept such payments just to purify you."


