Chapter 130 : the Fay', Al-anfal, Al-khums, Its Rules and the Properties Subject To Al-khums
============================================================================================

Al-Kulayni, may grant him blessings has said the following.

"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has invented the whole world for
His deputy as He has said to His angels. "When your Lord said to the
angels, "I am appointing someone as my deputy on earth, . . ." (2:30)
The whole world was for Adam and after him it belonged to the good ones
among his descendants and his successors. Whatever their enemies had
taken away from them came back to them through war or conquest that is
called Fay'.

It is the propety that would come to the as a result of conquest or
war. The rules for such properties in it (the book) is as Allah has
said, "Know that whatever property you may gain, one fifth belongs to
God, the Messenger, the kindred, orphans, the needy and those who need
money while on a journey. . . ." (8:41) Such properties belong to Allah,
the Messenger and the relatives of the Messenger. Such properties are
called al-Fay' (taken back). It is the property taken back from others
by force.

However, whatever would come to them without the use of force and
resources such as horses and man it is called al-Anfal. This kind of
properties belong to Allah and the Messenger only and no one else woill
have any share in it. Others can have shares only in what is acquired
through blood shed and fighting.

All those who would take part in the struggle will have certain shares.
Properties taken in such way is divided into four portions out of which
one would belong to the Messeenger. The portion that belongs to the
Messenger is divided into six portions. Three will be for him and the
other three for the orphans. The destitute and those left without means
on a journey.

However, the case of al-Anfal is different. It belongs to the Messenger
only. Of such properties was Fadak that belonged to the Messenger of
Allah only. It is because he and Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) conquered it
and there no one else took part. The name al-Fay' therefore does not
apply to it. Al-Anfal applies to it.

Similar to al-Anfal are such properties as the marshes, mines, oceans
and the wilderness. They all belong to Imam exclusively. If people would
work in them by the permission of the Imam four fifth will belong to
them for labor and one fifth would belong to the Imam. Such one fifth is
like al-Khums. If people would work in such properties without the
permission of the Imam, the Imam will have all of it and no one would
have any thing in them.

The same would be the case if someone would work, revive, improve,
develop and build on a land without the permission of the Imam. It would
be up to the Imam to leave it with him or take it away from him or
settle it differently."

1

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn 'Isa from
Ibrahim ibn 'Umar al-Yamani from Aban ibn abu 'Ayyash from Sulaym ibn
Qays who has said the following "I heard Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.)
say, 'We, By Allah, are the ones to whom Allah has referred by the words
'Dhi al-Qurba' (relatives) and has given the same status as to Him self
and His the Holy Prophet (s.a).

He has said, "Whatever God grants to His Messenger (out of the
property) of the people of the towns, belongs to God, the Messenger, the
kinsfolk, the orphans, the destitute . . ." (59:7) It applies to such
person from us exclusively. In the charity there no portion is
appropriated to us. It is the way Allah has honored His Holy Prophet
(s.a) and has honored us instead of feeding us the filthy things in the
hands of people."

2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Aban from Muhammad ibn Muslim from abu Ja'far (a.s.)
who has said the following. about the words of Allah, the Most High.
"Know that whatever property you may gain, one fifth belongs to God, the
Messenger, the kindred,. . ." (8:41) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to
the relatives of the Messenger of Allah. Al-Khums (one fifth) belongs to
Allah, the Messenger and to us."

3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hafs ibn al-Bakhtari from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Al-Anfal is such property for the acquisition of which no camels or
horses are use and no armed expeditions are undertaken. It is the
property that may come as a result of negotiated settlement or certain
people would give with their own hands, may come from a barren land or
from inside the valleys. Such properties belong to the Messenger of
Allah and it will belong to the Imams after the the Messenger of Allah.
The Imam (a.s.) will spend them as he may consider proper."

4

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn
'Isa from certain persons of our people from the virtuous servant of
Allah who has said the following. "Al-Khums (one fifth) is due on five
categories of properties. 1 Cattle 2 Properties acquired from diving
deep waters 3 The treasures 4 The mines and Salts. On each of such
categories al- Khums is due. Such one fifth is distributed just as Allah
has done.

The remaining four portions is distributed among those who has taken
part in the actual fighting or those lending support behind the front.
The one fifth is distributed as follows. One portion for Allah, one the
Messenger of Allah, one for the relatives (of the Messenger of Allah),
one for the orphans, one for the destitute and one portion for those who
become needy on a journey. Thus, the portion for Allah and the Messenger
of Allah belong to Leadership with Divine Authority after the Messenger
of Allah as the portion of inheritance.

Thus, he (Leadership with Divine Authority) will have three portions.
Two portions as inheritance and one is that which Allah has granted to
him.

Fifty percent of al-Khums (one fifth) belongs to him, the Imam (Leader
with Divine Authority). The other fifty percent of al-Khums belongs to
his family members. One portion for the orphans thereof, one portion for
the destitute thereof, one portion for those of them who become needy
while on a journey.

It is distributed among them according to the rules in the book and the
Sunnah. The limit is an amount that would suffice their expenses for a
whole year. If any thing is left extra it will go to the Wali,
(Leadership with Divine Authority). In the case of deficit the Wali
(Leadership with Divine Authority) is responsible to provide and pay the
deficit and as much as it would fulfill their needs.

Wali is responsible to pay the deficit because the extra is given to
him. Allah has given this one fifth exclusively to them and not the
destitute from the masses and those of them who become needy on a
journey as a replacement for the charities due on people. It is a sign
of honor for them because of their being the relatives of the Messenger
of Allah and an honor from Allah to keep them secure from the filth in
the hands of people.

Thus is for them only as sustenance and save them from humiliation and
destitution. They may receive other forms of charities from each other.
Those for whom is al-Khums are the relatives of the Holy Prophet (s.a)
whom Allah has mentioned in His words. "Warn your close relatives."
(26:214) They are the sons of 'Abd alMuttalib themselves, male and
female. No one of the families of Quraysh or the Arabs is of them. Among
them or from them also is none of their slave to have a portion in
al-Khums.

The charities of the masses of people is lawful for their slaves to
consume. Their slaves and the masses of people are the same. One whose
mother is from the family of Hashim and his father from the masses of
people the charities are lawful for such person to consume. Such person
is not entitled to receive from al-Khums because Allah, the Most High
has said, "Call them sons of their own fathers." (33:5)

The properties of the best quality of such properties go as the portion
of the Imam. The female slave, the best horse, the best cloths and other
items that are like and desired for. Such items go to him before the
distribution and before the subtraction of al-Khums.

He will pay and maintain with such properties, the causes where he
would need to pay such as grants to people who are inclined to the
system of faith etc. If anything would be left extra then al-Khums is
taken out therefrom and is distributed to the causes for which it is. If
any thing is left extra then it is give to the Wali (Leadership with
Divine Authority).

If nothing is left after the expenses then there is nothing for the
Wali. Nothing from the land goes to the fighters. So also is the
properties that are acquire by overwhelming except for what the army his
physically captured.

The Bedouins have no share in the distribution even if they would take
part in fighting with the Wali (Leadership with Divine Authority). It is
because the Messenger of Allah reached a settlement with them.

It said, "They will not be exiled and that if the Messenger of Allah
will be attacked by his enemies they will come to help to fight the
enemy but will have no share in the properties of the enemies
confiscated." This practice has been continuous ever since about them
and others.

The lands that were capture by the forces of the army will remain in
the public domain. The developers may keep them and reach a settlement
with the Wali who would use his discretion in the matter. The may find a
fair and proportionate and fair agreement on the basis of proper
protection of all parties rights and interests.

The apportionment may take shape in the form of a third, two thirds
etc. The tax on whatever is harvested will be ten percent if the
plantation is irrigated by rain. It is five percent if irrigation is
from mechanical means.

Wali collects this tax and spends on the causes that Allah has
described which are eight categories. 1 The needy, 2 the destitute, 3
the employees of the taxation office, 4 the people who sympathize with
the faith, 5 to set free the slaves, 6 to help the bankrupt, 7 for the
cause of Allah and 8 to help those who become needy on a journey.

Each cause can receive an amount enough for its expenses and
maintenance for up to one year in a reasonable manner. If anything would
b e left extra it goes to the Wali if it would not suffice the Wali must
provide the needed fund from his resources. The ten percent tax is
divided between the Wali and his partners such as workers and
supervisors of the land. They will receive their shares according to the
standing agreements.

The remaining will be spent on those who help him in the matters of
religion of Allah and in the interest of Islam and the strengthening of
the religion such as defense etc., in which there is general but not
personal interest. It is for his personal interests small or large.

Besides al-Khums for Imam there is al-Anfal. Al-Anfal is every kind of
abandoned land whose owners are no more and all the lands that are
acquired without the use of force and fighting but are achieved through
settlement and their owners have given them to the Imam without fight.
To the Imam belongs the mountains, inside of the valleys, marshes and
undeveloped lands that has no owners. To belongs the properties of the
kings (defeated) if such properties would not be usurped. The usurped
properties are all returned to the owner.

The Imam is the heir of those who have no heirs. He supports those who
have no supporters. The Imam (a.s.) said, "There is no category of the
properties that Allah may not have distributed and has given every
rightful person his or her rights of the general of particular nature of
the needy and the destitute and all categories of people." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "If justice would be practice among the people they will
become free from want."

The Imam (a. s.) then said, "Justice is more sweet than honey. No one
practices it properly except those who good in justice." The Imam (a.s.)
then said, "The Messenger of Allah would distribute the charities of the
rural areas in the rural areas and the charities of the towns to the
people of the towns. He would not divide every amount of charity receive
into eight portions. He would divide it proportionate to the categories
of the causes present before him and to the degree that for each cause
that would suffice it for one year.

There was no limit of time or a certain date or the combination of
both. He would base it on what was available and who was present and how
much of need of each category could have been fulfilled. He would offer
the remaining to other people.

Al-Anfal belongs to the Wali and so is all the lands that were captured
during the time of the Holy Prophet (s.a) to eternity. It does not
matter the conquest was made through the people of justice or otherwise,
because the responsibility of the the Messenger of Allah in one and the
same in the past, present or future generations. It is because the
Messenger of Allah said, "Muslims are equal in the matters of lives.
Even the small ones among them strive for the fulfillment of their
responsibilities.

There is no Zakat on al-Khums property. It is because the shares of the
needy from the masses are placed in the properties of the people in
eight categories. No one of the needy in the masses is left out. The
needy from the relatives of the Messenger of Allah have their share in
the fifty percent of al-Khums.

This suffices them and they do not need the charities of the masses,
the charities of the Holy Prophet (s.a) and the Wali (Leadership with
Divine Authority). In this way the system leaves no one as a needy of
the masses or of the relatives of the Messenger of Allah without proper
coverage and well fare benefits. All the needy benefit. For this reason
there is not tax on the properties of the Holy Prophet (s.a) or Wali
(Leadership with Divine Authority). It is because for all kinds of needs
there is resources in the system to facilitate them. There are
responsibilities as well as rights."

5 Ali ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah has narrated from Certain persons of
our people that I thinks is al-Sayyari from Ali ibn Asbat who has said
the following.

"In one of the meetings of abu al-Hassan Musa (a.s.) with al-Mahdi (one
of 'Abbassid ruler) the Imam found him paying reparations (for the
damages caused to people). The Imam (a.s.) said, "O Amir al-Mu'minin,
what has happened to the reparations due to us?" He then asked, "What
damage is caused to you O abu al-Hassan ?"

He (the Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah, the Holy, the Most High, granted
victory to His Holy Prophet (s.a) and the land of Fadak and its
surrounding areas came under his control without any armed struggle
Allah sent a message to His the Holy Prophet (s.a). It said, "Give the
relatives their rights." The Messenger of Allah did not know who they
were. He turned to Jibril to find out and Jibril turned to his Lord for
the answer. Allah then sent revelation to him to give possession of
Fadak to Fatima (a.s.).

Thereupon, the Messenger of Allah called Fatima and said to her. "O
Fatima (a.s.) Allah has commanded me to give possession of Fadak to you.
She then said, " O the Messenger of Allah, I have accepted the offer
from Allah and from you." Thereafter her representatives lived there
during the life time of the Messenger of Allah. When abu Bakr took
control he expelled her representatives therefrom.

She went to abu Bakr and asked him to reverse his decision and return
Fadak to her but he said to Fatima (a.s.), "Bring to a black or white to
testify that Fadak belonged to you." Fatima (a.s.) brought Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) and 'Umm Ayman who both testified in favor of
Fatima (a.s.). He then wrote, "Fatima must not be disturbed in the
matters of Fadak." Fatima then left with the document. On the way 'Umar
came from the opposite direction and asked, "What is it in your hand O
daughter of Muhammad?" Fatima (a.s.) said, "It is a document that ibn
abu Quhafa has written for me."

He said, "Show it to me." Fatima refused to hand it over to him but he
snatched it away from her hand and read it. He then spit on it wiped out
its writing and tore it into pieces. He said, "This was not captured by
forces of the camels and horses of your father so that you can tie the
rope around our necks."

Al-Mahdi said, "O abu al-Hassan define for me the boundaries of Fadak."
The Imam (a.s.) said, "On one side it borders the mountain of 'Uhud. On
the other side is 'Arish Misr. Also it borders Sayf al-Bahr and on one
of its sides is Dawmat al-Jandal." Then he asked the Imams, "Is that
all?" He said, "Yes, O Amir al-Mu'minin, this is all that came to the
Messenger of Allah without the use of the forces of the camels and
horses." He said, "This is a large area but I will look into it."

6

A number of our people has narrated Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn
al-Hakam from Ali ibn abu Hamza from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said
the following. "Al-Anfal means al-Nafl (optional). In this chapter,
al-Anfal, stands the amputation of the nose (of enemies and proof of
their humiliation)."

7

Ahmad has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr who has said
the following. "Once a person asked al-Rida (a.s.) about the words of
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, "Know that whatever
property you may gain, one fifth belongs to God, the Messenger, the
kindred,. . ." (8:41) It then was asked, "The portion that belongs to
Allah to who does it go?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It belongs to the
Messenger of Allah and whatever belongs to the Messenger of Allah it
belongs to the Imam."

Another question said, "If one of the categories of welfare recipient
would more and the other category less then how it is dealt with?"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is left to the discretion of the Imam
consider how the Messenger of Allah dealt with such cases. Is it not the
case that he used his own discretion and distribute as he would consider
proper? The Imam would deal with such case in the same way."

8

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has narrated from his father from ibn abu
'Imayr from Jamil ibn Darraj from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the
following. "Abu Ja'far (a.s.) was asked about the minerals such as gold,
silver, iron, lead and zinc. He said, "They all are subject to al-
Khums."

9

Ali has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from Jamil from
Zurara who has said the following.

"The Imam has the right before the distribution to spend form (booties
of war), give as gift, grants and other causes. The Messenger of Allah
had a confrontation with a people and he did not leave anything for them
from al-Fay'. He may have given them a share if he would have wanted."

10

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibnsn from 'Abd al-Samad ibn Bashir from Hakim Mu'dhin ibn 'Isa who has
said the following. "Once I asked abu 'Abdallah about the words of
Allah, the Most High, ""Know that whatever property you may gain, one
fifth belongs to God, the Messenger, the kindred,. . ." (8:41) Abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) placing his elbows on his knees and making hand
gestures said, "By Allah, such gains are the daily gains except that my
father had given more freedom and ease to his Shi'a (to pay the one
fifth any time during the or at the end of the year)."

11

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
al-Husayn ibn 'Uthman from Sama' who has said the following.

"I asked abu al-Hassan about al-Khums. He said, "It is due on all small
and large gains that people make."

12

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
ibn Yazid who has said the following.

"I wrote to the Imam (a.s.), may Allah take my soul in service for your
cause, explain to me what is gain and profit? What is its limit? What is
your opinion? May Allah grant you long life. I will be grateful for your
explanation so I will not continue in unlawful activities with invalid
prayer and fasting." He wrote to me , "Gain and profit is the income
from trade from its net profit or from farming after the deduction of
expenses and prizes."

13

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
abu Nasr who has said the following.

"I wrote to abu Ja'far (a.s.), "Is al-Khums paid before or after
deducting the expenses?" He wrote back in answer, "It is paid after the
deduction of the expenses."

14

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ali ibn al-Hakam from Ali ibn abu
Hamza from abu Basir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Whatever is gained from a war that is fought to establish the
testimony of that says, "There is no lord besides Allah and the Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah " its al-Khums belongs to us. It is not lawful
for to buy anything with a money for which al-Khums, our right is not
paid."

15

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from mmd ibn Sinan from Yunus ibn
ya'qub from 'Abd al-'Aziz ibn Na'fi' who has said the following.

"We asked permission from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and sent him a message.
He then sent us a message that told two of us should meet him at one
time. I and a man with me went to meet him. I said to the man, "I like
you to ask permission to ask questions." He said, "Yes, I will do so."
He then said to the Imam (a.s.), may Allah take my soul in service for
your cause, my father was taken as a captive by the 'Umayyids. I know
that 'Umayyids did not consider lawful and unlawful matters and that
they did not have any right in all that was in their possession in large
or small quantities but that they rightfully belonged to you.

When I think how much must return to you I get a feeling that almost
destroys my power of reason." The Imam (a.s.) said, "You are free from
such obligation as well as all those who is in same conditions as you
are, are also from such obligations after me." The narrator has said,
"We than left and Mut'ab.(the servant) reached the next group who were
to meet the Imam (a.s.) before us and said, "'Abd al-'Aziz ibn Na'fi'
has succeeded in what no one before him had ever done." They asked,
"What is it?" He then explained it to them.

Then two of them went to see the Imam (a.s.) One of them said, "May
Allah take my soul in service for your cause, my father was a captive in
the hands of the 'Umayyids. I knew that the 'Umayyids. Had no legal
control over all that had in small or large amounts. I would like that
you would set me free from the liabilities." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Is
that up us?" It is not up us. We have no right to make thing lawful or
unlawful." The two men then left. Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) became angry.

No one then went to see him but that abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) began to say,
"Are you not surprised at so and so? He comes to me to legalize what th
'Umayyids. Had done? He thinks it is up to us. That night no one
benefited less or more except the first two people. They gained what
they needed."

16

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn Mahbub from
Durays al-Kunnas who has said the following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "Why people get the course of adultery?" I
said, "I do not know, May Allah take my soul in service for your cause."
He said, "It is because of not paying our al-Khums (one fifth religious
dues) except our pure Shi'a. It helps cleans their birth."

17

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayar from
Shu'ayb from abu al- Sabbah who has said the following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said to me, "We are the people obedience to whom
is obligatory by the commands of Allah. Al-Anfal (properties acquired
without the use of armed forces) and the best of the properties of the
gains from war belong to us."

18

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad from Rifa'a from Aban ibn
Taghlib from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

About a man who dies without a heir the Imam (a.s.) said, "To him this
verse applies, 'They (the believers) ask you (Muhammad) about the booty
captured (from the enemies) during a war. . ." (8:1)

19

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayar from
Hammad from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following about how
much al-Khums is on treasures. "One fifth of treasure found is paid as
al-Khums." The question said, "How much is on minerals?" The Imam (a.s.)
said, "one fifth. So is lead, zinc and iron. All minerals are like gold
and silver on which the religious due is one fifth."

20

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Sinan from Sabbah al-Arzaq from Muhammad ibn Muslim from one of them
(abu Ja'far or abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The most serious trouble that one would face on the Day of Judgment is
when a person with the right to receive al-Khums will stand up and say,
"Lord, my al-Khums was paid." However, we have gifted it to our Shi'a to
cleanse and purify their birth."

21

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Muhammad ibn Ali from abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) who has said the following.

The narrator has said, "I asked him about what is taken out of the sea,
such as pearls, ruby and chrysolite and minerals such as gold and silver
and others as to how much is al-Khums on them?" The Imam (a.s.) said,
"If it would value up to a Dinar then al-Khums is due on it."

22

Muhammad ibn al-Husayn and Ali ibn Muhammad have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Ali ibn Mahziyar who has said the following.

"I wrote to him, 'My master, a man is given money to perform Hajj. Is
there al-Khums on such money when he would receive it or there is
al-Khums on what would remain extra from the expenses after Hajj?" He
wrote, "There is no al-Khums on him."

23

Sahl ibn Ziyad has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Ali ibn
al-Husayn ibn 'Abd Rabbihi who has said the following.

"Al-Rida (a.s.) sent a gift to my father and my father wrote to him,
"Is there al-Khums on the gift you just sent to me?" He wrote back to
him in answer, "There is no al-Khums on the gift that the recipient of
al-Khums has sent to you."

24

Sahl has narrated from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Hamadani who has said
the following. "I wrote to abu al-Hassan (a.s.) , 'ail ibn Mahziyar read
to me the letter of your father (a.s.) that said, "The owners of gardens
pay three percent after deducting the expenses. Those whose gardens
would not produce even the expenses there is nothing due on them."

A difference of opinion has risen among our people. They say that on
the produce of the gardens there is al-Khums after the deduction of the
expenses, the expenses of the garden not the expenses of the owner and
his family. The Imam (a.s.) wrote back in answer, "Al-Khums is due after
the deduction of the taxes to government and the expenses of one's
family."

25

Sahl has narrated from Ahmad ibn al-Muthanna who has said that Muhammad
ibn al-Tabari has said that a businessman from Persia who was of the
friends of abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) wanted permission about
al-khums.

The Imam (a.s.) wrote.

"In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

Allah increases people's sustenance and He is generous. He has
guaranteed rewards for work and depression in sadness. The use of a
property is not lawful unless it is used in the way Allah has made
lawful. Al-Khums helps us in our religion, in the expenses of our
dependents and our friends. It helps us to gift and buy protection of
for our dignity against those whom we fear. Do not withheld it from us
and do not deprive yourselves from our prayers as far as it is possible
for you.

Paying al-Khums increases you earnings, cleanses your sins and whatever
you would preserve for yourselves for the day that you would need help
the most. A Muslim is one who fulfills his promise to Allah. One is not
a Muslim if he would say, "Yes, with his tongue but would oppose it in
his heart. With peace."

26

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Muhammad ibn
Zayd who has said the following.

"A group of people came from Khurasan to abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.).
They asked him to set tehm free from the obligation of payment of
al-Khums. The Imam (a.s.) said, "What kind of plan is this? Do you try
to love us purely only with your tongue and withheld from us the right
that Allah has set for us? That right is al-Khums. We do not , do not
and do not wave it to anyone of you."

27

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father who has said the
following.

"I was in the presence of abu Ja'far al-Thani (a.s.) that Salih ibn
Muhammad ibn Sahl came and he was his supervisor of endowments in Qumm.
He said, "My master, wave to me ten thousand because I have already
spent it." The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is waved in your favor."

When Salih left then abu Ja'far (a.s.) said as herein below. "Once one
of them gets his hand on the property that belongs to Ahl al-Bayt of
Muhammad (s.a), to their orphans, their destitute, to their needy and to
those of them who become needy on a journey and then he comes to us and
says, "Wave it in my favor." Do you think I can say, "No, I will not
wave it in your favor?" By Allah, Allah will soon ask them on the Day of
Judgment without any concession."

28

Ali has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayar from Hammad from
al-Halabi who has said the following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the corral and diving for pearls.
The Imam (a.s.) said, "There is al-Khums due on them."

End of second Volume of the book on the people who possess Divine
Authority (of the book al-Kafi) that is followed by the book, belief and
disbelief. All praise belongs to Allah, Lord of the worlds. May the
peace and blessings be showered up on Muhammad and his family, the clean
and pure ones.


Translated
Muhammad Sarwar May 29, 1999 2:54 P M


