Chapter 95 : Submission and the Virtue of the Muslims H 1013, Ch. 95, H 1
=========================================================================

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from ibn Sinan from ibn Muskan from Sadir who has said the following. "I
said to abu Ja'far (a.s.), 'I just left your supporters and followers
opposing and disdaining each other.

" The narrator has said that The Imam (a.s.) then said, "What do you
have to do with their conditions. People have three obligations. They
must recognize the Imams, submit to the instructions they have received
from the Imams and refer to them in their disputes and differences."

H 1014, Ch. 95, h 1

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from
'Abdallah al-Kahili who has said the following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said, 'If a people would worship Allah only
Who has no partner, maintain the prayers, pay Zakat, perform Hajj of the
House and fast in the month of Ramadan but say about something that
Allah or the Messenger of Allah has done, would that it had been done
differently or find such feelings in their hearts in this they will be
considered as polytheists. He then recited this verse of the Holy
Quran.

"I swear by your Lord that they will not be considered believers until
they let you judge their disputes and then they will find nothing in
their souls to prevent them from accepting your judgment, thus,
submitting themselves to the will of God." (4:65). Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
then said, "You have to be submissive (before Allaah)."

H 1015, Ch. 95, h 3

mdd ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn ibn
Sa'id from Hammad ibn 'Isa from al-Husayn ibn al-Mukhtar from Zayd
al-Shahham who has said the following. "I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.),
'Among us there is a man called Kulayb. Nothing comes from you but that
he says, "I submit to it." Thus, we call him, "Kulayb, the
submissive."

The narrator has said that The Imam (a.s.) expressed kindness towards
him and prayed and then said, "Do you know what submission is?" We
remained silent. The Imam (a. s.) said, "That, by Allah, is al-Ikhbat in
the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, 'The
righteously striving believers who are humble before their Lord, . ."
(11:23)"

H 1016, Ch. 95, h 4

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Aban from Muhammad ibn Muslim from abu Ja'far (a.s.)
about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, "Whoever
achieves virtue will have its merit increased. . . ." (42:23) The Imam
(a.s.) said, 'achievement' refers to one's submission to us, his
speaking the truth from us and not to ascribe any lies to us."

H 1017, Ch. 95, h 5

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad
al-Barqi from his fahter from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Hamid from Mansur ibn
Yunus from Bashir al- Dahhan from Kamil al-Tammar who has said the
following.

"Abu Ja'far (a.s.) has said, "Triumphant indeed are the believers,"
(23:1) Do you know who they are?" I said, "You know best." He said,
Triumphant indeed are the believers, who are Muslims (submissive to
Allah). The Muslims are noble people. The believers are rare.
Congratulations to the believers."

H 1018, Ch. 95, h 6

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from certain person of our people from
al-Khashshab from al-'Abbass ibn 'Amir from Rabi' al-Musalli from Yahya
ibn Zakariya al-Ansari who has said the following.

"I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'Whoever loves to have a complete
belief he must say, "Everything that I say is from the family of
Muhammad whether those that they kept secret or those that they made
public those that have reached me from them and those that have not
reached me."

H 1019, Ch. 95, h 7

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
ibn 'Udhayna from Zurara or Burayd who has said the following. "Abu
Ja'far (a.s.) has said, 'Allah has addressed Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) in
His book.

" The narrator has said that asked him, "where and in which passage?"
He said, "It is in His words that read, "If they ever do injustice to
themselves and come to you (Muhammad) asking for God's forgiveness and
if the Messenger also was to ask God to forgive them, they would
certainly find God All-forgiving and All-merciful. (4:64)

"I swear by your Lord that they will not be considered believers until
they let you judge their disputes (on the issue of their agreement not
to allow the leadership pass to the descendants of Hashim). Then they
will find nothing in their souls to prevent them from accepting your
judgment, (to condemn or forgive them) thus, submitting themselves to
the will of God." (4:65) "

H 1020, Ch. 95, h 8

Ahmad ibn Mihran (may Allah grant him blessings) has narrated from from
'Abd al-'Azim al- Hassani from Ali ibn Asbat from Ali ibn 'Aqaba from
al-Hakam ibn Ayman from abu Basir who has said the following. "Once I
asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic,
the Most gracious. ". . .those of Our servants who listen to the words
and only follow the best ones. . ." .(39:18)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "They are those who are submissive to the
(commands) of Ahl al-Bayt of Muhammad (s.a). It is those who when
hearing a hadith do not add anything thereto or omit anything therefrom.
They present it just as they have heard."


**Chapter 96 : People's obligation after Hajj to Meet the Imam, Ask
them Religious Instructions, Declare and Pledge to them Allegiance and
Express their Love H 1021, Ch. 96, h 1**

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
ibn 'Udhayna from Fudayl who has said the following. "abu Ja'far (a.s.)
looked at the people perform Tawaf (walking around the Ka'ba seven
times) and said, "This is how they used to perform Tawaf in the times
ignorance (pre-Islamic era).

What they are required to do is to perform Tawaf and come to us,
declare their support and love for us and express their help for us. The
Imam (a.s.) then recited this verse of the Holy Quran. "Lord, fill the
hearts of the people with love for them . . ." (14:37)

H 1022, Ch. 96, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Asbat from Dawud ibn al-Ni'man from abu 'Ubayda who has said the
following. "I heard abu Ja'far say, (a.s.) when he saw people in Makka
and what they were doing, "Activities like those in the days of
ignorance. By Allah, they are not commanded to do as such.

What they are commanded to do is to complete their Hajj, relieve
themselves of the obligations of vows and visit us to inform us of their
support and express their help before us."

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Salih ibn al-Sindi from Ja'far ibn
Bashir and Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from ibn
al-Faddal all from abu Jamila from Khalid ibn 'Ammar from Sadir who has
said the following.

"I heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) when he was coming in and I was going out
and he held my hand and then said, "Turn to the al-Bayt (house). O
Sadir, what people are, in fact, commanded to do is to come to these
stones, perform Tawaf around them (walk seven times around) then come to
us declare their support to us. That is what Allah has said, ". . .I am
All-forgiving to the righteously striving believers who repent and
follow the right guidance." (20:82) Then he pointed his hand to his
chest -to our Leadership with Divine Authority.

Then he said, "O Sadi, would you like me to show you who create
obstacles on the way of Allah." Then he looked at abu Hanifa and Sufyan
al-Thuri of that time. They a circle of people around them. He then
said, "These are the ones who create obstacles on the way of Allah
without guidance from Allah and a clear book.

Would that these malignant ones sit in their homes. When people search
around and would not find anyone to inform them of the guidance of
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, and His messenger they would come
to us and we would inform them of the guidance of Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High, and His Messenger."


