Chapter 101 : There Is Nothing True With People Unless It Has Come From the Imams and Whatever That Has Not Come From Them (a.s.) Is False H , Ch. 101, H 1
===========================================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Yunus from ibn Muskan from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the
following. "I heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say, 'No one of the people has
anything true with him, or correct nor does anyone of the people judge
with truth except by means of what is made available from Ahl al-Bayt
(members of the family of Prophet Muhammad). When the affairs grow
branches and scatter chaotically the mistake would be from them and the
correct solution from Ali (a.s.)."

H , Ch. 101, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
abu Basir from Muthanna from Zurara who has said the following. "Once I
was in the presence of abu Ja'far (a.s.). A man from Kufa asked him
about the words of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.), "Ask me whatever you would
like. Whatever you may ask I will give you the answer."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "No one has any piece of knowledge of anything
that has not come through Amir al- Mu'minin (a.s.) . People may go
wherever they may like, however, by Allah, the truth comes from no where
else except from here, he pointed out with his hand towards his
house."

H , Ch. 101, h 3

A number of our people has narrated Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Washsha'
from Tha'laba ibn Maymun from ibn abu Mayam who has said the following.
"Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said to Salma ibn Kuhayl and al-Hakam ibn 'Utayba,
'Easternize or westernize you two will find not find correct knowledge
except that which has come to light through Ahl al-Bayt (members of the
family of Prophet Muhammad)."

H , Ch. 101, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id
from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from Mu'alla ibn 'Uthman
who has said the following. " Abu Basir said to me, 'Al-Hakam ibn
'Utayba is of those people about whom Allah has said, "Some people say,
"We believe in God and the Day of Judgment," but they are not true
believers." (2:8) Al-Hakam may easternize or westernize, he, by Allah,
will not find the true knowledge in no other source except from Ahl
al-Bayt to whom Jibril came (with knowledge)."

H , Ch. 101, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Salih ibn al-Sindi from Ja'far ibn
Bashir from Aban ibn 'Uthman from abu Basir who has said the following.
"I askked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the permissibility of the testimony of
a person born out of wedlock." He said, "No, it is not addissible."

I then said, "Al-Hakam ibn 'Utayba believes it is addmissible." The
Imam (a.s.) said, "O Lord, do not forgive his sin. Allah has not to
al-Hakam, " It (the Quran) is a reminder to you and to your people . .
." (43:44) Al-Hakam may go right or left, by Allah, the knowledge
worthwhile to learn comes only from Ahl al-Bayt (members of the family
of Prophet Muhammad) to who Jibril came down."

H , Ch. 101, h 6

A number of our people has narrated from al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan ibn
Yazid from Badr from his father who has said that Salam abu Ali
al-Khurasani narrated to me from Salam ibn Sa'id al-Makhzumi who has
said the following. "Once I was in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
that 'Abbad ibn Kathir, the devoted worshipper of Basra, and Shurayh,
the Faqih, (scholar of law) of the people of Makka came to see The Imam
(a.s.).

In the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) already there was Maymun
al-Qaddah, the slave of abu Ja'far (a.s.). 'Abbad ibn Kathir then asked
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), "O abu 'Abdallah, how many pieces of cloths were
used to shroud the Holy Prophet (s.a)?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "With
three pieces. Two of them were Suhari (made in Suhar, Yemen) and one
Hibara (made in Hibara, Yemen). Burd (fabric made in Yemen) was rare to
find. 'Abbad seemed frowning (as if he did not believe in the rarity of
the fabric) at this.

The Imam (a.s.) said, "The palm tree of (from which) Mary was 'Ajwa (a
kind of palm tree) and it had come from the heavens. Whatever grew from
its roots they were also 'Ajwa and whatever grew from its date-stones it
became of lower quality." When they left The Imam (a.s.) 'Abbad ibn
Kathir said to ibn Shurayh, "By Allah, I did not understand his simile
that abu 'Abdallah put forward to me."

Ibn Shurayh then said, " Ask this boy (Maymun al-Qaddah). He will
explain it to you because he is from them." He then ask the boy and he
said, " Is it true that you did not understand what he said to you?". He
'Abbad said, "No, by Allah, I did not understand." The boy, Maymun
al-Qaddah, then said, "The refers to his own self.

He informed you that he is one of the children of the Messenger of
Allah and the knowledge of the Messenger of Allah is with them. Whatever
knowledge would come from them is true and correct and whatever comes
from other sources are not genuine."


**Chapter 102 : The Hadith (statements) of Ahl al-Bayt (members of the
family of Prophet Muhammad) is Difficult and becomes Difficult H , Ch.
102, h 1**

d ibn Sinan from 'Ammar ibn Marwan from Jabir who has said the
following. "Abu Ja'far (a. s.) has said that the Messenger of Allah has
said, 'The Hadith (statements) of Ahl al-Bayt (members of the family of
Prophet Muhammad) is difficult and it becomes difficult.

No one believes in it except the angels that are close to Allah or the
Prophets who are Messengers also, a servant of Allah whose He has tested
for faith. Whatever would come to you of the Hadith (statements) of Ahl
al-Bayt of Muhammad (members of the family of Prophet Muhammad), if your
heart would feel relief and you recognized them accept them. Whatever
that would cause antipathy in your hearts and you could not recognize
leave them to Allah, to the Messenger of Allah and the scholar from Ahl
al-Bayt of Muhammad.

The ones to perish are those who do not accept Hadith of Ahl al-Bayt
(members of the family of Prophet Muhammad).Whenever one is narrated to
them they say, "By Allah, this was not and that was not." Denial is
disbelief."

H , Ch. 102, h 2

Ahmad ibn 'Idris has narrated from 'Imran ibn Musa from Harun ibn
Muslim from Mas'ada ibn Sadaqa who has said the following. "I said to
abu 'Abdallah that I one day spoke of Taqiya (hiding something for fear)
before Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.)." He said, "By Allah, if abu Dhar knew
what was in the heart of Salam he would have killed him even though the
Messenger of Allah had formed brotherhood between them.

What then would you think of the rest of the people? The knowledge of
the scholars is difficult and it becomes difficult No one is capable to
bear it except a prophet who is a messenger also or an angel who is
close to Allah or a believer whose heart Allaah has tested for faith."
The Imam (a.s.) then said, "The only reason that Salamn became of the
scholars is because he is a man from us (Ahl al-Bayt). For this reason I
ascribed him to the scholars."

H , Ch. 102, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Barqi from ibn
Sinan or others in a marfu' manner from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following. "Our Hadith (statements) are difficult and they
become difficult. Only well lighted chests, the well protected of
virtuous moral abilities are capable to accept them.

" Allah has taken a pledge from our Shi'a (followers) just as He has
taken such pledge from the children of Adam (Am I not Your Lord?"
Whoever would remain loyal to us Allah will grant then paradise. Whoever
would dislike us and would not deliver our rights to us they will live
in fire forever."

H , Ch. 102, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya and others have narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad
from one of our people the following. "I wrote to Imam al-Hassan
al\_'Askari (a.s.) saying, May Allah take my soul in service for your
cause, what is the meaning of the following Hadith of Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq (a.s.)?

"Our Hadith (statements) are difficult and they become difficult. No
one is capable to bear them not even an angel or a prophet who is also a
messenger or a believer whose heart Allah has tested for faith.?" The
answer came as herein below.

"The meaning of the words the truthful one 'that angels, prophets and
believers are not capable to accept them' is that of the truthful one is
that the angel does bear it until he deliver it to other angels. The
prophet does noor bear it until he delivers it to another prophet and
the believer does not bear it until he delivers to another believer.
This is the meaning of the words of my grandfather."

H , Ch. 102, h 5

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Mansur
ibn al-'Abbass from Safwan ibn Yahya from 'Abdallah ibn Muskan from
Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Khaliq and abu Basir who has said the following.
"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'O abu Muhammad, with us there is a secret
of the secrets of Allah and a knowledge of the knowledge of Allah. No
angel, near to Allah or a prophet who is a messenger also and no
believer whose heart Allah has tested for faith is capable to bear.

By Allah, Allah has not required anyone to bear it except us nor has He
required anyone to worship him in that way except us. With us there is a
secret of the secrets of Allah and a knowledge of the knowledge of
Allah. Allah has commanded us to preach it We then preached what Allah,
the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, had commanded us to preach.

However, we did not find a proper place for it or a people or bearers
who accept it until Allah created certain tribes. These people were
created from the clay out of which Muhammad and his descendants were
created and from a light from which Allah had created Muhammad and his
descendants. He made them with the excess of the making of His blessings
out of which He had made Muhammad and his descendants.

We then preached what Allah had commanded us to preach then these
people accepted and acknowledged that. [It reached them from us and they
accepted and acknowledged it]. Our mention reached them and their hearts
inclined towards us, recognizing us and our hadith. Had they not been
created from this they would not have been as such. No, by Allah, they
would not have acknowledged."

Then the Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah created certain tribes for Hell and
fire. He then commanded us to preach to them as we had preached to them
but to the later ones it seemed repugnant and their hearts felt hatred
and they rejected it from us, did not acknowledge it and considered it
as lies and they said, "They are magicians and liars." Allah then placed
a seal on their hearts and made them to forget. Allah then opened their
tongue with some of the truth.

Thus, they speak of it but their hearts are in denial. He uses it in
defense of His friends and those who obey Him. Had it not been there no
one would have worshipped Allah on earth. He commanded us to withheld it
from them, hide and conceal. You must also hide it from those that Allah
has commanded to withheld from and hide from those that Allah has
commanded to hide and withheld from." The narrator has said that the
Imam (a.s.) then raised his hands and wept and said, "O Lord, this is a
very small group.

Make our lives as their lives and our death like their death. Do not
make dominant over them any of Your enemies that would cause us suffer
pains for their suffering. If You would allow it to cause pains to us
because of their sufferings no one would worship You on earth. May Allah
send blessing up on Muhammad and his Ahl al-Bayt and may (Your) peace
and more peace be with them."


