Chapter 103 : the Commands of the Holy Prophet To Wish Well For the Imams of Muslims, Remain Close With Their Group and As To Who They Are H , Ch. 103, H 1
===========================================================================================================================================================

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Aban ibnn 'Uthman from ibn abu
Ya'fur from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The the Messenger of Allah addressed people in the mosque of Khif and
said, "May Allah grant joy and happiness to those of His servants that
on hearing my words understand them, memorize them preach them to those
who have not heard them. There can be many scholars of Fiqh (law) who do
not have understanding as there can be many bearers of Fiqh (law) to
those who are better scholars of Fiqh (law) then the bearer.

There are three things in which the heart of a Muslim does not feel
greed and treachery. Sincerity in deeds for Allah, wishing well for the
leaders of the Muslims and to stay close with the group of the Muslims
because their prayer encompass them from behind them and the Muslims are
each other's brothers. Their lives are as each other's lives and the
least important among them strive to fulfill their responsibilities."

Hammad ibn 'Uthman from Aban from ibn abu Ya'fur has narrated a similar
hadith with an addition of "They are as one hand to face their enemies".
In his Hadith he has mentioned that the Holy Prophet (s.a) made his
speech during his farewell pilgrimage in the mosque of Khif.

H , Ch. 103, h 2

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from some of our people from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from Hakam ibn Miskin from a man from Quraysh from the
people of Makka who has said the following. "Once Sufyan al-Thawri said
to me, "Come with to meet Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a. s.)." The narrator has
said that he went with him and they found Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) had
already rode his horse.

Sufyan said to him, "O abu 'Abdallah narrate to us the text of the
sermon of the Messenger of Allah in the Mosque of al-Khif." He said,
"allow me to go for my needs because I am already on the horse back and
when I will return then I will narrate to the text of the sermon." He
said, "I swear you to your close relation to the Messenger of Allah, you
must narrate the sermon first."

The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) dismounted his horse. Sufyan
said to him, "Ask someone to bring me ink and paper so I can write it
down." He asked for ink and paper and it was brought for him. The he
said writhe, "In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful the
sermon of the Messenger of Allah in the Mosque of al- Khif "May Allah
grant joy and happiness a servant who would listen to my words, then
understands them and would deliver them to those who have not heard
them. O people, those of you present here must deliver them to those
absent.

There can be many scholars of Fiqh (law) who do not have understanding
as there can be many bearers of Fiqh (law) to those who are better
scholars of Fiqh (law) then the bearer. There are three things in which
the heart of a Muslim does not feel greed and treachery.

Sincerity in deeds for Allah, wishing well for the Imams (leaders) of
the Muslims and to stay close with the group of the Muslims because
their call encompass those behind them and the Muslims are each other's
brothers. Their lives are as each other's lives and they act as one hand
against their enemies and the least important among them strive to
fulfill their responsibilities."

Sufyan wrote it down and proof read before him. Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
then rode his horse. I and Sufyan came back. Somewhere on the way he
said, "Stay where you are. I want to look at this Hadith."

I then said to him, "There is no doubt, by Allah, that abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) has tied something to your neck as such that it will never go
away." He aske, "What is that thing?" I then said, "There are three
things in which the heart of a Muslim does not feel greed and treachery.
Sincerity in deeds for Allah, is one that we know it.

The other one is 'Wishing well for the Imams of the Muslims.' Who are
these Imams for whom we must wish well? Are they Mu'awiya ibn abu Sufyan
and Yazid ibn Mu'awiya and Marwan ibn al-Hakam? (They are such
disqualified people that) the testimony of no one of them is acceptable
to us and it is not permissible to pray behind them."

Also his words, "Stay close with their group" Which group is it? Is it
the Muji'a group that says, "Those who do perform prayers, do not fast,
do not clean and wash themselves after carnal relations, cause the
destruction of the Ka'ba or marry his own mother have the same degree of
faith as those of angel Jibril and Mika'il.

Is it the Qadri, (pre-destinationist) who say, "What Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious, say will not happen but Satan says will
happen."? Is it the Harawri group who is the enemy of Ali ibn abu Talib
(a.s.) and call him an unbeliever? Is it the Jahmiy group who says that
the only thing needed is to know Allah only is faith and nothing else is
required?"

He then said, "Woe is you, what then they say?" I said, "They say, "Ali
ibn abu Talib, by Allah, is the Imam for whom we must wish well. To must
stay close to their group means, his Ahl al-Bayt (members of the family
of Prophet Muhammad).' The narrator has said that Sufyan al-Thawri then
tore the document of Zadith and said, "Do not tell it to anyone."

H , Ch. 103, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father and Muhammad ibn Yahya
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad all together from Hammad ibn 'Isa from Hariz
from Burayd ibn Mu'awiya from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following. "the Messenger of Allah has said, 'Allah, the Most Majestic,
the Most gracious, would not look to a friend of His who would strive
and pressure his soul in obedience to his Imam and wishing well for him
but that he will be with us in the high position in paradise."

H , Ch. 103, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
al-Faddal from abu Jamila from Muhammad al-Halabi from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Whoever would distance himself from
the company the Muslims even by one shibr (one foot) he has removed the
band of allegiance with Islam from his neck."

H , Ch. 103, h 5

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Whoever would distance himself from
the company of the Muslims and disregard the pledge of allegiance with
the Imam he will come before Allah with his hand cut off."


**Chapter 104 : The Mutual Rights between the Imam and his Followers H
, Ch. 104, h 1**

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from abu Hamza who has said
the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'What are the rights of
the Imam over the people?" He replied, "Of his rights over them is that
they must listen to him and obey him."

I then asked, "What are their rights on him?" He replied, "Maintain
among them equality and justice among the followers. When this prevails
among the people then there would no fear as to who has taken this and
that."

H , Ch. 104, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il ibn Bazi' from Mansur ibn Yunus from abu Hamza
from abu Ja'far (a.s.) a similar hadith except that he has said, "this
way, this way, this way and this way, meaning thereby front, back, right
and left."

Muhammad ibn Yahya al-'Attar from certain members of our people from
Harun ibn Muslim from Mas'ada ibn sadaqa from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following. "Amir al- Mu'minin (a.s.) has said, 'Do not be
deceitful to your leaders, do not confuse your guides, do not be
ignorant of your Imams and do not cut off the rope of your unity, least
you will fail and be disgraced.

On such foundation your affairs must be based and you must strictly
live within such system. Had you been able to observe what those who
lived before had observed and who had disregarded what you want to be
accepted you would have acted fast, came out and listened. However, you
can not observe what they had observed but the curtain will soon be
removed.'"

H , Ch. 104, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from 'Abd
al-Rahman ibn Hammad and others from Hanan ibn Sadir al-Sayrafi who has
said the following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'The Holy Prophet
(s.a) was given the news of his own death while he was in a good health
and he did not suffer any pain." He said, "The trusted Spirit came to
him." He said, "The Holy Prophet called for a prayer in congregation.

He then ordered the Muhajir and Ansar (people from Makka and the people
of Madina) to arm themselves. The people all came and the Holy Prophet
climbed the platform, the pulpit and gave out the news of his own death
and then said, "I warn of Allah the ruler after me over my followers for
not being kind to the community of the Muslims. He must honor the elders
among them and be kind to their weak, treat their scholars with dignity,
must not harm to humiliate them.

He must not allow them to suffer poverty that would turn them to
disbelief, must not close his door to them to let their strong over run
the weak ones. He must not use them in the (armed) campaigns for food
that would banish the offspring of my followers. Then he said,
(Certainly) I have delivered to you the message, gave you good advice so
you must bear this testimony." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said that this
was the last words of the Messenger of Allah from the pulpit."

H , Ch. 104, h 4

Muhammad ibn ali and others have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
'Isa from Ali ibn al-Hakam from a man from Habib ibn abu Thabit who has
said the following. "Honey and fig were brought to Amir al-Mu'minin
(a.s.) from Hamadhan and al-Hulwan (places near Baghdad).

He asked the his officers to call in the orphans. They were allowed to
lick honey from the containers while he himself distributed them among
the people. People asked, "Why should the orphans be allowed to lick the
honey?" He said, "He said that the Imam is the father of the orphans. I
just wanted to gave them a fatherly treat."

H , Ch. 104, h 5

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi
and Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father all of them from al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad al-Asbahani from Sulayman ibn dawud al-Manqari from Sufyan ibn
'Uyayna from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "The Holy
Prophet has said, 'Isma'il have more authority over every believer than
their own selves and after me Ali (a.s.) will such authority."

He was asked, "What is the meaning of that?" He said, "These are the
words of the Holy Prophet, 'One who would pass away his debts and
liabilities become my responsibility If one would live a legacy I will
be the heir thereof. A man will have no authority over himself if would
have no property and one will not authority over his dependents if would
not provide their expenses.

The Holy Prophet (s.a) and Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and their successors
have made it binding up on them. For this reason they have greater
authority over them than their own selves. The general masses of the
Jews accepted Islam only after these words of the Messenger of Allah.
They found peace for themselves and for their dependents."

H , Ch. 104, h 6

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from Aban ibn 'Uthman from Sabbah ibn Sayyaba from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The Holy Prophet (s.a) has said, 'Whoever of the believers or Muslims
would die and on him there is a debt for not for unlawful or extravagant
reasons it will be the responsibility of the Imam to pay it off
otherwise, he has sinned. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, says,
'Welfare funds (zakat) are only for the poor, the destitute,. . ."
(9:60) Such person is a bankrupt and there is a share for him with the
Imam.If he would withheld it he has sinned."

H , Ch. 104, h 7

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Salih ibn al-Sindi from Ja'far ibn
Bashir from Hanan from his father from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said
the following. "The Messenger of Allah has said, 'Imamat (Leadership
with Divine Authority) is not proper for one without the following
qualities.

Chastity that would keep him away from disobeying Allah, forbearance
that would give him self control against anger good guardianship over
his dependents like a kind hearted father towards his children." In
another hadith it says, " . . . so that he would be to the followers
like a loving father."

H , Ch. 104, h 8

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Mu'awiya ibn
Hakim from Muhammad ibn Muslim from a man from Tabaristan called
Muhammad Qal. Mu'awiya has said that he met this man from Tabaristan who
has said the following. "I heard Ali ibn Musa (a.s.) say, "A bankrupt
who would lend or borrow -uncertainty is from Mu'awiya- will given one
years time to pay. If he still could not pay, the Imam it off from
public treasury."


