Chapter 105 : the Whole Earth Belongs To the Imam (a.s.) H , Ch. 105, H 1
=========================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
ibn Mahbub from Hisham ibn Salim from abu Khalid al-Kabuli from abu
Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "We found in the book of Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) this. "The earth belongs to Allah and He gives it in
inheritance to whoever of His servants that He wishes.

The good end is for those who are pious before Allah', I and my Ahl
al-Bayt are the people to whom Allah has given the earth in inheritance
and we are the ones who are pious before Allah. The whole earth belongs
to us. Thus, whoever of the Muslims would revive a land, he must
establish it, pay taxes to the Imam from my Ahl al-Bayt. Whatever he has
used would be his.

If he would abandon or allow to become barren and another Muslim would
revive and re establish it he will have more right to it than the one
who have abandoned. This person will now pay the taxes to the Imam from
my Ahl al-Bayt and whatever he would use thereafter is his until Al-
Qa'im from my Ahl al-Bayt will rise with Divine Authority and with the
sword.

He will control and protect them and will remove from them just as the
Messenger of Allah had controlled and protected it, except, however, for
what would be in the hands of our followers. He will form a contract
with them and will leave the land to them."

H , Ch. 105, h 2

Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from his narrator (one of the Imams (a.s.))
reported to me the following. "The world and all that is therein belong
to Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, His Messenger and to us. If one
would control a part of it he must maintain piety before Allah. He must
pay the share of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, be generous to his
brethren, otherwise, Allah, the Messenger of Allah and we will bear no
responsibility torwards him."

H , Ch. 105, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from 'Umar ibn Yazid who has said the following. "I saw Masma' in
Madina. In that year he had tried to deliver a certain amount of
property to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) that he returned to him. I asked him
about the reason for the return..

The narrator has said that he said to me, "When I took the property to
him I said, ' I had become the in charge of the pearls in Bahrayn and I
have made four hundred thousand Dirham profit. I have brought eighty
thousand Dinar as your share. I did not like to keep your share and
disregard what Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has decreed to be
for you in our properties."

Is there no more from earth and what Allah takes out of it besides one
fifth for us, O abu Sayyar?" The whole earth belongs to us. Whatever
Allah causes to come out therefrom it belongs to us." I then said, "I
will bring all the property to you." He said, "O abu Sayyar, we have
made it a gift for you and made it lawful for you. Take your property
with you.

Whatever land is in the hands of our Shi'a it is lawful for them until
Al-Qa'im will rise with Divine Authority. He will make an agreement with
them about whatever land is in their hands and will give them permission
to use. Whatever land is in the hands of others their earning from it is
not lawful until Al-Qa'im will rise with Divine Authority.

He will take such lands away from them and will remove them humiliate
'Umar ibn Yazid has said, "Abu Sayyar said to me, ' I do not find anyone
doing business oor those in charge of certain tasks who would earn their
living lawfully except my self and those for whom they have made it
lawful."

H , Ch. 105, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from abu
'Abdallah al-Razi from al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn abu Hamza from his father
from abu Basir who has said the following. "Once I asked abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.), 'Is there any Zakat on Imam?'" He said, "O abu Muhammad, you
have spoken an impossible word.

Do you not know that both this and the next world belong to the Imam?
He can place them as he may want or give them to whoever he may want. It
is permissible for him from Allah. The Imam said, O abu Muhammad, the
Imam never spends a night without Allah's right on him for which He
would not ask him."

H , Ch. 105, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from 'Abdallah
ibn Ahmad from Ali ibn al-Ni'man from Salih ibn Hamza from Aban ibn
Mus'ab from Yunus ibn Zabyan or al-Mu'alla ibn al-Khnith who has said
the following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'What is for you from this earth?" He
smiled and then said, "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, sent Jibril
and commanded him to dig with his toe eight rivers on earth. Of these
are the River Sayhan and Jayhan which is the River in Balkh (central
Asia) the River al-Khshu' which is the River al-Shash, river Mihran
which is India, River Nile in Egypt, Tigris and Euphrates. All that
these rivers provide water or all that take water from them belong to us
and whatever is for us is for our Shi'a.

There is nothing for our enemies except what they have usurped. Our
friends and supporters in an place bigger than this and this, the sky
and earth. The Imam (a.s.) then recited the words of Allah. "They are
made for the believers in this world (but others have usurped it from
them) and are exclusively for them in the life hereafter (no one would
usurp from them)." (7:32)

H , Ch. 105, h 6

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn
'Isa from Muhammad ibn al-Rayyan who has said the following. "I wrote to
abu Muhammad, al- Hassan, al-'Askari (a.s.), May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, it is narrated to us that nothing else from this
world belongs to the Messenger of Allah except one fifth of net income."
The answer that came said, "Certainly, the world and all that is in it
belong to the Messenger of Allah."

H , Ch. 105, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad who has
narrated it in a marfu' manner from 'Amr ibn Shimr from Jabir from abu
Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "the Messenger of Allah has
said, "Allah created Adam and granted the world to him. Whatever
belonged to Adam belongs to the Messenger of Allah and whatever belonged
to the Messenger of Allah it belongs to the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt of
Muhammad (s.a)."

H , Ch. 105, h 8

Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan and Ali ibn
Ibrahim from his father all from ibn abu 'Umayr from Hafs ibn
al-Bakhtari from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.
"Jibril dug with his foot five rivers and the flank of water would
follow his foot.

These rivers were, Euphrates, Tigris, Nile, Mihran and the River of
Balkh. Whatever these rivers provide water or whatever that takes water
from them are the property of the Imam. The ocean that has circled the
land belongs to the (Imam).

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from al-Sarriy ibn al-Rabi' who has said
the following. "Ibn abu 'Umayr would not consider anyone a match of
Hisham ibn al-Hakam in anything. He would not miss meeting him. However,
their relations at a time stood at a distance. The reason for this was
the emrgence of diffirences between ibn abu 'Umayr and and abu Malik
al-Hadrami, a friend of Hisham, over the issue of Imamat.

Ibn abu 'Umayr had said that the whole world belongs to the Imam in the
form of property and ownership and that he has more authority over it
than those who have certain parts of it in their possession. Abu Malik
had said that it is not as such. The peoples properties belong to them
except what Allah has given to the Imam in the form of windfall profits
and one fifth taxes or interests.

Such properties belong to the Imam and Allah has instructed him how to
spent them and what to do with them. They agreed to ask Hisham to settle
the differences. They went to Hisham but he supported the idea of abu
Malik. Ibn abu 'Umayr became angry and distanced himself from Hisham
thereafter."


**Chapter 106 : Manners of the Imams in the Matters of Food and Clothes
as Leaders with Divine Authority H , Ch. 106, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
ibn Mahbub from Hammad from Humayd and Jabir al-'Abdi who has said the
following. "Amir al- Mu'minin (a.s.) has said, 'Allah has appointed me
the Imam for His creation, Therefore, He made it obligatory for me to
discipline myself in the matters of food, drinks and clothes to the
level of the very weak ones of the people so that the poor follow my
poverty and the rich would not become rebellious because of his
riches.'"

H , Ch. 106, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hammad ibn 'Uthman from Mu'alla ibn Khunays who has said the following.
"One day I said to abu 'Abdallah (a. s.), may Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, I thought of the descendants of so and so
('Abbasside) and the wealth they have at their disposal.

Then I wished that had such wealth been at your disposal we would have
lived with you prosperously." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Never O Mu'alla, by
Allah, had it been as you wished, there would have been nothing but hard
labor of protections at nights and strenuous work during the days,
coarse garments and tasteless food. Thus, it is kept away from us. Have
you ever seen a usurpation that Allah, the Most High, would cause to
become a blessing except this?"

H , Ch. 106, h 3

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Salih ibn abu Hammad and A number of
our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad and others through
different chains of narrators. The Hadith is about the protest of Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) against 'Asim ibn Ziyad who had confined himself in a
gown away from the people. His brother, al-Rabi' ibn Ziyad complained
before Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) complained that his 'Asim's family had
become depressed and his sons had been sadden because of his behavior.

Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) had summoned 'Asim ibn Ziyad and was brought
before him. When Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) saw him he frowned at him and
said, "Why did you not feel ashamed before your wife? Why did you not
show kindness to your sons? Do you think Allah had made good things
lawful to and then He would dislike if you would use them? You are less
significant to Allah than such a thing.

Is it not Allah Who has said, "He spread out the earth for the people
(55:10). There exists all kinds of fruits, palm-trees with sheathed
blossoms, (55:11) grain with its husk and aromatic herbs (55:12).

Is it not Allah Who has said, "He has made the two oceans meet each
other, (55:19) but has created a barrier between them so that they will
not merge totally (55:20). (Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of
your Lord do you then deny? (55:21).

From the two oceans comes pearls and coral." (55:22) I swear by Allah,
the use of the bounties of Allah in deeds is more preferred to Him than
then using in words. Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has
said, ". . and proclaim the bounties of your Lord." (93:11) 'Asim said,
"O Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.),

"Why have you confined yourself to tasteless food and harsh garments?"
He said, "How inconsiderate of you! Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious, has made obligatory for the Imams of justice to measure
themselves with the people of lowest standard of living so that the
poors' poverty would plunge him in despair." 'Asim then abandoned the
gown and begun to live an normal life."

H , Ch. 106, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi
from his fatherfm Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Khazzaz from Hammad ibn 'Uthman
who has said the following. "I was in the presence of abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) that a man said to him, "May Allah grant you well being, you have
mentioned that Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) would wear harsh garments.

He would buy a shirt worth four Dirhams only and so on. However, we see
that you have new garments." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Ali ibn abu Talib
(a.s.) would do so at a time when people would dislike it.

Wearing such garments to day would have defamed him. The best garment
for a given time is the garment that people of that time would use.
However, when our Al- Qa'im will rise with Divine Authority, he will
wear the kind of garment that Ali (a.s.) did and he will live just as
Ali (a.s.) lived."


