Chapter 107 : the Rare Ahadith in the Context H , Ch. 107, H 1
==============================================================

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Ayyub ibn Nuh who has said the
following. "I was in the presence of The Imam (a.s.) and he sneezed. I
then asked him, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, what
should one say when the Imam sneezes?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "One should
say, 'May Allah (grant) blessings (up on) you.'"

H , Ch. 107, h 2 Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ja'far ibn
Muhammad who has said that Ishaq ibn Ibrahim al-Daynuri narrated to me
from 'Umar ibn Zahir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). He has said that a man
asked, "Is al-Qa'im (the one who will rise with Divine Authority) is
offered the Islamic greeting as the commander of the faithful?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "No, because that is the name that Allah had given to Ali
ibn abu Talib (a.s.).

Allah had not given this name to anyone before him. No one will be
called with this name except an unbeliever." I then said, "May Allah
take my soul in service for your cause, what form of Islamic greeting
would be offered to him?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "They will say, "Peace
be up on you, O Baqiyya Allah (Allah's reserved power to establish His
authority on earth).

He then recited, "If you are true believers then know that the profit
which God has left for you is better for you (than what you may gain
through deceitful ways). I am not responsible for your deeds." (11:86)

H , Ch. 107, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'Umar who has said the following. "I asked
abu al-Hassan (a.s.), 'Why is he (Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) called Amir
al-Mu'minin (commander of the faithful)?" He said, "Because he fed them
knowledge. Have you not read in the Holy Quran, "We can buy more
provisions with this for our family. . ." (12:65)"

In another hadith it is said, "Because Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) would
feed them knowledge."

H , Ch. 107, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from ya'qub ibn Yazid from ibn abu 'Umayr
from abu al-Rabi' al-Qazzaz from Jabir who has said the following. "I
asked abu Ja'far (a.s.), 'Why is he (Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) is called
Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.)?"

He said, "Allah has given him this name and as such it has come in His
book, "When your Lord asked all the offspring of Adam (before their
birth), "Am I not your Lord?" All of them testified and bore witness to
their testimony that on the Day of Judgment they would not say, "We were
not aware of this (fact),." (7:172) that Muhammad is My messenger and
Ali is Amir al-Mu'minin (commander of the faithful)."


**Chapter 108 : Enlightening Points Deduced from the Holy Quran about
Leadership with Divine Authority) H , Ch. 108, h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from certain persons of our people from Hanan ibn
Sadir from Salim al-Hannat who has said the following. "I aske abu
Ja'far (a.s.), 'Explain to me the meaning of this verse of the Holy
Quran. "This, (Quran), is certainly the revelation from the Lord of the
Universe (26:192). It has been revealed through the trustworthy Spirit
(26:193) to your heart, so that you will warn (the people of the dangers
of disobeying God) (26:194).

It has been revealed in plain Arabic." (26:195) The Imam (a.s.) said,
"It refers to Leadership with Divine Authority of Amir al-Mu'minin
(a.s.)."

H , Ch. 108, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
al-Hakam ibn Miskin from Ishaq ibn 'Ammara from a man from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious.

"We offered Our Trust (Our deputation) to the heavens, to the earth,
and to the mountains, but they could not bear this burden and were
afraid to accept it. Mankind was able to accept this offer but he was
unjust to himself and ignorant of the significance of this Trust."
(33:72). The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to Leadership with Divine
Authority of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.)."

H , Ch. 108, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from abu Zahir from al-Hassan ibn Musa
al-Khashshab from Ali ibn Hassa'nfm 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious.

"Those who have accepted the faith and have kept it pure from
injustice, have achieved security and guidance." (6:82) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "It refers to faith in that Prophet Muhammad (s.a) has brought
from Allah about Wilaya, Leadership with Divine Authority and have not
mixed it with the authority of so and so that is mixing with
injustice."

H , Ch. 108, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
Mahbub from al-Hassan ibn Nu'aym al-Sahhaf who has said the following.
"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious. ". . .some of you have accepted the faith
and some of you have not.. . ." (64:2)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "On the day that Allah made all the offspring of
Adam to make a covenant with Him when they were just small particles He
made faith our Wilaya, (Leadership with Divine Authority) the standard
for faith and disbelief."

H , Ch. 108, h 5

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad from ya'qub ibn
Yazid from ibn Mahbub from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) the following about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the
Most gracious. ". . . fulfill their vows . ." .(76:7) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "It refers to the vow that was due to our Wilaya (Leadership with
Divine Authority)."

H , Ch. 108, h 6

Muhammad ibn Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Hammad
ibn 'Isa from RibIsma'il ibn 'Abdallah from abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the
words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious, "Had they followed
the Laws of the Old and New Testaments and what was revealed to them
from their Lord,. . ." (5:66) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to
Wilaya, (Leadership with Divine Authority)."

H , Ch. 108, h 7

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Asha'ari from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from al-Muthanna from Zurara from 'Abdallah ibn al-'Ajlan
from abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the most High.
"(Muhammad), say, "I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching to
you except (your) love of(my near) relatives.. ." (42:23). The Imam
(a.s.) said, "They (the relatives) are the Imams."

H , Ch. 108, h 8

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Asbat from Ali ibn abu Hamzafrom abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious. "One who
obeys God and His Messenger (to acknowledge Wilaya, (Leadership with
Divine Authority Ali and the Imams after him) will certainly achieve a
great success.". (33:71) This how it was revealed."

H , Ch. 108, h 9

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammadfrom Ahmad
ibn al- Nadr from Muhammad ibn Marwan in a marfu' manner to them about
the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious, "You are not
supposed to trouble the Prophet (in the matters of Ali and the Imam
(a.s.) .(33:53) . ." ". . .like those who annoyed Moses. God proved him
to be innocent of what they had said about him. . ." (33:70)."

H , Ch. 108, h 10

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Sayyariy from Ali ibn 'Abdallah who has said the following "A man
asked the Imam (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most High.. ",. . .
those who follow it (My guidance) will not go astray nor will they
endure any misery." (20:123) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to those
who acknowledge the Imams (Leaders with Divine Authority) follow their
commands and would not go beyond their obedience."

H , Ch. 108, h 11

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ali ibn Muhammad from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah in a marfu' manner about the words of Allah,
the Most High. "I do not (need to) swear by this town (Mecca) (90:1) in
which you are now living (90:2) or by the great father and his wonderful
son . . ." (90:3) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to Amir al- Mu'minin
(a.s.) and the Imams from his descendants."

H , Ch. 108, h 12

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'Urama and Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Ali ibn Hassa'n from
'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "Know that whatever
property you may gain, one fifth belongs to God, the Messenger, the
kindred, . . ." (8:41)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and the
Imams (a.s.)."

H , Ch. 108, h 13

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al- Washsha' from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan who has said the following. "I
asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic,
the Most gracious. "Among Our creatures are a group who guide and judge
with the Truth." (7:181). The Imam (a.s.) said, "Such people are the
Imams (a.s.)."

H , Ch. 108, h 14

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'Urama from Ali ibn Hassa'n from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir
from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic,
the Most gracious.

"It is God who has revealed the Book to you in which some verses are
clear statements (which accept no interpretation) and these are the
fundamental ideas of the Book,-they stand for Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.)
and the Imams- while other verses may have several possibilities-they
stand for so and so-. Those whose hearts are perverse-their companions
and followers-, follow the unclear statements in pursuit of their own
mischievous goals by interpreting them in a way that will suit their own
purpose. No one knows its true interpretations except God and those who
have a firm grounding in knowledge-such people are Amir al-Mu'minin
(a.s.) and the Imams-. . ." (3:7),."

H , Ch. 108, h 15

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Muthanna from 'Abdallah ibn 'Ajlan from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most High. "Do you think that God
will not make any distinction between those of you who have fought for
His cause and have relied on no one other than God, His Messenger, and
the faithful ones, and other people?. . ." (9:16) The Imam (a.s.) said,
"The word 'faithful' stands for Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and the Imams
who have not relied on any one besides Allah, the Messenger of Allah and
the faithful ones."

H , Ch. 108, h 16

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Safwan from ibn Muskan from al-Halabi from abu
'Abdallah about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious. "If they (the unbelievers) propose peace, accept it and trust
in God. God is All-hearing and All-knowing." (8:61). The narrator has
said, "I asked the Imam (a.s.), 'What is the meaning of peace?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It is the acknowledgment of our Leadership with Divine
Authority."

H , Ch. 108, h 17

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from Jamil ibn Salih from Zurara from abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words
of Allah, the Most High. ". . . you will certainly pass through one
stage after another." (84:19). The Imam (a.s.) said, "O Zurara, Has this
'Umma (nation) not passed through stages after the Holy Prophet (s.a)
and the affairs of three so and sos?"

H , Ch. 108, h 18

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Hammad ibn 'Isa from 'Abdallah ibn Jundab who
has said the following. "I asked abu al-Hassan (a.s.) about the words of
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "We sent Our guidance to
them so that perhaps they might take heed." (28:51) The Imam (a. s.)
said, "It means the one Imam after the other."

H , Ch. 108, h 19

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ;h ibn
Mahbub from Muhammad ibn al-Ni'man from Salam from abu Ja'far (a.s.)
about the words of Allah, the Most High. "(Muslims), say, "We believe in
God and what He has revealed to us. . ." The Imam (a.s.) said, "This is
primarily addressed to Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (a.s.) and
thereafter to the Imams (a.s.).

Then the words of Allah ". . . If they (refer to people) have faith, in
all that you (Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (a.s.) believe, they
will have the right guidance, but if they turn away, it would be for no
reason other than their own malice. . . ." (2:137)

H , Ch. 108, h 20

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Muthanna from 'Abdallah ibn 'Ajlan from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) the following. about the words of Allah, the Most High. "The
nearest people to Abraham, among mankind, are those who followed him,
this Prophet (Muhammad) and the true believers. . . ." (3:68) The Imam
(a. s.) said, "They are the Imams and those who follow them."

H , Ch. 108, h 21

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated Mu'alla ibn Muhammad \`from
al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn al-'A'idh from 'Udhayna from Malik al-Juhanni
who has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the
words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious. "He has revealed
this Quran to me to warn you and the coming generations (against
disobeying God).. . ." (6:19) The Imam (a.s.) said, "Whoever from the
family of Muhammad (s.a.) would become an Imam he will warn people by
means of the Holy Quran just as the the Messenger of Allah had done."

H , Ch. 108, h 22

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from Mufaddal ibn Salih from Jabir from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious.
"We had commanded Adam (certain matters). He forgot Our commandment and
We did not find in him the determination to fulfil Our commandments."
(20:115).

The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means that Allah commanded Adam about
Muhammad (s.a.) and the Imams after him. He did not acknowledge it
(Leadership with Divine Authority of the Imams) and he was not an 'Ulu
al-'Azm (a prophet who is granted greater determination. They arecalled
'Ulu al-'Azm because with a covenant was established to acknowledge
(Leadership with Divine Authority) of Muhammad (s.a.) and the executors
of his will and al-Mahdi and his discipline. They establish their
determination to acknowledge (Leadership with Divine Authority) of
Muhammad and th executors of his will."

H , Ch. 108, h 23

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ja'far
ibn Muhammad ibn 'Ubaydallah from Muhammad ibn 'Isa al-Qummifm Muhammad
ibn sulayman from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about
the words of Aallah. "We had commanded Adam (certain matters)
before.(The commands consisted of certain words about Ali,
Fatima,al-Hassan, al-Husayn and the Imams from their descendants) He
forgot Our commandment) (20:115).This is how it was revealed, by Allah,
about Muhammad and his family.

H , Ch. 108, h 24

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Nadr
ibn Shu'ayb from Khalid ibn Ma'dd from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from
al-Thumali from abu Ja'far (a. s.) who has said the following. "Allah
sent revelation to His prophet (s.a) in which He has said, "Follow
devotedly that which is revealed to you. You are certainly on the right
path." (43:43) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is just as saying, 'You have
acknowledged the Leadership with Divine Authority of Ali (a.s.) and Ali
is on the right path."

H , Ch. 108, h 25

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi from his
father Muhammad ibn Sinan from 'Ammar ibn Marwan from Munakhkhal from
Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "Jibril brought
this verse to Muhammad (s.a). "Evil is that for which they have sold
their souls: They have refused to accept God's revelations (about
Leadership with Divine Authority of Ali (a.s.)) in rebellion. . ."
(2:90)"

H , Ch. 108, h 26

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated Muhammad ibn Sinan
from 'Ammar ibn Marwan from Munakhkhal from Jabir who has said the
following. "Jibril this verse of the Holy Quran to Prophet Muhammad
(s.a) as herein below. "Should you have any doubt about what We have
revealed to Our servant, (about Leadership Ali (a.s). with Divine
Authority) present one chapter comparable to it . . ." (2:23)

H , Ch. 108, h 27

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated Muhammad ibn Sinan
from 'Ammar ibn Marwan from Munakhkhal from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following. "Jibril brought the following verse to Prophet
Muhammad (s.a). "People of the Book, have faith in the what We have
revealed (about Ali's Leadership with Divine Authority). . ." (4:47)

H , Ch. 108, h 28

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid from
his father from abu Talib from Yunus ibn Bakkar from his father from
Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "If they had
done what they had been advised to do (acknowledge Ali's Leadership with
Divine Authority), it would have been for their good and to strengthen
their faith." (4:66)

H , Ch. 108, h 29

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' from Muthanna al-Hannat from 'Abdallah ibn
'Ajlan from abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious. "Believers, submit yourselves to the will
of God as a whole. Do not follow the footsteps of Satan; he is your
sworn enemy. (2:208) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means submit yourselves
to our Leadership with Divine Authority."

H , Ch. 108, h 30

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
'Abdallah ibn Idris from Muhammad ibn Sinan from al-Fudayl ibn 'Umar who
has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning
of the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "However,
(the unbelievers) prefer the worldly life, (87:16) -The Imam (a.s.)
said, "They have preferred their (evil doers) friendship-" even though
the life hereafter will be better and will last forever -The Imam
(a.s.)said, "It means the friendship of Amir al- Mu'minin (a.s.) -
(87:17). This is what is written in the ancient heavenly Books,(87:18)
the Scriptures of Abraham and Moses (87:19)."

H , Ch. 108, h 31

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn Hassa'nfm Muhammad ibn
Ali from 'Ammar ibn Marwan from Munakhkhal from Jabir from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following about the words of Allah. "Why do you
arrogantly belie some of them (family of Muhammad (s.a) and murder
others whenever he (Muhammad (s.a) would bring you messages (Imam Ali's
Leadership with Divine Authority) which you dislike? (2:87)."

H , Ch. 108, h 32

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Hilal from his father from abu al-Safatij
from abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the
Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "God who guided us to this, deserves
all praise. Had He not guided us, we would never have been able to find
the right direction.. . ." (7:43) The Imam (a.s.) said, "On the Day of
Judgment The Holy Prophet (s.a), Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and the Imams
from his descendants will be brought in public sight. When their
followers will see them they will say, "God who guided us to this,
deserves all praise. Had He not guided us, we would never have been able
to find the right direction. He guided us to acknowledge Imam Ali's
Leadership with Divine Authority and the Imams from his descendants)."

H , Ch. 108, h 33

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'Urama and Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Ali ibn Hassa'nfm
'Abdallah ibn Kathir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah,
the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "What do they quarrel about?
(78:1). They quarrel about the great news." (78:2)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "The great news here stands for Leadership with
Divine Authority." I asked him about the meaning of, ". . . in such
helplessness, the human being realizes that it is God who is the true
Guardian . . ." (18:44) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to the
guardianship and Leadership with Divine Authority of Amir al-Mu'minin
(a.s.))."

H , Ch. 108, h 34

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Salih ibn al-Sindi from Ja'far ibn
Bashir from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu Basir from abu Ja'far (a.s.)
about the words of Allah, the Most High. "(Muhammad), be devoted to the
upright religion. It is harmonious with the nature which God has
designed for people.. . ." (30:30 The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is
Leadership with Divine Authority)."

H , Ch. 108, h 35

A number of our people has narrated Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ibrahim
al-Hamadani in a marfu' manner from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words
of Allah, the Most High. "We shall set up the balance to maintain proper
justice on the Day of Judgment. . . ." (21:47) The Imam (a.s.) said,
"Balances are the prophets and the executors of their wills."

H , Ch. 108, h 36

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ahmad ibn
al-Husayn ibn 'Umar ibn Yazid from Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Muhammad ibn
Sinan from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has said the following. "I asked
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most High. ". . .
those who do not wish to meet Us in the life hereafter, say, "Bring us
another book besides this one or change it.. . ." (10:15) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "They said, 'Change Ali (a.s.)."

H , Ch. 108, h 37

Ali ibn Muhammad from Sahl ibn Ziyad from 'Isma'il ibn Mihran from
al-Hassan al-Qummi from Idris ibn 'Abdallah who has said the following.
"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the interpretation of this verse of
the Holy Quran. "They will reply, "We did not pray," (74:43). The Imam
(a.s.)said, "Such people will be those who did believe in the Imams
about whom Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has saaid, " (The
foremost ones) will be the nearest ones to God" (56:11) Have not noticed
that people call the one second to the lead in horse racing 'al-Musalli'
(the praying)? This is what is meant therein. "We did not pray' means
'we did not follow the lead'."

H , Ch. 108, h 38

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from ''Abd al-'Azim ibn 'Abdallah
al-Hassani from Musa ibn Muhammad from Yunus ibn ya'qub from the one he
mentioned from abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious. "Had they (jinn and mankind) remained
steadfast in their religion (Islam), We would certainly have given them
abundant water to drink" (72:16) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means that
Allah would quench their heart with faith. Religion is a reference to
Leadership of Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) and the executor of his will with
Divine Authority."

H , Ch. 108, h 39

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn
Jumhur from al-Fudala ibn Ayyaub from al-Husayn ibn 'Uthman from abu
Ayyub from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the following. "I asked abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious. "To those who have said, "God is our Lord, " and who have
remained steadfast to their belief,. . ." (41:30) The Imam (a.s.) said,
"It refers to those who remained steadfast in their belief of Leadership
with Divine Authority of the Imams one after the other," " the angels
will descend saying, "Do not be afraid or grieved. Receive the glad news
of the Paradise which was promised to you. (41:30)"

H , Ch. 108, h 40

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Muhammad ibn Fudayl from abu Hamza who has said the
following. "I asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
High. "Say, 'I advise you to believe only in One God . . ." (34:46) The
Imam (a.s.) said that Allah has said, "I advise you to acknowledge Imam
Ali's Leadership with Divine Authority. It is the one that Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, has called, "'I advise you to believe only in
One."

H , Ch. 108, h 41

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'Urama and Ali ibn 'Abdallah from Ali ibn Hassa'n from 'Abd
al-Rahman ibn Kathir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah,
the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "God will not forgive or guide to
the right path those who first believe, then disbelieve, again believe
and disbelieve, and then increase their disbelief." (4:137)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "It was revealed about so and so and so and so
who believed in the Holy Prophet (s.a) in the beginning. They turned to
disbelief when Leadership with Divine Authority of Ali was made know to
them when the Holy Prophet (s.a) said, "Over whoever, I have Divine
authority Ali also has Divine authority. When the Messenger of Allah
passed away they turned to disbelief. They did not remain steadfast in
their oath of allegiance. They increased in their disbelief through
making people to pledge allegiance to them. They left nothing of the
faith that once they had."

H , Ch. 108, h 42 Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated
from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most High.
"Those who have reverted to disbelief after guidance has become manifest
to them, . ." .(47:25)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "They are so and so and so and so who reverted
from the faith in rejecting Leadership with Divine Authority of Ali
(a.s.)." I then asked about the words of Allah, the Most High. "This is
because they have said to those who hate God's revelation, "We shall
obey you in some matters." . . ." (47:26)

The Imam (a.s.) said, 'By Allah, it was revealed about the two of them
and their followers and that is the words of Allah, the Most Majestic,
the Most gracious, that Jibril brought to Muhammad (s.a) , "This is
because they have said to those who hate God's revelation, -about
Leadership with Divine Authority of Ali (a.s.)- "We shall obey you in
some matters. . ." (47:26) The Imam (a. s.) said, "They made an
agreement with the Amawids not to allow the leadership come to us after
The Holy Prophet (s.a) not to pay us the one fifth taxes saying, "We
have given them already so their is no need to give them more.

The transfer of leadership to them did not matter to them at all. They
said, "We obey in certain matters that you want us to obey, such as the
one fifth taxes. We will not pay it to them. His words that read, "who
hate God's revelation," refers to Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) Leadership
with Divine Authority over the creatures. With them was abu 'Ubayda,
their scribe. Allah has said, "If the unbelievers persist in their
disbelief, We shall also persist in punishing them (43:79). Do they
think that We do not hear their secrets and whispers? We certainly can
hear them and Our Messengers record it all (43:80)."

H , Ch. 108, h 43

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious.
"and those who commit evil and injustice therein.". (22:25) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It was revealed about them as they entered the ka'ba and
made an agreement and commitment to continue in disbelief and denial of
the Divine revelation about Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.). They, thus,
committed evil and injustice towards the Messenger of Allah about the
executor of his will. May Allah do away with the unjust people."

H , Ch. 108, h 44

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Asbat from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious.
"You will soon know who is in manifest error" (67:29) This verse is
addressed to those who refuse to acknowledge the Imam Ali's Leadership
with Divine Authority and the Imams after him that they are 'in manifest
error.

' Similarly they are addressed in this verse, "If you deviate from the
truth in your testimony, or decline to give your testimony at all, know
that God is Well Aware of what you do." (4:135) the truth referred to is
(Leadership with Divine Authority of the Imams (a.s.) They are also in
the words of Allah. "We shall certainly make the unbelievers (in
(Leadership with Divine Authority of Imam Ali (a.s.) suffer severe
torment (in this world) and will punish them far worse than what they
deserve for their deeds." (41:27)."

H , Ch. 108, h 45

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Asbat from Ali ibn Mansur from Ibrahimibn 'Abd al-Hamid from
al-Walid ibn Sabih from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah.
". . .Your suffering is only because you disbelieved when One God (and
the people who possess Leadership with Divine Authority were) was
mentioned. . ." (40:12)"

H , Ch. 108, h 46

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn
Khalid from Muhammad ibn sulayman from his father from abu Basir from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most High. "Someone
has (needlessly) demanded to experience the torment (of God), (70:1)
which will inevitably seize the unbelievers (in Imam Ali's Leadership
with Divine Authority)." (70:2) The Imam (a.s.) then said, "This, by
Aallah, how Jibril brought to The Holy Prophet (s.a.)."

H , Ch. 108, h 47

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
al-Hassan ibn Sayf from his brother from his father from abu Hamza from
abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most High. ". . . your
ideas are confused (51:8). Let whoever wishes, turn away from it
(Wilaya, Leadership with Divine Authority) (Our Quran)." (51:9) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "whoever would turn away from Wilaya, (Leadership with
Divine Authority) he has turned away from paradise."

H , Ch. 108, h 48

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Yunus who has said the following "A person in a
marfu' narrated to me from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious. "Yet, he has not entered
into Aqaba (90:11). Would that you knew what Aqaba is! (90:12). It is
the setting free of a slave." (90:13) The Imam (a.s.) said, "Setting
free of a slave is acknowledgment of the Wilaya of Amir al-Mu'minin
(a.s.), Leadership with Divine Authority."

H , Ch. 108, h 49

Through the same chain of narrators it is from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
about the words of Allah, the Most High. ". . . give to the believers
the glad news of their high rank in the sight of God.. . ." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It is the Wilaya Imam Ali's (Leadership with Divine
Authority)."

H , Ch. 108, h 50

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqifm his
father from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu Hamza from abu Ja'far (a.s.)
about the words of Allah, the Most High. ". . . two groups who dispute
with each other about their Lord. For the unbelievers (in Wilaya of Imam
Ali (Leadership with Divine Authority) the garment of fire has already
been prepared.. . ." (22:19)"

H , Ch. 108, h 51

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn ur from Ali ibn Hassa'n from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir who
has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of
Allah, the Most High. ". . . the human being realizes that it is the
truth (God) who is the true Guardian. . ." . (18:44) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "It is the Wilaya of Imam Ali's (Leadership with Divine
Authority)."

H , Ch. 108, h 52

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Salama ibn al-Khattab from Ali ibn
Hassa'n from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about
the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious. "God's (means
of purification and His) coloring. No coloring (purification) is better
than that of God. and we (Muslims) worship Him." (2:138) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Allah has colored the believers with the Wilaya of Imam Ali
(Leadership with Divine Authority) at the time He made to make the
covenant."

H , Ch. 108, h 53

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from ibn Faddal from al-Mufaddal ibn Salih from Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Halabi from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most Gracious. "Lord, forgive me, my parents, the
believers who have entered my home and all believing . . ." (71:28) The
Imam (a. s.) said, "Home means Wilaya of Imam Ali (Leadership with
Divine Authority).

Whoever acknowledges Wilaya has entered the home of the prophets. The
house mentioned verse 33:33 also refers to Wilaya. "People of the house,
God wants to remove all kinds of uncleanliness from you and to purify
you thoroughly." (33:33) It refers to the Imams (a.s.) and their Wilaya
(Leadership with Divine Authority). Whoever would acknowledge it he has
found a place in the house of The Holy Prophet (s.a.)."

H , Ch. 108, h 54

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl who
has said the following "I asked al-Rida (a.s.) about the words of Allah.
"(Muhammad), tell them, "To be happy with the favors and mercy of God is
better than whatever you accumulate." (10:58) The Imam (a.s.) said, "To
acknowledge the Wilaya of the family of Muhammad (s.a.) is better than
all that they accumulate of the worldly gains."

H , Ch. 108, h 55

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim al-Hassani from Ali
ibn Asbat from Ibrahim ibn 'Abd al-Hamid from Zayd al-Shahham who has
said the following "Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said to me on the way home on
Friday night, "Read from the Holy Quran. It is a Friday night. I then
read, "The appointed time for all of them will be the Day of Judgment
(44:40) (when wrong will be distinguished from right).

On this day friends will be of no benefit to one another, nor will they
receive any help (44:41) except for those to whom God grants mercy. . .
." (44:42) The Imam (a.s.) said, "We, by Allah, are those whom He has
granted mercy. We, by Allah, are the ones whom Allah has made
exceptional and we will support them (our followers) sufficiently."

H , Ch. 108, h 56

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim al-Hassani from
'Abdallah from Yahya ibn Salim from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following "When this, "but only attentive ears will retain it"
(69:12) the Messenger of Allah said, "They are your ears, O Ali."

H , Ch. 108, h 57

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim al-Hassani from
Muhammad ibn al- Fudayl from abu Hamza from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has
said the following "Once Jibril brought the following verse Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.). "The unjust ones (against the rights of the family of
Muhammad) (among you) changed what they were told to say. Then, We
afflicted them (the unjust against the rights of the family of Muhammad
(s.a.) with a torment from the heavens for their evil deeds." (2:59)

H , Ch. 108, h 58

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim
ibn 'Abdallah al- Hassani from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu Hamza
from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "Jibril brought this
verse. "Those who have done injustice (against the rights of the family
of Muhammad (s.a.) will not receive forgiveness from Allah or guidance
to any other path but that to Hell wherein they will remain forever.

Then he said, "O people, the Messenger has come to you with the truth
(Wilaya of Imam Ali (Leadership with Divine Authority). If you would
have faith in it it would be better for you. If you would reject (Wilaya
of Imam Ali (Leadership with Divine Authority) (know) that to Allah
belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth."


H , Ch. 108, h 59

Ahmad Mihran has narrated -may Allah grant him blessings- from 'Abd
al-'Azim from Bakkar from Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following. "This verse of the Holy Quran was revealed as this, "If they
had done what they had been advised to do (about Ali (a. s.), it would
have bee for their own good . . ." (4:66)

H , Ch. 108, h 60

Ahmad has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim from ibn 'Udhayna from Malik
al-Juhanni who has said the following "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
about the meaning of the words of Allah. ". . . He has revealed this
Quran to me to warn you and those who will receive it . . ". (6:19) The
Imam (a.s.) said, "It means, whoever of the family of Muhammad (s.a.)
will be the Imam he will warn people by means of the Holy Quran just as
the Messenger of Allah did.".

H , Ch. 108, h 61

Ahmad has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim from al-Husayn ibn Mayyah from
those who informed him has said the following "A man read this verse
before abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) "(Muhammad), tell them, "Act as you wish.
God, His Messenger and the believers will see your deeds. . . ." (9:105)
The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is not all believers. It refers to the
infalliable ones among them. We are the infallible ones."

H , Ch. 108, h 62

Ahmad has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim from Hisham ibn al-Hakam from abu
'Abdallah (a. s.) who has said the following. "The path which leads to
Me is a straight (the path of Ali not 'Alayya which means to me)."
(15:41)

H , Ch. 108, h 63

Ahmad has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from
abu Hamza from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "Jibril
brought this verse as this. ". . . but most human beings turn away (from
Wilaya of Ali (Leadership with Divine Authority) in disbelief." (17:89)
He said, "Jibril brought this verse as this "Say," Truth comes from your
Lord.(about Wilaya of Ali Leadership with Divine Authority) Let people
have faith or disbelieve as they chose." For the unjust (to the family
of Muhammad) We have prepared a fire. . ." (18:29)

H , Ch. 108, h 64

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) about the words of Allah. "All the places for prostration (or
parts of the body to be placed on the ground during) belong to God
(72:18) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They are the executors of the will of The
Holy Prophet (s.a) ."

H , Ch. 108, h 65

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
ibn Mahbub from al-Ahwal from Salam ibn al-Mustanir from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most High. "(Muhammad), say, 'This
is my way. I and all my followers invite you to God with proper
understanding.. . ." (12:108) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They are the
Messenger of Allah and Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.)."

H , Ch. 108, h 66

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il from Hanan from Salim al-Hannat who has said the
following. "I asked abu Ja'far (a. s.) about the meaning of the words of
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "We saved the believers
among them, (51:35) but We found only one Muslim house (51:36). The Imam
(a.s.) said, "That family is the family of Muhammad (s.a)."

H , Ch. 108, h 67

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from 'Isma'il ibn Sahl from al-Qasim ibn 'Urwa from
abu al-Safatij from Zurara from abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words of
Allah, the Most High. "When they see the torment approaching, the faces
of the unbelievers will blacken and they will be told, "This is what you
wanted to (experience)" (67:27).

The Imam (a.s.) said, "This was revealed about Amir al- Mu'minin (a.s.)
and his contemporaries who did what they to him. They will see Amir al-
Mu'minin (a.s.) in such a position that will make them envious. This
will cause their faces to show miserable. It will be said to them, "This
is the one whose title 'Amir al-Mu'minin' you had assumed."

H , Ch. 108, h 68

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Salma ibn al-Khattab from Ali ibn
Hassa'n from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about
the words of Allah, the Most High. "and by the witness (Muhammad) and
that which is witnessed (the Day of Judgment)," (85:3) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "They are The Holy Prophet (s.a) and Amir al- Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.)."


H , Ch. 108, h 69

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from al-Washsha' from
Ahmad ibn 'Umar al-Hallal who has said the following. "I asked abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most High. ". . . someone
will cry out, "God has condemned the unjust," (7:44) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "The caller will be Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.)."

H , Ch. 108, h 70

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad ibn 'Urama from Ali
ibn Hassa'n from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
about the words of Allah, the Most High. ". . .for they were guided to
speak the noblest words and follow the praiseworthy path." (22:24) The
Imam (a.s.) said, "They were Hamza, 'Ubayda, Salman, abu Dhar, al-
Miqdad ibn al\_Aswad and 'Ammar who were guidedd to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.).

"However, God has endeared the faith to you and has made it attractive
to your hearts - meaning thereby Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.)) . He has
made disbelief, evil deeds and disobedience hateful to you. Such people
will have the right guidance (meaning thereby the first, the second and
the third)" (49:7)

H , Ch. 108, h 71

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from ibn Mahbub from Jamil ibn Salih
from abu 'Ubayda who has said the following. "I asked abu Ja'far (a.s.)
about the meaning of the words of Allah, the Most High. ". . . Bring me
a Book, revealed before this Quran, or any other proof based on
knowledge to support your belief, if indeed you are truthful." (46:4).
The Imam (a.s.) said, "Book refers to Tura and the Gospel and knowledge
refers to the knowledge of the executors of the wills of the
prophets."

H , Ch. 108, h 72

Al-Husayn ibnmd has narrated from from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from the
one who had narrated to him from Ali ibnja who has said the following.
"I heard abu al-Hassan (a.s.) say, 'When the Messenger of Allah saw
Taym, 'Adi and Amawids climb his pulpit he was severely frightened.
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, sent him a reading to comfort him.
"When We told the angels to prostrate before Adam they all obeyed except
Iblis (Satan) who refused." (20:116) Then Allah, sent him a message that
said, "O Muhammad, commanded them and they disobeyed. Do not despair if
you will command them and they will disobey you in the matters of the
executor of your will."

H , Ch. 108, h 73

Muhammad in Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from al- Husayn ibn Na'im al-Sahhaf who has said the following. "I asked
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah. ". . . some of you have
accepted the faith and some of you have not. . ." (64:2) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has defined their
faith through their love for us.

He has defined their disbelief in the same fact. This took place on the
day He asked all the offspring of Adam (in the form of minute beings) to
make a covenant." I then asked him about the words of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious. "Obey God and the Messenger, but if you
turn away, know that the only duty of Our Messenger is to clearly
preach." (64:12).

The Imam (a.s.) said, "By Allah, no one of those who were destroyed
before or those who will be destroyed up to the time of the rise of al-
Mahdi with Divine Authority but because of disregarding of our Wilaya
(Leadership with Divine Authority) and the denial of our rights. The
Messenger of Allah did not leave this world before establishing the
great responsibility on this 'Umma to observe our rights. Allah guides
to the right path whomever he wants."

H , Ch. 108, h 74

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan and Ali ibn Muhammad have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Musa ibn al-Qasim al-Bajaliy from Ali ibn Ja'far from his
brother Musa (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most High. ". . .
their lofty mansions, all were toppled and their wells were left idle."
(22:45) The Imam (a.s.) said, "The abandoned well and idle well refers
to the silent Imam and lofty mansion refers to the speaking Imam."

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated a similar hadith from al-'Amrakifm Ali
ibn Ja'far from abu al-Hassan (a.s.).

H , Ch. 108, h 75

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Hakam ibn
al-Buhlul frm a man frm abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah,
the Most High. ""It has been revealed to you and to those who lived
before you that if you consider other things equal to God, your deeds
will be made devoid of all virtue. . ." (39:65). The Imam (a.s.) said,
"It means equal in Wilaya." "(Muhammad), You must worship God alone and
give Him thanks." (39:66). The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means worship Allah
through obedience and be thankful if I provided you support through your
brother, your cousin."

H , Ch. 108, h 76

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Hashimi who has said
that his father narrated to him from Ahmad ibn 'Isa who has said that
Ja'far ibn Muhammad narrated to me from his father and from his grand
father about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious.

"They recognize the bounties of God but they refuse them . . ."
(16:83). The Imam (a.s.) said that once this verse was revealed. "Only
God, His Messenger, and the true believers who are steadfast in prayer
and pay alms, while they kneel during prayer, are your guardians" (5:55)
Certain persons gathered in the Mosque of Madina. They said, 'If we
reject this verse we would have rejected the rest of them.

However, if we would accept it would be humiliating for us when Ali ibn
abu Talib (a.s.) would take control. They said, "We have learned that
Muhammad (s.a) is truthful in all that has said but we will turn away
and will not obey his command to obey Ali." The Imam (a.s.) said that up
on this verse was revealed. "They recognize the bounties of God but they
refuse them . . ." (16:83) . It means that they recognized Wilaya of Ali
(a.s.) (Leadership with Divine Authority) but many of them have refused
toacknowledge it."

H , Ch. 108, h 77

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
ibn Mahbub from Muhammad ibn al-Ni'man from Salam who has said the
following. "I asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
High. "(Among) the servants of the Beneficent God are those who walk
gently on the earth . . ." (25:63) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They are the
executors of the will (The Holy Prophet (s.a) who are afraid of their
enemies."

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Bastam ibn Murra from ishaq ibn Hassa'n from al-Haytham ibn Waqid from
Ali ibn al-Husayn al-'Abdi from Sa'd al-'Iskaf from Asbagh ibn Nabata
that he asked Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
High. ". . . to give thanks to Me first and then to them, (parents) to
Me all things proceed (31:14).

The Imam (a.s.) said, "The parents who must be thanked are the ones who
provide knowledge, and leave wisdom as their legacy and people are
commanded to obey them. Allah then has said, ". . . to Me all things
proceed." (31:14) People proceed to Allah and the guide to such goal are
the parents. Allah then has directed His words to ibn Hantama and his
friend saying in particular and in general, "If they try to force you to
consider things equal to Me,. . ." . (31:15)

It speaks of the will of The Holy Prophet (s.a). It demands not to
ignore the command to obey him (Ali (a.s.) otherwise, do not obey them
(parents) and do not listen to them. Then Allah has directed His words
to the parents. "Maintain lawful relations with them in this world. . ."
(31:15) It says that propagate the virtue and excellence of the
(spiritual) parents and call people to their guidance which is also
mentioned in these words of Allah. ". . . and follow the path of those
who turn in repentance to Me. To Me you will all return. . ." . (31:15)
The Imam (a.s.) said, "To Allah then to us. You must be pious before
Allah and do not disobey the parents. To please them is to please Allah
and to cause them anger is to cause anger to Allah."

H , Ch. 108, h 78

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Sayf from his father from 'Amr ibn Harith who has said the
following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah. ". .
. a blessed tree which has firm roots and branches rising up into the
sky." (14:24) The Imam (a.s.) said that the The Holy Prophet (s.a) said,
"The root is Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) and the branches are the Imams
from their (Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and The Holy Prophet (s.a)
descendants and the knowledge of Imams stand for the fruits. Their
faithful followers represent the leaves of such tree."

The Imam (a.s.) asked, "Is there anything else in the tree?" I said,
"No, there is nothing else there. The Imam (a.s.) then said, "By Allah,
when a faithful is given a child a leave grows in the tree and when a
faithful dies a leave falls off the tree."

H , Ch. 108, h 79

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Hamdan ibn Sulayman from 'Abdallah
ibn Muhammad al-Yamani from Mani' ibn al-Hajjaj from Yunus from Hisham
ibn al-Hakam from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the
Most Majestic, the Most gracious. ". . . the belief of any soul will be
of no avail to it unless some good deeds have been done with it. . ."
(6:158) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means to acknowledge the prophets and
the executors of their wills especially Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.)."
The Imam (a.s.) said, "The faith of a soul will not be of any benefit
because it will be removed."

H , Ch. 108, h 80

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Yunus from
Sabah al-Muzniy from abu Hamza from one of them (a.s.) about the words
of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "There is no doubt that
evil doers who are engulfed in sins -rejected Wilaya of Amir al-Mu'minin
Ali (a.s.)- are the companions of hell fire wherein they will live
forever." (2:81) A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from abu 'Ubayda
al-Hadhdha' who has said the following.

"I asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the capability and the people's words.
The Imam (a.s.) recited this verse of the Holy Quran. "They still have
different beliefs (11:118) except those upon whom God has granted His
mercy. God has created them to receive mercy. . . ." (11:119) O abu
'Ubayda, people face differences in search for truth and all of them
will be destroyed." The narrator has said that I then said, "Except
those who receive mercy from Allah. (11:119)"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Such people are our followers whom He has
created for His mercy. "God has created them to receive mercy. . . ."
(11:119) He has said that they are created to obey the Imam of blessings
that He has mentioned in His words "My mercy and blessings have
encompassed all things". Such blessing is the knowledge of Imam. His
(Imams') knowledge which is from His knowledge that has encompassed all
things. They are our Shi'a, followers).

Then He has said, ". . . I shall grant mercy to those who maintain
piety, (do not acknowledge the authority of those who are not Imams and
obedience to them). .." (7:156) Then Allah has said, ". . . whose
description they find written in the Torah and the Gospel. (The Holy
Prophet, the executor of his will and Al-Qa'im (the one who will rise
with Divine Authority).

He (the Messengers) enjoins them to do good (when he will rise with
Divine Authority) and forbids them to do all that is unlawful, -Munkar
(unlawful) is one who does not acknowledge the Wilaya of Imam) makes
lawful for them all that is pure (receive knowledge from its proper
source) and unlawful all that is filthy, (the words of those who oppose
the Imam are filthy) removes their burdens (the sins that they had
before acknowledging Wilaya of the Imam (Leadership with Divine
Authority) and the entanglements in which they are involved (the
entanglements are the words that they were not commanded to express.
Such words were not in praise and virtue of the Imam.

When they recognized the excellence of the Imam He removed their
burden. Such burden is the sin. Then He further explains about them)
Those who believe in him, (the Imam) honor and help him, and follow the
light which is sent down to him, will have everlasting happiness.".
(7:157) (Such people are those who kept away from the worship of the
Devil and Satan.

So and so are Devil and Satan. Worship is people's obeying them. Allah
then has said, "Turn to God in repentance and submit to Him. . ."
(39:56) .Then He has granted them rewards. ". . . will receive glad news
both in this life and in the life hereafter. . ." (10:64) (Imam gives
them the glad news of the rise of al-Mahdi with Divine Authority, the
news of the destruction of their enemies and salvation in the hereafter
and their meeting Ali and Muhammad (s.a) and their truthful family at
pond of al-Kawthar)."

H , Ch. 108, h 81

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from ibn Mahbub from
Hisham ibn Salim from 'Ammar al-Sabati who has said the following. "I
asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic,
the Most gracious. "Are those who seek God's pleasure equal to those who
incur His wrath and whose dwelling will be hell, the terrible
destination? (3:162)

People are of various grades in the sight of God. . ." (3:163) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Those who follow what Allah is pleased are the Imams.
They, by Allah, O 'Ammar, give grades and degrees to the true believers.
By means of our Wilaya (Leadership and guardian ship with Divine
Authority) and their acknowledgment of us Allah increases the reward for
their good deeds and (Allah) raises them to higher positions."

H , Ch. 108, h 82

Ali ibn Muhammad and others have narrated from sahl ibn Ziyad from
ya'qub ibn Yazid from Ziyad al-Qandi from 'Ammar al-'Asadi from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious. ". . . Good words (worship) will be presented before Him and
He will accept good deeds. . . ." (35:10) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is
our Wilaya Leadership and Guardianship with Divine Authority. He made a
gesture with his hands to his own chest saying Allah will not raise the
deeds of those who would not acknowledge our Wilaya."

H , Ch. 108, h 83

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from al-Qasim ibn Sulayman
from Sama'a from abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) about the words of Allah, the
Most Majestic, the Most gracious. ". . . God will grant you a double
share of mercy, ( al-Hassan and al-Husayn ) a light by which you can
walk. . ." (57:28) The Imam (a.s.) said, "Light means the Imam that you
would follow."

H , Ch. 108, h 84

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
al-Jawhari from certain persons of his people from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
about the words of Allah. "They ask you, "Is that true?"(The Imam (a.s.)
said, "It means what do you say about Ali (a.s.)?" Tell them, "It
certainly is true. I swear by my Lord. You can not escape from God's
(retribution)." (10:53)

H , Ch. 108, h 85

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn
Sulayman al- Daylami from his father from Aban ibn Taghlib who has said
the following. "I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), "May Allah take my soul
in service for your cause, what is the meaning of the words of Allah,
"Yet, he has not entered into ? aqaba." (90:11) The Imam (a.s.) said,
"To whoever Allah has granted honor through our Wilaya (Leadership with
Divine Authority) he has crossed the ?

aqaba (the stage). We are the ? aqaba. Whoever would reach us gains his
salvation." The narrator has said that he remained quite for a while and
then said to me, "Would to learn a letter from that would be better for
you than the whole world and all that is therein?" I said, "yes, May
Allah take my soul in service for your cause." He then said, "It is the
setting free of a slave." Then he said, "All people are slaves of fire.
except you and your people. Allah has set you free from fire through our
(Ahl al-Bayt) Wilaya (Leadership and Guardianship with Divine
Authority)."

H , Ch. 108, h 86

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Sama' from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious. ". . . Fulfill your covenant with Me . .."
(the covenant to acknowledge Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)) and I shall fulfill
Mine (admit you in paradise).. . ." (2:40)

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Salma ibn al-Khattab from
al-Hassan ibn 'Abd al-Rahman from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu Basir from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the
Most gracious. "When Our clear revelations are recited to them, the
unbelievers say to the faithful ones, "Which of us has a better position
and is more prosperous?" (19:73)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "the Messenger of Allah asked Quraysh (the
powerful tribe in Makka) to acknowledge our (Wilaya Leadership with
Divine Authority) they turned away and refused. The unbelievers of
Quraysh told the true believers of Quraysh (those who acknowledged our
Wilaya (Leadership with Divine Authority), "Which group of us has a
better position and is more prosperous?" This was to humiliated the true
believers.

Allah in rebuttal said, "How many generations (people of the past) of
greater prosperity and splendor have We destroyed before them?" (19:74)
I then asked the meaning of, "(Muhammad), tell them, "The Beneficent God
gives respite to those who have gone astray. . . (19:75).

The Imam (a.s.) said, "All them lived a life in error and did
acknowledge Wilaya (Leadership with Divine Authority of Amir al-Mu'minin
Ali (a.s.) and our Wilaya). They lived in error and lead others to
error. Allah gives them time in their error and rebellion until they
die. He then cuases them to have the worst of dwelling and be of the
weakest parties." I then asked him about the meaning of, ". . . until
they face the torment with which they were threatened or to the Day of
Judgment.

Then they will find out who will have the most miserable place and the
weakest forces." (19:75) The Imam (a.s.) said, ". . . until they face
the torment with which they were threatened. . ." is the time of the
rise of al-Mahdi with Divine Authority. That is the time when they will
find out what Allah will sent to them through the hands of al-Mahdi
(a.s.) and thus, are His words, ". . . who will have the most miserable
place (at the time of the rise of al-Mahdi with Divine Authority) and
the weakest forces." (19:75) )." I then asked about the words of Allah.
". . .

God further enlightens those who seek guidance. . .." (19:76) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Allah will grant them more guidance and certainty to
follow Al-Qa'im (the one who will rise with Divine Authority) so that
they will not reject or refuse his authority." I then asked about the
words of Allah. ". . . no one will be able to intercede for the others
except those whom the Beneficent God has given authority." (19:87)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "The acknowledgment of Wilaya (Leadership with
Divine Authority) of Amir al-Mu'minin Ali and the Imams after him is
part of the religion of Allah (a.s.) and this is the authority and the
covenant before Allah." I then asked about the words of Allah. "To the
righteously striving believers God will grant love." (19:96) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It is the love for Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) and to
acknowledge his Wilaya. It is this love of which Allah speaks in His
words.

"(Muhammad), We have given it to you (the Book, the Quran) in your own
language so that you could easily give the glad news to the pious ones
and warn the quarrelsome ones." (19:97). The Imam (a.s.) said, "It was
made easy for him when Allah appointed Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) as
the standard of truth. With him He gave glad news to the true believers
and warning to the unbelievers. It is these unbelievers whom He has
called "the quarrelsome ones"

The narrator has said that I then asked him about the words of Allah.
". . . so that you may warn a people who are unaware because their
fathers were not warned (36:6).The Imam (a.s.) said, "It was to warn the
people with whom The Holy Prophet (s.a) lived just as their forefathers
were warned and they were unaware of Allah, His messenger and His
warning.

". . . (I swear) that most of them are doomed to be punished (for not
acknowledging the Wilaya of Ali and the Imams after him (a.s.)) . They
have no faith (in the Wilaya of Ali and the executors of the will after
him (a.s.)." (36:7) since they did not believe and their punishment was
as such as Allah has mentioned, ". . . We have enchained their necks up
to their chins. Thus, they cannot bend their heads (in Hell) (to find
their way) (36:8).(Then Allah has said, ". . . We have set-up a barrier
in front of and behind them and have made them blind.

Thus, they cannot see.. . ." (36:10) (It will be the punishment for not
acknowledging the Wilaya of Ali and the Imams after him. This is in this
world and in the nest life it will be Hell wherein they will not be able
to raise their heard. Then Allah has said, ". . . Whether you warn them
or not, they will not believe." (36:10) (in Allah and the Wilaya of Ali
and the Imams after him (a.s.) Then Allah has said, ". . . You should
only warn those who follow the Quran (and Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.))
and have fear of the Beneficent God without seeing Him. Give them (O
Muhammad), the glad news of their receiving forgiveness and an honorable
reward (from God)." (36:11)"

H , Ch. 108, h 87

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from from certain persons of our people
from ibn Mahbub from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl who has said the following.
"I asked abu al-Hassan al-Madi (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious.

"They want to put out the light of God with their mouths,. . ." (61:8)
(The Imam (a.s.) siad, "They want to banish Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) with
their mouths) ". . . but God will certainly make His light shine
forever. ." . (61:8) (The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah will complete Imamat
(Leadership with Divine Authority) as He said in His words. "It is He
who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the true religion,. . ."
(61:9) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is He Who sent His Messenger with
Wilaya for the executor of his will and Wilaya is the true religion.

" I then read from the Holy Quran. ". . . make the true religion to
stand supreme over all religions, . . ." (61:9) The Imam (a.s.) said,
"He will it stand supreme at the time of (the rise of al-Mahdi with
Divine Authority) as Allah has said, ". . .He will make the true
religion to stand supreme over all religions, (Wilaya of Al-Qa'im) even
though the pagans may dislike it." (61:9). "The unbelievers refer to
unbelievers in the Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)" said The Imam (a. s.). I then
asked, "Is it revelation?" He replied, "These words are revelation but
the others are interpretation."

I then read from the Holy Quran. "This is because they accepted the
faith and then rejected. . ." (63:3) The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, has called those who would not follow His
Messenger in the matter of Wilaya hypocrites. He has considered those
who reject Imamat just as those who would reject Muhammad (s.a) and to
this effect He has revealed verses in the Holy Quran that read as herein
below. "When the hypocrites (in the matter of Wilaya of the executor or
your will, Ali (a.s.) come to you, they say, "We testify that you are
the Messenger of God." God knows that you are His Messenger. God
testifies that they hypocrites (in the matters of Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)
are liars ((63:1).

They have chosen their oaths as a shield for them to obstruct others
from the way of God (the way is the executor of the will). How terrible
is what they do! ((63:2). This is because they accepted the faith (your
message) and then rejected it (Wilaya of the executor of your will). God
has sealed their hearts, thus, they do not have any understanding."
(63:3). The narrator has said that I then asked, "What is the meaning of
'they do not have any understanding." (63:3)?"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah has said that they do not understand your
prophesy." I then asked about the meaning of Allah's words. "When they
are told, "Come and let the Prophet of God seek forgiveness for you,. .
." (63:6) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means that when the are asked to
come back to the Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) so the The Holy Prophet (s.a)
would ask Allah to forgive your sins, ". . . they shake their heads
(Allah says) and you can see them arrogantly turning away. . . " (63:6)
(from the Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) ". . . arrogantly. . .". ((63:5). Allah
then has reiterated His words about the fact that they know the Wilaya
very well saying, ". . . It is all the same whether you seek forgiveness
for them or not; God will never forgive them. God does not guide the
evil-doing people (63:6). The Imam (a. s.) said, "It refers to the
unjust ones against the executor of your will."

I then asked the Imam (a.s.) about the meaning of the words of Allah.
"Can one who walks with his head hanging down be better guided that one
who walks with his head upright?" (67:22) The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah
has compared the ones who would deviate from Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) to
those who walk with teir head bent down without knowing what is around
them. He, on the other hand has compared to those who would acknowledge
Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) with those who would walk on the straight path.
Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) is the straight path."

The narrator has said that I then asked The Imam (a.s.) about the words
of Allah. ". . . the Quran is certainly the word of a reverent
messenger." (69:40) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is the words of Jibril
from Allah about Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)."

I then asked about the words of Allah. "It is not the word of a poet
but only a few of you have faith," (69:41) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They
had said that Muhammad (s.a) is not truthful and Allah has not commanded
him anything about Ali (a.s.). Allah then revealed Quran (a reading)
about it. "It (Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) is a revelation from the Lord of the
Universe (69:43).

"Had Muhammad invented some words against Us, (69:44). We would have
caught hold of him by his right hand (69:45) and cut-off his main
artery." (69:46). Then Allah has turned to Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) saying,
"The Quran (Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) is certainly a reminder for the
(worlds) pious ones (69:48). We certainly know that some of you have
rejected it (69:49) and (on the Day of Judgment) this (Wilaya of Ali
(a.s.) will be a great source of regret for the unbelievers (69:50).
This (Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) is the Truth beyond any doubt (69:51).
(Muhammad), glorify the name of your Lord, the Great One." (69:52) Allah
has said, "Thank your Lord, the Great, Who has granted you this
distinction."

The narrator has said that I then asked The Imam (a.s.) about the words
of Allah. "Now that we have listened to the guidance, we believe in it..
. ." (72:13) The Imam (a.s.) said, "Guidance is Wilaya of Ali (a.s.). We
have established faith in our guardian and those who would do so '. . .
Whoever believes in his Lord does not need to fear loss or oppression."
(72:13) I then asked, "Is it of the revealed words of Allah?" He said,
"No, it is interpretation." I then asked him about the words of Allah.
"Say, "I do not possess any power to harm or benefit you." (72:21) The
Imam (a.s.) said, "the Messenger of Allah called people to acknowledge
Wilaya of Ali (a.s.).

Quraysh came to him and said, "O Muhammad, "Absolve us from such
acknowledgment." The Messenger of Allah said, "It is not from me but it
is up to Allah." They accused him and left him. Allah then revealed this
reading. ""Say, "I do not possess any power to harm or benefit you.
(72:21) Say, "No one can protect me from God,

(if I would disobey Him) nor can I find any place of refuge but with him
(72:22). My only (means of protection) is to convey the message of God
(about Ali (a.s.).. . ." (72:23) I then asked, "Is it the revealed words
of Allah?" He said, "Yes, it is the revealed word of Allah." Allah has
said to place more emphasis, ". . . Whoever disobeys God and His
Messenger (in the matters of Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) will go to hell,
wherein he will live forever." (72:23) I then read the words of Allah.

". . . until the unbelievers witness that with which they have been
threatened, they will then know whose helpers are weaker and fewer in
number." (72:24) It is a reference to the rise of al-Mahdi with Divine
Authority and his supporters)."

I then read the words of Allah. " Bear patiently whatever they say,. .
." (73:10) The Imam (a. s.) said, "They say, '. . . and leave them to
distance from them in an honorable manner." (73:10) "Leave (O Muhammad)
the prosperous unbelievers (in Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) to Me and give them
respite for a little while;" (73:11) I then asked him, "Is it the
revealed words of Allah?" He said, "Yes, it is."

I then read the words of Allah. "It gives more certainty to the people
of the Book. . ." (74:31) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They become certain
that Allah, Hid Messenger and the executor of his will are true." I then
read, '. . . and strengthens the faith of the believers.. . . " (74:31)
The Imam (a.s.) said, "Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) strengthens their faith." I
then read the words of Allah.

". . . The people of the Book and the believers have no doubt about
it.. . ." (74:31) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They have no doubts in the
Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)." I then asked, "What is this doubt?" He said,
"people of the Book and the believers that Allah has mentioned are meant
thereby. He said that they do not doubt the Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)." I
then read the words of Allah. ". . . This parable is a reminder for
mankind." (74:31) The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, it the Wilaya of Ali
(a.s.)." ". . . it is certainly one of the two great things." (74:35)
The Imam (a.s.) said. "It is the Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)." I then read the
words of Allah. ". . whether one steps forward to embrace the faith or
one turns away from it." (74:37) The Imam (a.s.) one who would step
forwards to our Wilaya he would step away from Hell and one who would
step away from our Wilaya he would step closer to Hell." I then read the
words of Allah. ". . . except the people of the right hand." (74:39) The
Imam (a.s.) said, "They, by Allah, are our Shi'a (followers)."

I then read the words of Allah. ". . . We did not pray," (74:43) The
Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to their saying, "We did not believe in
Wilaya of Ali (a.s.) and the Imams after him and would offer the special
greeting for them." I then read the words of Allah. ". . . Why do they
run away from guidance," (74:49) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means running
away from our Wilaya." I then read the words of Allah. "There is no
doubt that it is a guide." (74:54) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to
Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)."

I then read the words of Allah. "The servants of God fulfill their
vows. . ." (76:7) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They fulfill the vow and
covenant that they had made to acknowledge our Wilaya." I then read the
words of Allah. "(Muhammad), We have revealed the Quran to you in
gradual steps." (76:23) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means, revealed with
Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)." I then asked, "Is it of the revealed words of
Allah ?" He said, "Yes, with interpretation." I then read the words of
Allah. "This (chapter) is a reminder. . . .".(76:29) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "It is a reminder of Wilaya ." I then read the words of Allah. "He
admits to His mercy whomever He wants.. . ." (76:31) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "He admits in our Wilaya."

The Imam (a.s.) said, ". . . For the unjust He has prepared a painful
punishment." (76:31) Consider that Allah has said, "They (children of
Israel) did not wrong Us but wronged themselves. (2:57) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Allah is far glorious than to do injustice or ascribe injustice
to His-self. However, Allah has confuse us with His-self, thus, He has
called injustice to us as injustice to His-self and our Wilaya as His
own Wilaya and guardianship.

About this matter He revealed Quran (a reading) to His Prophet that
reads. "We did not do any wrong to them but they wronged themselves.
(16:118) I then asked, "Is it the revealed word of Allah ?" He said,
"Yes, it is."

I then read the words of Allah. "On that day, woe will be to those who
have rejected God's revelations!" (77:15) (The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah
has said, "O Muhammad, woe is to those who reject what I have revealed
about the Wilaya of Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.)." "Did We not destroy the
ancient people (77:16) and make others settle after them in their land?
(77:17).

The Imam (a.s.) said, "The ancient people are those who refused to obey
the prophets about the executors of their will. "Thus do We deal with
the sinful ones." (77:18) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to those who
sinned in the matters of Ahl al-Bayt (family) of Muhammad (s.a) and did
to them what they did." I then read the words of Allah. "The pious ones
. . ." (77:41)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "By Allah, only we and our Shi'a (followers)
follow truly the religion of Abraham/Ibrahim. Other people have no
relationship with it." I then read the words of Allah. "On that day, the
Spirit and the angels who stand in lines will not speak . . ." (78:38)
The Imam (a.s.) said, "We, by Allah, on the Day of judgment will the
permission to speak the truth." I asked him, "What will you say when you
will speak?"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "We will praise our Lord, greet our The Holy
Prophet (s.a) and intercede for our Shi'a . Our Lord will not reject our
request." I then read the words of Allah. "the records of the sinner's
deeds are in Sij4 n." (83:7) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They are the ones
who did injustice to the Imams and treated them with hostility." I then
read the words of Allah. ". . .This is what you had called a lie."
(83:17) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.)." I then asked, "Is it the revealed word of Allah ?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "yes, it is."

H , Ch. 108, h 88

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Salma ibn al-Khattab from
al-Husayn ibn 'Abd al- Rahman from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu Basir from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the
Most gracious.

"Whoever ignores My guidance will live a woeful life. . ." (20:124) The
Imam (a.s.) said, "It means ignoring Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)." I then read
the words of Allah. ". . . and will be brought in Our presence blind on
the Day of Judgment." (20:124) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means blind of
eyes in the next life and blind of heart towards Wilaya of Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) in this life." The Imam (a.s.) said, "He will be
confused on the Day of Judgment and will ask, ". . . He will say, "My
Lord, why have you brought me back to life blind; before I could see?"
(20:125). The Lord will say, "This is true. But just as you forgot Our
revelations that had come to you, so, also, are you forgotten on this
day." (20:126)

The Imam (a.s.) said, " 'revelations' means Imams (a.s.) that you
rejected so also you are rejected and left to the fire today. You did
not obey their commands and did not listened to their words."

I then read the words of Allah. "Thus We recompense those who are
unjust and have no faith in Our revelations. The torment in the life to
come will be more severe and last longer." (20:127) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "It refers to those who accept others as partners of Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) in the matters of Wilaya and have no faith in the
revelations of his Lord and have left the Imams (a.s.) on account of
hostility who have not followed their teachings and have not
acknowledged their Wilaya (Leadership with Divine Authority)."

I then read the words of Allah. "God is kind to His servants. He gives
sustenance to whomever He wants. . . ." (42:19) The Imam (a.s.) said, "
'Sustenance' is the Wilaya of Ali (a.s.)." I then read the words of
Allah. "We shall increase the harvest of those who seek a good harvest
in the life hereafter. . ." (42:20) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is the
recognition of Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) and the Imams from which the
receive additional gains." ". . However, those who want to have their
harvest in this life will be given it but will have no share in the
hereafter." (42:20) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They will have no share in
government of truth at the time of Al-Qa'im, the one who will rise with
Divine Authority)."


