Love for the Ahlul-Bayt (a)
===========================

 Story n. 1 
------------

‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī used to visit the shrine of Hazrat Ma’sūma (s) at
least once every week. He would walk [to the shrine], and along the way,
if he saw a discarded orange, cucumber or banana peel, he would use his
staff to remove it from the sidewalk. During the summer he used to visit
the holy city of Mashhad. When visiting the shrine of Imām Ridha (a) at
night, he would sit in the area adjacent to the side of the shrine
(*dharīh*) where Imām’s head is buried. In a state of humbleness and
humility he would then recite the *ziyārat* (greetings to the Imām).
Whilst in Mashhad he would participate in the Maghrib and ‘Ishā
congregational prayers led by Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Hādi Mīlānī,
sitting in a corner amongst the people [during the namaz].  
    
 ‘Allāmah had an intimate relationship with the Prophet (s) and the
Imāms (a). He would mention their names with extreme decorum and
reverence, participate in gatherings where their deaths were mourned,
and weep profusely for the tragedies that the Ahlul Bayt had faced.  
* *  
*Ayatullah Ibrāhim Amīnī*  
  

Story n. 2 
-----------

Marhūm ‘Allāmah’s connection with the Ahlul-Bayt was one of complete
love. Not once do I remember him mentioning the names of any one of the
Imāmswithout respect. Each time he would enter the shrine of Imām Ridhā
(a) in the holy city of Mashhad, I would see him place his trembling
hands on the threshold and kiss it – his entire body quivering from the
depths of his soul.  
    
 Occasionally in his presence we would ask him to pray for us. He would
reply, *“Go and ask from Hazrat [Imām]. We have no special position
here, everything is available from him”*.  
    
 When he kissed the wooden frame of the shrine (*dharīh*), his entire
being reflected a profound etiquette towards Imām Ridhā (a). With
complete propriety (*adab*) and extreme love he would then recite his
prayers in a corner. From the time he would enter until the time he left
he conducted himself with *adab*.  
    
*Hujjatulislām Doctor Ahmadī*  
  

Story n.3
---------

   
 A scholar once asked Shahīd Ayatullah Mutahharī, “Why do you respect
‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī so much and say *may I be sacrificed for him”*?  
    
 He replied,  
 I have seen many philosophers and mystics. My unique respect for
‘Allāmah is not related to his being a philosopher. Rather, my reverence
stems from the fact that he is an enamored lover of the Ahlul-Bayt. [For
example] ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī used to break his fast in the month of
Ramadhān by kissing the shrine (*dharīh*) of Hazrat Ma’sūmā (a). He
would walk to the holy shrine, kiss the *dharīh*, and then return to his
home to eat. It is this characteristic of his that has captivated me to
such a degree.  
    
*Shahīd Mutahharī*  
  

Story n. 4
----------

   
 Daily activities that occupied ‘Allāmah day and night did not prevent
him from seeking intercession and exhibiting propriety (*adab*) for the
Ahlul-Bayt. Rather he recognized that he was indebted to their
intercession for his situation. His respect for the words of the
Ma’sūmīn was so great that even when dealing with traditions whose
chains of narration were weak, he acted in a cautionary manner because
of the possibility that they might be from the Ahlul-Bayt. In addition,
he believed that even the slightest disrespect or ill-thought towards
this pure family should not be tolerated.  
    
*Ayatullah Misbāh Yazdī*  
  

Story n. 5
----------

   
 Whenever the name of one of the Ma’sūmīn was mentioned, humility and
etiquette would be apparent on ‘Allāmah’s face. He had particular
reverence for Imām Zamān [the 12th Holy Imam] – may we be sacrificed for
him. He considered the position of the Prophet, Imāms and Hadhrat
Siddāqa Kubrā [Sayyida Fatima] (a) to be beyond description. He had a
humble, reverential and pious manner in respect to them, considered
their position and status to be celestial, and had an in-depth knowledge
of their actions and history ..  
    
*‘Allāmah Tehrānī*  
  


