‘Allāmah as a Teacher 
======================

Story n. 1
----------

   
 ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī  was one of those rare teachers who acquainted his
students with the whisperings of life and the fountain of knowledge, but
at the same time trained them with the light of love and
self-purification…We have had and have many teachers; individuals who
have many students. However every teacher does not guide and train his
students. These are two categories separate from each other [ie.
Teaching and guiding]. Some teachers teach for many years and
concentrate only on imparting knowledge. ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī however, at
the very same time that he taught his students, he brought them up as
well, and day by day made them more accomplished.  
    
*Ustād Rezā Ustādī*  
  

Story n. 2
----------

   
 What can I say about someone to whom I owe my life and my soul? From
the time that God gifted him to us, he favored us with everything.  
    
 To us rash and rude students, he was gentle and tender. He was like a
tall father who bends to take the hand of his child, and walks in step
with him. He walked with and trained each of us according to our
individual style, taste and varying aptitude. Even though divine secrets
swelled in his luminous heart, he had a cheerful open and relaxed face,
a silent tongue and gentle voice. He was always in a state of thought,
and would occasionally have a tender smile on his lips.  
    
*‘Allāmah Tehrānī* 

Story n. 3
----------

   
 Professor Corbin was an inquisitive French university student from the
Sorbonne University of Paris. According to ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī he was a
simple-hearted and just man who believed that among the religions of the
world it was only Shī’ism that was a mobile and live sect. All other
religious sects had completed their lifespan and no longer allowed for
their followers to have expectation (*taraqqub*) and attain greater
stages of perfection.  
    
 Professor Corbin’s relationship with ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī began in the
year 1968, and continued for 20 years. Corbin saw ‘Allāmah’s precise
vision and sharp-sightedness as potentially powerful and influential in
the West and in Europe, and therefore carried out interviews with him.
His goal was that the voice of Islām and Shī’ism should reach the ears
of that part of the world so that they might too become aware of this
knowledge that was intrinsic to the soul necessary for the growth of the
soul. Eventually these interviews were published in four languages:
Farsi, Arabic, French and English and compiled in a book by the name of
Shi’a.  
    
 ‘Allāmah’s meetings with Corbin required a great deal of effort and
struggle on his part, as he was forced to travel from Qum to Tehran by
public bus so that he could talk about the truths of Shī’ism and
introduce the true face of the concept of the possessor of the greatest
sanctity *(wilāyat)* to him. But it quickly became clear that these
efforts were in fact of great service to Shī’ism because Corbin recorded
these meetings and made them available in Europe, spreading the truth of
Shī’ism and even supporting and defending the religion through his own
speeches and conferences.  
    
 Corbin was of the opinion that because Shī’ism believes in the
existence of a living Imām, it is the only religious sect that it is
still alive. This is because the belief and reliance on Hazrat Mahdī (a)
will always remain established. The Jewish faith died with the death of
Hazrat Mūsa (a), the Christian one with the ascension of Hazrat Isa (a).
All other sects of Islām also came to a dead-end with the death of
Hazrat Muhammad (s), whereas Shī’ism maintained that the authority, Imām
and possessor of Wilāyat who is connected with the spiritual world and
receives Divine guidance is alive, and therefore Shī’ism itself remained
alive as a religion.  
    
 In this way Corbin himself was very close to Shī’ism and as a result of
his interaction and discussions with ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī and his
acquaintance with these truths, especially that of Hazrat Mahdī (a), an
intense metamorphosis was apparent in him.  
    
 ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī used to say “he (Corbin) frequently recites
supplications from Sahīfāye Mehdiwiyye and cries as he does so”.   
    
*‘Allāmah Tehrānī* 


