Akhlāq (manner of character) at Home
====================================

 

Story n. 1
----------

   
 His manner and behavior at home was truly like that of Prophet Muhammad
(s) (*Muhammadī*). He never became angry, and we never heard him raise
his voice while speaking. While he was gentle, he was also decisive and
firm. He gave importance to praying on time, staying up during the
nights of the month of Ramadhān, reading the Qur’ān out loud, and
maintaining organization in all things. As a result of his strong, kind
sentiment and extremely kind heart, he would never refuse anyone.  One
day he said to me, *“from morning until now I have answered the door 24
times in order to reply people’s queries”*.  
    
*‘Allāmah’s daughter*  
  

Story n. 2
----------

   
 Although he had very little time, ‘Allāmah managed his schedule in such
a manner that he would spend one hour every afternoon with his family.
During this time he was so kind and affectionate that one could not
believe that this was an individual occupied with so much work.  
    
*‘Allāmah’s daughter*  
  

Story n. 3
----------

   
 At home ‘Allāmah was strongly opposed to anyone else carrying out his
personal tasks for him. There was always a competition in turning down
the bed [at home]. My father would try to carry out this task before
anyone else, and my mother would try to anticipate him. Even in the end
when he was sick and I used to go to his home, he would get up from his
place to pour his own tea despite his state of illness. And if I
objected and said, *“why didn’t you ask me to bring me some tea,”* he
would reply, *“no, you are a guest, and you are also a descendant of the
Prophet (s) (Sayyid), and I cannot give you any orders”*.  
    
*‘Allāmah’s daughter* 


