At Home with his Wife 
======================

Story n. 1
----------

   
 ‘Allāmah’s family life was extremely warm and pleasant. When his wife
passed away he shed so many tears and was so saddened and moved that one
day we asked him, *“we should be learning patience and endurance from
you - why are you affected such?”*  
    
 He replied:  
    
 Death is inevitable. Everyone must die. I am not crying for the death
of my wife. My tears are for the kindness, housekeeping abilities, and
the love my wife had. I have had a life full of ups and downs. In the
holy city of Najaf when we were faced with many difficulties, I was not
even aware of the needs and the administration of our life [because she
took care of them so well]. Managing our life was in the hands of my
wife, and throughout our life not once did my wife do something that I
said *I wish she hadn’t done that*, even just to myself. Nor did she
ever not do something that I said *I wish she had carried that out*!  
    
 Throughout our life together never once did she say to me why did you
carry out that particular act, or why didn’t you do something! For
example, you know that I work at home and am continually occupied with
writing and studying. As a result I get tired and occasionally I need to
rest and to renew my energy. My wife was aware of this. She would always
have the kettle on and tea ready. Although she was busy with housework,
she would pour me one cup of tea every hour. She would place it in my
study and would return to her work until the following hour…how can I
ever forget such love and kindness?!  
    
*Ayatullah Ibrāhīm Amīnī* 

Story n. 2
----------

His [‘Allāmah’s] behavior with my mother was incredibly respectful and
friendly. Through his actions it seemed as if he was always eager to see
my mother. We never saw them order each other to do or not do anything,
nor did we see any discord between the two of them. They were loving,
loyal and forgiving to each other to such an extent that we thought they
never disagreed. The two of them were truly like two friends with each
other.  
    
 Prior to her death, my mother was ill and confined to bed for 27 days.
During this period my father did not leave her bedside for a single
moment. He left all his work to take care of her.  
    
 At the same time my mother was an exceptional woman. She was patient
when faced with difficulties and a meager lifestyle. She managed all our
household affairs. She took care of our academic and social life and
handled all our concerns. She worked with such efficiency and wisdom
that my father was able to pursue his academic work with complete ease
of mind.   
*‘Allāmah’s daughter* 

Story n. 3 
-----------

*“It was this woman who allowed me to reach this position. She has been
my partner and whatever books I have written, half [of the credit]
belongs to her.” *  
    
 This one sentence from ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī is sufficient as an
indication of his enlightened view of women. At another time he said:  
    
 If a woman did not have importance, God would not have placed the
lineage of the 12 Imāms in the progeny of Hazrat Zahra (a). Truly if a
woman is noble and good she can make the entire world a rose-garden, and
if she is bad she can make the world a hell…Women and men are partners,
and after looking after the raising of her children, a woman must become
aware and familiar with the affairs of her society.  
    
*‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī* 


