At Home with his Children
=========================

 

Story n. 1
----------

   
 ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī was very affectionate with his children, as well as
his grandchildren. Sometimes he would spend an hour of his valuable time
listening to our chatting, or teaching us how to draw, or giving us
exercises for our homework.  
    
*‘Allāmah’s daughter* 

Story n. 2
----------

   
 ‘Allāmah valued his children, especially his daughters, a great deal.
He considered daughters to be a blessing from God, and valuable precious
gifts. He always encouraged his children to acquire the traits of
honesty and tranquility, and liked that the sound and melody of the
Qur’an should reach their ears. For this reason he used to read the
Qur’an out loud. He gave importance to his children being well-mannered,
and believed that the behavior of parents affects their children.  
    
 He was particularly respectful and loving towards his daughters, such
that he would call them by adding the word ‘sadāt’ to their name, and he
used to say that the respect of a daughter, especially a descendant of
the Prophet (s) (*Sayyid*), must be preserved. He believed that
daughters are a trust from God. However much a person pays them respect,
God and the Prophet (s) are pleased [with him].  
    
*‘Allāmah’s daughter*  
  

Story n. 3
----------

   
 Our upbringing was not limited to our childhood. Even after I was
married I used to always benefit from the guidance of my father. For
example, in the early days of our marriage when I would visit my
father’s home, he would advise me by saying “don’t let it be the case
that your actions result in the displeasure of Khānum (that is my
mother-in-law), for God will not let that pass. You must make sure to
assist her".   
    
*‘Allāmah’s daughter*  
  

Story n. 4
----------

   
 ‘Allāmah had a close relationship with his children. In his final years
when I was living in Tehran, I would visit him two or three times each
week, but it wasn’t determined exactly when I would go. Yet every time I
would visit, his wife (his second wife) would say that it’s been three
or four hours that he has been pacing waiting for you. When I would ask
how he knew I was coming, he wouldn’t give me a clear response, and in
the end I never understood how he was aware what time I would be
arriving.  
    
*‘Allāmah’s daughter*  
  

Story n. 5
----------

After the death of my son ‘Hasan’, he [‘Allāmah] came to Tehran.
However, I didn’t know how to behave with him so that he wouldn’t become
upset, and incidentally, he too, was thinking the same. When he arrived
he asked, *“Najma, what can I say to you?”* I said, *“Nothing. All
thanks belong to God”*. He replied *“All thanks belong to God, who, when
he gave you a child, he gave you a good child”*.  
    
*‘Allāmah’s daughter* 


