Sincerity and Humility
======================

 

Story n. 1
----------

   
 Although we had a very close relationship with ’Allāmah, not a single
instance comes to mind of a situation in which he brought up a subject
in the form of demonstrating [his knowledge] or that he presented some
information without being asked a question.  
    
*Ayatullah Ja’far Subhānī*  
  

Story n. 2
----------

   
 Our teacher one day told me “I have never seen any one more ascetic
than this man (‘Allāmah). Despite being a treasure of knowledge and
information, he still stands to pray in the final row of Ayatullah
Milānī’s prayers amongst the travelers”.  
    
*Hujjat ul-Islam Mūsawī Hamadānī*  
  

Story n. 3
----------

   
 Once when one of the scholars of the religious seminary (*Hawze
Ilmiye*) of Qum was praising the great Tafsīr al-Mizān in his presence,
‘Allama said the following: *“Don’t praise it lest I become pleased and
my sincerity and good intention be destroyed”*.  

Story n. 4
----------

   
 Every time I would meet ‘Allāmah, without exception I would try and
bend to kiss his hand and he would hide his hand under his cloak. He
would display such humility and shyness that we would be startled. One
day I said to him,

“We try to kiss your hand in order to benefit from your blessed
presence, why do you withhold this from us? Have you not heard of the
hadīth of Imām ‘Alī (a) that *‘whosoever teaches me one word, he has
made me his servant’*?” 

He replied, “Yes, it is a well-known narration and its text is agreed
upon”.  
 I then said, “You are the one who has taught us so much and have thus
caused us to be your servants over and over again. Is it not part of the
etiquette of a servant that he kisses the hand of his master and thus
receives blessings?”  
 With a charming smile ‘Allāmah said, “We are all the servants of God
Almighty”.   
    
*‘Allāmah Husayni Tehrānī* 

Story n. 5
----------

   
 In the month of Sha’bān 1411 H, ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī visited Mashhad and
came to our home. I gave him the library as his room so that he could
use the books with ease. The time for Maghrib prayers arrived, and I
spread a prayer mat for him and left the room so that he would start his
prayers at which time I could return and pray behind him.  
    
 It was approximately fifteen minutes after Maghrib when he called for
me. When I came near ‘Allāmah said, “We will follow you” [that is, I
want you to lead the prayers].  
 I said “I request that you please go ahead and pray yourself!” [that
you lead the prayers]!”  
 He said “We [I] have this request”.

I replied “For forty years we have wanted to pray one set of prayers
behind you, but it has not yet happened. Please accept”.  
 With a charming smile he said “Then it is not much to add one year in
addition to those forty years”.  
 I said “I am your servant and your follower. If you order me I will
carry out your order!” [to lead the prayers]

He said “I am not giving an order, this is just my request”.  
    
*‘Allāmah Tehrānī*  
  

Story n. 6
----------

   
 ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī was a world of greatness. Like a regular seminary
(*hawza*) student he would sit on the ground near the courtyard of the
school, and when it was nearly sunset, he would enter Madrasa Fayziyya.
When it was prayer time, he would pray in congregation behind the Late
Ayatullah Āghā Hājj Sayyid Muhammad Taqī Khānsārī as if he was just
another one of the students.  
    
 He was so humble and well-mannered and made such an effort to maintain
his etiquette that I repeatedly told him that in comparison to your
level of propriety (*adab*) and consideration we look ill-mannered!  
    
 Never once in almost forty years was he seen resting his back against a
pillow. Rather, in front of guests he would always maintain his
etiquette and sit a little distance in front of the wall. I was his
student and often went to his house and in observance of etiquette, I
wanted to sit slightly lower than him, but it was impossible. ‘Allāmah
would rise and say “If that is the case, then I must sit either at the
entrance or outside the room!”  
    
*‘Allāmah Tehrānī* 

Story n. 7
----------

   
 I used to participate in the higher level (*darse khārij*),
jurisprudence (*fiqh*) and principles of jurisprudence (*usūl*) classes
of Hazrat Imām Khumaynī (qs) and the philosophy classes of ‘Allāmah
Tabātabā’ī and was very attached to and loved both of these pious
teachers very much. One day I invited both teachers to my room in
Madrasa Hujjatiyya for lunch. They accepted my invitation and arrived at
my room. I wanted to coerce the two teachers into a philosophical
debate, but however much I tried I was not successful because they were
completely free of any personal desire and thus avoided all types of
academic argumentation.  
    
 In that session, if I addressed Imām Khumaynī and asked him something,
he would reply and ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī would remain quiet and listen
carefully. And if I asked ‘Allāmah a question, he would reply and Imām
(r) would remain quiet and listen carefully.  
    
*Ayatullah Ibrāhīm Amīnī* 

Story n. 8
----------

   
 In the course of the thirty years in which I had the honor of being in
his presence, never did I hear him use the word “I” on its own. On the
other hand, I heard him use the expression “I don’t know” many times in
response to a question, the same expression that most people are
reluctant to use. Yet, as a result of his extreme humbleness, this ocean
of knowledge and wisdom used this expression with ease.  
    
*Ayatullah Misbāh Yazdī* 

Story n. 9 
-----------

One of the years when ‘Allāmah had traveled to Mashhad, we went to his
house to visit him. Because of a weak heart and according to the orders
of his doctor, he was strictly forbidden from sitting on the ground. As
soon as we entered, he rose from his mattress and offered it to us to
sit on. I refused to sit, and for some time both he and I were left
standing until he said, *“sit so that I can say something”!* I obeyed
him out of politeness and sat. He too sat on the ground and then said,
*“what I wanted to say is that it’s softer over there”*.  
    
*‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī’s son-in-law*

 Story n. 10
------------

   
 I had written a paper on Imāmat and presented it to ‘Allāmah
Tabātabā’ī, saying, *“occasionally when you are tired of studying and
discussion, in the name of relaxation or as they say, for a recess
(zange tafrīh) have a look at this paper of mine as well”*.  
    
 He kindly agreed and read the paper from beginning to end, word for
word. After some time he said, *“I have seen it in its entirety”*. When
I went to pick it up from him, he made an objection saying that in a
particular place in the paper you have made a personal prayer only for
yourself. I had narrated a hadīth, and after the narration of the hadīth
and a commentary on it, I had written *“O God, bequeath the ability to
understand the signs of God to this being”!*  
    
 He [‘Allāmah] said, *“why have you made this personal prayer? Why have
you not included others in your invocation for Divine sustenance?”* Then
he said to me, *“as far as I am aware, I have never made a personal
prayer only for myself”*.  
    
*Ayatullah Jawādi Āmulī*  
  


