Justifications of Polygamy
==========================

In the light of the following justifications, we may refer to the
purposes beyond Islam’s allowing polygamy:

First, it happens that a wife may be affected by a physical or mental
defect that impedes her from doing her duties, responding to her
husband’s desires, or paying attention to the family members. Such
crises may create disorder; therefore, it is essenti al to find
acceptable and firm solution. This solution must be that:

(a) Either the husband, suffering the deprivation of his marital
rights, is neglected without treatment and left slipping in the depths
of vice, and the family members, as well, are left for disorder. This is
in fact wrongness against the husband and the family members,

(b) Or the husband leaves the diseased wife, by means of divorcement,
suffering the agonies of ailment in addition to the bitterness of
rejection and loneliness. This is absolutely denied by sound sense, for
it contradicts the principles of humanity,(c) Or the husband, after
obtaining the diseased wife’s permission, marries another wife who can
respond to his desires, reunite the scattered family, and encompass the
diseased wife with kindness.

This is in fact the best and most acceptable solution.

Second, in some circumstances, it happens that a wife is incapable of
giving birth. Husbands, in such cases, have to choose one of two—either
deprive themselves of sons and stand the burning feelings of being
heirless. This is however nobility. Or marry another woman capable of
giving birth. The second is in fact more logic since it is decided by
nature and instincts. Very rare are those who deny this fact.

Third, women, as a rule, are more numerous than men because, practicing
dangerous and deadly jobs in factories, mines, and the like, men
encounter fatal dangers. Men, naturally, are less immunized and more
subjected to the infections of diseases and epid emics than women are.
Biologists, referring to this fact, say that women enjoy physical
abilities that men lack and nearly all diseases affect men, not women.
On this account, there are 7,700,000 widows living, currently, in the
U.S.A. The office of Amer ican Census predicts that numbers of this
class will raise in the rate of two million per one decade.

Dr. Marion Langer, the sociologist, says that there are two solutions
only for covering the reduction in the numbers of men—either polygamy or
inventing a method that elongates men’s ages!

War is another reason beyond women’s being more than men in numbers.
Wars in fact terminate great numbers of men and cause horrible decrease
in their rates in proportion to women. In the First World War, the
number of the casualties was 21,000,000. The S econd World War consumed
about 50,000,000 men. This huge number of casualties caused a big space
in the numbers of men and created an international crisis that needed a
decisive treatment.

The Western nations, because they prohibited polygamy, faced this
problem with puzzlement; therefore, they had to treat it by means of
moral corruption that rumored profanity, prostitution, and bastards as
well as moral disorder.

Using such a unique, nonesuch method befitting the nature of humankind
and requirements of circumstances, Islam has treated this problem with
polygamy through which individuals and societies are saved from many
tragedies:

“Marry such women as seem good to you, two and three and four; but if
you fear that you will not do justice between them, then marry only one.
4:4)

Having allowed polygamy, Islam has not opened its door at random.
Protecting women’s rights and dignity, it has specified justice and
equality between wives as stipulations for the validity of polygamy.
Nevertheless, the stipulation of justice is dedicat ed to the material
requisites of life. The other emotional aspects are not controlled by
human beings. Hence, man is incapable of achieving fairness among wives
in the emotional matters:

“You will never be able to maintain justice among your wives, no matter
how hard you try. (4:129)”

Some people may claim that the Western woman does not need marriage
since she is able to practice jobs and seek earnings. This claim is
untrue. The actuality of the human nature and the inner instincts prove
the opposite. Woman’s need for man is not rest ricted in material
aspects only. It is in fact an urgent mental need without which woman
cannot perfect her entity. The same thing can be said about man.

Fourth, some men are characterized by excessive sexual energy that
requires extreme carnal need. This energy can be controlled by polygamy;
otherwise, it may find a deviant course. This is the very thing that
occurred in the societies that banned polygam y and, in return, were
affected by poly-girlfriends or poly-paramours.


