1. Advantages of Marriage
=========================

Because of the great variety of merits of marriage, many texts confirm
persistently on it by way of awakening the desires and warning against
its negligence. Marriage is the only means by which righteous progeny is
gained. Through sons, fathers feel dign ity, power, extent of existence,
good reputation, and great rewarding of God.

**2. Benefits of Marriage**

Marriage achieves chastity and immunity against corruption. From this
cause, the punishment of the marrieds who commit fornication is stoning
to death, because they are immunized by marriage and they despise the
holiness of the honors and dignities.

**3. Results of Marriage**

Marriage secures easeful subsistence, tranquility, and freedom from
worry. Naturally, man alone spends his day encountering the crises of
life and striving for seeking earnings. He can find relief nowhere
except in the shadows of his darling, sincere wif e who, trying to ease
his troubles, encompasses him with kind treatment and affectionate
conduct. Referring to this fact, God says:

“His creating spouses for you out of yourselves so that you might take
comfort in them and His creating love and mercy among you re evidences
(of the truth) for the people who (carefully) think (30:21).”

The Prophet (s) said: “Subsequent to the embracement of Islam, the best
thing that a Muslim can profit is a Muslim wife who pleases him when he
looks at her and has loyalty to him in honor and property.” ( 9 )

**Marital Happiness**

Marital happiness is achieved when it is known how to choose the
suitable partner. There are certain standards in the light of which
spouses must be chosen. Such standards strengthen the marital ties and
make peace of mind cover all the corners of the sp ouses’ lives. Bad
choice, on the other hand, exposes marriage to failure and
disappointment.

Treating this important aspect that plays a great role in people’s
life, the Ahl ul-Bayt (a) referred to the advantages and disadvantages
of both men and women so that each will know how to choose a spouse.

**The Ideal Husband**

The ideal husband is the qualified man who achieves happiness to his
wife and ensures tranquil marital life. Unlike the false idea of most of
people, the qualifications of a spouse have nothing to do with material
vanities, such as handsome house, comely means of transportation, or big
fortune. The true qualifications are high certificate, respectful
office, high morality, and the like matters. Material vanities may be
found with many spouses; still, they are unable to achieve marital
happiness or achie ve their wives’ pleasure and expectations.

Listen to the following words uttered by the wife of Muawiya —the
Umayyad caliph— who could no longer stand the life of luxury, lavish
expenditure, and wealth in the laps of her husband, and longed for her
love’s young dream, though he cannot secure luxu ry, lavish expenditure,
and wealth:

A house in which souls are roaming is favorable, in my sight, to a
handsome palace. To have a single cloak with delight is favorable, in my
sight, to wearing diaphanous clothes. A clumsy, but highborn, cousin of
mine is favorable, in my sight, to a stern unbeliever.

Hence, the true qualification is the mixture of three things: true
embracement of the religion, well mannerism, and capacity to maintain
and guard the wife materially and morally. Having these three qualities,
a man becomes, in the sight of Islam, an ide al competent husband.

The Prophet (s) said: “If a man whose morals and religiosity are
accepted in your sight proposes to your daughter, you must agree;
otherwise, there will come into being widespread idolatry and great
evil.” ( 10 )

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “The well-qualified husband is the chaste who
can save good living.” ( 11 )

Thus, it is discommended, as an Islamic ruling, to give one’s daughter
in marriage to the sinful, alcoholic, effeminate, ill-tempered, and the
like individuals whose religiosity and morality are not guaranteed.

**The Ideal Wife**

The ideal wife is the faithful, chaste, highborn, well-mannered,
good-looking woman who is well-behaved with her husband.

The Prophet (s) said: “The best of your ladies are the fertile, the
amiable, the chaste, the proud with her family, the humble with her
husband, who adorns herself for her husband, behaves decently with
others, listens and carries out her husbands’ instr uctions, provides
herself for him when they are alone, and avoids violating good manners,
like men.

The worst of your ladies are the humble with her family and proud
against her husband, the barren, the spiteful, who does not care if she
does something hideous, adorns herself when her husband is absent,
behaves chastely with him when he is present, does not listen and does
not carry out his instructions, abstains from providing herself to him
when they are alone just like a riding animal that prevents the rider
from riding it, does not accept his apologies, and does not forgive his
flaws.” ( 12 )

“The best women of my umma are the most bright-faced and the askers for
the less dowry.” ( 13 )

“He who chooses a wife for her beauty only will not have his aim
achieved. As for him who chooses a wife for her wealth only, Allah will
leave him with that wealth. Hence, you should choose the religious women
for marriage.” ( 14 )

“Beware of the green-looking women… It is the beautiful women of evil
source.” ( 15 )

This prophetic tradition warns against marrying the beautiful women
whose families are disreputable.


