Observance of Rights
====================

Spouses cannot obtain marital happiness before they apply the law of
give and take to themselves through observing each other’s rights.
Considering it as the first cell of society, the Islamic Sharia has paid
a great deal of attention to the marital life through regulations and
common rights of spouses and special rights of each. The common rights
that each spouse should perform towards the other are honesty,
confidence, trust, sympathy, and cooperation. These are the genuine
supports of successful mari tal life.

**Rights of Husbands**

By virtue of their obligatory and guardianship on their wives, husbands
enjoy definite rights:

**1. Obedience to Husbands**

A wife is fully responsible for responding to the husband’s acceptable
desires, and avoiding any matter that harms him, such as leaving the
house before obtaining his permission, spending his wealth wastefully,
neglecting the domestic duties, and the lik e matters.

Imam al-Baqir narrated that the Prophet (s) answered the woman who
asked him about the husbands’ rights against their wives by saying:
“Women should obey and avoid defying their husbands. They should not
give alms out of the husbands’ wealth before obtai ning their
permission, avoid observing fasting recommendably before they obtain
their permission, respond to their sexual call every time and in every
manner, even if they were on the backs of camels, and not leave their
houses before obtaining their per mission. If they do, they are cursed
by the angels of the heavens, angels of the earth, angels of wrath, and
angels of mercy until they come back to their houses.”

The woman then asked: “God’s Messenger, who is the owner of the
greatest right against man?” The Prophet (s) answered: “His father
is.”

She asked: “Who is the owner of the greatest right against woman?” The
Prophet (s) answered: “Her husband is.” ( 16 )

Imam as-Sadiq (a) narrated that a woman, whose husband had ordered her
not to leave her house until he would be back from his journey, sent a
messenger to the Prophet (s) to ask him a permission to visit her
diseased father.

“No,” answered the Prophet (s), “She should sit in her house and obey
her husband.”

As her father became intensely ill, she sent a messenger to the Prophet
(s) asking for permission to visit him.

“No,” answered the Prophet (s), “She should sit in her house and obey
her husband.”

As her father was dead, she sent a messenger to the Prophet (s) asking
for permission to attend his funeral ceremony.

“No,” answered the Prophet (s), “She should sit in her house and obey
her husband.”

When her father was buried, the Prophet (s) sent a messenger to tell
her that Allah forgave her father and her because of her observance of
the obedience to her husband. ( 17 )

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “As for any wife who passes a night while her
husband is angry with her for a question in which he is right, her
prayers will not be admissible unless her husband is pleased with her.”
**2. Compliance with Husbands**

Wives are recommended to encompass their husbands with nice
sociability, pleasant attention, and kind compliance by means of
observing their affairs, securing means of their physical and mental
tranquility, doing well the housekeeping, and caring for the family
members. Carrying out so, wives will certainly be dear and lovable by
husbands. Moreover, wives, by following such instructions, become good
examples for their sons and become the sources of high moral standards.
The most significant form of the wives’ compliance with their husbands
is to avoid exhausting them by expensive charges that injure their
economical capacities. This causes confusion to husbands who,
subsequently, begin to have an aversion to their wives.

Imam al-Kadhim (a) said: “Jihad of women is their compliance with their
husbands.”

The wives’ good behavior and compliance with their husbands raise their
spirits and supply them with huge physical and mental energies helping
in going on exerting all efforts for seeking earnings and encouraging on
standing ordeals and crises of life. T he wives’ quarrelsomeness and
disobedience, on the other hand, enfeeble the husbands’ entities and
bring to them senility earlier.

The following story is a good example:

A group of people went to ask the three brothers of Banu Ghannam for a
solution for their complicated question. As they met the first one, who
was old man, and asked him for a solution, he referred them to his
brother saying, ‘You may find a solution wi th him because he is older
than I am.’ When they went to meet his brother, they found a middle-aged
man. Having sought a solution from him, he said, ‘You may see my third
brother and, because he is older than I am, you can find a solution with
him.’ Henc e, they went to the third brother to meet a young man. As
they could no longer conceal their astonishment, they asked him about
his two brothers and his manner. He answered: ‘My brother whom you first
met is the youngest among us. Unfortunately, he had t o suffer the
misbehaviors of his ill-tempered wife because he anticipated an
intolerable matter if he would divorce her. His wife therefore has been
the main reason beyond his growing old at an earlier time. The second
one you met is the middle among us. His wife has gathered both good and
bad mannerism. She sometimes pleased him, but she also displeased him.
Hence, you can see him as middle-aged man. I have a well-mannered wife
who never shows misbehavior with me. Hence, I could keep my youth with
her. ’ ( 19 )

Let us now listen to the following words of a wise Beduin mother who
provides some instructions to her daughter on her wedding night:

“Daughter, you will very soon leave the house in which you came to this
world and the nest in which you grew up to join a nest that you have not
known yet, and a companion with whom you have not familiarized yourself
yet. Thus, you should behave as his b ondmaid so that he will behave as
your slave. Observe for him the following ten points:

The first and second are that you should live with him with
satisfaction and associate with him with obedience.

The third and fourth are that you should observe the places where his
eye and nose notice. Hence, he should not see anything ugly and should
not smell anything bad from you.

The fifth and sixth are that you should observe the times of his sleep
and food. Continuous feelings of hunger arouse fiery and continuous
disturbance of sleep arouses rage.

The seventh and eighth are that you should observe his wealth and
respect his family. To observe his wealth is to opt for moderation, and
to respect his family can be achieved through good management.

The ninth and tenth are that you should avoid disobeying his orders and
divulging his secrets. You will certainly arouse his malice against you
if you disobey him, and you will certainly expose yourself to his
unexpected punishment if you divulge his sec rets.

Beware of showing happiness before him when he is sad or showing
depression when he is happy, because the earlier is a sign of negligence
and the latter is a sign of annoyance.

Glorify him more than anyone else does, so that he will honor you more
than anyone else. You must know that you cannot obtain that which you
like before you prefer his satisfaction to yours and prefer his desires
to yours in any matter. Finally, God may choose for you the good.” ( 20
)


