3. Observance of Husbands’ Honor
================================

The most important obligation that is imposed upon a wife is to protect
her husband’s honor and reputation and exert all efforts for avoiding
any matter that deforms them, such as profligacy, garishness, or
divulgement of secrets, especially matters that husbands try to conceal.
Any negligence of this right will waste away confidence and threaten
with disagreement.

**Rights of Wives**

The Islamic Sharia has paid the greatest attention to wives and granted
them, opposite to the rights of husbands, all their material and ethical
rights that are based on wisdom, justice, and the good and interests of
both spouses:

**1. Disbursement**

It is obligatory upon husbands to save their wives’ essentials material
requirements, such as clothing, food, and residence as well as other
requisites that meet their ranks and way of living. From the viewpoint
of the Islamic Sharia, disbursement is a f amiliar right that husbands
must carry out for their wives, no matter how wealthy they are. This
right, however, does not cease to be valid unless the wife is decided as
recalcitrant. Furthermore, husbands are not allowed to coerce their
wives to do the household managements or nurse the babies unless they
themselves do such matters voluntarily.

**2. Good Companionship**

Wife is the husband’s intimate companion and partner of his life. She
shares him in good days and bad days, consoles him in sorrow and in joy,
and does alone exhausting efforts, such as the household managements,
care for the family affairs, and maternal functions. Hence, it is
necessary for husbands to associate with their wives nicely and treat
them with leniency. Out of their boasting and arrogance, some husbands
misthink that manhood cannot be achieved unless they control, mistreat,
insult, and disg race their wives. As a matter of fact, such qualities
are detestable since they indicate the complexity and feebleness of
personality. They also create disorder of marital life and eradicate
family pleasure. In view of her emotions and functions, woman i s
sensitive and quick-tempered; therefore, she may, sometimes, utter an
unbecoming word or stinging reproach originated from a mental excitement
or emotional agitation. In such cases, husbands are required to control
themselves and turn in kind forgivene ss so that the family march will
go on peacefully.

The Prophet (s) said: “The like of woman is a crooked rib. If you leave
it crooked, you will benefit by it. But if you try to fix it, you will
break it.”

This means that man, when his wife exceeds the limits of disobedience
to him, must treat her, first, by means of advice. If such means prove
futility, he must follow the method of ignoring her and avoiding
sleeping with her. If this is also useless, he m ay then beat her, but
not severely:

“Admonish women who disobey, do not sleep with them and beat them. If
they obey, do not try to find fault in them. Allah is High and Supreme.
(4:34)”

**3. Protection**

Because wives are under the guardianship of them, husbands are
responsible for defending them against any matter that may cause them
moral or material injury or may defame or soil their dignities, such as
dissoluteness and suspicious association with the other sex or immoral
women. How ugly those men who shove their wives in mixed clubs and
dissolute parties and allow them to dance with whomsoever they want are!
They try to close their eyes before the serious religious, moral, and
social dangers of such mixing that threatens the family entities with
disorder and disintegration.

Man, too, must be jealous and protect his wife and family against the
trickeries and misleading rumors of the invasions that could deceive
many male and female Muslims who, lacking enough knowledge of the
principles and concepts of their religion, repeat ed these rumors just
like parrots. It is important for such individuals to learn enough about
their religion, each according to his intellectual and cultural level,
so that they will be saved from the evils and trickeries of such
invasions.

“Believers, save yourselves and your families from the fire which is
fueled by people and stones and is guarded by stern angels who do not
disobey Allah's commands and do whatever they are ordered to do
(66:6).”

**False Rights**

Intending to extinguish the luminous light of Islam, the anti-Muslims
have dedicated all efforts to invading the Islamic world by weapons of
delusions and false principles. Unfortunately, the inexperienced and the
dull responded to such strange concepts, and went on imitating and
calling for them as if they are within their untouchable values. Because
of that, curtains covered the Islamic portrait that has been shining
with beauty, illumination, and ideality and a new deformed, hideous
portrait came out . Islam, thus, began to feel strange and alienated
among its people, while the non-Islamic concepts occupied large
positions in the intellects and feelings of Muslims to clear them out of
values and idealities. Moreover, many calls and hireling writers r aced
in demanding with more non-Islamic traditions so as to spread them in
the Islamic environment through false claims of defending, releasing,
and equalizing women with men, in addition to similar fake statements.
Let us now refer to some of these dece ptive rumors:

**Removal of the Veil**

As they could not stand seeing Muslim women guard themselves from
dissoluteness and lechery through veiling themselves with hijab, ( 21 )
the propagandists of liberalism tried to seduce them by means of
removing the veil and grooming themselves so as to take t hem away from
the highness of their dignities and boudoirs. Having been deceived by
such false calls, some women, unfortunately, responded and began to
remove their veils and show their beauty and charms so as to prepossess
eyes and hearts shamelessly. A ll over their extensive history, Muslim
women, who ignored the dangers and slips that were plotted against them,
have never been seduced in such a mean and illusory way.

Unlike the idea of the dissolute, hijab is not an aspect of retardation
or reactionism, it is in fact an aspect of modesty and chastity since it
guards women against indecorum and deterioration, protects them from the
snooping of the aberrant, and keep t hem away from the slips of vices
and seductions.

Finally, Muslims must learn lessons from the Western nations that have
suffered many misfortunes of immorality as well as ethical, physical,
and social tragedies—all because they allowed removal of veiling,
primping up, and mix of the sexes to prevail on their societies.

**Moral Defects**

Primping up and mixing of the sexes have created moral complications in
the Western milieus. Thus, they have no longer denied the sexual vices
or felt ashamed of their sins. Accordingly, they have become the
subjects of moral diseases that massacred them so heavily that the
honorable personalities have had to declare their denial and complaint
and warned against the horrible dangers of such dissolution.

Depicting the collapse of morality in his country, Paul Beaudre—the
French author said that it had no longer been odd to hear about the
existence of sexual relations between the relatives, such as fathers and
daughters and brothers with their sisters in some French provinces as
well as the crowded quarters of cities.

The Fourteen Committee, whose task is to inspect the ambushes of
lechery reported that most of the nightclubs, dance halls, manicure
places, stores of cosmetics, massage rooms, and coiffures have become
brothels or, perhaps, something too horrible to be mentioned.

Ben B. Lindsey –the judge of Los Angeles in 1934- predicted that
forty-five per cent of girls of schools profane their honors before they
leave schools. In the higher stages of study –as the judge added- this
rate raises vastly.

In his book titled ‘History of Lechery’, George Scat, referring to the
common state in his country, said that numbers of the non-professional
prostitutes have come to an unprecedented rate. Among almost all the
social classes, you can find such prostitut es. In the sight of girls
nowadays, sexual intercourse, lechery, and even abnormality have become
within the modern styles of living. Such moral corruption can be found
even with the children of both sexes because they have been affected by
the crooked e nvironment and the sexual incentives.

In his book tiled ‘Sexual Regulations,’ Dr. Rodet Hugo said that it had
not been odd or abnormal to see the seven or eight-year-old girls play
sexually with boys or, even, practice sexual intercourse with them.

A physician from the city of Baltimore reported that in a period of one
year, more than one thousand suits of committing fornication with less
than twelve - year - old girls were brought before the courts in that
city alone. Moral corruption has not stopped at such lowly levels, but
it has exceeded all limits of normal sexual relations to reach a stage
of perversion and sexual deviation. It has become familiar, under the
encouragement of the law, to see a boy get married to a boy of his same
sex and to see some people congratulate for such marriage!

Dr. Hooker says that it has been common, in the faculties, nursery
schools, and even religious schools, to hear about the commitment of
sodomy among the students most of whom have completely lost any desire
for the other sex.

Let us now ask the parrot-like propagandists of liberalism whether this
is the very goal that they want for the Islamic nation and themselves,
or whether they do not understand the results of their liberalism!

Beyond dispute, every individual who calls for liberalism and primping
up is no more than an axe deconstructing the entity of the Islamic
society, and a pioneer of evil and dissolution in his nation and
country.

“Those who like to publicize indecency among the believers will face
painful torment in this world and in the life to come. Allah knows what
you do not know. (24:19)”


