Physical Defects
================

Any nation that lacks religious and moral values and is predominated by
deviation must encounter the results of its individuals’ aberrance and
corruption. Like the collapse of moralities, individuals of such a
nation must suffer physical collapse.

This is what has exactly occurred in the Western milieus that have
become the target of venereal diseases, which caused great losses,
socially and economically. Hence, physicians, through numerous reports,
have gone on declaring the dimensions and danger ous tragedies of such
diseases.

A French physician declared that, because of syphilis and venereal
diseases, more than thirty thousand persons die annually. After hectic
fever, syphilis occupies the second position in the list of the
deadliest diseases in France.

In Britannica Encyclopedia, it is recorded that, as an annual rate,
200,000 persons affected by syphilis and 160,000 persons affected by
gonorrhea are treated in the official hospitals of the U.S.A. 650
hospitals have been specialized in treating these d iseases. In
addition, 61% of the diseased with syphilis and 89% of the diseased with
gonorrhea see official physicians.

In the book titled ‘Sexual Regulations’, it is recorded that
30,000-40,000 babies die in the U.S. annually because of hereditary
syphilis, and that the number of mortalities because of the other
diseases —except tuberculosis- is as same as the number of mortalities
of syphilis.

Thus, the Western nations, because of their dissoluteness, have paid
all these losses as taxes collected from the health and life of their
individuals.

**Social Defects**

In addition to the material and physical losses, the dissolute nations
have suffered serious social defects. Because they neglected principles
of chastity and sincerity and closed the eyes to the conditions of true
matrimony, these nations have terminate d their family and social lives.
Thus, you find the spouses each wandering in the glooms of deviation.
The wife, being dissolute and adorning herself with maximum appearance
of beauty and seduction, breaks froth in a direction, and the husband
wander in the hotbeds of vice and depravity. As soon as one of them
finds a personality that is more attractive or seductive than his/her
other half, he/she slips in the depths of vice with him/her. As this
circle goes on, the family entity will unquestionably des troy and the
matrimonial relation will split for the most tasteless reason. Reports
of experts in this field have confirmed this fact.

About the divorcement in the town of Donor in 1922, Ben B. Lindsey says
that separation was the result of every marriage and the courts received
a file of divorcement of every two states of marriage. The judge also
confirmed that this was not in the town of Donor only, but also all
towns all over the U.S., almost, witnessed such cases. Such states of
divorcement or separation, the judge added, are still increasing…

The other nations that authorized illegitimate sexual relations were
not better than the U.S. in encountering bad results of abnormality and
mixing of the sexes. Most of the individuals of such societies rejected
marriage and preferred bachelorhood so as to satiate their sexual mania
and to free themselves from the bounds and costs of marriage.

An essay issued in a newspaper in Detroit said that the common states
of the decrease in the rates of marriage, the increase in the rates of
divorce, and the illegitimate relations between men and women—all these
indicate that ‘our’ society is retarding to the depths of bestiality.
The natural desire of sexual reproduction has faded away, the newborns
are left without judgment, the feeling of the importance of family
structure has been relying upon the persistence of civilization, and
self-judgment has been null. The negligence of the results of
civilization and free government has been prevalent on the society.

A deep look at the tragedies that invaded the Western world proves that
they have been the results of primping up, dissoluteness, mixing of the
sexes, and commonness of the sexual incentives, such as the sexy movies,
stories, and songs, that deformed the moral values and rumored
corruption in the Western societies.

In his report advanced before the General Committee of the Association
of ban of adulteries, Emil Porissi said that the sexy photographs have
affected people’s feelings with the highest degrees of excitement and
disorder and urged the miserable customers to commit unimaginable
crimes. Besides, they have affected boys and girls so tremendously.
Because of the existence of such seductive photographs, the moral and
physical states of many schools and colleges have been null. Finally, it
is incredible to fi nd anything more destructive to girls than these
photographs. ( 22 )

From the previous presentation, we conclude that the Islamic Sharia has
ordered Muslim women of hijab and warned them against primping up and
suspicious mixing with the other sex so as to guard their dignities and
chastity from the incentives of offense and seduction, and protect the
Islamic society from the tragedies and misfortunes that affected the
Western societies, deformed their morals and consciences, and caused
them misery and perdition:

“Prophet, tell your wives, daughters, and the wives of the believers to
cover their bosoms and breasts. This will make them distinguishable from
others and protect them from being annoyed. Allah is All-forgiving and
All-merciful. (33:59)”

This is one of the holy Quranic texts that enjoin hijab and urge Muslim
women to adhere to it in such a frank, serious style.

First, God orders the Prophet (s) to convey the divine command to his
wives, daughters, and wives of the believers that they must cover their
bosoms and breasts. He then shows the importance of hijab by expressing
that it will save them from harm and ann oyance. This is because hijab
covers the charms of women and encompasses them with rings of immunity
and protection against the spying and criminal intrusions of the
dissolute individuals who try to play with the chastity and dignity of
women.

“Wives of the Prophet, you are not like other women when you have fear
of Allah; hence, do not be tender in your speech lest people whose
hearts are sick may lust after you. Speak a good word. Stay in your
houses and do not display yourselves after the manner of the
(pre-Islamic) age of darkness. Be steadfast in the prayer, pay the
zakat—the religious tax, and obey Allah and His Messenger. (33:32-3)”

God addresses to the wives of the Prophet (s), because they are not
like ordinary women in fields of honor and ranking, for their belonging
to the pioneer personality of Muslims—the Prophet (s). He orders them to
fear Him and avoid the disobedience to Hi s Messenger and Him. This very
statement proves that the honor of their belonging to the Prophet (s)
relies upon the stipulation that they must fear God and obey His
Messenger and Him. He then warns them against speaking with people in
tender style so as not to arouse the lusts of the ill-hearted ones. He
then orders them to speak in a style indicating modesty, chastity,
dignity, and gravity. He then orders them to stay in their houses and
avoid displaying themselves before the non-relatives, as women i n the
period before Islam used to do. These matters, if applied, secure
women’s chastity and dignity and protect them from the slips of sins and
obsessions of suspect.

Through its high idealities and ethics, the holy Quran goes on planting
virtue and chastity in the mentalities of Muslim women:

“(Muhammad), tell the believing men to cast down their eyes and guard
their carnal desires; this will make them more pure. Allah is certainly
aware of what they do. Tell the believing woman to cast down their eyes,
guard their chastity, and not to show off their beauty except what is
permitted by the law. Let them cover their breasts with their veils.
They must not show off their beauty to anyone other than their husbands,
father, father-in-laws, sons, step-sons, brothers, sons of brothers and
sisters, women of their kind, their slaves, immature male servants, or
immature boys. They must not stamp their feet to show off their hidden
ornaments. All of you, believers, turn to Allah in repentance so that
perhaps you will have everlasting happiness. (24:30 -1)”

In the previous holy Verse, God orders the Prophet (s) to convey the
moralities of the Quran—the divine revelation, to the believers who,
through so, can be guided constructively. He orders the Prophet (s) to
convey the instruction that the believing men must cast down their eyes
before women so as to save themselves from serious dangers. It
frequently has happened that a single aspirant look at beauty resulted
in long regret, and a single look has frequently captured with the traps
of love. A sinful vi ew may also shove in the depths of vice The Lord,
then, orders the believing men to guard their carnal desires against
sexual sins —or guarding them against being seen by others—.

By issuing the two instructions of casting down the sights and guarding
the carnal desires, God has closed the most dangerous doors to moral
evils. He then guards the believing men with chastity and honesty as He
tells that such practices secure purity o f souls and moralities and
benefit for the religion and the worldly life. He then refers to His
absolute prevalence, supervision, and awareness of the believers’ sights
and carnal desires as well as everything else, so that this will lead to
the enlighte nment of the senses and the raising of the ethical
values.

He then refers to the believing women by ordering them, like men, of
casting the sights before the non-relatives and controlling the carnal
desires, since both the sexes have equal instincts and tendencies that
attract each other.

He then dedicates definite instructions to the believing women so as to
regulate their behaviors and kindle in their mentalities feelings of
modesty, chastity, and dignity. He orders them not to display their
aspects of beauty before anyone except the re latives except the
external appearances and those which are allowed by the Islamic
Sharia—namely, the clothes, face, and palms of the hands. He also orders
them to lower their veils on their necks and breasts so as to keep them
unseen. He then permits women to show off their aspects of beauty before
their relatives as well as the individuals who are not expected to be
charmed or seduced by such aspects of beauty. Hence, the Verse nominates
their fathers, fathers-in-law, sons, stepsons, brothers, nephews ,
bondmaids, men who are not expected to have any desire for women, such
as the insane and the righteous old men, and the boys who are immature
or too innocent to realize women’s private parts. He then warns women
against stamping their feet to show off or to make others hear the
sounds of their anklets. Finally, God instructs all believers to repent
to Him so that they will see success in this world and the life to
come.

The Prophet (s) said: “Every eye will be weeping on the Day of
Resurrection except three: an eye that wept out of fear of Allah, an eye
that was cast down against scenes that are forbidden by Allah, and an
eye that passed night sleepless for sake of Alla h.” ( 23 )

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: “The (forbidden) look is one of the poisonous
arrows of Eblis. It has frequently happened that a single look caused a
long-termed regret.” ( 24 )

“The first look is yours, the second is against you, and the third
causes you perdition.” ( 25 )

“The Prophet (s) warned men against seeing women before they obtain
their guardians’ permission.” ( 26 )

“Every individual may commit a deal of fornication. The –forbidden-
look is the fornication of the eye, backbiting is the fornication of the
mouth, and touching is the fornication of the hands, whether it affects
sexually or not.” ( 27 )

“Any one who casts his sight upward to the heavens so as to avoid
looking at a woman will be given one of the Paradisiacal women in
marriage by Allah before he is back to his normal sighting.” ( 28 )


