V Woman in Islam
================

While discussing the marital rights, I feel it is important to refer to
women’s ranks in Islam and to tell how this religion cares for and treat
women with utter kindness. This is the reason beyond women’s being happy
and respectful under the shades of I slam. To prove so, it is essential
to compare between women of the first age of Islam and women of other
ages in the light of the divine principles and genuine standards, away
from capricious and ignorant tendencies and control of the customs and
traditi ons that are unsuitable to be considered as true criteria in
examining, evaluating, and distinguishing the genuine facts from the
false, since some facts may take the color of their surroundings or
circumstances. As a matter of fact, custom, sometimes, r egards evil
manners as good and good traits as evil. It can be trusted and accepted
as arbiter only when it agrees with the wise guidance of God. Only then,
custom will not misjudge and will not go astray from justice.

**Woman in the Ancient Ages**

The social standard of women’s evaluation in the different ancient ages
varied to great extent and swing between negligence and excessiveness,
deprived of any state of moderation. Woman, first, was regarded as
lowly, imperfect creature. Then, she was reg arded as a devil that
inspires with sinning and evil. Then, she was regarded as the mistress
of the society who has absolute control over everything. Then, she was
regarded as a worker that must be exerting all efforts for saving her
livelihood.

During most of these ages, woman used to suffer misery and humiliation,
since her rights were usurped and her soul was enslaved by man who had
the right to use her for any purpose.

During the Roman civilization, woman’s values were unstable. First, she
was decided as a slave and servant of man, who had all the freedom to
domineer her. Then, she was overestimated when she was freed from the
fist of fathers and husbands and granted a ll rights of possession,
heritage, divorce, indecorum, and indecency to the degree that a Roman
woman used to marry a number of men shamelessly.

A Roman writer mentioned the story of a woman who moved in the laps of
eight men in less than five years. Another saint referred to the story
of that woman whose last marriage was the twenty-third to the man who
married twenty times before her. ( 29 )

Furthermore, the Roman woman was allowed to practice sexual deviation
freely, and that was the main reason beyond the corruption that affected
the Roman society.

In the custom of the Greek civilization, woman was added to the
rubbish. She was sold, purchased, and regarded as devilish infection.

The ancient codes of India decided that epidemic, death, hell, poison,
snakes… etc. are better than woman. Hence, the Indian women’s rights to
live were ceased with the death of their husbands who were their
absolute masters and lords. Hence, they had to throw themselves in the
fire in which the bodies of their husbands were thrown; lest, the
eternal curse would befall them.

From the viewpoint of the Torah, the rank of woman can be noticed
through the following words that are recorded in the Exodus, Chapter 14,
paragraph 17:

“My heart and I wandered so as to know, search, and seek wisdom and
reason, and to know that evil is ignorance and idiocy is insanity. I
found that woman who is snare and whose heart is trap and hands are
fetters, is bitterer than death.” ( 30 )

Christianity, in the Middle Ages, considered woman as a devilish,
profane creature that should be kept away.

In his book titled ‘History of Ethics of Europe’, Liki says that people
used to escape women’s shadows and deem sinful to approach or meet them.
They also believed that to meet by chance in the way or talk to any
woman, including mothers, wives, or siste rs, abort righteous deeds and
spiritual efforts.

Thus, the Western society used to underestimate women. In 586 A.D., a
conference was held in France to decide whether woman is h3\>uman being
or not! After discussions, they decided that woman is human being that
is created for serving man!

In England, Henry VIII deemed unlawful for women to recite the Holy
Scriptures. Until 1850 A.D., women were not regarded as citizens, and
until 1882, they had no personal rights and had no right to possess
anything. Hence, women were dissolved in the per sonalities of their
fathers or husbands. ( 31 )


