Equality of the Sexes
=====================

Among the various heresies that invaded the East was the idea of the
complete equality of man and woman in political, economical, and social
fields. The naïve Muslims, having been deceived by this fallacy, went on
calling to it, ignoring its being in vio lation of the principles of
nature and conscience, because of the great differences between the two
sexes and the dissimilarity of their qualifications in this life. By
proving the great differences between man and woman, it becomes easy to
realize the f alsity of this idea that is full of negligence and waste
of the characteristics of both sexes.

Generally, man is huger, stronger, and more steadfast against ordeals
than woman is. He is also more broad-minded, sagacious, and
experienced.

Woman, on the other hand, is, generally, more handsome, less physically
powerful, more sensitive, and more delicate than man is, since she is
prepared for her maternal tasks.

Symptoms of menstruation, pregnancy, and suckling that occur to women
and influence effectively their lives and physical states are factors
that increase the difference between the two sexes. During their
monthlies, women suffer symptoms that cause them to be unfamiliar.

Dr. Jebb Hard says that it is infrequent to find a woman who does not
suffer a disorder during her menstrual period. Most women, however,
suffer headache, exhaustion, pain under navels, and anorexia. They also
become aggressive and sleepers. Because of t hese symptoms, it is
possible to say that women become ill during their monthlies and that
they have to suffer such illness once a month. Hence, such physical
changes naturally affect women’s intellectual faculties and bodily
processes.

Thus, many researchers have proved the impossibility of the equality of
the sexes.

In his book that proved the inequality of the sexes through natural
experiments and observations, Antoine Namilav; the Russian physician,
records that ‘we must not deceive ourselves by claiming that it is easy
to equalize between man and woman in the pra ctical life. In fact, none
in this world exerted the efforts that we, the Soviet, had exerted for
making the equality of the sexes practical, and none enacted such
innocent, but fanatical, laws that we have enacted in this field.
Nevertheless, woman’s fa milial position has hardly ever changed.
Moreover, woman’s social position has also hardly ever changed. The
conception of the impossibility of the equality of the sexes is still
deep-rooted in the minds of all the classes of the Soviet society.’ ( 39
)

Dr. Alexis Carrel, who received the 1912 Nobel Prize for Physiology,
says that it is essential for educationists to pay a great deal of
attention to the mental and organic characteristics as well as natural
functions of both male and female since there a re innumerable
differences between the sexes. Hence, it is necessary, for constructing
a civilized world, to take in consideration these differences.

As a matter of fact, we cannot consider man’s surpassing woman in the
scientific and theoretical fields as a standard that is applied to all
men. It happens that woman surpasses man in such fields. This, however,
cannot deny the fact that woman, in most cases, falls behind man. Some
people claim that woman’s falling behind man has been the reason of
social traditions and educational systems that prevailed on her life.
This is not accurate because most of such traditions and systems have
ceased to exist in most of the dissolute nations where the difference
between the sexes faded away and woman have enjoyed all opportunities
that are gained by men. Yet, woman, in these societies, has still
occupied the second position after man. This is another evidence on the
impossibility of the equality of the sexes, which is, such being the
case, considered as a sort of idiocy and silliness.

As the propagandists of equality of the sexes are completely incapable
of developing man’s qualifications so as to make him fit to do the
female tasks, they cannot make women assume masculine manners and do the
jobs that are purely men’s.

The Divine Wisdom has prepared each sex for definite function and tasks
in this life. Hence, it is unavoidable to distribute jobs among them
according to each one’s qualifications and abilities. It is said that
‘everything is prepared for doing its job.’

Man’s task is to practice the arduous works and the out-of-house
affairs, work hard for securing means of livelihood for the family
members, and guarantee material and moral protection and pleasure for
them. Women, however, are unqualified enough to do s uch tasks so
expertly.

Woman’s task, on the other hand, is to be good housewife and bring up
well-qualified men. None but woman can change her house and society into
a paradise where man can find release of the life difficulties and
children can feel the warm affection and fac tors of growth and
prosperity. To insert women in men’s fields and encourage her competing
with him in his own tasks is regarded as forfeiture of their
qualifications. It also plays the role of immobilizing men’s right to
practice their vital activities that, nobody except him, can do, as well
as his right to create a family.

The results of modern women’s competition with men in the fields of
their specialization have been dangerous moral, social, and mental evils
whose disadvantages have surpassed greatly their advantages.

Because women have failed to do their genuine tasks and joined the
mixed society, the family structure has become the victim of loss,
immorality, and misery, and has suffered the commonness of moral
deviation and collapse.

On another page of his aforementioned book, the Russian researcher
records that ‘symptoms of sexual disorder have disappeared on all the
workers. This is in fact serious danger that threatens termination to
socialism. Hence, we must fight with every weap on such symptoms.
However, fighting at this front has many problems and difficulties. I
can refer to thousands of events that demonstrate the fact that the
infection of sexual libertinism spread into the educated individuals of
the proletariat in additio n to the ignorant ones.’ ( 40 )

It is however acceptable for women to practice certain jobs pertaining
to and befitting their sex, such as teaching girls or treating women. In
case a woman does not have a family provider or when the breadwinner is
incapable of securing her essential re quirements, it becomes acceptable
for her to practice a job that saves her from the charms of the mixed
association and saves others from her charms.

Islam, having protected her dignity, has saved the earnings of the
needy women without letting them need for such suffering. If Muslims
defray the zakat, poverty will find no place in the Islamic society.
Thus, what do the propagandists of the equality o f the sexes want? If
they intend to dignify and free women from social wronging, Islam has
certainly freed women, raised their ranks, and granted them their moral
and material rights. They in fact intend to deceive and humiliate women
so as to approximat e them from the eyes and flirts of the wolves. What
do the liberalist women want? Do they seek the absolute equality with
man, or do they seek the freedom of dissoluteness and indecorum?

Because they all are immoral purposes, Islam has forbidden both man and
woman to respond to such calls so as to save them from the slips of
charms and the tragedies of the mixing of the sexes.


