Distinction Between the Sexes
=============================

Islam has freed women from the offensive traditions and customs of the
pre-Islamic era, honored them, raised their ranks, and decided their
being equal to man in humanity, principles, sanctity of blood, honor,
and property, and the deserving of the rewar ds and penalties of the
life to come. On bases of fairness and wisdom, it has identified women’s
values and standings to men. In some situations, Islam, depending upon
advisability and rightness, has deemed women as same as men, but it,
because of the di fferent qualifications and responsibilities in the
various fields of life, has also made a distinction between them through
nominating certain rights, duties, and rulings for each.

In all these affairs, Islam has aimed at achieving wisdom, uprightness,
and fair evaluation of humankind’s natures and traits. By preferring man
in certain rulings, Islam has not aimed at humiliating or wronging
woman. Its one and only purpose has been t he achievement of justice
through granting each sex the rights that befit the qualifications and
responsibilities.

We, hereinafter, will refer to the most significant points of
distinction between the two sexes so as to realize the reasons of the
Islamic rulings in this regard:

**1. Maintenance**

Each society, no matter how small it is, is in need for a
well-qualified guardian whose mission is to supervise its affairs and
achieve prosperity and development. From this cause, each family is in
an inevitable need for a guardian and supervisor who, though engaged in
serious task requiring sagacity, practice, willpower, and enough
experience in this life, must govern his family member with well
management and secure means of acceptable livelihood.

Now, which one is the worthiest of supervising and maintaining the
family? Is it man or woman?

Owing to his qualifications, man is more experienced in the life
affairs, more competent of supervising the family morally and
materially, and more capable of achieving means of good living than
woman is. This matter has been decided by the eternal const itution of
Islam:

“Men are the maintainers of women because Allah has made some of them
to excel others and because they spend out of their property. (4:34)”

Maintenance, however, does not mean absolute dominance and policies of
severity and violence against the family members, since such practices
are in violence of the ethics of Islam. The true maintenance relies upon
mutual understanding, cooperation, and emotional and intellectual
consent between the paterfamilias and his family members:

“Women have benefits as well as responsibilities. Men have a status
above women. (2:228)”

In view of her femininity, woman is tenderhearted, sensitive, and
touchy. Frequently, women’s emotions prevail on their minds. All these
matters qualify her to fulfill the mission of maternity whose functions
require such feelings, and take her way from the leadership of family
that requires sagacity, emotional balance, tolerance, and firmness. All
these traits are found with man; therefore, he is more qualified than
woman is in fields of maintaining the family.

Finally, positive woman usually disrespects the inactive, feeble
husband and honors the husband of great and attractive personality.

**2. Man’s Preference to Woman in Inheritance**

The Islamic Sharia has decided that man should enjoy the double of
woman’s share of heritage. Some simple-minded people misthink that such
a law is considered as mortification and wronging for woman. In fact,
Islam has never degraded or wronged woman. Be cause of man’s big
responsibilities, Islam has decided for him double share of heritage so
that fairness and equity can be achieved.

Unlike woman, man is responsible for securing his family members’ food,
clothing, house, education, and medical treatment. He is, unlike woman
too, responsible for protecting Islam by all possible means. Finally,
man is responsible for many social obliga tions that require spending.
In the light of this comparison, it is fair to decide for man a double
share of heritage. Woman, however, is luckier than man is, since she is
not responsible for many family and social obligations. Hence, Islam has
decided:

“Let the male inherit twice as much as the female. (4:11)”

Finally, woman’s possessive and vested rights are completely saved for
her alone, and man has no right to do anything to such properties before
her satisfaction and permission are obtained. Woman, in this field, is
equal to man.

**3. Testimony**
The Islamic Sharia has considered two women’s testimony as one man’s so
as to protect woman’s testimony from falsity and to guard the litigants’
rights from wronging and waste.

As she is prevailed by agitated emotions, sensitivity, and passivity
towards a definite party, woman deviates from justice and neglects the
right and the obligation of providing exact testimony. Evading so, Islam
has decided the joining of two women in t estimony so that one may
remind the other and prevent her from false testifying:

“Let two men or one man and two women whom you choose, bear witness so
that if one of them makes a mistake the other can correct him.
(2:282)”

Modern medical experiments have proved that some women, during their
monthlies, suffer symptoms causing their mental powers to be enfeebled.
Hence, they become oblivious. ( 41 ) Such experiments support the
necessity of joining two women during bearing testimo nies.

**4. Polygamy**

The enemies have waged wrong campaigns against Islam using various
forms of bitter criticism and empty censure one of which is their
vituperating Islam’s permitting polygamy, which is, as they have
claimed, considered as injury and confusion for the mari tal life.

First of all, Islam was not the originator of polygamy. Many centuries
before Islam, polygamy was decided by the divine religions and positive
laws.

“Polygamy was not forbidden in the most ancient code. Likewise, it was
not forbidden in the Torah and the Gospel. Since the reign of Prophet
Abraham up to the Nativity, none of the prophets forbade polygamy. In
the Gospel, we cannot find a single text te lling the illegality of a
matter which was decided as legal in the Old Testament. Everything that
is mentioned in the Gospel asserts the legality of polygamy in every
situation except one: the bishop who shows failure in standing
monasticism must satisfy himself with a single wife…

Edward Westermarck, whose major interests were history of marriage,
says that ‘polygamy, as the Church confesses, perpetuated until the
seventeenth century. Moreover, it occurred frequently beyond the sights
of the Church and the ruling authorities.’

Hence, Islam, allowing polygamy, has not brought something heretic.
However, the new thing that Islam has brought in this regard was
reforming the disorder created by absolute polygamy and taking in
consideration the necessities that God does not neglect . In some
circumstances, or even general social circumstances, the allowance of
polygamy is more beneficial than its forbiddingness.” ( 42 )

As a matter of fact, those who denied Islam’s allowing polygamy have
certainly practiced it by means of deviation and sinful relations. Had
they thought about the matter perceptively and impartially, they would
have found that polygamy is the one and onl y solution for the problems
and crises that befall individuals and societies.


