Section Six
===========

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَعَنَ اللّهُ أُمَّةً دَفَعَتْكُمْ عَنْ مَقامِكُمْ وَأَزالَتْكُمْ
عَنْ مَراتِبِكُمُ الَّتِي رَتَّبَكُمُ اللّهُ فِيها
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May Allah curse those people who denied you your position (O’ Ahlul
Bayt) and removed you from your rank which Allah himself had granted
you.”

The Shi’a have a firm belief in the Imamate of the chosen members of the
family of the Prophet as they form the completion of the faith of Islam
and ‘perfect’ the message of the Prophet by protecting it until the end
of time. In the opinion of the Shi’a, the role of the Imam is two:

**1. Islamic Religious Leadership**

All Muslims agree that in the 23 year span of the Prophet of Islam, even
though the entire Qur’an was revealed, however not all of the Islamic
laws were implemented and explained to the community in detail. It is
for this reason that some Muslims believe that if there is no ruling in
the Qur’an or Sunnah that they can apply Qiyas (analogy) to the laws –
in essence, making up their own rulings. However the Shi’a believe that
since there are 12 Imams after the Prophet, that they had the
responsibility to explain and elucidate upon the rulings of the Prophet
and to further develop these – based on their infallibility and Divinely
granted knowledge. Thus, there is no room in the Shi’a teachings for
making up rulings based on one’s own ‘opinion’.

**2. Political Leadership of the Ummah**

The majority of Muslims believe that after the Prophet, we are free to
choose our own political leadership and even if an unjust and tyrannical
ruler is placed as the head by the “majority”, then he must be followed
without question! However, the Shi’a believe that Allah would never
leave the community without a political leader and thus, the Prophet
definitely appointed and made known his successors. In our present day
and age, it is interesting that when Yasir Arafat was on his death bed,
his followers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip were talking about his
successor to carry the cause of the Palestinians forward!

Just imagine, these people have the foresight to ensure a successor is
groomed and appointed for the role of guiding a few million people from
Palestine, however our Prophet would leave this world without doing the
same for the entire Muslim nation of close to 2,000,000,000,000 people!

The ‘curse’ in this section of the Ziyarat is directed towards those
people who denied a group of people their God given right to rule and
lead and who ultimately ended up denying the words of Allah and the
Prophet by electing their own leaders! From this line we also understand
that Islam is not only “prayers and fasting” – rather, it is a complete
system which includes the Religious leadership of the community and all
of its aspects: social, political, economic, artistic and all other
dimensions.

Thus, we reject any form of “Islam” if it does not conform to the Islam
of Rasulullah, ‘Ali, Hasan and Husayn and the rest of the infallibles
(peace be upon all of them).


