Section Seven and Eight
=======================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَعَنَ اللّهُ أُمَّةً قَتَلَتْكُمْ، وَلَعَنَ اللّهُ الْمُمَهِّدِينَ
لَـهُمْ بِالتـَّمْكِينِ مِنْ قِتالِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May the curse of Allah be upon those people who killed you and may the
curse of Allah be upon those people who made it easy for them by
preparing the grounds of your killing.”

The meaning of “...those people who killed you...” is a direct reference
to Yazid, Shimr and the other criminals who directly carried out the war
against the successor of the Prophet and may also be in reference to
those people who killed the first 11 Imams.

As for who “...those people who made it easy for them...”, we alluded to
this in our previous discussion and once again reiterate that these
people are none other than those who laid the foundation of Karbala’
while they battled for power in the Saqifah of Bani Sa’ida.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَرِئْتُ إِلَى اللّهِ وَإِلَيْكُمْ مِنْهُمْ وَأَشْياعِهِمْ
وَأَتْباعِهِمْ وَأَوْلِيائِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I turn to Allah and I turn towards you and turn away from them and
their adherents, followers and friends.”

Not only do we curse and ask Allah to remove His mercy from these
people, but once we have carried this Islamic injunction out, we then
attest that we hold firmly to Allah and the Ahlul Bayt and distance
ourselves from not only the killers of the Imam, but also those who
adhere to their ideology and accept them as their leaders, those who
follow them (both in succession and also in the spiritual essence of the
word) and those who are classified as their friends. Is this nothing
other than “Tabarrah” which is one of our Furu’ ad-Din?

This belief of Tawallah and Tabarrah can best be summarized in the
famous hadith from Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) in
which, when he was asked about the definition of ‘religion’ and he said,
“...is religion anything other than love and hate...”


