Section Eleven
==============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَعَنَ اللّهُ ابْنَ مَرْجانَةَ، وَلَعَنَ اللّهُ عُمَرَ بْنَ سَعْدٍ،
وَلَعَنَ اللّهُ شِمْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May the curse of Allah be upon Ibne Marjana and may the curse of Allah
be upon ‘‘Umar b. Sa’ad and may the curse of Allah be upon Shimr.”

Ibne Marjana is one of the people discussed in the previous section as
he is from the family of Ziyad. Since his mother was an adulteress named
Marjana, if we wish to refer to him by his mother’s side, he would be
known as Ibne Marjana, while if we wish to refer to him by his father’s
side, who was also an unchaste person, he would be known as b. Ziyad.
Thus, (‘Ubaydullah) b. Ziyad is also known as ‘Ubaydullah Ibne Marjana –
one with an unclear lineage and family tree.

What was Ibne Marjana’s role in the event of Karbala’? He was the
governor of Basrah and then was sent to Kufah. He was directly
responsible for the killing of Muslim b. ‘Aqil and also guilty of
massing the troops towards Karbala’.

‘‘Umar b. Sa’d b. Abi Waqqas is the second person cursed in this
section. Sa’d b. Abi Waqqas was a prominent companion of the Prophet,
however like others, he let the material world and Satan get the best of
him some time after the death of the Messenger of Allah.

Rising up in opposition to the Imamate of ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, he refused
to pledge his allegiance to the successor of the Prophet and after a
lifetime of submission to Islam, ended up leaving this world in
opposition to Allah. However his son, who was cursed by Prophet Muhammad
and Imam ‘Ali did not even enjoy a temporary lofty rank and was actually
disowned by his father! His role in the event of ‘Ashura was as
commander-in-chief of the entire battalion on the plains of Karbala’ as
he was given the “honour” of being the governor of Ray (a village on the
outskirts of Tehran, Iran – it still exists today as a suburb of South
Tehran).

To show his perversity and Satanic ideas at the mere thought of killing
the remaining grandson of the Prophet, we quote two lines of poetry he
composed:

“Should I give up the government of Ray which is my ultimate goal and
desire to attain?  
 Or should I return to Kufah, guilty and culpable of the killing of
al-Husayn?  
 And in the killing of him (al-Husayn) is the hell fire of which there
is nothing to save me,  
 However the government of Ray is that thing which brings pleasure to my
eyes.”

Shimar b. Dhil Jawshan, the third person cursed in this section was once
a staunch follower of Imam ‘Ali and even fought against Mu’awiyah in the
battle of Siffin, however he too succumbed to Satan and followed his low
desires.

His crimes included encouraging Ibne Ziyad not to accept any sort of
peace treaty with Imam Husayn and to ensure that he was killed to
prevent any more ‘rebellion’ in the nation. His sins are too numerous to
recount here, however his greatest crime was severing the head off of
the body of Imam Husayn.


