Section Twelve
==============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَعَنَ اللّهُ أُمَّةً أَسْرَجَتْ وَأَلْجَمَتْ وَتَنَقَّبَتْ
لِقِتالِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And may the curse of Allah be upon the nation that carried out, saw and
were silent at your killing.”

How many people make up this ‘nation’ mentioned in this section who saw,
carried out and were silent at the massacre of Karbala’? Some historians
state that this number exceeded 80,000 people however the most famous
account which has come to us directly from the Masumeen is 30,000.

The entire city of Kufah was mobilized for this act of terrorism and
‘‘Ubaydullah b. Ziyad ensured that everything needed to finish this
battle was brought to the war front.

Those who participated in this event and even those who did not however
remained silent are all cursed – just as those who even today hear of
this tragedy and of other acts of oppression throughout the world are
cursed even if they are not directly responsible for what happens.

There are three main reasons why the Imam did not receive the support he
should have gotten from the Muslims, and upon review we see that they
are definitely not ‘valid excuses’:

1. The people’s own personal gain and profit: When Imam Husayn, while in
the Hajj asked a person who had just arrived from Kufah about what the
people were talking about, this man said, “The hearts of the people are
with you, however their swords are with Bani Umayyah...” To this, the
Imam replied, “Surely the people are the servants of the transient world
and the religion is something which they pay lip service to. They hold
on to it when it serves their purpose however when they are plagued with
difficulties, then very few hold firm to it.”

2. Fear of the government in power: Mua’wiyah, Yazid and his gang were
very effective in striking terror and fear into the hearts of the
people. The propaganda of Yazid, b. Ziyad and others infused deep into
the psyche of the people such that they shook at the thought of going
against their ‘leaders’ let alone even question their actions.

3. Ignorance of the truth: In all times, we see that those who are
misled are the people who lack true knowledge and awareness of what is
going on in the world, just as Imam ‘Ali has said, “Ignorance is the
root of all evil.” Again, the propaganda machine of Yazid was so strong
that people thought him and his forefathers to be the true Muslims and
leaders, while the Commander of the Faithful and his family were
considered to be out of the fold of Islam!

One wonders if these same things can not be seen in all ages where truth
is pitted against falsehood...


