Section Thirteen
================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِأَبِي أَنْتَ وَأُمِّي، لَقَدْ عَظُمَ مُصابِي بِكَ، فَأَسْأَلُ اللّهَ
الَّذِي أَكْرَمَ مَقامَكَ، وَأَكْرَمَنِي بِكَ، أَنْ يَرْزُقَنِي طَلَبَ
ثارِكَ مَعَ إِمامٍ مَنْصُورٍ مِنْ أَهْلِ بَيْتِ مُحَمَّدٍ صَلَّى
اللّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May my father and mother be sacrificed for you. Surely my sorrow for
you is great and I pray to Allah who has honoured your status and has
also honoured me through you that He grant me the opportunity to seek
your revenge with the victorious Imam from the family of Muhammad.”

This is perhaps one of the most moving, inspirational, and thought
provoking lines of this Ziyarat.

We first make a very honorific promise to the Imam that had he been
alive today, that we would be willing to sacrifice ourselves and even
our parents in his way. Thus, our lives mean nothing when compared to
the Imam. This is not only a plea made to an Imam who is no longer with
us, rather, since our 12th Imam is still alive and among us, we are
making this pledge to him as well, since he is the inheritor of Imam
Husayn – are we truly ready and willing to sacrifice ourselves and our
families for the 12th Imam? It is hard enough to sacrifice our money let
alone our lives and our parents...

The appeal made in this section of the Ziyarat is to be along side the
12th Imam in his army to take the revenge on all of those who were
guilty of this great crime – from the days in Saqifah up until the day
of ‘Ashura in 61 AH.

As for the honoured status of the Imam, to recount his lofty rank would
take us volumes, however it is enough to mention that he was the son of
the Prophet (according to the Qur’an) and that the dirt from around his
grave is a means of cure for illness as has been seen and recorded in
many books. It is through his noble status that we today, the Shi’a,
have any status or honour – as it is through following his mission that
true Islam is separated and differentiated from the Islam practiced by
the majority of others.

We also make a supplication that we are able to assist the 12th Imam in
his mission to avenge the death of the Hujjat of Allah on the Earth. Yes
it is true that over 1,350 years have passed since this massacre and
that Mukhtar took “revenge” for the killings, however the true revenge
which is to be done by the immediate family under the authority of Allah
still remains – as we discussed in the beginning of this commentary.

In actuality, this line of the Ziyarat shows us that ‘Ashura is not ‘one
day’ and Karbala’ is not ‘one land’ and that as long as oppression and
tyranny remain, ‘Ashura and Karbala’ remain and it is only with the
advent of the 12th Imam that this state of affairs will perpetuate.

Unfortunately, we only study the event of Karbala’ and ‘Ashura as a
historical occurrence with no desire to tie it into current events to
see how Karbala’ is alive today and how ‘Ashura is occurring every day
and this is what this one line of the Ziyarat is seeking to instil
within us...

It also keeps the hope of the advent of the reformer of the world, our
12th Imam, enlivened in our hearts as we seek to be along side him when
the Divine retribution takes place.


