Section Fifteen
===============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبا عَبْدِ اللّهِ، إِنِّي أَتَقَرَّبُ إِلَى اللّهِ، وَإِلى
رَسُولِهِ، وَإِلى أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ، وَإِلى فاطِمَةَ، وَإِلَى
الْحَسَنِ، وَإِلَيْكَ بِمُوَالاتِكَ، وَبِالْبَراءَةِ مِـمَّـنْ أَسَّسَ
أَسَاسَ ذلِكَ وَبَنى عَلَيْهِ بُنْيانَهُ، وَجَرى فِي ظُلْمِهِ
وَجَوْرِهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَعَلَى أَشْياعِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ Aba ‘Abdillah! Surely I seek closeness to Allah and to His Messenger
and to the Commander of the Faithful and to Fatimah and to Hasan and to
you through love of you and through distancing myself from those who
laid the foundations and those who built upon and carried out oppression
and cruelty upon you all and upon your followers.”

What does it mean to seek closeness to Allah, His Messenger and the
other noble personalities mentioned in this section? Without doubt,
‘closeness’ to these individuals cannot be in the physical sense of the
word – rather, it is a spiritual meaning. Therefore, being close to
Allah means to be at the highest pinnacles of faith and certainty such
that a person has no doubts or misgivings of the path of life, Al-Islam,
which he has chosen to follow.

Closeness to the Messenger of Allah, the Commander of the Faithful,
Fatimah, Hasan, and Imam Husayn is also achieved through following their
mission and way of life and becoming ‘one’ with them on the spiritual
realms.

According to this section of the Ziyarat, closeness to Allah can only be
achieved through “TawAllah” and “Tabarrah” – love and hate for those
whom Allah has commanded us to show these two opposing states towards.
This is not only a concept seen in this Ziyarat, rather, in many of the
verses of the Qur’an, we are also told to have love and companionship
for the believers and to be harsh and firm against the disbelievers.

Thus in summary, we see that the only way to be close to Allah and His
Messenger and those whom we are ordered to follow and obey is through
love for them – and true love entails a complete obedience to the one
whom we love (as the Qur’an also attests to). At the same time, love is
not enough as ‘love cannot conquer evil’ – thus, we also need to
distance ourselves and make known our aversion to those people who
oppressed and mercilessly killed the family of the Prophet – we have
mentioned who these people are in our previous discussions and more
shall be mentioned in this Ziyarat, Insha-Allah.


