Section Sixteen and Seventeen
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَرِئْتُ إِلَى اللّهِ وَإِلَيْكُمْ مِنْهُمْ، وَأَتَقَرَّبُ إِلَى
اللّهِ ثُمَّ إِلَيْكُمْ بِمُوالاتِكُمْ وَمُوالاةِ وَلِيِّكُمْ،
وَبِالْبَراءَةِ مِنْ أَعْدائِكُمْ، وَالنَّاصِبِينَ لَكُمُ الْحَرْبَ،
وَبِالْبَراءَةِ مِنْ أَشْيَاعِهِمْ وَأَتْبَاعِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I disassociate myself from them through Allah and through all of you
and I seek nearness to Allah and then to you through love for you and
your friends and disassociation with your enemies and from those who
want to fight against you and disassociation from their adherents and
followers.”

The importance of disassociation from the enemies of Allah is so great
that we repeat our thoughts in this section. Just as in the last section
we sought closeness to Allah and those select personalities and
distanced ourselves from His enemies, once again we repeat the same
words since if there is even an atom’s weight of love in our hearts for
the enemies of Allah, it is **impossible** to love Allah, His Messenger
and the Ahlul Bayt.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي سِلْمٌ لِمَنْ سالَمَكُمْ، وَحَرْبٌ لِمَنْ حارَبَكُمْ، وَوَلِيٌّ
لِمَنْ والاكُمْ، وَعَدُوٌّ لِمَنْ عاداكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely I am at peace with those who are at peace with you and I am at
war with those who are at war with you and I am a friends to those who
are friends to you and I am an enemy to those who are enemies to you.”

In actuality, this line of the Ziyarat is the natural outcome from the
previous two sections – meaning that once we realize who we love and
hate, we then realize whom we are at war with and whom we are at peace
with. Is it possible for us to love the enemy of Allah, the Prophet and
his Ahlul Bayt while showing hatred for their sincere followers?

Obviously, once we realize who our true loves and guides are we would
necessarily be loyal to them and **also** those who love and follow
them. When we realize who the enemies of Allah, the Prophet and his
Ahlul Bayt are we would necessarily also have an aversion to them and
would be in a state of perpetual war with them...


