Section Eighteen
================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَسْأَلُ اللّهَ الَّذِي أَكْرَمَنِي بِمَعْرِفَتِكُمْ، وَمَعْرِفَةِ
أَوْلِيَائِكُمْ، وَرَزَقَنِي الْبَراءَةَ مِنْ أَعْدائِكُمْ، أَنْ
يَجْعَلَنِي مَعَكُمْ فِي الدُّنْيا وَلأَخِرَةِ، وَأَنْ يُثَبِّتَ لِي
عِنْدَكُمْ قَدَمَ صِدْقٍ فِي الدُّنْيا وَالأَخِرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So then I ask Allah who has honoured me with a cognizance of all of you
and a cognizance of your friends that He also grant me the opportunity
to disassociate myself from your enemies and that He place me with you –
both in the transient world and also in the next life – and that he make
me firm in your presence with a truthful stance both in the transient
world and also the next life.”

When a person wants to follow another person or ideology, it is
necessary for him to know that person or ideology from all of its
various dimensions. Can a supporter of democracy for example, say with
100% certainty that he accepts this form of government if he has not
studied it?

Thus, the friends of the Ahlul Bayt would necessarily become closer to
these individuals through a deeper knowledge of these noble
personalities and all aspects of their lives.

As we know, this deep knowledge of the Ahlul Bayt which we request can
only be granted to us by Allah and it is for this reason that we always
turn back to Him as our source of guidance. This is one of the key
ingredients in the Du’a and Ziyaaraat which the Prophet and A’immah have
taught us that every issue goes back to Allah, thus, placing Tawhid at
the fore-front of all of our discussions.

In this Ziyarat, what does it mean when we say, “...that He place me
with you both in the transient world and also in the next life...”? This
‘oneness’ has very many levels and degrees to it, however in this
section it refers to a “spiritual oneness” which is accomplished through
following the morals and etiquette of the Ahlul Bayt such that ‘being
like them’ is then equated with ‘being with them’ – this is in regards
to the life of this world.

As for the next world, the Qur’an itself tells us that, “On that Day
shall we call every people with their Imam...” Thus, we pray that on the
Day of Judgment, we are raised up in the company of our Imam however the
only way this can be accomplished is to be with them in this world.

The last line of this Ziyarat which reads, “...and that he make me firm
in your presence with a truthful stance...” carries a very important
meaning with it. In this line, we are being taught that it is not of any
worth to be a “Husayni” for the moment – meaning that to profess love at
this moment of our lives is not some great honour. Rather, what is
important is to die as a “Husayni” and to be brought up on the Day of
Resurrection as a “Husayni”.

How many people lived around the Prophet and were his “companions” in
this world – will they be his companions in the next life? How many
people pledged allegiance to ‘Ali on the day of Ghadeer and even after
the death of the first three Caliphs however where were they when he was
fighting the battles of Jamal, Siffin, Nahrwan and other wars?

Thus, in this section we make a prayer to Allah that we are able to
remain as a “Husayni” throughout our entire life and even at
Resurrection and that we never switch sides and become a “Yazidi”.


