Section Nineteen
================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَسْأَلُهُ أَنْ يُبَلِّغَنِي الْمَقامَ الْـمَحْمُودَ لَكُمْ عِنْدَ
اللّهِ، وَأَنْ يَرْزُقَنِي طَلَبَ ثارِي مَعَ إِمامِ هُدىً ظَاهِرٍ
نَاطِقٍ بِالْحَقِّ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And I ask Him (Allah) that He enables me to reach to the honoured
station with you in the presence of Allah and that He grant me the
ability to seek the revenge of you with the rightly guided Imam from
you, who shall surely come and speak the truth.”

The honoured station (Maqaam al-Mahmood) is not one which everybody can
reach to and it is for this reason that in Suratul Isra (17), we read,
“...and in the night perform the recommended prayers (Salatul Lail).
Perhaps is through this act that Your Lord may grant you an honoured
station (Maqaam al-Mahmood).” Thus, the only way to soar to the peaks of
closeness with Allah is through the spiritual travels – one of them
being closeness to the Ahlul Bayt in the true sense of the word.

Although the tafseer of this verse has limited the true Maqaam
al-Mahmood as belonging to the Prophet Muhammad and his power of
Intercession for all who Allah permits him to intercede for, however
there are others who, according to numerous ahadith, will have the
permission to intercede for others – the teacher will be able to
intercede for his students; the Shaheed will be able to intercede for
family members and other categories which the hadith speak about.

However, the term Maqaam al-Mahmood used in this section is of a
‘general’ nature of a lofty status and not that rank of the Prophet of
Islam.

The mention of the 12th Imam is once again seen in this Ziyarat and we
once again ask Allah that we are given the opportunity to be with our
Imam in seeking revenge for this great act of murder on the plains of
Karbala’. This Imam **will** come and will take the revenge for his
family who were wronged and one of the Du’as of each true believer
should be that he is present and fighting **with** the Imam rather than
**against** the Imam.


