Section Twenty
==============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَسْأَلُ اللّهَ بِحَقِّكُمْ وَبِالشَّأْنِ الَّذِي لَكُمْ عِنْدَهُ
أَنْ يُعْطِيَنِي بِمُصابِي بِكُمْ أَفْضَلَ مَا يُعْطِي مُصاباً
بِمُصِيبَتِهِ، مُصِيبَةً مَا أَعْظَمَها وَأَعْظَمَ رَزِيَّتَها فِي
الإِسْلامِ وَفِي جَمِيعِ السَّموَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And I ask Allah for your sake and for the status and rank which you
have with Him that He grant me that thing due to me showing grief and
sorrow at your sorrows even more than of that which he gives in a
person’s own grief and sorrows, and what great sorrow and tragedies you
faced! How great was your tragedy for Islam and for all of the
inhabitants of the heavens and the Earth!”

What is being asked for in this section of the Ziyarat? The Qur’an
clearly tells us that when an affliction befalls a person there are
certain things which Allah grants him: “And surely We will test you with
something from fear and hunger and a loss in your wealth, lives and your
children – then give good tidings to those who show patience that when a
tribulation befalls them they say,

***‘Surely we are all from Allah and back to Him is our return.’ Surely
it is upon these people that the prayers of their Lord are showered and
His Mercy and surely it is these people who are on the right path.”
(2:155-157)***

Thus, in this section of the Ziyarat we are asking Allah to grant us
patience and to shower us with His Prayers and Mercy for us bearing the
tribulations which befell Abi ‘Abdillah and his family and friends.

We also attest to the fact that whatever comes upon us in the form of
tribulations and tests is nothing compared to what happened to the
grandson of the Prophet and that his tribulations were something which
all of the inhabitants of the heavens and the Earth had a hard time in
bearing!

According to one hadith from the 5th Imam, everything in creation – the
Jinn, wild animals, trees, even the sky cried at the murder of Imam
Husayn! This should come as no surprise to us as in one verse of the
Qur’an, Allah tells us that at the death of a particular person, the sky
and the Earth did not cry (since this person was not worthy of this) –
thus, this means that at the death of others, it is possible for the
Earth and Sky to show ‘emotions’ and she tears.

Even today, scientists have shown how animals can develop a close bond
to their owner and if the owner dies, that animal is able to sense this
and also feels grief and their entire pattern of life changes...

Without doubt, the Hujjat of Allah leaving his Earth in the fashion in
which he did is something which would even make a hard rock split and
have water gush out from it, however how tragic it is that the heart who
hears of his tragedy does not break down in tears...


