Section Twenty Four
===================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللَّهُمَّ الْعَنْ أَبا سُفْيانَ وَمُعَاوِيَةَ وَيَزِيدَ بْنَ
مُعَاوِيَةَ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْكَ اللَّعْنَةُ أَبَدَ الأََبِدِينَ، وَهذَا
يَوْمٌ فَرِحَتْ بِهِ آلُ زِيادٍ وَآلُ مَرْوانَ بِقَتْلِهِمُ
الْحُسَيْنَ صَلَواتُ اللّهِ عَلَيْهِ، أَللَّهُمَّ فَضاعِفْ عَلَيْهِمُ
اللَّعْنَ مِنْكَ وَالْعَذابَ الأَلِيمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ Allah! Curse Abu Sufan and Mu’awiyah and Yazid b. Mu’awiyah – upon
them may Your curse be forever and eternity. And this is the day when
the family of Ziyad were happy and so were the family of Marwan at their
killing of Husayn, may the Prayers of Allah be upon him. O’ Allah!
Increase upon them Your curse and (Your) painful punishment.”

Once again we see the curse being sent upon specific individuals and
once again, we ask Allah to remove His mercy from these individuals due
to their wicked acts.

Abu Sufyan remained a polytheist until his death and thus, died in
opposition to Allah and His Messenger. The same can be seen for his
off-spring – his son and grandson, Mu’awiyah and Yazid - who although
‘openly’ accepted Islam, were the greatest opponents to Allah and His
Messenger! It was not until the reign of the 3rd Caliph that Mu’awiyah
finally began to take a prominent role in the government – after all, he
was from the same family as Uthman. However, this did not stop him from
having Uthman killed and then pinning the blame on the Commander of the
Faithful ‘Ali so that the people would rise up against him!

Mu’awiyah continued his evil plots during the caliphate of Imam ‘Ali and
his son, Hasan al-Mujtaba. Alhamdulillah, after he was sent to the hell
fire, his son Yazid was appointed as the Caliph of the Muslim nation!
Thus, they were the ones to bring the monarchy to Islam – something seen
in many Muslim countries even today!

Where as it would take books to describe Mu’awiyah’s deviations, we
mention just a few so we can better under why we curse him: he was the
first to perform Jumuah Salat on Wednesday; he permitted a person to
marry to sisters at one time (which is forbidden in Islam); he
introduced the Adhan on the day of ‘Eid al-Adhha and ‘Eid al-Fitr; he
recited his Salat in full while on a journey; he made use of pure silk
and gold which is forbidden for men; he did not implement the Islamic
penal code; he drank alcohol in the open; he established the monarchy in
Islam; he cursed the family of the Prophet – especially Imam ‘Ali in the
open and made it a part of the Jumuah Khutbah without which the Jumuah
Khutbah was invalid; he prohibited people from narrating ahadith of the
Prophet, and hundreds of other things...

The actions of Yazid were no less – including the act of killing the
grandson of the Prophet, attacking the Holy Ka’bah and destroying it and
hundreds of other acts during his three years and six months of
“leadership” of the Muslim nation...


