Section Twenty Eight
====================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللَّهُمَّ خُصَّ أَنْتَ أَوَّلَ ظالِمٍ بِاللَّعْنِ مِنِّي، وَابْدَأْ
بِهِ أَوَّلاً، ثُمَّ الْعَن الثَّانِيَ وَالثَّالِثَ وَالرَّابِعَ.
أَللَّهُمَّ الْعَنْ يَزِيدَ خامِساً، وَالْعَنْ عُبَيْدَ اللّهِ بْنَ
زِيادٍ وَابْنَ مَرْجانَةَ وَعُمَرَ بْنَ سَعْدٍ وَشِمْراً وَآلَ أَبِي
سُفْيانَ وَآلَ زِيادٍ وَآلَ مَرْوَانَ إِلى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ Allah! Particularly curse the first tyrant, a curse from me, and
begin the first curse with him and then send the curse on the second and
the third and then the forth (tyrant). O’ Allah curse Yazid, the fifth
(tyrant) and curse ‘Ubaydullah b. Ziyad and Ibne Marjanah and ‘‘Umar b.
Sa’d and Shimr and the Family of Sufyan and the family of Ziyad and the
family of Marwan until the day of Judgement.”

As we draw a close to this Ziyarat, we once again bring to memory those
specific tyrants who began the movement against the family of the
Prophet and ask Allah to remove His mercy from them. The individuals
mentioned here number 11 - who are these people and what did they do –
we explain this in detail so as to better understand why we curse all of
them. One point should be mentioned that although some people were not
present in the event of Karbala’ however if they are ‘gathered’ in this
group, then this is due to the fact that they were pleased with what
occurred – even though they may not have had a direct hand in the
killing.

Also, it should be noted that ‘Ubaydullah b. Ziyad and Ibne Marjanah are
**one person** however he has been mentioned twice since his mother and
father were both adulterers and thus, there is no clear record of whose
child he was. This shows the despicability of the act of adultery that a
child is sometimes left with no lineage and mentioning him twice would
also remove the doubt from the people’s minds that ‘Ubaydullah b. Ziyad
as being another person who was not guilty of the crimes in Karbala’.

1. The first tyrant – The First Caliph who ruled for 2 years and 3
months:  
 a. Stealing the Caliphate from the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali b.
Abi Talib (peace be upon him).  
 b. Ordering the Imam (peace be upon him) to be tied and bound and
dragged through the streets of Madina to give the Bay’at.  
 c. Ordering the daughter of the Prophet, Fatimah az-Zahra (peace be
upon her) to be attacked and beat up – thus, causing her to have a
miscarriage, losing her son Mohsin and which lead to her death.  
 d. Designating the second Caliph through his will.

2. The second tyrant – The Second Caliph who ruled for 10 years and 6
months:  
 a. Stealing the Caliphate from the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali b.
Abi Talib (peace be upon him).  
 b. Planning the event of attack against Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (peace
be upon him) and Fatimah Az-Zahra (peace be upon her) after the death of
the Prophet.  
 c. Organizing the stealing of the Caliphate and placing the first
Caliph in his seat at the Saqifah.  
 d. Many innovations in the faith of Islam such as:  
 • Prohibiting Mut’ah of the woman and Mut’ah of the Hajj;

• Adding the line, ‘As-Salat is better than sleep’ [الصلاة خير من النوم]
to the Adhan of Fajr;

• Bringing upon new rulings in regards to the divorce, and many other
acts.

e. Inappropriate distribution of the public treasury.  
 f. Racial discrimination between Muslims.  
 g. Making Mua’wiyah the governor of present day Syria.  
 h. Selectively implementing the Islamic penal code by turning a blind
eye to his friends and family members who committed acts contrary to
Islamic legislation.  
 i. Designating the third Caliph through his twisted and perverted
“Council” to assign who would succeed him.

3. The third tyrant – The Third Caliph who ruled for approximately 12
years:  
 a. Stealing the Caliphate from the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali b.
Abi Talib (peace be upon him).  
 b. Many innovations in the faith of Islam.  
 c. Putting forth his government without keeping the common people in
mind for positions and relating positions to family and friends.  
 d. Appointing people to government positions who were not worthy of
such positions.  
 e. Limiting the Public Treasury to the Bani Umayyah.  
 f. Racial discrimination amongst the Muslims.  
 g. Physically attacking and assaulting people who were not happy with
the situation of the government and their policies.  
 h. Showing respect to the prime enemies of Islam and the teachings of
the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) such as
Marwan b. Hakam.

The acts of aggression of the rest of those cursed in this section are
too numerous to mention and thus, we leave this for the readers to
investigate and research.


