Ziyarat and Du’a
================

The Du’a (supplication) is the act of speaking to Allah (swt) while the
Ziyarat (visitation) is the act of speaking with the role-models and
true examples of the faith sent by Allah (swt) .

Nevertheless, Ziyarat itself is also a form of speaking with Allah (swt)
since the individuals being addressed are the Prophets (as) and A’immah
(as) who are individuals that invite humanity to the worship of the One
True God and to struggle against the internal and external enemies. Thus
in reality, the Ziyarat is nothing more than speaking to Allah through
the intermediaries which He himself has appointed in order for us to
reach to perfection.

The Du’a is the act of travelling towards Allah-consciousness and
self-knowledge while the aim of the Ziyarat is knowledge of the Imam
(as) – and in actuality this is the same as having knowledge of Allah 
and knowledge of ourselves.

Within the Du’a taught by the Ahlul Bayt (as), there are four main
points seen: shedding of tears and showing grief, expressing one’s
needs, gaining a better understanding of the faith and beliefs and the
invitation to stand up and fight against the enemies - internal and
external.

This is the same thing which can be seen in the Ziyarat as well, however
at the same time, we are calling upon and remembering those
personalities who are the best and most perfect examples of these four
characteristics.

By this we mean that the Ahlul Bayt (as) are the ones whose tears which
they shed in their prayers are the most sincere drops of grief; they are
best able to express their needs to their Creator in the most eloquent
of ways; their understanding of the faith was the most complete and
perfect, and lastly, they were the ultimate manifestation of those who
stood up and fought against both their internal enemies and the external
despots – each one in his own way and method.

Of all the Ziyarats we have, the best example in which these four points
are manifest is that of Imam Husayn (as) – especially since he was the
supreme expression of rising up for Allah (swt) and standing up in the
face of oppression and tyranny.


