Du’a After Ziyarat ‘Ashura - Du’a Alqamah
=========================================

In some books of supplication, this supplication is referred to as Du’a
Alqamah named after the companion of Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon him,
Alqamah. However, Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi quotes very clear traditions in
Mafatih al-Jinan that Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, recited this
du’a in the presence of the companion Safwan, not Alqamah. Therefore,
the correct name of this supplication is Du’a to be recited after
Ziyarat ‘Ashura or Du’a Safwan.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا اللّٰهُ يَا اللّٰهُ يَا اللّٰهُ، يَا مُجِيبَ دَعْوَةِ
الْـمُضْطَرِّينَ، يَا كَاشِفَ كُرَبِ الْـمَكْرُوبِينَ، يَا غِيَاثَ
الْـمُسْتَغِيثِينَ، يَا صَرِيخَ الْـمُسْتَصْرِخِينَ، وَيَا مَنْ هُوَ
أَقْرَبُ إِلَيَّ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ، وَيَا مَنْ يَحُولُ بَيْنَ
الْـمَرْءِ وَقَلْبِهِ، وَيَا مَنْ هُوَ بِالْـمَنْظَرِ الأَعْلىٰ،
وَبِالأُفُقِ الْـمُبِينِ، وَيَا مَنْ هُوَ الرَّحْمٰنُ الرَّحِيمُ عَلىٰ
الْعَرْشِ اسْتَوىٰ، وَيَا مَنْ يَعْلَمُ خَائِنَةَ الأَعْيُنِ وَمَا
تُخْفِي الصُّدُورُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! O Allah! O Allah! O He who gives answer to the cries of the
persecuted! O He who pulls out the grief-stricken from agony and
anguish! O He who comes to help those who shed tears in helplessness! O
he who brings relief to those who cry for help! O He who is close by,
nearer than my jugular vein! O He who makes peace between heart and
mind; O He whom people search in the highest and noblest perspectives;
in true and evident distinctions! O He who is Beneficent and Merciful in
His authority! O He who knows what the furtive eyes betrays and what the
secretive hearts conceal!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا مَنْ لاَ يَخْفىٰ عَلَيْهِ خَافِيَةٌ، يَا مَنْ لاَ تَشْتَبِهُ
عَلَيْهِ الأَصْوَاتُ، وَيَا مَنْ لاَ تُغَلِّطُهُ الْـحَاجَاتُ، وَيَا
مَنْ لاَ يُبْرِمُهُ إِلْـحَاحُ الْـمُلِحِّينَ، يَا مُدْرِكَ كُلِّ
فَوْتٍ، وَيَا جامِعَ كُلِّ شَمْلٍ، وَيَا بارِىَ النُّفُوسِ بَعْدَ
الْـمَوْتِ، يَا مَنْ هُوَ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ فِي شَأْنٍ، يَا قاضِيَ
الْـحَاجَاتِ، يَا مُنَفِّسَ الْكُرُبَاتِ، يَا مُعْطِيَ السُّؤُلاَتِ،
يَا وَلِيَّ الرَّغَبَاتِ، يَا كافِيَ الْـمُهِمَّاتِ، يَا مَنْ يَكْفِي
مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَلاَ يَكْفِي مِنْهُ شَيْءٌ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالأَرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O He whom do not deceive those who do everything in secret! O He whom
intermingled voices of the countless callers (supplicants) do not stop
from giving answer to each and every one! O He whom wants and needs of
the infinite needy do not put in confusion for attending to one and all
separately! O he whom clamorous determined pleading of petitioners do
not upset! O He who reaches and takes hold of everything that tries to
escape! O He who keeps together and brings into harmony people who know
and understand! O He who examines the souls when they present themselves
before Him after death! O he who, each day, has (new) distinct glory! O
Fulfiller of wants and needs! O He who gives confront and respite in
distress! O He who liberally satisfies those who solicit His favours! O
He who stands by and follow close upon those who humble and fervently
call on Him! O He who effectively support those who make sincere
efforts! O He who is equal to and can do anything instead of another in
the matters concerning all things; and nothing, in the heavens and the
earth, can be out of the reach of or is free from His hold.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْأَلُكَ بِحَقِّ مُحَمَّدٍ خَاتَمِ النَّبِيِّينَ، وَعَلِىٍّ أَمِيرِ
الْـمُؤْمِنِينَ، وَبِحَقِّ فَاطِمَةَ بِنْتِ نَبِيِّكَ، وَبِحَقِّ
الْـحَسَنِ وَالْـحُسَيْنِ، فَإِنِّي بِهِمْ أَتَوَجَّهُ إِلَيْكَ فِي
مَقامِيِ هٰذَا، وَبِهِمْ أَتَوَسَّلُ، وَبِهِمْ أَتَشَفَّعُ إِلَيْكَ،
وَبِحَقِّهِمْ أَسْأَلُكَ وَأُقْسِمُ وَأَعْزِمُ عَلَيْكَ، وَبِالشَّأْنِ
الَّذِي لَـهُمْ عِنْدَكَ وَبِالْقَدْرِ الَّذِي لَـهُمْ عِنْدَكَ،
وَبِالَّذِي فَضَّلْتَهُمْ عَلىٰ الْعَالَـمِينَ، وَبِاسْمِكَ الَّذِي
جَعَلْتَهُ عِنْدَهُمْ، وَبِهِ خَصَصْتَهُمْ دُونَ الْعَالَـمِينَ،
وَبِهِ أَبَنْتَهُمْ وَأَبَنْتَ فَضْلَهُمْ مِنْ فَضْلِ الْعَالَـمِينَ
حَتَّى فَاقَ فَضْلُهُمْ فَضْلَ الْعَالَـمِينَ جَمِيعاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I beseech Thee in the name of Muhammad, the last Prophet, and Ali, the
commander of the faithfuls, in the name of Fatimah, the daughter of Thy
Prophet, and in the name of Hasan and Husayn. I direct myself towards
Thee, through them, in my address, through them I try to get a hearing,
through them I put forward my case to get Thy favours, in their names I
make a request to Thee.

Bound to Thee by oath, living a life according to Thy commands, I carry
out my pledge by every means, in the name of the love and devotion Thou
has for them, and the influence and status they enjoy in every dimension
of Thy will, the superior most pre-eminence in wisdom and character Thou
bestowed upon them to transcend above everything in the whole universe,
in the name of Thy name Thou revealed to them in trust, on account of
which Thou chose them in preference over everything found in the heavens
and the earths, through which Thou built their syndrome, developed to
perfection their surpassing excellence in knowledge, learning and deeds,
out of all the rest of the people, till their completeness surpassed the
total achievement of all the people put together;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْأَلُكَ أَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَأَنْ
تَكْشِفَ عَنِّي غَمِّي وَهَمِّي وَكَرْبِي، وَتَكْفِيَنِي الْـمُهِمَّ
مِنْ أُمُورِي، وَتَقْضِيَ عَنِّي دَيْنِي، وَتُجِيرَنِي مِنَ الْفَقْرِ،
وَتُجِيرَنِي مِنَ الْفَاقَةِ، وَتُغْنِيَنِي عَنِ الْـمَسْأَلَةِ إِلىٰ
الْـمَخْلُوقِينَ، وَتَكْفِيَنِي هَمَّ مَنْ أَخَافُ هَمَّهُ، وَعُسْرَ
مَنْ أَخافُ عُسْرَهُ، وَحُزُونَةَ مَنْ أَخافُ حُزُونَتَهُ، وَشَرَّ
مَنْ أَخافُ شَرَّهُ، وَمَكْرَ مَنْ أَخافُ مَكْرَهُ، وَبَغْيَ مَنْ
أَخَافُ بَغْيَهُ، وَجَوْرَ مَنْ أَخَافُ جَوْرَهُ، وَسُلْطَانَ مَنْ
أَخافُ سُلْطَانَهُ، وَكَيْدَ مَنْ أَخَافُ كَيْدَهُ، وَمَقْدُرَةَ مَنْ
أَخَافُ مَقْدُرَتَهُ عَلَيَّ، وَتَرُدَّ عَنِّي كَيْدَ الْكَيَدَةِ،
وَمَكْرَ الْـمَكَرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I request Thee to send blessings on Muhammad and on the children of
Muhammad; (and) look into the causes of my sorrows, anxieties, burdens,
and do away with them, let me be equal to, sufficiently instructed,
while dealing with my important enterprises and efforts, (and) carry out
and fulfil my obligations, set me free from the clutches of poverty and
from the pangs of hunger, let me have enough to live upon, free from the
need to turn to others.

Let me be an adequate match for him who, I am afraid, shall create
trouble, thwart the schemes of the one who, I am afraid, shall treat me
harshly, let him, who, I am afraid, shall vex me, come to grief, expose
and rebuke him, who, I am afraid, shall slander me, layout a plan to
defeat him, who, I and afraid, shall try to deceive me by stratagem,
take notice and act swiftly against him, who, I am afraid, shall treat
me unjustly, take me into Thy custody to keep safe from the one who, I
am afraid, shall tyrannize me, exercise Thy supreme authority to keep 
him in check, who, I am afraid, shall rule over me, outwit him, who, I
am afraid, shall lay traps to deceive me cunningly, make ready a fitting
reply to him who, I am afraid, shall oppress me; keep off from me the
obstinate deceit of the vindictive malicious, and the crafty artifice of
the cunning imposter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ مَنْ أَرَادَنِي فَأَرِدْهُ، وَمَنْ كادَنِي فَكِدْهُ،
وَاصْرِفْ عَنِّي كَيْدَهُ وَمَكْرَهُ وَبَأْسَهُ وَأَمَانِيَّهُ
وَامْنَعْهُ عَنِّي كَيْفَ شِئْتَ وَأَنَّى شِئْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my Allah put an end to the intentions of him who desires to destroy
me, outwit him who makes plans, keep off from me his deceit and
intrigue, his hostility and fancy, keep me aloof, refusing to have
anything to do with him, in whatever manner, on any occasion, as Thou
wills.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ اشْغَلْهُ عَنِّي بِفَقْرٍ لاَ تَجْبُرُهُ، وَبِبَلاَءٍ لاَ
تَسْتُرُهُ، وَبِفَاقَةٍ لاَ تَسُدُّهَا، وَبِسُقْمٍ لاَ تُعَافِيهِ،
وَذُلٍّ لاَ تُعِزُّهُ، وَبِـمَسْكَنَةٍ لاَ تَجْبُرُهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my Allah divert his attention from me and involve him in his own over
bearing anxieties which Thou will not cut down, in misfortune which Thou
will not make easy to deal with, in waywardness from which Thou will not
lead him back on the right path, in spiritless laziness which Thou will
never change into fruitful activity, infamy and disgrace from which Thou
will not allow him to rise to the surface, in broken fortune which Thou
will not let get set.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ اضْرِبْ بِالذُّلِّ نَصْبَ عَيْنَيْهِ، وَأَدْخِلْ عَلَيْهِ
الْفَقْرَ فِي مَنْزِلِهِ، وَالْعِلَّةَ وَالسُّقْمَ فِي بَدَنِهِ حَتَّى
تَشْغَلَهُ عَنِّي بِشُغْلٍ شاغِلٍ لاَ فَراغَ لَهُ، وَأَنْسِهِ ذِكْرِي
كَما أَنْسَيْتَهُ ذِكْرَكَ، وَخُذْ عَنِّي بِسَمْعِهِ وَبَصَرِهِ
وَلِسانِهِ وَيَدِهِ وَرِجْلِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَجَمِيعِ جَوارِحِهِ،
وَأَدْخِلْ عَلَيْهِ فِي جَمِيعِ ذٰلِكَ السُّقْمَ وَلاَ تَشْفِهِ حَتَّى
تَجْعَلَ ذلِكَ لَهُ شُغْلاً شاغِلاً بِهِ عَنِّي وَعَنْ ذِكْرِي،
وَاكْفِنِي يَا كافِيَ مَا لاَ يَكْفِي سِواكَ فَإِنَّكَ الْكافِي لاَ
كافِيَ سِواكَ، وَمُفَرِّجٌ لاَ مُفَرِّجَ سِواكَ، وَمُغِيثٌ لاَ مُغِيثَ
سِواكَ، وَجارٌ لاَ جارَ سِواكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my Allah let contemptible disgrace stick like a leech on the forehead
between his two eyes, expose him to emptiness in every effort he makes,
let wicked inclination, distraction and inactivity cut deep into his
body and soul, in order that Thou diverts his attention from, me,
absorbed in his own pursuits that do not free him to employ himself at
another, make him think no more of me as he has willfully neglected and
forgotten Thee, take away from me and throw overboard his attention,
interest, communication, influence, support, and perverted thinking
every evil he commits or draws it on himself, let everything he does go
waste, defective and incomplete, and do not give any letup so that he is
kept fully preoccupied and gets no time to pay attention to me or think
of me.

Give enough to me, O He who effectively and completely gives
satisfaction. There is no one other than Thee who gives sufficiently,
because Thou alone gives enough, no one else gives to the seeker’s
satisfaction except Thee. Thou dispels the clouds of sorrows, no one
else, save Thee can free the grief-stricken from cares. Thou comes to
help, no one else, except Thee, can do a favour when called for help.
Thou art near, ready to avert the danger, no one else, save Thee, is
close enough to stand by in the hour of trouble.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَابَ مَنْ كَانَ جَارُهُ سِوَاكَ، وَمُغِيثُهُ سِوَاكَ، وَمَفْزَعُهُ
إِلىٰ سِوَاكَ، وَمَهْرَبُهُ إِلىٰ سِوَاكَ، وَمَلْجَؤُهُ إِلىٰ
غَيْرِكَ، وَمَنْجَاهُ مِنْ مَخْلُوقٍ غَيْرِكَ، فَأَنْتَ ثِقَتِي
وَرَجَائِي وَمَفْزَعِي وَمَهْرَبِي وَمَلْجَئِي وَمَنْجَايَ، فَبِكَ
أَسْتَفْتِحُ، وَبِكَ أَسْتَنْجِحُ، وَبِـمُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ
أَتَوَجَّهُ إِلَيْكَ وَأَتَوَسَّلُ وَأَتَشَفَّعُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Comes to grief he who relies upon his own friends instead of Thee; or
looks for his own supporters in place of Thee; frightened, cries for
help having some one else other than Thee in mind; terrorized, runs away
from the danger to a place of escape outside of Thy guaranty, and takes
refuge in an asylum not watched over by Thee; and tries to bring himself
to a place of safety through the help of created beings, excluding Thee,
the Creator.

Therefore, Thou art my trust, my hope, my retreat, my refuge, my
security, unto which one can run for safety, for this reason I call for
thy help, and seek Thy support to carry out my affairs easily and
successfully, through Muhammad and the children of Muhammad I present
myself before Thee, try to draw Thy attention and ask for salvation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَسْأَلُكَ يَا اللّٰهُ يَا اللّٰهُ يَا اللّٰهُ،فَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ
وَلَكَ الشُّكْرُ وَإِلَيْكَ الْـمُشْتَكىٰ وَأَنْتَ الْـمُسْتَعانُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

So I beseech Thee, O Allah! O Allah! O Allah! Because (all) praise is
for Thee (alone), and also prostration in thankfulness, thou alone
listens to complaints, Thou alone is called upon for help.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَسْأَلُكَ يَا اللّٰهُ يَا اللّٰهُ يَا اللّٰهُ بِحَقِّ مُحَمَّدٍ
وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ أَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَأَنْ
تَكْشِفَ عَنِّي غَمِّي وَهَمِّي وَكَرْبِي فِي مَقَامِي هٰذَا كَمَا
كَشَفْتَ عَنْ نَبِيِّكَ هَمَّهُ وَغَمَّهُ وَكَرْبَهُ، وَكَفَيْتَهُ
هَوْلَ عَدُوِّهِ، فَاكْشِفْ عَنِّي كَمَا كَشَفْتَ عَنْهُ، وَفَرِّجْ
عَنِّي كَمَا فَرَّجْتَ عَنْهُ، وَاكْفِنِي كَمَا كَفَيْتَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So I beseech Thee, O Allah! O Allah! O Allah! In the name of Muhammad
and the children of Muhammad to send blessings on Muhammad and on the
children of Muhammad, to put to flight the sorrows, the anxieties, the
burdens, now surrounding me from all sides, just as Thou made Thy
Prophet free of his sorrows, anxieties and burden, and saved him from
the terror of his enemies, in such manner as Thou made him to do so, let
me also do the same, let me be free of care as Thou gave him joy, heart
and confidence, let me have enough and be contended as Thou gave him
sufficiently.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاصْرِفْ عَنِّي هَوْلَ مَا أَخَافُ هَوْلَهُ، وَمَؤُونَةَ مَا أَخَافُ
مَؤُونَتَهُ، وَهَمَّ مَا أَخَافُ هَمَّهُ، بِلاَ مَؤُونَةٍ عَلىٰ
نَفْسِي مِنْ ذٰلِكَ، وَاصْرِفْنِي بِقَضَاءِ حَوَائِجِي، وَكِفَايَةِ
مَا أَهَمَّنِي هَمُّهُ مِنْ أَمْرِ آخِرَتِي وَدُنْيَايَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Send away from me the terror that frightens me, the encumbrance that I
find burdensome, the anxieties that wear me down, freeing me from their
impact. Make me use my means freely to carry out and complete my
business or employment, and do anything requisite instead of another,
which may make me anxious about my affairs in this world or the
hereafter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَمِيرَ الْ،مُؤْمِنِينَ وَيَا أَبَا عَبْدِاللّٰهِ، عَلَيْكُمَا
مِنِّي سَلاَمُ اللّٰهِ أَبَداً مَا بَقِيتُ وَبَقِيَ اللَّيْلُ
والنَّهارُ، وَلاَ جَعَلَهُ اللّٰهُ آخِرَ الْعَهْدِ مِنْ زِيَارَتِكُمَا
وَلاَ فَرَّقَ اللّٰهُ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Ameerul-Mu’mineen! O Abaa Abillah! As long as I am alive and the days
and nights follow each other I invoke Allah to send blessings on you
forever and ever. May Allah not make this pledge of physical and
spiritual close association with you (both) the last fulfilment, and may
Allah not separate me and you (both) from one another.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ أَحْيِنِي حَيَاةَ مُحَمَّدٍ وَذُرِّيَّتِهِ، وَأَمِتْنِي
مَـمَاتَـهُمْ، وَتَوَفَّنِي عَلىٰ مِلَّتِهِمْ، وَاحْشُرْنِي فِي
زُمْرَتِـهِمْ، وَلاَ تُفَرِّقْ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَهُمْ طَرْفَةَ عَيْنٍ
أَبَداً فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my Allah let me have a meaningful existence as Muhammad his
descendants had lived, and die as they departed from this world, take to
and carry out completely their creed; and raise me for the last
judgement along with the people dedicated to them, and do not cut (us)
in two (groups), even for the flash of an eyelid, ever, either in this
world or in the life of the hereafter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَمِيرَ الْـمُؤْمِنِينَ وَيَا أَبَا عَبْدِاللّٰهِ، أَتَيْتُكُمَا
زَائِراً وَمُتَوَسِّلاً إِلىٰ اللّٰهِ رَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمَا،
وَمُتَوَجِّهاً إِلَيْهِ بِكُمَا، وَمُسْتَشْفِعاً بِكُمَا إِلىٰ اللّٰهِ
تَعَالىٰ فِي حَاجَتِي هٰذِهِ فَاشْفَعَا لِي فَإِنَّ لَكُمَا عِنْدَ
اللّٰهِ الْـمَقَامَ الْـمَحْمُودَ، وَالْـجَاهَ الْوَجِيهَ،
وَالْـمَنْزِلَ الرَّفِيعَ وَالْوَسِيلَةَ,
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Ameerul Moomineen! O Abaa Abillah! I come nearer to (you both) to
establish close physical and spiritual relationship, and thereby seek
nearness to Allah, my lord Nourishes and your lord Nourisher, through
you I direct myself towards Him, and request you to speak in favour of
my immediate at hand needs and wants I have put before Allah. So please
speak well of me because, of course, with Allah your thoughtful
judgement is highly credible, your disposition enjoys conclusive
preference, your action keeps step with precise acumen, and a sure means
of approach to gain His favour.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي أَنْقَلِبُ عَنْكُمَا مُنْتَظِراً لِتَنَجُّزِ الْـحَاجَةِ
وَقَضَائِهَا وَنَـجَاحِهَا مِنَ اللّٰهِ بِشَفَاعَتِكُمَا لِي إِلَى
اللّٰهِ فِي ذٰلِكَ فَلا أَخِيبُ، وَلاَ يَكونُ مُنْقَلَبِي مُنْقَلَباً
خَائِباً خَاسِراً، بَلْ يَكُونُ مُنْقَلَبِي مُنْقَلَباً رَاجِحاً
مُفْلِحاًمُنْجِحاً مُسْتَجاباً بِقَضَاءِ جَمِيعِ حَوائِجِي وَتَشَفَّعا
لِي إِلَى اللّٰهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I looked for and went through all possibilities and finally brought
myself over to you in the hope of obtaining, speedily and successfully,
fulfilment of my demands, their final settlement and favourable
execution by Allah on account of your recommendations on my behalf to
get Allah’s approval. So, let not my “seeing the light” be a bitter and
“fallen short” change of heart, but make my “accepting the true faith”
resolution a turning point leading to preference and full satisfaction
in the matter of the disposal of my wants and needs;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْقَلَبْتُ عَلَى مَا شَاءَ اللّٰهُ وَلاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ
بِاللّٰهِ، مُفَوِّضاً أَمْرِي إِلَى اللّٰهِ، مُلْجِئاً ظَهْرِي إِلَى
اللّٰهِ، مُتَوَكِّلاً عَلَى اللّٰهِ، وَأَقُولُ حَسْبِيَ اللّٰهُ
وَكَفىٰ، سَمِعَ اللّٰهُ لِـمَنْ دَعَا، لَيْسَ لِي وَرَاءَ اللّٰهِ
وَوَرَاءَكُمْ يَا سَادَتِي مُنْتَهىٰ، مَا شَاءَ رَبِّي كَانَ وَمَا
لَمْ يَشَأْ لَمْ يَكُنْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I direct myself to bring myself over to that which Allah wills and
commands. (because) there is no power and no might save Allah. I commit
my case to Allah, anything neglected or taking place behind my back
shall be taken care of Allah, I entrust Allah with the management of my
affairs, and say: Allah is sufficient and enough, Allah pays attention
to whoso makes a request to Him, there is nothing for me in that which
is on the other side (in opposition) of Allah, and you, O my leaders,
ultimately that which my lord Nourisher wills takes place, and happens
not that which He wills not.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِاللّٰهِ أَسْتَوْدِعُكُمَا اللّٰهَ،
وَلاَ جَعَلَهُ اللّٰهُ آخِرَ الْعَهْدِ مِنِّي إِلَيْكُمَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no power and no might save in Allah. Unto you (both) I have
come with love and affection, motivated under Divine incentive. May
Allah not make my this pledge of physical and spiritual close
association with you (both) the last fulfilment.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْصَرَفْتُ يَا سَيِّدِي يَا أَمِيرَ الْـمُؤْمِنِينَ وَمَوْلايَ
وَأَنْتَ يَاأَبَا عَبْدِاللّٰهِ يَا سَيِّدِي وَسَلاَمِي عَلَيْكُمَا
مُتَّصِلٌ مَا اتَّصَلَ اللَّيْلُ وَالنَّهارُ، وَاصِلٌ ذٰلِكَ
إِلَيْكُمَا غَيْرُ مَحْجُوبٍ عَنْكُمَا سَلاَمِي إِنْ شَاءَ اللّٰهُ.
وَأَسْأَلُهُ بِحَقِّكُما أَنْ يَشَاءَ ذٰلِكَ وَيَفْعَلَ فَإِنَّهُ
حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I take advantage O my leader, O Ameerul Moomineen, O my friend to whom I
have surrendered, body and soul, and you O Abaa Abillah, O my leader,
and pay respects with love and affection, nonstop, (till) do not carry
embracing days and nights, closely embracing it, to you, if Allah so
wills, without ever being separated, in your names I beseech Him, that
He wills it and does it because verily it is He who alone is praised,
and he brings about beautiful things.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْقَلَبْتُ يَا سَيِّدَيَّ عَنْكُمَا تَائِباً حَامِداً لِلّٰهِ
شَاكِراً رَاجِياً لِلاِِْجابَةِ، غَيْرَ آيِسٍ وَلاَ قَانِطٍ، آئِباً
عَائِداً رَاجِعاً إِلىٰ زِيَارَتِكُمَا، غَيْرَ رَاغِبٍ عَنْكُمَا وَلاَ
عَنْ زِيَارَتِكُمَا بَلْ رَاجِعٌ عَائِدٌ إِنْ شَاءَ اللّٰهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

see the light and bring myself over to you, accepting the true faith,
sorry for my earlier ignorance, thankful to Allah, always hopeful of
getting His favour, never giving into despair, nor losing heart, ever
ready to be near you, coming back again and again to see you, never “not
longing” for your nearness, but, if Allah so wills, shall be always in
your neighbourhood as an everyday habit.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِاللّهِ، يَا سَادَتِي رَغِبْتُ
إِلَيْكُمَا وَإِلىٰ زِيَارَتِكُمَا بَعْدَ أَنْ زَهِدَ فِيكُمَا وَفِي
زِيَارَتِكُمَا أَهْلُ الدُّنْيَا، فَلا خَيَّبَنِيَ اللّٰهُ مِـمَّا
رَجَوْتُ وَمَا أَمَّلْتُ فِي زِيارَتِكُمَا إِنَّهُ قَرِيبٌ مُجِيبٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no power and no might save in Allah. O my leaders I long for
you and love to be in your company though the worldly people looked at
it with indifference and kept aloof from your friendly intercourse. May
not Allah let me fall short of in that which I hope for and in that
which I look long and attentively to establish everlasting reunion with
you. Verily He is near and gives positive answer to prayers.


