The Ziyarat of Imam Husayn
==========================

The ahadith which speak about the Ziyarat of Imam Husayn (as) refer to
it as being an obligatory (wajib) act which each person who claims to be
a Shi’a must perform at least once in his life (this is in reference to
the physical visitation of the Imam at his shrine in Karbala’ – since
the spiritual meeting of the Imam from wherever one lives through the
recitation of the words given to us can be performed at any time and any
place).

Is this “wajib” commandment in the narrations the same “wajib” which we
understand for acts of worship such as Hajj, Khums, Salat, Sawm, etc?
Through this discussion and commentary of this Ziyarat, we hope to
clarify this issue, however it suffices to mention here that this is an
act which the Prophet of Islam (as) told his daughter, Fatimah Az-Zahra
(sa), that a group of her Shi’a (followers) would perform (this was
foretold over 50 years before the event occurred) and is something which
each Imam has emphasized!

There are numerous benefits which have been promised will be granted to
the one who pays his respects to the 3rd Imam and include: one’s sins
will be removed, an increase and also Divine blessings in one’s life,
removal of difficulties and the acceptance of one’s legitimate desires
and appeals. In addition, the Ziyarat of the 3rd Imam is equivalent to
the (spiritual) visitation of Allah (swt) and the visitation to His
Noble Prophet (S).

It goes without saying that such benefits are not acquired simply by the
physical visit to Karbala’ without any positive change in the morals and
character of a person. This point shall be elucidated upon in detail in
our next discussion, God willing so that we do not think that by a mere
journey of a few hours and the recitation of a few words, that we truly
become deserving of such bounties!

The Benefits of the Ziyarat of Imam Husayn
------------------------------------------

The benefits of visiting the Leader of the Martyrs (as) can be divided
into two categories: the individual benefits and the societal gains.
Although each of these categories contain numerous sub-categories, we
will only look at one of each in order to keep this discussion brief.

The Individual Benefits
-----------------------

Without doubt, visiting the Imams, especially Sayyid ash-Shuhada (as)
has a very great individual benefit to it since the true meaning of
Ziyarat is “to meet someone” and “being one and united” with the person
whom we are encountering – either through a physical engagement or a
spiritual and esoteric meeting. From one point of view, we know that
these personalities are infallible and without doubt, when a person
meets those whom he likes to be around and are his friends, he takes on
their characteristics or tries hard to be like them to “fit in”
(positive peer pressure). Thus, when a person goes to meet those who are
the closest to Allah (swt) in the spiritual hierarchy and who are the
most righteous from the point of view of their actions and demeanour, he
would definitely seek to emulate and be like them!

Just as a person who has been invited to meet the political head of a
country or another personality would ensure that he looks presentable
and would make sure that he has showered, brushed his teeth, combed his
hair, worn the best clothing and applied the best perfume, so too when a
person goes to meet personalities such as the Prophet of Islam (S) and
the A’immah (as), he too must ensure that not only is he presentable
from the physical point of view, but more importantly that his inside is
purified of all sins. It is for this reason that Tawbah or asking
forgiveness is one of the introductory steps before a person even
entertains the thought of going for Ziyarat. Therefore, one of the
benefits of the Ziyarat is both a physical cleaning of our body and also
a spiritual cleansing of our heart!

Is it possible for a person who says ‘As-Salam ‘Alaika O’ Aba ‘Abdillah’
to be negligent of the noble ethical traits which this Imam best
exemplified? Is it possible for a person who says ‘As-Salam ‘Alaika O’
Aba ‘Abdillah’ to be one who worships his lower desires, the wealth of
the world and who shows veneration to the open enemies of Allah (swt)?
If we see that we have gone to visit the Prophet (S) or any of our
A’immah (as) while we have these negative traits within us then we
should be sure that there is some doubt in regards to our visitation...

The Societal Benefits
---------------------

The societal benefits of this visitation can be best understood if we
analyze the reasons why the enemies of the Ahlul Bayt (as) have
prevented the Shi’a from visiting their A’immah (as) – those buried in
Medina and Iraq, but more importantly, the one buried in Karbala’.

The enemies of the Ahlul Bayt (as) , especially the Bani Umayyah, Bani
Abbas and even today’s enemies knew and know the power of the Ziyarat.
They have probably studied the philosophy and true meaning of the
Ziyarat better than we have and thus, understand that if it is carried
out with a complete awareness of the individual whom we are paying our
respects to, his or her own struggles against injustice and their
motives in rising up for Allah (swt), and that if all of these were
instilled in the hearts of those visiting them, that a great revolution
would take place in their lands!

They know that the true meaning of the Ziyarat of Imam Husayn (as) is
the rejection and overthrow of ‘their version’ of Islam and an
acceptance and implementation of the true visage of Islam which calls
for justice, equality and freedom for all.

The societal effects of this Ziyarat are ones which affect all aspects
of one’s life – economics, social welfare, arts and humanities,
literature, etc. In addition, something as “simple” as the placing of
the Turbah during the time of Salat which we prostrate upon reminds us
of two things: one is that we are all from Allah and from the ground
which He created us and it is back into that Earth that we shall return.
However more importantly we are reminded that if we are to go back to
Allah, then the best way to return back to Him is through losing our
life on the plains of Karbala’ – not necessarily the physical land of
Karbala’ in Iraq, rather as the saying goes, ‘Every day is ‘Ashura and
every land is Karbala’.’

Why Ziyarat ‘Ashura?
--------------------

Of all the rites of visitation which we can read when we want to salute
Imam Husayn and his family and companions, the best and most highly
recommended one is that of Ziyarat ‘Ashura.

In this comprehensive visitation, we combine the concepts of Tawalla
[Love for the sake of Allah (swt)] and Tabarra [Hate for the sake of
Allah (swt)], the culture of self-sacrifice for the lofty goals of the
society and the fact that we must **never** succumb to oppression and
tyranny.

In addition, through such an encompassing prayer, the issues of Tawhid,
Nubuwwat and Ma’ad are explained and we realize that without Imamate,
these three principle beliefs have no meaning or power to them!

The truth of this statement is clear since if we look through history,
these three beliefs have never brought about any serious change in the
Muslim state of affairs [just look at the state of the “Muslims” today
throughout the world] nor have these three beliefs been able to conquer
foreign occupiers of the Muslim lands nor expel foreign entities who
have illegally occupied our sovereign countries!

One Qur’anic proof of this point is the verse of Mubahilah (3:61) in
which the Christians, who had come to debate the Prophet about the true
character of Jesus the son of Mary, brought forth a very interesting
point which all Muslims can learn from.

The delegation told the other Christians that if Muhammad brings his
companions to the Mubahilah field then to go ahead and challenge them
(as the companions - on their own - have no power or strength). However
if Muhammad brings his Ahlul Bayt (‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn) then
they must not go against him as they would definitely perish!

Thus, if the Christians of Najran knew the power of the Ahlul Bayt, then
this is something which the rest of the Muslim Ummah also needs to
realize and accept.

Therefore, by reading the Ziyarat of ‘Ashura, we are actually seeking to
keep the Islam of Muhammad, ‘Ali, Hasan and Husayn .... up until Imam
al-Hujjah alive and through this visitation, we reject the Islam of the
likes of Abu Sufyan, the first, second and third “Caliphs”, Mu’awiyah,
Yazid and the entire polluted chain of Bani Umayyah, Bani ‘Abbas and
others.

The Etiquette of the Ziyarat of Imam Husayn
-------------------------------------------

When visiting the shrine of Imam Husayn (as), we must first off realize
whom we are going to visit and the etiquette which we must observe. Just
as we spend time to look presentable when we have an important business
meeting or a luncheon with a client, so to when we go to meet the
representative of Allah (swt) on the Earth, we must also observe these
and many other norms and etiquette.

In a long hadith narrated by Muhammad b. Muslim, he asked Imam Muhammad
b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (as) in regards to the etiquette of the Ziyarat of Imam
Husayn (as). He specifically asked them Imam, “Is it not the same as
visiting the house of Allah and performing the Hajj?” To this question,
the Imam replied, “But of course it is.” The companion then asked,
“Thus, are all the things which the Hujjaj must observe also necessary
for me to perform?” To this, the Imam (as) replied and stated: “It is
incumbent upon you to deal with those who travel with you with goodness;
you should speak less except for the remembrance of Allah; you must
ensure that you are wearing clean clothes...”

The Imam (as) went on to list over 15 conditions for the visitor of Imam
Husayn and concluded his statement by telling b. Muslim that, “If you
observe all of these conditions, then you shall receive the reward as if
you had performed a Hajj and ‘Umrah...”

These are obviously related to that person who is able to physically
perform the Ziyarat, however many of them can also be performed by those
who are reading this Ziyarat from far away.

In summary, the things which these sorts of ahadith teach us are that we
need to mould our lives to conform with the way of life of the person
whom we are visiting – spiritually. We need to show humility and
humbleness in our day to day life [this can be seen in the fact that
when we perform the Ziyarat we are recommended to go barefoot and walk
with tranquility], we need to always look presentable when interacting
with others [we are recommended to wear clean, white clothes and apply
perfume to ourselves], we need to be ready and willing to assist those
less fortunate than ourselves [it is recommended to give Sadaqa before
the Ziyarat and to offer a gift to others] and we need to show
moderation in our lifestyle [we are told that we should not eat heavy
and fatty foods before such visits which may only make us feel tired and
lazy]...

In addition to the etiquette of Ziyarat related to our physical
presence, we must also remember the spiritual etiquette – the most
important one being the rejection of all external despots and enemies
and that if we need to be killed to keep our honour and dignity (just as
Imam Husayn did), then so be it. After all, Sayyid ash-Shuhada (as) has
told us that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَوْتٌ فِي عِزٍّ خَيرٌ مِنْ حَيَاةٍ فِي ذُلٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A death in dignity is better than a life in humiliation.”


