Section Four
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبا عَبْدِ اللّهِ، لَقَدْ عَظُمَتِ الرَّزِيَّةُ وَجَلَّتْ
وَعَظُمَتِ الْمُصِيبَةُ بِكَ عَلَيْنا وَعَلَى جَمِيعِ أَهْلِ
الإِسْلامِ، وَجَلَّتْ وَعَظُمَتْ مُصِيبَتُكَ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ عَلَى
جَمِيعِ أَهْلِ السَّمَاوَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ Aba ‘Abdillah! Surely the tribulations are great and unbearable and
your tragedy is great for us, and for all the people of Islam and
unbearable and great is your tragedy in the heavens and for all of the
dwellers of the heavens.”

In this section of the Ziyarat, we address our Imam directly and recall
the tragedies which befell him and our grief and remorse at what
occurred on the plains of Karbala’.

The historians have stated that from the first day of creation until the
Resurrection comes, the tribulations which Imam Husayn faced are the
greatest and most severe – and there is no other historical event which
comes close to what he went through. However, why such an emphasis on
recalling this tragedy in this particular way and with such words?

The late scholar, Ayatullah Murtadha Mutahhari has written that, “Once,
I sat down and tried to count the number of reasons why this event was
so unbearable and I was able to come up with around twenty-one reasons
and I do not think that there is any other single event in this world
which could compare to this injustice...”

When we study the event of Karbala’ we see that no one was spared – the
infant child, the young adults, the grown men, the elderly and even the
women of the camp! Not only were they murdered in cold blood, but even
after their death, they were not shown respect and this is evident from
the trampling of their bodies by the horses and their decapitation and
parading through the streets of Kufah and Shaam (Syria)!

In addition, we read in the Ziyarat that this is a tribulation that not
only the people of the Earth feel grief and cry about, but even the
Angels in the Heavens express remorse about! In this regards, we have
numerous hadith, however suffices us to quote the following from the 6th
Imam, Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq where he has said, “What is wrong with
you that you do not go (to the Ziyarat of the grave of al-Husayn)?
Surely 40,000 Angels are at his grave, crying, until the Day of
Resurrection.”


