Section Five
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَعَنَ اللّهُ أُمَّةً أَسَّسَتْ أَسَاسَ الظُّلْمِ وَالْجَوْرِ
عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May the curse (La’n) be upon those people who laid down the foundations
for the oppression and wrongs done upon you, the family of the Prophet
[Ahlul Bayt].”

The word “La’n” which is usually translated as ‘curse’ is one of those
Arabic words with no direct translation in the English language. Its
true meaning is to be removed and distanced from the mercy of Allah and
does not mean ‘curse’ as in using a curse word (as we use in English).
Thus, the ‘La’n’ which we make means that we are asking Allah to remove
His mercy in this world from the people who brought the event of
Karbala’ into being (and who also perpetuate their claims even today)
and also for Him to not show Mercy upon them on the plain of the
Resurrection.

In this section, we ask Allah to remove his mercy and blessings from
those people – that part of the nation of Islam – who laid down the
foundations of tyranny and this is in direct reference to those who took
part in Saqifah of Bani Sa’idah – those who stole the Caliphate from its
rightful inheritor, Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib(as).

The ‘La’n’ is not something alien to Islam or limited to the Shi’a since
the Qur’an clearly tells us that this is something permissible for all
Muslims and is an act which the Angels and Allah Himself also perform
upon certain individuals! In Suratul Ahzab (33), verse 57 we read,
“Surely those people who hurt Allah and His Prophet (Muhammad), the
curse of Allah shall be upon them in this life and in the next...”

Without doubt, we can not “hurt” Allah – however we can do things
against His religion and His chosen servants which He does not accept
and which “anger” him. Without doubt, the killing of the one whom He had
chosen to lead the community is one such reason for His curse to
descend. In addition, without doubt, the killing of the son of the
Prophet (Imam Husayn) is an act which hurt the Prophet. Thus, he has a
right to curse such individuals and us being his followers, acting
according to his Sunnah have every right to also curse such people!

As historians assert, had the caliphate not been stolen from the
Commander of the Faithful in the event of Saqifah, the foundations for
oppression and wrongs done upon all the members of the Ahlul Bayt would
never have been laid. Thus, we ask Allah to remove His mercy from those
who hatched the plots which led to this great tragedy...


