Chapter 57: On What Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) said on the Subject of Divine Leadership to Yahya ibn ad-Dhahhak al-Samarqandi in the Presence of Al-Ma’mun
================================================================================================================================================

57-1 Al-Hakim Abu Ali Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad al-Bayhaqi narrated that
Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Sowli said that there have been various forms of
narration transmitted from Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) in various wordings for
which I have not found any authentic document. I have seen the various
forms. I will include the meaning of this narration here, even though it
has been narrated in different words.

“Al-Ma’mun wished in his heart that Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) would fail in the
arguments and be overcome by the opposing sides. However, Al-Ma’mun
acted differently on the surface. Then Al-Ma’mun gathered together the
jurisprudents and the masters of eloquent speech, and privately told
them to argue with the Imam (a.s.) on the subject of Divine Leadership.
Then Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) told them, ‘Please choose one person from among
yourselves to argue with me on your behalf. Then whatever becomes
imperative for him is going to be imperative for all of you.’ Then they
chose a man known as Yahya ibn adh-Dhahhak al-Samarqandi for whom there
was no man in Khorasan (in Persia) to challenge. Then Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)
told him, ‘O Yahya! Ask me about anything you wish.’ Yahya said, ‘I will
ask about Divine Leadership. How do you claim one to be a Divine Leader
who did not lead the people (perhaps he was referring to Imam Ali
(a.s.)), and abandon one who has led the people and the people are
content with his Divine Leadership?’ Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) told him, ‘O
Yahya! Tell me, which of the following two people are right: One who
acknowledges a person who denounces himself, and one who acknowledges a
person who considers himself to be honest! Which of the two are right,
and which one is wrong?’ Then Yahya remained silent. Al-Ma’mun told him,
‘Answer him.’ Yahya said, ‘O the Commander of the Faithful (i.e.
Al-Ma’mun)! Please excuse me from answering.’ Al-Ma’mun said, ‘O Abal
Hassan (Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.))! We understand your intentions behind asking
this question.’ Then the Imam (a.s.) said, ‘Now Yahya must inform us
about which of his leaders have denounced themselves and which ones have
acknowledged themselves. If he thinks that they have denounced
themselves, then they do not deserve to be Divine Leaders. And if he

57

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بابُ ذِكرَ ما كَلَّمَ بِهِ الرِّضا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَحْيَى بْنِ
الضَّحّاكِ السَمَرْقَنْدِيُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي الإِمامَة عِنْدَ الْمَأمُونِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 1 - حَدَّثَنا الْحاكِم أَبُو عَلِي الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ أحْمَد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْبِيْهَقِيُّ قالَ حَدَّثَني مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَحْيَى الصُّوليُّ قالَ
يُحْكَى لِلرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ خَبَرٌ مُخْتَلِفُ الأَلْفَاظِ
لَمْ تَقَعْ لِي رِوَايَتُهُ بِإِسْنَادٍ أَعْمَلُ عَلَيْهِ وَقَدِ
اخْتُلِفَ أَلْفَاظُ مَنْ رَوَاهُ إِلا أَنِّي سَ‏آتِي بِهِ
وَبِمَعَانِيهِ وَإِنِ اخْتَلَفَتْ أَلْفَاظُهُ كَانَ الْمَأْمُونُ فِي
بَاطِنِهِ يُحِبُّ سَقَطَاتِ الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ وَأَنْ
يَعْلُوَهُ الُْمحْتَجُّ وَإِنْ أَظْهَرَ غَيْرَ ذَلِكَ فَاجْتَمَعَ
عِنْدَهُ الْفُقَهَاءُ وَالْمُتَكَلِّمُونَ فَدَسَّ إِلَيْهِمْ أَنْ
نَاظِرُوهُ فِي الإِمَامَةِ فَقَالَ لَهُمُ الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
اقْتَصِرُوا عَلَى وَاحِدٍ مِنْكُمْ يَلْزَمُكُمْ مَا لَزِمَهُ فَرَضُوا
بِرَجُلٍ يُعْرَفُ بِيَحْيَى بْنِ الضَّحَّاكِ السَّمَرْقَنْدِيِّ وَلَمْ
يَكُنْ بِخُرَاسَانَ مِثْلُهُ فَقَالَ الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ يَا
يَحْيَى سَلْ مَا شِئْتَ فَقَالَ نَتَكَلَّمُ فِي الإِمَامَةِ كَيْفَ
ادَّعَيْتَ لِمَنْ لَمْ يَؤُمَّ وَتَرَكْتَ مَنْ أَمَّ وَوَقَعَ الرِّضَا
بِهِ فَقَالَ لَهُ يَا يَحْيَى أَخْبِرْنِي عَمَّنْ صَدَقَ كَاذِباً
عَلَى نَفْسِهِ أَوْ كَذَبَ صَادِقاً عَنْ نَفْسِهِ أَيَكُونُ مُحِقّاً
مُصِيباً أَمْ مُبْطِلاً مُخْطِئاً فَسَكَتَ يَحْيَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ لَهُ الْمَأْمُونُ أَجِبْهُ فَقَالَ يُعْفِينِي أَمِيرُ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ جَوَابِهِ فَقَالَ الْمَأْمُونُ يَا أَبَا الْحَسَنِ
عَرِّفْنَا الْغَرَضَ فِي هَذِهِ الْمَسْأَلَةِ فَقَالَ لا بُدَّ
لِيَحْيَى مِنْ أَنْ يُخْبِرَ عَنْ أَئِمَّتِهِ أَنَّهُمْ كَذَبُوا عَلَى
أَنْفُسِهِمْ أَوْ صَدَقُوا فَإِنْ زَعَمُوا أَنَّهُمْ كَذَبُوا فَلا
إِمَامَةَ لِكَذَّابٍ وَإِنْ زَعَمَ أَنَّهُمْ صَدَقُوا فَقَدْ قَالَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

thinks that they have acknowledged themselves, then the first one said,
‘I have attained mastery over you but I am not the best of you.’ And the
one who comes next will say, ‘It was a mistake to pledge allegiance to
the first one. Kill anyone who does this again.’ Then, by God, he was
not pleased with anything but killing those who repeated that. Then when
someone is not the best of the people - given that to be the best is
only possible by having such characteristics as knowledge, struggling in
the way of God, and possessing other nobilities - none of which he
possessed; then how can the pledge of allegiance to someone be proper if
the pledge of allegiance to one has made such a mistake which deserves
that anyone doing such an act (pledge of allegiance) be killed. How can
his leadership be acceptable for others while he is as such? Then he
himself said the following on the pulpit, ‘Indeed there is a Satan
within me which may overcome me. Please direct me to the straight way
whenever he (the Satan within me) makes me go astray. And please advise
me whenever I make a mistake.’ Therefore, they themselves declare that
they are not Divine Leaders whether they are telling the truth or
lying.’ Then Yahya had no answer to give. Then Al-Ma’mun got surprised
about what the Imam (a.s.) had said and said, ‘O Abal Hassan Ar-Ridha’
(a.s.)! There exists no one else but you on the Earth who can speak so
eloquently.’”


