Chapter 61: On The Martyrdom of Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) Due to Being Murdered by Al-Ma’mun With Poison
===============================================================================================

61-1 Al-Hakim Abu Ali Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad al-Bayhaqi narrated that
Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Sowli quoted on the authority of Ubaydillah ibn
Abdullah and Muhammad ibn Musa ibn Nasr al-Razi, on the authority of his
father and Al-Husayn ibn Umar al-Akhbari, on the authority of Ali ibn
Al-Husayn - the author of Bogha al-Kabeer - that in the last days of his
life, Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) got a fever. Then he decided to have a phlebotomy
performed. Then Al-Ma’mun rode on (an animal) to see him. Before going
there, he took out something from a vase and asked his servant to crush
it with his hands. The servant crushed it on a tray. Al-Ma’mun told the
servant that he does not have to wash his hands. Then he asked the
servant to accompany him to Ar-Ridha’’s (a.s.) house. When Al-Ma’mun
entered the house, he sat in front of the Imam (a.s.) until he (a.s.)
decided to start the blood-letting. Or as Ubaydillah said he put off the
blood-letting and told his servant to bring him a pomegranate. There was
a pomegranate tree in the garden of Ar-Ridha’’s (a.s.) house.

61

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بابُ وَفاة الرِّضا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ مَسْمُوماً بِاغتِيالِ الْمَأمُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 1 - حَدَّثَنا الْحاكِم أَبُو عَلِي الحُسَيْنِ بْنِ أحْمَد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْبِيْهَقِيُّ قالَ حَدَّثَنا مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ يَحْيَى الصُّوْليُّ
حَدَّثَني عُبِيْد اللَّه بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّه وَمُحَمَّدِ بْنِ مُوسَى
بْنِ نَصْرِ الرَّازِيُّ عَنْ أَبيهِ وَعمر الأخْباري عَنْ عَلِىِّ بْنِ
الحُسَيْن كاتب بقاء الكبير فِي آخِرَين أَنَّ الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ
السَّلامُ حُمَّ فَعَزَمَ عَلَى الْفَصْدِ فَرَكِبَ الْمَأْمُونُ وَقَدْ
كَانَ قَالَ لِغُلامٍ لَهُ فُتَّ هَذَا بِيَدِكَ لِشَيْ‏ءٍ أَخْرَجَهُ
مِنْ بَرْنِيَّةٍ فَفَتَّهُ فِي صِينِيَّةٍ ثُمَّ قَالَ كُنْ مَعِي وَلا
تَغْسِلْ يَدَكَ وَرَكِبَ إِلَى الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ وَجَلَسَ
حَتَّى فَصَدَ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَقَالَ عُبَيْدُ اللَّهِ بَلْ أَخَّرَ
فَصْدَهُ وَقَالَ الْمَأْمُونُ لِذَلِكَ الْغُلامِ هَاتِ مِنْ ذَلِكَ
الرُّمَّانِ وَكَانَ الرُّمَّانُ فِي شَجَرَةٍ فِي بُسْتَانٍ فِي دَارِ
الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The servant picked a pomegranate from the tree. Al-Ma’mun asked him to
peel it, open it up and prepare it for eating. The servant peeled it and
prepared it in a bowl. Then Al-Ma’mun asked the servant to wash his
hands. Then the servant brought in the pomegranate. Then Al-Ma’mun told
Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.), ‘Have some.’ Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) replied, ‘No, not until
the Commander of the Faithful (Al-Ma’mun) leaves.’ Then Al-Ma’mun
insisted on it by saying, ‘By God! It is not possible. You must eat some
of it in my presence. I would also have some of it along with you were
it not for my stomachache.’ Then Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) ate a few spoonfuls of
it and Al-Ma’mun left. However Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) fainted and sat up again
fifty times that day before saying the afternoon prayers. Al-Ma’mun sent
someone to Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) and said, ‘I know that this unconsciousness
and feeling of apathy is due to the phlebotomy that you had done.
However, Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) got worse at night, and died before the
morning. The following were the final words which he uttered, *‘…Say:
Even if you had remained in your homes, those for whom death was decreed
would certainly have gone forth to the place of their death…’*[^1] *‘And
the command of God is a decree determined.’’*[^2] When the following
morning came, Al-Ma’mun woke up early and ordered that Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.)
be washed and shrouded. He himself followed the corpse with a bare head
and in bare and said, ‘O brother! Indeed there is a gap in Islam due to
your demise. And God’s destiny (for you) overcame my efforts on your
behalf.’ Then Al-Ma’mun had the grave of Harun Ar-Rashid (al-Ma’mun’s
afther) dug open and buried Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.) there. Then Al-Ma’mun said,
‘I hope that God the Highest would grant some benefits to my father due
to being close to Ar-Ridha’ (a.s.).’”

[^1]: Qur’an, 3:154

[^2]: Qur’an, 33:38


