Preface
=======

How beautiful are the feet of the herald on the mountains, announcing
peace, heralding good tidings, announcing salvation, saying to Zion,
"Your God has manifested His kingdom." (Isaiah 52:7)

I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they
brought him near before him.

And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that
which shall not be destroyed. (Daniel 7:13-14)

But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest
asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the
Blessed?

And Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. (Mark
14:61-62)

Seek first the Kingdom of God, and its righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. (Matthew 6:33) He will transform the
body of our humiliation that it may be conformed to the body of his
glory, by the power that also enables him to make all things subject to
himself. (Philippians 3:21)

Unto thy Lord is the recourse that day…. Stir not thy tongue herewith
to hasten it. (Qur'an 75.12, 16)

Those who believe (in the Qur'an), and those who follow the Jewish
(scriptures), and the Christians and the Sabians,--any who believe in
God and the Last Day, and work righteousness, shall have their reward
with their Lord; on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.
(Qur'an 2.62)

By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, surely the son of Mary will soon
descend amongst you and will judge mankind justly… (Bukhari, 4. 60,
3448)

[The Mahdi] will fill the earth will equity and justice as it was
filled with oppression and tyranny. (Sunan Abu Dawud, 36.4272).

Philosophy and faith are not incompatible.[^2] Indeed, whenever faith in
divine revelation of the One God reflects upon anything in the world,
this reflection constitutes what is commonly called "philosophy of
religion." Philosophy of religion does its best work not so much in
attempting rational proofs of revelation, but of explicating the truths
of divine and human action as conveyed by revelation.

When philosophy concerns itself with revelation, it invariably
constructs models of agency and ethical action distinguishing between
that which belongs to the Divine and that which belongs to the human.
The models present distinctions of similarity, as in acts of mercy; and
of difference, as in acts of creation. Both types of action are ethical
in nature, that is, they are oriented to bringing about some good
result. But the human being can achieve agency only in acts of mercy not
in acts of creation, i.e., only where there is a created similarity and
never at the point of difference between the divine and the human.

As is clear from revelation, the human being performs no real act of
creation since it is beyond the creature's capacity to bring anything
into existence. Although it is common to speak of "human creativity"
this type of action is always merely a refashioning of an already
created substance or form. Indeed, the mark of Abrahamic tradition
regarding the being of God and the being of the human is the singularly
fundamental distinction between Creator and creature. Creative action is
a unique category of divine agency and can only be passively witnessed
to or received as a gift by creaturely, human agents.

When considering any agential act, it is also necessary to recognize
its personal, individual origin. Although it is common to think in terms
of collective action in terms of contractual agreements and concerted
efforts of groups from pairs to entire populations, the agency of the
individual never disappears from human events. Indeed, at the legal
level, and above all the moral level, it is revelation and reason
unambiguously point to personal agency in all actions and events in
creation.

As the human being achieves full consciousness and conscientious
awareness in relation to others, the self fully emerges as a sense of
personal identity and accountability. The self and the sense of self in
identity and accountability are not so important in terms of the errors
to which it is prone, but in terms of the good of which it is capable.

This is a crucial point when considering human ethical action at the
point of similarity with Divine action. While the fundamental
distinction between divine and human action is never erased, nor could
it be, these two agencies disclose their similarity not only at the
point of good outcomes, but even more at the point of their personal
natures.

The uncreated Self that alone belongs to God has a created
correspondence in the created self of the individual human being. Human
self-hood and ethical agency are creaturely reflections of the divine
Self as eternal Agent - the Ever-living: creating and ever merciful
toward the creation. When considering any aspect of divine creativity,
whether in originating creation or in bringing to consummation, there is
always a dimension of human reflection in terms of self identity and
agency in relation to God. Any consideration of the full effects of
revelation upon faith, indeed, creating faith, must keep the relation of
Creator and human creatures in view.

True to the primal meaning of "islam" as the original religion of
revelation and personal relationship with God the Creator, faithful
philosophy is the understanding and action elicited from such faith.
While it is understood that this islam unfortunately retreated into the
background of human memory or was even forgotten by many polytheistic
civilizations, revelation of the One God was extended through the
Abrahamic heritage of Judaism, Christianity and Islam. The extension of
revelation through the prophets particularly with Abraham throughout the
three faiths, always focus upon the ultimate work of God to rescue
creation from its ultimate decline and destruction through resurrection
and new creation.

This is the salvific or soteriological dimension of the revelation
culminating in events of the appearing of the Messiah for all believers
out of all nations and, according to Islam, inaugurated by the
preparatory arrival of the Mahdi, gathering all Muslims to readiness for
the appearing of Messiah.[^3] All of this comes about exclusively on
account of divine intervention, superseding all human action other than
response to the call of God to be gathered. However, the ethics of faith
rest largely upon the Messianic promise of salvation.

The ethics of faith are the humanistic implications of Messianism /
Madhism (M/M). M/M humanism emerges as a great religious philosophical
project for aiding the faithful in determining the relationship between
the knowledge of divine action or agency and that of human action or
agency. It becomes essential to develop a philosophical account in
making these determinations for the sake of the realities of human
contexts and of their transformation through ultimate divine
intervention. The Abrahamic faiths present two models of human agency:
ethical and eschatological, the former active and constructive, the
latter quite passive and receptive. We move now to the discussion of
these two modes.


