1) Ethical Agency
=================

In this mode of action the human being is enjoined by constraint of
divine commandment and / or spiritual motivation to act constructively
in terms of others and the environment.

If this fundamental distinction is well-established, robust notions of
self conceived in terms of this category that can develop according to
conceptualities of personal life-planning and political existence.
Eschatological agency certainly figures in to the faith of ethical human
agents but entirely in terms of anticipatory religious practices
associated with the eschatological doctrines of M/M. Ethical agency
arises from a combination of free obedience to the law of God and loving
voluntarism in terms of generosity of action and regard for the other.

The philosopher Immanuel Kant attempted to join the two through the
concepts of right and virtue. In this vision, self-respect and
other-respect are carefully balanced through a necessity of mutual
reinforcement. There is in Kant, however, an over-critical dimension
concerning the self-love that is a necessary part of other-love in all
ethical agency. One is always acting toward oneself as one acts toward
others.

Of course self-love is a highly visible feature of ancient reasoning
about the self in relation to others. Aristotle's Nichomachian Ethics,
Bk IX, as essential to all friendship. Not at all characteristic of
grasping greed[^4], self-love assumes of model of the self according to
the highest, noblest virtues of character and generosity. Everything
about self-love is connected with a life-time of identity formation
according to the highest principles of moral and affective
cultivation.

The genuineness of this self-love actually becomes a necessary
prerequisite to ethical action toward others. Friendship is also a
crucial aspect here because the self-identity cultivated by self-love is
not only a determination to be conformed to virtuous principles but to
emulated and mutually motivate one's friend and to be motivated by one's
friend in their pursuit. The moment that virtue begins to be born in the
self and in the friend with whom one also shares in the mutually
conditioned self-love, this love is intensified by the lovability of the
nascent virtue element that has become detectable both to oneself and to
the other.[^5]

The classic concern that virtue must be loved for its own sake,
indifferent to the desires of the self, prove to be entirely
wrong-headed; that until the self awakens to the desire for virtue and
begins to embody it through self-cultivation of virtue, virtue cannot
truly begin to be realized. Indeed, the affinity of the human being with
another human being is the ground of friendship, such the self-love and
other-love cannot be wholly distinguished from one another.

Just as true self-love will not be tolerant of the failures of the self
to be virtuous, so too will the friend be intolerant toward failures to
pursue the same by the friend.

Although Kant's reasoning on this matter called for duty to supersede
all other virtues, this is clearly not a balance tending toward the
favoring of love and mercy. His overwhelming concern with self-conceit
and arrogance hardly leaves any room for rightful self-love. Kant's goal
was an objective grounding of morality, not a yet higher principle of
mercy and love. But like fundamental concern with the law, the mature,
highly differentiated and cultivated self that corresponds at a
creaturely level to the Creator Self that is the unique deity, is
completely lost on Kant.[^6] Indeed, Kant does not believe that a proper
self-love ever exists.

Benevolence is only a duty; and while he is most concerned with duty as
an invariable cause of right action - love or affection being to easily
disturbed to be relied upon, even the pleasure of seeing other takes joy
in one's benevolence toward them could just as well be taken as a matter
of indifference.[^7] Thus, while Kant is guided by his reduction of human
agency to that of duty and virtue as the unwavering commitments to
fulfill one's duty - objectively and universalistically[^8],

he fails to give a proper account of the person as a highly affective
self comparable at the creaturely level to the Creator. Suffice it to
say that Kant can affirm self-respect along with respect for others, but
as helpful and laudable as his cultivation of autonomous agency is, it
does not conceive largely nor intricately enough of the self as ethical
agent. While human agency must achieve moral action, human existence is
not defined by its agency, but its agency is defined by the human and
its qualities of living.

This is where the teachings of Jesus, specifically his love command,
along with the prophets and apostles who embody the same command become
indispensible. Although the anti-philosophers Kierkegaard and Nietzsche,
together with exegetes such as Albert Schweitzer of the early 20th
century recognized the subjugation of human life to the falsehoods of a
moral system that reduced the human being to a mere agent of action, it
is always required that the words of revelation are restored to their
authoritative position in philosophical reflection.

Great passages such as "God so loved the world," "you shall love the
Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength," "the
Sabbath was made for man and not man for the Sabbath," "love your
neighbor as yourself," "you are my disciples if you have love for one
another," "now abide faith, hope, love, but the greatest of these is
love," are all indications of the centrality of love in ethical agency
and the self-formation of the believer.

In the love command of scripture, which is said to sum up all commands,
to embrace it and to advance it through obedient action is not merely to
achieve correct legal behavior, but to achieve full humanness from the
Creator / Redeemer that is God. Just as God's being cannot be reduced to
his actions, neither can the human being. Actions serve to achieve
relations functions which are greater than the discrete actions as such.
The bond of affection and relationship by which virtue enabling
covenants and ultimately family and friendship with God and with others,
is the incomparable goal of all human agency just as it is in all divine
agency. Indeed, eschatological agency is but the fulfillment of divine
love and human destiny in that love.

Understanding ethical agency through the love command of Jesus and of
all revelation is the critical importance of development and maturation
of the self in relation to God and to others. Obviously, the connection
between the institutional concerns of the law in establishing and
maintaining a society that embodies political, economic and criminal
justice require a reasonable if very imperfect application of human
judgment and action to others within a wider community.

Obedience to the love command and the self that is formed by it is a
response to transcendent reality, creating a permanent and necessary
paradoxical tension that is required of all learning and practice of
ethical agency.[^9] The tension is to be embraced so that the status quo
of human tradition and practice will never be seen as a perfect
achievement, but as it truly is, always affected by the sin and error
that is the human condition. With the application of the love command to
human life of course most supremely, one is enjoined to the most radical
application of divine love, namely, to love all equally, including one's
enemies. As found in the central message of Jesus' Gospel, Matthew 5:

44 But I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute
you,

45 so that you may be children of your Father in heaven; for he makes
his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the
righteous and on the unrighteous.

46 For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Do not
even the tax collectors do the same?

47 And if you greet only your brothers and sisters, what more are you
doing than others? Do not even the Gentiles do the same?

48 Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.

The will of God for the human being is based upon the very pattern of
the will of God for himself in universal love. God is impartial; God
makes no distinctions in his love. This does not mean that the imperfect
systems of justice devised by human beings can be eliminated, but that
we as human beings must never allow ourselves to be reduced to that
imperfection. No human being, however unjust and unloving in behavior,
can be treated any less justice than another, since this is the will of
God and the action God shows toward everyone. God's perfection is in his
equal love and treatment of every human being - as the Apostle writes:
God "has bound everyone under sin so that he may be merciful to all."

This does not mean that he honors everyone equally; or that great
achievement in holiness is irrelevant. Righteous living and loving
service is immensely greater than wickedness and cruelty.

There is no one who is not in need of mercy because every human being
is a sinner. Although the levels of sin from one individual to the next
may hold magnitudes of difference, nevertheless, all require the mercy
of God. Just as the sun and the rain are universal blessings upon all
coming from God's perfection, human love must all be all-inclusive.
Ethical agency in light of the love command requires equal regard toward
all on the part of believers. As the great Medieval poet, Iacopone da
Todi O Charity, true life - for every other love is dead - You break no
laws, but obey them all; and in the heart In which there is no law, you
bring it into being.

He who flees from you cannot know the sweetness of your fruit.[^10] At
the level of institutions and the practice of law, the best human beings
may be able to accomplish is equality before the law, attached to it
will be an impulsion to see that the essentials of goodness in human
living might also be achieved for all. Because God's action is directed
by his loving Being, no exercise of justice is without compassion and
the obligation to alleviate the suffering of human beings as a part of
the life-long formation of the self in love. Here we must realize that
when revelation speaks of God's mercy, it is never a passive activity on
God's part but active, benevolent, forgiving. Human love based upon the
model of divine love will then also have this active basis for every
expression of itself.

This is perhaps no better summarized than in the apostle's injunction
to avoid vengeance in the practice of justice by deferring vengeance
entirely to the God in all of his exclusive perfection and rights.
Presuming that human faith and love are ever anything more than
imperfect, requiring deepest humility, is to express that most rejected
pseudo-religious self-justifying so rejected by revelation. For human
beings, the norm of justice as ethical agents of divine love is to find
out how to achieve forgiveness as the highest expression of divine mercy
in all of our imperfect judgments and human relations.

Since every human being, no matter how faithful they might be before
God, still and always requires divine mercy, this mercy in the form of
universal forgiveness of the love command is the highest achievement of
ethical agency.

One of the great concepts of pre-eschatological time and its conditions
for divine / human agency is the "Between the Times" - between the time
of creation and consummation, but particularly between the time of the
Messiah's first coming and his second coming. The Second Coming,
otherwise known as the Parousia (lit. "Presence" of God and of the
Messiah, who's Spirit, imbues him and the whole world when He appears).
Humanity lives until this end (eschatos) in a transitional, transitory
state of non-permanence and must carry out everything according to
faith, hope, and love.

Before the of M/M events, humanity must live with its radical
limitations - radical in the sense of the depths of human finitude and
proneness to sin and therefore the unending struggle to live ethically,
toward others, oneself and always toward God. Under these conditions,
God is most often called "Merciful" because this supreme need of
humanity is mercy. If humanity was not so fallible; if even its best
obedience to God and the law were not so very imperfect, some other
attribute of God would have been elevated to first place.

Divine mercy receives the most mentioned because God's most frequent
act toward human beings is the forgiveness of sin and assistance in our
weakness. The needs and lacks of humanity are not in God or his plan (or
"divine economy" - oikonomia) for creation, but God has permitted
humanity to endure this condition in order to instill in them the
ethical strength that one day he, completely independent of us, will
perfect through resurrection. Until then, we are ethical agents on a
pilgrimage between the inauguration and the completion of Messianic
promises.[^11]


