2) Eschatological Agency
========================

The One Divine Being acts uniquely and unilaterally to bring human
beings and the rest of creation to ultimate perfection. In doing so, His
action is unconditioned in relation to all human action and
response.[^12] Here the human being is enjoined to witness divine acts of
reconstructing reality that consummate history and achieve a perfected
condition of human and environmental relations. M/M doctrines belong
entirely to the conditions of eschatological agency.

M/M doctrines are certainly a key aspect of motivation for ethical
agency but once they become a reality in future time, the truth
conditions for action shift to eschatological agency. Indeed, whenever
the two models of agency are confused or conflated, quite negative
consequences often follow, e.g., "hastening the day"[^13] such as a
vision of large numbers in religious revival.

While religious revivals can be most laudable events, they do not
constrain the Divine Being in any way to change the appointed time of
the end. When "hastening the day" becomes politicized the eschatological
vision of M/M doctrines become temporalized and believers try to
approximate divine action in their own actions, the outcome can be quite
the opposite to the will of God in terms of ethical agency. In order to
avoid such outcomes, their distinction requires strict
maintenance.[^14]

A key feature of M/M doctrines is that they present a model of reality
where ultimate truths and acts of divine consummation are exclusive of
human intention and action. M/M doctrines conceive of perfected human
conditions, conceptualize their religious hope of a perfected future in
terms of unilateral divine agency and posit epochal schematization of
history. If followed consistently, M/M doctrine foreclose the
possibility of conflating divine and human action and truth
realization.

The necessary distinction above requires focus upon ethical agency and
rests upon the conventional conceptuality of synergistic agency typical
of everyday religious belief and practice. M/M doctrines can serve then
as antidotes to utopian aspirations (including religious perfectionism)
installed in social and political planning that over-estimate the human
capacity to achieve the divinely revealed visions of consummation and
perfection. With a categorical focus on ethical agency, the fuller
dimensions of self within the religious community can be expanded.

M/M doctrine as eschatological agency has its only analog in a divine
act of creation. Divine creative action in entirely unilateral such that
while creature participate in the action, they do not contribute to it
in any way.[^15] This is the nature of the يوم القيامة "day of
resurrection".

Creatures are either beneficiaries of this unique form of action or
exempted from it. Indeed, beyond comparisons even with birth and death,
creative action represent fundamental changes in the universe, in the
state of the earth, in the course of human events. No human contribution
to this type of action is ever in view, according to revelation.

Although there is a proximity of human action to eschatological events,
and there are interpretive traditions that in their apologetical zeal
suggest ways that ethical agency somehow influences the former, this is
in fact not the case. Indeed, human action is not in proximity to the
original divine act of creation, but the nature of eschatological
action, now matter how close or interpenetrating both kinds of agency
are, the eschatological does not depend upon the ethical in any way.

Indeed, the exclusivity of divine action in eschatological agency
points both to the weakness and dependency of human action as well as
the triumph of this act belonging solely to God. Any share that human
beings as believers have in this triumph is one of inheritance, not of
co-achievement let alone co-action.

The exegesis of scriptures throughout the 20th and into the 21st
centuries has shown an increasing realization of their eschatological
nature and their outlook for Judaism, Christianity and Islam. M/M
doctrines are expressed particularly in such anticipations of final
judgment of the world and above all in the promise of resurrection. In
each case, the principle of prophetic mediation of divine agency is
central. The M/M offices of prophet, priest and king coalesce into a
single figure of divine anointing for redemption of humanity from a
world that has become hostile to God and God's purposes for the world.

While the role of M/M mediator is a human one, the life of this one is
completely defined by the plan and purposes of God. Nothing in human
agency can be done to hasten the appearing of this one, to manufacture
the necessary conditions for this appearing, let alone to contribute to
the triumph of divine love that characterizes the consummation of
creation that is the sole prerogative of God.

In perhaps the most exalted of all apostolic passages, as a result of
the eschatological agency achieved by M/M events at the end of this age,
this mediation will render up all things to God "so that God may be all
in all." The eschatological action of judgment is followed by that of
reconciliation of all things to their Creator and to one another. M/M
events and their mediator are necessary in so far as this One is at the
prime eschatological agent as Person but only on the way toward the
recreation of all things and their recovery in the all-in-all-ness with
God.

What kind of agent is the human being under the conditions of
eschatological agency? A passive agent. Just as there are two dimensions
of faith, passive and active; the aspect of agency is bound up in them.
The divine decision to create or to be merciful, is independent of the
creature, even though it is entirely directed toward the creature. As
all divine action toward is considered non-necessary - God does not need
the creation to be God - so especially are eschatological events.

In the same way that faith is first a passive act that receives,
eschatological event, following upon the historical events of the
present time, eschatological agency among human beings is passive as God
brings about those consummating events that are his prerogative alone.
The time for ethical agency is over, the time for divine agency is
revealed in acts of judgment and resurrection, recreation. Up until this
time, believers live in hope and act ethically because of their
expectation of the eschatological agency.[^16]

Another of the primary distinctions to be made between the ethical
agency and eschatological agency is the personal focus of the former and
the collective focus of the latter. In ethical agency, the human
individual is responsible for his or her own acts; in the passivity of
eschatological agency, humanity becomes a collective reality, either to
be redeemed or condemned, depending upon true faith in the consummation
of all things. It is thus incumbent upon ethical agents to develop
themselves personally, i.e., to grow intellectually and morally, to care
for the body and for one's progeny, to seek the welfare of others, and
the peace of the world, always guided by love.[^17] Although
eschatological agency is guided by divine love always for each and every
creature, the narrative descriptions of this aspect of revelation - upon
which M/M doctrines are based - are consistently cosmological and
global. This fact should aid the necessary philosophical distinction
between the two, however, so that ethical agency is never confused with
eschatological agency.

[^1] Some key texts: Meir M. Bar-Asher. Scripture and Exegesis in Early
Imami Shiism (1999, Brill; with its extensive review of early exegetes,
e.g., Furat ibn Furat ibn Ibrahim al-Kufi, Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi,
Abu-'l Nadr Muhammad ibn Mas'ud al\`Ayyashi & Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn
Ja\`far al-Nu\`mani; A. A. Sachedina. Islamic Messianism: The idea of
Mahdi? in twelver Shi?ism. Albany: State University of New York Press,
1981 ; S. A.

Arjomand. The Shadow of God and the Hidden Imam; Mercedes
Garc?a-Arenal. Messianism and Puritanical Reform: Mahd?s of the Muslim
West. Brill: 2006; Paul E. Lovejoy and J. S. Hogendorn, "Revolutionary
Mahdism and Resistance to Colonial Rule in the Sokoto Caliphate,
1905-6," The Journal of African History, Vol. 31, No. 2 (1990), pp.
217-244; William Horbury. Messianism among Jews and Christians: twelve
biblical and historical studies. London: T & T Clark, 2003; Randall
Heskett. Messianism within the scriptural scroll of Isaiah.

New York: T&T Clark, 2007; Eric F. Mason. 'You are a priest forever':
Second Temple Jewish messianism and the priestly christology of the
Epistle to the Hebrews. Leiden: Brill, 2008; Jacob Neusner. Ancient
Judaism and modern category-formation: "Judaism," "Midrash,"
"Messianism," and canon in the past quarter-century. Lanham, MD:
University Press of America, 1986; Géza G. Xeravits. King, priest,
prophet: positive eschatological protagonists of the Qumran library.
Leiden: Brill, 2003.

[^2] In the later work of Heidegger, he acknowledges that God appears in
modern philosophy as the impersonal cause and ground of being, to which
one does not pray nor can one sacrifice the idea. But the greater
reality is the nearness of the "divine God" (g?ttlichen Gott) in the
freedom of faith; cf., Martin Heidegger. Identit?t und Differenz.
Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 2006, p. 77; cf., also,
Susannah Young-ah Gottlieb. Regions of sorrow: anxiety and messianism in
Hannah Arendt and W.H. Auden. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University
Press, 2003; Martin Kavka. Jewish messianism and the history of
philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

[^3] Judaism also sees two mediatorial figures in its eschatology:
Mashiach ben David and Mashiach ben Yossef the latter preparing the way
for the former. In Christianity, Moses and Elijah are seen to return to
inaugurate the messianic appearing of Jesus.

[^4] NE, IX, 8.

[^5] NE, IX, 4; cf., Harry Frankfurt. The Reasons of Love. Princeton
University Press, 2004.

[^6] Critique of Practical Reason, 5.73, 74.

[^7] Groundwork, 4.398.

[^8] Ibid, 4.402.

[^9] This has been most appropriately expressed already in the 16th
century by the theologian, Martin Luther, in his great formula: the
believer as simil iustus et peccator, "simultaneously righteous and
sinful"; and is no better interpreted in the 20th century than by the
religious ethicist Reinhold Niebuhr (1892-1971), cf., An interpretation
of Christian ethics. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1935; Moral man and
immoral society: a study in ethics and politics. New York: C. Scribner's
sons, 1932; The nature and destiny of man: a Christian interpretation.
New York, C. Scribner's Sons, 1949.

[^10] From Lauda 33 as cited in Alessandro Vettori. Poets of Divine
Love. Franciscan Mystical Poetry of the Thirteenth Century. New York:
Fordham University Press, 2004, p. 124.

[^11] Cf., Sophia Vasalou. Moral agents and their deserts: the character
of Mu'tazilite ethics. Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press,
2008.

[^12] Cf., Joseph A. Fitzmyer. The One who is to come. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 2007; also very helpful: Jerry L. Walls, ed. The Oxford
handbook of eschatology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.

[^13] Christianity has occasionally misinterpreted some of its
scriptures in terms of hastening or constraining God to act
eschatologically. In every case however, the proper translation requires
the sense of following or traveling to the end to the age; some
theologians have called this "the hastening that waits;" cf., such texts
as 2 Peter 3

8 But do not ignore this one fact, beloved, that with the Lord one day
is like a thousand years, and a thousand years are like one day.

9 The Lord is not slow about his promise, as some think of slowness,
but is patient with you, not wanting any to perish, but all to come to
repentance. 10 But the day of the Lord will come like a thief, and then
the heavens will pass away with a loud noise, and the elements will be
dissolved with fire, and the earth and everything that is done on it
will be disclosed.

11 Since all these things are to be dissolved in this way, what sort of
persons ought you to be in leading lives of holiness and godliness, 12
waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God, because of which
the heavens will be set ablaze and dissolved, and the elements will melt
with fire? 13 But, in accordance with his promise, we wait for new
heavens and a new earth, where righteousness is at home. 14 Therefore,
beloved, while you are waiting for these things, strive to be found by
him at peace, without spot or blemish; 15 and regard the patience of our
Lord as salvation.

Cf., also, 1Corinthians 1:8; Philippians 1:6.

[^14] Cf., Anthony D. Smith. Chosen peoples. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2003; W.W. Meissner. Thy kingdom come: psychoanalytic
perspectives on the Messiah and the millennium. Kansas City: Sheed &
Ward, 1995; Chaim Nussbaum. Semblance and reality: Messianism in
biblical perspective. Hoboken, NJ: Ktav Pub. House, 1991; Aviezer
Ravitzky. Messianism, Zionism, and Jewish religious radicalism;
translated by Michael Swirsky and Jonathan Chipman. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1996; Mercedes Garc?a-Arenal. Messianism and
puritanical reform: Mahd¯is of the Muslim west. Translated from the
Spanish by Martin Beagles. Leiden: Brill, 2006.

[^15] In the famous essay, "Die Kehre", there is a key quote from the
poet, H?lderlin's Patmos, stimulated by the vision of John's Apocalypse,
"But where this is danger, also grows the redemptive," (Wo aber Gefahr
ist, w?chst Das Rettende auch), Op. cit., p. 119.

[^16] Cf., John M. G. Barclay, Simon J. Gathercole. Divine and Human
Agency in Paul and His Cultural Environment. Continuum, 2006; Douglas H
Knight. The Eschatological Economy: Time and the Hospitality of God.
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, 2006; Christiaan Mostert. God and the Future:
Wolfhart Pannenberg's Eschatological Doctrine of God. Continuum, 2002.

[^17] Cf., Stephen J. Pope, ed. Hope & solidarity: Jon Sobrino's
challenge to Christian theology. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 2008; J.
Aaron Simmons and David Wood, eds. Kierkegaard and Levinas: ethics,
politics, and religion. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press,
2008.


