Imam Mahdi: the Crusader of Equality and World Peace
====================================================

Most of the world religions have faith in the future of humanity. They
all believe, though in different forms, that a messiah will save the
entire humanity and the world from all sins. The messiah will establish
a society on the basis of true virtues.

The Hindu religious scripture Mahabharata says whenever there are sins
and injustice in the world the God sends his messenger to earth to fight
all evils and establishes an order dictated by justice, equality and
peace. Ancient Hindu texts clearly state that at the end of Kalyug
(period full of sins) a saint named Kalki will come to this world to
fight all evils and to establish just order.

In the same conspectus Bible says that Jesus will come back to earth
and after fighting enemies of humanity, establish rule of the Lord
God.

Islam though recognizes Jesus as messiah and believers have faith in
him that he will fight against rampant injustice and corruption in
religion, but they categorically differentiate between Imam Mahdi and
Jesus.

Though, throughout the history of Islam, a few individuals -- driven
either by the desperate state of Muslims in their community or a selfish
pursuit of power and prestige -- laid claim to being Mahdi. Somehow they
found a following as well among the uninformed masses those were
desperately looking for salvation from the heavens. For some of these
individuals (like Bab of Iran or Mirza Ghulam Qadiani of India) made
claim to being Mahdi was just a stepping stone to the development of
heretic sects which broke away from the fold of Islam. Thus, it is at
least prudent to visit the facts of this prophecy and avoid falling pray
to false claimants that will appear from time to time.

According to hadith narrated by Abu Saeed Khudri (R.A.) Rasulullah
(Sallallahu Alayhi Wasallam) said: "...(regarding the rule of Imaam
Mahdi) the skies will rain down in abundance and the earth will yield
forth its crop in abundance, and those alive will desire that those who
have already passed away should have been alive to enjoy this
prosperity..."

This announcement which will be heard by all those present will
establish his authenticity. Another sign which will indicate the
authenticity of Imaam Mahdi will be that in the Ramadhaan prior to his
emergence an eclipse of the sun and moon will occur.

It is strongly believed that when the believers are severely oppressed
in every corner of the world. The saviour will fight the oppressors,
unite the Muslims, bring peace and justice to the world, rule over the
Arabs, and lead a prayer in Mekkah at which Isa(pbuh) (Jesus) will be
present. It is not just Islam which has faith in the saviour of God but
other religions of the world also have mention of a messenger who they
believe will save the humanity against all odds.

**Savior in Christianity**

The "New Testament is full of references to Christ's return, more or
less direct, and they offer a wide and highly interesting field for
study. They are to be found in every one of the twenty seven books of
the New Testament, except the Epistle to the Galatians (which had a
special object) and the short Epistles, Philemon and 2 and 3 Johns " .
Here is a collection of the New Testament passages concerning the second
advent of Jesus Christ, which will also serve as material for further
study of the subject.

Not all the passages about his return and the last things are quite
easily intelligible, chiefly because it is difficult to interpret the
symbols used in them and to decide whether a certain passage is to be
taken literally or metaphorically. Particularly, the passages from the
Revelation of Saint John the Divine, the last book of the Bible, are the
most symbolical and, therefore, the least intelligible and the most
difficult to interpret.


