Quotations From the Bibile
==========================

(i) "O Jerusalem, Jerusalam, thou that killest the prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered
thy children together, even as a hen gathered her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.
For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord."

- St. Mathew 23: 37-39

(ii) "And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple: and his
disciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of the temple. And
Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things" Verily I say unto
you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another. That shall not
be thrown down. And as he sat upon the Mount of Olives, the disciples
came unto him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be?
And what shall be the sign of they coming, and of the end of the
world?

And Jesus answered and said unto them Take heed that no man deceive
you. For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall
deceive many. And ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars: see that ye
be not troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is
not yet. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in
dives places.

All these are the beginning of sorrows. Then shall they deliver you up
to be affected, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of al nations
for my name's sake. And then shall many be offended and shall betray one
another, and shall hate one another and many false prophets shall rise,
and shall deceive many. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of
many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure unto the end, the same
shall be saved and this gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all
the world for a witness unto all nations and then shall the end come.

When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by
Daniel the prophet,. Stand in the holy place, (whose readeth, let him
understand): Then let them which be in Judaea flee into the mountains:
Let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any thing out of
his house: Neither let him which is in the field return back to take his
clothes. And woe unto them that are with child and to them that give
suck in those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved:
but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened. Then if any man
shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not.

For there shall arise false Christs, great signs and wonders; insomuch
that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. Behold, I
have told you before, you, Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth:
behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not. For as the
lightening cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so
shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

For whosesoever the carcase is there will the eagles be gathered
together? Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun
be darkened; and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall
fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken: And
then shall appear the sign of that Son of man in heaven: And then shall
all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man
coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he shall
send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather
together his elect from the four winds from one end of heaven to the
other.

Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When his branch is yet tender, and
putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is night: So likewise ye, when
see al these things, know that it is near, even at the doors. Verily I
say unto you. This generation shall not pass, till all these things be
fulfilled.

Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. But
of that day and hour knoweth no man no, not the angels of heaven, but my
father only. But as the days of Note were, so shall also the coming of
the Son of man be. For as in the days that were before the flood they
were eating and drinking, marrying and given in marriage, until the day
that Note entered into the ark, And knew not until the flood came, and
took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. Then
shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left.

Two women shall be grinding at the mill, the one shall be taken, and
the other left. Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord
doth come. But know this that if he Goodman of the house had known in
what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not
have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready for
in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh.

Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler
over his household to give them meat in due season blessed is that
servant, whom his lord when t he cometh shall find so doing. Verily I
say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods. But and
if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayed his coming:
And shall begging to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink
with the drunken; The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he
looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of And shall
cut him as under, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites; there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."

- St.Mathew 24

This is not all but in Bible; there are other references as well where
they explain the future existence of the messiah.

Above we have dealt with religious parallelism and the Messianic hope
in relation to the Semitic religions all of which have risen in or near
the Mediterranean region of the world although they have spread far
beyond the borders of the lands of their origin. It is desirable to have
a view of the Messianic hope (or millennialism) in non-Semitic religions
also.


