Zoroastrianism
==============

Zoroastrianism is the religion founded by Zoroaster in Persia around
1000 B.C. Its holy book is the Avesta (or Zend Avesta). Today there are
about 20,000 Zoroastrians (Gabars) in Iran (mostly in Yezd) and about
120,000 Zoroastrianism (Parasees) in India (mostly in Bombay). "

The Messianic (or millennial) hope cannot be studied satisfactorily
apart from other eschatological problems e.g. the doctrine of
resurrection, the final judgment, dissolution of world and the life
hereafter. They are all closely (though somewhat mysteriously) related
to one another. According to Zoroastrianism "the world would end 3,000
years after Zoroaster's death at which time a new prophet would
arise:"

People of this religion believe that in the fourth period of the
universe a saviour, Saoshyant, will appear, the dead will rise for their
final reward or punishment, and good will reign eternally. Saoshyant
"will bring about the final judgment, dispense the drink of immortality
and usher in the new world. Thus, Finite Time, which had come forth from
Infinite Time, merges with it again after the space of 12,000 years.

In the Judae-Christian religion (the Bible) "the figure of the Messiah,
originally a future king of Israel who would save his people from
oppression, evolved, in Deutero-Isaiash for instance, into a universal
Saviour very similar to the Iranian (Zoroastrian) Saoshyant."

**Hinduism**

Hinduism is generally believed to have originated in the second
millennium B.C. Hinduism the oldest of the living religions of the
world, claiming, as it does, the adherence of about four hundred million
people, leaves the door open for future manifestations or incarnations
of God. "The incarnations of Vishnu are innumerable, like the rivulets
flowing from an inexhaustible take.

According to the Bhagvad-Gita no incarnation is final. It quotes Sri
Krishna as saying: "Though unborn and immortal, and also the Lord of all
beings, I manifest Myself through my own Yogamaya (divine potency),
keeping My Nature (Prakriti) under control. Arjuna, whenever there is a
decline of righteousness and unrighteousness is in the ascendant, (then)
I body Myself forth. For the protection of the virtuous, for the
destruction of evil-doers, and for establishing Dharma (righteousness)
on a firm footing, I am born from age to age." The Messianic hope in
Hinduism is direct corollary of its incarnation theory. The Sanskrit
word "Avatar" etymologically means 'descent' of a deity; technically, it
means an incarnation or manifestation of God.

"Vishnu (Sanskr, the "active one"), in the Indian Rig-Veda (is) a minor
deity,... Vishnu in the Epic (Ramayana and Mahabharata) mythology
developed into the preserver-god, one of the Hindu triad with Brahma,
the creator; and Shiva, the destroyer; and as such he has saved mankind
in ten incarnations" 1 whenever a great disorder, physical or moral
disturbed the world, Vishnu descended 'in a small portion of his
essence' to set it right, to restore the law, and thus to preserve
creation....

. A tenth incarnation, Hindus believe, is reserved for the last day,
when Vishnu is to return to earth to execute righteousness and
judgment.

"Avatar is Hindu mythology (is), an incarnation of the Deity. Ten
avatars are peculiarly distinguished, and four of them are the subject
of Puranas, or sacred poems. These 10 are among the incarnations of
Vishnu, the Supreme God. The Matsya avatar was the decent of the Deity
in the form of a Matsya avatar was the decent of the Deity in the form
of a fish; Kachyapa or Kurma, in that of a tortoise; Varaha, as a boar;
Nara Sinha (Man Lion), as a monster, half man, half lion; Vamana, as a
dwarf; Parasurama,as the son of Jamadagni. All these took place in the
Satya Yuga, or Golden Age.

The seventh incarnation was in the form of the four sons of King
Dasarath, under the names of Rama, Lakshmana, Bhart, and Strughana, in
order to destroy certain demons that infested the earth... Rama forms
the subject of the Ramayana. The eighth Avatar of Vishnu, in the form of
Krishna, (is) the best known of all; forms the subject of the great ...
Mahabharata. Its object was to relieve the earth from the Daityas, and
the wicked men who oppressed it. The ninth was in the form of Buddha.
The Kalki, or tenth avatar, is yet to come at the end of Kali Yuga."

Kalki, or White horse. This is yet to come. Vishnu mounted on a white
horse, with a drawn scimitar, blazing like a comet, will, according to
prophecy, end this present age, viz., the fourth or Kaliyug, by
destroying the world, and then renovating creation by an age of purity."
1 "This incarnation of Vishnu is to paper at the end of the Kali or Iron
Age, sated on a white horse, with a drawn sword blazing like a comet,
for the final destruction of the wicked, the renovation of creation, and
the restoration of purityâ€¦.

It is clear from the above that Brahma (the creator), Vishnu (the
preserver) and Siva (the destroyer) are the three attributes (or forms)
of one and the same primordial person. There is, therefore, no room for
the popular misconception that Hinduism believes in three gods and not
in the one true God. Unity underlies trinity: trinity (or multiplicity)
is the manifestation of unity.

Prophet according to Hinduism is not a messenger or apostle of God but
God Himself, since He does not send anyone but Himself descends to
execute His divine plan. Kalki, therefore, would be God Himself rather
than a messenger of God.

**Buddhism**

Buddhism is the religion founded by Siddartha Gautam Buddha in the 6th
century B.C. Like Christ, "Buddha had the courage to attack popular
religion, superstition, ceremonial, and priest craft, and all the vested
interests that clung to them. 25 and consequently came into clash with
the institutional religion, with the priest and theologians of his day
and was regarded as a rebel against the established faith. And lastly,
while Christianity predicts the second coming of Christ, Buddhism holds
out the promise of the advent of the Maitreya Buddha. Why the World Need
a Messiah?

Justice of present international system may be questioned in which
birthplace tend to play so large a role in life chances. One child may
get a wonderful life where all the social and financial securities are
guaranteed just because of born into an affluent/ developed state. While
the other will be deprived even of the basic requirements of life and
may have to struggle all his life to feed him and his family what to
talk of right to education and dignified life as heralded by several
constitutions of the world.

Why those born into some countries lived comparatively so well, while
some born into less favored countries lived in absolute poverty,
confronted by specters of disease, starvation and death. In this age of
21st century where we are discussing the avenues of having a residential
arrangement on Moon or Mars, the humanity is also witnessing the food
riot erupted in several countries. On one hand we see people of one
country pouring millions of liters of milk and butter into sea just to
maintain the global prices while on the other hand a son killing a
father over a piece of bread or a father selling off his daughter for
the medicine of his wife.

This situation demands action and not just a small increase in foreign
aid, but sweeping structural change in the global system. There should
be a system of distributive justice which is impartial, universal and
accords the interest of all individuals regardless of citizenship or
compatriot status, equal weight.

The present political conditions of the world show how a handful of
people from the developed world are setting the agenda for the rest of
the world by force and oppression. The world's so called superpower is
providing all the financial and strategic help to the fascist force of
Israel. This evil force is using the money and support to kill the
innocent people of Palestine. These oppressive powers are controlling
the economy and polity to decide the fate of less fortunate.

The West as a result of their growing or advanced financial power,
since the 1950s and also presently, have been dominating and colonizing
the other countries. They claim to be peacemakers but they are monsters
disguised in human fashion ready to kill by perpetrating injustice
against the weaker ones.

We have been living in a complex world in which nations and political
movements interact in intricate ways to formulate policies and handle
conflicts. It is not difficult to imagine the sufferings of lacks of
people of Palestine who are living as refugees in their very own
homeland. The West should be reminded that 'justice denied to any people
means that a battle line has been drawn'.

The world is at such a juncture where only a Messiah can save the world
and humanity from such rampant injustice. One of the first tasks before
the messiah will be to encounter these evil forces and remove the double
standard policies which are governing the world at the moment.

Here the question arises that could global government be the answer to
global poverty and starvation? Do we owe equal to our co-citizens as
much as to those in other countries? I argue that not only do we have
strong obligations to people elsewhere, but that an accountable
integration among nation-states will help ensure that all persons can
lead a decent life. Our duties are equally strong to our fellow citizens
as well as foreigners.

But the important question is who will be able to govern that global
state in such an ideal manner where there is justice, fairness and
opportunities for everyone belonging to the earth irrespective of the
caste, creed, religion or race. I argue that Imam Mahdi, the imam in
hiding, the ambassador of almighty is the only person equipped to bring
peace and justice to this Universe.

He will have the ability to be the real crusader of the equality and
world peace which is need of the hour. The world can rely only on his
administration and dispensation of justice when he reappears which will
finally create a world of peace and justice with no despair and
oppression. Imam Mahdi, Allah's appointed ruler will be the only
qualified person to form a society where people irrespective of their
faith and gender will have everything which is socially desirable.

There will be no concept of nationalism but a global government based
on moral principles of justice, fairness and equality. There will be a
world without corruption, favoritism, nepotism and violence. It will be
exactly the kind of world promised by Quran to the mankind.

The idea of an ideal global government is not wishful thinking but the
aspiration of every individual, who always want better things: prettier
view, better things to eat, and an ideal life with no social and
economic problems. Imam Mahdi, the awaited saviour, will make the world
a just and ideal system. He will conquer hearts of man and will form
Dar-ul-Islam.


