Supremacy of Each Tradition and Infallibility of Sacred Texts
=============================================================

Christians and Muslims who believe in the cataclysmic end to history as
recorded in their sacred texts believe only one group will be saved. The
first thing that will occur under the rule of the Mahdi is the
conversion of the whole world to Islam. The followers of all other
religions will embrace Islam and profess faith in one God, just as He
has said in the Qur'an: "…to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and
the earth, willingly and unwillingly, and to Him shall they be returned"
(3:82).

For Christians, the second coming of Christ signals a period of rapture
for the believer but tribulation for non-believer. Those who have not
accepted Christ as the Savior of the world will be left behind, and, if
not converted, will ultimately perish. According to the Christian faith,
the establishment of this Divine kingdom on earth is the great theme of
the Bible.

The call of the Gospel is to participation with Christ in that kingdom.
He comes to reward his followers, and to assert his authority throughout
the earth, "for the nation and kingdom that will not serve him shall
perish; they shall be utterly wasted" (Isaiah 60:12). The establishment
of Christ as the undisputed Savior is best established the passage in
John where Jesus states: "I am the way and the Truth and the Life. No
one comes to the Father except through me" (John 14:6).

In the apocalyptic texts of Matthew, we see Christ encouraging his
disciples to spread the Good News of the gospel ("Go therefore and make
disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit." (Matthew 28:19) and ultimately separating
the believer from the non-believer and ("And before Him shall be
gathered all nations. And he shall separate them as a shepherd divides
his sheep from the goats." (Matthew 25:32).

An attitude of supremacy and inerrancy regarding the texts of each
tradition permeates each faith as well. Muslims acknowledge the divine
attributes of the Hebrew and Christian scriptures but maintain that the
Qur'an stands apart in that it has remain pure and unaltered through the
centuries. In his book, "Our Belief," His Holiness Ayatullahelozma
Makarem Shirazi states: "We believe that, for the guidance of man, God
sent down several divine books, among which we may name: the Sohof,
given to Noah; the Law, given to Moses; the Gospel, given to Jesus; and
the Qur'an, given to Mohammad.

Unfortunately, through long elapses of time, many of the scriptures
have been tampered with and altered to some extent by the interference
of ignorant and unauthorized people, resulting in the replacement of
some incorrect and immoral ideas. Among these as an exception is the
Glorious Qur'an which has remain unaltered and is exactly the same as it
was; and it has always been shining like the bright sun, throughout the
ages and the nations, alighting hearts."

Not surprisingly, there are Christians who support the notion of the
infallibility and inerrancy of the Bible. One Christian apologist
writes, "Since God is truth (John 3:33, Romans 3:4), what is breathed
out by God, must also be true (John 17:17) and infallible. Due to the
infallible character of God (Titus 1:2), the Son (John 14:6) and the
Holy Spirit (1 John 5:6,7), the Scripture which is inspired by God is
also inerrant in every aspect (Matt 22:43-45, Matt 22:32, and Gal 3:16).
The Old Testament also attests the inerrancy of the Bible. The word of
the Lord is flawless (Psalms 12:6), it is eternal and stands firm
(Psalms 119:89), and that every word of God is flawless (Proverbs
30:5-6)."

How Christians and Muslims understand the texts and prophecies of their
respective traditions is important because they can influence the ways
in which they interpret issues such as war and peace, the environment,
and social justice.

For example, if followers in both traditions believe that war and chaos
are necessary to usher in end times, why would they work for peace
between nations? This is an important question for those participating
in interfaith dialogue around the globe but takes on an especially
important significance in current US-Iran relations. The Shi'ia emphasis
on the return of Imam Madhi has led some in the West, and specifically
in the United States, to speculate that Iran's government may be
attempting to bring about war to hasten the Mahdi's appearance. Of
course, such speculations are antithetical to the teachings of Mahdism
which emphasize justice and equity for all of mankind.


**Embracing a plurality of perspectives**

Over the centuries, there have been few religious leaders who have
possessed the patience or the courage to learn about the religion of the
other with openness, tolerance, and compassion or to accept that other
faiths may be encountering different aspects of the same truth. Medieval
Christian apologists from the 7th to the 14th centuries struggled to
understand Islam, usually reading the Quran and other Muslim literature
in its original language.

The majority of these apologists strove to prove the supremacy of
Christianity over Islam; however, there were a few exceptions. Peter the
Venerable, for example, wrote in the 12th century that in addressing
Muslims, Christians should proceed "not as our people often do, by arms,
but by words; not by force, but by reason; not in hatred, but in love."
Nicholas of Cusa produced "Sifting the Quran" in the 15th century, which
argues that the Quran may be used as an introduction to the Gospel, and
praises the human and religious virtues of Muslims.

One of the most compelling calls for religious tolerance may come from
the Gospel of John. On the night before his crucifixion, Jesus prays for
the unity of all of his followers: 'Father, may they all be one as you
are in me, and I in you; may they also be on in us so that the world may
believe that you sent me' (John 17:20, 21). Although this appears to be
a call to unity within the Church itself, it could also suggest a
broader interpretation, calling followers of all faiths to worship the
same God.

The Christian response to other faiths is also expressed in the book of
Acts where Peter, responding to the realities of a multi-faith community
states, "I truly understand that God shows no partiality, but in every
nation anyone who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him"
(Acts 10: 34-35).

There have been several Shi'ia scholars who have supported the call to
unity among a plurality of religious perspectives, particularly in the
name of establishing peace. The late Allamah Tabataba'I in his
interpretation of verse 200 of the Ali-Imran chapter of the Qur'an says:
"Undoubtedly, the emergence and formation of any society are the results
of a single objective shared in common by all the members of that
society.

This objective is like a spirit which is inspired in all nooks and
crannies of the society and brings about a certain type of unity among
members of the society." In response to this, Dr. Rahim Eivazi of Tehran
University states: "Taking note of this point along with the instinctive
inclination of man to unify in spite of differences and plurality may
render a new definition for a culture of peace, with the Abrahamic
religions being the frame of reference for communication patterns in
this direction." Dr. Eivazi goes on to say that, "…considering the
inefficiency of governmental preventive measures [to reduce tensions in
international relations], new measures (achieved through new angles) are
needed; the religious scholars of monotheistic religions should get
involved in guiding socio-political currents in this direction."

At a meeting of religious and political leaders in Oslo, Norway in May
of 2007, former President Mohammad Khatami noted the distinction between
religion as an expression of "divine matter" and religion as an aspect
of group identity. He went on to quote Surah 2, verse 285 of the Holy
Qur'an which states: "We make no distinction between one and another of
his Prophets" and, more explicitly, from verse 136 stated, "We believe
in God, and the revelation given to us and to Abraham, Ishmael, Jacob
and his descendents and that given to Moses and Jesus and that give to
all Prophets. We make no difference between one and another of them."

Because of this, Khatami noted, "A believer in Islam will find himself
or herself in an identity framework in which believers in other faiths
also exist-an identity which not only leads to tolerance but also brings
about a kind of solidarity among followers of different religions."
Muslims do form a distinct identity group but it is not exclusive. Islam
"can be inclusive as it identifies a kind of compassion and proximity as
a basis for relations with other identities." He said further, "Islam
calls on followers of other religions to get together in an identity
circle vaster than a circle of specific individuals-an identity that
stands on two pillars: monotheism and freedom of thought."

**Conclusion**

This brings us back to our original question: are Christians and
Muslims called to convert the other or to embrace the possibility of a
plurality of perspectives that allows for mutual and respectful
exploration of the other's faith? For me, the answer lies in the fruits
of efforts that are already underway in this important effort. Through
interfaith dialogue, Christians and Muslims who worship the one God are
approaching the exploration of each other's faith with reverence and
humility and are realizing new possibilities for establishing peace and
lasting relations. For example, through our dialogue work with clerics
in Iran, we at the National Cathedral have seen repeatedly that this
dialogue takes place under conditions of reverence for the other's
faith, not attempts at conversion.

As Dr. David Thomas stated, we are engaging in the kind of "respectful
inquiry into the faith tradition of the other that puts preconceptions
about its truthfulness and legitimacy aside and attempts to discover the
core beliefs and diversity of expressions with respect and
attentiveness."

We recognize that we are called to this kind of engagement by the God
who knows and loves us all and the God we wish to serve. This knowledge
supersedes the need for conversion and establishing the supremacy of
each faith, and permits us to explore the path of peace and walk
together to worship and honor the one God.

As an American who strives to advance reconciliation between my country
and Iran, it pleases me to state that leaders in the Iranian clerical
and NGO communities have taken the lead in interfaith dialogue as a
means to build bridges between cultures and followers of various faith
traditions. It was former President Khatami who proposed the idea of a
Dialogue Among Civilizations and Cultures, a notion that received such
overwhelming support that the United Nations declared 2001 as the year
of Dialogue Among Civilizations.

In addition, the Center for Interreligious Dialogue in Tehran has been
conducting interfaith discussions for almost twenty years to provide a
platform for the exchange of ideas and the construction of a global
community that is grounded in the basic rights of all people. In a joint
round of discussions held in Geneva in 2005 between the World Council of
Churches and the Center for Interreligious Dialogue, Ayatollah Mahmoud
Mohammadi Araqi stated, "We are ready to reach mutual understanding with
the nations of the West and any other country or bloc through
dialogue.

We reject the idea of a clash of civilizations and still believe that
most of the problems of the world can be solved through dialogue. We are
open to dialogue and stretch out our hands for anyone in the world who
is interested in dialogue to talk and negotiate to find reasonable
solutions to our common problems."

Proponents of interfaith dialogue reinforce the notion that people
across the lines of faith cannot simply study the sacred texts of the
other to deepen their understanding of each tradition. They must meet in
person to experience humanity of the other and to comprehend the
intricate complexities with which people embrace and live out their
faith. One of the failures of the early Christian apologists was that
their understanding of Islam was based solely on the Muslim texts they
had read. They had virtually no contact with Muslim communities.

We see the negative effects of this kind of isolation underscored in
the tensions between the US and Iran, peoples who have had virtually no
contact for almost thirty years. In light of the current tensions
existing between our countries, the need for peace established through
religious channels takes on a unique significance at this point in
history.

Interfaith dialogue is work that is ongoing, of course, and each of us
must be dedicated to remaining open to learning about the other's faith
and humanity. The challenge of this work is not in finding an answer to
pluralism but in trying to appreciate why believers from other faiths
accept what they do. It is our hope that increasing knowledge of each
tradition will lead Christians and Muslims to understand that both
traditions are authentic expressions of truth and are parallel paths to
the same God. In a world where religion is increasingly used to justify
violence, this is a much needed perspective.


