The Relation of the Shi‘a with the Mu‘tazilah
=============================================

Question:
---------

For what reason have the principles of religion been divided into five
principles? Has the link of the Shi‘a with the Mu‘tazilah played any
role in that?

Answer:
-------

The Shi‘a have conducted discussions and debates about Islamic issues
with all sects, as mentioned in books of *kalam* (theology) and
polemics. However, they have not influenced it with regard to any issues
of creed. As we have mentioned numerous times, the Shi‘a school of
thought is an original Islamic school of thought, though the remaining
sects appeared afterwards.  
 The beliefs of the Shi‘a are not limited to these five principles, but
rather comprise many other issues as well. Of course, in one exposition,
the Islamic beliefs can be summarized into *tawhid* (Divine unity),
*nubuwwah* (prophecy), and *ma\`ad* (resurrection), or in *tawhid* and
*nubuwwah*, since the remaining beliefs, such as *Imamah* (vicegerency)
and resurrection are a part of the issues which the Holy Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) preached and informed about. And according
to the narrations, faith in the prophecy consists of faith in all that
the Prophet conveyed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِيمَانُ بِالنُّبُوَّةِ إِيمَانٌ بِكُلِّ مَا أَنْبَأَ عَنْهُ
النَّبيُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Faith in the prophecy consists of faith in all that the Prophet
conveyed.

On this basis, these five principles – Divine unity, Divine justice,
prophecy, *Imamah*, and the resurrection – are among the principles in
which all Muslims must believe. Reason and revelation also affirm them.
Summarizing the beliefs in these five principles is because the Shi‘a
regard the issue of Divine justice and the *Imamah* as important as the
remaining principles of belief, but Ahl al-Sunnat – the Ash\`ari sect –
do not believe in them.

The Shi‘a have taken the Islamic beliefs directly from the Holy Qur’an
and the traditions of the Prophet and Imams (peace be upon them) and
have not been influenced by the Mu‘tazilah with respect to any of their
beliefs, since the Mu‘tazilah sect came into being afterwards.

If we see that the Mu‘tazilah share the Shi‘a view in some issues, what
is proper is that we say that they have taken these views from the Shi‘a
Imams either directly or indirectly. The well-known proverb, “Belief in
coercion and anthropomorphism is Umayyad and belief in Justice and unity
is an Alawi doctrine,”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الجَبْرُ وَالتَّشبِيهُ أَمَوِيَّان وَالْعَدْلُ وَالتَّوحِيدُ
عَلَوِيَّان
  </p>
</blockquote>

confirms this claim.

In spite of this, some writers who are ignorant of the Shi‘a school of
thought and have researched the Mu‘tazili and Ash‘ari sects have assumed
the Shi‘a scholars, among them Sayyid Murta¤a, were Mu‘tazili since they
found them opposed to some Ash‘ari beliefs.


