The Secret of Choosing the Imams
================================

Question:
---------

What was the secret of appointing the Imams (peace be upon them) to the
position of *Imamah* and *wilayah*? Is human intellect able to
understand this?

Answer:
-------

This question is not exclusive to the appointment of the Imams (peace be
upon them), but can be brought up regarding the selection of all the
prophets and even angels such as Jibra’il, the Trustee of revelation,
and regarding the superiority of some prophets over others and some
nations and individuals over others, and in the same way about the
superiority of humanity over many other types of creation.

The reality is that selection is among the acts of Allah, as numerous
verses indicate:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ اصْطَفَى آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ عِمْرَانَ
عَلَى الْعَالَمِين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily Allah chose Adam, Nuh, the family of Ibrahim, and the family
of \`Imran over all people.”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ الحَمْدُ للهِ ِوَسَلاَمٌ عَلَى عِبَادِهِ الَّذِينَ اصْطَفَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Praise be to Allah and peace be with those of His servants whom
He has chosen.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَرْيمَ ُإِنَّ اللهَ اصْطَفَاكِ وَطَهَّرَكِ وَاصْطَفَاكِ عَلَى
نِسَاءِ الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“O’ Maryam! Verily Allah has chosen you, purified you, and chosen
you over all the ladies of the world.”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ اصْطَفَاهُ عَلَيْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah has chosen him over you.***”[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنيِّ اصْطَفَيْتُكَ عَلَى النَّاسِ بِرِسَالاَتيِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(O’ Musa) verily I have chosen you over mankind with my
communications.”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثمُ َّأَوْرَثْنَا الْكِتَابَ الَّذِينَ اصْطَفَيْنَا مِنْ عِبَادِنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then We gave the book in inheritance to those of Our servants whom
We had chosen.”***[^6]

Even Mansur, the ‘Abbasid caliph, would say that Imam Ja‘far al-as-Sadiq
(peace be upon him) was among those denoted by the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلَّذِينَ اصْطَفَيْنَا مِنْ عِبَادِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“those of Our servants whom We have chosen.”***[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدِ اصْطَفَيْنَاهُ فيِ الدُّنْيَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And verily We chose him in this world.”***[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللهُ يَصْطَفِي مِنَ المَلاَئِكَةِ رُسُلاً وَمِنَ النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah chooses messengers from among the angels and mankind.”***[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنهَّمُْ عِنْدَنَا لمَِِنَ المُصْطَفَينَ الأَخْيَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And verily with Us they are from among the chosen and righteous
ones.”***[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَممَِّنْ هَدَيْنَا وَاجْتَبَيْنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And from among those whom We guided and chose.”***[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْتَبَيْنَاهُمْ وَهَدَيْنَاهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We chose them and guided them.”***[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلكِنَّ اللهَ يجَْتَبي مِنْ رُسُلِهِ مَن يَشَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But Allah chooses whom He wishes among His messengers” (and conveys
to them those hidden realities which are necessary for their leadership
position).***[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللهُ يجَْتَبي إِلَيْهِ مَن يَشَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah chooses whomsoever He wishes.”***[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذلِكَ يَجْتَبِيكَ رَبُّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And thus does thy Lord choose thee.”***[^15]

… and many more verses, all of which indicate that selection is one of
the acts of Allah in His wisdom, or rather is one of the Divine manners
of conduct.

There is a treatise by Zaid al-Shahid, the son of Imam Zain al-‘Abidin
(peace be upon him), called *al-Safwah* in which he has studied the
issue of the selection of the Ahl al-Bait.

The issue of granting rank exists in the natural world as well, and its
necessity is entirely understandable by reason. Just as all species
cannot belong to the human species, and all organs cannot be the eyes or
head or brain, and all fruits and plants cannot be berries and squash,
and the entire tree cannot be the branch, leaves, or roots, in the same
way, all individuals cannot be perfect in their manners, qualities, and
features. That is, all cannot be Muhammad (peace be upon him and his
family), ‘Ali (peace be upon him), Ibrahim al-Khalil (peace be upon
him), or Musa al-Kalim (peace be upon him).

The issue of being an Imam or a follower (*ma’mum*) as well is such that
it is either through Allah’s decree and natural causes or through direct
specification and selection by Allah. In any case, all of these are
signs that are laden with secrets and wisdom which only Allah Himself
knows.

In these affairs none has the right to say, “Why was I not made into
someone or something else?” or, for example, “How come all the angels
were not made Jibra’il al-Amin (the Trustworthy) and all people were not
made Muhammad al-Mustafa (the Chosen)?” or “Why weren’t all of the
world’s mountains and rocks made of gold?” If such a thing were to
happen, the perfection of the world would become subject to defect and
the order and coordination existing among its various parts would cease
to exist.

This is though the Noble Qur’an itself speaks thus about the order and
minute coordination existing among the parts of the universe:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالشَّمْسُ تجَرِي لِمُسْتَقَرٍّ لهَاَ ذلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِِ
الْعَلِيمِ  وَالْقَمَرَ قَدَّرْنَاهُ مَنَازِلَ حَتىَّ عَادَ
كَالْعُرْجُونِ الْقَدِيمِ  لاَ الشَّمْسُ يَنْبَغِي لهَاَ أَنْ
تُدْرِكَ الْقَمَرَ وَلاَ اللَّيْلُ سَابِقُ النَّهَارِ وَكُلٌّ فيِ
فَلَكٍ يَسْبَحُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the sun travels in its appointed path; that is the decree of the
Mighty, the Knowing. And We have appointed phases for the moon until it
becomes like an old, yellow, date branch. Neither is it***
***appropriate for the sun to overtake the moon, nor does the night
overtake the day; and all float in their orbit.”***[^16]

*“Everything in the world is in its place—*  
*If you look well, nothing is more or less*  
*All Divine decrees are just and wise—*  
*Our intellects can’t fathom the secrets of creation”*

While the human world is a world of choice and selection, the secrets of
these matters – i.e. Divine decrees and selection are so complex that it
can be said that even if humanity were to conduct research and studies
for millions of years to come, they would still be faced with many
unknown secrets.

In summary, the world of creation is a world of causes and effects, and
at the same time the human world is a world of choice and duty.

The wise Divine decrees and ordinances govern all affairs. Understanding
the reasons for selection of an Imam or prophet and its creational and
discretionary aspects, and other such issues, requires an intimate
knowledge of all the secrets of Divine actions and the universe. Only
those who have come under Allah’s special guardianship understand the
fine points of these matters, and all of the prophets and Imams (peace
be upon them) were as such.

All human individuals have been encouraged by various means to strive to
gain mastery over the sun and moon, and so forth, and since Allah has
made them subservient to humanity, they can try to comprehend the
secrets of things and make use of their benefits; but if they are unable
to understand something’s cause or causes, they must regard it as a
Divine decree and make use of its existential blessings.

Thus, it is our duty to make use of the teachings and guidance of the
prophets and Imams (peace be upon them) and regard the blessing of their
existence and guidance among the greatest of Divine blessings and make
them our role-models. And if we are unable to comprehend the philosophy
of the selection of these true Divine proofs with our imperfect
intellects, we must not turn to rejecting or opposing them. Otherwise,
we will be regarded as among those people who in the era of the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) himself denied – either out of
ignorance or with ulterior motives – that the selection of the progeny
was Divine. The Noble Qur’an, in the course of a verse, mentions them as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ يَحْسَدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَى مَا آتَاهُمُ اللهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ
فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ
وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ مُلْكًا عَظِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“Or are they envious of the people (the Prophet and his progeny) on
account of what Allah has granted them out of His abundance? Verily, we
granted the family of Ibrahim*** ***the Book and wisdom and granted them
a great kingdom.”***[^17]

According to the Qur’anic commentaries, this verse was revealed about
them. It is incumbent upon us to understand, through reflection and
contemplation of the circumstances of the universe, that everything is
found in its particular place and the Divine knowledge and wisdom is
evident in all of the great and small creations of the Lord of the
Universe. Therefore, precisely as we read in one of the verses of the
Noble Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah best knows where to place His messengership.”***[^18]

Thus, selection of the prophets and Divine legatees is among the affairs
that, like all the other actions of the Lord of the Universe, are
possessed of their own particular wisdom, though humanity with its
imperfect knowledge and intellect may be unable to fathom its secrets
and complexities.

[^1]: Surah Ali-Imran (3), Verse 33

[^2]: Surah al-Naml (27), Verse 59

[^3]: Surah Ali-Imran (3), Verse 4

[^4]: Surah al-Baqarah (2), Verse 247

[^5]: Surah al-A\`raf (7), Verse 144

[^6]: Surah al-Fatir (35), Verse 32

[^7]: Surah al-Fatir (35), Verse 32

[^8]: Surah al-Baqara (2), Verse 130

[^9]: Surah al-Hajj (22), Verse 75

[^10]: Surah Sad (38), Verse 47

[^11]: Surah Maryam (19), Verse 58

[^12]: Surah al-An\`am (6), Verse 8

[^13]: Surah Ali-Imran (3), Verse 179

[^14]: Surah ash-Shura (42), Verse 13

[^15]: Surah Yusuf (12), Verse 6

[^16]: Surah Yasin (36), Verses 38-40

[^17]: Surah an-Nisa’ (4), Verse 54

[^18]: Suurah al-An\`am (6), Verse 124


