The Countenance of the Imams’ (peace be upon them) Conduct
==========================================================

Question:
---------

Why were the conduct, manner, and methods of the Imams (peace be upon
them) not the same in regard to performance of their duty?

Answer:
-------

Contrary to what is said, the conduct of the Imams (peace be upon them)
in confronting various events that were similar to an extent was not
very divergent, since all of their conduct was within the scope of the
principles and agenda of Shiaism, which are the original principles of
Islam itself. All of their actions and programs demonstrated the truth
of Islam and its redemptive teachings. And if we see that the Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) and Amir al-Mu’minin (peace
be upon them) each acted in one way in one important phase of their
noble lives and in another way in another phase, this is in entirety a
result of the commandments of Islam and the Qur’an.

This is because Islam has both the command;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ أَنْ تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… except that you protect themselves from them (and practice
dissimulation for the sake of more important goals).”***[^1]

and the command

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ مَنْ أُكْرِهَ وَقَلْبُهُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالإِْيِمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“… except one who is compelled while his heart is tranquil with
faith.”***[^2]

And it also has the command

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَاهِدِ الْكُفَّارَ وَالْمُنَافِقِيَن وااغْلُظْ عَلَيْهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Struggle against the disbelievers and hypocrites and be harsh
towards them.”***[^3]

as well as

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذِ الْعَفْوَ وَأْمُرْ بِالْعُرْفِ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الجْاَهِلِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“Act with compassion and accept their excuse, and command towards
goodness, and turn away from the ignorant (and fight them not).”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَسْتَوِي الحَسَنَةُ وَلاَ السَّيِّئَةُ إِدْفَعْ بِالَّتيِ هِيَ
أَحْسَنُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“Nor are good and evil alike; repel evil with what is most
good.”***[^5]

Likewise, the Qur’an says

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنِ اعْتَدَى عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُوا عَلَيْهِ بمِثْلِ مَا اعْتَدَى
عَلَيْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So whoever transgresses with respect to you, transgress with respect
to him in a like manner.”***[^6]

And it also says with regard to executing the punishment for adulterers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَأْخُذْكُمْ بهِمَا رَأْفَةٌ فيِ دِينِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And let not compassion for them overtake you in executing Allah’s
command.”***[^7]

Overall, the conditions and situation of the Imam’s (peace be upon them)
era demanded the very same form of conduct for the protection of the
Islamic principles and the essence of Shiaism that they in practice
adopted, and of course the Shi‘a must follow the path of true Islam,
which the Imam recognizes better than all else and doesn’t deviate from
even an inch.

[^1]: Surah Ali-Imran (3), Verse 28

[^2]: Surah al-Nahl (16), Verse 106

[^3]: Surah al-Tahrim (66), Verse 9

[^4]: Surah al-A\`raf (7), Verse 199

[^5]: Surah al-Fussilat (41), Verse 34

[^6]: Surah al-Baqarah (2), Verse 194

[^7]: Surah al-Nur (24), Verse 2


