The Limits of the Imam’s Leadership
===================================

Question:
---------

Just as the range of the Imam’s leadership includes guidance of the
people, elucidation of religious rulings, exegesis of the Qur’an, and
answering objections, it also includes political issues, protecting the
order of society, implementing Islamic rules, establishing justice,
ensuring security, and protecting the borders of Islam.

Please explain the relationship of these two parts with the principle of
*Imamah* and explain to what extent Shi‘a have accepted this issue.

Answer:
-------

As has been indicated, their range of leadership includes both parts,
and in reality these two parts are inseparable. However, the issue that
was the focus of attention and covetousness of usurping politicians and
oppressors was political leadership and taking control of the leadership
of society.

Thus, their opposition to the Imams (peace be upon them) was focused on
this aspect, and if they opposed them from the aspect of guidance in
religious affairs – that is, if they entered the field by making
institutions of learning, libraries, and schools – this was so that the
people would feel less of a need for the guidance of the Imams (peace be
upon them), and as a result, distance themselves from them, in order
that they do not come under the effect of the spiritual and religious
training of the Imams (peace be upon them).

Again, it was for this very reason that they feared the Imams’ becoming
well-known in intellectual and social circles, since they used to
observe that the becoming known of their intellectual ability and
enlightening guidance occasioned the progress and mastery of Shi‘a
thought and the people’s increased inclination towards the Ahl al-Bait
(peace be upon them).

The fact that in books of *kalam*, *Imamah* has been defined, in the
words of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), as “authority
over all religious and worldly affairs of humanity” shows that in this
definition their attention was primarily to the Imam’s authority over
social affairs and his vicegerency of the Prophet in governing. This is
because the dimension of the leadership and authority of the Imams in
religious and spiritual matters and the intellectual eminence of the Ahl
al-Bait (peace be upon them) were undeniable. Since enlightenment and
guidance of people in religious and spiritual affairs was not linked to
political issues, it was not opposed by the power-seekers.

And even if they desired to oppose them in this aspect, the people would
not have accepted it, since the people were aware of their intellectual
ability.

From the meaning of the word “*wilayah*” (authority), primarily the
leadership and administration of social affairs, governing, and
maintaining order are understood.

Verses of the Qur’an and many traditions, such as the *mutawatir*
tradition of Ghadir also support this understanding. The following two
verses are an example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنمَّاَ وَلِيُّكُمُ اللهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وُالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَوةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَوةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“Your wali is none but Allah and His messenger and the believers,
those who establish the prayers and pay the poor-rate while they kneel
(in their prayers).”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَطِيعُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُوليِ الأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in authority among you
(the Prophet’s legatees).”***[^2]

The word *Imamah* also indicates the aspect of spiritual *Imamah* and
intellectual and religious leadership to the same degree, as the
following verse expresses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا وَأَوْحَيْنَا
إِلَيْهِمْ فِعْلَ الخَيرَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we made them leaders who guide at our command, and we revealed
to them the performance of virtuous deeds.”***[^3]

In addition to these, many other verses and traditions such as the
tradition of *thaqalayn*, s*afinah*, *aman*, and other traditions
indicate this point. Thus, it has come in the tradition of *thaqalayn*:

*“Do not precede the Ahl al-Bait, and do not go before them.”*

In other words, be their followers. If greater attention is paid to the
content of the mentioned verses and traditions, it will become known
that they indicate both dimensions of leadership; thus the Shi‘a have
always considered the Imam the possessor of both positions, political
leadership, and spiritual leadership, and have considered others to be
usurpers.

The usurping rulers also knew this reality – that according the Shi‘a,
the Imam’s leadership is absolute – and thus, occasionally though they
were confident that the Imam of the time did not intend to rise, they
would act cautiously. As an example, Mansur had this belief with regard
to Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him). Still, he wouldn’t abandon
precaution, always kept the Imam under the surveillance of his secret
officers, and would create difficulties for him in various ways. In the
end he was still unable to bear the existence of the Imam, since he
viewed the method the Imam had adopted as dangerous for his government;
for this very reason he martyred him.

Harun adopted the same method. He held Imam Musa al-Kazim (peace be upon
him) in prisons and under surveillance for many years, since he knew the
Shi‘a consider both positions of spiritual and worldly leadership as
belonging to the Imam.

As opposed to this, the role and conduct of the Imams (peace be upon
them), which was a cause of the protection of Shi‘a thought and Islamic
laws, was very important. It is possible to regard it as their miracle,
and such action was not possible except through special Divine
instruction.

Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him) and Imam Hasan (peace be upon him)
adopted their particular policies, while Imam Husayn (peace be upon him)
undertook his great uprising. In the same way, the remaining Imams
(peace be upon them) each acted in a particular fashion. If they were
not to do so, no path or method opposed to those tyrannous policies
would be able to survive under such annihilating strikes; yet we see
that the school of Shiaism survived and even until today is known in the
world as the symbol of true Islam and the herald of a just world
government.

One point worth noting is that all of the Imams (peace be upon him)
would promise that spiritual, intellectual, and practical leadership
would in the future – in the age of the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (may
Allah hasten his return) (peace be upon him) – be united with political
leadership, which hitherto was usurped by the oppressive rulers, and
under the shadow of that leadership, all of Islam’s goals will be
achieved.

[^1]: Surah al-Ma’idah (5), Verse 55

[^2]: Surah an-Nisa’ (4), Verse 59

[^3]: Surah al-Anbiya’ (21), Verse 73


