Principality of Reason or Narration in Specifying the Imam (peace be upon him)
==============================================================================

Question:
---------

In the issue of *Imamah*, between reason and narration, which is given
precedence? In other words, are the issues pertaining to the topic of
*Imamah* primarily provable through intellectual proofs or narrated
proofs?

Answer:
-------

As can be understood from the question itself, issues are of two types.
One type are the issues that are ascertained through reason and are
accepted through application of logical procedures and intellectual
proofs, such as proving the existence of Allah, His essential attributes
of perfection, and the necessity of prophecy, i.e. the proof of prophecy
in general. The other type are those issues that are proved solely
through narration, meaning that there is no way of proving them except
revelation and relation by a truthful relater, that is, a prophet or
Imam whose prophecy or *Imamah* is already established. Among these
issues, there are also some issues that can be established in both ways.
Of course, in this case the narrated proofs are a form of guidance
towards the intellectual proofs.

The researcher must be well attentive to this aspect of issues and must
see which discussion can be established through reason, which through
narration alone, and which through both methods. And in each case, he
should commence according to the method peculiar to that issue so that
he can reach an appropriate conclusion. Otherwise, if he wishes to enter
into an exclusively narrational issue through reason, it is natural that
he will not reach a valid conclusion.

It is possible that some may raise a question regarding whether the
principality of reason takes precedence in the issue of *Imamah* over
the principality of narration or not.

The answer is that that in the issue of *Imamah*, like the issue of
prophecy and the conditions of a prophet, proving the principle of
general *Imamah*, i.e. proving the principle of a need for the existence
of the Imam and the conditions of the Imam, is accomplished through
reasoning. Of course, if the issue of *Imamah* were among the issues
that are outside the limits of understanding of human reason and
reasoning did not understand it independently, it could be proved by
narrational evidence alone, i.e. the guidance of the Prophet. This is
because reliance on narrational evidence with regard to the principle of
*Imamah*, as opposed to the principle of prophecy, does not involve
circular reasoning, though in the issue of prophecy it involves circular
reasoning.

Thus, the narrational proofs of *Imamah* can also be regarded, similar
to the narrational proofs of the principle of prophecy, as guidance to
the decree of reason.

Issues such as the necessity of infallibility, how the Imam is
appointed, and the fact that this affair has not been delegated to the
people are principles pertaining to reason. And existing narrational
proofs affirm this decree of reason.

It is obvious that with groups who, like the Asha’ira, do not believe in
rational good and evil, discussion can only be held through those
narrational proofs. Some of the effects and benefits of the existence of
the Imam and his distinctions can only be proved through narrational
proofs, just as these effects and unique traits are proved for the
Prophet through narrational proofs.

In the issue of the specific *Imamah* (the *Imamah* of a particular
person) as well, like the specific prophecy in which explicit
declaration by the previous prophet is a proof of the prophecy of the
following prophet, the prophet’s declaration of the Imam’s *Imamah* and
likewise the declaration by the previous Imam of the *Imamah* of the
following Imam is a proof of his *Imamah*. There is this difference that
the principle way of establishing prophecy is a miracle, since the only
true way to establish the prophecy of the first prophet is through a
miracle and this is the only reliable evidence of the claim of prophecy,
though the prophets after his prophecy can be established both by
declaration of the previous prophets and by miracle, and the Divine way
has also been to send prophets along with miracles, since the
establishment of prophecy through a miracle is comprehensible by all.

However, the method of declaration by the previous prophet is only an
authoritative proof for believers in that previous prophet. It is for
this reason that we say that the method of establishment by miracle is a
general way, which is an authoritative proof for all. Still,
establishing the occurrence of a miracle at the hands of a prophet is
limited to narrational methods for one who is absent from the time and
place of occurrence of the miracle. Certainly, the Glorious Qur’an is
the only miracle whose establishment has no need of narrational proofs,
since it is existent, just as the explicit declaration of the Qur’an
that it is impossible to bring its like indicates that it is a miracle.

In the issue of *Imamah*, the *Imamah* of the first Imam is established
solely by the Prophet’s (peace be upon him and his family) declaration,
and since it has been proven in the discussion of general *Imamah* that
the *Imamah* of the Imam is through specification by the Prophet by
command of Allah, the miracle that is manifested by the Imam, just as it
is an independent proof of the truth of claim of *Imamah*, is also a
proof of the declaration of the prophet, if such a declaration by the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) is not in our hands. Reliance
on rational proofs in the issue of specific *Imamah* is in order to
establish the existence of a specific declaration.

For example: it can be said that it is obligatory for the prophet, in
that Allah, in his absolute wisdom, has commanded the prophet to
explicitly declare the *Imamah*, to specify and introduce the Imam after
himself, even if that declaration is no longer accessible by us or has
become ambiguous or its purport has become subject to doubt. Since the
claim of a declaration has not been made except with regard to a
specific personality – Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) –
rationally, the person specified by Allah and the Prophet is not other
than ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him).

Or it can be said that since the condition of the Imam – who is
appointed by Allah and the prophet to lead humankind in religious and
worldly affairs – is infallibility, and the claim of infallibility has
not been made for anyone except ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him),
rationally ‘Ali ibn Abi Taib (peace be upon him) is the appointed and
infallible Imam.

Similarly, with regard to the twelfth Imam it is said that according to
narrational proofs, the world is never without an Imam and Proof
(h*ujjat*) of Allah – apparent or hidden – and in this long period of
over a thousand years, the chain of *Imamah* is not to be severed. And
since the claim of *Imamah* has not been forwarded for anyone other than
that personage, or if it has been made its invalidity has been proved,
aside from him, who is in concealment, no one else is the Imam and he is
the Imam. And if he is not the Imam, other objections discussed
previously in the issue of the general *Imamah* will once again arise.

This is though there is no justification for raising them, since the
result of such discussions leads to matters such as the performance of
evil by Allah, the Wise, and so forth, from the like of which Allah’s
essence is pure and free.

$$SECTION[Messianism (*Mahdawiyyah*)]


