Original Source of Belief in Imamah and Faith in The Appearance of the Twelfth Imam (peace be upon him)
=======================================================================================================

Question:
---------

From which Islamic sources has the position and esteem (*i\`tibar*) of
the *Imamah* and leadership and faith in the reappearance of Imam Mahdi
(may Allah hasten his return) been understood? And what effect have
events and the passage of time had on the completion of this principle?

Answer:
-------

According to a verse of Qur’an, *Imamah* is a station that was granted
to Ibrahim al-Khalil (peace be upon him) after that great test—trial by
*kalimat* (words)[^1]. According to traditions that are consecutively
narrated (*mutawatir*) and which both Shi‘a and Sunnis have related,
this station was also placed in the Ahl al-Bait of the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) and they have been singled out for this great
Divine grant.

On this basis it has been established that in every era an individual
from this family who possesses the necessary capabilities, including
knowledge and infallibility, will be responsible for the station of
*Imamah* and leadership.

Such an individual is the proof (*hujjat*) of Allah, equal of the
Qur’an, guide of the people, and protector of the religion and Divine
law. *Imamah* is a principle that has been established from the time of
the Prophet of Allah (peace be upon him and his family) until our time
and will continue from our time until the end of the world. The point of
its apparent perfection and complete flowering will be during the age of
the gladdening reappearance of Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return)
and establishment of his united just world government, during which the
world will be filled with equity, justice, goodness, and blessings
through the blossoming of all human potentials and evolution of thoughts
and becoming apparent of terrestrial and celestial blessings.

The agenda of forming a new world community which must end in spreading
justice and the sovereignty of *tawhid* (Divine unity) is understood
from the core of Islamic teachings. The Noble Qur’an in several chapters
has announced this and hundreds of prophetic traditions have related the
world’s adoption of Islam and the government of justice and
establishment of complete security in the land after the reappearance of
the promised Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return), who is from the
descendents of ‘Ali and Fatimah (peace be upon her) and shares the name
and agnomen (*kunya*) of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).

Belief in the appearance of Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return)
with the mentioned qualities is something which has been mentioned in
Islam’s primary texts. According to consecutively-narrated (*mutawatir*)
traditions, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) has given
news of this blessed event and requested his ‘*ummat* (community) to be
in wait of that consequential day.

Though the issue of appearance is deduced from the general tidings
pertaining to Islam’s becoming supreme in the world and truth overcoming
falsehood, this does not mean that the issue of appearance is solely a
concept deduced from the purport of traditions, since the text and very
words of narrations point to it independently, and most of the faithful
rely one these very texts that explicitly point to the appearance of
Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return) and its signs.

Once it is known that the foundation of the existence of this belief is
the general tidings and texts of traditions, it can be said that
historical conditions and events that occurred after the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) had no role in its coming into existence.

This is because the origin of this idea is the era of prophecy and the
traditions related to it exceed one thousand traditions, which are
narrated in books traditions, commentary, and many other books.
Prominent Sunni scholars have also written independent books about it,
and books written more than twelve centuries ago by the greatest experts
and researches of Islamic sciences clearly indicate that the person of
the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) gave tidings about
the issue of the appearance of the Promised Mahdi (may Allah hasten his
return), and his companions, the followers (*tabi\`in*) of the
companions, and after them other generations of people have narrated
them.

[^1]: Surah al-Baqara (2), Verse 124: “When his Lord tried Ibrahim by
words, then he completed them.”


