The Qur’an and Messianism (Mahdawiyyat)
=======================================

Question:
---------

Which verse of the Noble Qur’an can be cited regarding the authority
(*wilayat*) of the twelve Imams (peace be upon them) and the just
government of Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return) and the supremacy
of Islam over the world?

Answer:
-------

The verses from whose purport it is understood that the twelve Imams—may
Allah elevate their word—have authority and *Imamah* are many in number.

Among them is the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“You are but a warner, and every people has a guide.**”[^1]

And the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“My covenant reaches not the oppressors (and only that group of your
descendants is worthy of this position who are pure and
infallible).”[^2]

and the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ يَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَنْ يَتْبَعَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Thus is one who guides to the truth worthier of being followed?”[^3]

These verses indicate this point since from them one understands that
society is not without an Imam, the infallibility of the holder of the
station of *Imamah*, and his being more knowledgeable than others, and
this issue is among the exclusive convictional principles of the Shi‘a.
And from the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ
وَأُولِي الأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ ye who have brought faith! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and
those in authority among you (the trustees of the Prophet).”[^4]

This doctrine of the Shi‘a—that the Imam and ruler must be infallible—is
understood. This is because in this verse obedience to those in
authority has been commanded in an absolute manner. Obedience to the
Prophet, which is in all affairs, has been expressed together with
obedience to those in authority in one word—the imperative verb أطيعوا,
“obey!”

It is obvious that someone whom the believers have been ordered to obey
absolutely in such a way must be infallible and far removed from errors
and mistakes, and as it is undisputed that from among the Islamic sects
only the Shi‘a believe in the infallibility of the Imam.

In addition to this, commentaries and reliable traditions also indicate
that the intent of the noble verse “Obey Allah…” and other verses is the
twelve Imams (peace be upon them), and in these commentaries, the
blessed names of these personages are also mentioned explicitly.

As for the supremacy of Islam in the world and its overcoming all
religions, it is sufficient to pay attention to verses 32 and 33 of
Surah at-Tawba, verse 28 of Surah al-Fath, verses 6 and 8 of Surah
al-Saff, and numerous other verses. In them, the promise of appearance
and true religion’s overcoming all religions has been given, a promise
that will come to pass with the appearance of Imam Mahdi (may Allah
hasten his return), and this is inviolable.

In regard to the appearance of Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return)
in particular, many verses have been elucidated to refer to it, which
exceed one hundred verses in all. The book *Al-Mahajja fi ma Nazala fi
al-Qa’im al-Hujja* (*The Final Destination Regarding What Has Been
Revealed About the Twelfth Imam*) has collected all of them.

Among those verses is this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لِيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُمْ فِي الأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلِيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهَمُ دِيْنَهُمْ الَّذِي ارْتَضَى لَهُمْ
وَلِيُبِدَّلَنَهُم مِنْ بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْناًا يَعْبُدُونِنِي لاَ
يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئاُ وَمَنْ كَفَرَ بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فَأُولَئِكَ هُمُ
الفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Allah has promised those who have believed among you and do good
deeds that He shall certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made
rulers those before them and shall make firm for them their religion
which He has chosen for them and shall change their fear into security;
they will worship Me and associate none with Me, and whoever disbelieves
after that, it is they who are the iniquitous.”**[^5]

and this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُرِيدُ أَنْ نَمُنَّ عَلى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الأَرْضِ
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“And we desire bestow a favor on those deemed weak in the land and
make them leaders and make them inheritors.**”[^6]

and the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِنْ بَعْدِ الذِّكْرِ أَنَّ الأَرْضَ
يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِي الصَّالِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“And verily We have written in the Zabur (Psalms) after the
Remembrance that my righteous servants will inherit the earth.”**[^7]

[^1]: Surah Ra’d (13), Verse 7

[^2]: Surah Baqarah (2), Verse 124

[^3]: Surah Yunus (10), Verse 35

[^4]: Surah an-Nisa’ (4), Verse 59

[^5]: Surah Nur (24), Verse 55

[^6]: Surah Qasas (28), Verse 5

[^7]: Surah al-Anbiya’ (21), Verse105


