Controversy Regarding the Date of Birth of Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return)
===================================================================================

Question:
---------

How can the controversy about the date of birth of Imam Mahdi (may Allah
hasten his return), which some say corresponds to the number of the
letters of the word **نور** (“nur,” light) – 256 – while according to
some traditions, it took place in the year 255 A.H., be explained. In
what year did the occultation of that personage take place?

Answer:
-------

Dispute about such matters does not harm the basic topic or cause an
enigma.

Such disagreement exists with regard to the date of birth of most
historical personalities; in fact in many cases their dates of birth and
death are unknown.

The disagreement about the date of birth of Imam Sahib al-‘Amr (may
Allah hasten his return) is less than the disagreement existing about
the date of birth of some of the Imams and the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) himself.

The reliable opinion is 255 A.H., which Fadl ibn Sha¤han
al-Nayshapuri—who is one of the major traditionists and a contemporary
of Imam Hasan al-‘Askari (peace be upon him) - has related, and his
intermediary is a person like Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Hamza ibn Husayn ibn
‘Ubaydullah ibn ‘Abbas ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him).

As for the occultation of Imam Sahib al-‘Amr (may Allah hasten his
return):

From the very time of birth the public did not have permission to visit
him in the usual manner, and his venerable father would only grant
special companions and Shi‘a the felicity of visiting his peerless son
and كلمة الله باقية (Allah’s remaining word). The commencement of the
minor occultation, which was also the beginning of that personage’s
*Imamah*, took place on the day of martyrdom of Imam Hasan al-‘Askari
(peace be upon him), that is in the year 260 A.H.

A point which must be mentioned here is that the coming up of the issue
of the occultation of the Imam was not unexpected for the Shi‘a and
believers in *Imamah* when it occurred, since it had been referred to
before that time in many traditions, and the people knew that Imam Sahib
al-‘Amr (may Allah hasten his return) will have to occultations—a short
occultation called “*sughra*” and “*qusra*” and a long occultation
called “*kubra*” and “*tula*”.

The detailed report of that has been mentioned completely in the books
and *usul* (books of principles) of the Shi‘a which were written before
the birth of Imam Sahib al-Zaman (may Allah hasten his return).


