The title “Al-Qa’im” (The Riser)
================================

Question:
---------

As everyone knows, one of the titles of the Mahdi (may Allah hasten his
return) is “Al-Qa’im” (The Riser). A tradition has been related
regarding the reason for his being given this title that requires
contemplation, since it apparently indicates that this title was given
because that personage will reappear after death. Yet we have over
approximately one thousand traditions regarding that personage, his
occultation, and long life, in view of which that tradition cannot be
relied upon. However, if some clarifications about its narrators, text,
and meaning can be given, it would be useful.

Answer:
-------

The great scholar Shaykh al-Tusi narrates an unreliable tradition that
apparently indicates that the “Qa’im” was given this title because he
will arise after death. Shaykh al-Tusi has provided a bit of explanation
about this tradition, but before we enter this topic, we consider it
necessary to mention the basics of *Imamah* in Shiaism, which verses of
the Noble Qur’an, traditions, and rational proofs affirm. These
principles are as follows:

1. *Imamah* is a Divine covenant, and individuals—who are worthy of
bearing it—are specified and appointed by Allah, and this Divine
selection and appointment is announced to the people by the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family).

2. The most important conditions of the Imam are sinlessness and being
more knowledgeable than all other people, such that all be in need of
his knowledge, guidance, and direction, which he be free of need of all,
as has been related about Khalil ibn Ahmad that he said about the
*Imamah* of Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِحْتِيَاجُ الْكُلِّ إِلَيْهِ وَاسْتِغَنَاؤُهُ عَنِ الْكُلِّ دَلِيلٍ
عَلَى أَنَّهُ إِمَامٌ الْكُلِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The dependence of all others on him and his independence from all
others are proof that he is the Imam of all.”[^1]

3. The earth will never be without a Divine Proof and Imam, and whoever
dies without having recognized the Imam of his time dies the death of
ignorance.

4. The Imams, as per the text of *mutawatir* traditions from the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family), are twelve personages.

5. They are twelve and all are from the Ahl al-Bait (peace be upon them)
of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), and according to the
meaning of the *mutawatir* traditions of Thaqalayn (The Two Weighty
Things), they are equals of the Qur’an and shall never part from the
Qur’an.

6. The Imams possess all of the religious and administrative stations
except prophethood, which was sealed with the Holy Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family). And as Imam ‘Ali (peace be upon him) has said
in *Nahj al-Balagha*, they are قوام الله, or the Divine Guardians[^2]
over the creation, and on the basis of another tradition, they are the
ship of salvation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَدْخُلُ الْجَنَّةَ إِلاَّ مَنْ عَرَفَهُمْ وَعَرَفُوهُ وَلاَ
يَدْخُلُ النَّارَ إِلاَّ مَنْ أَنْكَرَهُمْ وَهُمْ سَفَنٌ النَّجَاةِ
وَأَمَانٌ الأُمَّةِ مِنَ الضَّلاَلِ وَالإِخْتِلاِفِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“None shall enter Paradise except one who recognizes them and whom they
recognize, and none shall enter Hell except one who denies them; they
are the ships of salvation and refuge of the ummat from deviation and
discord.”[^3]

7. The name, qualities, and order of the *Imamah* of the Imams (peace be
upon them) was specified by the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family), and in addition, each Imam specified the following Imam.

These are among the important foundations of belief in the principle of
*Imamah*, and for every Muslim who believes in the unseen world and in
Allah, messengership, and the messengership of the Seal of the Prophets
(peace be upon him and his family), the criterion of truth of these
fundamentals is a rational proof, Qur’anic verse, or definite and
*mutawatir* tradition. And most of these fundamentals can be proven by
all three means.

The fact that *Imamah* is a Divine covenant and Allah specifies it has
been argued by rational and Qur’anic proofs and the
consecutively-narrated *sunnat*. ‘Allamah Hilli has established one
thousand proofs of this issue in *Alfain*, and in fact this issue has
its roots in the unity of Allah, and like the principle of Divine Unity,
it comprises unity of rulership and authority over creation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ الْحُكْمُ وَلَهُ الأَمْرُ وَهُوَ السُّلْطَانُ وَهُوَ الحَاكِمُ
وَهُوَ الوَلِيُّ وَهُوَ العَالِمُ بِمَصَالِحِ عِبَادِهِ لاَ أَمْرٌ وَ
لاَ نَهِيٌّ لِأَحَدٍ دُوْنِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“His is the command and rule, He is the King and the Ruler and the One
in authority, He is the one who is cognizant of the interests of His
servants. Commanding and Forbidding is for none save Him.”*

In the issue of the necessity of sinlessness and being the most
knowledgeable as well, abundant rational, Qur’anic, and narrational
proofs exist, among which is this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ يَهْدِي إِلى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَنْ يَتْبَعَ أَمَّنْ لاَ
يَهْدِي إِلاَّ أَنْ يُهْدى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then is one who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or
one who does not find guidance except by being guided?***”[^4]

The late ‘Allamah has also established one thousand proofs about the
issue of the necessity of sinlessness.

Regarding the principle that the earth shall not remain without a Proof
and Imam, in addition to verses such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And every people has a guide.”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ وَصَّلْنَا لَهُمْ الْقَوْلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly we conveyed them the verses of Qur’an
continuously.”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلُّ أُنَاسِ بِإِمَامِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The day when We will call every people with their leader.”***[^7]

*Mutawatir* traditions are also found, among which is the well-known
tradition of Kumail ibn Ziyad from Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him)
which has been mentioned in *Nahj al-Balagha* and all other books of
Zaydi and Twelver Shi‘a and even in the reliable books of the Sunnis,
such as *Tadhkirat ul-Huffaz*. From this it is known that all are agreed
that the earth will never be empty of a Proof; of course, it makes no
difference whether the Proof is apparent or hidden.

And in *Sawa\`iq* and other books of the Sunnis, a discourse has been
related from Imam Zain al-\`Abidin (peace be upon him) in which it has
been explicitly mentioned that the world is not without an Imam from the
Ahl al-Bait (peace be upon them).

These principles have even been explicated in the supplications of the
Imams from Ahl al-Bait (peace be upon them). In this regard, we will
suffice with only a portion of the supplication of the day of \`Arafah
from Imam Zain al-‘Abidin (peace be upon him). That personage says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّـهُـمَّ إِنَّكَ أَيَّدْتَ دِينَكَ فِي كُلِّ أَوَانٍ بِإِمَامٍ
أَقَمْتَهُ عَلَمًا لِعِبَادِكَ وَ مَنَارًا فِي‌ بِلاَدِكَ بَعْدَ أَنْ
وَصَلْتَ حَبْلَهُ بِحَبْلِكَ وَ جَعَلْتَهُ الذَّرِيعَةَ إِلَى
رِضْوَانِكَ وَ افْتَرَضْتَ طَاعَتَهُ وَ حَذَّرْتَ مَعْصِيَتَهُ وَ
أَمَرْتَ بِامْتِثَالِ أَوَامِرِهِ وَ الِانْتِهَآءِ عِنْدَ نَهْيِهِ وَ
أَن لاَ يَتَقَدَّمَهُ مُتَقَدِّمٌوَ لاَ يَتَأَخَّرَ عَنْهُ مُتَأَخِّرٌ
فَهُوَ عِصْمَةُ اللاَئِذِينَ وَ كَهْفُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَ عُرْوَةُ
الْمُتَمَسِّكِينَ وَ بَهَآءُ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah! You have supported your religion in every age with an Imam whom
You established as a standard for Your servants and a beacon in Your
lands, after You linked his covenant with Yours and made him the means
of Your pleasure, made obligatory his obedience and cautioned against
his disobedience, commanded to execute his commands and shun what he
forbids and that none should precede him nor stay back from him. Thus he
is the guard of those seeking refuge and the recourse of the believers,
handle of those who grasp (guidance) and the glory of the inhabitants of
the universe.”[^8]

Anyone who looks carefully at this portion of the supplication will both
come to recognize the Shi‘a viewpoint regarding the principle of
*Imamah* and will also understand that this station and these affairs
were established for the Imam from the beginning and no one has added
anything to them.

As for the issue that “Whoever dies without recognizing the Imam of his
time dies the death of ignorance,” this is also a principle which
reliable traditions have conveyed explicitly. The reliable traditions of
*Thaqalain* (the two weighty things), *Safina* (the ship of salvation),
and *Aman* (safety) all indicate this point.

And it has been explicitly mentioned in *mutawatir* traditions that the
Imams are twelve personages, all of whom are from the Ahl al-Bait of the
Prophet, and eleven of them are from the progeny of ‘Ali and Fatimah
(peace be upon them), the first of them being Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be
upon him), and after him Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (peace be upon him),
followed by the Prince of Martyrs Imam Husayn (peace be upon him), and
after him nine people from his progeny, of whom the ninth—who is the
twelfth Imam—is Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return).

Thus, since these principles have been established with firm proofs,
eminent scholars such as Shaykh al-Tusi, Shaykh al-Mufid, Ibn Babawayh,
‘Allamah Majlisi (Allah’s mercy upon them all) have refuted by relying
on these principles the statement of anyone who, previous to their time
or subsequent to it, has said something to the contrary or given
attention to a rare and unaccepted tradition. This is because the
buttress of the proofs of these principles is reliable to an extent that
it can even be claimed that after the principle of Divine unity and
prophecy, no principle is so reliable.

In view of all this, no Shi‘a scholar has held that the rising of the
Qa’im (may Allah hasten his return) will occur after his death. And if
anyone has brought up baseless possibilities, taking into account the
points mentioned and since they are completely against objective
realities, they must not be given any attention, since they have no
scientific value.

After this preface and explanation of this point, the life and long
occultation of the Imam has been established on the basis of these
principles. There remains no room for this tradition that says the Qa’im
(may Allah hasten his return) will rise after death, since this notion
would result in the severing of the thread of *Imamah*, the earth’s
remaining without the existence of a sinless Imam, and the refutation of
many traditions which indicate the life and long occultation of that
personage.

Aside from all of these objections, the above-mentioned tradition’s
chain of narrators is not reliable, and none of the \`Ulama’ or Fuqaha’
(jurists) has relied on such traditions in even a single secondary
issue. This is because one of the narrators is Musa ibn Sa\`dan
al-Hannat, whom scholars of rijal (the science of the study of
narrators) have described as weak and whose narration they consider
unreliable. He has narrated this tradition from ‘Abdullah ibn Qasim,
whom they have titled “The Ever-Lying Hero.” He in turn narrates from
Abu Sa\`id al-Khurasani, and if we don’t consider his existence unknown
according to reference books of rijal, then his position—in terms of
being truthful or dishonest—is unclear.

Now, contemplate; how can this tradition—whose narrator is the champion
of fabrication—be relied upon in opposition to those firm fundamentals
and hundreds of reliable traditions?

As for the reason for employing the title “Al-Qa’im” for the Imam of the
Age (may Allah hasten his return):

“Al-Qa’im” means “the one who rises.” The Imam shall rise against
political conditions and religious and social deviations and fill the
world with justice and equity after it had become filled with injustice
and oppression. Additionally, the issue of rising with the sword and
armed struggle is also understood from that title.

Nevertheless, since “rising” has weak and strong degrees, it can be
understood from traditions that all of the Imams were قائم بالأمر
*“Qa’im bi ’l-amr”* (upholders of the affair), and it is proper and
befitting to employ this title for all of them, in accordance with the
positions they had. But since the rising of Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten
his return) is a world uprising that subsumes all social, individual,
political, and economical conditions of humanity and brings to fruition
Allah’s promises to His prophets and the prophets’ prophecies to their
people, this title is used without qualification for that personage.
Thus, anytime they say “al-Qa’im” and their is not context that another
one of the Imams is intended, Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return)
is understood from that.

In a tradition that Shaykh Saduq narrates in the book *Kamal al-Din*
from Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (peace be upon him), the ninth Imam, it has
come:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِمَامَ بَعْدِي ابْنِي عَلِّي)...(
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Imam after me is my son ‘Ali - Imam ‘Ali al-Naqi* *(peace be upon
him) - whose command is my command, whose speech is my speech, and
obedience to whom is obedience to me. And the Imamah after him has been
placed in his son Hasan - Imam Hasan al-‘Askari* *(peace be upon him).
His command is his father’s command, his word is his father’s word, and
obedience to him is obedience to his father.*

*The narrator says, After that the Imam fell silent.*

*I asked, O’ son of the Messenger of Allah, then who is the Imam after
Hasan (peace be upon him)?*

*The Imam at first wept to a great extent and then said, After Hasan,
his son is the Establisher of Truth, the Awaited (القائم بالحق
المنتظر).*

*I said, O’ son of the Messenger, why has that personage been named
“Qa’im” (The Riser)?*

*The Imam replied, because after his name and remembrance is forgotten
and most of the believers in his Imamah turn back from their creed, he
shall rise.*

*I said, Why has he been named “Muntazar” (The Awaited)?*

*He replied, because he has an occultation with a very long duration,
such true believers will wait for his advent and appearance, but people
of doubt and uncertainty will deny and rejecters will ridicule him.
Those who specify a time for it will become many and those who are hasty
during that occultation will be destroyed, but the Muslims—those who
submit—will achieve salvation.”*[^9]

‘Allamah Majlisi has said, the meaning of “death” that has come in that
weak tradition is that that personage will arise after his name and
memory has been forgotten.

And Shaykh Mufid relates a tradition from Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon
him) in *al-Irshad* in which he says, **"سمي القائم لقيامه بالحق"** “He
was named the ‘Qa’im’ because he shall arise with truth.”[^10]

And from some narrations another reason that is understood is that the
Imam was given this title by Allah because, in the worlds before this
world, he used to stand and pray.

Regarding the entitling of that personage with the title “Al-Mahdi” as
well, appropriate reasons have been mentioned. Of course, it is not the
case that “Al-Qa’im” is the original title and “Al-Mahdi” is a secondary
title. Both are titles and the usage of each name has a separate reason.
Rather, it can be said that since the concept of the “Mahdi” is “the one
whom Allah has guided” (من هداه الله), according to rank, a person must
be “Qa’im” whom Allah has guided.

That is, the “Qa’im” must be “one whom Allah has guided,” but it is not
necessary that “one whom Allah has guided” must always be “Qa’im.”
However, the actions, reforms, movement, uprising, and stand that will
take place by the Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return), such as
establishment of a world government, are dependent on rising and the
becoming actualized of the title “Qa’im.”

These titles are not classified into primary and secondary, and all have
been heard from the blessed tongues of the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) and pure Imams (peace be upon them); nor do they have
“old” and “new.” Each has its own particular concept and each has been
used with attention to a particular aspect. In texts, sometimes all of
these titles are mentioned, sometimes one, and another time one title is
mentioned before another.

In any case, application of these titles is on the basis of essential
and actualized titles, all of which that personage possesses.

[^1]: Mu’jam Rijal al-hadith, Volume 7, Page 76 and Tanfih al-Maqal,
Volume 1, Page 403

[^2]: Nahj al-Balagha, Subhi al-Salih, Speech 152, Part 7

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 6, Page 233

[^4]: Surah Yunus (10), Verse 35

[^5]: Surah Ra’d (13), Verse 7

[^6]: Surah Qasas (28), Verse 51

[^7]: Surah Isra’ (17), Verse 71

[^8]: Sahifah Sajjadiyah, Supplication 47

[^9]: Kamal ad-Din, Volume 2, Page 378, Section 36, hadith 3. See also,
Ma’ani al-Akhbar

[^10]: Irshad of Shaykh Mufid, Page 364


