The Miraculous Birth of the Imam of the Age (may Allah hasten his return)
=========================================================================

Question:
---------

Miracles and supernatural events are related with regard to the birth of
the twelfth Imam. To what extent are these miracles reliable and how can
they be proven? And why have some historians not related them?

Answer:
-------

1. Historians have written and recorded the actual birth of Imam Mahdi
the Twelfth Imam, son of Imam al-‘Askari (peace be upon him), like all
other historical events.

2. Regarding some of the miracles that occurred during that personage’s
birth or that of all other prophets and trustees (awsiya’), if prevalent
historical sources do not provide anything, this is considered a defect
of the sources mentioned, since the same historians in many instances
have pointed to some historical aspects which were not so important.
This lack of attention by a writer of history to some aspects of an
issue sometimes originates from creedal prejudice. But this action,
whatever it’s proof may be, does not harm the relations of other
people’s statements that took place based on reliable sources.

The history of the prophets is *akandeh* of miracles, and the birth and
growth of most prophets was not normal. For example, the creation of
Adam, birth of Ibrahim (peace be upon him), birth of Ishaq and Musa and
Yahya and ‘Isa and his speaking from the cradle are all among abnormal
events.

All of these are a chain of historical events, though such-and-such
historian may not have related them. The details of the birth of the
Imam of the Age (may Allah hasten his return), which is among the
uncontestable historical events, are similar. Its not being narrated by
historians who were either biased or intended to be brief or intended
other things does not harm the issue itself.

That which the Shi‘a attribute to the Imams is similar to the issues
that have been said about Ibrahim, Ishaq, Isma‘il, Musa, ‘Isa, Yahya,
and so on, all of which, of course, also have a reliable chain of
narration.

The events related to the birth of the Twelfth Imam are more reliable,
from the point of view of chain of narration and source, than most
historical events that one sees.


