Philosophy of the Delay of Reappearance with the Presence of Conditions
=======================================================================

Question:
---------

Throughout history, we sometimes come across conditions and
opportunities in which it is assumed the requisites for reappearance are
present, for example, the people’s receptiveness to religion,
self-sacrifice in the path of Islam, giving their lives, and martyrdom
for it was to such an extent or with such fervor and commotion that it
appears that rather than 313 people, thousands of people are ready to
sacrifice their lives under the command of the Imam (peace be upon him).
With the existence of these conditions, what is the secret of the delay
of the reappearance?

Answer:
-------

Regarding the presence of the conditions for the reappearance of the
Imam of the Age (may Allah hasten his return):

First, no one can claim to know with certainty, that is, say that all
the conditions are fulfilled, since this claim itself requires knowledge
of all the conditions, since it is possible that the traditions have not
comprised an exposition of all of the conditions.

Second, assuming that the conditions are limited to those instances that
have come in the traditions, as Shaykh al-Saduq has said, in reality one
can still not be sure that those particular 313 companions and the
remaining conditions are present.

This is because if all of the conditions and circumstances apparently
indicate the presence of the requisites of reappearance, without
denying, for example, the existence of pure individuals who can be
counted among the 313 companions of the Imam (peace be upon him), we
also cannot claim that all of the individuals are like Salman, Abu Dhar,
Miqdad, Rashid Hijri, and the people of Karbala’.

In the present situation, with all the claims that are put forward in
our society for returning to and aspiring at Islam, which are certainly
a matter of pride, we still see that many bring the Divine laws under
question in a large number of political, economical, and social issues.
This is to such an extent that they regard some religious commandments
that are not exclusive to a particular time or place as being restricted
to the Prophet’s (peace be upon him and his family) time and on this
pretext free themselves from responsibility. With the existence of such
individuals and events, how can we say that the conditions for
reappearance are ready, let alone asking about the reason for it delay?

On this basis, in this issue it is appropriate for us to submit to the
command and will of Allah, the All-Knowing, and not forgo the merit of
waiting for the reappearance. And as was indicated in the tradition of
‘Ali ibn Mahziyar, we should attribute the concealment of the Imam
(peace be upon him) to our own actions and always keep the memory of
that personage alive in our hears and try to bring about the requisites
of his appearance ever more by reforming our own actions.


