The Principle of Grace and the Imamah of the Concealed Imam
===========================================================

Question:
---------

Has the “principle of grace” been derived from the traditions and
narrations of the Ahl al-Bait (peace be upon them) or has it entered
Shi‘a *kalam* (theology) through the contact of the Shi‘a with the
Mu‘tazila? And what is the method of applying this principle with the
existence of the concealed Imam?

Answer:
-------

Since the Shi‘a have many proofs regarding the principle of *Imamah*
aside from the principle of grace, with the existence of those proofs,
if the principle of grace is relied upon, it is for the purpose of
supporting the proofs.

As for the contact of the Shi‘a with the Mu‘tazila, who are sometimes
referred to as the *adliyya* (Equitists) as opposed to the *Asha*‘*ira*,
it should be known that though the Mu‘tazila, a sect that splintered off
from the Asha‘ira and came into being after the Shi‘a, were in agreement
with the Shi‘a over some beliefs and theological issues, this is not
proof of their affecting the Shi‘a school. Rather, it is instead proof
of their being affected by Shi‘a beliefs, since the Asha‘ira are a sect
that came into being later on. Moreover, as was mentioned, all of the
Shi‘a beliefs are taken from reason, the Glorious Qur’an, and traditions
of the Ahl al-Bait (peace be upon them). The principle of grace is also
from the Shi‘a themselves and is derived from those very sources and
origin.

It is in a tradition that Jabir asked the Prophet of Allah (peace be
upon him and his family) about the benefit of the existence of a
concealed Imam and the way of deriving benefit from his existence during
the concealment. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said in
reply,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْ وَالَّذِي بَعَثَنِي بِالنُّبُّوَةِ! إِنَّهُمْ يَنْتَفِعُونَ بِهِ
وَيَسْتَضْيِئُونَ بِنُورِ وِلاَيَتِهِ فِي غَيْبَتِهِ كَانِتْفَاعِ
النَّاسِ بِالشَّمْسِ وَإِنْ جَلَّلَهَا السَّحَّابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Yes, by the One who sent me with the prophecy! Verily they benefit from
him and seek light from the illumination of his wilayah (authority)
during his concealment just as people benefit from the sun though it has
been covered by clouds.”[^1]

To negate in entirety that the existence of a concealed Imam is *lutf*
(grace) is not proper for a rational person who is unaware of unseen
affairs. After the *Imamah* itself and his concealment are established,
certainty of the existence of grace and presence of a benefit in his
existence is necessary, since if the appointment of an Imam who has been
commanded to go into concealment does not entail grace, it is futile and
vain; and Allah is far above vain and futile actions. Therefore, the
appointment of a concealed Imam by Allah certainly entails *lutf*
(grace).

Granted, if we wish to establish both the necessity of appointment of an
Imam and the *Imamah* of a concealed person through the principle of
grace, the objection arises that it must first be known that the
concealed Imam entails grace. Otherwise, without knowledge of its being
grace, his *Imamah* will not be established. However, we establish the
necessity of appointment of an Imam through the principle of grace and
the *Imamah* of the concealed Imam through other firm proofs, and by
joining these two proofs to the fact that Allah does not do anything in
vain, it is established that the *Imamah* of the concealed Imam entails
grace. The statement of al-Muhaqqiq al-Tusi, who says;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وُجُودِهِ لُطْفٌ وَتَصْرِفُهُ لُطْفٌ آخِرَ وَعَدَمُهُ مِنَّا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

is based on the principle that the existence of the Imam is grace
absolutely, whether manifest or hidden. And this is a principle that has
been established in accordance with the speech of Amir al-Mu’minin
(peace be upon him), who says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَئَلَّا تُبْطِلُ حُجَجِ اللهِ وَبَيِّنَاتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Divine proofs and signs are protected by the existence of the Imam,
whether he be present or concealed.

It is worthy of mention that if the objection of the absence of grace
with regard to the concealed Imam be valid, it is also applicable to an
Imam who is not concealed, yet who is not able to act freely in affairs.
His *Imamah* will be without grace for the same reason that the *Imamah*
of the concealed Imam is regarded as being without grace. However, this
objection has not been made with regard to the manifest Imam who is not
able to freely act in the affairs and tasks pertaining to *Imamah*.
Similarly, it has not been made regarding a prophet who, due to
circumstances, is unable to guide others or whose guidance is not
effective, or a prophet whose mission was general, but opponents and
adversaries prevented his message from reaching the entire public, and
it has not been denied that his prophecy entails grace.

It is possible to establish a rational proof of the *Imamah* of the
concealed Imam (peace be upon him) with the exposition that appointment
and specification of the Imam by Allah is grace, and grace is obligatory
upon Allah. Therefore, Allah has appointed someone to *Imamah* after
Imam Hasan al-‘Askari (peace be upon him), and that person will not be
other than his son, since the incapacity and invalidity of the other
claimants to *Imamah* has been established and at present, no one has
such a claim. Thus, either Allah has withheld grace to His servants
during the period of concealment, which is opposed to Divine wisdom, or
He has appointed an Imam out of grace, in which case the Imam is none
other than the twelfth Imam.

[^1]: al-Zam al-Nasib, Volume 1, Page 429


