The Issue of Bada’ (Alteration in the Divine Will) and the Tradition of Abu Hamza
=================================================================================

Question:
---------

A tradition has been narrated by Abu Hamza Thumali from Imam Al-Baqir
(peace be upon him) according to which Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon
him) said that relief will come after the 70th year after Hijra, but
because of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (peace be upon him) the affair
was delayed until the year 140 after Hijra. Then, because the Shi‘a did
not protect the secret, Allah once again delayed the affair such that He
did not place any time for it in the knowledge of the Imams.

Please explain the commentary of this tradition along with the many
other traditions that indicate that the promised relief shall occur
after long periods and following great events and happenings. And
doesn’t the occurrence of *bada’*, which is understood from this
tradition, cause the presumption that something became known for
Allah—we seek refuge with Allah—after it had been unknown? In any case,
what is the correct explanation?

Answer:
-------

First: This tradition has objections in its chain of narrators, since
according to books of *rijal*, Abu Hamza al-Thumali did not belong to
the fourth generation of narrators; his demise occurred in the year 150
A.H. Hasan ibn Mahbub, who according to the chain of narrators narrated
this tradition from Abu Hamza, is from the sixth generation, and passed
away at the age of 75 years in the year 224 A.H. Thus, Hasan ibn Mahbub
was not more than one year old when Abu Hamza passed away. In such a
case it is absolutely not possible for him to narrate from Abu Hamza,
and without doubt another individual was an intermediary between him and
Abu Hamza. However, since it is not known who that person is, we cannot
regard this tradition as reliable; moreover, a tradition narrated by
only one person cannot be an authority in doctrinal principles, let
alone when its chain of narrators is also unknown.

Second: With the existence of many reliable traditions that all
explicitly indicate that the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (may Allah
hasten his return) and the just government of the righteous shall not
come to pass that quickly and that one must await magnificent changes
and grave events over very long periods before his reappearance, how can
a forged tradition with only one chain of narrators be relied upon in
the face of all those traditions? Moreover, many sermons and traditions
have been related from Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him) in which
both the length of the period during which one must await the
reappearance and the great events and severe trials of the believers
have been referred to. With the existence of this, how is it possible to
say that a singly-narrated, forged traditions that says that the Imam
specified the time of reappearance as the year 70 A.H. is reliable.

In addition, alteration in Divine decrees is a conceivable matter,
though this does not mean that Allah the Exalted is unaware of affairs
in the beginning and then acquires knowledge of them. Such a belief is
invalid according to the Shi‘a, since all Shi‘a believe Allah to be free
and far removed from ignorance coming to know about something after its
being concealed. *Bada’*, in the conception which the Shi‘a believe in,
is a Qur’anic and Islamic principle, and an important part of the issues
of theology and similarly the issues of prophecy are based on it.

Among the verses related to *bada’* are;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّ اَهْلَ القُرى آمَنُوا وَاتَّقَوا لَفَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ
بَرَكَاتِ مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالأَرْضِ وَلَكِنَ كَذَّبُوا
فَأَخَذْنَاهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Were the inhabitants of the cities to believe and adopt piety, We
would open them blessings from the sky and the earth; yet they denied
(the truth), so We requited them what they had earned.”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ظَهَرَ الْفَسَادُ فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ أَيِدِي
النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Corruption has manifested in the land and in the sea on account of
what the hands of the people have earned.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَبُّكُمْ اُدْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your Lord has said, Call on Me that I may answer you.”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّاراً يُرْسِلُ السَّمَاءَ
عَلَيْكُمْ مِدْرَاراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Seek forgiveness from your Lord, since He is Ever-Forgiving; He
constantly sends rain upon you from the sky.”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَاعَدْنَا مُوْسَى ثَلَثِينَ لَيْلَةً وَأَتْمَمْنَاهَا بِعَشْرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We covenanted Musa*** ***thirty nights, then completed them with ten
(nights more).”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوْلاَ كَانَتْ قَرْيَةٍ آمَنَتْ فَنَفْعِهَا إِيْمَانُهَا إِلاَّ
قَوْمُ يُوْنُسٍ لَمَّا آمَنُوا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُمْ عَذَابَ الْخِزْيِ
فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَتَعْنَاهُمْ إِلى حِيَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So why did not one of the cities believe that its belief might
benefit it except the people of Yunus; when they believed we remove from
them the debasing punishment in this world and cause them to enjoy until
a specified time.”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَئِنْ شَكَرْتُمْ لأَزِيدِنَّكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily, if you be grateful, I shall increase you (in
blessings).”***[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجاً وَيَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ
لاَ يَحْتَسِبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever adopts piety with regard to Allah, He creates for him an
escape (from difficulty) and grants him sustenance whence he does not
expect.***”[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَالِكَ بِأَنَّ اللهَ لَمْ يَكُ مُغَيِّراً نِعْمَةٍ أَنْعَمَهَا عَلَى
قَوْمٍ حَتَّى يُغَيِّرُوا مَا بِأَنْفُسِهِم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is because Allah does not change any blessing He had granted
unto a people until they change what is in themselves.”***[^9]

The *bada’* that the Shi‘a believe in, along with belief in the absolute
knowledge and power of Allah, is a concept that is understood from such
verses. For example, in them it is said that gratitude causes blessings
from Allah to increase; Allah delivers a pious person from hardships by
virtue of piety (*taqwa*) and sustains him from an unexpected source; He
fulfills needs through prayer; on account of repentance and faith, He
distances people from punishment; and because of misuse of blessings, He
removes them from people.

Of course, abundant traditions that have been narrated by *Shi*‘a and
Sunnis and similarly manifold stories which have been related in
original Islamic sources indicate this point. In fact, if *bada’* were
not to exist, many religious concepts, such as prayer, reliance on
Allah, repentance, charity, kindness towards relatives, gratitude,
seeking forgiveness, admonition, granting tidings, and threatening, will
be impossible to explain. *Bada’* means belief in the effect of these
affairs in the life of a person.

Whether we are able to explain *bada’* in view of Allah’s absolute
knowledge and cognizance of all affairs or are unable to understand its
secret and reality, in any case we must believe in the issue of *bada’*
in accordance with the content of manifold verses of Qur’an and
*mutawatir* traditions.

This is because sometimes, though all the factors and preliminaries for
the occurrence of something are present, other factors strip them of
their effect and as a result prevent that thing from occurring. In such
a case, the existence of those factors, their continuation, and the
factors that strip them of their effect are all preserved in the *Umm
al-Kitab* by Divine decree in accordance with the order and arrangement
He has specified. Those affairs are also linked to people’s actions by
choice, they occur through the will of Allah and His decree. That is,
neither compulsion (*jabr*) is involved, nor delegation (*tafwid*);
rather it is a reality between the two:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ جَبْرَ وَلاَ تَفْوِيضَ بَلْ أَمْرَ بَيْنَ الأَمْرَينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Neither compulsion (jabr) nor delegation (tafwid), but a matter
between the two ideas.”*[^10]

As an example, Allah has decreed that fire should burn or that every
created being should develop in its particular course, and if an
obstacle comes about, that thing will not exist. Of course, it should be
kept in mind that in matters pertaining to matter, if an obstacle to
their coming about blocks the causes of an event, this is not called
*bada’*. Only in instances when things like charity, kindness to family,
and prayer influence the occurrence or nonoccurrence of an affair such
that humanity considers its existence or non-existence definite from the
point of view of apparent causes and then the opposite occurs, that is
called *bada’*.

This is though apparently this instance does not have much difference
from the previous instance except that the object of effacement and
affirmation in the first issue was observable matters and able to be
perceived by most or all people, but in the second issue it is
non-observable matters; thus, most individuals are unable to perceive
it. The second type indicates the existence and influence of the unseen
world and the existence of Allah more than the first, though all affairs
are from Him.

In summary, the concept of *bada’* is the same concept that is well
understood from this verse of Qur’an in which Allah the Exalted refutes
the false belief of the Jews:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ يَدُ اللهِ مَغْلُوْلَةً غُلَّتْ أَيْدِيهِمِ
وَلُعِنُوا بِمَا قَالُوا بَلْ يَدَاهُ مَبْسُوطَتَانِ يُنْفِقُ كَيْفَ
يَشَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the Jews said, Allah’s hand is fettered, may their hands be
fettered and they be cursed on account of what they said. Rather His
hands are outspread; He bestows howsoever He wishes.”***[^11]

Thus *bada’* in its correct meaning is the negation of this erroneous
belief of the Jews, who say that Allah’s hand is fettered from acting in
affairs. In other words, *bada’* means that Allah’s hands are extended
and His absolute power is unlimited, without this having any conflict
with His absolute knowledge.

In other words, the reality of *bada’*, with its correct meaning such
that it is compatible with Allah’s absolute knowledge, in accordance
with His freedom from all forms of ignorance, and opposed to the
erroneous view of the Jews and all other deniers of the issue of *bada’*
who view Allah’s power as limited, must be explained thus: According to
Divine decree, everything has particular effects, and things take place
in accordance with those effects in conformance to Divine Will.

In other words, it is a Divine decree that, for example, fire should
burn, but the realization of this characteristic—its occurrence—is
pursuant to Divine Will. In addition, there are a number of unseen
causes, such as reliance on Allah, charity, and prayer—which are not
common material affairs—all of which have a peculiar effect. In the
stage of action, whichever of those material or non-material
causes—apparent or unseen—is stronger will be effective in the
occurrence of affairs, and its entailed result will come about. For
example, in many cases, in spite of the existence of barriers, kindness
to relatives, which has been decreed as a factor in lengthening one’s
life overcomes all other factors and as a result a person’s life is
lengthened. Thus, it has come in a tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِلَّةُ الرَّحْمِ تُزِيدُ فِي الْعُمْرِ وَتُدْفَعُ مِيْتَةَ السُّوْءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Kindness to relatives lengthens the life and repels the difficulties
of death”*[^12]

The summary of the reality of *bada’* is that causes and factors are not
limited to material causes. Rather, in addition to material causes,
there are also non-material causes in accordance with Divine decree.

On this basis, one must have faith both in unseen causes and in Divine
Will and that:

كُلُّ يَوْمٍ هُوَ فِي شَأْنِ
----------------------------

***“Every day He is in a state [of glory]”***[^13]

and the continuance of His acting in sustaining, curing, guiding, and so
forth. Without Allah’s will, nothing can produce an effect, though we
are unable to fathom the details of these Divine matters and their
connection to one another.

It is possible that the meaning of “effacement” in *bada’* is the
effacement of these decrees by other decrees, such as the effacement of
the effect of illness and being cured by medicine or prayer, which takes
place by the will of Allah. The decree and effect of the illness is also
by Divine will, just as we see that in material and apparent causes and
effects a particular factor prevented a person from falling into the
ocean or from a high place or prevented the occurrence of an accident or
collision. And sometimes this change is effaced or affirmed by the
influence of unseen causes.

Perhaps the meaning is that decrees are not definite; it is only through
the will of Allah that these decrees are effaced or affirmed, and
without that no decree comes to fruition. And the meaning of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِنْدَهُ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And with Him is the ‘Mother of the Book’*** [^14]

is that all relations and decrees are in the “Mother of the Book,” or
that whatever takes place does not take place in contradiction to it,
and everything is in the “Mother of the Book.”

In any case, *bada’* has an intelligible and logical meaning and it
can’t be said to mean the uncovering of a matter hidden from or unknown
by Allah. The purpose of explaining *bada’* in terms of each of the
mentioned explanations is so that by understanding these realities
people’s attention to Allah increase and so that they do not forget Him
in any circumstances or rely only on apparent and ordinary means in
their affairs. And even when those means are present they should still
consider themselves in need of Allah’s attention, and when those means
are not present, they should not become hopeless; Allah may very well
bring about that matter through other means.

In short, unlike the Jews, he should not consider Allah’s hands to be
tied, and should believe in the great truth of Divine unity that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ الَّلهُمَّ مَالِكُ الْمُلْكِ تُؤْتِي الْمُلْكَ مَنْ تَشَاءُ
وَتُنْزِعُ الْمُلْكَ مِمَّنْ تَشَاءُ وَتُعِزُّ مَنْ تَشَاءُ وَتُذِلُّ
مَنْ تَشَاءُ بِيَدِكَ الْخَيْرَ إِنَّكَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيءٍ قَدِيرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“Say: O’ Allah, Master of the Kingdom, You grant the kingdom to
whomsoever You please and remove it from whomsoever You please; You make
mighty whomsoever You please and debase whomsoever You please. All good
lies in Your hand; verily You have power over all things.”***[^15]

As a matter of principle, without such a conviction, the development of
humanity and their traveling the worlds of cognizance and true
advancement and ascension to celestial positions is not possible. This
is a reality that also has a basis in human nature, and even if he
denies the issue of *bada’* with his tongue, he admits it with his
conscience. Thus, in situations of danger, he supplicates to Allah to
repel them and takes recourse to His most beautiful names, like the
Sustainer, the Healer, the Sufficient, the Protector, all of which make
sense through belief in *bada’*.

And as Allah says in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتَكُمْ إِنْ أَتَاكُمْ عَذَابَ للهِ أَوْ أَتَتْكُمِ
السَّاعَةَ أَغَيْرَ اللهِ تَدْعُونَ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ بَلْ
إِيَّاهُ تَدْعُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Say: Do you think that if Allah’s punishment come to you or the Hour
(of Resurrection) come, that you will call upon other than Allah, if you
be truthful; rather Him alone will you call.”**[^16]

Based on this importance which belief in *bada’* has in worshipping
Allah and paying attention to Him, it has come in Shi‘a traditions that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عُبِدَ اللهَ بِشَيْءٍ مِثْلُ الْبَدَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Allah has not been worshipped by anything like belief in bada’*”[^17]

In summary, the issue of *bada’*, no matter how it is explained, does
not contradict Allah’s absolute knowledge. That is, just as He is
“All-Knowing,” He is also “All-Powerful.”

Two objections have been raised regarding the issue of *bada’*.

First Objection:
----------------

The first objection is from the believers in predetermination, who say
that when Allah has knowledge with respect to something, it is
impossible for His knowledge to be in disagreement with the thing that
is known. Thus, the meaning of “Every day He is in a state of glory” is
that every day and every instant whatever Allah’s knowledge is
associated to occurs; He creates and sustains and withholds. All actions
are from Him, and nothing occurs that is outside the range of His
knowledge. In fact, outside the limits of His knowledge, no action is
possible. Similarly, it is obligatory for all events to which His
knowledge is associated to take place, since for such actions not to
take place entails His being ignorant, while The Divine Essence is pure
of all forms of ignorance, defect, and fault. From this they raise the
objection of Allah—as well as His creation—being compelled.

Of course, this objection is rejected by referring to one’s reason,
since every individual clearly and unambiguously sees himself as free in
his actions. In reality, this is a form of objection with respect to
obvious matters, just like if someone doubts whether fire burns or makes
hot.

Another answer to this objection is that first of all, it doesn’t
disprove the issue of *bada* even if it is valid, since if one believes
in predetermination and denies free will, effacement and affirmation,
which are among Allah’s actions, will in the end occur either by
compellation or free will, like all other actions.

In other words, a person who believes in predetermination cannot negate
effacement and affirmation with this objection; he can only say that the
occurrence of effacement and affirmation, which are both Divine actions,
is necessary and certain.

Second, the correct answer to the objection itself is that effacement
and affirmation are both uncompelled Divine actions, and like all other
Divine actions take place through free will; and “Allah’s knowledge of
their occurrence through free will” cannot negate their being
uncompelled. Otherwise, it would entail knowledge influencing the thing
that is known, which is impossible. Similarly, with regard to the
actions of people, Allah has knowledge that they will occur through free
will. Such knowledge does not negate the person’s free will. It appears
that the sage Muhaqqiq al-Tusi refers to this asnswer when he says (in
the form of a poetical couplet) in answer to Khayyam:

*To term the timeless Divine knowledge the cause of disobedience*  
*Is, among those possessed of reason, out of extreme ignorance*

That is, knowledge of the performance of actions by individuals
possessing free will does not contradict the uncompelled nature of those
actions.

Second Objection:
-----------------

How can the prophecies of the Prophets and Divine friends regarding
unseen future events, especially the prophecies of the Noble Messenger
(peace be upon him and his family) and the pure Imams (peace be upon
them) be explained and justified if *bada’* is possible with regard to
them? That is, how have they given information with certainty about so
many future events without taking into account the possibility of
*bada’* with respect to those prophecies?

**Answer**: The possibility of occurrence of *bada’* and its occurrence
in some instances does not mean that it occurs in all instances. Thus,
the prophecies of those personages, whose knowledge was grounded in
Allah’s knowledge and teaching and inspiration, indicates that *bada’*
will not occur, and is not in contradiction with the possibility of
*bada’*.

The objection may also be worded in a different way: according to some
traditions, in some instances the reports of the prophets and Imams
(peace be upon them) did not come to pass, and the reason for that has
been mentioned as *bada’* or other factors. And this entails having
informed about something that is untrue and being accused of lying, and
causes a weakening of the position of prophecy and vicgerency.

In addition, the prophet or vicegerent who makes the prophecy either
knows about the occurrence of *bada’* or doesn’t know about it. In the
first case, it is obvious that announcing with certainty the occurrence
of an event that will not occur even though the announcer knows that it
will not occur constitutes a lie. And the position of the prophets is
far removed from that.

In the second case as well, announcing with certainty the occurrence of
an event that may or may not occur because of the possibility of
*bada’*, if not a lie, does not much befit the position of prophecy or
*Imamah*.

**Answer**: First, according to reliable traditions, the knowledge and
awareness of unseen matters that Allah grants to the prophet or his
successor and commands him to announce belongs to the definite affairs
in which there is no *bada’*. For example, the Prophet’s (peace be upon
him and his family) prophecy about ‘Ammar being killed at the hands of
the rebellious party, about the martyrdom of Amir al-Mu’minin and Imam
Husayn (peace be upon him) and the remaining tragedies to befall the Ahl
al-Bait (peace be upon them), or about Fatimah (peace be upon her) being
the first of the Ahl al-Bait to meet him, all are definite matters not
subject to *bada’*. The same is true about the prophecy that Islam shall
subdue the world, that Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his return) will
appear at the end of time and the explanation of his qualities and
characteristics, and tens of other undeniable prophecies. Similarly, the
reports about the unseen given by Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him),
much of which the Ahl al-Sunnat have also narrated, and the reports of
the remaining Imams (peace be upon them) about unseen affairs are not
subject to *bada’*, or more correctly, *bada’* will not take place in
these matters, or else those personages would not have given information
about them.

The traditions which mention the existence of *bada’* in their reports
of the unseen are either very rare or contain a weak chain of narration,
or else their indication of such a point is incomplete. Take for example
the same tradition of Abu Hamzah which was discussed earlier.

If there is a s*ahih* (sound) tradition in this regard, it is the
tradition of Amr ibn Hamq from Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him)
which says, I had the honor of coming to the presence of Amir
al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him) when he had been struck with the fatal
blow; he (peace be upon him) said, O’ Amr, I shall part from you… until
the year 70, calamities will take place; he repeated this statement
thrice.

I said, O’ Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him), you said that
calamities will occur until the year 70; is there deliverance after that
year?

He said, Yes, Amr. After every trial there is deliverance and ease.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَمْحُو اللهَ مَا يَشَاءُ وَيُثْبِتُ وَعِنْدَهُ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah effaces whatsoever He pleases and affirms, and with Him is the
Mother of the Book.*****”**[^18]  
 This tradition does not prophesy the appearance and uprising of the
Imam of the Time (may Allah hasten his return); rather it gives
information about a Divine custom,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily with difficulty is ease.”***[^19]

At the same time, it mentions the point that this deliverance will come
to be in the case that *bada’* does not occur. In reality, the Imam, by
reciting the verse “Allah effaces whatsoever He pleases and affirms, and
with Him is the Mother of the Book” wanted to say that this matter is
not definite; it may very well be that *bada’* will occur and prevent it
from occurring.

[^1]: Surah A’araf (7), Verse 96

[^2]: Surah Rum (30), Verse 41

[^3]: Surah Ghafir (40), Verse 60

[^4]: Surah Nuh (71), Verse 10, 11

[^5]: Surah A’raf (7), Verse 142

[^6]: Surah Yunus (10), Verse 98

[^7]: Surah Ibrahim (14), Verse 7

[^8]: Surah Talaq (65), Verse 2, 3

[^9]: Surah Anfal (8), Verse 53

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 4, Page 197

[^11]: Surah Ma’idah (5), Verse 64

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 77, Page 172

[^13]: Surah al-Rahman (55), Verse 29

[^14]: Surah Ra’d (13), Verse 39

[^15]: Surah Ali-Imran (3), Verse 26

[^16]: Surah Anam (6), Verse 40

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 4, Page 107, hadith 19

[^18]: Surah Ra’d (13), Verse 39 [Tafsir al-‘Ayashi, Volume 2, Page 217,
hadith 68]

[^19]: Surah Inshirah (94), Verse 6


