Before Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
========================================

Question:
---------

Has the Shi‘a school been discussed in the speech of the religious
leaders before Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him)?

Answer:
-------

As we mentioned before, Shiaism is an genuine Islamic school introduced
by the person of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his family),
and all can understand this point from the matter found in *Nahj
al-Balaghah* and the sayings of Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him).

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (peace be upon him) and Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq
(peace be upon him) explained the various dimensions of this school for
the people and perfected the people’s information about it and
eliminated the over- and under-exaggeration existing regarding this
issue.

They demonstrated that the principle of *Imamah* was an genuine and
entirely Islamic concept and the reference point of explaining its
reality and limits are the Imams (peace be upon them), just as they are
the reference for explaining all Islamic concepts and terminology and
Qur’anic verses. When their unparalleled and great-learned position
became apparent, all understood that those eminent men possessed all
abilities and at the same time were the sole reliable source in
recognizing the principle of *Imamah* and its entire and original
concept. Of course, this does not mean that we should presume that the
principle of *Imamah* was their innovation or, as some who do not
believe in the unseen world say, a product of history.

Among the reliable traditions according to Ahl al-Sunnat are the
traditions of ‘Ali ibn Husayn (peace be upon him), Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir (peace be upon him), and Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq (peace be upon
him); as Ahmad Shakir has written in his commentary of *al-Ba\`ith
al-Hathith*, the spiritual position and *Imamah* of the Imams before
these two Imams was very firm in the hearts of the people.

The belief that the Imams are *al-Qur’an al-Natiq* (the Qur’an that
speaks), i.e. they know the specific Qur’anic meanings and expressions,
was raised on numerous occasions previous to Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(peace be upon him) in the words of his noble father Imam ‘Ali Zain
al-‘Abidin (peace be upon him) and before him in the traditions of Amir
al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him), Imam al-Hasan (peace be upon him), and
Imam al-Husayn (peace be upon him). The Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) has pointed to this issue in traditions that have passed the
limit of *tawatur* (consecutive narration) and he (peace be upon him and
his family) introduced the Imams as equals of the Qur’an. In the books
of Ahl al-Sunnat, a sermon has been narrated from Imam ‘Ali Zain
al-‘Abidin (peace be upon him) in which the placing of *Imamah* in Ahl
al-Bait (peace be upon them) and their being the sole referral authority
and Divine authority for mankind has been discussed explicitly and in
depth.


