Shi‘a Ideology’s Practicality
=============================

Question:
---------

Keeping in view the fact that aside from the short five-year period of
Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him), the administration of society was
not in the hands of the Imams (peace be upon them), to what extent is
the system of religious government according to the Shi‘a view
practicable and able to be implemented in society?

Answer:
-------

Shi‘a thought is a logical school that has and has always had the
possibility of being implemented in the core of its teachings.

The Shi‘a view about the issue of *Imamah* is that after the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) the religious and political leader of
society must be someone who knows better than all else all the laws and
principles the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) brought for
the people from Allah. Without doubt during the time of the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) none but ‘Ali (peace be upon him)
possessed this distinction, and therefore the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) selected ‘Ali (peace be upon him) to succeed him and
then introduced the rest of the Shi‘a Imams, who are twelve people in
all, to the people and appointed them his successors.

Certainly, this was not because of their physical relationship with the
Prophet; rather their spiritual attributes, intellectual abilities and
so forth became the reason that Allah chose them alone from among the
people to succeed the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), just
as the Qur’an says about the successors of the prophets as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ اصْطَفَى آدَمَ وَنُوْحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ
عِمْرَانَ عَلَى الْعَالميِنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily Allah chose Adam, Nuh, the family of Ibrahim, and the family
of \`Imran over all the people of the world.***”[^1]

If the people want to tread the true path in all matters, they must
follow them and regard them as *wali al-amr* (guardians of the
believers’ affairs), must consider it obligatory to obey them, and must
respect their commands just like the commands of the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family). At the same time, the laws and policies
broached in the Shi‘a school are not imaginary and unreal affairs that
could be said to be unable to be implemented. Rather, they are the most
genuine Islamic teachings that, if conditions are available, can be
implemented in every society.

If we see that during a portion of history some people prevented their
political aspect from being realized, it does not mean that they cannot
be implemented. Rather, since these laws were formulated in view of the
realities of the existence of man, all human societies are in search of
them, and according to the belief of Shi‘as, will in the end reach them.
This undertaking will be accomplished at the end of time through the
last Divine authority (h*ujjat*), and human society will be administered
by a single system and law.

In addition, what is fundamental in the call of the prophets is to
explain the realities and the path of salvation and the way that leads
to ultimate success, which must be announced to the people even in case
of certainty that it will not be accepted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“Surely We have guided him to the Path, whether he be grateful or
ungrateful.”***[^2]

This is because the responsibility of the prophet is to propagate the
Divine laws, among which is *Imamah*; it is the people who must accept
the prophets’ invitation and cooperate with the prophets and Imams
(peace be upon them) to make available the opportunity to put it in
practice.

The conduct of the Imams (peace be upon them) and their policies were
all practical, bearing results, and at the same time realistic.

For example, the conduct of Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon them) was in
light of the conditions of existing realities and the conduct of Imam
Hasan al-Mujtaba (peace be upon him) and Imam Husayn Sayyid al-Shuhada’
(peace be upon him) was the same way. They performed all their actions
while keeping in view existing conditions. For example, if Imam Hasan
al-Mujtaba (peace be upon him) made peace with Mu\`awiyah, he took into
consideration all the aspects of the issue and in those conditions saw
no better course of action. And Imam Husayn (peace be upon him)
consciously refused to pledge allegiance to Yazid, went to Karbala’ and
accepted those sorrowful difficulties, and in the end reached his
purpose.

Yes, if Imam Husayn (peace be upon him) had been in a different
situation and had seen that the path and provisions for taking charge of
the government are ready, he would still have moved to acquire his right
and repel the undeserving from the *khilafah* of the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family). But conditions in his time were such that he
knew that the situation is not suitable for reaching this aim. Thus,
with the great and unparalleled mission which he implemented he created
a reawakening in the Muslim world, and as long as the world remains the
reawakening of Islam’s reviver will remain alive.

He, although apparently he did not prevent Yazid and all the usurpers of
the *khilafah* who came after him from usurping the *khilafah*,
internally turned people’s hearts away from them and put to the wind
Mu\`awiyah’s plots to defeat Islam. He performed such a deed that
afterwards it was said, “Islam is Muhammadi in origin and Husayni in
continuance.”

The remaining Imams (peace be upon him), too, performed well the
responsibility with which they were entrusted in protecting Islam,
keeping in mind existing conditions.

Belief in the appearance of the savior and twelfth Imam gave comfort to
the Shi‘as and created a spirit of resistance, patience, and
perseverance in the people and prevented power-seeking, despair, and
carelessness towards religion. It is a belief that has been explicitly
mentioned in the core of Shi‘a teachings and reliable traditions, and
this principle received more attention during the time of Imam al-Baqir
(peace be upon him) and as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) and people’s
inclination to it increased in light of the transgressions the usurping
rulers committed.

The people understood that if some indifferent individuals during the
time of the companions – that is, after the Prophet’s demise (peace be
upon him and his family) – conjectured that introducing change in the
principle of *Imamah* would not bring much change in the Islamic agenda,
in reality it caused a major tragedy and caused Islam to veer from its
true course and the usurped *khilafah* became a means of hedonism and
easy living for a few and of fettering the people and a return to the
customs of Caesar, Kisra, and other Satanic powers.

This matter strengthened their faith in the principle of *Imamah* and
they understood that it is only this school of thought that can bring
Islam’s agenda to fruition and end that deplorable situation.

Thus, the becoming conduct of the Imams (peace be upon them) on the one
hand and the oppressive behavior of the usurpers of the *khilafah* on
the other caused the Shi‘a school of thought to become ever more
influential in people’s hearts, and as a result their inclination to the
Imams (peace be upon the) began to increase. It is because of this that
in spite of the efforts of the rulers, Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
was so popular among the masses that the Shi‘a themselves are recognized
through him.

[^1]: Surah Ali-Imran (3), Verse 33

[^2]: Surah Insan (76), Verse 3


