Shi‘a Positions with Respect to the Usurping Rulers
===================================================

Question:
---------

How were the stands of the Shi‘a with respect to the rulers and on what
basis were they taken?

Answer:
-------

The positions of the Shi‘a have always been on the basis of protecting
Islam’s interests, preserving the religion, and denying the legitimacy
of oppressive and usurping governments, and they have always endeavored,
in the form of an opposing front, to establish a powerful Islamic
government on the foundation of religious rule.

In explaining the religious concepts, the Shi‘a follow only the Qur’an
and *sunnah* and conduct themselves in accordance with the Qur’anic
injunction:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَادِلهْـُمْ بِالَّتيِ هِيَ أَحْسَنُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And debate with them in the best manner.***”[^1]

by honorable discussion and debate, and also, in instances, on the basis
of *taqiyyah* (dissimulation) which becomes necessary in certain
conditions in all times and places. They do this so that they can guide
others to true Islam and the true concepts of the religion and remove
society from under the yolk of oppressive and usurping rulers and
merciless officials.

It is thus that we see that the Shi‘a have throughout history always had
uprisings against the armed powers.

The Shi‘a believe in the *Imamah* of those whose names and infallibility
were explicitly mentioned by the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) and in taking positions they always act on the basis of Islamic
teachings and the conduct of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family). In situations when the right conditions do not exist, such as a
portion of the life of Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him), they give
preference to silence and apparently sitting aside over rebellion, or
conduct themselves like Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (peace be upon him) to
save Islam from the threat of splintering.

However, the event of Karbala’ and refusal of Sayyid al-Shuhada’ (peace
be upon him) to pledge allegiance to Yazid was an uprising the like of
which neither had precedence nor will be seen after it.

That movement was a model and path-opening agenda of struggle for
Muslims.

That uprising, though apparently it was crushed and defeated, in reality
was a successful uprising, since it revived the true Islam and brushed
aside the factors of hopelessness and despair from the faces of the
Shi‘a and became a cause of their constancy of thought and strength of
spirit. After that, no uprising or movement took place among the Shi‘a
that was crushed and changed hopes to despair, and the infallible
leaders of the Shi‘a knew, as per the traditions and through the
(special) knowledge of the *Imamah* which they possessed, that belief
and faith in the Ahl al-Bait (peace be upon them) must be propagated in
the hearts of the people so that, through an increase in their awareness
and by training capable powers in academic, political, and cultural
arenas, they can prevent the usurping rulers from opposing them and in
this way prepare the way for the rule of the true Islamic views.

[^1]: Surah Naml (16), Verse 125


