Suratul Baqarah: Verses 30-33
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣٠) وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلائِكَةِ إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي الأَرْضِ
خَلِيفَةً قَالُواْ أَتَجْعَلُ فِيهَا مَن يُفْسِدُ فِيهَا وَيَسْفِكُ
الدِّمَاء وَنَحْنُ نُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِكَ وَنُقَدِّسُ لَكَ قَالَ إِنِّي
أَعْلَمُ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣١) وَعَلَّمَ آدَمَ الأَسْمَاء كُلَّهَا ثُمَّ عَرَضَهُمْ عَلَى
الْمَلائِكَةِ فَقَالَ أَنبِئُونِي بِأَسْمَاء هَؤُلاء إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣٢) قَالُواْ سُبْحَانَكَ لاَ عِلْمَ لَنَا إِلاَّ مَا عَلَّمْتَنَا
إِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْعَلِيمُ الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣٣) قَالَ يَا آدَمُ أَنبِئْهُم بِأَسْمَائِهِمْ فَلَمَّا أَنبَأَهُمْ
بِأَسْمَائِهِمْ قَالَ أَلَمْ أَقُل لَّكُمْ إِنِّي أَعْلَمُ غَيْبَ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَأَعْلَمُ مَا تُبْدُونَ وَمَا كُنتُمْ
تَكْتُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when your Lord said to the angels, “Verily I am going to make in
the earth a vicegerent”; they said: “wilt thou place in it such as shall
make mischief in it and shed blood while we celebrate Thy praise and
extol Thy holiness?” He said: “Surely I know what you do not know”***
**(30)*****.***

***And He taught Adam the names, all of them, then presented them to the
angels and He said: “Tell Me the names of those if you are right”***
**(31)*****.***

***They said: “Glory be to Thee! We have no knowledge but that which
Thou hast taught us; surely Thou, Thou*** **(alone),** ***art the
knowing, the Wise”*** **(32)*****.***

***He said: “O Adam! Inform them of their names. And when he had
informed them of their names, He said: “Did I not say to you that I
surely know the unseen*** **(secrets)** ***of the heavens and the earth
and*** **(that)** ***I*** ***know what you manifest and what you were
hiding?”*** **(33).**

Commentary
----------

The verses tell us why the man has been sent to this world, what is the
significance of his appointment as the vicegerent of Allah in this
earth, what are the characteristics and special features of this
vicegerency. Unlike other Qur'anic stories, it has been told in one
place only, that is, in these verses.

**Qur’an:** ***And when your Lord said:*** We shall explain in vol. IV,
what the “speech” or “saying” means when it is attributed to Allah, to
angels and to the Satan.

**Qur’an:** ***they said: “Wilt thou place in it such as shall make
mischief in it . . . and extol Thy holiness?”**:* The angels heard the
announcement, “I am going to make in the earth a vice­gerent”, and at
once arrived at the conclusion that the wouldbe vicegerent would make
mischief in the earth and shed blood. Apparently they understood the
ultimate behaviour of the said vicegerent from the words, “in the
earth”.

A vicegerent appointed in the earth would certainly be created from
material components; he would necessarily be bestowed with two basic
traits of desire and anger; the earth is a place of unceasing struggle
and constant confrontation; its resources are limited, its opportunities
finite; but the proposed vicegerent's desire would be unlimited,
infinite. The condition of the earth and earthly things was hardly
reassur­ing.

Its creatures were subjected to ever-continuing deterioration and
disintegration; its good was always turning into bad; it was a place
where an individual could not live without a group having similar
characteristics and traits. Keeping all this in view, the angels at once
understood that what Allah intended to create was not only an
individual, but a species.

The members of that species would have to live together, cooperating
with one another; that is to say, they would have to establish a
society, a social order. And with a venture like this, they were bound
to cause mischief and to shed blood.

On the other hand, they knew that vicegerency - setting one thing in
place of another - was unthinkable unless the vicegerent were a true
copy of his predecessor in all the characteristics, traits and intrinsic
abilities.

The proposed earthly creature was to be made vicegerent of Allah in the
earth. Allah has got for Himself the best names, the sublime attributes;
His mercy and power are beyond the comprehension of His creatures; He,
in His person, is untouched by any defect; and, in his actions, is free
from all kinds of evil and disorder.

How could an earthly vicegerent, with all his defects and deficiencies,
represent the majesty and splendour of Allah in the earth? Well, could a
lowly creature of earth be a mirror of divine beauty and sublimity?

This was their question - and it was no more than a ques­tion. It was
not a protest, not an objection; they actually wanted to know the truth.
They later asserted their belief that Allah was the Knowing, the Wise.

They believed that what Allah intended to do was based on knowledge and
wisdom; and their question was put in order to learn the underlying
wisdom of the decision of Allah. What their question - or, pleading -
amounted to was as follows:

Allah intends to appoint a vicegerent in the earth; in order that the
said vicegerent should represent Allah by celebrating His praise and
glorifying His holiness through his worthy pres­ence. But his earthly
nature would not let him do so; it would irresistibly pull him towards
mischief and wickedness.

So far as the main purpose of this vicegerency - celebrating Allah's
praise and glorifying His holiness - is concerned, we are already doing
it. Therefore, we are Allah's *de facto* vicegerents; and if Allah
wishes, He may bestow upon us this designation. What is the need, then,
of a new creation to act as vicegerent of Allah in the earth?

For the reply, Allah used a sentence, “Surely I know what you do not
know”, and an action, “And He taught Adam the names, all of them”.

The context shows that:

First: The vicegerent was to get the vicegerency of Allah; he was not to
become a successor of any earthly creature that had preceded him. If
Allah had wanted the man to take the place of that previous creature,
the reply, “And He taught Adam the names, all of them”, would be quite
irrelevant.

Assuming that man was given vicegerency of Allah, this prestige would
not be restricted to the person of Adam only, his descendants too would
be vicegerents of Allah in the earth. Adam was taught the names; in
other words, this knowledge was ingrained in human being in such a
manner that, since that first day, it has been constantly bearing newer,
fresher and better fruits; whenever man gets a chance, he discovers new
avenues of knowledge; and thus he always finds himself imbued with
previously unknown potentialities that more often than not turn into
real achievements. It is a never ending process; it is a wonder that
will not cease, and ever-fresh insight that will never fail to astonish.

That this assumption is correct, and the whole mankind is vicegerent of
Allah, is evident by the following verses:

***And remember*** **(O people of 'Ad!)** ***when He made you successors
of Nūh's people . . .*****(7:69);**

***Then We made you successors in the land after them . . .***
**(10:14);**

***. . . and He makes you successors in the earth*** **(27:62).**

The word translated here as “successor” is the same that has been
translated as “vicegerent” in the verse under discussion.

Second: Allah did not say that the vicegerent-designate would not cause
mischief and bloodshed; nor did He reject the plea of the angels that
they celebrated His praise and extolled His glory. By this silence, He
confirmed that the angels were right on both counts. But then He made
manifest one thing which the angels were not aware of.

He showed them that there was a matter which they could not shoulder the
responsibility of, while this proposed vicegerent could do so. Man was
entrusted with a divine secret which the angels, in their nature, were
unable to know or understand. And that divine gift would more than
compensate the ensuing mischief and bloodshed.

Allah told them, first, that surely He knew what they did not know. Then
He referred to the same reply by telling them: “Did I not say that I
surely know the unseen (secrets) of the heavens and the earth?” Looking
at the intervening sentences it may easily be understood that the
“unseen (secrets)” refer to “the names”.

It does not refer to Adam's knowledge of those names. The angels were
unaware of even the existence of these “names”; it was not that they
knew about the names but were not sure whether Adam knew them or not.

Had the angels been doubtful only about Adam's knowledge of the names,
it would have been enough to tell Adam to inform the angels of the names
in order that they would have known that Adam knew.

Instead, Allah first asked them to tell Him “the names of those”. The
angels had claimed the vicegerency of Allah for themselves, and had
hinted that Adam was not fit for it; but the essential qualifi­cation
for the vicegerency was the knowledge of the names; therefore, Allah
asked both candidates about the names; the angels did not know them, and
Adam knew; it proved that he had the qualification while they lacked it.

The question (about this knowledge) addressed to the angels ends with
the clause, “if you are right”; it means that they had claimed a
position, essential qualification of which was this knowledge.

**Qur’an:** ***And He taught Adam the names, all of them, then presented
them to the angels:***

The Arabic pronoun, “them”, used in “then presented them”, is made for
rational beings, those who have life, sense and understanding.
Obviously, the names (or, the named ones) were some living and sensible
being who were hidden behind the curtain of the “unseen”.

It follows that the knowledge given to Adam of their names was something
totally different from what we understand from the knowledge of names.
Merely knowing the names (in the sense known to us) has no distinction;
otherwise, the angels too would have become equal to Adam in this
respect as soon as they heard those names from Adam.

Also, there would have been no distinction for Adam in such a knowledge.
The angels could rightly complain to Allah that He taught those names to
Adam, but kept them (i.e. the angels) in dark; had He taught them too,
they would have been equal to, if not better than, Adam! Understandably,
such favouritism could not have silenced the angels. Surely, it was
something deeper then merely knowing all the names.

It would not have been a convincing argument for Allah to teach Adam a
dictionary and then put it as an evidence against the angels - the
honoured servants who do not precede Him in speech and who act according
to His commandment only - telling them to inform Him of the words which
they had not been taught, and which the mankind was to invent in future.

Moreover, the only purpose of language is to convey the feelings and
ideas to the hearer; but the angels do not need any language for this
purpose; they convey and receive the ideas directly without the medium
of words; their stage is far higher than that of human beings in this
respect.

However, it is clear that the knowledge of the names which the angels
got after hearing them from Adam was not the same as Adam had got by
teaching of Allah - the inferior knowledge of the names they could
grasp, but not the superior one which qualified Adam for vicegerency of
Allah.

Adam deserved the vicegerency because he was given the knowledge of the
names, and not because he informed the angels of those names. That is
why they declared, “Glory be to Thee! We have no knowledge but that
which Thou hast taught us”. They accepted that they did not possess that
knowledge.

The above discourse leads us to believe that Adam was taught the names
of the named ones in such a way that he clearly knew their reality and
recognized their substantial existence; it was not merely knowing the
semantic value of a noun.

The named ones were substantial realities, the actual beings that were,
at the same time, hidden behind the curtain of the unseen (secrets) of
the heavens and the earth. This especial knowledge could be learnt only
by an earthly human being, but was quite incompre­hensible by a heavenly
angel. And this knowledge had an intrinsic bearing upon vicegerency.

“al-Asma' ” (**الأسماء** = the names ), in the sentences, “And He taught
Adam the names”, is a plural with the definite article “al” (the)
prefixed to it. Grammatically, it denotes general­ity,
comprehensiveness; and it is followed by the emphatic, “all of them”.

Clearly, Adam was taught all the names of every named thing, without any
restriction or limitation. As described earlier, the pronoun, “them”, in
the clause, “then presented them to the angels”, shows that every name,
that is, the named one, was a living being having knowledge and
intellect; and at the same time, he was in the curtain of the unseen -
the unseen of the heavens and the earth.

“The unseen of the heavens and the earth”: It is a genitive case.
Somewhere else this phrase may mean the unseen parts of the heavens and
the earth. But in this verse, where Allah intends to demonstrate His
perfect and comprehensive power, and to show the deficiency and
incapability of the angels, it must mean a secret which is unseen to all
the worlds, to all the heavens and the earth; an unseen beyond the
sphere of the universe.

If you look at all the particulars of this verse - that “the names”
denotes generality, that the named ones were alive and had knowledge,
and that they were unseen to the heavens and the earth - you will agree
that it perfectly fits on the theme of the verse 15:21,

***And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures of it and We
do not send it down but in a known measure.***

Whatever is called a thing - whatever is “named” a thing - Allah has its
vast treasures, ever-lasting, never-ending, unmeasured by any measure,
unlimited by any limit. Measure and limit come to it when it is created
and sent down.

The vastness of these treasures is not of the same kind as the
multi­plicity of number, because a number, no matter how large, is by
definition measured, limited and quantified. The said treasures are vast
in their ranks and grades. (We shall further explain it in Chapter 15.)

The named ones who were presented before the angels were sublime beings,
who were well-protected by Allah, hidden in curtains of the unseen. He
sent them down to the universe with their blessings and benefactions,
and created all that is in the heavens and in the earth from their light
and splendour. Although they had numerous identities, they were not
different in their number or in their persons; whatever difference there
was, it was in their ranks and grades.

**Qur’an:** ***and I know what you manifest and what you were hiding:***
The sentence stands face to face with the mention of the unseen
(secrets) of the heavens and the earth. Probably it refers to those
things which are the parts of the heavens and the earth; and in this way
both sentences together cover all unseen things - those which are beyond
the sphere of the heavens and the earth together with those which are
within that sphere.

Instead of saying “and what you hide”, Allah said, “and what you were
hiding”. This changed style shows that there was something hidden
especially in respect of Adam and his appoint­ment as vicegerent.
Probably it was the incident described in the next verse:

“. . . (the angels) ***prostrated except Iblīs. He refused and he showed
arrogance, and he was one of the unbelievers”.***

It shows that Iblīs was an unbeliever before then, and that his refusal
to prostrate had sprung from that disbelief, which he had kept hidden
upto that moment. Obviously, the prostration of the angels and the
refusal of Iblīs had happened after Allah had told them, “Surely I know
what you do not know”, but before He said to them, “. . . I know what
you manifest and what you were hiding” (i.e. the unbelief kept secret by
Iblīs). It also explains the reason why the former sentence was changed
to, “I surely know the unseen (secrets) of the heavens and the earth”.

Tradition
---------

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “The angels could not know what they said (***Wilt
Thou place in it such as shall make mischief in it and shed
blood***)*,*if they had not (earlier) seen someone who had made mischief
in it and shed blood.” (*at-Tafsīr, al-'Ayyashī*)

The author says: This tradition may be pointing to an earlier creature
that inhabited the earth before the mankind, as some other Tradition
say. It is not against what we have said that they understood it from
the very words of Allah: ***Verily, I am going to make in the earth a
vicegerent**;* rather the tradition and our explanation are
complementary.

The tradition, without putting it in the framework of our explanation,
would show that the angels too, like Iblīs, had committed the folly of
unauthorized analogy - a very objectionable practice.

Zurarah said: “I visited Abū Ja'far (a.s.) and he asked (me): 'What do
you have of Shī'ah Tradition?' I said: 'I do have a large number of it;
and I was thinking of kindling a fire to burn them in it.' He said:
'Hide it (somewhere), you will (naturally) forget what you are not
familiar with.' ” (Zurarah said):

“Then, I thought about the mankind (and asked him about them). He said:
'How did the angels get their knowledge when they said, ***Wilt Thou
place in it such as shall make mischief in it and shed blood?'***

*“* Zurarah further reports that whenever Abū 'Abdillah (a.s.) mentioned
this tradition, he said: “It is a shattering blow against al-Qadariyyah
(i. e. those who say that man is completely independent of Allah in his
actions).”

Abū 'Abdillah (a.s.) further said: “Adam (a.s.) had, in the heaven, a
friend from among the angels. When Adam got down from the heaven to the
earth, the angel felt lonely; he complained (of it) to Allah and sought
His permission.

Allah allowed him and he came down to him (Adam); he found him (Adam)
sitting in a desolate region. When Adam saw him, he put his hand on his
head and cried aloud.” Abū 'Abdillah (a.s.) said: “They narrate that (it
was such a loud cry that) all the creatures heard it.

The angel told him: 'O Adam! I do not see but that you have disobeyed
your Lord and put on yourself a burden beyond your strength. Do you know
what Allah had told us about you, and (what) we had said in His reply?'
(Adam) said: 'No.' (The angel) said: 'Allah told us, “I am going to make
in the earth a vicegerent”.

We said: “Wilt Thou place in it such as shall make mischief in it and
shed blood?” Thus, He created you to place you in the earth. Could it be
right for you to stay in the heaven?' ” Abū 'Abdillah (a.s.) said:
“Allah in this way consoled Adam for three days.” (*ibid*.)

The author says: The tradition shows that the Garden of Adam was in the
heaven. Other Tradition on this subject will be given later.

In the same book, Abū 'l-'Abbas is quoted as saying that he asked Abū
'Abdillah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, ***And He taught Adam the
names, all of them**,* (and enquired) ***as to what Allah had taught
him.*** (The Imam) said: “The earths, the moun­tains, the canyons and
the valleys.” Then he looked at the rug which he sat upon and said: “And
this rug is among the things which He taught him.”

It is reported in the same book that al-Fudayl ibn al-'Abbas asked Abū
'Abdillah (a.s.) what were the names which Allah taught Adam. He
replied: “The names of the valleys and the vegetables and the trees and
the mountains of the earth.”

The same book narrates from Dawūd ibn Sarhan al-'Attar that he said: “I
was with Abū 'Abdillah (a. s.) ; he called for the table-spread and we
took our meals. Then he called for the wash­bowl and hand-towel. I said
to him:

'May I be your ransom! The words of Allah: ***And He taught Adam the
names, all of them*** *-* was (this) wash-bowl and hand-towel among
them?' He (a.s.) said: 'The mountain-passes and the valleys.' Saying
this he pointed by his hand this and that way.”

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Verily, Allah taught Adam the names of His
proofs, all of them; then He presented them - and they were the
spirits - to the angels, and said: 'Tell Me the names of these if you
are right in your claims that you have more right, than Adam, to the
vicegerency in the earth because of your glorifying and extolling (Me).'

They said:'***Glory be to Thee! We have no knowledge but that which Thou
hast taught us; surely Thou, Thou*** (alone), ***art the Knowing, the
Wise.'*** Allah, Blessed and High is He! said: '***O Adam! Inform them
of their names.**'* When he informed them of their names, they knew of
their (i.e. those spirits) high rank before Allah, Great is His name!

They realized that they (i.e. those spirits) were more deserving to be
the vicegerents of Allah in His earth, and (to be) His proofs over His
creatures. Then Allah removed them (the spirits) from their sight, and
subjugated them with their (i.e. those spirits) obedi­ence and love; and
told them,

**'*****Did I not say to you that I surely know the unseen***
**(secrets)** ***of*** ***the heavens and the earth and*** **(that)**
***I know what you manifest and what you were hiding?'”***[^1]

The author says: The meaning of this tradition may be understood from
the commentary given earlier; and it may also be realized that there was
no contradiction between this tradition and the preceding ones.

It was explained earlier that the verse 15:21 **(*****And there is not a
thing but with Us are the treasures of it . . .*****)** that every thing
originally exists in the treasures of the unseen; the things that are
with us came into being on descending from there. The name given to a
thing in this existence is in fact the name of that which is hidden in
the treasures of the unseen.

You may say that Allah taught Adam every thing that was in His treasures
of the unseen - unseen that was hidden from the heavens and the earth.
The same idea may be conveyed in these words: Allah taught Adam the
names of all things - the things that were unseen secrets hidden from
the heavens and the earth. The sum total of both statements is the same.

It is not out of place here to point to the Tradition of *at-tīnah*
(**الطّينة** = the substance, of which a thing is made). Such a
tradition, narrated in *Biharu '1-anwar,* is as follows:

Jabir ibn 'Abdillah said: “I said to the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.a.):
'What was the first thing which Allah created?' He said 'The light of
your prophet, O Jabir! Allah created it, then created from it every
good; then He caused it to stand before Him in the station of
“nearness”, so long as Allah wished.

Then He divided it into parts; and He created the Throne from one part,
and the Chair from another part, and the bearers of the Throne and the
occupiers of the Chair from yet another part; and He placed the fourth
part in the station of love, as long as Allah wished.

Then He divided it into parts; and He created the Pen from one part, and
the Tablet from another part, and the Garden from yet an­other part; and
He placed the fourth part in the station of fear, as long as Allah
wished.

Then He divided it into portions, and He created the angels from one
portion, and the sun from another portion, and the moon from yet another
portion, and He placed the fourth portion in the station of hope, as
long as Allah wished.

Then He divided it into portions, and He created the understand­ing from
one portion, and the knowledge and forbearance from another portion, and
the (divine) protection and help from yet other portion, and He placed
the fourth portion in the station of modesty as long as Allah wished.

Then He looked at it with awe-inspiring eye, and that Light started
perspiring, and one hundred and twenty-four thousand drops dropped from
it; and Allah created from each drop the soul of a prophet and apostle.
Then the souls of the prophets began breathing, and Allah created from
their breasts the souls of (His) friends and the martyrs and the good
ones.' ”

The author says: There are numerous Tradition of the same type; and on
deep pondering they support what we have written earlier; some of them
will be discussed later on. You should not reject such Tradition
outright, thinking that they were forged by the Sūfīs.

The wonders of the creation are unfathomable; the scientists and the
philosophers have spent, and are spending, their lives in discovering
some of its secrets; but every solved enigma brings in its wake a lot of
fresh previously unthought of enigmas.

Do not forget that this is the unfathomability of this physical world -
the smallest in range, the narrowest in scope, the lowest in rank. How
can we pass judgement about other worlds beyond this one - the worlds of
light, spaciousness and abundance?

[^1]: Ma'ani '1-akhbar


