Suratul Baqarah: Verse 34
=========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣٤) وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلائِكَةِ اسْجُدُواْ لآدَمَ فَسَجَدُواْ
إِلاَّ إِبْلِيسَ أَبَى وَاسْتَكْبَرَ وَكَانَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when We said to the angels: “Prostrate before Adam”, then all
prostrated except Iblīs. He refused and he showed arrogance and he was
one of the unbelievers*** **(34)*****.***

General Comment
---------------

It has been explained earlier that the preceding words, “and what you
were hiding”, show that there was a hidden thing that had, meanwhile,
come into open. The last sentence of this verse too leads to the same
conclusion. Instead of saying, “He refused and he showed arrogance, and
he disbelieved”, it says, “. . . he was one of the unbelievers”.

It was not that he became an unbeliever at that moment; he was an
unbeliever long since, but had kept it a secret, and this event brought
it into open. Also, it was mentioned that the event of the prostration
of the angels must have happened between the divine words, “Surely I
know what you do not know”, and the words, ”. . . I know what you
manifest and what you were hiding”. It may be asked: Why then has Allah
put this verse after those words?

Probably it has been done just to create a link between the stories of
cre­ation of Adam and his being placed in the Paradise. The twelve
verses (28-39) were revealed to describe how and when man was made
vicegerent of Allah, how was he sent down to the earth, and what is to
happen to him in this life - the happenings that will have a bearing on
his lasting happiness or unhappiness.

For this theme, the event of prostration has not much importance -
except as a connecting link. That is why it has been mentioned here only
briefly without going into details. Perhaps, it is because of the same
reason that the Qur'an has changed the pronouns referring to Allah from
the third person (***your Lord said***) to the first (***And when We
said***)*.*

The angels had not hidden anything from Allah; it was Iblīs who had done
so. Then why did Allah ascribe this deed to all of them (*you were
hiding*)? Allah in this talk used the same method which even the human
beings have adopted for their own speeches; we ascribe the work of an
individual to the whole group, if the doer is not properly identified or
if he tries to remain anony­mous.

Also, there may be another explanation for it. Apparently the first
announcement, “I am going to make in the earth a vice­gerent”, had shown
that the said vicegerent would have authority over the angels too. It
may be inferred from the command obliging them to prostrate before Adam.

Probably on hearing that first announcement some disturbing thought had
come into their minds, as it had never occurred to them that any earthly
creature could be given authority over everything including themselves.
Some Tradition too point to it. In this context the words, “what you
were hiding”, could easily be addressed to the angels.

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***“Prostrate before Adam”**:* Apparently it shows that
prostration, *per se,* may be done before other than Allah, if it is
done in conformity with Allah's command, as a mark of respect to that
person. A similar case is found in the story of Yūsuf (a.s.):

***And he raised his parents upon the throne and they*** **(all)**
***fell down in prostration before him, and he said: “O my father! this
is the interpretation of my vision of old; my Lord has indeed made it to
be true”*** **(12:100).**

This topic needs some clarification.

It was explained in the chapter of The Opening what the worship means.
The worshipper places himself in the position of servitude and performs
what manifests this status, what clearly shows that he accepts the
mastership of his master.

Those acts must be such as to show the master's mastership or the
servant's servitude; for example, prostrating before the master, bowing
down to him, standing before him when he sits, walking behind him when
he walks etc.

The more apt an action is to show this status, the more reserved it
becomes to the rites of the divine worship. Prostration is the most
significant symbol of the master's status arid the servant's low rank,
because the man in this act falls down and puts his forehead on the
ground. For this reason, it has the strongest connection with the divine
worship.

However, prostration is not the same thing as worship. They have two
different meanings, and worship is not a quidditative substance of
prostration. A quidditative characteristic can never be separated from
any being. But prostration may be done with­out any thought of reverence
or worship - for example, just to make fun of someone.

Keeping this in view, it may safely be said that although the connection
of prostration with divine worship is the strongest, that worship is not
its quiddity. There­fore, prostration, *per se*, cannot be exclusively
reserved for Allah. If there is any impediment or obstruction, it should
emanate from the *sharī'ah* or the reason.

What the *sharī'ah* and the reason forbid is ascribing the prerogatives
of the lordship to anyone other than Allah. But they do not forbid
honouring someone or according him respect when it is done without
elevating him to godhead.

The discourse given above was from purely academic point of view. But
the religious good taste, conditioned as it is by rituals of worship,
has strictly reserved the prostration for divine worship; it should not
be done for anyone other than Allah; in Islam, one is forbidden to
prostrate before others even as a mark of respect.

Apart from prostration, there is no proof - either from the Qur'an and
tradition or from reason and logic - against according respect and
showing reverence to others than Allah, especially when it is done as a
part of the love of Allah; examples may be given of revering and loving
the good servants of Allah and pay­ing respects to the graves of the
friends of Allah or to the things attributed to them.

There is no reason whatsoever why such actions should be prohibited. (We
shall deal with this subject in a more appropriate place, God willing.)

Tradition
---------

Abū 'Abdillah (a.s.) said: “When Allah created Adam and ordered the
angels to prostrate before him, it came into the angels' mind: 'We never
thought that Allah had created any creature more honourable than us; we
are His neighbours, and we are the nearest of His creation to Him.'

Thereupon Allah said: 'Did I not say to you that I know what you
manifest and what you were hiding?'- (it was) a reference to what they
had mentioned concerning the affairs of the *jinn,* and had con­cealed
what was in their own minds. So, the angels, who had said what they had
said, took refuge with the Throne.” (*at-Tafsīr, al-'Ayyashī*)

Another tradition of the same theme is narrated in the same book from
'Alī ibn al-Husayn (a.s.), the last part of which runs as follows: “When
the angels realized that they had fallen into error, they took refuge
with the Throne; and it was a group of the angels - and they were those
who were around the Throne; it was not all the angels (who had thought
so). . . So, they have taken refuge with the Throne till the Day of
Resurrection.”

The author says: The theme of the two Tradition may be inferred from the
talk of the angels: “We celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness”;
and “Glory be to Thee! We have no knowledge but that which Thou hast
taught us; surely Thou, Thou (alone), art the Knowing, the Wise.”

It will be explained later that the Throne means the divine knowledge,
as the Tradition narrated from the Imams of *Ahlu 'l-bayt* (a.s.) say.
(Therefore, the angels' taking refuge with the Throne would refer to
their confession that they knew only that which Allah had taught them
and that only Allah was the Knowing, the Wise.)

According to some Tradition, the word “the unbelievers”, (in the clause,
“and he was one of the unbelievers”) refers to the species, *jinn,* to
which Iblīs belonged, and which was created before man. Allah says:

***And certainly We created man of clay that gives forth sound, of black
mud fashioned into shape. And the jinn We created before of intensely
hot fire*** **(15:26-27).**

According to the above-mentioned Tradition, the attribution of hiding to
the angels (*what you were hiding*) needs no expla­nation; the clause
means exactly what it says; the angels had actually hidden in their
hearts the idea of their supremacy.

A third, group of Tradition says that the said clause refers to Iblīs
and his hidden thought that he would not make obeisance to Adam and
would not prostrate before him if asked to do so.
There is no contradiction between these various explanations, because
all the meanings may be inferred from the Qur'anic verses. They are all
true and based on fact. Various Tradition throw light on various facets
of the same fact.

Abū Basīr said: “I said to Abū 'Abdillah (a. s.): 'Did the angels
prostrate and put their foreheads on the earth?' He said: 'Yes, as an
honour (bestowed on him) by Allah.' ”(*Qisasu 'l-­anbiya, ar-Rawandī*)

The Imam said: “Verily the prostration of the angels before Adam was in
obedience to Allah and for their love of Adam.” (*Tuhafu '1-'uqūl*)

Mūsa ibn Ja'far (peace be on them both) narrates through his forefathers
that a Jew asked Amīru 'l-mu'minīn 'Alī (a.s.) about the miracles of the
Prophet in comparison with the mir­acles of (other) prophets (in course
of which) he said: “This is Adam before whom Allah ordered His angels to
prostrate.” “Did He do any thing like it for Muhammad?”

'Alī (a. s.) said: “It was so. But Allah ordered His angels to prostrate
before Adam; yet their prostration was not a prostration of worship; (it
was not) that they had worshipped Adam against Allah, Mighty and Great
is He! It was rather as an acknowledgement of Adam's superiority and a
mercy of Allah towards him.

And Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) was given what was better than that. Verily
Allah, Great and High is He!, blessed him in His omnipotence, and the
angels, all of them, prayed for him, and the believers were obliged to
pray for him. So this is the increase, O Jew! ”(*al-Ihtijaj*)

Allah created Adam, and he remained for forty years in (that) shape
(i.e. a statue without life). And Iblīs, the cursed, used to pass by him
and say: “Why have you been created?” al -'Alīm (i.e. al-Kazim - a.s.)
said: “Then Iblīs said: 'If Allah ordered me to prostrate before this, I
would certainly disobey Him.

' . . . Then Allah said to the angels, 'Prostrate before Adam'; all of
them prostrated; but Iblīs showed the envy that was in his heart and he
refused to prostrate.” (*at-Tafsīr, al-Qummī*)

*Biharu 'l-anwar* narrates, quoting from *Qisasu 'l-­anbiya',* as-Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said: “Iblīs was ordered to prostrate be­fore Adam, and
he said: 'O my Lord! By Thy honour! If Thou excusest me from prostrating
before Adam, I would certainly worship Thee worship no one would ever
have worshipped Thee in a like manner.' Allah, Great is His glory!,
said: 'I like to be worshipped according to My own pleasure.' ”

The Imam also said: “Verily Iblīs cried aloud four times: First, on the
day he was cursed, and the day he was dropped down to the earth, and the
day Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) was sent (as prophet) after a (long) interval of
the apostles, and when the source of the Book was sent down. And he
snorted (in satisfac­tion) twice: when Adam ate from the tree and when
he (Adam) was sent down from the Garden.”

And he said about the words of Allah:

***so their nakedness appeared unto them*** **(20:121):**

“Their nakedness was not seen before, then it was uncovered.”
Also he said: “The tree from which Adam was forbidden (to eat) was the
spikenard.”

The author says: The Tradition - and there are many - support what we
have written about prostration.


