Suratul Baqarah: Verses 35-39
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣٥) وَقُلْنَا يَا آدَمُ اسْكُنْ أَنتَ وَزَوْجُكَ الْجَنَّةَ وَكُلاَ
مِنْهَا رَغَدًا حَيْثُ شِئْتُمَا وَلاَ تَقْرَبَا هَذِهِ الشَّجَرَةَ
فَتَكُونَا مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣٦) فَأَزَلَّهُمَا الشَّيْطَانُ عَنْهَا فَأَخْرَجَهُمَا مِمَّا كَانَا
فِيهِ وَقُلْنَا اهْبِطُواْ بَعْضُكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ عَدُوٌّ وَلَكُمْ فِي
الأَرْضِ مُسْتَقَرٌّ وَمَتَاعٌ إِلَى حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣٧) فَتَلَقَّى آدَمُ مِن رَّبِّهِ كَلِمَاتٍ فَتَابَ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّهُ
هُوَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣٨) قُلْنَا اهْبِطُواْ مِنْهَا جَمِيعًا فَإِمَّا يَأْتِيَنَّكُم
مِّنِّي هُدًى فَمَن تَبِعَ هُدَايَ فَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٣٩) وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ وَكَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا أُوْلَئِكَ
أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We said: “O Adam! dwell you and your wife in the Garden and
eat*** **(you both)** ***from it*** **(freely)** ***a plenteous***
**(food)** ***wherever you*** **(two)** ***wish and do not approach***
**(you two)** ***this tree, for then you*** **(two)** ***will be of the
unjust”*** **(35)*****.***

***But the Satan made them both slip from it and drove them out of what
they were in; and We said: “Get down, some of you being the enemies of
others; and there is for you in the earth an abode and a provision for a
time”*** **(36)*****.***

***Then Adam received*** **(some)** ***words from his Lord, so He
returned to him mercifully; surely He is Oft-returning*** **(to
mercy)*****, the Merciful*** **(37)** ***.***

***We said: “Get down you there-from all together; and if*** ***there
comes to you a guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, no
fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve*** **(38)** ***.***

***And*** **(as to)** ***those who disbelieve in, and belie, Our signs,
they are the inmates of the fire, in it they shall abide”*** **(39).**

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***And We said: “O Adam! Dwell you and your wife. . .
”**:*Although the story of the angels' prostration before Adam has been
repeated several times in the Qur'an, that of his placement in the
Garden has been given in three places only:

**First:** The verses given above, from Chapter 2 (the Cow).

**Second:** In Chapter 7 (the Elevated Places):

• ***And*** **(We said):** ***“O Adam! dwell you and your wife in the
Garden; so eat from where you desire, but do not go near this tree, for
then you will be of the unjust”*** **(19).**

• ***But the Satan whispered an evil suggestion to them that he might
make manifest to them what was hidden from them of their nakedness, and
he said: “Your Lord has not forbidden you from this tree except that you
may not both become two angels or that you may*****(not)** ***become of
the im­mortals”*** **(20).**

• ***And he swore to them both: “Most surely I am a sincere adviser to
you”*** **(21).**

• ***Then he caused them to fall by deceit; so when they tasted of the
tree, their nakedness became manifest to them, and they both began to
cover themselves with the leaves of the Garden; and their Lord called
out to them: “Did I not forbid you both from that tree and say to you
that the Satan is your open enemy?”*** **(22).**

• ***They said: “Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves, and if Thou
forgive us not, and have*** **(not)** ***mercy on us, we shall certainly
be of the losers”*** **(23).**

• ***He said: “Get down, some of you being the enemies of others, and
there is for you in the earth an abode and a provision for a time”***
**(24).**

• ***He*** **(also)** ***said: “Therein shall you live, and therein
shall you die, and from it shall you be raised”*** **(25).**

**Third:** In Chapter 20 (Ta-Ha):

• ***And certainly We had covenanted unto Adam before, but he forgot;
and We did not find in him any determination*** **(115).**

• ***And when We said to the angels: “Prostrate before Adam”, they did
prostrate, but 1blīs*** **(did it not);** ***he refused*** **(116).**

• ***So We said: “O Adam! surely this is an enemy to you and to your
wife; therefore let him not drive you both forth from the Garden so that
you should be put to toil*** **(117);**

• ***Surely it is*** **(ordained)** ***for you that you shall not be
hungry therein nor bare of clothing*** **(118);**

• ***and that you shall not be thirsty therein nor shall you feel the
heat of the sun”*** **(119)*****.***

• ***But the Satan whispered an evil suggestion to him; he said: “O
Adam! shall I guide you to the tree of immortality and a kingdom which
decays not?”*** **(120).**

• ***Then they both ate of it, so their nakedness appeared unto them,
and they both began to cover themselves with leaves of the Garden, and
Adam disobeyed his Lord, so he got astray*****(121)*****.***

• ***Then his Lord chose him, so He turned to him and guided*** **(him)
(122)*****.***

• ***He said: “Get down you two therefrom, all*** **(of you)*****, one
of you*****(is)** ***enemy to another. So if there comes to you guidance
from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, he shall not go astray nor be
unhappy*** **(123)*****.***

• ***And whoever turns away from My remembrance, his shall surely be a
straitened life, and We will raise him, on the Day of Resurrection,
blind”*** **(124)*****.***

• ***He shall say: “My Lord! why hast Thou raised me blind, and I was a
seeing one indeed?”*** **(125)**

• ***He will say: “Even so: Our signs came to you, but you forgot them;
even thus shall you be forsaken this day”*** **(126)*****.***

• ***And thus do We recompense him who is extravagant and does not
believe in the signs of his Lord; and certainly the chastisement of the
hereafter is severer and more lasting”*** **(127)*****.***

The context, and particularly the opening words of the story, “Verily I
am going to make in the earth a vicegerent”, clearly show that it was
for the earth that Adam was created; it was the original plan that he
should live and die in the earth. Allah had temporarily placed the
couple in the Garden to test them in order that their nakedness might be
uncovered to them.

Also the context in all three places shows that the order to the angels
to prostrate before Adam, and then to Adam to stay in the Garden is a
single, continuous, story. It all shows that Adam (a. s.) was created
specifically for the earth, and the way to send him down was through the
Garden as mentioned in the Qur'an:

It was shown that he was superior to the angels and, therefore, more
qualified for the vicegerency of Allah; then they were told to prostrate
before him, in acknowledgement of his superiority; then he was placed in
the Garden but forbidden to go near a particular tree; so that on eating
from it they should become aware of their nakedness and then be sent
down to the earth.

It means that the last link in this chain was their becoming aware of
their private parts - it was this factor which irrevocably showed that
they were fit for this earth, ready for this life. ”*as-Saw 'ah*”,
(**السَّوأة** literally means shame, disgrace, private part of the body.

In this story it has been used in the last meaning, as may be seen from
the words, “and they both began to cover them­selves with leaves of the
Garden”. That is why we have translated it as “nakedness”. )

However, their awareness of their pudenda proved that in addition to
their spiritual qualities, they had also animal instincts and desires
ingrained in them. It naturally made them dependent on nutrition and
growth. Iblīs wanted them to become aware of their nakedness.

Adam and his wife were given earthly, human existence and were at once
placed in the Garden without any delay; they were not given time to
perceive and understand their nakedness or its concomitants; they had
not yet comprehended the life of this earth and its necessities.

When they were sent to the Garden their connection with the spiritual
world, including the angels, was strong; their link with it was not
weakened. It should be noted that Allah has said, “what was hidden from
them”; He has not said, “what had been hidden from them”; it may be
inferred from the expression used that their nakedness could not remain
hidden for ever in this life; it was hidden for only a short period when
they were placed in the Garden.

The uncovering of their nakedness with all its concomi­tants was a
predetermined fact and it depended upon their eating from that tree.
That is why Allah had told them: “therefore let him not drive you both
forth from the Garden so that you should be put to toil”; thereafter,
the Satan “drove them out of what they were in”.

It should not be overlooked that even when Allah pardoned them after
their repentance, He did not return them to the Garden - they were sent
down to the earth to live therein. If their eating of the tree, the
uncovering of their private parts and the life of this world were not a
confirmed divine plan, an irrevocable pre­determined decree, they would
have been returned to their place in the Garden as soon as they were
forgiven their mistake.

In short, it was the divine plan that they should spend sometime in the
Garden to get them prepared for the life in this world; and their
removal from the Garden, according to the causal relation decreed by
Allah, depended on their eating from the tree and becoming aware of
their nakedness, and it happened because they listened to the whispering
of the Satan.

Allah says: “And certainly We had covenanted unto Adam before, but he
forgot”. Which covenant does this verse allude to? Does it refer to the
admonition, “and do not approach (you two) this tree, for then you (two)
will be of the unjust”?

Or to the warning, “surely this (i.e., the Satan) is an enemy to you and
to your wife”? Or does it refer to the general covenant made with all
human beings in general and with the prophets in particular?

The first possibility is out of question altogether. Allah says: “But
the Satan whispered an evil suggestion to them . . . and he said: 'Your
Lord has not forbidden you from this tree except that you may not become
two angels or that you may (not) become of the immortals . . .' ”

Obviously, when Adam and his wife committed the error and tasted of the
tree they were aware of the prohibition - even the evil suggestion of
the Satan had begun with a reference to it. And Allah says in this verse
that “We had covenanted unto Adam before, but he forgot; and We did not
find in him any determination.” It, therefore, could not refer to that
prohibition, because Adam had not forgotten it at all.

The second suggestion - that the covenant might refer to the warning
against the Satan - is not so wide of mark; still it is not supported by
apparent meaning of the verses. The said warn­ing was given to both Adam
and his wife, while this verse refers to a covenant made especially with
Adam.

It leaves us with the last alternative that the covenant means the
general covenant which was made with the whole mankind and more
particularly with the prophets. This verse (about the covenant with Adam
and his forgetting it) occurs at the beginning of the story in the
chapter of Ta-Ha; and the story concludes with the words, “So if there
comes to you guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, he
shall not go astray nor be unhappy.

And whoever turns away from My remembrance, his shall surely be a
straitened life, and We will raise him, on the Day of Resurrection,
blind. He shall say: 'My Lord! why hast Thou raised me blind, and I was
a seeing one indeed?' He will say: 'Even so: Our signs came to you, but
you forgot them; even thus shall you be forsaken (literally: forgotten)
today.”'

These concluding verses perfectly fit that opening one. To turn away
from the remembrance of Allah is not different from forgetting the
covenant of Allah. Add to it the use of the same verb (*you forgot
them*) in the next verse. All these references are perfectly compatible
with the covenant made with the souls of the human beings about the
Mastership of Allah and their own servitude.

That covenant obliged the man that he should never forget that Allah is
his Lord, the Ruler and Master of his affairs; nor should he lose sight
of the fact that he is a wholly owned slave of Allah; that he has no
authority whatsoever over his benefit or harm; nor does he has any
control over his life, death or resurrection; in short he owns neither
his person, his characteristics nor his actions.

The error that stands opposite to this remembrance is for­getfulness -
man forgets his Lord and His All-encompassing Mastership; he becomes
engrossed in his own self, getting bogged down more and more in the mire
of this world's attractions.

Look at this world's life, with all its diversity; and see how it
spreads its tentacles in all directions. Note how it is shared by the
believer and the unbeliever both. And then find out how the two groups
respond to its joy and sorrow. How different is their respective
attitude towards this life's success and failure, happiness and
unhappiness, content and discontent, relief and suffering.

These factors affect the two groups - the believers and the
un­believers - in entirely different ways. The believer has the
know­ledge of Allah and the unbeliever lacks this knowledge. And it
causes all the differences in their respective behaviour.

Every man looks at this world; a world that is submerged in all types of
misfortunes and disasters: a life followed by death, a health ruined by
disease, a prosperity eaten away by poverty, a comfort des­troyed by
discomfort, a gain nullified by loss - this is, in a nut­shell, the life
of this world.

The believer knows that everything and every affair belongs to Allah;
nothing is independent of God, the Lord. Every thing and every affair
emanates from Him; and all that originates from Him is good and
beautiful; nothing but beauty and splendour, goodness and excellence,
can come from Him.

And because all things and all affairs issue forth from his Lord and
Master, he thinks that all is elegant and fine; he dislikes nothing and
fears nothing; everything in his eyes is likeable, except that which his
Master tells him to dislike. He subjugates his likes and dislikes to
those of his Master. In short, all his attention is fixed to the
pleasure of his Master.

He knows that everything is the sole property of God; none else has any
share in anything. That being the case, why should he worry how the
Master manages His own property? He does not think that he is competent
to meddle in the affairs of his Lord.

This submission to Allah creates a perfect tranquillity, a truly happy
life, untarnished by unhappi­ness; a light without darkness, a joy
without sorrow, a benefit without harm, and a riches without want. It
all happens because he believes in Allah and in His mastership.

On the other hand is the unbeliever who does not know Allah. By cutting
himself off from the one and only Master, he has to bow his head before
every creature. He believes that every­thing is independent in its
actions - that it has a power of its own to benefit or to harm, to do
good or evil.

Consequently, he remains in constant fear of everything; he is ever
apprehensive of every real or imagined danger. He is always grieving for
want has befallen him, longing for the opportunities he has missed. He
feels nostalgia for the prestige or wealth that is gone; breaks his
heart for the children, relatives or friends who have left him.

He is inextricably trapped by the attractions of the world; he relies on
them and has trust in them; and when any thing goes wrong, he sinks into
despair. Then as soon as he makes a virtue of necessity and is resigned
to that misfortunate, a new calamity overwhelms him.

In this way, he is always driven from pillar to post, with a heavy heart
and a gloomy countenance; “thus does Allah lay uncleanliness on those
who do not believe”.

It can be seen, in the light of the above discourse, that forgetting the
covenant and unhappiness of this world's life, both are interrelated -
the later springs from the former. This fact becomes clearer if we
compare the wordings of the verse 20:123-124 with those used in the
verse under discussion. The former says:

***So if there comes to you guidance from Me, then whoever follows My
guidance, he shall not go astray nor be un­happy. And whoever turns away
from My remembrance, his shall surely be a straitened life, and We will
raise him, on the Day of Resurrection, blind.***

And the same idea has been expressed in this verse in the following
words:

. . . ***then whoever follows My guidance, no fear shall come upon them,
nor shall they grieve.***

It may be inferred from these verses that the forbidden tree was of such
a nature that if one ate from it he would certainly be entangled in the
troubles and misfortunes of this life - he would spend his life in this
world, heedless of his own place, forgetting his Lord.

Probably Adam (a. s.) wanted to combine the fruit of that tree with the
covenant that he had entered into with his Lord. But he could not
succeed; the fruit had its effect, he forgot the covenant and fell into
the troubles and toils of this world. Then he was saved when he repented
before Allah and Allah turned to him with mercy.

**Qur’an:** ***and eat*** **(you two)** ***from it*** **(freely)** ***a
plenteous*** **(food)** *“ar-Raghad”* (**الّرغَد** ) literally means
happiness, well-being, good life and affluence *arghada 'l -qawmu
mawashiyahum* (**أرغَدَ القومُ مواشيهم**) means, “the people left their
cattle to graze wherever it liked. *“Qawmun raghad”* (قومٌ رَغَد) and
*“nisa'un raghad”* (**نِساءٌ رَغَدّ**) means people (or women) having a
life of plenty and opulence.

**Qur’an:** ***and do not approach*** **(you two)** ***this tree**;* The
context shows that actual prohibition was of eating from it; but they
were told not even to approach it; the prohibition was couched in these
terms for emphasis. What was really forbidden is seen from the verse:

***so when they tasted of the tree, their nakedness became manifest to
them*** **(7:22),**

and

**. . .** ***they both ate of it, so their nakedness appeared unto
them*** **(20:121) .**

**Qur’an:** ***for then you*** **(two)** ***will be of the unjust**:
“az-Zalimīn”* (**الظالمين**) is the *nomen agentis* of *az-zulm*
(**الظُّلم** = injustice, to do wrong). It is not from *az-zulmah*
(darkness), as has been suggested by someone. Adam and his wife
acknowledged their wrong-doing, and the Qur'an quotes them as saying:

***“Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves, and if Thou forgive us
not, and have*** **(not)** ***mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the
losers”*** **(7:23).**

This clause has been changed in Chapter 20 to “so that you should be put
to toil”; and the toil has further been explained in these words:

***Surely it is*** **(ordained)** ***for you that you shall not be
hungry therein*** **(i.e. in the Garden)** ***nor bare of clothing; and
that you shall not be thirsty therein nor shall you feel the heat of the
sun*** **(20:118-119).**

Clearly, the injustice and wrong-doing, mentioned in the verse 2:25, was
to bring in its wake the toil of this world - hunger, thirst, nakedness
and other discomforts. The injustice or wrong that they had done was
against their own selves; it was neither a sin (as this term is used in
the *sharī'ah)* nor an injustice against Allah.

It shows that the prohibition was in the nature of an advice pointing
out to them what was good for their own comfort; it did not have the
force of an ordained law. Adam and his wife did wrong to themselves,
because their disregard to that divine advice caused their removal from
the Garden.

When a man commits a sin (i.e. an offence, from the *sharī'ah* point of
view), he is given a punishment. Then if he repents and his repentance
is accepted, the punishment is completely waived off, and he is returned
to his previous position as though he had not committed the sin at all.

If Adam and his wife were guilty of such a sin, they should have been
returned to their place in the Garden soon after their repentance was
accepted. But it was not done. It clearly shows that the prohibition did
not have the force of an ordained law; it was only an advice.

Even so, neglecting it had its natural effect on both of them and they
had to come out of the Garden. But this removal from the Garden was not
a punishment for any sin or crime; it was the natural consequence of the
wrong they had done against their own selves. (We shall write again on
this subject, God willing.)

**Qur’an:** ***But the Satan made them both slip from it:*** The Satan
could have misled them by creating evil thoughts in their hearts, in the
same way as he misleads other human beings. But many verses, in the
three narratives quoted at the beginning of this commentary, show that
the Satan had appeared before Adam and his wife, and had talked to them
face to face:

***So We said: “O Adam! surely this is an enemy to you and to your
wife”*** **(20:117).**

Allah had pointed out the Satan to Adam, not by any verbal description
but by showing to him the person of the said enemy. (Note the
demonstrative pronoun, “this is”.)

**(The Satan)** ***said: “O Adam! Shall I guide you to the tree of
immortality. . . “*** **(20:120)*****.***

The speaker, that is, the Satan, must have talked to Adam face to face.

***And he*** **(i.e. the Satan)** ***swore to them both: “Most***
**surely** ***I am a sincere adviser to you”*** **(7:21).**

Obviously, he was visible to Adam and his wife and swore during his talk
with them .

***. . . And their Lord*** ***called out to them: “Did I not forbid you
both from that tree and say to you that the Satan is your open
enemy?”*** **(7:22)**

It indicates that the Satan was visible to Adam and his wife. If the
Satan had misled them by creating evil thoughts into their minds without
appearing before them, they could have said to Allah that they were not
aware that that thought was put into their minds by the Satan; that they
mistook it to be their own thought because the Satan had not appeared
before them.

They used to see and recognize the Satan. Likewise, other prophets - all
of them covered by Allah's protection - used to see and recognize him if
and when he came to them. Many Tradition mention such encounters in the
stories of Nūh, Ibrahīm, Mūsa, 'Īsa, Yahya, Ayyūb, Isma'īl and Muhammad
(may Allah bless him and his progeny as well as the prophets).

The above-quoted verses as well as the verse 7:20:

***and he said: “Your Lord has not forbidden from this tree except
that*** **. . .”**

also show that the Satan had visited then near that tree in the Garden.
He entered the Garden, talked to them and put evil suggestion before
them. He was able to do so because the Garden was not the Garden of
eternal abode.

The Qur'an also says that Adam, his wife and the Satan all were removed
from the Garden together. (Of course, Allah had said to the Satan:

***“Then get down from this, for it does not befit you to behave proudly
therein”*** **(7:13).**

But the pronouns “this” and “therein” may refer to the angels or to the
heaven. It may mean: Get down from the company of the angels; or, get
down from the heaven as it is a place of honour.)

**Qur’an:** ***and We said: “Get down, some of you being the en­emies of
others. . . ”:*** The second person pronouns, used in this verse, are
plural, which denote at least three persons. Clearly, it was addressed
to Adam, his wife and the Satan. The Satan was turned out of the heaven
and/or the company of the angels before (as described above).

This verse combines in itself that previous order too; and manifests the
firm decree of Allah establishing enmity between Iblīs on one side and
Adam and his wife and their descendants on the other. It also
promulgates another decree that they shall live in the earth, die
therein, and be raised again from it.

It may safely be said that the whole human race (Adam together with his
descendants) is covered by the last mentioned decree:

***Therein shall you live, and therein shall you die, and from it shall
you be raised*** **(7:25).**

This verse comes at the end of the story (in Chapter 7) which begins
with the following words:

***And certainly We created you, then We fashioned you, then We said to
the angels: “Prostrate before Adam”. . .*** **(7:11).**

In both verses plural pronouns have been used; and it is an indi­cation
that the creation and the decree to live and die in the earth includes
more than two, that is, other human beings too besides Adam and his
wife.

The story of Adam may have been used by Allah to represent the rise,
fall and rise again of the wole mankind. Adam was the first
representatives of humanity, and his life was a symbol, a miniature, of
the human beings life-span in this world.

The angels were told to prostrate before Adam, because he was the
vicegerent of Allah in the earth. It has been mentioned earlier that
this vicegerency was bestowed on the whole mankind. The angels
prostrated before Adam, as he was the symbol of humanity, the
representative of his race.

Adam and his wife were placed in the Garden and then were sent down from
there because they had eaten of the for­bidden tree. Every man may see
his own face in this mirror. His soul, before coming to this world,
enjoyed the sublime and lofty existence; his abode was spiritually near
to his Lord - a place of joy and happiness, of splendour and light; in
the company of purified companions and spiritual friends, near to Allah,
the Lord of the worlds.

Then he opted for this transient life, and was at once entangled in the
troubles and toils of this world; leaving that purified existence, he
was attracted to this tedious and odious life.

Adam at once repented and prayed for the mercy of Allah. In the same
way, man may return to Allah and consequently to the eternal abode of
honour and bliss. But if he took the wrong turning, did not try to
return to Allah, and, in short, followed his base desires, he would
change the bounty of Allah into dis­belief and ungratefulness, would
direct himself to the place of disgrace - to the hell; and how evil that
resting place is!

**Qur’an:** ***Then Adam received*** **(some)** ***words*** ***from his
Lord, so He returned to him mercifully: “at-Talaqqī”***(**التَّلّقي** =
to receive) signifies “to learn”. It was this learning of the words that
paved the way for the repentance of Adam.

*“at-Tawbah”* (**التوبة**) literally means to return; generally it is
used for repentance, because when a man repents, he returns to his Lord.
This verb is at times ascribed to Allah (as in this verse), and
signifies that Allah returns or restores the servant to His grace and
mercy.

In other words, He accepts the plea of the servant and forgives his
sins. At other times it is attributed to the servant; then it signifies
the servant's return to Allah, that is, his repentance from his sins.

*at-Tawbah* (repentance) of man is flanked on both sides by two
*tawbahs* (mercies) of Allah. Man can never do without the mercy of
Allah. He needs mercy and help of Allah to turn away from sins; only
then he may return to Allah, may repent from his sins; then again the
mercy of Allah comes forward, and his repentance is accepted.

Therefore, an accepted repentance of man issues forth from the mercy of
Allah, and also ends on His mercy. The verse 9:118 clearly mentions this
fact:

***then He returned to them*** (mercifully) ***so*** ***that they might
return*** (i.e. might repent).

What were the words which Adam received from his Lord? Some people think
that it refers to their invocation reported in Chapter 7:

***They said: “Our Lord! We have been unjust to our­selves, and if Thou
forgive us not, and have*** **(not)** ***mercy on us, we shall certainly
be of the losers”*****(7:23).**

But this view is not supported by the sequence of the events. Adam and
his wife had addressed that invocation before they were told to get down
from the Garden (7:24); and it was after getting that order that he
“received some words” from Allah, as is clear from the verse 2:36-37.
Therefore, “some words” cannot refer to that previously uttered
invocation.

There may, however, be another explanation: When Allah announced to the
angels that He was going to make a vicegerent in the earth, they said:
“Wilt Thou place in it such as shall make mischief in it and shed blood,
while we celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness?” Allah did not say
that their accusation against the wouldbe vicegerent was wrong; His only
answer was that He taught Adam all the names.

There must have been some­thing deep, meaningful and relevant in this
teaching of the names; otherwise, the angels could not be satisfied,
their objection could not be answered. The names taught to Adam must
have contained some such thing that would come to the rescue of man if
he sinned, would save him from disgrace if he erred.

Probably, the words received at the time of repentance were related to
the names taught to him in the beginning.

It cannot be denied that Adam (a.s.) did wrong to himself by placing
himself in this world - a crossroads of happiness and unhappiness; had
he been ensnared by it he would have perished; but he chose to return to
his original place of spiritual bliss and was saved; he had to undergo,
in this process, untold miseries and unbearable hardships.

In any case, he put himself in so much trouble that he became “unjust”
to himself. The question arises as to why Allah selected this hard way
to send him from the Garden to the earth. The fact, however, remains
that in this process he attained to such heights of eternal bliss and
spiritual perfection as would have been impossible to reach without
coming down to the earth - and that too with a stigma of mistake.

The events leading to his removal from the Garden and, later, to the
acceptance of his repentance showed to him his true reality - how
humble, dependent, deficient and servile he was; and at the same time he
came to realize that every difficulty of this world leads to manifold
ease in the next life; every unpleasant­ness here results in enhanced
pleasantness there; every trouble in the obedience to Allah brings in
its wake the pleasure of Allah and His unlimited reward; the process
continues until the servant reaches the sublime presence of his Lord.

Adam knew, through his own experience, taste of many of the beautiful
attributes of Allah: His forgiveness, turning mercifully to the
servants, covering their mistakes, bestowing mercy on them, putting them
in the shadow of His compassion and grace - these are some of the divine
attributes which He has especially reserved for the sinners.

Adam could not know and understand them without passing through the
stages which Allah had decreed for him.

This, however, was his repentance; it made ordination of a*sharī'ah*
essential. It was necessary for Adam and his descendants to know which
path they should take so as to reach their desti­nation, the abode of
bliss and happiness. His repentance brought him to the stage where
promulgation of religion and ordination of the *sharī'ah* was
inevitable.

That is why Allah frequently mentions the repentance before the belief:

***Stand fast then*** **(in the right path)** ***as you are com­manded,
as also he who has turned*** **(to Allah)** ***with you. . .***
**(11:112)*****;***

***And most surely I am most forgiving to him who repents and believes
and does good. . .*****(20:82).**

There are many such verses in the Qur'an.

**Qur’an:** ***We said: “Get down you therefore all together; and if
there comes to you a guidance from Me, then whoever*** **follows** ***My
guidance, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve. And***
**(as to)** ***those who disbelieve in, and belie, Our signs, they are
the inmates of the fire, in it they shall abide”.***

This is the essence of religion ordained, for the first time, for Adam
(a.s.) and his descendants. Allah has condensed the whole religion in
these two sentences; nothing has been added, nor can be added to it upto
the Day of Resurrection.

Ponder on this story and particularly the narrative of Chapter 20. You
will see that Allah had issued two decrees in respect of Adam and his
descendants. When he ate from the tree, it was decreed that he should
get down to the earth and spend his life therein - a life of trouble and
toil.

And when he repented, it was ordained that he and his descendants should
be honoured with divine guidance. The first decree initiated the earthly
life for him; the second, issued after his repentance, bestowed dignity
and grace to that life, by providing it with divine guidance.

From then on, man's life is composed of two lives: A material, earthly
life and a spiritual, heavenly one. It may be inferred from repetition
of the order to “get down” in this narrative:

***“Get down, some of you being the enemies of others; and there is for
you in the earth an abode and a provision for a time”*** **(2:36).**

**“Get** ***down you therefrom all together; and if there comes to you
guidance from Me. . .”*** **(2:38).**

Repentance of Adam **(2:37)** occurred between these two orders. The
sequence shows that Adam had repented before their departing from the
Garden, although he had slipped from his earlier position of honour. It
may also be, inferred from the change in the styles of the following
verses: Allah said to Adam, when placing him in the Garden,

“***do not go near this tree”*** **(7:19);**

but when they ate from it,

***their Lord called out to them: “Did I not forbid you both from that
tree. . . ” (*****7:22).**

Note the demonstrative pronoun, “this”, (for a nearer object) in the
former speech, and “that” (for a farther one) in the latter. Also
contrast the verb, “said”, (showing proximity) of the former with
“called out” (showing distance) of the latter. All this together
supports the above-given explanation that at the time of the second
order Adam was still in the Garden but not in his earlier honoured
place.

***“Get down, some of you being the enemies of others; and there is for
you in the earth an abode and a provision for a time”*** **(2:36;
7:24).**

***“Therein shall you live, and therein shall you die, and from it shall
you be raised”*** **(7:25).**

The verses indicate that the life on the earth was very different from
that in the Garden. This life is firmly connected with the earth, full
of difficulties and hardships. Man, in this life, is created from the
earth, then after death is returned into it, and will, on the Day of
Resurrection, be raised from it. This life is different from that of the
Garden. It follows that Adam had lived a heavenly - and not earthly -
life in the Garden.

This observation gives us a certainty that the Garden of Adam was in the
heaven, although it was not the Garden of eternal abode from which one
is never turned out.

What is meant by “the heaven”? We shall, God willing explain it
somewhere else.

Now, we come to the mistake of Adam. The explanation given under various
verses throws sufficient light on this subject. But the importance of
the topic justifies its recapitulation in a systematic way:

The verses obviously say that he had committed a mistake and disobeyed
the divine command: ”. . . for then you (two) will be of the unjust”;
“and Adam disobeyed his Lord, so he got astray”; and they too
acknowledged their error: “Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves,
and if Thou forgive us not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall
certainly be of the losers.”

But on meditating on the verses, and particularly on the admonition not
to eat of the tree, we come to a definite conclusion that the said
prohibition was not in the nature of an authoritative command; it was
rather like an advice to guide Adam to his good and comfort. The
following proof irresistibly leads us to this conclusion:

First: Allah said in this, as well as in Chapter 7, that eating of the
tree would be an injustice, a wrong-doing **(*****for then you two will
be of the unjust*****).** The same result has been described as “toil”
**(*****so that you should be put to toil*****)**; and the “toil” has
been explained in the terms of worldly needs and troubles, because it
was ordained “for you that you shall not be hungry therein (i.e., as
long as you remained in the Garden) nor bare of clothing; and that you
shall not be thirsty therein nor shall you feel the heat of the sun”.

It seems clear that it was to protect them from these worldly troubles
and toils that they were told not to go near that tree, The prohibition,
therefore, was not more than an advice; certainly it was not an
authoritative command. Going against an advice does not entail a sin,
does not involve rebellion against the adviser.

The injustice, mentioned in this story, therefore, means their doing
wrong against their own selves, putting themselves in this world's
hardship and toil; but it cannot mean the sin committed by a servant
against his master.

Second: When a servant repents, that is, returns to Allah, his Lord, and
the Lord accepts that repentance, all the effects of the sin are erased,
as though he had not committed any sin at all.

If the prohibition against eating from the tree had the force of an
authoritative command, an ordained law, Adam and his wife should have
been returned to their place in the Garden as soon as their repentance
was accepted. But they were not.

It decisively proves that the prohibition was of advisory nature like
telling someone not to put his hand in a fire; if he does not listen to
the advice, his hand would certainly burn, and the subsequent apology
would not unburn it, even if the apology was accepted.

Likewise, Adam and his wife disregarded the advice, and as a result of
eating from the tree, had to go out of the Garden and live in the earth
a life of trial and hardship. Their repentance could not take them back
to the Garden as their coming to the earth was the natural and
inevitable result of that action.

The prohibition, in short, was no a law ordained by the Master - like
the announcement that a man who neglects to pray would enter the Fire;
or the one who disobeys the rules of the *sharī'ah* would be punished.
If it were like such a command, the repentance would have rubbed out the
effect of disobedience and they would have been sent back to the Garden
straight away.

Third: ***We said: “Get down you therefrom all together; and if there
comes to you a guidance from Me, then whoever follows*** ***My guidance,
no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve. And*** (as to)
***those who disbelieve in, and belie, Our signs, they are the inmates
of the fire, in it they shall abide.”***

These verses have put in a nutshell all the detailed laws, rules, and
regulations sent by Allah for the mankind, through His angels, books and
apostles. And it was the first *sharī'ah* which Allah ordained for the
world, the world of Adam and his descendants. It was ordained after the
second order to “get down” - and the order to “get down” was not a
legislative, but a creative, command, resulting from his eating of the
tree.

It means that at the time when Adam partook of the tree, no*sharī'ah*
was ordained yet, and no law was promulgated. There­fore, whatever Adam
did was not a transgression against any law of the*sh*ari'*ah,* nor was
there any sin or crime involved in acting against that advice.

Question: The order to the angels and Iblīs to prostrate before Adam was
an authoritative command, and it was given before the order to Adam not
to go near that tree. Therefore, it is difficult to believe that at that
time there was no obligatory law.

Reply: We are talking about Adam and his descendants, and not about the
angels and Iblīs. It is irrelevant whether the angels and Iblīs were
given a compulsory order before Adam was placed in the Garden.

Question: If the prohibition were of an advisory nature, Allah would not
have described its disregard in the terms of “injustice”,
“disobedience”, and “going astray”.
Reply: We have already explained that the “injustice” done by Adam and
his wife was against their own selves; it was not a sin against Allah.

*“al-'Isyan”* (**العِصيان** = disobedience ) literally means to resist,
or to yield with difficulty. The Arabs say: I broke it and it was
broken; I broke it *fa-'asa* (**فعـَصى** =) but it resisted, or yielded
to my pressure with difficulty.

Not heeding an order is called *al-'isyan,* because one does not yield
to that enjoinment or prohibition. This resistance may occur against an
advice as much as against a compulsory order. The word in itself does
not imply sinning; it all depends on the nature of the order that was
disregarded.

Of course, nowadays we, the Muslims, use this word as synonymous to
sinning. And now it has become a terminology of the*sharī'ah* (or of the
Muslims), used for disobedience to an authoritative command. But this
later transformance cannot effect its original or literal meaning for
which it was used in the Qur'an.

*“al-Ghawayah”* (**الغَوايَة** = to go astray) literally means inability
of a man to look after his interests; not managing one's affairs
properly. This word by itself does not indicate committing a sin or
crime. It is the context that determines its value. Its em­phasis
changes depending on whether the neglected order was an advice or an
authoritative command.

**Question:** Then why did they repent? Why did they say, “and if Thou
forgive us not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the
losers?”

**Reply:** *at-Tawbah* (repentance) means to turn to. And the word can
be used in various meanings, depending on context.

A servant rebels against his master, and thereafter returns to him and
asks for his forgiveness; the master, if he so wishes, pardons him, and
gives him his previous rank and position.

A doctor tells a patient not to eat certain fruits, lest his illness be
prolonged or the disease be complicated. The patient disregards the
prohibition and, as a result, puts his life in dan­ger. Now he feels
embarrassed and repents before the doctor, asking for his forgiveness,
begging him to prescribe for him a medicine to enable him to regain his
health and vigour.

The doctor may tell him that now it will be necessary for him to undergo
a long and difficult treatment, adding that if he per­severed in the
prescribed regimen his health would be much better than before.

The significance of the other words used in the narrative, like
forgiveness, mercy and loss, may likewise change with the context.

Tradition
---------

Al-Qummī ('Alī) narrates, in his *at-Tafsīr,* from his father (Ibrahīm
ibn Hashim) who narrates, from as-Sadiq (a.s.) (omitting the chain of
intervening narrators, although it was fully described by his Shaykh).
He said: “as-Sadiq (a. s.) was asked about the Garden of Adam whether it
was a garden of this world or one of the hereafter's.

He (a.s.) said: 'It was a garden of this world, wherein the sun and the
moon rose. Had it been a Garden of the hereafter, he would have not come
out of it.' He (a.s.) further said: 'Allah placed him in the Garden and
allowed him its free­dom with exception of the tree.

(It was done) because here was a creature of Allah who could not survive
without (some) enjoin­ment and prohibition, nor (could it continue)
without food, cloth, shelter and marriage; nor could he know, without
divine help, what was beneficial to him from what was harmful.

Then came to him Iblīs and told him: “If you (two) ate from this tree,
which Allah has forbidden you, you (two) would become two angels and
would abide in the Garden for ever; and if you (two) did not eat from
it, Allah would turn you out from the Garden;” and he swore to them that
he was a sincere adviser to them; as Allah quotes his words:

***Your Lord has not forbidden you from this tree except that you may
not both become two angels or that you may*** (not)***become of the
immortals. And he swore to them both: “Most surely I am a sincere
adviser to you.***”

Adam believed in his words, and they (i.e. Adam and his wife) ate from
the tree; and they became as Allah says: ***their nakedness became
manifest to them**;* what Allah had clothed them with of the (attires of
the) Garden dropped away from them, and they both began to cover
themselves with the leaves of the Garden; and their Lord called out to
them:

***Did I not forbid you both from that tree and say to you that the
Satan is your open enemy?***

They said, as Allah quotes them:

***“Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves; and if Thou forgive us
not, and have*** (not) ***mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the
losers.”***

Thereupon Allah said to them:

***“Get down, some of you being the enemies of others; and there is for
you in the earth an abode and a provision for a time.”***

'“He (the Imam) said: “that (time) is the Day of Resurrection”. He
further said: “Then Adam descended on the (hill of) as-Safa - and it got
this name because *Safīyu 'llah* (**صَفيُّ الله** = the sincere friend
of Allah, i.e. Adam) came down on it; and Hawwa' (Eve) descended on the
(hill of) al-Marwah - and it was named al-Mar-wah because *al-mar'ah*
(**المرءة**) the woman descended on it. The Adam remained in prostration
for forty days, weeping for the Garden.

So Jibrīl (Gabriel) came to him and said: 'Did Allah not create you with
His hand, and (did He not) breath into you from His spirit, and (did He
not) made His angels prostrate before you?' He said: 'Certainly.' (Then
Jibrī1 said:) 'and He ordered you not to eat from the tree and you
disobeyed Him?' Adam said: 'Iblīs swore to me falsely.'”

The author says: There are other Tradition too from *Ahlu '1-bayt* (a.
s.) to the effect that the Garden of Adam was of this world; although
some of them are from the same Ibrahīm ibn Hashim.

The phrase, “a garden of this world”, has been used in contrast to the
Garden of everlasting abode. It indicates a state between this world and
the hereafter. Adam's garden was not the Garden of everlasting abode,
but neither was it a garden like is the state, place and time that of
ours *al-Barzakh* (**البَرزَخ**) between one's death and the Day of
Resurrection.

The said Garden may be called a Garden of al-Barzakh, and it may well
have been situated in this world. The sentences, “Adam descended on the
(hill of) as-Safa”, and “Hawwa' descended on the (hill of) al-Marwah”,
indicate that, before it, they were somewhere above this world.

The interpretation of “a time” with the “Day of Resurrection” is also
revealing. Man remains in al-Barzakh after his death, and at the same
time he remains in the earth. Many Qur'anic verses use these expressions
interchangeably.

For example:

***He will say: “How many years did you tarry in the earth?” They will
say: “We tarried a day or part of a day”, but ask those who keep
account. He will say: “You did tarry but a little - had you but known***
**(it)” (23:112-114).**

***And at the time when the Hour shall come, the guilty shall swear***
**(that)** ***they did not tarry but an hour; thus they used to utter
lies. And those who are given knowledge and faith will say: “Certainly
you tarried according to the decree of Allah till the Day of
Resurrection, but you did not know”*** **(30:55-56).**

Apart from that, many Tradition of *Ahlu 'l-bayt* (a.s.) show that the
Garden of Adam was in the heaven, and that he and his wife descended
from the heaven. For the one who is familiar with the language of
Tradition, it is not difficult to believe that the said Garden was in
the heaven and that they had descended from the heaven to the earth,
even if they were created in the earth itself and live therein all
along.

These expressions are not any different from those which say that the
Garden is in the heaven, and yet say that the grave is an orchard from
the orchards of the Garden or a pit from the pits of the Fire. Many
similar expressions are found in the Tradition. Any lingering doubt will
be removed when we shall write about the heaven, God willing.

There is no mention in the correct and reliable Tradition as to how
Iblīs found his way to Adam and his wife, or as to what means he adopted
for this purpose. Some Tradition mention the serpent and peacock as the
two helpers of Iblīs in his endeavour to mislead Adam and his wife; but
they are extremely unreliable.

Obviously, such Tradition were interpolated under the influence of
Judaism. This story has been taken from the Jews, and to make this point
clear, we are quoting it from the Bible (King James version). The story
is given in the book of Genesis:

*“And the Lord God formed man of the dust of ground, and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul. And the
Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man
whom he had formed.*

*And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is
pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the
midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. And a
river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was
parted, and became into four heads.*

*The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole
land of Havilah, where there is gold; And the gold of that land is good:
there is bdellium and the onyx stone. And the name of the second river
is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia. And
the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth towards
the east of Assyria.*

*And the fourth river is Euphrates. And the Lord God took the man, and
put him into the Garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it. And the Lord
God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest
freely eat: But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou
shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt
surely die.*

*And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I
will make him an help meet for him. And out of the ground the Lord God
formed every beast of the field and every fowl of the air; and brought
them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam
called every living creature that was the name thereof.*

*And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to
every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet
for him.*

*And the Lord Gad caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept:
and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;
And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and
brought her unto the man.*

*And Adam said: This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: she
shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Therefore shall
a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife:
and they shall be one flesh. And they were both naked, the man and his
wife, and were not ashamed.*

*Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the
Lord God has made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye
shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And the woman said unto the
serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden: But of the
fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye
shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. And the
serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:*

*For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall
be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. And when the
woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to
the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the
fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and
he did eat.*

*And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were
naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.
And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the
cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence
of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden.*

*And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?
And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because
I was naked; and I hid myself. And he said, Who told* *thee that thou
wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I com­manded thee that
thou shouldest not eat?*

*And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me
of the tree, and I did eat. And the Lord God said unto the woman, What
is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled
me, and I did eat.*

*And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this,
thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the
field; -upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the
days of the life; And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt
bruise his heel.*

*Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire
shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. And unto Adam he
said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast
eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat
of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it
all the days of thy life; Thorns also and thistles shall it, bring forth
to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; In the sweat of thy
face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out it
wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return. And
Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of all
living.*

*Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God said, Behold, the man
is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put
forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for
ever:*

*Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till
the ground from whence he was taken. So he drove out the man; and he
placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword
which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.”*

*(Genesis, ch.2: vs. 7 to ch.3: vs. 24)*

Compare the narrative of the Qur'an with that of the Bible, then ponder
on various Tradition narrated in the Shi'ah or Sunnī books; you will
come to know many revealing differences. But we are not going into it
because it is beyond the scope of this book.

Question: How could Iblīs enter the Garden and mislead Adam therein? The
question arises because:

i) the Garden is a place of cleanliness and purity,

***wherein there shall be nothing vain nor any sin*** **(52:23);**

ii) The garden is in the heaven, and Iblīs was already turned out
therefrom when he refused to prostrate before Adam.

***Then get out of it, for surely you are driven away*** **(15:34).**

***Then get down from this, for it does not befit you to behave proudly
therein*** **(7:13).**

Reply: (i) The Qur'an disallows vain and sinful acts in the Garden of
eternal abode (in which the believers shall be placed after
resurrection) and the Garden of al-Barzakh wherein they are placed after
death. But it is silent about the Garden of Adam, in which he was placed
together with his wife before man was sent to this world and given any
authoritative law.

Rather, it may be said that it shows not only possibility of
disobedience therein, but also its occurrence. Proof: This very
disobedience of Adam and his wife.

Moreover, vanity and sin are relative terms; and they do not occur until
man comes into this world, and is given some authoritative laws to
follow.

(ii) The argument may be replied as follows:

a. It cannot be definitely said that the clauses, “get down of it” and
“get down from this” were meant to turn Iblīs out of the heaven, because
“the heaven” has not been mentioned in preceding sentences. The order,
therefore, could mean, 'get out of the ranks of the angels', or 'get
down from the honour and dignity given to thee'.

b. May be, the order to get down or to get out meant only that he could
not live or stay in the heaven with the angels. If so, then it was not a
prohibition against occasionally going or ascend­ing thereto. This
interpretation is supported by the verses which describe the Satans'
occasional goings upto the heaven to eaves­drop the conversations of the
angels.[^1]

Also, it has been narrated that before the time of 'Īsa (a.s.), the
Satans were going upto the seventh heaven; when he was born they were
barred from the fourth heaven and above; then after the birth of the
Prophet they were barred from all the heavens.

c. There is no mention in the Book of Allah that Iblīs had entered the
Garden. Therefore, the question does not arise at all. It has, of
course, been narrated in the Tradition; but they are not
*al-mutawatir;*and possibly the narrators have de­scribed the story in
their own words, and not exactly as the Imam said.

Utmost that may be put as evidence that Iblīs had entered the Garden is
the verse: *and he* (i.e. the Satan) *said:*

***“Your Lord has not forbidden you from this tree except that you may
not become two angels. . . ”(*****7:19),**

as he had used the pronoun, “this”, (“this tree”) which denotes
nearness. But if it is taken to mean nearness in place, it would give
the same meaning in Allah's command,

***. . . do not go near this tree*** **(7:18).**

Surely it, cannot be said that the pronoun indicates that Allah was in
that place near the tree.[^2]

'Abdu 's-Salam al-Harawī[^3] said: “I said to ar-Rida (a.s.): 'O son of
the Messenger of Allah! tell me about the tree from which Adam and
Hawwa' ate, what was it? Because people do have different views about
it; some have narrated that it was a wheat-plant, and others have
reported that it was the tree of envy.' He said: 'All this is true.'

I said: 'Then what do these explanations, with their differences, mean?'
He said: 'O son of as-Salt! Verily the tree of the Garden bears (fruits
of) many kinds; and it was a wheat-plant and (yet) it bore grapes; and
it was not like a tree of this world. And when Allah raised the status
of Adam by making the angels prostrate before him and by placing him in
the Garden, he said:

“Has Allah created any man superior than me?” And Allah knew what had
came into his mind; so He called out to him: “Raise your head, O Adam!
and look at the pil­lar of the Throne.” So, he looked at the pillar of
the Throne and found written on it:

“There is no god except Allah; Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; 'Alī
ibn Abī Talib is the Leader of the faithful, and his wife, Fatimah is
the Chief of the women of the worlds, and al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the
Chiefs of the youths of the people of the Garden.” Adam said:

“O my Lord! who are they?” He, Mighty and Great is He said: “O Adam!
they are (from) your off-springs; and they are better than you and all
My creation; and if it were not (for) them, I would have not created
you, nor the Garden, nor the fire, nor the heaven, nor the earth. So be
careful not to look at them with envious eyes; otherwise, I will turn
you out of My nearness.”

But he looked at them with envious eyes and entertained the hope of
(attaining to) their rank. So, the Satan got the better of him, until he
ate from the forbidden tree; and got the better of Hawwa', and she
looked at Fatimah with envious eyes until she too, like Adam, ate from
the tree. Thereupon, Allah turned them out of His Garden, and got them
down from His nearness to the earth.'”[^4]

The author says: This matter has been described in many Tradition, some
more detailed than this; others, more concise. In this tradition, the
Imam has confirmed that the tree was the wheat-plant, and also that it
was the tree of envy.

The former implies that the tree was not worthy of attention of the
people of the Garden; the later indicates that it was too lofty to come
within the grasp of Adam and his wife (as a tradition says that it was
the tree of the knowledge of Muhammad and his progeny).

Apparently, the two interpretations are totally different from each
other, and the tradition seems a problematic one. But if you ponder on
the covenant referred to earlier, you will see that both meanings are
complementary, and not mutually exclusive.

Adam (a.s.) wanted to combine the pleasures of the Garden - a place of
nearness to Allah, where it was necessary to always keep the covenant
before one's eyes, and not to let one's attention divert to anyone or
anything else - with the forbidden tree - which would bring all the
world's troubles in its wake; but he failed in his endeavour, was sent
down to the earth because he had been heedless of the said covenant and
of its demands.

It was reserved for the Prophet to combine these two seemingly apposite
factors; it was he who, for the first time, harmonized this world with
the next, synchronized the matter with the spirit, and brought into
being a whole man.

However, Allah again guided Adam aright, chose him for His vicegerency,
and as a result of his repentance, raised him above the worldly desires
and made him remember again the forgotten covenant.

“But he looked at them with envious eyes and entertained the hope of
(attaining to) their rank”: The second clause explains the first; Adam
wanted that he too should attain to that status; it was not that he was
envious (i.e., had any ill will) against them. Envy is a vice, while
aspiring to raise one's status is not.

Now let us look at the following two Tradition:

1. ath-Thumalī narrates from Abū Ja' far (a. s.) that he said: “Allah
made a covenant with Adam that he should not go near the tree. But when
the time came when, according to the know­ledge of Allah, he was to eat
of it, he forgot (the covenant) and ate from it.

And that is (the meaning of) the words of Allah:

***And certainly We had covenanted unto Adam before, but he forgot; and
We did not find in him any determination.”***[^5]

2. al-'Ayyashī narrated in his *at-Tafsīr* from one of the two (i.e.,
the fifth or the sixth) Imams, that he was asked as to why Allah
punished Adam for his forgetfulness. He said: “He had not forgotten; and
how could he forget when he had remembered it (very well) and (even)
Iblīs had told him:

***Your Lord has not forbidden you from this tree except that you may
not both become two angels or that you may*** **(not)** ***become of the
immortals.”***

The way to harmonize these seemingly conflicting Tradition is clear if
one applies to them the foregoing explanation.

Abū 's-Salt al-Harawī said: “al-Ma'mūn gathered for 'Alī ibn Mūsa
ar-Rida (a.s.) people of various sects from among the Muslims, the Jews,
the Christians, the Magians, the Sabaeans and all other religions.
Nobody stood (for religious discussion with the Imam) but that he was
forced to accept his (Imam's) arguments and was put to silence.

Then stood before him 'Alī ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm and said to him: 'Do
you believe in sinlessness of the prophets? O son of the Messenger of
Allah!' He said: 'Yes.' He ('Alī ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm) said: 'Then
what would you do with the words of Allah: ***and Adam disobeyed his
Lord, so he got astray?. . .'***

Then said our master, ar-Rida (a. s.): 'Woe unto you! O 'Alī! ! Have
fear of Allah (in your heart) and do not ascribe indecencies to the
prophets of Allah, and do not interpret by your own opinion the Book of
Allah (Mighty and Great is He!)

Verily Allah (Mighty and Great is He!) says:

**. . .** ***but none knows its interpretation except Allah and those
who are firmly rooted in knowledge*** **(3:7).**

As for the words of Allah,

***and Adam disobeyed his Lord, so he got astray,***

(the fact is that) Allah (Mighty and Great is He!) had created Adam (to
be) His proof in His earth and (to be) His vicegerent in His towns; He
had not created him for the Garden; and the disobedience was (done) by
Adam in the Garden, and not in the earth; (and it came to pass) so that
the measures of the decree of Allah (Mighty and Great is He) might be
fulfilled.

So when he was sent down to the earth and was made (Allah's) proof and
vicegerent, he was protected (i.e. became sinless), as Allah says:

***Surely Allah chose Adam and Nūh and the descendants of Ibrahīm and
the descendants of 'Imran above all the worlds.”'*** **(3:33)** [^6]

The author says: The sentence, “and the disobedience was . . . in the
Garden”, points to what we have already mentioned that there was no
religious law ordained in the Garden; and that Adam (a.s.) even before
his creation, was destined to live in the earth; and, therefore, the
disobedience was of an advice, and not of an ordained law. In this
context, there appears no reason why anyone should try (as someone has
done) to explain away this tradition in a round-about way.

'Alī ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm said: “I was present in the court of
al-Ma'mūn; and 'Alī ibn Mūsa was there with him. And al-Ma'mūn said to
him: 'O son of the Messenger of Allah! Is it not your belief that the
prophets are sinless?'

He said: 'Yes.' (al-Ma'mūn) said: 'Then what is the meaning of the words
of Allah, the High: ***and Adam disobeyed his Lord, so he got
astray?'*** (The Imam) said: 'Verily Allah said to Adam: ***Dwell you
and your wife in the Garden and eat*** **(you both)** ***freely wherever
you*** **(two)** ***wish and do not approach*** **(you two)** ***this
tree,*****(pointing to a tree)** ***for then you*** **(two)** ***will be
of the unjust.***

Allah did not say to him: Do not eat from this tree nor from another
tree of its kind. And they did not eat from it; they ate from another
(similar) tree because the Satan whispered evil suggestion to them and
said:

***“Your Lord has not forbidden you from this*** (i.e. the other
simi­lar) ***tree**;* He has only forbidden you from approaching that
one; and He has not forbidden you from that three ***except that you may
not both become two angels or that you may not become of the immortals.”
And he swore to them both: “Most surely I am a sincere adviser to
you.”***

And Adam and Hawwa' had not seen before that anyone swearing falsely in
the name of Allah; thus he caused them to fall by deceit and they ate
from that (tree) because they believed in his oath in the name of Allah.

And it all happened before Adam was made a prophet, and it was not a big
sin leading 'one to the fire; it was only a forgiven minor (sin) that is
permissible to the prophets before they begin receiving revelation.

But when Allah chose him and made him prophet he became sinless, not
committing any minor or major sin. Allah (Mighty and Great is He!) has
said: ***Surely Allah chose Adam and Nūh and the descendants of Ibrahīm
and the descendants of 'Imran above all the worlds. . .' ”***('*Uyūnu
'1-akhbar*)

The author says: as-Sadūq (may Allah have mercy on him!) after narrating
the tradition in full, has commented as follows:

“Strange that 'Alī ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm, in spite of his open
hostility towards, and enmity and hatred of, *Ahlu '1-bayt* (a.s.),
should narrate this tradition.”

This comment only looks at the belief of the sinlessness of the prophets
which this tradition purportedly proves; but as-Sadūq (may Allah have
mercy on him!) did not look deep into its implications.

The reported reply is not in accord with the well-known belief of the
Imams of *Ahlu '1-bayt,* that all the prophets were fully protected from
all major and minor sins before as well as after getting the
prophethood.

Moreover, the reply presumes that the verse does not mean what it
apparently says. According to this tradition, the verse, “Your Lord has
not forbidden you from this tree except that you may not both become two
angels . . . ”, should be read as follows:

“Your Lord has not forbidden you from this (i.e. the other similar)
tree; He has only forbidden you from approaching that one; and He has
not forbidden you from that tree except that you may not both become two
angels . . .”

Such deletions are against the norms of eloquence. The quoted speech of
the Satan clearly shows that he was instigating them to eat from the
very tree that was forbidden, holding out to them the hope of becoming
angels or immortals:

***“Your Lord has not forbidden you from this tree except that you may
not both become two angels or that you may*** (not) ***become of the
immortals.” “O Adam! shall I guide you to the tree of immortality and a
kingdom which decays not?”***

The narrator, that is, 'Alī ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm, had himself been
given the correct and complete answer in the court of al-Ma'mūn, as the
preceding tradition shows; therefore, there is something wrong in this
narration of his, although some parts may be somehow interpreted
correctly.

As-Sadūq has narrated (through his chain) from al-Baqir (a.s.) , through
his forefathers, from 'Alī (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
said: “Adam and Hawwa' stayed in the Garden, (till they were sent out of
it) for seven hours according to the (counting of the) days of the
world, until Allah sent them down on the same day.”

'Abdullah ibn Sinan said: “Abū 'Abdillah (a.s.) was asked - and I was
present there: 'How long did Adam and his wife stay in the Garden until
their mistake removed them from it?' He said: 'Verily Allah breathed His
spirit into Adam after the mid­day on Friday; then created his wife from
his lowest rib; then He made His angels prostrate before him and placed
him in His Garden the same day.

And by God! he did not stay therein but six hours of the same day until
he disobeyed Allah. Thereupon, Allah removed them both from it after the
sunset, and they were put into the courtyard of the Garden till the
morning; then their nakedness became manifest to them; and their Lord
called out to them:

***“Did 1 not forbid you both from that tree?”*** Adam felt ashamed and
bowed (his head) and said: ***“Our Lord! We have been unjust to
ourselves and we confess our sins; therefore, forgive us*** (our sins).”
Allah said to them: ***“Get down you both from My heavens to the earth;
because no sinner shall remain in My nearness - neither in My Garden nor
in My heavens. ” '*** (*at-Tafsīr,* al-'Ayyashī)

The author says: The tradition gives a new detail, that Adam and Hawwa'
were removed first from the Garden to its courtyard and then from the
courtyard to the earth. There are some indi­cations in the Qur'an to
support this information:

First: They were twice told to “get down” (vide vs. 2:36 and 2:38)*.*It
was a creative, and not a legislative, order, and a creative order takes
effect the instant it is given.

If the first order told them to get down to the earth, there was no
question of their not getting down to the earth at once; and, therefore,
the second order would be superfluous. But in the light of this
tradition the two commands would be perfectly in order.

Second: As mentioned in the commentary, this idea may be inferred from
the changed verbs and pronouns of the verses. Allah describes in these
words his talk with Adam when he was being placed in the Garden:

***And We said: “O Adam! dwell you and your wife in the Garden . . . and
do not approach*** (***you*** two) ***this tree.*** . . “

But after they had eaten from the tree, ***their Lord called out to
them: “Did I not forbid you both from that tree?”*** The verb, “We said”
of the former has been changed to “called out to them” in the latter; as
the demonstrative pronoun, “this tree” (showing nearness) was replaced
by “that tree” (showing distance).

These changes show that Adam had been removed, by the time of the second
address, from his original place of nearness in the Garden to a distant
place - which the tradition describes as the courtyard.

But this tradition says that Hawwa' was created from the lowest rib of
Adam; it is a Biblical story which has been totally rejected by the
Imams of *Ahlu 'l-bayt,* (as will be seen from the Tradition which will
be quoted under the verses of the creation of Adam). This tradition,
therefore, is unacceptable unless this expression is taken to mean that
Hawwa' was created from the clay left over from the creation of Adam and
which was lying near his lowest rib.

Whether he stayed in the Garden for six hours (as this tradi­tion says)
or seven (as the former says) is not very important, because such things
are mere approximation.

It is reported from the fifth or the sixth Imam (peace be on them both)
that he said about the verse, ***then Adam received*** **(some)**
***words from his Lord**,* that (the words were as follows):

“There is no god except Thee; Glory be to Thee, O Allah! and praise! I
have committed evil and been unjust to myself; therefore, forgive me (my
sin) and Thou art the best of the forgivers.

There is no god except Thee; Glory be to Thee, O Allah! and praise! I
have done wrong and been unjust to myself; therefore, have mercy on me,
and Thou art the best of the forgivers. There is no god ex­cept Thee;
Glory to Thee, O Allah! and praise!

I have committed evil and been unjust to myself; therefore, have mercy
on me, and Thou art the best of those who have mercy. There is no god
except Thee; Glory be to Thee, O Allah! and praise! I have done wrong
and been unjust to myself; therefore, forgive me (my sin) and turn to me
(with mercy); surely Thou, Thou alone, art oft­returning (with mercy),
the Merciful.”[^7]

The author says: This theme has been narrated also by as­-Sadūq,
al-'Ayyashī, al-Qummī and others; nearly the same thing has been
narrated through the Sunnī chains; and it may possibly be inferred from
the apparent meaning, of the verses.

al-Kulaynī has written in *al-Kafī : “And* another tradition says in
respect of this verse: (Adam) had asked from (Allah) by the right of
Muhammad and 'Alī and Fatimah and al-Hasan and al-Husayn.”

The author says: This explanation too has been narrated by as-Sadūq,
al-'Ayyashī, al-Qummī and others. A nearly simi­lar tradition has been
narrated through the Sunnī chains. it is reported in *ad-Durru
'l-manthūr* that the Prophet said: “When Adam committed the sin that he
committed, he raised his head towards the heaven and said:

'I beseach Thee, by the right of Muhammad, to forgive me.' Allah
revealed to him (i.e., asked him through revelation): 'And who is
Muhammad?' He said: 'Blessed is Thy name! When Thou created me, I raised
my head towards Thy Throne and saw written therein: There is no god
except Allah; Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.

Thus I knew that no one could be more honoured in Thy presence than him
whose name Thou hadst placed with Thy name.' Thereupon, Allah revealed
to him: 'O Adam! Verily he is the last of the prophets, from thy
descendants; and if it were not for him, I would have not created thee.'
”

The author says: Although these Tradition seem not to be in accord with
the apparent meaning of the verse, on deeper consideration this
explanation does not look so far-fetched. The sentence, “Then Adam
received (some) words from his Lord”, shows that he was taught those
words by the Lord, and that he had got that knowledge before his
repentance.

Also, it is known that Allah had taught him all the names. Allah told
the angels that He was going to make in the earth a vicegerent; ***they
said:***

***“Wilt Thou place in it such as shall make mischief in it and shed
blood, while we celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness? He said:
“Surely I know what you do not know” . And He taught Adam the names, all
of them.***

There must have been something in those names to wipe out every
injustice, to erase every sin and to cure every spiritual and moral
disease; otherwise, the objection of the angels could not be answered -
Allah did not say a single word to refute the angels' assertion; all He
did was to teach Adam all the names.

It means that those names could cure all the ills of humanity; the
angels understood it and surrendered to the know­ledge and wisdom of
Allah. We have earlier explained that those names were sublime
creations, hidden from the heavens and the earth; they were
intermediaries to convey the grace and bounties of Allah to His
creation; and no creature would be able to attain to its perfection
without their assistance.

At this stage, we may refer to some Tradition which say that Adam saw
the figures of Muhammad and his *Ahlu 'l-bayt,* and also their light at
the time he was taught the names; and the ones which mention that he saw
them when Allah took out his offspring from his back; and the others
which describe his seeing them in the Garden.

However, Allah has not identified those words, and has used it as a
common noun, ”(some) words”; nevertheless, the Qur'an has clearly used
the expression, “word ”, for an individual being, as for example, in the
verse 3:45:

. . . ***Allah gives you good news of a word from Him whose name is the
Messiah, 'Īsa son of Maryam . . .***

Some exegetes have written that the “words”, mentioned in this verse,
refer to the plea of Adam and his wife reported in Chapter 7:

***They said: “Our Lord! We have been unjust to our­selves, and if Thou
forgive us not, and have*** (not) ***mercy on us, we shall certainly be
of the losers. ”***

But the sequence of events does not support this view. The repentance of
Adam, according to the narrative of Chapter 2, had occurred after his
coming to the earth. The verse (2:37) describing the repentance comes
after the verse (2:36) that mentions his descent to the earth.[^8]

But they had uttered that plea while they were still in the Garden,
before coming down to the earth. The plea is given in verse 7:23; and
the order to “get down” comes after that in verse 7:24. Apparently, this
plea was in response to their admonition by Allah:

**“*****Did I not forbid you both from that tree . . . ?”;*** they
wanted to declare their servitude and to surrender themselves to Allah;
acknowledging that all the auth­ority was in the hands of Allah and He
might do what He pleased; He was their Lord, and they had put themselves
in danger of loss by being unjust to themselves.

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Verily, Mūsa asked his Lord to let him meet Adam;
and he was joined with him (i.e., Adam). Mūsa said to him: 'O father!
Did Allah not create you with His hand, and breathe into you of His
spirit; and make the angels prostrate before you, and order you not to
eat of the tree?

Then why did you disobey Him?' (Adam) said: 'O Mūsa! How long before my
creation did you find my mistake (mentioned) in the Torah?' He said:
'Thirty thousand years before.' (Adam) said: 'That is it.”' as-Sadiq
(a.s.) said: “Thus refuted Adam the argument of Mūsa.”[^9]

The author says: as-Suyūtī has narrated in *ad-Durru
'l-­manthūr*approximately similar Tradition, through various chains,
from the Prophet.

Al-Baqīr (a.s.) said: “By God, Allah had surely created Adam for the
world, and He gave him place in the Garden, in order that he might
disobey Him and thus He might return him to that for which He had
created him.” [^10]

The author says: A tradition of the same theme, narrated by al-'Ayyashī
from as-Sadiq (a.s.), concerning an angel friend of Adam, has been
quoted earlier.

A Syrian asked 'Alī (a.s.) as to which valley in the earth was the most
honoured. He (a.s.) said: “The valley called Sarandīb wherein Adam
descended from the heaven.”[^11]

The author says: In contrast to it, there are numerous Tradition showing
that he had descended at Mecca (and some of them have been quoted
above). May be, he first came down to Sarandīb and then got down to
Mecca.

It has been reported by at-Tabaranī, Abu 'sh-Shaykh (in his*al-'Azamah)*
and Ibn Marduwayh, from Abū Dharr, that he said: “I said: 'O Messenger
of Allah! What do you say, was Adam a prophet?' He said: 'Yes. He was a
prophet (and) an apostle; Allah talked to him before; He had told him:
“O Adam! dwell you and your wife in the Garden.”

The author says: The Sunnīs have narrated almost similar Tradition
through various chains.

[^1]: For example:  And We have guarded it (i.e. the heaven) against
every accursed Satan, but he who steals a hearing; so there follows him
a visible flame (15:17-18).

[^2]: The first and third replies seem strange, to say the least. The
author himself has said (while commenting on the phrase, ” . . . the
Satan made them both slip from it”) that the order to “get down” or to
“get out” may mean, “Get down from the company of the angels; or, get
down from the heaven”. But here he rejects the second alternative
altogether! The third reply is based on القياس مع الفارق an unacceptable
analogy - that which overlooks the important differences between the two
sides. If the Satan is governed by time and space how does it imply that
Allah too should be governed by them? Moreover, in the same commentary
the author has proved on the strength of this same verse that “the Satan
had visited them near that tree in the Garden. He entered the Garden . .
. (and) Adam, his wife and the Satan all were removed from the Garden
together.” This leaves us with the second reply, which is doubtlessly
without any flaw and is supported by the Qur'an. (tr.)

[^3]: That is, Abu 's-Salt Abdu 's-Salam ibn Salih al -Harawī.

[^4]: 'Uyūnu 'l-akhbar

[^5]: Kamalu 'd-dīn

[^6]: al-Amalī, as-Sadūq

[^7]: al-Kafī

[^8]: It is not in accord with the author's earlier assertion that the
verse 2:36 describes Adam's removal from the earlier-held place of
honour to the courtyard of the Garden; after which he learned “some
words” from Allah and repented (2:37); and it was later that he was sent
down from the courtyard to the Garden (2:38). (tr)

[^9]: at-Tafsīr, al-Qummī

[^10]: 'llalu 'sh-shara' i'

[^11]: al-Ihtijaj


