Suratul Baqarah: Verses 40-44
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٤٠) يا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اذْكُرُواْ نِعْمَتِيَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتُ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَأَوْفُواْ بِعَهْدِي أُوفِ بِعَهْدِكُمْ وَإِيَّايَ
فَارْهَبُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٤١) وَآمِنُواْ بِمَا أَنزَلْتُ مُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ وَلاَ
تَكُونُواْ أَوَّلَ كَافِرٍ بِهِ وَلاَ تَشْتَرُواْ بِآيَاتِي ثَمَنًا
قَلِيلاً وَإِيَّايَ فَاتَّقُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٤٢) وَلاَ تَلْبِسُواْ الْحَقَّ بِالْبَاطِلِ وَتَكْتُمُواْ الْحَقَّ
وَأَنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٤٣) وَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلاةَ وَآتُواْ الزَّكَاةَ وَارْكَعُواْ مَعَ
الرَّاكِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٤٤) أَتَأْمُرُونَ النَّاسَ بِالْبِرِّ وَتَنسَوْنَ أَنفُسَكُمْ
وَأَنتُمْ تَتْلُونَ الْكِتَابَ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O children of Israel! Remember My bounties which I be­stowed on you,
and be faithful to*** **(your)** ***covenant with Me, I will*** **fulfil
(My)** ***covenant with you; and of Me, Me alone, should you be
afraid*** **(40)*****.***

***And believe in what I have sent down verifying that which is with
you, and be not the first to deny it, neither take a mean price in
exchange for My signs; and Me, Me alone, should you fear***
**(41)*****.***

***And do not mix up the truth with the falsehood, nor hide the truth
while you know*** **(it) (42)*****.***

***And keep up prayer and pay the zakdt and bow down with those who bow
down*** **(43)*****.***

***What! do you enjoin men to be good and forget your own selves while
you read the Book? Have you then no sense?*** **(44)**

General Comment
---------------

Now begins the rebuking of the Jews that continues for more than a
hundred verses. Allah reminds them of the bounties bestowed, of the
honours given; contrasting it with their ingrati­tude and disobedience;
showing how at every juncture they paid the favours of Allah with
disregard of their covenant, open rebel­lion against divine commands and
even with polytheism.

The series reminds them of twelve events of their history - like
res­cuing them from Pharaoh and his people by parting the river,
drowning of Pharaoh and his army, the appointed rendezvous at the mount
Sina'i, the Jews' starting calf-worship in Mūsa's absence, and Mūsa's
order to them to kill themselves, their de­mand from Mūsa to show their
Lord to them face to face, their death by lightning and then their
arising from dead etc. - all of which shows how they were chosen to
receive the especial favours of Allah.

But their ingratitude runs parallel to it. They repeatedly broke the
covenants made with Allah, committed capital sins, hideous crimes and
shameful deeds; more despic­able. Was their spiritual poverty and moral
bankruptcy - in open defiance to their book and total disregard to the
reason? It was all because their hearts were hardened, their souls lost
and their endeavours worthless.

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***. . . and be faithful to*** **(your)** ***covenant with
Me**:* (**العَهد** = covenant) literally means guarding and*“al-'Ahd”*
maintenance. By association it has come to mean covenant, oath,
testament, will, encounter, house, etc.

**Qur’an:** ***. . . and of Me, . . . should you be afraid**:
“ar-Rah-bah”* (**الرّهبة** = fear ) is opposite of *ar-raghbah*
(**الرغبة**= desire ).

**Qur’an:** ***. . . and be not the first to deny it**:* That is, first
among the people of the book, or first among your own people. This
first­ness is not all-inclusive, because the disbelievers of Mecca had
rejected the Message before the Jews.


