Suratul Baqarah: Verses 45-46
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٤٥) وَاسْتَعِينُواْ بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلاَةِ وَإِنَّهَا لَكَبِيرَةٌ
إِلاَّ عَلَى الْخَاشِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٤٦) الَّذِينَ يَظُنُّونَ أَنَّهُم مُّلاَقُو رَبِّهِمْ وَأَنَّهُمْ
إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And seek assistance through patience and prayer; and most surely it
is a hard thing, except for the humble ones*** **(45)*****,***

***who know that they shall meet their Lord and that they shall return
to Him*** **(46)*****.***

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***And*** ***seek assistance through patience and prayer:***
Man seeks assistance in such affairs and tasks as he cannot manage
alone, and in hardships and difficulties which he cannot overcome
himself. In reality there is no helper except Allah.

Man can, therefore, manage all his affairs and overcome all his
difficulties by courage and steadfastness (i.e. by patience) and by
looking towards Allah (i.e. by prayer).

These two factors are the best way to get assistance: patience makes
even the great misfortunes look trivial, and putting all his confidence
in Allah awakens the spirit of faith; and thus man comes to realize that
the cause which he is relying upon can never fail to produce the desired
effect.

**Qur’an:** ***and most surely it is a hard thing except for the humble
ones:*** The pronoun, it, refers to the “prayer”. It is difficult to
relate it to “seeking the assistance”, because it will then cover
patience too, and the word “the humble ones” will not look appropriate -
humbleness does not fit very much with patience.

The word used here for humbleness is *“khushū'”* (**الخشوع**);
*“khudu'”* (**الخضوع**) too has the same meaning but with one
difference: while the latter shows itself in the limbs of the body, the
former refers to the inner feeling.

**Qur’an:** ***who know that they shall meet their Lord . . .**:* The
word used in this verse for “knowing” is *“yazunnūn”* (**يظنون**);

it literally means “they think”. But the context, that is, the belief in
the hereafter, demands a firm conviction that would leave no room for
any doubt or supposition. Allah says:

***and they are sure of the hereafter*** (2:4)***.***

Or, may be, Allah, by using this word, makes us realize that even an
elementary idea of the hereafter is sufficient to create in a man
humility and humbleness before his Lord. Many a knowledge comes to man
in stages:

(1) first he becomes aware of an idea;

(2) then he has some doubts about its correctness;

(3) then he becomes inclined to accept it;

(4) then gradually the possibility of his accepting the opposite view
vanishes completely and he becomes firmly convinced of the truth of that
idea - and this firm conviction is called knowledge.

If such knowledge is concerned with some frightening affair, then his
worry and disquiet will begin as soon as he reaches the third stage when
he is only inclined to accept it - is only “thinking” that probably it
may be true.

This Qur'anic expres­sion, in other words, says that man, for showing
humbleness before Allah, needs only to be aware of the idea that there
is a Lord Whom he may return to after his death. In this context only a
strong supposition should be enough to make him desist from disobeying
his Lord; it would not be necessary, for this purpose, to reach the
stage of firm knowledge.

From this point of view, the verse looks almost similar to the verse:

**. . .** ***there­fore, whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do
good deeds, and not join any one in the worship of his Lord***
**(18:110)*****.***

The above discourse is based on the assumption that the words, “they
shall meet their Lord . . .”, refer to the Day of Resurrection. But if
they are interpreted in, another way (as we shall describe in Chapter
7), there should be no difficulty at all in its explanation.

Tradition
---------

as-Sadiq (a. s.) said: “Whenever 'Alī (a.s.) faced a difficulty, he used
to stand up for the prayer and then recite this verse: ***and seek
assistance through patience and prayer.”***[^1]

The same Imam said about this verse: “The patience means fasting.” Also
he said: “When a man is confronted by a hard misfortune, he should fast.
Surely Allah says: ***and seek assistance through patience**,* that is,
fast.”[^2]

The author says: al-'Ayyashī too has narrated the theme of these two
Tradition in his *at-Tafsīr.* Interpretation of “patience” as fast is
based on the “flow” of the Qur'an.

Abu 'l-Hasan (a.s.) said about this verse: “The patience means fast;
when a man is visited by a hardship or misfortune, he should fast;
surely Allah says: ***And seek assistance through patience and prayer;
and most surely it is a hard thing except for the humble ones.*** And
the humble one is he who shows humility in his prayer, turning all his
attention to it; and it means the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and the
Leader of the faithful (a.s.).”[^3]

The author says: The Imam has inferred from this verse the desirability
of fasting and praying when one is facing any hardship or turmoil; and
likewise, the desirability of seeking the divine help through the medium
of the Prophet and 'Alī (a.s.) at that time. In this way, the tradition
interprets the fast and the prayer as the Prophet and 'Alī (a.s.).

'Alī (a.s.) said about the verse, who ***know that they shall meet their
Lord . . .*** *:* Allah says that they are sure that they would be
resurrected. And the supposition *az-zann* (**الظن**) means certainty.
(*ibid*.)

The author says: as-Sadūq also has narrated this tradition, al-Baqīr
(a.s.) said that this verse was revealed about 'Alī, 'Uthman ibn Maz'ūn,
'Ammar ibn Yasir and (some of) their friends[^4].

[^1]: al-Kafī

[^2]: al-Kafī

[^3]: al-'Ayyashī

[^4]: al-Manaqib, Ibn Shahrashūb


