Suratul Baqarah: Verses 62
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٦٢) إنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَالَّذِينَ هَادُواْ وَالنَّصَارَى
وَالصَّابِئِينَ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ وَعَمِلَ
صَالِحاً فَلَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ وَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ
وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Christians,
and the Sabaeans, whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and does
good, they shall have their reward from their Lord, and there is no fear
for them, nor shall they grieve (62).***

Commentary
----------

The verse first mentions the believers, and then says, “who­ever
believes in Allah . . .” The context shows that the latter phrase refers
to the real belief, the true *iman,* and that the word, “those who
believe”, (mentioned at first) refers to those who call themselves
believers.

The verse says that Allah gives no im­portance to names, like the
believers, the Jews, the Christians or the Sabaeans. One cannot get a
reward from Allah, nor can he be saved from punishment, merely by giving
oneself good titles, as they, for example, claim that:

***no one will enter the Garden except he who was a Jew or a
Christian*** **(2:111).**

The only criterion, the only standard, of honour and happiness is the
real belief in Allah and the Day of Resurrection, accompanied by good
deeds. It should be noted that Allah did not say, 'who­ever of them
believes'; otherwise it would have accorded some recognition to these
titles, and would have implied that there was, after all, some benefit
in acquiring these names.

This theme has been repeatedly expounded in the Qur'an. The honour and
felicity depend entirely on true and sincere servitude; no name, no
adjective, can do any good unless it is backed by correct belief and
good deeds.

This rule is applicable to all human beings, right from the prophets to
the lowest rank. Look how Allah praises His prophets with all beautiful
and excel­lent attributes, and then says:

***and if they had set up others*** **(with Him)** ***certainly what
they did would have become ineffectual for them*** **(6:88)*****.***

Also, He describes the high status and great prestige of the Holy
Prophet and his companions, and then ends it with these words:

***Allah has promised those among them who believe and do good,
forgiveness and a great reward*** **(48:29).**

Ponder on the significance of the phrase “among them”.

Then we find that Allah had given a man some of His signs but he went
astray:

***and if We had pleased, We would certainly have exalted him thereby,
but he clung to the earth and followed his low desire . . .***
**(7:176).**

There are many verses clearly showing that the honour and respect with
Allah depends on reality, not on appearance.

Tradition
---------

Salman al-Farisi said: “I asked the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) about the people
of that religion which I followed (prior to Islam), and I described
their (way of) prayer and worship. Then it was revealed: ***Surely***
***those who believe, and those who are Jews. . .*** *”*[^1]

The author says: Various other Tradition with different chains of
narrators, say that this verse was revealed about the people of Salman.

Ibn Faddal said: “I asked ar-Rida (a.s.) why *“an-Nasara”* (**النصارى**
= the Christians) were given that name. He said: “Because they were from
a village called an-Nasirah (**الناصرة** = Nazarath) in Syria.[^2]
Maryam and \`Isa settled there after they returned from Egypt.”[^3]

The author says: We shall comment on this tradition when writing on the
stories of *\`Isa* (a.s.) in Chapter 3 (The House of \`Imran), God
willing.

The same tradition says that *“al-Yahūd”* (**اليهود** = the Jews) got
this name because they are descended from Yahūda, son of Ya'qūb.[^4]

The Imam said: “The Sabaeans are a people, neither Zoroas­trian nor
Jews, neither Christians nor Muslims; they worship the stars and
planets.[^5]

The author says: It is idol-worship of a special type; they worshipped
only the idols of the stars, while others worshipped whatever idol
caught their fancy.

A Historical Discussion
-----------------------

Abū Rayhan at-Bīrūnī writes in his book *al- 'atharu 'l-­baqiyah:*

“The earliest known among them (i.e., the claimants of prophethood was
Yudhasaf.[^6] He appeared in India at the end of the first year of the
reign of Tahmurth; and he brought the Persian script. He called to the
Sabaean religion, and a great many people followed him.

The Bishdadian kings and some of the Kayanis who resided in Balkh held
the sun, the moon, the stars and the planets together with other
elements in high esteem and believed that these luminaries were very
sacred.

It continued until Zoroas­ter appeared at the end of the thirtieth year
of Peshtasav's reign. The remnants of those Sabaeans are now in Harran,
from which they have got their new name, Harraniyyah.

Also it is said that this nomenclature refers to Haran, son of Tarukh
(Terah) and brother of Ibrahīm (a.s.), as he allegedly was one of their
religious leaders and its staunchest follower.

“Ibn Sancala, the Christian, has written a book against Sabaeans. In
that book he has attributed many ridiculous things to this Haran. For
example, he describes the Sabaeans' belief about Ibrahīm (a.s.) in these
words:

“Ibrahīm (a.s.) was removed from their community because a white spot
had appeared on his foreskin, and the Sabaeans believed that a person
having a white spot was unclean, and avoided mixing with such person. To
remove that defect, Ibrahīm cut his foreskin, i.e. circumcised himself.
Then he entered one of the temples; and lo! an idol called out to him:

“O Ibrahīm! You went away from us with one defect and came back with
two; get out and do not ever come back to us.” Ibrahīm was enraged; he
smashed the idols; and went out. After some time, he felt remorse for
what he had done, and decided to sacrifice his son on the altar of
Jupiter, as it was their custom to kill their children to please the
deities. When Jupiter was convinced of the sincerity of his repentance,
it sent a lamb to him to slaughter in place of his son.”

” 'Abdu '1-Masīh ibn Ishaq al-Kindī wrote a book in reply of a book by
'Abdullah ibn Isma'īl al-Hashimī. In that book \`Abdu '1-Masīh writes
about the Sabaeans:

”'It is generally believed that they indulge in human sacrifice,
although nowadays they cannot do so openly. But so far as our own
information goes, they are monotheists who believe that God is free from
every defect and evil, they describe God in negative, not positive,
terms; for example, they say:

Allah can­not be defined or seen, He is not unjust or oppressive.
According to them, the beautiful divine names may be used for God, but
only in an allegorical sense, because no divine attribute can truly
describe the reality.

They believe that the management of all affairs is done and controlled
by the sky and the heavenly bodies; the sky and those bodies are living
things having the characteristics of speech, hearing and sight.

They revere the light and the lumin­aries. One of their legacies is the
dome above the niche in the Umayyid mosque of Damascus; it was their
prayer house, and at that time even the Greeks and the Romans followed
the same religion. Then it came under Jewish control and they turned it
into a synagogue. Later, the Christians took it over and converted it
into a church.

Then came the Muslims, and they changed it into a mosque. The Sabaeans
had their numerous places of wor­ships, and their idols were named after
various names of the sun, and shaped with fixed patterns, as has been
described by Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi in his book, *The Houses of Worship.*

For ex­ample, there was the temple of Ba'lbak which housed the idol of
the sun; of Qiran, which was related to the moon and built in the moon's
shape, like a shawl worn over head and shoulders. And there is a village
nearby, Salamsīn by name; it is a corruption of its original name,
**صنَم سين** (Sanam Sīn = the idol of the moon).

Likewise, another village is called Tara'ūz, that is, the gate of Venus.
They do also claim that the Ka'bah and its idols be­longed to them, and
that the Meccan idol-worshippers were of the Sabaean religion. According
to them the idols, Lat and \`Uzza, re­presented Saturn and Venus.

They have many prophets in their hierarchy, most of them being the Greek
philosophers, for ex­ample, Hermes of Egypt, Agadhimun, Walles,
Pythagoras and Babaswar (maternal grandfather of Plato) and many others
like them.

Some of them do not eat fish - lest it be spume; nor poultry, because it
is always hot. Also, they do not use garlic, because it creates headache
and burns the blood and semen (which is the source of continuity of the
human race); and they avoid beans, because it dulls the intelligence and
also because it had first sprouted in a human skull.

They observe three compulsory prayers: at sunrise (eight *rak \`at);* at
noon (five *rak \`at) ;* and at the third hour of the night.

”'They prostrate three times in each rak \`ah. Also, they observe two
optional prayers - at the second and ninth hours of the day.

” \`They pray with *taharah* and wudu '; they take bath after *janabah;*
but they do not circumcise their children because they have not been
told to do so. Most of their laws concerning marital and penal codes are
like the*sharī \`ah* of Islam; while the rules about touching a dead
body are similar to Torah's.

They offer sacrifices to the stars, their idols and the temples; the
sacrificial animals are killed by the priests and witch-doctors, who
read in it the future of the man who offers the sacrifice and answer to
his questions.

” 'Hermes is sometimes called ldris, who is mentioned in Torah as
Akhnukh. Some of them say that Yudhasaf was Hermes.

” 'Some others have said that the present-day Varraniyyah are not the
real Sabaeans; rather these are mentioned in the books as heathens and
idolators. The Sabaeans were those Israelites who stayed behind at
Babylon when their majority returned to Jeruselem in the reigns of Cyrus
and Artaxerxes.

They were favourably disposed to Zoroastrian beliefs, as well as to the
religion of Nebuchadnezzar. What resulted from this exercise was a
mixture of Judaism and Zoroastrianism - like the Samaritans of Syria.

Most of them are found in Wasit and the rural areas of Iraq around
Ja'far and Jamidah; they trace their genealogy to Enosh, son of Seth.
They criticize and oppose the Harraniyyah and their religion. With
exception of a few things, there is no similarity between the two
religions: The Sabaeans face towards the North Pole in their prayers,
while the Harraniyyah face to­wards the South Pole.

” 'Some people of the book have said that Methuselah had a son (other
than Lamech), named Sabī, whom the Sabaeans have descended from. The
people, before the *sharī\`ah* spread and before Yudhasaf appeared on
the scene, followed Samanian beliefs; they lived in the eastern part of
the world and worshipped idols.

Their remnants are found in India, China and Taghazghaz, and the people
of Khurasan call them Shamnan. Their relics, places of worship and idols
are seen in eastern Khurasan adjoining India. They believe in eternity
of the universe and transmigration of soul. According to them, the sky
is falling down in an endless vacuum, and that is why it is moving round
and round.'

“According to some writers, a group of them rejects the theory of
eternity of the universe and says that it came into being one million
year ago.”

The author says: All the above description has been taken from the book
of al-Biruni. The opinion, attributed to some writers, that Sabaeans'
religion was a mixture of Judaism and Zoroastrianism flavoured with some
elements of Harraniyyah's beliefs, seems better suited in this context;
after all, the verse obviously enumerates the groups which followed a
divinely ­inspired religion.

[^1]: ad-Durru 'l-manthūr

[^2]: In those days, all the land now divided into Syria, Jordan, Lebnon
and Palestine, was called Syria or Greater Syria.

[^3]: Ma\`ani '1-akhbar

[^4]: Ma\`ani '1-akhbar

[^5]: at-Tafsir, al-Qummi

[^6]: It is now almost certain that Yudhasaf is a corruption of
Budhastav, the title of Gautama Buddha, the founder of Bhuddhism.


