Preface
=======

All praise is for Allah Who sent down the Qur'an to His servant so that
he may be a warner to the worlds; and blessings be on him whom He sent
as a witness, and a bearer of good news and a warner, and as one
inviting to Allah by His permission, and as a light-giving torch; and on
his progeny from whom Allah kept away the uncleanliness and whom He
purified a thorough purifying.

In this preface we shall describe the method adopted in this book to
find out the meanings of the verses of the Qur'an.

*at-Tafsir* (**التفسير** = exegesis), that is, explaining the meanings
of the Qur'anic verse, clarifying its import and finding out its
significance, is one of the earliest academic activities in Islam. The
interpretation of the Qur'an began with its revelation, as is clear from
the words of Allah:

***Even as We have sent among you an Apostle from among you who recites
to you Our com­munications and purifies you and teaches you the Book and
the wisdom and teaches you that which you did not know*** **(2 :151).**

The first exegetes were a few companions of the Prophet, like Ibn
\`Abbas, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, Ubayy (ibn Ka'b) and others. (We use the
word, \`companion', for other than 'Ali) because he and the Imams from
his progeny have an unequalled distinction - an unparalleled status,
which we shall explain somewhere else.

Exegesis in those days was confined to the explanation of literary
aspects of the verse, the background of its revelation and, occasionally
interpretation of one verse with the help of the other. If the verse was
about a historical event or contained the realities of genesis or
resurrection etc., then sometimes a few Tradition of the Prophet were
narrated to make its meaning clear.

The same was the style of the disciples of the companions, like Mujahid,
Qatadah, Ibn Abi Layla, ash-Sha'bi, as-Suddi and others, who lived in
the first two centuries of *hijrah.* They relied even more on Tradition,
including the ones forged and inter­polated by the Jews and others.

They quoted those Tradition to explain the verses which contained the
stories of the previous nations, or which described the realities of
genesis, for example, creation of the heavens and the earth, beginning
of the rivers and mountains, the “Iram” (the city of the tribe of \`Ad),
of Shaddad the so-called “mistakes” of the prophets, the alterations of
the books and things like that. Some such matters could be found even in
the exegesis ascribed to the companions.

During the reign of the caliphs, when the neighbouring countries were
conquered, the Muslims came in contact with the vanquished people and
were involved in religious discussions with the scholars of various
other religions and sects. This gave rise to the theological discourses-
known in Islam as *'Ilmu'l-kalam* (**عِلمُ الكلام**).

Also, the Greek philosophy was translated into Arabic. The process began
towards the end of the first century of *hijrah* (Umayyad's period) and
continued well into the third century (Abbasid's reign). This created a
taste for intellectual and philosophical arguments in the Muslim
intelligentsia.

At the same time, at-tasawwuf (**التصوف** = Sufism, mysticism) raised
its head in the society; and people were attracted to­wards it as it
held out a promise of revealing to them the realities of religion
through severe self-discipline and ascetical rigours -instead of
entangling them into verbal polemics and intellectual arguments.

And there emerged a group, who called themselves people of tradition,
who thought that salvation depended on believing in the apparent
meanings of the Qur'an and the tradition, with­out any academic
research. The utmost they allowed was looking into literary value of the
words.

Thus, before the second century had proceeded very far, the Muslim
society had broadly split in four groups: The theolo­gians, the
philosophers, the Sufis and the people of tradition. There was an
intellectual chaos in the *ummah* and the Muslims, generally speaking,
had lost their bearing. The only thing to which all were committed was
the word, “There is no god except Allah, and Muhammad (saw) is the
Messenger of Allah””.

They differed with each other in everything else. There was dispute on
the meanings of the names and attributes of Allah, as well as about His
actions; there was conflict about the reality of the heavens and the
earth and what is in and on them; there were controversies about the
decree of Allah and the divine measure; opinions differed whether man is
a helpless tool in divine hands, or is a free agent; there were
wranglings about various aspects of reward and punishment; arguments
were kicked like ball, from one side to the other concerning the
realities of death, *al-barzakh* (**البرزَخ** = intervening period
between death and the Day of Resurrection); resurrection, paradise and
hell.

In short, not a single subject, having any relevance to religion, was
left without a discord of one type or the other. And this divergence,
not unexpectedly, showed itself in exegesis of the Qur'an. Every group
wanted to support his views and opinions from the Qur'an; and the
exegesis had to serve this purpose.

The people of tradition explained the Qur'an with the Tradition ascribed
to the companions and their disciples. They went ahead so long as there
was a tradition to lead them on, and stopped when they could not find
any such tradition (provided the meaning was not self-evident). They
thought it to be the only safe method, as Allah says:

**. . . and** ***those who are firmly rooted in knowledge say:' “We
believe in it, it is all from our Lord.”*** **(3:7).**

But they were mistaken. Allah has not said in His Book that rational
proof had no validity. How could He say so when the authenticity of the
Book itself depended on rational proof. On the other hand, He has never
said that the words of the com­panions or their disciples had any value
as religious proof. How could He say so when there were such glaring
discrepancies in their opinions?

In short, Allah has not called us to the sophistry which accepting and
following contradictory opinions and views would entail. He has called
us, instead, to meditate on the Qur'­anic verses in order to remove any
apparent discrepancy in them.

Allah has revealed the Qur'an as guidance, and has made it a light and
an explanation of everything. Why should a light, seek brightness from
others' light? Why should guidance be led by others' guidance? Why
should “an explanation of everything” be explained by others' words?

The theologians' lot was worse all the more. They were divided into
myriads of sects; and each group clung to the verse that seemed to
support its belief and tried to explain away what was apparently against
it.

The seed of sectarian differences was sown in academic theories or, more
often than not, in blind following and national or tribal prejudice; but
it is not the place to describe it even briefly. However, such exegesis
should be called adaptation, rather than explanation. There are two ways
of explaining a verse - One may say: “What does the Qur'an say?” Or one
may say: “How can this verse be explained, so as to fit on my belief?”

The difference between the two approaches is quite clear. The former
forgets every pre-conceived idea and goes where the Qur'an leads him to.
The latter has already decided what to believe and cuts the Qur'anic
verses to fit on that body; such an exegesis is no exegesis at all.

The philosophers too suffered from the same syndrome. They tried to fit
the verses on the principles of Greek philosophy (that was divided into
four branches: Mathematics, natural science, divinity and practical
subjects including civics). If a verse was clearly against those
principles it was explained away.

In this way the verses describing metaphysical subjects, those
explaining the genesis and creation of the heavens and the earth, those
con­cerned with life after death and those about resurrection, paradise
and hell were distorted to conform to the said philosophy.

That philosophy was admittedly only a set of conjectures - unencum­bered
with any test or proof; but the Muslim philosophers felt no remorse in
treating its views on the system of skies, orbits, natural elements and
other related subjects as the absolute truth with which the exegesis of
the Qur'an had to conform.

The Sufis kept their eyes fixed on esoteric aspects of cre­ation; they
were too occupied with their inner world to look at the outer one. Their
tunnel-like vision prevented them from looking at the things in their
true perspective.

Their love of esoteric made them look for inner interpretations of the
verses; without any regard to their manifest and clear meanings. It
en­couraged the people to base their explanations on poetic expres­sions
and to use anything to prove anything.

The condition became so bad that the verses were explained on the-basis
of the numerical values of their words; letters were divided into bright
and dark ones and the explanations were based on that division. Building
castle in the air, wasn't it?

Obviously, the Qur'an was not revealed to guide the Sufis only; nor had
it ad­dressed itself to only those who knew the numerical values of the
letters (with all its ramifications); nor were its realities based on
astrological calculations.

Of course, there are Tradition narrated from the Prophet and the Imams
of *Ahlu'l-bayt* (as) saying for example: “Verily the Qur'an has an
exterior and an interior, and its interior has an interior upto seven
(or according to a version, seventy) in­teriors . . . ” But the Prophet
and the Imams gave importance to its exterior as much as to its
interior; they were as much con­cerned with its revelation as they were
with its interpretation.

We shall explain in the beginning of the third chapter, “The Family of
\`Imran”, that “interpretation” is not a meaning against the manifest
meaning of the verse. Such an interpretation should more correctly be
called “misinterpretation”.

This meaning of the word, “interpretation”, came in vogue in the Muslim
circles long after the revelation of the Qur'an and the spread of Islam.
What the Qur'an means by the word, “interpretation”, is some­thing other
than the meaning and the significance.

In recent times, a new method of exegesis has become fashionable. Some
people, supposedly Muslims, who were deeply influenced by the natural
sciences (which are based on observa­tions and tests) and the social
ones (that rely on induction), followed the materialists of Europe or
the pragmatists.

Under the influence of those anti-Islamic theories, they declared that
the religion's realities cannot go against scientific knowledge; one
should not believe except that which is perceived by any one of the five
senses; nothing exists except the matter and its properties.

What the religion claims to exist, but which the sciences reject - like
The Throne, The Chair, The Tablet and The Pen - should be interpreted in
a way that conforms with the science; as for those things which the
science is silent about, like the resurrection etc., they should be
brought within the purview of the laws of matter; the pillars upon which
the divine religious laws are based - like revelation, angel, Satan,
prophet­hood, apostleship, imamah (Imamate) etc. - are spiritual things,
and the spirit is a development of the matter, or let us say, a property
of the matter; legislation of those laws is manifestation of a special
social genius, who ordains them after healthy and fruitful
contemplations, in order to establish a good and pro­gressive society.

They have further said: One cannot have confidence in the Tradition,
because many are spurious; only those Tradition may be relied upon which
are in conformity with the Book. As for the Book itself, one should not
explain it in the light of the old philosophy and theories, because they
were not based on obser­vations and tests - they were just a sort of
mental exercise which has been totally discredited now by the modern
science.

The best, rather the only, way is to explain the Qur'an with the help of
other Qur'anic verses - except where the science has asserted something
which is relevant to it.

This, in short, is what they have written, or what necessarily follows
from their total reliance on tests and observations. We are not
concerned here with the question whether their scientific principles and
philosophic dicta can be accepted as the foundation of the Qur'an's
exegesis.

But it should be pointed out here that the objection which they have
levelled against the ancient exegetes - that theirs was only an
adaptation and not the explanation -is equally true about their own
method; they too say that the Qur'an and its realities must be made to
conform with the scien­tific theories. If not so, then why do they
insist that the academic theories should be treated as true foundations
of exegesis from which- no deviation could be allowed?

This method improves nothing on the discredited method of the ancients.

If you look at all the above-mentioned ways of exegesis, you will find
that all of them suffer from a most serious defect: They impose the
results of academic or philosophic arguments on the Qur'anic meanings;
they make the Qur'an conform to an extraneous idea. In this way,
explanation turns into adaptation, realities of the Qur'an are explained
away as allegories and its manifest meanings are sacrificed for
so-called “interpretations”.

As we mentioned in the beginning, the Qur'an introduces it­self as:

• ***the guidance for the worlds*** **(3:96);**

• ***the manifest light*** **(4:174),**

• ***the explanation of every thing*** **(16:89).**

But these people, contrary to those Qur'anic declarations, make it to be
guided by extraneous factors, to be illuminated by some outside
theories, and to be explained by something other than itself!

What is that “something else”? What authority has it got? And if there
is any difference in various explanations of a verse -and indeed there
are most serious differences - which mediator should the Qur'an refer
to?

What is the root-cause of the differences in the Qur'an's explanations?
It could not happen because of any difference in the meaning of a word,
phrase or sentence. The Qur'an has been sent down in plain Arabic; and
no Arab (or Arabic-knowing non-Arab) can experience any difficulty in
understanding it.

Also, there is not a single verse (out of more than six thousand) which
is enigmatic, obscure or abstruse in its import; nor is there a single
sentence that keeps the mind wandering in search of its meaning. After
all, the Qur'an is admittedly the most eloquent speech, and it is one of
the essential ingredients of eloquence that the talk should be free from
obscurity and abstruseness.

Even those verses that are counted among the “ambiguous” ones have no
ambiguity in their meanings; whatever the ambiguity, it is in
identification of the particular thing or individual from among the
group to which that meaning refers. This statement needs some
elaborations:

In this life we are surrounded by matter; even our senses and faculties
are closely related to it. This familiarity with matter and material
things has influenced our mode of thinking. When we hear a word or a
sentence, our mind races to its material meaning.

When we hear, for example, the words, life, knowledge, power, hearing,
sight, speech, will, pleasure, anger, creation and order, we at once
think of the material manifestations of their meanings. Likewise, when
we hear the words, heaven, earth, tablet, pen, throne, chair, angel and
his wings, and Satan and his tribe and army, the first things that come
into our minds are their material manifestations.

Likewise, when we hear the sentences, “Allah created the universe”,
“Allah did this”, “Allah knew it”, “Allah intended it” or “intends it”,
we look at these actions in frame of “time”, because we are used to
connect every verb with a tense.

In the same way, when we hear the verses:

• **. . .** ***and with Us is more yet*** **(50:35),**

• ***. . . We would have made it from before Ourselves*** **(21:17),**

• ***. . . and that which is with Allah is best . . .*** **(62:11),**

• ***. . . and to Him you shall be brought back*** **(2:28, etc.),**

we attach with the divine presence the concept of “place”, because in
our minds the two ideas are inseparable.

Also, on reading the verses:

• ***And when We intend to destroy a town*** **(17:16),**

• ***And We intend to bestow a favour…*** **(28:5),**

• ***and Allah intends ease for you*** **(2:185),**

we think that the “in­tention” has the same meaning in every sentence,
as is the case with our own intention and will.

In this way, we jump to the familiar (which most often is material)
meaning of every word. And it is but natural. Man has made words to
fulfil his social need of mutual intercourse; and society in its turn
was established to fulfil the man's material needs. Not unexpectedly,
the words became symbols of the things which men were connected with and
which helped them in their material progress.

But we should not forget that the material things are con­stantly
changing and developing with the development of expert­ise. Man gave the
name, lamp, to a certain receptacle in which he put a wick and a little
fat that fed the lighted wick which illumi­nated the place in darkness.
That apparatus kept changing until now it has become the electric bulb
of various types; and except the name “lamp” not a single component of
the original lamp can be found in it.

Likewise, there is no resemblance in the balance of old times and the
modern scales - especially if we compare the old apparatus with the
modern equipment for weighing and measuring heat, electirc-current's
flow and blood-pressure.

And the armaments of old days and the ones invented within our own times
have nothing in common, except the name.

The named things have changed so much that not a single component of the
original can be found in them; yet the name has not changed. It shows
that the basic element that allows the use of a name for a thing is not
the shape of that thing, but its purpose and benefit.

Man, imprisoned as he is within his habitat and habit, often fails to
see this reality. That is why al-Hashawiyyah and those who believe that
God has a body interpret the Qur'anic verses and phrases within the
fame-work of the matter and the nature. But in fact they are stuck with
their habit and usage, and not to the exterior of the Qur'an and the
Tradition.

Even in the literal meanings of the Qur'an we find ample evidence that
relying on the habit and usage in explanation of the divine speech would
cause confusion and anomaly. For example, Allah says:

• ***Nothing is like a likeness of Him*** **(42:11)*****;***

• ***Visions comprehended Him not, and He comprehends*** **(all)**
***visions; and He is the Knower of subtilities, the Aware***
**(6:73*****);***

• ***Glory be to Him above what they ascribe*** **(to Him) (23:91;
37:159).**

These verses manifestly show that what we are accustomed to cannot be
ascribed to Allah.

It was this reality that convinced many people that they should not
explain the Qur'anic words by identifying them with their usual and
common meanings. Going a step further, they sought the help of logical
and philosophical arguments to avoid wrong deductions. This gave a
foot-hold to academic reasoning in explaining the Qur'an and identifying
the individ­ual person or thing meant by a word. Such discussions can be
of two kinds:

i) The exegete takes a problem emanating from a Qur'anic statement,
looks at it from academic and philosophical point of view, weighs the
pros and cons and with the help of the phil­osophy, science and logic
decides what the true answer should be. Thereafter, he takes the verse
and fits it anyhow on that answer which, he thinks, is right.

The Muslim philosophers and theologians usually followed this method;
but, as mentioned earlier, the Qur'an does not approve of it.

ii) The exegete explains the verse with the help of other relevant
verses, meditating on them together - and meditation has been forcefully
urged upon by the Qur'an itself - and ident­ifies the individual person
or thing by its particulars and attributes mentioned in the verse.

No doubt this is the only correct method of exegesis. Allah has said:

***And We have revealed the Book to you explaining clearly everything***
**(16:89).**

Is it possible for such a book not to explain its own self? Also He has
described the Qur'an in these words:

***A guidance for mankind and clear evidence of guidance and
discrimination*** **(between wrong) (2:185);**

and He has also said:

***And We have sent down to you a manifest light*** **(4:174).**

The Qur'an is, accordingly, a guidance, an evidence, a discrimination
between right and wrong and a manifest light for the people to guide
them aright and help them in all their needs. Is it imaginable that it
would not guide them aright in its own matter, while it is their most
important need? Again Allah says:

***And*** **(as for)** ***those who strive hard for Us, We will most
certainly guide them onto Our ways (29:69).***

Which striving is greater than the endeavour to understand His Book? And
which way is more straight than the Qur'an?

Verses of this meaning are very numerous, and we shall discuss them in
detail in the beginning of the third chapter, The Family of \`Imran.
Allah taught the Qur'an to His Prophet and appointed him as the teacher
of the Book:

***The Faithful Spirit has descended with it upon your heart that you
may be of the warners, in plain Arabic language*** **(26:193-4)*****;***

***and We have revealed to you the Reminder that you may make clear to
men what has been revealed to them, and that haply they may reflect***
**(16:44)** ***;***

***. . . an Apostle . . . who recites to them His communications and
purifies them, and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom***
**(62:2)*****.***

And the Prophet appointed his progeny to carry on this work after him.
It is clear from his unanimously accepted tradition:

I am leaving behind among you two precious things; as long as you hold
fast to them you will never go astray after me: The Book of Allah and my
progeny, my family members; and these two shall never separate from each
other until they reach me (on) the reservoir.

And Allah has confirmed, in the following two verses, this declaration
of the Prophet that his progeny had the real know­ledge of the Book:

***Allah only desires to keep away the unclean­liness from you, O people
of the House! and to purify you a*** **(thorough)** ***purifying***
**(33:33)** ***;***

***Most surely it is an honoured Qur'an, in a Book that is hidden; None
do touch it save the purified ones*** **(56:77 -79)** ***.***

And the Prophet and the Imams from his progeny always used this second
method for explaining the Qur'an, as may be seen in the Tradition that
have been narrated from them on exegesis, some of which will be quoted
in this book in appropriate places. One cannot find a single instance in
their Tradition where they might have taken help of an academic theory
or philosophical postulate for explaining a verse.

The Prophet has said in a sermon:

“Therefore, when mischief come to confuse you like the segments of
darkened night, then hold fast to the Qur'an; as it is the intercessor
whose inter­cession shall be granted; and a credible advocate; and
whoever keeps it before him, it will lead him to the Garden; and whoever
keeps it behind, it will drive him to the Fire; and it is the guide that
guides to the best path; and it is a book in which there is explanation,
particularization and recapitulation; and it is a decisive (word), and
not a joke; and there is for it a manifest (meaning) and an esoteric
(one); thus its apparent (meaning) is firm, and its esoteric (one) is
knowledge; its exterior is elegant and its interior deep; it has (many)
boundaries, and its boundaries have (many) boundaries; its wonders shall
not cease, and its (unexpected marvels shall not be old.

There are in it the lamps of guidance and the beacon of wisdom, and
guide to knowledge for him who knows the attributes. Therefore, one
should extend his sight; and should let his eyes reach the attribute; so
that one who is in perdition may get deliverance, and one who is
entangled may get free; because meditation is the life of the heart of
the one who sees, as the one having a light (easily) walks in darkness;
therefore, you must seek good deliverance and (that) with little
waiting.

\`Ali (a.s.) said, *inter alia,* speaking about the Qur'an in a sermon:
“Its one part speaks with the other, and one portion testifies about the
other.”

This is the straight path and the right way which was used by the true
teachers of the Qur'an and its guides, may Allah's blessings be on them
all!

We shall write, under various headings, what Allah has helped us to
understand from the honoured verses, by the above mentioned method. We
have not based the explanations on any philosophical theory, academic
idea or mystical revelation.

We have not put into it any outside matter except a fine literary point
on which depends the understanding of Arabic eloquence, or a
self-evident or practical premises which can be understood by one and
all.

From the discussions, written according to the above- men­tioned method,
the following subjects have become crystal-clear:

1. The matters concerning the names of Allah, and His attributes, like
His Life, Knowledge, Power, Hearing, Sight and Oneness etc. As for the
Person of Allah, you will find that the Qur'an believes that He needs no
description.

2. The matters concerning the divine actions, like creation, order,
will, wish, guidance, leading astray, decree, measure, com­pulsion,
delegation (of Power), pleasure, displeasure and other similar actions.

3. The matters concerned with the intermediary links between Allah and
man, like the Curtain, the Tablet, the Pen, the Throne, the Chair, the
Inhabited House, the Heavens, the Earth, the Angels, the Satans, and the
Jinns etc.

4. The details about man before he came to this world.

5. The matters related to man in this life, like the history of mankind,
knowledge of his self, the foundation of society, the prophethood and
the apostleship, the revelation, the inspi­ration, the book and the
religion and law. The high status of the prophets, shining through their
stories, comes under this heading.

6. The knowledge about man after he departs from this world, that is,
*al-Barzakh.*

7. The matters about human character. Under this heading come the
various stages through which the friends of Allah pass in their
spiritual journey, like submission, faith, benevolence, humility, purity
of intention and other virtues.

(We have not gone into details of the verses of the law, as more
appropriately it is a subject for the books of jurisprudence.)

As a direct result of this method, we have never felt any need to
interpret a verse against its apparent meaning. As we have said earlier,
this type of interpretation is in fact misinter­pretation. As for that
“interpretation” which the Qur'an has mentioned in various verses, it is
not a type of “meaning”; it is something else.

At the end of the commentaries, we have written some Tradition of the
Prophet and the Imams of *Ahlu'l-bayt* (as), narrated by the Sunni and
Shi\`ah narrators. But we have not included the opinions of the
companions and their disciples, because, first, there is too much
confusion and contradiction in them; and second, they are not vested
with any authority in Islam.

On going through those Tradition of the Prophet and the Imams (peace be
on them all!), you will notice that this “new” method of exegesis
(adopted in this book) is in reality the oldest and the original method
which was used by the Teachers of the Qur' an (peace of Allah be on them
all!).

Also, we have written separately various topics - philo­sophical,
academic, historical, social and ethical - when there was a need for it.
In all such discussions, we have confined our talk to the basic
premises, without going in too much detail.

We pray to Allah, High is He, to guide us and keep our talk to the
point; He is the Best Helper and the Best Guide.

*Dependent on Allah,*
Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba'i


