Suratul Baqarah: Verses 75-82
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٧٥) أَفَتَطْمَعُونَ أَن يُؤْمِنُواْ لَكُمْ وَقَدْ كَانَ فَرِيقٌ
مِّنْهُمْ يَسْمَعُونَ كَلاَمَ اللّهِ ثُمَّ يُحَرِّفُونَهُ مِن بَعْدِ
مَا عَقَلُوهُ وَهُمْ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٧٦) وَإِذَا لَقُواْ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ قَالُواْ آمَنَّا وَإِذَا خَلاَ
بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَىَ بَعْضٍ قَالُواْ أَتُحَدِّثُونَهُم بِمَا فَتَحَ
اللّهُ عَلَيْكُمْ لِيُحَآجُّوكُم بِهِ عِندَ رَبِّكُمْ أَفَلاَ
تَعْقِلُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٧٧) وَلاَ يَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّ اللّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا يُسِرُّونَ وَمَا
يُعْلِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٧٨) وَمِنْهُمْ أُمِّيُّونَ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ الْكِتَابَ إِلاَّ
أَمَانِيَّ وَإِنْ هُمْ إِلاَّ يَظُنُّون
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٧٩) فَوَيْلٌ لِّلَّذِينَ يَكْتُبُونَ الْكِتَابَ بِأَيْدِيهِمْ ثُمَّ
يَقُولُونَ هَـذَا مِنْ عِندِ اللّهِ لِيَشْتَرُواْ بِهِ ثَمَناً
قَلِيلاً فَوَيْلٌ لَّهُم مِّمَّا كَتَبَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَوَيْلٌ لَّهُمْ
مِّمَّا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨٠) وَقَالُواْ لَن تَمَسَّنَا النَّارُ إِلاَّ أَيَّاماً مَّعْدُودَةً
قُلْ أَتَّخَذْتُمْ عِندَ اللّهِ عَهْدًا فَلَن يُخْلِفَ اللّهُ عَهْدَهُ
أَمْ تَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨١) بَلَى مَن كَسَبَ سَيِّئَةً وَأَحَاطَتْ بِهِ خَطِيـئَتُهُ
فَأُوْلَـئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨٢) وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّالِحَاتِ أُولَـئِكَ
أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do you then hope that they would believe in you? While a party from
among them indeed used to hear the word of Allah, then altered it after
they had understood it, and they know*** **(this)** ***(75).***

***And when they meet those who believe they say: “We believe”; and when
they are alone one with another they say: “Do you talk to them of what
Allah has disclosed to you that they may argue with you by this before
your Lord? Do you not then understand?” (76).***

***What! Do they not know that Allah knows what they conceal and what
they proclaim? (77).***

***And there are among them illit­erates who know not the Book but only
lies, and they do but conjecture (78).***

***Woe, then, to those who write the book with their hands and then say:
“This is from Allah ”, so that they may sell it for a small price;
therefore woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them
for what they earn*** **(thereby) (79).**

***And they say: “Fire shall not touch us but for a few days. ” Say:
“Have you taken a promise from Allah, then Allah will never fail to keep
His promise, or do you speak against Allah what you do not know?”
(80).***

***Yea! whoever earns evil and his sins beset him on every side, these
are the inmates of the Fire; in it they shall abide (81).***

***And*** **(as for)** ***those who believe and do good deeds, these are
the dwellers of the garden; in it they shall abide (82)***

Commentary
----------

The context shows that the unbelievers, and especially those of Medina,
thought that the Jews were the likeliest people to help and support the
Apostle of Allah at his advent. The pagan tribes of Aws and Khazraj
lived with the Jews of Medina, and they knew that the latter followed a
divine religion and a revealed book. Thus it was not too much to expect
them to believe in the latest in the series of divine religions and
books.

This was the basis of their hope that the Jews would accept the Apostle
of Allah as the true prophet, and would strengthen the cause of
religion, and actively participate in the propagation of truth. But no
sooner did the Prophet migrate to Medina than the Jews showed their
latent hostility. The hope was shattered and the expectation turned to
disappointment.

That is why Allah addresses the believers, saying: “Do you then hope
that they would believe in you?” Concealment of truth and alteration of
divine words was their deep-rooted life-pattern. Why wonder if they go
back on what they used to say before the advent of Islam?

**Qur’an:** ***Do you then hope . . . and they know this:*** The speech
is now addressed to the Prophet and the believers, referring to the Jews
in third person. This same style was used in the preceding story of the
Cow, because the Jews had omitted the event from the Torah. These verses
continue that mode of address because it exposes their habit of altering
and manipulating the divine book.

**Qur’an:** **And** ***when they meet those who believe . . . and what
they proclaim:*** The two conditional clauses, “when they meet those who
believe” and “when they are alone one with another” are not in
opposition to each other - as were the clauses in the verse:

***And when they meet those who believe, they say: “We believe”; and
when they are alone with their Satans, they say: “Surely we are with
you, we were only mocking (2 :14)*** .

Here the two clauses simply describe two instances of the Jews'
trans­gressions and ignorance:

First: They indulge in hypocrisy, showing that they have accepted Islam,
and trying in this way to protect themselves from trouble, ridicule and
even death.

Second: They want to deceive Allah, forgetting that He is the Knower of
the seen and the unseen, Aware of what they conceal and what they
proclaim.

We may infer from the verses that the Jewish laity in Medina sometimes
talked openly with the believers, telling them of some of the
foretellings about the Prophet or giving them some information that
proved the truth of Islam and its Prophet.

But their leaders used to admonish them for it, telling them that it was
a thing revealed to them, it should not be disclosed to the believers,
lest they argued with the Jews before the Lord - as though if the
believers did not argue with them before God, He would not know of it!

Such thinking implies that Allah knew only the apparent, not the hidden
and concealed things or thoughts. Allah refuted this foolish idea and
said: “What! Do they not know that Allah knows what they conceal and
what they proclaim?”

It is our, and not God's, knowledge which is limited to the seen and
does not comprehend the unseen, because our perception depends on the
senses which in their turn depend on body organs - equipped with nervous
instruments, surrounded by space and time, influenced by a hundred other
material causes.

This talk also throws light on the materialistic outlook of the
Israelites. They were so steeped in that belief that they applied the
human limitations to God too. They thought that God was present and
active inside the matter and prevailed over it.

But that presence and that control and management were based on the same
principles as a material cause brings out and controls a material
effect. Such a belief was not a specialty of the Jews; it was and is
held even by those followers of Islam who believe in fundamentality of
matter.

For these people, God's life, know­ledge, power, choice, will, decree,
order and management have the same meanings as do their own life,
knowledge etc. It is a disease for which there is no cure. And the signs
and warnings can avail nothing to a people who do not understand.

Such views have made Islam a laughing-stock in the eyes of those who
have no access to the true faith and correct Islamic knowledge. Those
detractors say: The Muslims ascribe to their Prophet the saying, “Allah
created Adam in His likeness”; and these followers of the Prophet have
created a god in the likeness of Adam.

One group of the Muslims ascribes to its Lord all the qualities of the
matter. Another group does not understand anything of God's beautiful
attributes; consequently it reduces all divine attributes to negatives.
It says that the names and adjectives, which are used for both God and
His creatures, have quite different mean­ings in both cases.

When we say, “God is Existent, Knowing, Powerful and Alive”, the words
denote some divine qualities totally incomprehensible to us, completely
different from the meanings they have when they are applied to a human
being.

Therefore, it is necessary to reduce these words to their negatives.
What the above sentence, for example, means is this: “God is not
non-existent, not unaware, not powerless and not lifeless.”

Such explanation implies that they believe in that which they do not
understand, worship that which they are uncertain about and invite
others to believe in that which neither they nor anyone else knows
anything about.

The word of truth is enough to dispel such falsehoods. The people have
been admonished by the true religion to hold fast to the essence of
reality and steer clear between the above-men­tioned two extremes.

They should know that Allah is not like His creatures, nor is He a set
of negative propositions. The true religion directs common people to
believe that Allah is a thing, unlike other things; that He has
knowledge, unlike our knowledge; power, unlike our power; and will, not
produced by contempla­tion; that He talks, not with a mouth; and hears,
not with ears.

As for the people of higher understanding, they must ponder on His signs
and acquire deep knowledge of His religion. He has said:

***Say: \`Are those who know and those who do not know alike?” Only
those possessed of understanding shall bear in mind*** **(39:9).**

The people of higher understanding are not equal to a common man in
their knowledge of truth and religion; likewise, the two are not alike
in their respective responsibilities. This, therefore, is the teaching
of religion for both groups respectively; it is there for them to
follow, would they do so?

**Qur’an:** And ***there are among them illiterates who know not the
Book but only lies and they do but conjecture;*** *“al- Ummiyy”*
(**الأميّ** = one who does not read or write) is related to *“al-umm”*
(**الأم** = mother).

It is as though the excessive love of the mother prevented her from
entrusting her child to a teacher to teach and train him; consequently
he could learn only from his mother. *“al-Amainiyy”* (**الأماني**) is
plural of *“al-umniyyah”* (**الأمنية** = lie).

The verse says that some of the Jews were literates who did read and
write the book - but making alterations in it; and the rest were
illiterates who knew nothing of the book except the lies of the former
group.

**Qur’an:** ***Woe, then, to those who write the book with their hands .
. .*** *: “al-Wayl”* (**الويل** = woe, disaster,, severe punishment,
adversity, affliction) ;*“al -ishtira' ”* (**الإشتراء** = to sell).

**Qur’an:** ***therefore, woe to them for what their hands have written
. . .*** *:* The pronouns may refer either to all Jews or only to the
interpolators among them. If the former view is taken then the woe and
condemnation would cover the illiterates too.

**Qur’an:** ***Yea! whoever earns evil and his sins beset him on every
side. . .*** *“al-Khatī'ah”* (**الخطيئة** = translated here as “sins”)
actually refers to the psychical condition resulting from evil-doing.
That is why the verse speaks first of his evil-doing and then of the
effects of the sins besetting him on every side. When he is beset by his
sins on every side, there should remain no opening for the guidance to
reach him; he, therefore, will go to Hell and abide there forever.

Had there been an iota of faith in his heart, or some good traits like
justice in his character, it would have been possible for the rays of
guidance to penetrate to him. The overwhelming besetting of sins on
every side, therefore, is possible in case of polytheism, as Allah says:

***Surely Allah does not forgive that any­thing should be associated
with Him, and forgives what is besides that to whomsoever He pleases***
**(4:48 );**

and also in case of dis­belief and denial of the divine signs, Allah
says:

***And*** **(as to)** ***those who disbelieve in and belie Our signs,
they are the inmates of the Fire, in it they shall abide*** **(2:39).**

In short, the earning of evil and being beset by sins on all sides is a
broad expression covering all that would make one to abide in the Hell
forever.

The two verses under discussion are almost similar to the verse:

***Surely those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Christians,
and the Sabaeans, whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and does
good, they shall have their reward . . .*** **(2:62).**

Both show that the basis of salvation and eternal happiness is the true
belief and good deeds. The only difference between the two sets of the
verses is that the verse 2:62 shows that mere taking to oneself
nomenclatures like the Muslim, the Jew etc. is of no use; while the
verses under discussion show that mere claiming of salvation is of no
worth at all.

Tradition
---------

al-Baqir (a.s.) said about the words of Allah, ***And when they meet
those who believe . . .*** *:* ” Some of the Jews (who were not inimical
to the Muslims and were not a party to the Jewish con­spiracy against
them), on meeting the Muslims, used to narrate what the Torah contained
of the description of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.); so their elders forbade them
to do so and said:

\`Do not in­form them of what the Torah contains of the attributes of
Muham­mad (s.a.w.a.), lest they argue with you by that before your
Lord.' Thereupon, this verse was revealed.”[^1]

It is narrated from the fifth or the sixth Imam that he said about the
words of Allah, Yea! ***whoever earns evil . . .**.* “If they deny the
*wilayah* (**الوِلاية** = friendship, overlordship) of the Leader of the
faithful, then they are the inmates of the Fire, in it they shall
abide.”[^2]

*The author says:* ash-Shaykh at-Tūsī has narrated in his *al-Amalī* a
tradition of nearly the same theme. The two Tradition are based on the
principle of the “flow” of the Qur'an and fit the verse on one of its
best example. Allah has counted the love of, and submission to, the
Prophet's family-members as a good deed, as He says:

***Say: “I do not ask of you any recompense for it except the love
for*** **(my)** ***near relatives; and whoever earns good, We give him
more of good therein*** **(42:23).**

Also, the tradition may be taken as another explanation of the verse, as
we shall describe in the Chapter 6 (The Table) that “the good” means
complying with the demands of the belief of monotheism. If so, then the
tradition particularly mentions \`Alī (a.s.) because he was the first of
this *ummah* to open this door.

[^1]: Majma \`u'l-bayan

[^2]: al- Kafi


