Suratul Baqarah: Verses 83-88
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨٣) وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ لاَ تَعْبُدُونَ
إِلاَّ اللّهَ وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ إِحْسَاناً وَذِي الْقُرْبَى
وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَقُولُواْ لِلنَّاسِ حُسْناً
وَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَآتُواْ الزَّكَاةَ ثُمَّ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ إِلاَّ
قَلِيلاً مِّنكُمْ وَأَنتُم مِّعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨٤) وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَكُمْ لاَ تَسْفِكُونَ دِمَاءكُمْ وَلاَ
تُخْرِجُونَ أَنفُسَكُم مِّن دِيَارِكُمْ ثُمَّ أَقْرَرْتُمْ وَأَنتُمْ
تَشْهَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨٥) ثُمَّ أَنتُمْ هَـؤُلاء تَقْتُلُونَ أَنفُسَكُمْ وَتُخْرِجُونَ
فَرِيقاً مِّنكُم مِّن دِيَارِهِمْ تَظَاهَرُونَ عَلَيْهِم بِالإِثْمِ
وَالْعُدْوَانِ وَإِن يَأتُوكُمْ أُسَارَى تُفَادُوهُمْ وَهُوَ مُحَرَّمٌ
عَلَيْكُمْ إِخْرَاجُهُمْ أَفَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِبَعْضِ الْكِتَابِ
وَتَكْفُرُونَ بِبَعْضٍ فَمَا جَزَاء مَن يَفْعَلُ ذَلِكَ مِنكُمْ إِلاَّ
خِزْيٌ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يُرَدُّونَ
إِلَى أَشَدِّ الْعَذَابِ وَمَا اللّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨٦) أُولَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرَوُاْ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا
بِالآَخِرَةِ فَلاَ يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابُ وَلاَ هُمْ يُنصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨٧) وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ وَقَفَّيْنَا مِن بَعْدِهِ
بِالرُّسُلِ وَآتَيْنَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ
وَأَيَّدْنَاهُ بِرُوحِ الْقُدُسِ أَفَكُلَّمَا جَاءكُمْ رَسُولٌ بِمَا
لاَ تَهْوَى أَنفُسُكُمُ اسْتَكْبَرْتُمْ فَفَرِيقاً كَذَّبْتُمْ
وَفَرِيقاً تَقْتُلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨٨) وَقَالُواْ قُلُوبُنَا غُلْفٌ بَل لَّعَنَهُمُ اللَّه بِكُفْرِهِمْ
فَقَلِيلاً مَّا يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel: “You shall
not worship*** **(any)** ***but Allah and*** **(you shall do)** ***good
to*** **(your)** ***parents, and to the near of kin and to the orphans
and the needy, and speak to men good*** **(words)** ***and keep up
prayer and pay the zakat. ” Then you turned back except a few of you
and*** **(now too)** ***you turn aside (83).***

***And when We made a covenant with you: “You shall not shed your blood
and you shall not turn your people out of your cities;” then you gave a
promise while you witnessed (84).***

***Yet you it is who slay your people and turn a party from among you
out of their homes, backing each other up against them unlawfully and
exceeding the limits; and if they should come to you as captives, you
would ransom them - while their very turning out was unlawful for you.
Do you then believe in a part of the Book and disbelieve in the other?
What then is the reward of such among you as do this but disgrace in the
life of this world, and on the Day of Resur­rection they shall be sent
back to the most grievous chastise­ment, and Allah is not at all
heedless of what you do (85).***

***These are they who have bought the life of this world for the
hereafter, so their chastisement shall not be lightened nor shall they
be helped (86).***

***And most certainly We gave Musa the Book and We sent apostles after
him one after another; and We gave \`Isa, the son of Maryam, clear
evidence and strengthened him with the holy spirit. What! whenever then
an apostle came to you with that which your souls did not desire, you
were insolent, so you called some*** **(of them)** ***liars and some you
slew (87).***

***And they say: “Our hearts are covered.” Nay, Allah has cursed them on
account of their unbelief- so little it is that they believe (88).***

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***And when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel:
“You shall not worship*** **(any)** ***but Allah. . .*** *”:* To begin
with, the verse refers to the Children of Israel in third person, and
then ends by addressing them in second person,

“Then you turned back . . . ” The first sentence mentions making a
covenant with them - which must naturally be in words - then describes
that covenant; this in its turn begins with a declarative sentence, “You
shall not worship (any) but Allah”, and ends up with some imperative
ones, “and speak to men good words . . .”

When the stories of the Israelites began, they were addressed in second
person, because the verses contained a lot of admonition and reprimand;
it continued to the story of the Cow when, because of demands of
eloquence, it was changed to third person. Conse­quently, this verse too
began with third person, but when time came to quote the verbal
covenant, the style reverted to the second person.

“You shall not worship (any) but Allah”: It is a prohibition in the form
of information. This style shows the utmost im­portance attached to the
ban by the speaker - it is as though the speaker has no doubt whatsoever
that the order shall be complied with, and that, in this case, the
servants will not dare to go near idolatory.

The same style is continued in the next clause, “and (you shall do) good
to (your) parents, and to the near of kin and to the orphans and the
needy.”

The change over to second person, although resorted to for the purpose
of quoting the covenant, has put the speech back to the original style
and has linked the last clauses of the covenant to the fresh admonitary
ones: “and keep up prayer and pay the *zakat.* Then you turned back . .
.”

**Qur’an:** ***and*** **(you shall do)** ***good to*** **(your)**
***parents . . .**:* As translated here, it is a declarative sentence
with the sense of im­perative. It may also be translated as an
imperative sentence: “and (do) good . . .” The verse gives in descending
order of importance, the list of those whom one should do good to.

The parents are the root of man's existence, and nearest of all to him.
Then come the near of kin. Going outside the circle of relatives, the
orphans are most deserving of kindness and beneficence, because in their
small age they are deprived of their father - their guardian, protector
and bread-earner. Other needy persons come after them.

**Qur’an:** ***“And to the orphans”***: *“al-Yatīm”* (**اليتيم** =
orphan) is he whose father has died. The word is not used for him who
has lost his mother. Also, it is said that a human child is called
“orphan” if his father dies, but in animals, the adjective is used for
one whose mother dies.

**Qur’an:** ***“And the needy”***: *“al-Masakīn”* (**المساكين**) is
plural of *al-miskīn* (**المسكين** = needy, impoverished, destitue,
lowly).

**Qur’an:** ***“and speak to men good (words)”***: *“Husnan”*
(**حُسناً**= beauty, excellence) is an infinitive verb, used for
adjective (beautiful, excellent, good) to give emphasis. Some reciters
have recited it *hasanan* (**حَسَنناً** = beautiful, excellent, good).

However, the sentence enjoins them to speak nicely to the people; it is
an in­direct way of ordering them to maintain good social relations to
behave with people nicely, gently and good-manneredly - no matter
whether the opposite party is a believer or an unbeliever.

It cannot be said to be abrogated by the verse of fighting, because the
two verses are not contradictory to each other; the place and time of
social contact is other than the place and time of fighting. For
example, using hard words when admonishing a child to correct his
behaviour is not contrary to maintaining good social relation.

**Qur’an:** **“*****You shall not shed your blood. . .*** **”***:* This
too is a prohibitory order, in the form of an information - the same
style which was used in, ***“You shall not worship (any) but Allah”***.
”*as-safk”* (**السّفك** = to shed blood).

**Qur’an:** ***backing each other*** **up** ***against them*****:**
*“at-Tazahur”* (**التظاهر** = to help each other). *Az-Zahīr*
(**الظهـير** = helper); it is derived from *az-zahr* (**الظهـر** = back)
as though the helper strengthens the back of the helped one.

**Qur’an:** ***while their very turning away was unlawful*** for you:
Its literal translation will be, \`while it was unlawful for you their
very turning out.' The pronoun *“it” is* not related here to any
previously mentioned noun etc., it is a pronoun used to begin a
sentence. In the verse,

***Say: “He, Allah is one” (112:1),***

the pronoun “He” has the same grammatical significance.

**Qur’an:** ***Do you believe in a part of the Book . . .*** *:* Why
should you follow the rule of paying ransom for them and disobey the
prohibition of turning them out? Are not both rules in the same book? Do
you believe in a part of the Book and disbelieve in the other?

**Qur’an:** ***And We sent apostles after him one after another:***
*“at -Taqfiyah”* (**التقفية** = to send someone after someone else).

**Qur’an:** ***and We gave Isa son of Maryam, clear evidence:*** This
subject will be dealt with in Chapter 3, (The Family of \`Imran).

**Qur’an:** ***And they say: “Our hearts are covered”**: al-Ghulf “*
(**الغُـلف**) is plural of *al-aghlaf*. It is derived from *ghilaf*
(**الغـلاف** = cover). They say: Our hearts are protected under various
covers and veils - your call cannot reach our hearts. The sentence has
the same import as the verse:

***And they say: “Our hearts are under coverings from that to which you
call us*** **(41:5).**

Tradition
---------

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said about the words of Allah, ***and speak to men
good*** (words): “Speak to men the best of that which you would like to
be said about yourself.”[^1]

As-Sadiq (a.s.) said about this verse: “Speak to men, and do not speak
but good until you know what it is.

“al-Baqir (a.s.) said: “Speak to men the best, of that which you would
like to be said about yourself; for certainly Allah, Mighty and Great is
He, dislikes an abuser, curler, speaker of evil against the believers,
indecent, shameless (and) begger, and He loves the modest,
mild-tempered, chaste (and) moderate.”[^2]

The author says: A tradition, similar to the first one, has been
narrated in al-Kafī from as-Sadiq (a.s.) with another chain of
narrators; and similarly in al-\`Ayyashī.

Another tradition, like the second one has been written from the same
Imam in al-Kafī; and one like the third is narrated from al-Baqir (a.s.)
in al -\`Ayyashī. Apparently these meanings of the “good word” have been
inferred from general usage.

As-Sadiq (a.s) said: “Verily Allah sent Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) with five
swords: So (there is) a sword against a *dhimmī* (**الذِمـيّ** = free
non-Muslim subject of an Islamic country). Allah said: *and speak to men
good* (words); it was revealed about the *dhimmīs,* then it was
abrogated by another verse,

***Fight those who do not believe in Allah. . . (9:29)***[^3]

The author says: In this tradition the Imam has taken the “speech” to
mean behaviour. We say: Do not speak to him but good; what we mean is:
Do not deal with him but in a good and decent manner. This meaning will
apply only if we take the word, “abrogated” in its terminological sense.
But it may also be taken in its literal sense (as we shall explain under
the verse:

***Whatever signs We abrogate or cause to be forgotten*** **(2:106);**

and in that case this verse will not be in conflict with that of the
fighting. It should be pointed out that such uses of words in their
literal meanings (as against their terminological ones) are not
infrequent in the Tradition of the Imams.

[^1]: al-Kafi

[^2]: Ma\`ani 'l-akhbar

[^3]: al-\`Ayyashī


