Suratul Fatiha: Verses 6-7
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٦) اهدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ الْمُسْتَقِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٧) صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ غَيْرِ الْمَغْضُوبِ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ الضَّالِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Guide us to the straight path (6),***

***the path of those upon whom Thou hast bestowed favours,*** ***not of
those inflicted by Thy wrath, nor of those gone astray (7).***

Commentary
----------

Qur’an
------

***Guide us to the straight path . . . nor of those gone astray:*** The
meaning of *“al-hidayah”* (**الهداية** = guidance, to guide) may easily
be understood, if we consider first the significance of the
“path”.*“as-Sirat”* (**الصراط** = path) is synonymous with *at-tarīq*
(**الطريق**) and *as-sabīl* (**السّبيل**).

In these verses, Allah has commended the path that it is straight and
that it is the path taken by those upon whom Allah has bestowed His
bounties and favours. It is this path guidance to which has been asked
for. And it is the ultimate goal of the worship: The servant prays to
his Lord that his worship, clean from all im­purities, be performed in
this path.

Allah has mentioned in His Book that He has laid down a path for man,
nay, for all the creation, a path upon which they are proceeding. He
says:

O ***man! Surely thou art striving to thy Lord, a hard striving, until
thou art to meet Him*** **(84:6)*****;***

***. . . and to Him is the ultimate resort*** **(64:3)*****;***

***. . . now surely to Allah do all affairs eventually come***
**(42:53).**

There are many such verses, showing that all are proceeding on a
prescribed road and that their destination is Allah. So far as the way
is concerned, Allah has said that there are two ways, not one:

***Did I not enjoin on you, O children of Adam! that you should not
worship the Satan? Surely he is your open enemy. And that you should
worship Me; this is the straight path*** **(30:60-61)*****.***

So, there is a straight path, and also there is another path. Again He
has said:

. . . ***then verily I am near; I answer the prayer of the supplicant
when he calls on Me, so they should answer My call and believe in Me,
that they may walk in the right way*** **(2:186)*****;***

***Call upon Me, I will answer you. Verily, those who are arrogant to My
worship shall soon enter hell, dis­graced*** (40:60)***.***

Obviously, Allah is near to His servants, and the nearer path to Him is
that of worship and prayer. Compare it with description of those who do
not believe in Him:

. . . ***these shall be called to from a far-off place*** **(41:44).**

Obviously, the station of unbelievers is far-off place. There are thus
two ways to Allah, a near one - the way of the believers - and a distant
one, that of the others. It is the first difference between the ways.

Second difference:

***Surely*** (as for) ***those who reject Our signs and turn away from
them haughtily, the doors of heaven shall not be opened for them***
**(7:40).**

What is the function of a door? To let authorized people pass through it
and bar the entry to unauthorized ones. The verse shows that there is a
passage from the lower level to the upper heights.

On the other hand, Allah says:

. . . ***and to whomsoever My wrath descends he shall perish indeed***
**(20:81)*****.***

The word translated here as “shall perish” literally means “shall fall
down”. Therefore, there is another passage coming for the upper heights
to the lower level. Also He says:

**. . .** ***and whoever adopts unbelief instead of faith, he indeed has
gone astray from*** **(i.e., has lost)** ***the right way*** **(2:
108).**

Allah uses the term “polytheism” for “going astray”.[^1] Accordingly,
people are divided into three categories:

First, those who proceed to the upper heights - those who believe in the
signs of Allah and are not arrogant to His worship.

Second, those who fall down to the lower levels - they are those upon
whom the wrath of Allah has descended.

Third, those who have gone astray from the right path; they are lost,
wandering hither and thither.

The last verse under discussion points to these three categories: “the
path of those upon whom Thou hast bestowed favours, not of those
inflicted by Thy wrath, nor of those gone astray.”

Obviously, “the straight path” is separate from the last two paths. It
is the path of the believers who are not arrogant. At the same time, the
following verse shows that the straight path itself may be divided in
various “traffic lanes”, ways or branches:

**. . . A*****llah will exalt those of you who believe, and those who
are given knowledge, in high degrees . . .*** **(58:11).**

This statement needs some elaboration:

Every straying is polytheism and vice versa, as may be in­ferred from
the words of Allah:

***. . . and whoever adopts un­belief instead of faith, he indeed has
gone astray from the right way (2:108).***

The same is the theme of the verse:

***Did not I en­join on you, O children of Adam! that you should not
worship the Satan? Surely he is your open enemy. And that you should
worship Me; this is the straight path. And certainly he has led astray a
great multitude from among you*** **(36:60 - 62)*****.***

Likewise, the Qur'an counts polytheism as injustice and vice versa, as
may be seen in the words which the Satan shall utter after the judgment
will be delivered against him and his followers:

**. . .** ***surely I disbelieved in your associating me with Allah,
before; surely it is the unjust that shall have the painful
punishment*** **(14:22)*****.***

Then it counts injustice as straying:

***Those who believe and do not mix up their faith with injustice, those
are they who shall have the security and they are those who shall be
guided aright*** **(6:82).**

It should be noted that they shall be guided aright and shall have
security against straying or its resulting punishment only if they do
not mix their faith with injustice and inequity.

It is clear from looking at these verses together that going stray,
polytheism and inequity all have the same effect; all three are adjunct
to each other. That is why it is said that each of them is identifiable
by the other two. For all practical purposes the three are one and the
same, although they may be different in their literal meaning.

The straight path, then, is different from that of those who have gone
astray; it is a path which is far away from polytheism and injustice.
There can be no straying in this path - neither in hidden ideas and
beliefs (for example, the disbelief or the thoughts disapproved by
Allah); nor in open actions or omissions (like committing a sin or
omitting a good deed). It is the true mono­theism in belief and in
deeds.

And what is there after the truth but error? The above-mentioned verse
6:82 fits on it completely. That verse guarantees security in the way
and promises perfect guidance. The promise is inferred from the fact
that the original word translated as “guided aright” is noun-agent, and
the gram­marians say that such a noun is really made for future. This is
one feature of the straight path.

Allah has identified those bestowed with divine favours, in the verse:

***And whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favours from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the righteous ones; and excellent are these as
companions*** **(4:69).**

The belief and the obedience have been explained shortly before it in
these words:

***But no! by your Lord! they do not believe*** **(in reality)**
***until they make you a judge of that which has become a matter of
disagreement among them, and then they do not find any straitness in
their selves as to what you have decided, and submit with total
submission. And if We had prescribed for them: Kill yourselves or go
forth from your homes, they would not have done it except a few of them;
and if they had done what they were admonished, it would have certainly
been better*** **for** ***them and most efficacious in strengthening***
**(them) (4 :65-66) .**

Those who truly believe are really strong in their servitude and
submission, in words and in deeds; in appearance and in secret. Yet such
perfect believers shall be placed in a rank behind those upon whom Allah
has bestowed favours; that is why Allah has said, “these are with those
. . .” and not, 'among those'. They shall be with them, but not of them.
It is further strengthened by the last sentence, “and excellent are
these as companions”. Companions are other than the self.

There is another, somewhat similar, verse in fifty-seventh chapter:

***and*****(as for)** ***those who believe in Allah and His apostles,
these it is that are the truthful and the martyrs with their Lord; they
shall have their reward and their light . . .*** **(57:19).**

The believers, thus, shall be included in the ranks of the martyrs and
the truthful - in the life hereafter. The fact that it will happen in
the next world is inferred from the words, “with their Lord”, and “they
shall have their reward”.

Those bestowed with divine favours who are the people of the straight
path - with whose relationship the straight path is identified - have
greater prestige and higher rank than these believers who have cleansed
their beliefs and actions from straying, polytheism and injustice.
Pondering on these verses together, one feels sure that this group of
the believers (with this quality) still continues; it has not come to
its end.

Had this group completed its term, it would have been counted among (and
not, “with”) those bestowed with favours; these believers would have
gone up and instead of being with those bestowed with favours, would
have become part of them. They probably are among those who have been
given knowledge from Allah, as He says:

***Allah will exalt those of you who believe, and those who are given
know­ledge, in high degrees (58:11).***

The people of the straight path are bestowed with excellent bounties
that are more precious than that of the complete faith and perfect
belief. This is the second feature of the straight path.

Allah repeatedly mentions *as-sirat* (path) and *as-sabīl* (way) in the
Qur'an; but He has never attributed to Himself except one straight path;
although He attributes several ways to Himself.

***And*** **(as for)** ***those who strive hard for Us. We will most
certainly guide them onto Our ways*** **(29:69).**

Likewise, He has never ascribed “the straight path” to any of his
servants, the only exception being this verse under discussion which
ascribes it to those who are bestowed with divine favours; but He
frequently attributes “the way” to one or the other of His chosen
servants:

***Say: “This is my way; I invite you unto Allah; with clear
sight*****(are)** ***I and he who follows*** ***me”*** **(12:108);**

***. . . and follow*** ***the way of him who turns to Me*** **(31:15);**

***. . . the way of the believers . . .*** **(4:l15).**

It is an indication that “the way” is other than “the straight path”.

There may be various and different ways taken by various chosen servants
proceeding on the way of worship and submission; but “the straight path”
is only one, as Allah points to it in these words:

***Indeed, there has come to you a light and a clear Book from Allah;
with it Allah guides him who follows*** ***His pleasure into the ways of
safety and brings them out of utter darkness into light by His
permission and guides them to the straight path*** **(5:15-16).**

See, how the verse refers to “the ways” (in plural), and to “the
straight path” (in singular). Now, there may be two explanations for it.
Either “the straight path” is the same thing as “the ways”, or “the
ways” on going further join together and then merges into the straight
path. There is another difference between the straight path and the way.
Allah says:

***And most of them do not believe in Allah without associating
others*** **(with Him) (12:106).**

Note how the believers are said to associate others with Allah. It shows
that some sort of polytheism (that is, straying) may co-exist with
belief (and the belief is a “way”); in other words the way may co-exist
with polytheism. But the straight path cannot do so because it is not
the path of those who have gone astray.

Each of these ways has some excellence or some deficiency - but not so
the straight path. Each way is a part of the straight path, but is
distinguished from the other ways. It may be inferred from the
above-mentioned verses as well as from others. For example, Allah says:

***And that you worship Me; this is the straight path*** **(36: 61);**

***Say: “Surely,*****(as for)** ***me, my Lord has guided me to the
straight path;*** **(to)** ***a most right religion, the faith of
Ibrahim the upright one”*** **(6:161).**

The worship and the religion are com­mon to all the ways, and they are
also “the straight path”. The relation of the straight path to the ways
of Allah is that of the soul to the body. The body, during the life,
undergoes countless changes, varies from day to day - from infancy to
childhood; from adolescence to youth, from middle to old age and to
senility.

But the soul remains the same, and is always one with body at every
stage. Sometimes, the body is inflicted with undesirable effects, which
the soul would never accept, if left to itself.

But the soul - the creation of Allah, upon which He created the man -
never deteriorates. Yet, in all these states, the body remains one with
the soul. Likewise, the ways of Allah are one with the straight path;
but sometimes a way - the way of the believers, of the followers of the
Prophet of those who turn towards Allah or any other way - suffers from
some kind of deterioration, although the straight path is immune from
all defects and im­perfections.

You have seen how one of the ways, the belief, some­times combines with
polytheism and straying, but the straight path does not do so. In short,
the ways are of various grades -near or distant; safe or unsafe; clean
or unclean - but all are in the straight path, or, let us say, are one
with the straight path.

Allah has mentioned this fact, in a parable of truth and falsehood, in
these words:

***He sends down water from the heaven, then the valleys flow according
to their measure, and the torrent bears along the swelling foam; and
from what they melt in the fire for the sake of*****(making)**
***ornaments or apparatus arises a scum like it; thus does Allah compare
truth and falsehood; then as for the scum, it passes away as a worthless
thing; and as for that which profits the people, it remains in the
earth; thus does Allah set forth parables*** **(13:17).**

It clearly shows that the hearts and mind differ in their abilities and
capacities to receive the divine knowledge and spiritual perfection,
although all partake of the same divine sustenance. (Its full
explanation will be written in the ch. 13).

This was, however, the third feature of the straight path. From the
above analysis it may be seen that the straight path is a sort of
controller of all the ways leading to Allah. We may say that a way
leading to Allah leads a man to Him as long as it remains one with the
straight path; but the straight path leads to Allah unconditionally,
without any if or but.

That is why Allah has named it *“as-siratu '1-mustaqīm”* (**الصراط
المستقيم** = the straight path). *as-Sirat* means a clear path, and is
derived from *“saratttu sartan “* (**صرطتُ صرطاَ** = I swallowed it
completely); in other words, this clear path swallows its walkers
without letting them go out. *“al-Mustaqim”* (**المستقيم** = straight)
literally means the one who stands on his legs, and has full control of
himself as well as of the things attached to him.

In other words, it is a thing which is not subjected to change or
variation. Thus *“as-siratu 'l-mustaqīm” =*the straight path is the path
which never fails to guide and to lead the walker to his destination.
Allah says:

***Then as for those who believe in Allah and hold fast unto Him, soon
will He admit them to Mercy from Him and*** **(His)** ***Grace, and
guide them unto Himself*** **(by)** ***the straight path*** **(4:175).**

Obviously this guidance does not fail; it always succeeds. Also He has
said:

***Therefore (for) whomsoever Allah intends that He would guide him
aright, He expands his breast for Islam, and (for)whomsoever He intends
that He should leave him to err, He makes his breast strait and narrow
as though he were ascending into the sky; thus does Allah lay
uncleanliness on those who do not believe. And this is the path of your
Lord, (a) straight (path) (6:125 -126).***

That is, this is Allah's path that never changes, nor does it fail to
reach its destination. Again He says:

***He said: “This is a straight path with Me; surely as regards My
servants, thou hast no authority over them except those who follow thee
of the deviators”*** **(15:41-42).**

The verse declares that this is His settled course which never varies.
In this way, it conveys the same idea which is contained in the verse:

***For you shall not find any alteration in the course of Allah; and you
shall not find any change in the course of Allah*** **(35:43).**

The above-mentioned discourse has made the following points clear:

First: There are various ways to Allah, each differing with others in
perfection, easiness and smoothness. It all depends on its nearness or
remoteness from the basic reality, from the straight path, like the way
of submission, of faith, of worship, of purity of intention or of
humility before Allah.

Some of the ways leading to the opposite direction are disbelief,
polytheism, infidelity, exceeding the bounds, committing sins etc. Allah
has said:

***And for all are grades according to what they did, and so that He may
pay them back fully their deeds and they shall not be dealt with
unjustly*** **(46:19).**

The same is the case with the spiritual knowledge which the human mind
receives from Allah. They vary according to mental and spiritual
capacity of the receivers, and are tinted by colours of visions of the
beholders. This fact is shown in the Qur'anic parable mentioned earlier:

***He sends down water from the heaven, then the valleys flow according
to their measure . . .*** **(13:17).**

Second: The straight path controls all the ways. Likewise, the people of
the straight path (who have been firmly established in it by Allah) do
enjoy complete authority to guide the other servants of Allah. Allah
says:

**. . .** ***and excellent are these as companions*** **(4:69);**

***Verily, your only Master is Allah and His Apostle and those who
believe, those who keep up prayer and pay zakat while they are bowing
down*** **(5:55).**

The last men­tioned verse was revealed about 'Ali, the Leader of the
faithful (a.s.), as *al-mutawatir* Tradition say; and he (peace be on
him) was the first to open this door in Islam. More details of it will
be given in the fifth chapter.

Third: The import of the guidance to the way depends on the meaning of
the way itself. *al-Hiddyah* (**الهِداية**) means to guide, to lead; it
accepts two objects, either without any preposition (as in the language
of Hijaz) or with *ila* (**الى** = to) before the second object (as in
the language of other tribes). This detail has been given in *as-Sihah*
of al-Jawharī, and obviously it is correct.

Before going further, a mistaken notion should be removed. Some people
think that the meaning of guidance changes, depending on whether its
second object is preceded by the preposition *ila* or not. If there is
no such preposition, then according to them, guidance means “to convey
to the destination”; if it is preceded by *ila,* then it denotes “to
show the path”.

In evidence, they offer the following verses:

***Surely you cannot guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He
pleases*** **(28:56).**

This verse, in which the verbs, “cannot guide” and “guides”, have been
used without preposition, says that the Prophet could not guide whom he
pleased.

But it is known that he, throughout his life, guided the people, that
is, showed them the path of Allah. There­fore, what has been negated
must be the other meaning.

What the verse, then, says is this: you cannot convey to the spiritual
goal whom you please; but it is Allah who conveys to that destination
whom He pleases. This difference in meaning is more clearly seen in the
verses:

***And We would certainly have guided them in the right path***
**(4:68).**

The verb (in the Arabic text) has been used without any preposition and
it refers to the divine guidance -that is, conveyance to destination.
And Allah addresses the Prophet in these words:

***and most surely you guide to the right path*** **(42:52).**

Here the verb is followed by *ila* and the sentence attri­butes to the
Prophet the task of guidance, in the meaning of showing the way.

According to their reasoning the three verses put together show that
when guidance is used in the meaning of “conveying to destination”, its
second object accepts no preposition; when it is used for “showing the
path”, the said object is preceded by ila.

But this notion is not supported by the Qur'an. Allah quotes the
believer of the people of Pharaoh as saying:

**“O** ***my people! follow me, I will guide you to the right course”***
**(40:38).**

Here the Arabic text has no preposition and yet it does not mean
conveying to destination, it only denotes showing the way.

What has been mentioned in the verse 28:56 ***(Surely you cannot guide
whom you love, but Allah guides whom He pleases)*** is the reality or
perfection of guidance. The verse shows that the Prophet could not
bestow on his people the perfect guidance, the reality of guidance, as
it was a task that Allah has reserved for Himself.

In short, the meaning of guidance does not depend on preposition ila
coming or not coming before the second object. In both cases the meaning
is the same.

*al-Hidayah* means to guide, to show the destination by showing the way,
or, let us say, to convey to the destination. Guidance, in reality, is
reserved for Allah, and He guides His servants by creating such causes
that point the destination to them and lead them to their spiritual
goal.

Allah says:

***Therefore*** **(for)** ***whomsoever Allah intends that He would
guide him aright, He expands his breast for Islam*** **(6:125);**

***. . . then their skins and their hearts become pliant to the
remembrance of Allah; this is Allah's guidance, He guides with it whom
He pleases*** **(39:23).**

The verb “become pliant” is followed by the preposition “to”, giving the
verb a shade of meaning of inclination and repose. Guidance, thus, means
that Allah creates in the heart an aptitude by which it initiates,
accepts, inclines towards and becomes serene in the remembrance of
Allah.

It has been mentioned earlier that there are many ways lead­ing to
Allah. Consequently, guidance for one way would differ from those of the
others. Each way has a special guidance of its own. This variation has
been hinted at in the verse:

***And*** **(as for)** ***those who strive hard for Us, We will most
certainly guide them unto Our ways; and Allah is most surely with the
doers of good*** **(29:69).**

A man strives “in the way of Allah”; and another strives “for Allah”.
There is a great difference between the two. The first tries to keep the
way safe and free from all dangers and blockades; the second's attention
is fixed on Allah only.

It is this man who is praised in this verse - he strives hard for Allah;
thereupon Allah helps him and guides him on the way most suited to his
ability and power; and thereafter keeps guiding him from one way to
another until He exclusively attaches him to Himself.

Fourth: The straight path is preserved in the ways of Allah - the ways
that are of various grades and levels. Allah guides man to it; and the
man is thus guided aright. As mentioned above, Allah may keep guiding a
man from one way to the other which is of a higher grade, and then to a
third one still higher.

The prayer in this verse, “Guide us to the straight path” (revealed on
behalf of those whom Allah has already guided to His worship) points to
this very fact. If we keep this point in view, there would be no room
for an objection like the following: The one who utters this prayer is
already guided aright - how can he pray afresh for guidance?

It would be an attempt to reobtain a thing which is already in hand, and
it is just impossible. Also, the worshipper is already on the straight
path - how can he pray to be guided again to the same path? Isn't it an
impossibility?

But the explanation given by us clears away the mist of such objections.

Another objection: Our Law is the most perfect and most comprehensive of
all the laws sent by Allah since the dawn of humanity. Why should we ask
from Allah to guide us to the path of those of the previous people upon
whom He had bestowed favours?

Reply: Admittedly, the Law brought by Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) is more
perfect than any other one. But it does not necessarily mean that all
those who follow this Law are more perfect than all those who followed
the previous laws. An average follower of the law of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)
cannot surpass Nuh or Ibrahim (a.s.) , although their laws were sent
long before the Islamic Law.

It is one thing to accept and follow a law; it is quite another to get
spiritual perfection by total submission - by perfectly moulding oneself
in that law's pattern. A believer of previous nations who attained a
high spiritual level, who became a mirror of divine attributes, is most
certainly better than, and superior to, a follower of this law who did
not reach that state - even though the latter would be following the
most perfect and comprehensive law, that is, the Law of Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.).

Therefore, it is quite in order for a believer of lower grade (although
he may follow a perfect law) to pray to Allah to help him reach the
level of a believer of higher grade (although he might have followed a
less perfect law).

An exegete has replied to the above-mentioned objection in a way that is
not free from defects. He has said: The religion of Allah is one, and
that is Islam. The fundamental truths - the belief in One God, the
Prophethood and the Day of Judgement and all that results from this
belief - are the same in all the laws and revelations sent by Allah.

The Law of Islam has an added distinction, in that it covers all aspects
of human life and is, thus, the most comprehensive one. It looks more
properly after public welfare. Moreover, its foundation is laid on
reasoning - in all its forms: The logic, the admonition and the goodly
argumentation.

All divine religions are, thus, the same and the fundamental truths are
common to all. The previous people have preceded us in this path.
Therefore, Allah has ordered us to look into their affairs, to take
lessons from them and to follow them to spiritual perfection.

The author says: The principle upon which this reply is based is against
the principles that guide us in exegesis of the Qur'an. The reply
assumes that the realities of fundamental truths are on the same level
in all the religions; that there is no difference in their grades; that
the spiritual perfections and religious virtues are of the same quality
everywhere.

According to this view, the highest ranking prophet is equal to the
lowest type of believer in his existence and natural perfection - so far
as his creation is concerned. The difference, if any, is based on the
subjective outlook of *sharī'ah,* not on any matter of creation.

In their opinion, this case is similar to that of a king vis-a-vis his
subjects - they are not different in their human existence, the
difference is in their subjective and assumed positions only which are
laid down by people and which do not have any in­dependent existence.

This thinking, in its turn, is based on the theory of material­ism,
which teaches that nothing exists but matter; metaphysical “things” have
no existence at all (or, at least, we are not in a position to know that
they exist). The only exception is God, and we believe in His existence
because of logical evidence.

Those who accepted this view did so because, coming under the influence
of natural sciences, they put all their confidence in their five senses.
Or because they thought that “commonsense” was enough for explaining the
divine words, and therefore, ne­glected to meditate on the Qur'an. God
willing, we shall throw more light on this subject at some other place.

Fifth: The people of the straight path are higher in rank than others,
and their path is superior to the others' ways. It is because of their
knowledge, and not because of their virtuous deeds. They have that
knowledge of divine attributes which is hidden from others. (We have
explained earlier that perfection of virtuous deeds is found in some of
the inferior ways also.

Therefore, deeds cannot be the criterion by which the people of the
straight path are given excellence over the rest.) The ques­tion arises
as to what is that knowledge and how it is acquired. We shall deal with
these questions when we shall explain the verse 13:17

***(He sends down water from the heaven, then the valleys flow according
to their measure).***

The following verses too point to this fact:

***Allah will exalt those of you who believe, and those who are given
knowledge in higher degrees*** **(58:11)*****;***

***To Him do ascend the good words; and the good deed lifts them up***
**(35:10).**

What ascends to Allah is the good words, that is, true belief and
knowledge; good deeds lift up the good words and help them in their
ascension, without themselves going up. We shall fully discuss this
verse when we shall reach it.

Tradition
---------

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said about the meaning of worship: “Wor­ship is of three
kinds: some people worship Allah, because they fear Him - so it is the
worship of slaves; and a group worships Allah, Blessed and High is He,
to seek reward - so it is the wor­ship of hirelings; and a group
worships Allah, Mighty and Great is He, because of (His) love - and this
is the worship of noble persons, and it is the most excellent worship.”
*(al-Kafi)*

Verily, some people worshipped Allah being desirous (of His reward) - so
this is the worship of traders; and some people worshipped Allah fearing
(His punishment) - so it is the worship of slaves, and a group
worshipped Allah in gratitude (to Him) -so this is the worship of noble
men. *(Nahju '1-baldghah)*

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Verily people worship Allah in three ways: One
group worships Him in desire of His reward, and it is the worship of
covetous ones, and it is greed; and others worship Him in dread of the
Fire, and it is the worship of slaves, and it is fear; but I worship Him
in His love - Mighty and Great is He and this is the worship of noble
ones.

(It is) because Allah has said:

***and they shall be secure from terror on that days*** **(27:89);**

and He has said,

***Say: \`If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you. .
.'*** **(3:31).**

Therefore, whosoever is loved by Allah, he shall be among the secure
ones; and it is a hidden posi­tion, cannot touch it save the purified
ones.” *(al-\`Ilal, al-Majalis* and *al-Khisal )*

The author says: The meaning of these Tradition may be understood from
the preceding Commentary. The Imams (of *Ahlu '1-bayt)* have variously
attributed the worship of the noble ones sometimes to gratitude and
sometimes to love, because in final analysis both are one and the same.
Gratitude and thankfulness means putting the received bounty in its
proper place.

It is the thankfulness for worship that should be addressed to Allah, as
only He, Himself, deserves to be worshipped. Allah is worshipped because
He is Allah, that is, because He alone holds all attributes of beauty
and glory. He, of all things, is Beautiful; He alone is loved for
Himself. What is love? It is inclination and attraction towards beauty.

We say: He is worshipped because He is He; we may express the same idea
if we say: He is worshipped because He is beautiful and beloved. Again,
the same theme may be explained by saying that He is worshipped because
He is the Bestower of favours and is thanked through worship. All three
expressions carry the same import.

It has been narrated through Sunni chains that as-Sadiq (a.s.) explained
the verse, “Thee do we worship . . .” in these words: “We do not ask
from Thee other than Thee, and we do not worship Thee by substitute and
replacement, as do those who are ignorant of Thee, removed from Thee.”

The author says: This tradition points to what has been explained in the
Commentary that worship demands presence (of heart) and purity (of
intention) which does not allow diversion to any substitute, to anything
else.

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said *inter alia* in a tradition: “And whosoever thinks
that he worships (Allah) by (His) attributes without being conscious of
Him, he refers (his worship) to an absent one; and whosoever thinks that
he worships the attribute and the person (having that attribute) he
nullifies monotheism, because the attribute is other than the person;
and whosoever thinks that he ascribes the person to the attribute, he
belittles the Great One, and they do not assign to Allah His proper
prestige . . .' “ *(Tuhafu '1-'uqūl*)

as-Sadiq (a.s.) explained the verse: *Guide us to the straight path,* in
these words: “Guide us to adhere to the path that leads to Thy love, and
conveys to Thy Garden, (the path that) prevents us from following our
desires (lest we be ruined) and from adher­ing to our opinions (lest we
be destroyed). *(Ma\`ani 'l-akhadr)*

The same book quotes \`Ali (a.s.) as saying about this verse: “Continue
for us Thy help with which we obeyed Thee in our past days, so that we
continue to obey Thee in our coming days also.”

The author says: The two Tradition point to two aspects of the reply of
the previously mentioned objection - that the prayer for guidance,
addressed by a person already guided aright, is trying to obtain a thing
in hand, and that it was asking for impossible. The first tradition
looks at the difference in the grades of guidance, and the second looks
at oneness of guidance in its reality.

Again *Ma'ani 'l-akhbar* quotes 'Ali (a.s.) as saying: “The straight
path, in this world, is that which stops short of excesses and rises
above shortcomings, and remains straight; and, in the next world, it is
the path of the believers (leading them) to the Garden. ”

The same book quotes the same Imam, explaining the verse: *The path of
those. . .,* as follows: “Say: Guide us to the path of those upon whom
Thou hast bestowed favours by strengthening them for Thy religion and
Thy obedience - not (of those whom Thou favoured) with wealth and health
because such things are sometimes given even to the disbelievers or to
the sinful.”

(Then he said:) “And those (bestowed with divine favour) are those about
whom Allah says:

***And whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favours from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the righteous ones, and excellent are these as
companions*** **(4:69).**

ar-Rida (a.s.) narrates through his forefathers from Amir al-mu'minin
(a.s.) that he said: “I heard the Apostle of Allah saying: 'Allah,
Mighty and Great is He, has said: “I have divided the Opening of the
Book between Myself and My servant; so, its half is for Me and the
(other) half is for My servant. And My servant shall get what he asks
for.”

When the servant says: ***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful**,* Allah, Great is His Glory, says: “My servant has started
with My name, and it is incumbent upon Me that I should complete his
works for him and bless him in his affairs.”

And when he says: ***All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds,*** Allah, Great is His Glory, says: “My servant has praised Me,
and he knows that the bounties that are with him are from Me, and that
the misfortunes that have been averted from him were so averted by My
grace; (O My angels!) I appoint you as My witnesses that I shall add for
him the favours of the next world to those of this world, and will avert
from him the calamities of the next world as I have averted from him the
calamities of this world.”

And when he says, ***The Beneficent, the Merciful,*** Allah, Great is
His Glory, says: “My servant bore witness for Me that I am the
Beneficent, the Merciful; I make you My witness that I will most surely
augment his share in My mercy, and I will most certainly increase his
portion in My bounties.”

And when he says, ***The Master of the Day of Judgement**,* Allah, the
High, says: “I make you My witness that, as he has acknowledged that I
am the Master of the Day of Judgement, I will most certainly make his
reckoning easier (for him) on the Day of Reckoning, and I will most
certainly accept his good deeds, and look over his sins.”

And when he says: ***Thee do we worship,*** Allah, Mighty and Great is
He, says: “My servant is telling truth, He worships Me only. Be My
witness that I will most surely give him for his worship a reward that
will be the (object of) envy to all who opposed him when he worshipped
Me.”

And when he says, ***and Thee do we beseech for help,*** Allah, the
High, says: “From Me has My servant sought help, and in Me has he taken
refuge. Be My witness that I will most certainly help him in his
affairs, and will aid him in his difficulties, and will take his hand in
his calamities.”

And when he says, ***Guide us to the right path*** **. .** ., Allah,
Mighty and Great is He, says: “This (part) is for My servant, and My
servant shall have what he asks for; and I have answered (the prayer of)
My servant, and have given him what he hopes for and have protected him
from what he is afraid of.” ' ” (\`*Uyūnu 'l-akhbar).*

The author says: as-Sadūq has narrated in *\`Ilalu 'sh-shara'i \`,* an
almost similar tradition from ar-Rida (a.s.). The tradition explains the
chapter of The Opening in the frame of the daily prayer.

It further confirms the previously mentioned fact that this divine
revelation has been sent, as though on behalf of the servants of Allah,
to teach them the manners of servitude; to show them how to praise their
Lord and how to declare their allegiance to Him. It is a chapter made
especially for the purpose of worship; and no other chapter comes near
to it in this respect. For example:

1. The entire chapter is a divine speech, revealed on behalf of His
servant, so that he may recite it when he stands to worship his Lord.

2. It is divided in two parts: one for Allah and the other for the
servant.

3. It contains, in spite of its brevity, all the Qur'anic wisdom. The
Qur'an is a vast treasure of fundamental truths, moral values and the
most comprehensive *sharī \`ah* which consists of the rules of worship
and mutual dealings, as well as the penal and civil codes. Further it is
a valuable mine of divine promises and threats, stories of previous
peoples as well as parables and moral lessons.

But, in spite of this wide scope, all its teachings may be returned to
four fundamental truths: the Oneness of God, the prophet­hood, the
resurrection (with all its details) and the guidance of mankind to its
bliss in this world as well as in the next. Needless to reiterate that
this chapter contains all these basic realities in these very short, and
at the same time very eloquent, sentence.

It will not be out of place to compare the beauty, glory and
spirituality of this chapter, used in the Muslims' prayers, with the
Lord's prayer, used by the Christians in their prayer:

Our Father which art in heaven Hallowed be thy name.
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil:
For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
for ever. Amen. *(Matthews 6: 9 -13)*

Ponder deeply on the teachings contained in these sentences, supposed to
be of divine revelation, and see what manners of servitude does this
prayer teach. First it tells them that their Father (i.e. God, in their
terminology) is in heaven. Then it prays about the Father that His name
be hallowed, His kingdom come and His will be done in earth as it is in
heaven.

The question is: Who will fulfill these wishes which look more like
political slogans than spiritual invocation. Then it makes them ask for
their daily bread, and for His forgiveness in lieu of their
forgiveness - that He should waive His rights as they have waived
theirs. But what right do they possess except that which they have been
given by God Himself?

Then they beseech Him not to lead them into temptation but to deliver
them from evil. This is asking for im­ possible, because this world is
the place appointed for our test and trial, so that we may acquire
spiritual perfection. Would not salvation lose its meaning, if there was
no test and trial?

And yet some orientalists have temerity to write: “Islam does not have
any superiority over other religions, so far as spiritual knowledge is
concerned, because all divine religions invite the men to the belief in
one God, and ask them to purify themselves by good character and
virtuous deeds. The religions excel one another only in deep-rootedness
of their social fruits.”

It is narrated in *Man la yahduruhu '1-faqīh* and *at-Tafsīr* of
al-\`Ayyashi that as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: “The straight path is
Amīru'l-mu'minīn (a.s.).”

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: ”(The straight path) is the path to the knowledge
of Allah. And there are two paths, one in this world and the other in
the next. As for the path in this world, it is the Imam whose obedience
is obligatory; whosoever knows him in this world and follows his
guidance, he shall proceed on the path which is the bridge over the hell
in the next world; and whosoever does not know him in this world, his
foot shall slip (over that bridge) in the next world, and he shall fall
down into the fire of the hell.” *(Ma\`ani '1-akhbar)*

The same book quotes as-Sajjad (a.s.) as saying: “There is no curtain
between Allah and His proof, nor is there any screen for Allah against
His proof. We are the gates of Allah, and we are the straight path, and
we are the (treasure) chest of His Knowledge, and we are the
interpreters of His revelation, and we are the pillars of His Oneness,
and we are the place of His secret.”

Ibn Shahrashūb has quoted from *at-Tafsīr* of Wakī 'ibn al-Jarrah from
ath-Thawrī from as-Suddī from Asbat and Muja­hid from Ibn \`Abbas that
he said about the verse: *Guide us to the straight path:* “Say O group
of the servants (of Allah): Lead us to the love of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)
and his family ­members.”

The author says: There are other Tradition of the same meaning. Such
Tradition are based on the “flow” of the Qur'an, that is, application of
the Qur'an wherever it is applicable. It should be noted that the term,
“flow” - and it will often be used in this book - has been taken from
the Tradition of the Imams of *Ahlu 'I-bayt* (a.s.):

al-Fudayl ibn Yasar said: “I asked Abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the
tradition, \`There is no verse in the Qur'an but it has an ex­terior and
an interior, and there is no word in it but it has a boundary, and every
boundary has a watching place.' (I asked him) what was the meaning of
exterior and interior.

The Imam said: \`Its exterior is its revelation and its interior is its
interpretation; some of it has already passed (i. e. happened) and some
of it has not come about yet; it runs along (or flows) as run the sun
and the moon; when a thing of it comes (to its appointed place and time)
it happens . . . (*at-Tafsīr,* of al -\`Ayyashī)

This theme is found in other Tradition too. It is the convention of the
Imams of *Ahlu 'l-bayt* (a.s.) that they apply a Qur'anic verse to all
things it may be applied to. And this convention was correct and
reasonable, because the Qur'an was revealed as a “guidance to the
worlds”; it guides the man­kind to correct belief, correct ethics and
correct action. The matter of belief that it has explained is eternal
truth; it is not limited to a certain time or certain place.

The virtue or vice and the rules laid down for them are not confined to
one per­son or one period - they are general and applicable to all
rel­evant persons and times. The Tradition explaining the back­ground of
revelation of a certain verse - when, why and about whom or what was it
revealed - do not affect its general import.

The rule is not restricted to that particular person or event;
otherwise, it would cease to be valid in other similar conditions, and
would die with the death of that person. The Qur'anic declaration is
general. If it praises some persons, or condemns some others, it is
because of the presence of good or evil characteristics in them.

And wherever those good or evil characteristics are found, even in later
generations, the verse will in all truth be applied to them. The Qur'an
itself proves it, as Allah says:

***With it*** **(i.e., the Qur'an)** ***Allah guides him who follows***
***His pleasure into the ways of safety . . .*** **(5:16);**

***. . . and most surely it is a Mighty Book, falsehood shall not come
to it from before it nor from behind it*** **(41:41-42)** ***;***

***Surely We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
guardian*** **(15:9) .**

There are numerous Tradition, perhaps reaching to hun­dreds, which apply
various verses of the Qur'an to the Imams or to their enemies. They are
called the Tradition of “flow”. But now that the general principle has
been explained, we shall not include those Tradition in this book -
except where it becomes necessary for the explanation of a verse or for
some reasoning or discussion.

[^1]: As may be seen in the verses 36:60-62, quoted above.


