Suratul Baqarah: Verses 6-7
===========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٦) إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ أَأَنذَرْتَهُمْ أَمْ
لَمْ تُنذِرْهُمْ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٧) خَتَمَ اللَّهُ عَلَى قُلُوبِهِمْ وَعَلَى سَمْعِهِمْ وَعَلَى
أَبْصَارِهِمْ غِشَاوَةٌ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who disbelieve, alike is it to them whether you warn
them or do not warn them, they will not believe (6).***

***Allah has set a seal upon their hearts and upon their hearing; and
there is a covering over their eyes; and for them is a great punishment
(7).***

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***Surely those who disbelieve. . . will not believe**:*
They were the people who obstinately clung to rejection of faith and in
whose hearts disbelief had established deep roots. This may be inferred
from the fact that warning them and not warning them was all alike to
them; they would not move from their obduracy.

Probably it refers to the disbelievers of Quraysh, who were the
bitterest enemies of Islam and who did try their utmost to extinguish
the light of faith; they persisted stubbornly in their enmity until
Allah destroyed them in Badr and other battles.

The sentence, ***“alike is it to them whether you warn them or do not
warn them, they will not believe”***, strengthens this interpre­tation;
because it could not be applied to all the disbelievers of the world -
otherwise the door of guidance would be closed. Also, this same sentence
has come in Chapter of Yasin (36:10) which is a Meccan chapter.

Then it appears in this chapter that is the first chapter revealed at
Medina. (It was revealed before the battle of Badr.) Therefore, more
probably this verse also refers to the same Meccan group. In other
places too the same explanation may be given to the word, “those who
disbelieve”, unless there is a reason to the contrary.

Likewise, wherever the word, “those who believe”, has been used in the
Qur'an it refers to the first and early Muslims - unless there is any
reason to believe otherwise. .This style of address was reserved for
them as a protocol of honour.

**Qur’an:** ***Allah has set a seal. . . great punishment:*** Allah has
ascribed the sealing to His own action, but the covering over their eyes
is attributed to their own selves. It shows that they had put a curtain
on their souls against the light of truth - it was their own choice.

Then, after their sins and disbelief, Allah put another curtain or seal
over their souls. Their disbelief and misdeeds thus fall between two
curtains - the first from them­selves, the second from Allah.

Its further explanation will be given under 2:26;

***Surely Allah is not ashamed to set forth any parable - that of a gnat
or anything above that . . .***

Disbelief, like belief, has various degrees and ranks; and its effects
also vary, like those of belief.

Tradition
---------

Az-Zubayri says that he said to as-Sadiq (a.s.): “Tell me how many ways
of*al-kufr* (**الكفر** = disbelief, infidelity, to cover) are there
according to the Book of Allah? Mighty and Great is He! He (the Imam)
said: \`Disbelief, according to the Book of Allah, is of five types.
There is the disbelief of denial (and denial is of two kinds), and the
disbelief by neglecting what Allah has ordered, and the disbelief of
disavowal, and the ingratitude.

As for the disbelief of denial, it is denial of the Lord­ship; it is the
talk of those who say: “there is no Lord (i.e. Cre­ator), nor any Garden
nor Fire”. It is the word of two groups of disbelievers who are called
atheists. And they are those who say:

***“Nothing destroys us but time”*** **(45:24).**

It is a religion invented by them as it seemed good to them, but they
have no proof to support their view. That is why Allah has said (about
them): *And they have no knowledge of that; they only con­jecture*
(ibid.) that it is in reality as they say. And He also said:

***Surely those who disbelieve, alike is it to them whether you warn
them or do not warn them, they will not believe.' ”**(al-Kafi)*

And as for the second kind, it is the denial after knowing; it means
that the denier denies (the existence of God), but he knows (very well)
that He is the truth, and he is convinced of it (in his heart).

And Allah has said (about such people):

***And they denied them unjustly and proudly while their soul had been
con­vinced of them*** **(27:14);**

**. . .** ***and aforetime they used to pray for victory against those
who disbelieved, but when there came to them that which they did
recognize*** **(i.e. the Prophet)** ***they dis­believed in him; so
Allah's curse is on the unbelievers*** **(2:89).**

So this is the explanation of the two kinds of denial.

And the third way of disbelief is ingratitude to the bounties (of
Allah); and it is as Allah says quoting (the Prophet) Sulayman:

***“This is of the grace of my Lord that He may try me whether I am
grateful or ungrateful; and whoever is grateful, he is grate­ful***
***only for his own self, and whoever is ungrateful, then surely my Lord
is Self-sufficient, Honoured “*** **(27:40);**

***If you are grateful*****,** ***I would certainly give you more, and
if you are ungrateful, My chastisement is truly severe*** **(14:7).**

***Therefore remember Me, I will remember you, and be thankful to Me,
and do not be ungrateful to Me*** **(2:152).**

(In all these verses Allah has used the word *al-kufr* = disbelief, to
denote ungratefulness, and in­gratitude.)

And the fourth way of disbelief is leaving out or neglecting what Allah
has ordered to do. It is as Allah says:

***And when We made a covenant with you: You shall not shed your blood
and you shall not turn your people out of your cities; then you gave a
promise while you witnessed. Yet you it is who slay your people and turn
a party from among you out of their homes, backing each other up against
them unlawfully and exceeding the limits; and if they should come to you
as captives,*** ***you would ransom them - while their very turning out
was unlawful for you. Do you then believe in a part of the book and
disbelieve in the other?*** **(2:84-85)*****.***

In this verse Allah has charged them with disbelief because they did not
follow the commandment of Allah; (it should be noted that) Allah has (in
this very verse) linked them to belief, yet He did not accept it from
them and it did not benefit them before Allah.

So Allah (further) said:

***What then is the reward of such among you as do this but disgrace in
the life of this world, and on the day of resurrection they shall be
sent back to the most grievous chastisement, and Allah is not at all
heedless of what you do***(ibid.)

And the fifth way of disbelief is disavowal. It is as Allah says,
quoting lbrahim (a.s.)

**“. . .** ***we renounce you, and enmity and hatred have appeared
between us and you for ever until you believe in Allah alone”***
**(60:4),**

that is, we disavow and repudiate you.

And He says, describing Iblīs and his disowning his friends from mankind
on the Day of Resurrection:

**“.** ***. . surely I dis­believed in your associating me*** **(with
Allah)** ***before”*** **(14:22).**

And also He says:

***And he said: “You have only taken for yourselves idols besides Allah
by way of friendship between you in the world's life, then on the
resurrection day some of you shall deny others, and some of you shall
curse others . . .*** **(29:25),**

that is, some of you shall dissociate from others.

The author says: This tradition confirms what we have previously
mentioned that disbelief has many grades and ranks.


