Suratul Baqarah: Verses 8-20
============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٨) وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَقُولُ آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَبِالْيَوْمِ
الآخِرِ وَمَا هُم بِمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٩) يُخَادِعُونَ اللَّهَ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَمَا يَخْدَعُونَ إِلاَّ
أَنفُسَهُم وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٠) فِي قُلُوبِهِم مَّرَضٌ فَزَادَهُمُ اللَّهُ مَرَضاً وَلَهُم
عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْذِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١١) وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لاَ تُفْسِدُواْ فِي الأَرْضِ قَالُواْ
إِنَّمَا نَحْنُ مُصْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٢) أَلا إِنَّهُمْ هُمُ الْمُفْسِدُونَ وَلَكِن لاَّ يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٣) وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ آمِنُواْ كَمَا آمَنَ النَّاسُ قَالُواْ
أَنُؤْمِنُ كَمَا آمَنَ السُّفَهَاء أَلا إِنَّهُمْ هُمُ السُّفَهَاء
وَلَكِن لاَّ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٤) وَإِذَا لَقُواْ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ قَالُواْ آمَنَّا وَإِذَا
خَلَوْا إِلَى شَيَاطِينِهِمْ قَالُواْ إِنَّا مَعَكُمْ إِنَّمَا نَحْنُ
مُسْتَهْزِؤُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٥) اللَّهُ يَسْتَهْزِئُ بِهِمْ وَيَمُدُّهُمْ فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ
يَعْمَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٦) أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرُوُاْ الضَّلالَةَ بِالْهُدَى فَمَا
رَبِحَت تِّجَارَتُهُمْ وَمَا كَانُواْ مُهْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٧) مَثَلُهُمْ كَمَثَلِ الَّذِي اسْتَوْقَدَ نَارًا فَلَمَّا أَضَاءَتْ
مَا حَوْلَهُ ذَهَبَ اللَّهُ بِنُورِهِمْ وَتَرَكَهُمْ فِي ظُلُمَاتٍ
لاَّ يُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٨) صُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْيٌ فَهُمْ لاَ يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(١٩) أَوْ كَصَيِّبٍ مِّنَ السَّمَاء فِيهِ ظُلُمَاتٌ وَرَعْدٌ وَبَرْقٌ
يَجْعَلُونَ أَصَابِعَهُمْ فِي آذَانِهِم مِّنَ الصَّوَاعِقِ حَذَرَ
الْمَوْتِ وَاللَّهُ مُحِيطٌ بِالْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٢٠) يَكَادُ الْبَرْقُ يَخْطَفُ أَبْصَارَهُمْ كُلَّمَا أَضَاء لَهُم
مَّشَوْا فِيهِ وَإِذَا أَظْلَمَ عَلَيْهِمْ قَامُواْ وَلَوْ شَاء
اللَّهُ لَذَهَبَ بِسَمْعِهِمْ وَأَبْصَارِهِمْ إِنَّ اللَّه عَلَى كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And there are some people who say: “We believe in Allah and in the
last day”; while they are not at all believers (8).***

***They desire to deceive Allah and those who believe, and they do not
deceive except themselves and they do not perceive (9).***

***There is a disease in their hearts, so Allah added to their disease
and for them is a painful chastise­ment because of the lie they were
saying (10).***

***And when it is said to them, “Do not make mischief in the land”, they
say: “We are but peace-makers” (11).***

***Now surely they themselves are the mischief-makers, but they do not
per­ceive (12).***

***And when it is said to them: “Believe as the people have believed ”,
they say: “Shall we believe as the fools have believed?” Now surely they
themselves are the fools, but they do not know (13).***

***And when they meet those who believe, they say: “We believe ”; and
when they are alone with their Satans, they say: “Surely we are with
you, we were only mocking” (14).***

***Allah pays them back their mockery, and leaves them alone in their
rebellion blindly wandering on (15).***

***These are they who buy error for the guidance, so their bargain
brings*** ***(them)*** ***no gain, nor are they guided aright (16).***

***Their parable is like the parable of one who kindled afire, but when
it had illumined all around him, Allah took away their light, and left
them in utter darkness - they do not see (17).***

***Deaf, dumb*** ***(and)*** ***blind, so they will not turn back
(18).***

***Or like an abundant rain from the heaven in which is utter darkness
and thunder and lightning; they put their fingers into their ears
because of the thunder peals, for fear of death, and Allah encom­passes
the unbelievers (19).***

***The lightning almost takes away their sight; whenever it shines on
them they walk in it, and when it becomes dark to them they stand still;
and if Allah had pleased He would certainly have taken away their
hearing and their sight; surely Allah has power over all things (20)
.***

Commentary
----------

These thirteen verses are about the hypocrites. We shall discuss this
subject in detail in Chapter 63 (The Hypocrites) and in some other
places.

**Qur’an:** ***They desire to deceive:*** *“al-Khad'ah”* (**الخُدعة**)
is deceit, duplicity.

**Qur’an:** ***When they are alone with their Satans:*** *“ash-Shaytan”*
(**الشيطان**) means evil, wicked; that is why the Iblīs is called the
Satan.

**Qur’an:** *Their* ***parable is like the parable of one who kindled a
fire . . . they will not return:*** The hypocrites are like a man who is
surrounded by a blinding darkness in which he cannot distin­guish good
from bad, beneficial from harmful; to remove it he kindles a fire, and
in its light is able to see to some distance around it; then as soon as
it has illumined all around, Allah, extinguishes it by wind, rain or
some other thing like it and he is left as he was before - in utter
darkness.

And now he is pressed between two darknesses - that of the night and
that of bewilderment and nullity of his endeavour. This parable fits
exactly on hypocrites. A hypocrite declares himself to be a Muslim, and
through it gains some benefits, as he is treated as a Muslim in matters
of marriage and inheritance etc.

But as soon as death approaches - the time when the real and complete
benefits of Islam should have ap­peared - Allah takes away the light,
nullifies his deeds and leaves him in utter darkness in which he cannot
see at all. Thus he falls between two darknesses - his original one and
the one he added with his dark deeds.

**Qur’an:** ***Or like an abundant rain . . . Allah has power over all
things:*** *“as-Sayyib”* (**الصَّيّب** = abundant rain); *“al- barq”*
(**البرق** = lightning; flesh of lightning); *“ad-ra'd”* (**الرَّعد** =
thunder that is heard after lightning); *“as-sa \`iqah ”* (
**الصّاعِقة**= thunderbolt, to strike with lightning).

This is another example for the hypocrites. A man is caught in a rain
pour; darkness surrounds him, he is unable to see around and loses his
bearings. The rain tells him to run away; to find a shelter somewhere,
but darkness prevents him from it; frightening thunder and
lightning-bolts have overwhelmed him, yet when lightning appears he
tries to take its advantage by walking ahead in its light - but it
appears only for a fleeting moment and then disappears; whenever it
shines he walks ahead and when darkness I engulfs him again he stops.

A hypocrite is exactly in the same position. He does not like Islam, but
has to profess to be a Muslim. His words do not reach his heart; what he
says is different from what he believes in his heart. Because of this
discrepancy his path is not illuminated as it should have been.

The result is that he gropes about aimlessly and stumbles every now and
then; he walks a little and then stops. Thus Allah punishes him with
disgrace; and had He wished so, He would have taken away his sight and
hearing, thereby disgracing him on the very first day.


