Suratul Baqarah: Verses 21-25
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٢١) يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اعْبُدُواْ رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ
وَالَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٢٢) الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الأَرْضَ فِرَاشاً وَالسَّمَاء بِنَاء
وَأَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاء مَاء فَأَخْرَجَ بِهِ مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ
رِزْقًا لَّكُمْ فَلاَ تَجْعَلُواْ لِلَّهِ أَندَادًا وَأَنتُمْ
تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٢٣) وَإِن كُنتُمْ فِي رَيْبٍ مِّمَّا نَزَّلْنَا عَلَى عَبْدِنَا
فَأْتُواْ بِسُورَةٍ مِّن مِّثْلِهِ وَادْعُواْ شُهَدَاءَكُم مِّن دُونِ
اللَّهِ إِنْ كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٢٤) فَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلُواْ وَلَن تَفْعَلُواْ فَاتَّقُواْ النَّارَ
الَّتِي وَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَالْحِجَارَةُ أُعِدَّتْ لِلْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٢٥) وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِين آمَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّالِحَاتِ أَنَّ
لَهُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ كُلَّمَا رُزِقُواْ
مِنْهَا مِن ثَمَرَةٍ رِّزْقًا قَالُواْ هَذَا الَّذِي رُزِقْنَا مِن
قَبْلُ وَأُتُواْ بِهِ مُتَشَابِهًا وَلَهُمْ فِيهَا أَزْوَاجٌ
مُّطَهَّرَةٌ وَهُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O men! worship your Lord Who created you and those before you so that
you may guard*** **(against evil)** ***(21) ;***

***Who made the earth a bed*** **(resting place)** ***and the sky a
structure; and*** **(Who)** ***sends down rain from the heaven, thereby
brings forth with it subsistence for you of the fruits; therefore do not
set up equals to Allah while you know (22).***

***And if you are in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our
servant, then produce a chapter like it and call on your witnesses
besides Allah if you are truthful (23).***

***But if you do*** **(it)** ***not - and never shall you do*** **(it)**
***- thenbe on guard against the fire of which men and stones are the
fuel; it is prepared for the unbelievers (24) .***

***And convey good news to those who believe and do good deeds that for
them are gardens in which rivers flow; whenever they shall be given a
portion of the fruit thereof, they shall say: “This is what was given to
us before;- and they shall be given the like of it, and they shall have
pure mates in them; and in them they shall abide (25).***

Commentary
----------

**Qur’an:** ***O men! worship your Lord . . . may guard*** **(against
evil)**: The preceding nineteen verses have described the positions of
the three groups category-wise: The pious ones who are on the guidance
from their Lord; the disbelievers whose hearts and ears have been sealed
and who have their eyes covered; and the hypo­crites in whose hearts
there is disease so Allah added to their disease and they are deaf, dumb
and blind.

In this background, Allah calls the men to be His good ser­vants, to
worship Him and to join, not the disbelievers and the hypocrites, but
the pious ones, those who guard themselves against evil. This context
shows that the clause, “so that you may guard (against evil)”, is
governed by the verb “worship” - you should worship Allah to join those
who guard against evil, who are pious. It may also be governed by the
verb, “created” - Allah created you in order that you may guard
yourselves against evil.

**Qur’an:** ***Who made the earth a*** ***bed . . . do not set up equals
to Allah while you know:*** *“al-Andad”* (**الأنداد**) is plural of
*an-nidd* (**النِّد** = alike, equal, peer). The phrase, “while you
know”, is unconditional, and grammatically it is circumstantial phrase
of ”do not set up”; these two factors lend extra-ordinary force to the
prohibition of setting up equals to Allah.

The sentence shows that a man who has even a little knowledge should not
ascribe any equal or partner to Allah; he should know that it is Allah
Who has created him and those before him and arranged and managed this
system in the creation for their sustenance and survival.

**Qur’an:** ***And*** ***if you are in doubt . . . then produce a
chapter like it . . .*** : It is a challenge which human beings and jinn
can never meet. This challenge has been offered to demonstrate the
miracle of the Qur'an, to show that it is a Book sent down by Allah,
there is no doubt in it; that it has been revealed as an ever­lasting
miracle that will remain alive till the end of the world. This challenge
has repeatedly been given in the Qur' an:

***Say: “If men and jinn should combine together to bring the like of
this Qur'an, they could not bring the like of it, even though some of
them were aiders of the others”*** **(17:88).**

***Or, do they say: “He has forged it?” Say: “Then bring ten chapters
like it forged and call upon whom you can besides Allah, if you are
truthful”*** **(11:13).**

This context shows that the pronoun “it” in “like it” refers to “that
which We have revealed to Our servant”, that is, the Qur'an. It is a
challenge to them to bring a like of the Qur'an in its inimitable style
and meaning.

The word *“min mithlihi”* (**من مثلهِ** = translated here as “like it”)
may also be rendered as “from like him”. In that case it will be a
challenge to bring a like of the Qur'an written by someone like the Holy
Prophet.

This Qur'an has been brought by a person who was never taught by any
teacher, who had not learnt these valuable and marvelous truths from any
human being, nor had he taken this most eloquent style from any mortal.

If the disbelievers thought that such a man can write such a Book, then
let them bring its like from some such illiterate man. In this light,
the verse would have the same import as the following one:

***Say: “If Allah had desired*** **(otherwise)** ***I would not have
recited it to you, nor would He have taught it to you; indeed I have
lived a lifetime among you before it; do you not then understand?”***
**(10:16)**

Both explanations have been given in some Tradition.

Obviously, this and the other challenging verses dare the antagonists to
bring, if they can, like of even the shortest chapter of the Qur'an -
say, the Chapter of *al-Kawthar* or *al- Asr.*

A strange exegesis has been written by someone that “like it ” means
like this Chapter, The Cow, in which this verse occurs. This explanation
is totally devoid of good literary taste. Those who disbelieved in the
Qur'an, rejected the whole Book as being forged against Allah.

What purpose could be served by challenging them to bring a Chapter like
that of The Cow? Such a challenge would, in final analysis, mean this:
If you are in doubt the short Chapter of *al-Kawthar* or *al- Ikhlds,*
then bring a like of the largest Chapter of The Cow. Absurd, isn't it!

Miracle And Its Quiddity
------------------------

The claim of the Qur'an that it is a miraculous sign, and the challenge
to the doubters offered by this verse, contains in reality two claims:
First, that miracles, super-natural events, do occur; second, that the
Qur'an is one of such miracles.

If the second claim is proved, the first will automatically be proved.
That is why the Qur'an has challenged the men to bring its like, as it
would prove both aspects of the claim.

How does a miracle happen? After all, it is against the deep-­rooted
system of the cause-and-effect which is never negated. The Qur'an
explains this subject in the following two stages:

First: The miracle is a reality; the Qur'an is one of the miracles,
which in itself proves the existence of miracles in general; it offers a
challenge to its adversaries and in this way proves its truth.

Second: What is the reality of miracle? How can a thing happen in this
world of nature against the universal law of the cause-and-effect?

The Miracle Of The Qur’an
-------------------------

Undoubtedly, the Qur'an has offered a continuing challenge, by which it
proves itself to be a miracle. This challenge has been given in many
verses of Meccan as well as Medinite period. All of them show that this
Book is a divine miracle, a super-natural sign.

The verse under discussion, “And if you are in doubt as to that which We
have revealed to Our servant, then produce a chapter like it . . . ”, is
one of those challenges: Produce a chapter like one of the Qur'an from
someone like the Prophet.

It should be noted that it does not purport to prove the prophethood of
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) directly; it does not say, \`if you are in doubt as
to the prophethood of Our, servant'; instead it says, \`if you are in
doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our servant'.

Likewise, all the challenges given in the Qur'an aim to prove that this
Book is a super-natural sign from Allah. And when this fact is
established, the prophethood of the Prophet will automatically be
proved.

The verses of challenge vary in their scope and generality. The most
general is the verse:

**Say: \`** ***If men and jinn should combine together to bring the like
of this Qur'an, they could not bring the like of it, even though some of
them were aiders of the others”*** **(17:88).**

The verse is of Meccan period, and it is easy to see that it contains an
all-encompassing challenge.

This challenge is not confined to its unsurpassed eloquence and purest
style. Otherwise, the challenge would not cover non­-Arabs; it could be
addressed to only those who spoke pure Arabic before it was debased by
foreign influence - in other words, only to the Arabs of the days of
paganism or to those whose life-span bridged the time of paganism and
that of Islam. But the verse chal­lenges not only the whole mankind but
confronts the *jinn* also.

As for other special qualities of the Qur'an (like the exposi­tion of
spiritual realities, the high morals, the most comprehensive and the
fairest legal code, the information of the things unseen as well as
other subjects which the man had not even thought of when the Qur'an was
revealed), they are of such a nature that only a selected group - and
not the whole mankind - may appreciate them.

But the challenge is general and covers elites and common men and
*jinn.* It is clear in this light that it is not confined to any one
quality; it defies them to bring a like of this Book in all its
qualities together.

The Qur'an is a miracle: For a man of eloquence, in its spellbinding
sublimity and style; for a sage, in its sagacity; for a scholar, in its
knowledge; for a sociologist, in its social system; for a legislator, in
its legislation; for a politician, in its politics; for a ruler, in its
rule of justice; and for the whole world, in such things which none of
them can grasp like the information of the unseen, prophecies of future
events, freedom from discrepancy in its laws, knowledge and expression.

The Qur'an claims to be a comprehensive miracle, covering all its
aspects. It is a miracle for every individual man and *jinn -*an average
person or a select one, learned or ignorant, man or woman, of a very
high rank of excellence or of a lower level -in short, anyone who has
enough intelligence to understand the Qur'anic speech.

Man, by nature, comprehends a virtue and understands its various grades.
Every person should look into an excellence which he or someone else has
got; then he should compare that excellence or virtue with what the
Qur'an contains of the same; and then he should decide - in all honestly
and justice - whether it is in human power to bring a like of the
Qur'an. Is it possible for a man to bring such divine knowledge, so
well-reasoned, as the Qur'an has done?

Is it within human power to build such character, based on foundation of
reality, which may honestly be compared with the Qur'anic teaching in
purity and excellence? Can human beings legislate perfect laws covering
all human activities without blundering into discrep­ancies, with the
spirit of monotheism and the word of piety permeating every order and
its every implication, with purity and cleanliness feeding its root and
shoots?

Can such astonishing comprehensiveness and all-inclusiveness come from
an untaught man? A man who was born and brought up among a people whose
only share in human virtues was a life sustained with raids, plunders
and wars; they buried their daughters alive, and killed their children
for fear of poverty; they boasted of their fathers and married their
mothers; debauchery was their pride; they condemned knowledge and showed
off their ignorance; in spite of their haughtiness and chauvinism, they
were preyed upon by every hunter and were easy targets for anyone who
wished to conquer them - one day they were under the Yemenite rule, the
next day were ruled over by the Ethiopians; some day Byzantine emperors
lorded over them, the other day it was Persia's turn to humiliate them.
This is the picture, in miniature, of the Arabs before Islam. And in
such environment, the Qur'an was brought by the Prophet of Islam.

Again, suppose a man brings a book, claiming that it is a guidance for
the worlds. Will he dare to include in it the news and informations of
the unseen - both past and future - not in one or two places but spread
over a lot of topics - in stories, in prophecies, and about the events
that are to happen in future? And what will be your judgment if not a
single detail proves wrong?

Once again, man is a part of this natural world; this world is
constantly changing and developing from perfection to per­fection. Is it
possible for a man to talk about each -and every affair of human life;
to give the world knowledge, laws, wisdom, admonition, parables,
stories - concerning every matter, big or small - without committing any
discrepancy, without showing any trace of gradual development?

And especially so, if his talks are not delivered all at one time, are
delivered piecemeal in a long period of twenty-three years? And even
more so when some topics are repeated again and again, when there are
shoots sprout­ing from a previously planted root? Undoubtedly, it is not
poss­ible, because no man can remain unchanged in his knowledge and
outlook throughout his life.

When a man ponders over these facts about the Qur'an -containing the
above-mentioned distinctions besides many more - he can entertain no
doubt whatsoever about its divine origin; he will feel sure that it is
beyond human power, over and above the natural and material causes.

If someone is not in a position to understand this clear fact, he should
follow the dictate of his nature - in other words, he should ask those
who are knowledge­able about this subject.

Question: Why did not the Qur'an confine its challenge to the elite
only? What is the use of including general public in this call? After
all, a common man is easily- influenced by such claims and it takes him
no time to accept pretensions of every pretender.

Don't you see that it was this group that surrendered to al-Bab,
al-Baha', Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiyanī and al- Musay­lamah, even though
what those deceivers brought as their proof was more like a senseless
jabber and raving delirium than a sensible talk?

Reply: It was the only way to keep the miracle all-inclusive; the only
possible method for discerning the perfection and excel­lence in a
quality that has various ranks and grades. People have different grades
of understanding; likewise, the virtues differ in their perfection.

Those who have high level of understanding and correct perception will
easily appreciate the high quality of an excellent work. Those who have
a lower understanding should refer to the former for their judgement. It
is the dictate of nature and demand of human psyche.

A miracle that can be universal and comprehensive, that can be addressed
to every individual, in every place and at all times, that can be
conveyed to all and can remain alive to the last day of the world, must
necessarily be a set of divine know­ledge and spiritual realities.

All other miracles were either material objects or a tangible event that
were governed by the laws of nature inasmuch as they were confined to a
certain time and space.

They were seen by only a limited number of people; even supposing, for
the sake of argument, that it was observed by all people of that
particular place, it could not be witnessed by peo­ple of other
localities; and suppose that an impossible happened, that is, it was
seen by the whole world, it could not continue eternally for the future
generations to observe.

It was for this reason that Allah chose this academic and spiritual
miracle, that is, the Qur'an, for the Prophet of Islam, so that it may
continue its challenge to the whole mankind -in all places and in all
generations. And thus the miracle con­tinues in its generality, defying
every person, in every area and every era.

First Specific Challenge: The Knowledge It Contains
---------------------------------------------------

Now we come to its specific challenges. It has offered par­ticular
challenge concerning the knowledge it imparts arid cogni­tion it
contains. Allah says:

**. . .** ***and We have revealed the Book to you explaining clearly
everything*** **(16:89);**

**. . .** ***nor anything green nor dry but*** **(it is all)** ***in a
clear book*** **(6:59).**

There are many other verses of the same theme. Look at the fundamental
teachings given in the text of the Qur'an; then see its details for
which it has referred the people to the Prophet - as Allah says:

***. . . and whatever the Apostle gives you, take it, and from what­ever
he forbids you, keep back . . .*** **(59:7);**

**. . .** ***that you may judge between people by means of that which
Allah has taught you*** **(4:105).**

Then you will know that Islam has put its attention to all big and small
topics relevant to divine knowledge, moral virtues and religious laws -
covering worship, mutual dealings, social regulations, penal code, and,
in short, everything that affects life and character.

All this is based on the foundation of human nature and monotheism.
Analyze the details and you will find monotheism as their basis; combine
the basis with relevant principles and you will get the details.

Then it has declared that all this knowledge will remain valid to the
end of the world; will continue to guide mankind and will always be
relevant to human needs and environment. Allah says:

**. . .** ***and most surely it is a Mighty Book: Falsehood shall not
come to it from before it nor from behind it; a revelation from the
Wise, the Praised One*** **(41:41-42).**

***Surely We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
guardian*** **(15:9).**

In other words, it is a Book which is beyond the reach of the law of
change and development; it will never be disturbed by abrogation.

A question may be asked here: The sociologists are of the opinion that
the laws and regulations controlling the society must change according
to the changes occurring in the structure of society. As the time passes
and civilization marches ahead, it becomes necessary to change the laws
to cope with the changed situation.

Then how can the *sharī\`ah* of Islam continue without any change or
abrogation all these centuries? We shall explain this matter, God
willing, under the verse:

***Mankind was but one peo­*****ple . . . (2:213).**

Here it is enough to point out that the Qur'an has built its laws on the
foundation of monotheism and excellent ethics that spring from healthy
human nature; it declares that legislation must grow up from the seed of
creation and existence.

The scholars of sociology, on the other hand, have fixed their eyes on
changes of society, totally ignoring the spiritual side of monotheism
and morality. As a result, their word concentrates on material
development of the society - and society is not a living organism, it
does not have a soul; and the word of Allah is the highest.

Second Specific Challenge: The Recipient Of The Revelation
----------------------------------------------------------

Another aspect of this challenge is the personality of the untaught
Prophet who brought this Qur'an as a miracle in its words and in its
meanings. He had not learnt from any teacher, was not trained by any
instructor.

This challenge is contained in the following words of Allah:

***Say: “If Allah had desired*** **(otherwise)** ***I would not have
recited it to you, nor would He have taught it to you; indeed I have
lived a lifetime among you before it; do you not then understand?”***
**(10:16).**

The Prophet lived among them as one of them. In all those years, he had
not risen above them in scholarship, nor was he renowned for any
knowledge. He did not deliver any lecture, nor did he compose a single
line of poetry, up to his fortieth year - that is to say, for about
two-thirds of his total life-span; he did not get any distinction in
literature or scholarship all these years.

Then, all of a sudden, he brought what he said was the revelation from
God, before which giants of literature felt like pigmies, and elo­quent
speakers became tongue-tied. He published that revelation to the
furthest limits of the world, but no one dared to bring its like in all
these centuries.

The outmost that his adversaries could say was that he must have learnt
those stories from Christian monks during his trade-journeys to Syria.
But he had gone to Syria only twice: First, in his early childhood, with
his uncle, Abū Talib and then, at the age of twenty-five, with Maysarah,
the slave of Khadījah. In both these journeys he was never alone day or
night, and no­body ever reported any such meeting with any supposed
teacher.

Even if we accept for the sake of argument that such training session
did take place, many questions will arise from it: Who taught him this
divine knowledge of monotheism? Where did he get these wise rules and
these realities? And lastly, who gave him this unsurpassed elocution
which has kept the silver-tongued elocutionists dumbfounded all these
years?

Another suggestion was that he learned these sublime truths from a
blacksmith, of Roman origin, who made and sold swords. Allah replied to
this allegation in this verse:

***And certainly We know that they say: “Only a mortal teaches him ”.
The tongue of him whom they are inclined to blame for it is barbarous,
and this is clear Arabic language*** **(16:103).**

A third accusation was that he gained this knowledge from Salman, the
Persian, who allegedly knew all about various religions and sects. But
Salman met the Prophet in Medina and thereafter accepted Islam, while
the major portion of the Qur'an was re­vealed at Mecca, and that part
contained all the principles, know­ledge and stories that were later
repeated at Medina - we may say that Meccan revelation had more of these
thing, than the verses revealed at Medina. The question is: What
knowledge did Salman add after his conversion to Islam? Nothing.

Moreover, read the Old and the New Testaments, and compare the stories
of the previous prophets and their people written in them with those
revealed in the Qur'an. You will see that the latter's history and
stories are different from the former's. The Bible attributes such sins
and evils to the prophets of Allah which one would be loth to ascribe to
an average man of good character.

But the Qur'an absolves them from such blames. Then you will find in the
Bible many topics that have no bearing on, and relevance to, the
spiritual knowledge or moral excellence. The Qur'an never talks except
about that which is truly beneficial to people in their spiritual
upliftment and char­acter-building.

Third Specific Challenge: Its Prophecies And Information Of Unseen
------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'an's third specific challenge is concerning its proph­ecies and
the information it gives of the unseen. Such verses may be divided in
four categories:

1. The information about previous prophets and their nations: Allah says
about some of these stories:

***These are of the tidings of the unseen which We revealed to you; you
did not know them -*** **(neither)** ***you nor your people - before
this. . .*** **(11:49);**

and He says after the story of Yūsuf:

***This is of the tidings of the unseen*** **(which)** ***We revealed to
you, and you were not with them when they resolved upon their affair,
and they were devising plans*** **(12 :102);**

also, about the story of Maryam:

***This is of the tidings of the unseen which We reveal to you; and you
were not with them when they cast their pens*** **(to decide)**
***which*** **of** ***them should have Maryam in his charge, and you
were not with them when they contended one with another*** **(3:44);**

and about \`Isa:

**Such is 'Isa, son of Maryam;** ***(this is)*** ***the saying of truth
about which they dispute*** ***(19:34).***

There are many verses of the same import.

2. Prophecies of future events: For example: The Romans would avenge
their defeat:

***The Romans are vanquished, in a near land; and they, after being
vanquished, shall overcome within a few years*** **(30:2-4);**

the Prophet would return to Mecca after his *hijrah:*

***Most surely He Who has made the Qur'an binding on you will bring you
back to the destination*** **(28 :85);**

the vision of the Prophet would certainly come true:

***Certainly Allah had shown to His Apostle the vision with truth: You
shall most cer­tainly enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah pleases, in
security,*** **(some)** ***having their heads shaved and*** **(others)**
***having their hair­cut, you shall not fear*** **(48:27);**

the behaviour, in future, of a group of Muslims:

***Those who are left behind will say when you set forth for the gaining
of acquisition: Allow us*** (that) ***we may follow you. They desire to
change the words of Allah*** **(48:15);**

nobody would be able to harm the Prophet:

. . . ***and Allah will protect you form the men*** **(5:70);**

the Qur'an will remain under the protection of Allah:

***Surely We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
guardian*** **(15:9).**

We may include in this category other numerous verses giving good
tidings to the believers and threatening the disbelievers and pagans of
Mecca of various retributions.

In this category come the prophecies of the signs and dis­turbances
appearing soon before the Day of Judgement. For example:

***And it is forbidden to a town which We destroyed that they shall not
return, until when Gog and Magog are let loose and they shall hasten
forth from every elevated place. And the true promise shall draw nigh,
then lo! the eyes of those who disbelieved shall be fixedly open: O woe
to us! surely we were in heedlessness as to this; nay, we were unjust
ones*** **(21:95-97).**

***Allah has pro­mised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them successors in the earth as He made
successors those before them . . .*** **(24:55).**

***Say: \`He has the power that He should send on you a chastisement
from above you or from beneath your feet, or that He should throw you
into confusion,*** **(making you)** ***of different parties; and make
some of you taste the fighting of to others . .. .*** **(6:65).**

3. The verses based on such scientific realities which were unknown, and
even unthought of, when the Qur'an was revealed, and which have just now
been discovered after long researches:

***And We send the winds fertilizing*** **(15:22);**

***And the earth - We have spread it forth and put in it anchors***
**(i.e. mountains)** ***and caused to grow in it of everything,
weighed*****(15:19)*****;***

***Have We not made the earth a resting place, and the mountains as
pegs*** **(therein)?** ***(78:6 - 7 ).***

4. The verses that allude to many great events and disorders that were
to happen in the Islamic community, or the world in general, after the
lifetime of the Prophet. For example:

**O you** ***who believe! whoever of you turns back from his religion,
then soon Allah will bring a people that He shall love them and they
shall love Him, humbled before the believers, mighty against the
unbelievers, they shall strive hard in Allah's way and shall not fear
the censure of any censurer; this is Allah's grace, He gives it to whom
He pleases*** **(5:54);**

***And every nation had an apostle; so when their apostle came, the
matter was decided between them with justice and they shall not be dealt
with unjustly. And they say: “When will this threat come about, if you
are truthful?” Say; “I do not control for myself any harm, or any
benefit, ex­cept what Allah pleases; every nation has a term; when their
term comes, they shall not then remain behind for an hour, nor can they
go before*** **(their time)”.** ***Say: “Tell me if His punishment
overtakes you by night or by day! What then is there of it that the
guilty would hasten on?”*** **(10:47-50)** ***;***

***Then set your face uprightly for the*** **(right)*****religion in
natural devotion*** **(to the truth),** ***the nature made by Allah in
which He has made men; . . . and be not of the polytheists, of those who
divided their religion and became sects; every sect rejoicing in what
they had with them*** **(30:30-32).**

There are many verses that come into this category, and we shall
describe some of them when explaining the seven­teenth chapter (The
Night-journey). It should be noted here that this category is one of the
specialties of this book of ours.

Fourth Specific Challenge: No Discrepancies In The Qur’an
---------------------------------------------------------

It is one of the challenges of the Qur'an that there is no discrepancy
in it. Allah says:

***Do they not then meditate on the Qur'an? And if it were from any
other than Allah, they would have found in it many a discrepancy***
**(4:82).**

This is a material world, governed by the law of change and development.
Every item in this world changes day after day from weakness to
strength, from deficiency to perfection -in its own self as well as in
all its concomitants and attachments. Man is no exception to this rule.

He also undergoes constant change and development in his existence as
well as in effects of his actions and reactions. And this law applies
also to what he gets through his perception and intellect. Every man
finds that his to­day is a bit more perfect than his yesterday.

Every passing hour makes him realize what mistakes he had committed in
the past hour, what erroneous views he had held a few hours back. It is
a fact that no sane person can deny.

In this background, look at the Qur'an. Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) brought this
book piece by piece, one small chapter or a few verses at a time. It
continued for twenty-three years in different places, various conditions
and divergent situations:

In Mecca and Medina, by day and by night, during journeys and at home,
in thick of battle and in time of peace, during hard up days and in easy
times, when Muslims suffered defeat and when they were victorious, in
safety and in danger.

It contained all types of subjects - it unveiled spiritual knowledge,
taught excellent ethics and ordained laws for every conceivable aspect
of life. In spite of all these factors, there is not a whiff of
discrepancy in its matter or meaning - it is an oft-repeated book whose
parts resemble one with the other.

There is not a least difference, contradiction or contrariety in the
realities it has explained, in the principles it has laid down. One
verse explains the rest, one sentence clarifies the others, as 'Alī
(a.s.) said: “Its one part speaks with the other, and one portion
testifies about the others.”

No doubt, if such a book would have been from other than Allah, there
would have been a lot of ups and downs in its style; the speech would
have bounced between elegance and clumsiness; the themes would have
ranged from correct to erroneous. In short, the book would have been
uneven, unbalanced and full of discrepancies.

Question: This is a claim without any proof. Non-Muslim scholars have
written many books showing that the Qur'an suffers from many
discrepancies and mistakes - in construction of sen­tences (which fall
short of the standard of eloquence) as well as in themes and meanings
(which contain errors in its views and teachings).

The replies given by the Muslims are just piteous attempts to explain
away those contradictions and shortcomings. Those are defects that a
correct and good speech should not have had in the first place.

Reply: The so-called discrepancies and defects have not been discovered
by our adversaries; they have been mentioned (together with their
replies) by Muslims in their books of exegesis and other subjects
related to the Qur'an (not excepting this book of ours); the Muslim
authors have used this method to show that what looks at the first
glance an unusual style or expression is in fact a gem of highest
eloquence.

The non-Muslim writers have just picked out those supposed defects and
discrepancies and collected them in their books, ignoring the replies
that showed the real beauty of those expressions. If eye of love is
blind, the eye of enmity is not any brighter.

Question: Well, how can you explain away the difficulty that arises out
of abrogation? Many Qur'anic verses have been abrogated, as the Qur'an
itself says:

***Whatever signs We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We bring one
better than it or like it*** **(2:106) ;**

**And** ***when We change*** **(one)*****communication for***
**(an­other)** ***communication, and Allah knows best what He reveals .
. .*** **(16:101).**

Abrogation is at least a change of opinion, an incon­sistency of
thought, if not an outright contradiction in speech.

Reply: Abrogation is neither a contradiction in speech nor a change of
opinion or thought. A rule is abrogated when the society, the
environment, changes in such a way that the under­lying wisdom of that
rule remains no longer valid. The difference, if any, is not in the
opinion; it is rather in the subject matter.

A clear evidence of it may be seen in the abrogated verses themselves -
they invariably always contained some phrases or clauses to show that
the given order was a temporary one, that it would soon be abrogated.
For example:

***And as for those who are guilty of lewdness from among your women,
call to witness against them four*****(witnesses)** ***from among you;
then if they bear witness con­fine them to the houses until death takes
them away or Allah makes some way for them*****(4:15).**

Note the last sentence and the hint it gives. Another example:

***Many of the people of the Book wish that they could turn you back
into unbelievers after your faith . . . But pardon and forgive***
**(them)** ***until Allah should bring about His command*** **(2:109).**

Here too the concluding phrase shows that the rule ordained was not
forever.

Fifth Specific Challenge: Its Eloquence
---------------------------------------

The Qur'an has also challenged its adversaries to bring its like in its
eloquence. Allah says:

***Or, do they say: “He has forged it?” Say: “Then bring ten chapters
like it forged and call upon whom you can besides Allah, if you are
truthful.” But if they do not answer you, then know that it is revealed
by Allah's knowledge and that there is no god but He; will you then
sub­mit?*** **(11:13-14)**

These verses were revealed at Mecca. Again Allah says:

***Or, do they say: “He has forged it?” Say: “Then bring a chapter like
this and call whom you can besides Allah, if you are truthful.” Nay,
they have rejected that of which they have no comprehensive knowledge,
and its final interpretation has not yet come to them*** **(10:38-39).**

These are Meccan verses too. All these verses challenge the doubters and
disbelievers to bring the like of ten or even one chapter of the Qur'an
in its style and eloquence, as eloquence was the most accomplished art
of the Arabs of those days. Undoubtedly, they had reached the highest
peak of eloquence. No preceding, contemporary or following nation ever
reached even near them in their mastery of literature.

Their expression was elegant, their style enchanting; their words
perfectly fitted their themes and meanings; their talks were always in
harmony with the occasions; their words were plain and their sentences
beautiful; and their speech had an easy flow and inimitable grace. It
was a way of which they were the pioneers and the only walkers.

The Qur'an challenged such a nation in every possible way, so as to
excite their rage, rouse their fury and fire them with determination to
meet the challenge. It should not be forgotten that they were extremely
proud of their art of eloquence and never acknowledged the least
elocutionary skill to anyone else. In spite of that arrogance of theirs,
the Prophet dared them to bring just one chapter like the Qur'an.

It is a challenge that even now is ringing in the ears of disbelievers,
defying them to forge, if they can, just one chapter like it. But the
Arabs' only answer was to avoid it; the more forcefully they were
challenged, the more evident their helplessness was. Ulti­mately, they
used to hide themselves to avoid hearing its sound.

Allah says:

***Now surely they fold up their breasts that they may conceal from Him;
now surely, when they put their garments as a covering, He knows what
they conceal and what they make known*** **(11:5).**

Even after fourteen centuries, no one has been able to bring its like.
Those who tried it put themselves to shame and made themselves targets
of ridicule. History has preserved some samples of those pathetic
attempts. Musaylamah (who posed as a prophet) wrote these words in reply
to the Qur'an ch. 105 (The Elephant):

***“The elephant, what is the elephant! And what will make you
understand what the elephant is? It has an unwholesome tail, and a long
trunk.”***

In another “verse”, which he recited before al-Sajah (who also claimed
to be a prophetess), he said: ***”. . . then we penetrate it into you
women a hard penetration, and take it out from you forcefully. . .”***

Look at this rigmarole and decide its worth. A Christian in latter days
wrote this “chapter” in reply to the Chapter of The Opening:

***“All praise is due to the Beneficent, the Lord of the beings, the
King, the Subduer. For Thee is the worship, and from Thee is the help.
Guide us to the path of faith.”***

All attempts to meet this challenge suffered the same fate.

### Two Questions

First: It is unreasonable to say that a speech can reach a level where
it would become a miracle, a super-natural work. Language has been made
by human ingenuity. How can a pro­duct of nature be above the reach of
nature? A maker is more powerful than the thing he makes; a cause always
encompasses its effect.

It is the man who invented the words to meet his social needs, to convey
to others' minds what one thinks or feels. The relationship of a word
with its meaning is created by man. It is a subjective quality given to
the word by man. This quality cannot reach beyond the ability of the
maker himself. In other words, it is impossible for a speech to rise
above the human ability.

Second: Let us accept for the time being that a particular composition
of a speech may reach super-natural level, may be­come a miracle. Every
intended theme may be clothed in various sentences, each differing from
the others in grades of perfection; and out of those numerous sentences
one would reach a standard which would be beyond human ability and
power - and that composition would be a miracle.

It means that for every intended meaning there would be one miraculous
sentence; and other struc­tures would be below that standard. But we see
that the Qur'an, more often than not, repeats many themes - and
especially the stories - using different compositions and dissimilar
styles. Whichever sentence-structure and style is accepted as a miracle,
the other ones would fall short of that standard.

Reply: Before replying to these objections one matter should be
clarified here. It were such questions which led some Muslim scholars to
believe in the theory of *as-sarf* (**الصَّرف** = to turn away). They
believed like other Muslims that it was impossible for men to bring a
like of the whole Qur'an; or its ten chapters, or even one chap­ter.

But, according to them, this inability of men was not based on the fact
that the Qur'anic speech in itself was beyond the human power. The real
reason was that Allah, by His predominant will and decree, has turned
away and dissuaded would-be adver­saries from bringing its like. Allah
has done so to preserve and protect the sanctity of the prophethood.

This theory was totally wrong. This explanation is not in conformity
with the clear import of the challenging verses. Allah says for example:

***Or, do they say: “He has forged it?” Say: “Then bring ten chapters
like it forged and call upon whom you can besides Allah, if you are
truthful. “But if they do not answer you, then know that it is revealed
by Allah's knowledge and that there is no god but He; will you then
submit?*** **(11:13-14)*****.***

Ponder on the sentences, “then know that it is revealed by Allah's
knowledge”. The challenge was meant to prove that the Qur'an was a
revelation; that it was not a speech forged by the Apostle; and that it
was revealed by Allah's knowledge and not by the Satans. The same theme
is found in the following verses:

***Or, do they say: “He has forged it.” Nay! they do not believe. Then
let them bring a talk like it if they are truthful.*** **(52:33-34).**

***And the Satans have not come down with it; and it behooves them not,
and they have not the power to do*** **(it).** ***Most surely they are
far removed from the hearing*** **(ofit) (26:210-212).**

On the other hand, this theory of “turning away” implies that the
reality *of* the Qur'an's miracle was not in its being a revelation from
Allah; the miracle was that Allah pre­vented the people from bringing a
like of it. Again look at the verse:

***Or, do they say: “He has forged it?” Say: “Then bring a chapter like
this and call whom you can besides Allah, if you are truthful.” Nay,
they have rejected that of which they have no comprehensive knowledge,
and its final interpretation has not yet come to them . . .***
**(10:38-39).**

This verse clearly says that what made them helpless before the Qur'an,
what made it impossible for them to bring a like of even one of its
chapters, was the fact that it has a final interpretation whose
knowledge is reserved for Allah - a knowledge which they lacked. It is
this inherent quality of the Qur'an which vanquished the adversaries.

It was not that they had ability to bring its like but Allah pre­vented
them from doing so. Then, there is the verse:

***Do they not then meditate on the Qur'an? And if it were from any
other than Allah, they would have found in it many a discrepancy***
**(4:82)*****.***

It shows that the miracle is in the inherent quality *of* the Qur'an
that it was free from discrepancy in its words and mean­ings - because
it is a quality which is not within the power of any creature - not that
there was some discrepancy in this Book, but Allah prevented people from
finding it out.

All these Qur'anic declarations prove that the theory of *as-sarf* has
no leg to stand, and one should not take it seriously.

Now we come to the objections mentioned earlier. It is a fallacious
argument that as the language is a product of human ingenuity, it can
never reach a level which would be beyond the grasp or ability of human
beings; language, being a product, cannot be more powerful than its
producer. The fallacy lies in the fact that what has been invented by
man is simple words for particular meanings.

But this congruity of the words with their meanings does not teach the
man how to arrange those words, how to plan, draft and deliver a talk in
the best possible way - in a way that the talk reflects the beauty of
the meaning as it is in the mind, and the meaning in its turn becomes a
mirror of the reality, remains in complete agreement with the fact.

It requires dexterity in the art of eloquence, adroitness in elocution;
also it depends on sharp intelligence and comprehensive knowledge so
that the speaker may be fully cognizant of all as­pects of the subject
matter. It is this skill and knowledge that differs from man to man, and
creates difference between talk and talk in their respective perfection
and beauty.

So, there are three aspects of a human talk; Knowledge of language - a
man may be having the most comprehensive know­ledge of the words of a
language, without being able to speak it; elocutionary skill - a man may
be the most accomplished orator, without being cognizant of material and
spiritual realities; Know­ledge of realities - a man may be the most
learned scientist or theologian without having the ability to express
his views and meanings intelligibly.

These three factors may be found separately (as mentioned above) and may
also combine together in some people. And on them depend the beauty and
the eloquence of a speech.

The first factor - single words for their meanings - has been invented
by social instinct of man. But the remaining two depend on intellectual
refinement and delicate discernment.

Human perception, intelligence and discernment is limited and
restricted. We cannot comprehend all the details of an event, all
concomitants of a fact. As a result, we cannot be sure of being right at
any time. Furthermore, we are gradually moving from deficiency to
perfection, and so is our perception and discern­ment. Look at any
spellbinding orator or enchanting poet; com­pare his earlier work with
his latest and you will see the difference.

In this background, let us look at human speech - any human speech.
First, we cannot be sure that it is free from errors of fact and
judgment, because, as mentioned above, no speaker can have comprehensive
knowledge of all the details and con­comitants of an event.

Second, it will not be on the same level with speaker's former or later
speech. Not only that: Even in the same speech the beginning will surely
be on a level different from that of the end, although we, probably,
will not be able to discern it because of the minuteness of difference.

Now, when we find a decisive speech, based on comprehen­sive knowledge,
and free from all types of discrepancy, we will have to admit that it is
not the work of a mortal man. This reality has been described in the
following verses:

***Do they not then meditate on the Qur'an? And if it were from any
other than Allah, they would have found in it many a discrepancy***
**(4:82);**

**(I swear)** ***by the heaven endued with rotation, and by the earth
splitting*** **(with plants etc.),** ***most surely it is a decisive
word, and it is not a jest*** **(86:11-14).**

Note the adjectives used for the heaven and the earth - they point to
the constant changes occur­ring therein, because the oath is about a
Book which is free from change and difference, inasmuch as it is based
on an unchange­able and lasting reality, that is, its “interpretation”.
(It is a Qur'anic terminology that will be explained in Ch. 3.)

Also, Allah says:

***Nay! it is a glorious Qur'an, in a guarded tablet*** **(85: 21-22)
;**

**(I swear)** ***by the Book that makes manifest*** **(the truth);**
***surely We have made it an Arabic Qur'an so that you may under­stand.
And surely it is in the original of the Book with Us, truly elevated,
full of wisdom*** **(43:2 -4);**

***But nay!*** **(I swear)** ***by the falling of stars; and most
certainly it is a great oath if you only knew; most surely it is an
honoured Qur'an, in a book that is hidden; none do touch it save the
purified ones. A revelation by the Lord of the worlds***
**(56:75 -80).**

These and other similar verses show that the Qur'an is based on
established realities that do not change, that are never altered. And,
therefore, the Qur'an itself is safe from change, alteration and
discrepancy.

To come back to the main objection: Accepted that language has been made
by men. But it does not mean that there cannot be found a piece of
literature that is beyond the reach of the very men who made the
language. Otherwise, we would have to say that a sword-maker must be the
bravest of all the swordsmen, the inventor of chess or lute must be the
most accomplished chess-master or lutenist!

The perfect eloquence demands that, first, the word should be in
complete harmony with the intended meaning, and, second, the conveyed
meaning must be in accordance with the established fact. How the words
fit the meanings?

The structural sequence of the words and their parts should perfectly
agree with the natural order of the intended meaning and its parts -
bringing the man-made language and sentences in total agreement with the
nature. (See for details *Dala'ilu '1-ijaz* of ash-Shaykh \`Abdu
'1-Qahir al-Jurjanī.)

As for the meaning, it must be correct and true, based on a real fact
existing outside our imagination - and that fact should be of permanent
value, unchangeable and un­alterable. The first quality (the agreement
of the word with meaning) depends on this basic quality of the meaning.

A very eloquent sweet-sounding jocular speech cannot stand before a
serious talk; nor can an eloquent, serious speech - if it is based on
wrong premises - be equal to a talk that reflects true facts and
comprehensive wisdom.

A speech attains the highest standard of eloquence when its words are
sweet, its style free-flowing, its meaning fitting the occasion and its
conveyed proposition based on true facts.

Such a talk, based as it is on reality, can never differ with other
realities; can never disagree with other truths. Truth and reality is a
non-divisible entity. Truth cannot refute another truth; reality cannot
oppose another reality.

Lie, on the other hand, may be in opposition to another lie as it surely
is against the truth. Ponder on the verse:

**. . .** ***and what is there after the truth but error*** **(10:32).**

Note that truth is singular; there is no division in it. Again Allah
says:

**. . .** ***and follow not*** **(other)** ***ways, for they will
scatter you away from His ways . . .*** **(6:153).**

Lie has many ways, it is not only disunited but also disuniting.

Obviously, there can be no difference whatsoever between one truth and
the other; instead, there shall be total union and unison between them -
one truth will lead to the other, one reality will guide to the other;
thus, one part of the Qur'an con­firms the others, one sentence
testifies for the others.

It is a wonderful quality of the Qur'an. Take any verse; it is clear in
its meaning; add to it another relevant verse equally clear; and you
will find them together pointing to a new reality that was not shown by
either verse separately: then put them side by side with a third
relevant verse, and you will gain fresh insight into new sublime
realities.

It is a unique quality of the Qur'an, and you will see many examples of
this special character­istic in this book. Unfortunately the exegetes
had so far neglected this method. Had they followed this way since the
early days, they would have discovered by now so much of its hidden
treasures.

This lengthy discourse was necessary to show that the two objections
laid down against the Qur'anic miracle of eloquence were baseless.
Miraculous eloquence is not based on words alone. Therefore, it is out
of place to say that as it is man who had made the language, how can any
speech be above the reach of the man himself?

Also, there is no room for the question that as only one out of many
possible compositions can be the highest, how is it possible to express
one idea in different ways, and then to claim that all were of
miraculous standard?

Our foregoing explanation has made it clear that the miracle of
eloquence depends on mean­ing - on its agreement with sublime
unchangeable reality and on its conformity with the words.

The Reality Of Miracle According To The Qur’an
----------------------------------------------

The Qur'an repeatedly asserts the occurrence of miracle - an unusual
preternatural phenomenon, which shows the authority of metaphysical
forces over the physical and material world. Miracle is not something
against self-evident rational truth.

Some people have tried to explain away the verses that describe various
miracles; their aim was to make the Qur'an fit the principles of modern
physical sciences. But such attempts are unacceptable, as they are a
forced burden on the language and the Qur'an.

We are going to explain, under various headings, what the Qur'an teaches
us about the meaning and reality of miracle.

### 1. The Qur'an Confirms the General Rule of the Cause-and-Effect

The Qur'an says that in this natural world everything, every effect, has
a cause; that there is a system of cause-and-effect permeating through
this world. It is a self-evident reality; and on this truth depend the
scientific and academic researches and discussions. Man by nature
believes that there must be a cause for every natural phenomenon.

Likewise, academic researches try to find out relevant causes for all
such happenings. What is a cause? It is such a thing, or a combination
of things, that when­ever it occurs, another thing - its effect -
unfailingly comes into being.

We try to find out by experiments the causes of various things. For
example, experience has taught us that if there is any burn, it must
have been caused by fire, movement, friction or some such cause. A cause
must be unfailable, compre­hensive and universal. In other words,
whenever and wherever the cause is found, its effect must be found.

This matter is clearly confirmed by the Qur'an. It takes this principle
for granted when it talks about life, death, susten­ance and other
heavenly or earthly phenomena - although it ultimately ascribes all the
effects, and their causes too, to Allah.

The Qur'an, therefore, confirms the general system of the
cause-and-effect; whenever a cause is found (with all its necess­ary
conditions) its effect must come into being, and whenever we see an
effect, it surely and unfailingly proves the existence of its cause.

### 2. The Qur'an Affirms Miracle (Super-Natural Events)

The Qur'an, nevertheless, narrates many an event that goes against the
normal, natural system of the cause-and-effect. It ascribes many
super-natural miracles to various prophets, like Nūh, Hūd, Salih,
Ibrahīm, Lūt, Dawūd, Sulayman, Mūsa, \`Isa and Muhammad (peace of Allah
be on them all!).

It should not be forgotten here that those events, although abnormal and
uncus­tomary, were not inherently impossible; they were not like an
assertion that \`A positive proposition and its opposite are affirmed
together and are negated together'; or like a statement that \`A thing
can be separated from its own self'; or that \`One is not a half of
two'.

We instinctively know that such propositions are impossible, they cannot
be. But the miracles shown by the proph­ets were not of this category;
otherwise, the minds of untold billions of religionists, since the dawn
of humanity, would not have accepted them and believed in them. No man
accepts an inherently impossible statement, nor does any sane person
ascribe such a thing to another.

Moreover, the effects that are called miracle, are not un­known to the
nature. The natural world is continuously engaged in bestowing on the
matter one form after the other, turning one event into another, giving
life to the dead, and death to the living, transforming the misfortune
into fortune and the comfort into discomfort.

All this is happening daily in the world of nature; the only difference
between a natural event and a miraculous one is in the speed and steps
required to reach the goal. A natural cause brings about its effect, in
special conditions, at a particular time and space, step by step in a
long series of changes.

The matter present in a walking-stick may one day appear in a running
ser­pent; a disintegrating skeleton may one day become a living man -
but in its natural course it will take a very long time, under certain
conditions of time and space, with numerous consecutive causes which
would constantly change that particular matter from one form to the
other, taking it from one step to the next and then to the third and so
on, until it appears in the required shape and form.

In normal way, it cannot happen without its proper causes, without its
necessary conditions; nor can it be brought into being by will-power of
a human being. But when it comes to a miracle, it happens just by the
will of the prophet, without any material cause and without any lapse of
time.

Of course, it is very difficult for a simple mind - as it is for a
scientific brain - to understand such super-natural events; man is,
after all, accustomed to the natural-causality. On the other hand, no
scientist can outright reject occurrence of super-natural phenomena even
in this atomic age.

Every day someone or the other demonstrates his skill bringing some
super-natural events about; people see it, radios and televisions
broadcast it, news­papers and magazines publish it; and nobody says that
it could not have happened as it was against the laws of nature.

Such phenomena have led many modern scholars to the theory that man,
like everything else, is surrounded by unknown magnetic or electric
currents; man may, through rigorous train­ing, get control over the
surrounding currents, and use them to affect other material things in
abnormal and unusual ways, bring­ing those astonishing feats about.

If this theory is proved correct and all-inclusive, it will supersede
all present theories that explain various happenings and effects in
terms of motion and power; it will replace all previous causes with one
all-pervasive natural cause: the mag­netic currents.

This is their theory. They are right in their belief that every natural
phenomenon must have a natural cause if the causal relationship between
them is intact.

The Qur'an has not identified by name any all-pervasive natural cause
that would explain all natural and super-natural events, as it is not
within the main purposes of this divine book. But it affirms that every
natural phenomenon has a natural cause - by permission of Allah.

In other words, every phenomenon is totally dependent on Allah, Who has
appointed for it a certain procedure, a natural cause through which it
gets its existence -the existence that is given by Allah. Allah says:

***and whoever fears Allah He will make for him an outlet, and give him
susten­ance from whence he thinks not; and whoever trusts in Allah, He
is sufficient for him; surely Allah attains His purpose; Allah indeed
has made a measure for everything*** **(65:2-3) .**

Its first sentence unreservedly declares that whoever fears Allah and
has trust in Him, Allah is sufficient for him, and He will surely manage
his affairs and make him succeed, even if in the normal way it may seem
impossible, even if the material causes go against him. It is supported
by the following verses:

***And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then verily I am very
near; I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me***
**(2:186) ;**

**Call** ***upon Me, I will answer you*****(40:60);**

***Is not Allah sufficient for His servant?*** **(39:36).**

The next sentence, “surely Allah attains His purpose”, explains the
reason of the first declaration. The same theme is found in the verse:

**. . . and** ***Allah is predominant over His affair, but most people
do not know*** **(12:21).**

This sentence too is all-inclusive and without any condition. Allah has
His own way to let a thing happen, if He so wills - even if the normal
ways are closed, even if usual paths to it are cut off.

This may possibly happen in two ways: First, Allah may bring that thing
into being simply by His will, without resorting to any material or
natural cause. Second, there may be an alter­native natural cause,
unknown to us, which Allah may have ap­pointed for that phenomenon; it
may be hidden from our eyes but the Maker and Creator, Who has
prescribed it, knows it and uses it to attain His purpose.

This second possibility seems more appropriate in view of the last
sentence, “Allah indeed has made a measure for everything.” This
sentence shows that every effect, whether it is in accordance with the
normal causality or not, has a measure appointed by Allah, is related to
other beings, has a connection with other things; Allah may bring that
effect into existence through any other related thing, even if the
normal cause is absent.

What should not be forgotten is the basic fact that it is Allah Who has
bestowed causality on a cause; this rela­tion of cause and effect is not
independent of Allah.

Allah has created causal relation between various things. He can attain
His purpose through any way He wishes. No doubt, there is the system of
cause-and-effect in the world; but this chain is in the hands of Allah,
He may use it in any way He wills.

There is a real causal relation between a thing and the things that have
preceded it; but that reality is not as we know it - that is why no
academic or scientific theory is capable of explaining all phenomena of
the world; it is really as Allah knows, makes and manages it.

This basic principle has been referred to in the verses of “decree” or
“measure”:

***And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures of it, and We
do not send it down but in a known measure*** **(15:21)*****.***

***Surely We have created every thing according to a measure***
**(54:49);**

***. . . and Who created every thing, then ordain for it a measure***
**(25:2)*****.***

***Who created then made complete, and Who made*** **(things)**
***according to a measure then guided*** **(them to their goal) (87:2 -
3) .**

Look also at the following verses:

***No misfortune befalls on the earth nor in your own souls, but it is
in a book before We bring it into existence*** **(57:22).**

***No affliction comes about but by Allah's permission; and whoever
believes in Allah, He guides aright his heart; and Allah is Cognizant of
all things*** **(64:11).**

These verses (and especially the first) show that the things take their
particular identity in accordance with a measure ap­pointed for it by
Allah; that measure gives it its individuality and defines it; and that
measure and definition precedes the thing and then accompanies it. A
thing can be properly delineated only if it is seen in its perspective,
clearly defining its relation to all other things.

The other related things serve as a mould that gives this item its
peculiar shape and particular form. Every material effect is connected
with all things which precede or accompany it. All such things together
serve as the cause of this effect; and this one in its turn becomes a
part of the cause of other effects that come later.

Also, it may be proved from the following two verses:

***That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of every thing. . .***
**(40:62) ;**

***. . . there is no living creature but He holds it by its forelock;
surely my Lord is on the straight path*****(11:56).**

Add to them the fact that the Qur'an confirms the general system of
causality -and you will find the complete picture displayed before your
eyes.

1. The first verse says that every thing is created by Allah, and the
second one states that creation is on a single pattern; there is no
deviation in it as that would cause chaos and disturbance.

2. The Qur'an confirms the general system of causality for all material
things.

3. It follows that every material thing and effect is invariably always
created by a cause - a cause that precedes it and brings it into being.
It makes no difference whether it is a normal and usual cause, or a
supernatural one. There must always be a cause.

4. Many usual causes which sometimes fail to bring about the expected
effects are not the real causes. The real causes are those which never
fail to create the expected effects. An example may be given of various
diseases and their causes; influenza was previously thought to be caused
by cold; but cold did not always create it, now it has been discovered
that it is caused by a virus. The same is true about many supernatural
feats.

### 3. Whatever is Caused by Natural Causes is Really Caused by Allah

The Qur'an, while affirming the causal relation between a cause and its
effect, ascribes every effect to Allah. The inference is that these
normal and usual causes are not independent in creating their effects;
the real cause, in the true sense of this word, is only Allah.

Allah says:

• ***surely His is the creation and the command*** **(7:54);**

• ***Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is
Allah's*** **(2:284);**

• ***His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth***
**(57:5)*****;***

• ***Say: “All is from Allah”*** **(4:78)*****.***

There are numerous such verses showing that everything belongs
exclusively to Allah; He may deal with it in any way He likes; no one
else can handle it at all except by permission of Allah; He allows
whomsoever He wishes to manage, influence and effect it to a certain
extent. But this divine permission, establishing the relation of
causality, does not make that cause independent of Allah; it is just a
permission given by the real owner to use his property.

The man having this permission cannot transgress the limits imposed by
the owner. Allah says:

• ***Say: “O Allah, Master of kingdom! Thou givest the kingdom to
whomsoever thou pleasest and takest away the kingdom from whomsoever
Thou pleasest*** **(3:26);**

• ***Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its cre­ation, then guided
it*** **(to its goal) (2:50) ;**

• ***. . . whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is
His; who is he that can intercede with Him but by His permission?***
**(2:255)*****;***

• ***. . . and He is firmly established on Arsh, regulating the affair;
there is no intercessor except after His permission*** **(10:3)*****.***

The causes do have the causality because Allah has given it to them.
They have got it, but are not independent of Allah. It is this factor
that has been described in above verses as “inter­cession” and
“permission”. Permission means that there was an impediment which, but
for this permission would have hindered the now-authorized agent from
interfering in this affair.

In short, every cause has been given the power to create the relevant
effect; but the real authority is yet in the hands of Allah.

### 4. The Souls of the Prophets do have Influence Over the Super-Natural Events

Allah says:

**. . .** ***and it was not meet for an apostle that he should bring a
sign except with Allah's permission; but when the command of Allah came,
judgement was given with truth, and those who treated*** **(it)** ***as
a lie were lost*** **(40:78).**

The verse shows that it was the apostle who brought the sign - by
permission of Allah. The souls of the prophets were given a special
power to cause the miracle; and that causal power, like all other
causes, created its effect with permission of Allah.

Again Allah says:

***And they followed what the Satans chant*** **(of sorcery)**
***against the kingdom of Sulayman; and not that Sulayman disbelieved,
but*** **(it was)** ***the Satans that disbelieved, they taught men
sorcery and what*** **was** ***sent down to the two angels at Babylon,
Harut and Marut: Yet these two taught no one until they had said,
“Surely we are only a trial, therefore do not be a disbeliever”. Even
then men learned from these two that by which they might cause a
separation between a man and his wife; and they cannot hurt with it
anyone except with Allah's permission*** **(2:102).**

This verse proves two things: magic has some reality; and it, not unlike
miracle, is caused by a psychical factor of the magician, by permission
of Allah.

Take a miracle, a magic, a mysterious wonder of a saint, or a
spell-bringing skill acquired through rigorous practice - all these
extra-ordinary or super-natural deeds emanate from their agents'
psychical factors - or will-power - as the above-mentioned verses have
shown.

But Allah has made it clear that the psychical cause found in His
apostles, prophets and believers is predominant, has the mastery, over
all other causes, in all imaginable conditions; it can never be
overpowered. Allah says:

***And certainly Our word has already gone forth in respect of Our
servants, the apostles: Most surely they shall be the assisted ones, and
most surely Our host alone shall be the victorious ones***
**(37:171-173).**

***Allah has written down: I will most certainly prevail, I and My
apostle . . .*** **(58:21)*****.***

***Most surely We help Our apostles and those who believe, in this
world's life and on the day when the witnesses shall stand***
**(40:51).**

As you see, these verses do not put any condition or restriction on the
promised victory; the apostles and the believers shall be victorious
over their adversaries in all conditions and situations.

It may be inferred from it that this divine source is some­thing
metaphysical, preternatural. Material things are, in their nature,
measured and limited; they get the worst of it if they are faced by
another thing which is superior in power. But this preternatural
spiritual source, which is assisted by the will of Allah, is never
defeated by any factor; whenever it is faced by any material adversary,
it is given by Allah a far more superior power to achieve victory with
flying colours.

### 5. Whatever is Caused by Psychical Power Depends on a Command from Allah

Read again the last sentence of the verse *40:78,* mentioned at the
beginning of the preceding chapter:

***“but when the com­mand of Allah came, judgement was given with truth,
and those who treated*** **(it)** ***as a lie were lost”.***

You will see that the super­natural event caused by the psychical power
of the agent depends on a command from Allah - in addition to His
permission. That command may coincide with the said permission, or may
be one with it. The command of Allah is His creation, described by the
word 'Be' in the verse:

***His command, when He intends anything, is only that He says to it,
“Be”, and it is*** **(36:82)*****.***

Also Allah says:

***Surely this is a reminder, so whoever wishes takes to his Lord a way.
And you do not wish except that Allah wishes; surely Alldh is Knowing,
Wise*** **(76:29-30).**

***It is naught but a reminder for the worlds, for him among you who
wishes to go straight. And you do not wish except that Alldh wishes, the
Lord of the worlds*** **(81:27-29).**

These verses show that the affairs which are within the sphere of the
man's will, and under his control and authority, are still dependent on
the divine will for their existence. What these verses say is this: The
intentional actions of a man are done by his will; but that will itself
depends on the will of Allah.

The verses do not say that whatever is wished by man is wished by Allah.
Had it been the case, no human wish would have remained unfulfilled -
because it would have become the will of Allah! Also, many verses refute
this idea;

***And if We had wished We would certainly have given to every soul its
guidance*** **. . . (32:13).**

***And if your Lord had wished surely all those who are in the earth
would have believed*** **(10:99)*****.***

Our will depends on the divine will; our action depends on our will, and
also they depend - indirectly, through our will -on the will of Allah.
And both our will and action depend on the command of Allah - on His
word, “Be”.

Things, affairs and events may be either natural or super­natural; and
the super-natural may be either on the side of good, like miracle, or on
that of evil, like magic and sooth saying. But all of them come into
being through natural causes, and at the same time they depend on the
will of Allah. In other words, they cannot come into being unless the
natural cause coincides, or becomes one, with the permission and command
of Allah.

All things are equal in this respect; but when a prophet brings about a
miracle, or a good servant of Allah prays to Him for a thing, an
additional factor, that is, the decisive command of Allah, is added
thereto; and the desired effect or event unfailingly comes into being.
Allah says:

***Allah has written down: I will most cer­tainly prevail, I and My
apostles*** **(58:21) ;**

**I** ***answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me. . .***
**(2:186).**

See also other such verses quoted in the preceding chapter.

### 6. The Qur'an Attributes the Miracle to an Invincible Cause

The preceding chapters have made it clear that miracle, like other
natural and super-natural things, needs a natural cause; and that all
causes depend on some metaphysical causes. All these events and effects
may, thus, be divided into four categories:

**First:** The normal events: They come into being by normal apparent
causes which are accompanied by real causes - in most cases those real
causes are material ones; arid those causes depend on the divine will
and. command.

**Second:** The extra-ordinary events of evil nature, like sor­cery and
sooth saying: They are caused by natural but unusual and abnormal
causes, which are accompanied by the real causes; and those causes
depend on the divine permission and will.

**Third:** The extra-ordinary events of good nature, like a prayer
answered by Allah: They are caused by the natural and real cause, with
permission and will of Allah - but such events do not contain any
element of challenge, that is, they do not purport to prove the truth of
any call or claim.

**Fourth:** The miracles: The extra-ordinary, super-natural events of
good character, which are brought about as a challenge, to prove the
truth of the call or claim. They too are caused by the natural and real
causes with permission and will of Allah.

The third and fourth categories have an extra quality in them: Their
cause is fortified by an invincible factor; it can never be overpowered,
as it is always accompanied by the decisive command of Allah.

**Question:** It is strange to say that miracle is caused by a natural
cause. Suppose, we discover the real natural cause of a miracle; will it
not then be possible for us to create that miracle? If yes, then
miraculousness would be a relative matter; any action would be a miracle
in the eyes of those who are unaware of its cause, but quite an ordinary
thing for those who know.

In the same way, an event that was believed to be a miracle in dark ages
would not be so impressive in this age of science and knowledge. If
scientific research found out the real natural causes of the miracles,
there would be no miracle at all - and no miracle could be used to prove
the truth of the prophet's claim.

What all this leads to is this: A miracle is not a proof except against
him who is ignorant of its natural cause; therefore, it cannot be put as
an evidence of the truth of the prophet's claim.

**Reply:** Miraculousness of a miracle does not depend on unknowability
of its cause; nor is it a miracle because it emanates from an
extraordinary or mysterious cause. It is a miracle because it is brought
about by such an extraordinary cause which is in­vincible, which cannot
be overcome, cannot be defeated.

Let us look at the case of a seriously sick person, who, all of a
sudden, is cured by the prayers of a believer. It is called a miraculous
event, because it emanates from an invincible cause. We know that
patient could be cured by medical treatment, and it would have been a
normal process; but this cause, that is, the medical treatment, could be
foiled by other more powerful factors; and that is why it is not called
a miracle.

### 7. The Qur'an Counts Miracle as a Proof of the Truth of the Claim of Prophethood

Question: What is the connection between miracle and veracity of the
claim of prophethood? Reason fails to see any binding relation between
the two. But the Qur'an time and again asserts this concomitancy, as may
be seen in the stories of various prophets, for example, Hūd, Salih,
Mūsa, \`Isa and Muhammad (peace of Allah be on all of them!).

The Qur'an narrates that no sooner did they announce their claim than
they were asked by their people to bring some miracle to prove the truth
of their claim; and they responded to it by showing the miracle.

Not only that. Some of them were given their miracle even before their
nations had asked them for it. Allah told Mūsa (a.s.) at the start of
his mission:

***Go you and your brother with My signs and be not remiss in
remembering Me*** **(20:42).**

And He says about \`Isa (a.s.):

***And*** **(will make him)** ***an apostle to the children of Israel:
“That I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, that I create for
you out of dust like the form of a bird, then I breathe into it and it
becomes a bird with Allah's permission and I heal the blind and the
leper, and bring the dead to life with Allah's permission and I inform
you of what you eat and what you store in your house; most surely there
is a sign in this for you, if you are believers”*****(3:49).**

The same is the position of the Qur'an which was given to the Prophet
right at the start of his mission. The reason does not see any
connection whatsoever between the truth of the message of an apostle or
a prophet on one hand and his ability to show a super-natural sign on
the other.

Moreover, the beauty of the principles expounded by the apostles and the
prophets, strengthened as it is by irrefutable proofs, dispenses with
the need of any miracle - for an intelligent and knowledgeable person.
That is why it is said that miracles are needed for convincing the
simple-minded people, because they cannot understand a learned
discourse; but knowledgeable persons do not need them.

Reply: The prophets had not brought the miracles to prove any principle
of religion, like belief in Oneness of God and the Day of Resurrection
etc. - the truth of which could be realized by intellect and reason.
They always proved such things with reasoning and logical arguments.

For example, Allah says regarding the existence of the Creator:

***Their apostles said: “Is there doubt about Allah, the Master of the
heavens and the earth?”*** **(14:10);**

and He says about resurrection:

***And We did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between
them in vain; that is the opinion of those who disbelieve; then woe to
those who disbelieve on account of the fire. Shall We treat those who
believe an and do good like the mischief-makers in the earth? Or shall
We make those who guard*** **(against evil)** ***like the wicked?***
**(38:27-28).**

Why were, then, the apostles asked to show miracle, and why did they
bring it about? It was to prove that they were in fact sent by Allah; it
was meant to authenticate their claim.

The prophets claimed that they were sent by Allah, that He had revealed
His message to them - either directly or through an angel. It was an
assertion of a super-natural event; a claim of a reality beyond the
physical senses and mental cognization of their people; a fact above the
level of man's perception.

If that claim was right, it would be a special metaphysical disposition
reserved for the prophets only. The difficulty was that the proph­ets
were like any other human being in their humanity and in its
characteristics. How could they be favoured for this especial
relationship with the world beyond nature?

The disbelievers, therefore, resorted to two methods to disprove the
prophets' claim:

First Method: They tried to refute it through such “argu­ments” as the
following:

a) ***They said: “You are nothing but human being like us; you wish to
turn us away from what our fathers used to worship”*** **(14:10).**

The apostles were like all other men; and other men do not receive such
divine revelation as was claimed by the apostles. If they could be given
revelation from God, why could not others get it as well? Were not all
of them alike in their humanity?

The apostles replied to it in these words:

***Their apostles said to them: “We are nothing but human beings like
yourselves, but Allah bestows (His) favours on whom He pleases of His
servants. . . “*** **(14:11) .**

They accepted that they were like all men in their humanity, but showed
that apostleship was a very especial favour of Allah, and He bestows it
on whom He pleases. It is not difficult to see that being alike does not
preclude some of them from being reserved for some especial favours. Of
course, if Allah had pleased, He could have bestowed it on anyone among
them, but He chose for this favour whom He pleased. The same was the
thrust of their protest against the Prophet:

***“Has the reminder been revealed to him from among us?”*** **(38:8)**

b) Of the same nature, but with added sarcasm, were the following
remarks of the polytheists of Mecca:

***And they say: “Why was not this Qur'an revealed to a man of
importance in the two towns?”*** **(43:31)**

***And they say: “What sort of apostle is this that he eats food and
goes about in the marts; why has not an angel been sent down to him so
that he be a warner with him? Or a treasure be thrown down to him, or be
for him a garden from which he may eat!”*** **(25:7-8)**

What they wanted to say was this: If the Apostle (of Islam) really has
been chosen by God to receive divine revelation, then he must be someone
above all the mortals. Then why does he require food to eat, and why is
he obliged to go about in the markets to earn his livelihood?

If he is truly a representative of God, he should have been accompanied
by an angel to assist trim in his work, or he should have been given a
treasure to save him the trouble of earning his livelihood in the
markets, or a garden should have been bestowed on him, so that he would
not need a food like ours.

Allah answered them in these words:

***See how they coin comparisons for thee! So they have gone astray,
therefore they shall not be able to find a way . . . And We did not send
before thee any messengers but they most surely ate food and went about
in the markets; and We have made some of you a trial for others; will
you bear patiently? And your Lord is Ever-seeing*** **(25:9,20).**

And in reply to their demand for sending down an angel, it was said in
another chapter:

***And if We had made him angel, We would certainly have made him a man,
and We would certainly have made confused to them what they make
con­fused*** **(6:9)*****.***

c) Going further, they raised their demands even higher:

***And those who do not hope for Our meeting, say: “Why have not angels
been sent down upon us, or*** **(why)** ***do we not see our Lord?” Now
certainly they are too proud of themselves and have revolted a great
revolt*** **(25:21).**

According to their thinking, there was no difference between them and
the Prophet; all were human beings. Then why should he be reserved for
this office of apostleship? They too should be visited by angels; or,
even better, they should see the Lord. Allah replied to them:

***On the day when they shall see the angels, there shall be no joy on
that day for the guilty, and they shall say: “It is a forbidden thing
totally prohibited”*** **(25:22).**

It means that if they persist in their dis­belief, they shall not see
the angels except at the time of death, and then they shall not find any
joy in it. The same thing has been mentioned in another verse:

***And they say: “O you to whom the Reminder has been revealed! you are
most surely insane. Why do you not bring to us the angels if you are of
the truthful ones?” We do not send the angels but with truth, and then
they would not be respited*** **(15:6-8).**

d) This last verse shows us one more twist of their “argu­ments”. The
Prophet, according to their thinking, was truthful in his claim of
revelation, but he was insane; whatever news he brought was a product of
his unstable mind and was, therefore, not correct. The same “argument”
was put against Nūh (a.s.), as the Qur'an says:

**. . .** ***and they called*** **(Nūh)** ***mad, and he was driven
away*** **(54:9)*****.***

These were the variations of their “arguments” against the claims of the
Prophet, the arguments which were based on similarity of the prophets
and their people in their humanity.

Second Method: It was to reject outright the claim of the prophets, and
demand from them proof of their veracity, asking them to bring some
signs to show that they were in fact represen­tatives of Allah and
recipients of His revelation.

The apostles and the prophets claimed a distinction which was intangible
and unknowable to their people. They claimed that they were given
apostleship and /or prophethood; that they were spoken to by Allah -
either directly or through angels. Now, such a claim could not be
verified by any test or experiment. It could be objected against in two
ways:

(i) There was no proof that such a claim was true; (ii) there was proof
that it was not true. Revelation, divine speech, (and the resulting
*sharī\`ah* and religious discipline) could not be experienced by anyone
other than the claimant; the normal system of cause and effect was
against it. If such a claim were true, it would mean that the Prophet
was in direct contact with the world beyond nature; he was tuned to the
divine power - the power that can change the course of nature can make
the effect appear without their usual causes.

In that case, he should be able to produce some another tangible
super-natural effect; after all one super-natural event is like any
other super-natural event so far as the divine authority is concerned.
If Allah spoke to the Prophet - a super-natural effect - He should show
on his hands some other tangible super-natural effects in order to prove
the truth of his former claim, that is, the claim that he receives
revelation from God.

If God wanted to guide the people aright by means of a super-natural
thing, that is, revelation, then let Him prove the truth of His Prophet
by means of another super-natural, that is, miracle.

That was why the people asked for miracles whenever a prophet was sent
to them. They wanted miracles to verify his claim of prophethood, and
not to ensure the truth of his teach­ings. Suppose a man is sent by a
ruler to his subjects with his commands and laws. He reaches his
destination and they ask him for his credentials.

Will they be satisfied if, at this juncture, he starts explaining the
wisdom underlying each rule and regulation? Certainly not. They will
say: All that you have said, just shows that these rules are based on
wisdom and meant for our good; but it does not prove in any way that
they are from our ruler, nor that you are his deputy authorized to
manage our affairs on his behalf.

We shall believe in your claim only when you show us a credential to
this effect, for example, an appointment letter duly signed by the ruler
and having his official seal. It is as the polytheists had said to the
Prophet:

**“.** ***. . until you bring down to us a book which we may read”***
**(17:93).**

From the above explanation, two things become abundantly clear.

**First:** Miracle has an inseparable. Connection with the truth of the
claim of prophethood. Learned and ignorant, elite and common, all men
need miracle in order to be able to accept the truth of a prophet's
claim.

**Second:** What the prophet receives and perceives of the revelation is
entirely different from those things which we feel by senses or
comprehend by intellect. In plain words, revelation is not a function of
mind; it is a reality totally separate from “right thinking”.

This fact is brilliantly clear from the Book of Allah; and no one,
having an iota of common sense, can entertain any doubt about it. But in
recent times some “scholars” have closed their eyes from this reality,
and tried to reinterpret the spiritual facts and divine knowledge in the
light of the natural sciences.

They have, accordingly, based their explanations on materialistic
theory. They believe that human perception and comprehension is a
characteristic of matter, emanating from the brain. They are of the
opinion that all real merits and perfections - whether of an individual
or of a group - are developments of matter only. Based on these
premises, they have explained prophethood and all related spiritual
factors on the following materialistic lines:

Prophethood is a sort of a sharp mental power, an intel­lectual genius.
The genius who is called prophet, looks at the social conditions of his
nation; analyses what they have inherited of the beliefs, ideas, customs
and superstitions; and then changes them to conform with the needs of
his time and place, in the most suitable manner.

In that light, he frames for them the basic social principles and
ordains practical rules and regulations - in order to raise their
standard of life, to elevate their morality and ethics, to make them
better members of society. Basing on this hypothesis, they have declared
that:

1) Prophet is an intellectual genius, who calls his people to the good
of their social life.

2) Revelation is the good thought which comes into his mind.

3) Divine book is the collection of those good thoughts and ideas,
inasmuch as they are free from personal desires and selfish motives.

4) Angels who, the prophet says come to him, are only the natural
material forces which keep the world going. Or, they are psychological
traits which lead the man to his perfection. The Holy Ghost is a higher
development of those material forces, which rains those pure ideas on
the prophet's mind.

Satan is a retrogression of the same material forces, which poisons the
minds with evil thoughts and incites the people to anti-social deeds. In
the same vein they have explained away all the realities which the
prophets have told us about - like the Tablet, the Pen, the Throne, the
Chair, the Book, the Reckoning, the Garden, and the Fire.

5) Religions are products of times; they change with the times.

6) The miracles, attributed to the prophets, are nothing more than myths
and fictions; which were forged in the in­terest of religion, to
strengthen the belief of common people; or to enhance the prestige of
religious leaders in the eyes of their followers.

This in short is their explanation. But prophethood, in this meaning,
should rather be called a political device than a divine reality. It is
not possible here to throw light on its various facets. What the
readers, however, should not overlook is that this inter­pretation has
no resemblance whatsoever to what has been de­scribed in the Books of
Allah and the Tradition of the prophets.

What led these “scholars” to such interpretations was their total
submission to materialistic theories; that was why they rejected every
metaphysical reality, and tried to bring it down to the level of
lifeless matter.

Such peoples are academic descendants of an earlier group: Many early
theologians interpreted every religious reality - the Throne, the Chair,
the Tablet, the Pen, the Angels etc. - in material terms, adding, at the
same time, that those things existed beyond the grasp of our senses.
Needless to say that that inter­pretation was not based on any actual
experiment or sensual perception.

Now that the area of physical sciences has expanded so much, and every
thing is being analyzed, tested and experi­mented on, this later
generation was obliged to reject the idea of physical existence of those
religious realities, because, as mentioned above, their existence could
not be proved by any test or experiment.

Therefore, they had to invent other meanings for those realities, well
within the area of sensual perception. They thought that they were
serving the cause of religion in this way - because their interpretation
would bring those realities within the sensual and physical recognition,
and thus save them from being totally rejected by modern scholars.

Both groups have strayed from the right path. The ancient theologians
correctly understood the meanings of these words, without resorting to
any allegorical interpretation. But they erred when they thought that
those were material things although beyond the purview of sensual
perception, not subjected to the laws of matter.

The modern scholars took the wrong way from the very start; they gave
these words wrong meanings in their eagerness to make them conform to
material realities; in their attempt to pull these sublime truths down
to the level of physical experience.

The correct way is to explain these words according to the dictates of
the language and the usage; then shall come the stage of identifying
what, how and where, for example, the Pen is. This should be done with
the help of other relevant verses. After the Pen is identified, it may
be compared with current scientific ideas to check whether it goes
against them.

If that examination reveals that the identified entity was beyond the
domain of matter, then it should not be proved, or disproved, by the
principles of physical sciences. The science is concerned with material
and physical things.

What authority has it got to judge metaphysical or spiritual things? Can
we allow a linguist to prove, or disprove, a proposition of astronomy by
the rules of grammar? If not, then why should the rules of physical
sciences be applied to prove, disprove or interpret metaphysical
realities?

### Qur’an

***But if you do*** **(it)** ***not - and never shall you do***
**(it) -*****then be on guard against the fire of which men and stones
are the fuel; it is prepared for the unbelievers. And convey good news
to those who believe and do good deeds, that for them are gardens in
which rivers*** **flow;** ***whenever they shall be given a portion of
the fruit thereof, they shall say: “This is what was given to us
before;- and they shall be given the like of it, and they shall have
pure mates in them; and in them they shall abide.***

The chapter began with description of three groups: the pious ones, the
disbelievers and the hypocrites. But then all of them were joined
together by the words, “O men!”, calling them to worship Allah.

In this context, they could be divided in two groups only: those who
answered this call (i.e. the believers) and those who did not answer it
(i.e. the disbelievers). The hypocrites do not come into this picture,
probably because in their appearance they are with the first group,
while in reality they are included in the second. Perhaps, that is why
the previous designation of the first group *(those who guard against
evil)* has been changed here for “those who believe”.

*“al-Waqud”* (**الوَقود**) is fuel. The verse says that man himself is
the fuel of the hell. He is his own fuel, to keep the fire burning, and
to get himself burned in that fire. Allah says:

***then in the fire shall they be burned*** **(40:72).**

***It is the fire kindled by AllAh, which rises above the hearts***
**(104:6-7).**

Man shall be burned in a fire that will be kindled and fueled by his own
self.

The next verse, 2:25, runs parallel to it and we find the same principle
at work here also: “whenever they shall be given a portion of the fruit
thereof, they shall say: \`This is what was given to us before;' and
they shall be given the like of it”. It indicates that man shall get
there only what he has himself pre­pared here.

The Prophet has said: “As you live so you will die, and as you die so
you will be raised.” But the people of the paradise have a pleasant
distinction vis-à-vis the people of the fire, because they shall be
given ever-increasing rewards by their Lord:

***They have therein what they wish and with Us is more yet***
**(50:35).**

“. . . Of which men and stones are the fuel”: The stones referred to
here are the idols which the disbelievers worshipped. Allah says:

***Surely you and what you worship besides Allah are the firewood of
hell . . .*** **(21:98).**

“. . . they shall have pure mates in them”: The adjective “pure”,
inasmuch as it qualifies the “mates”, refers to purity from all such
things as may create aversion and unpleasantness - whether in their
bodies or in their ehavior. In other words, the mates given to the
believers in paradise will be free from every disagreeable
characteristic or trait.

### Tradition

as-Sadūq narrates that as-Sadiq (a.s.) was asked about this verse and he
said: “The pure mates are the ones who shall be free from menstruation
and other excrements.”

The Author says: Some other Tradition have expanded the meaning to
include cleanliness from all defective traits, all characteristics
causing aversion.


