Suratul Baqarah: Verses 26-27
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٢٦) إِنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ يَسْتَحْيِي أَن يَضْرِبَ مَثَلاً مَّا بَعُوضَةً
فَمَا فَوْقَهَا فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ فَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّهُ
الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّهِمْ وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فَيَقُولُونَ
مَاذَا أَرَادَ اللَّهُ بِهَذَا مَثَلاً يُضِلُّ بِهِ كَثِيرًا وَيَهْدِي
بِهِ كَثِيرًا وَمَا يُضِلُّ بِهِ إِلاَّ الْفَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(٢٧)الَّذِينَ يَنقُضُونَ عَهْدَ اللَّهِ مِن بَعْدِ مِيثَاقِهِ
وَيَقْطَعُونَ مَا أَمَرَ اللَّهُ بِهِ أَن يُوصَلَ وَيُفْسِدُونَ فِي
الأَرْضِ أُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah is not ashamed to set forth any parable -*** **(that
of)** ***a gnat or anything above that; then as for those who believe,
they know that it is the truth from their Lord, and as for those who
disbelieve, they say: “What is it that Allah means by this parable?” He
causes many to err by it and many He leads aright by it, but He does not
cause to err by it*** **(any)** ***except the transgressors*** **(26),**

***who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation and cut
asunder what Allah has ordered to be joined, and make mischief in the
land; these it is that are the losers*** **(27).**

Commentary
----------

Qur’an
------

***Surely Allah is not ashamed. . . :*** Gnat or mosquito is one of the
smallest animals perceptible by naked eyes. These two verses run
parallel to verses 19 - 21 of ch. 13:

***Is then he who knows that what has been sent down to you from your
Lord is the truth like unto him who is blind? Only those pos­sessed of
understanding shall bear in mind, those who fulfil the promise of Allah
and do not break the covenant, and those who join that which Allah has
bidden to be joined, and fear Allah and fear the evil reckoning.***

The verse clearly shows that there is a straying, a blind­ness, which
afflicts the man as a result of his evil deeds; it is different from
that initial straying and blindness which the man opts for by his own
free will. Look at the sentence, “but He does not cause to err by it
(any) except the transgressors”. They transgressed first, and it was
only then that Allah made them go astray.

Guidance and misguidance are two comprehensive words; they encompass
every felicity and infelicity that comes from Allah to His good and
wicked servants respectively. As Allah describes in the Qur'an, He makes
His good servants live a happy life, strengthens them with the spirit of
faith, bring them out of the darkness into the light, and gives them a
light by which they walk among the people; He has taken them under His
protection and guardianship, and there is no fear for them, nor shall
they grieve; He is with them, answers them when they call on Him, and
remembers them when they remember Him; and the angels come down to them
with good news of eternal peace.

Diametrically opposed to it is the condition of evil-doers. Allah causes
them to err, takes them out of the light into the darkness, sets a seal
upon their hearts and hearings, and a cover­ing over their eyes; He
alters their faces turning them on their backs; places chains on their
necks and these reach up to their chins, so they have their heads raised
aloft, and makes a barrier before them and a barrier behind them, then
He covers them over so that they cannot see.

He appoints for them the Satans to become their associates, and they
turn them away from the right path while they think that they are guided
aright; those Satans make their misdeeds to seem good to them and they
are their guardians; Allah leads them on by steps from whence they
perceive not; and yet He respites them, but His plan is firm; He makes a
plan for them and leaves them alone in their rebellion, blindly
wandering on.

These are some examples of the conditions of the two groups.

On deeper consideration, it appears that man, in this world, lives two
lives: there is this life which may be seen and perceived by all, and
there is another life hidden behind this one; that hidden life is either
good or bad - depending on his faith and deeds. Man will become aware of
that hidden life when the veil of secrecy will be removed after death.
Then he will see himself in his true form.

Further, it appears from the Qur'anic verses that man has had a
spiritual life before the life of this world; and he shall have another
life after this one. In other words, man has been given three lives -
this life in this world is the second one, there was one preceding it
and there will be another following. The con­dition of the third life
shall be determined by that of this second life - which, in its turn, is
governed by the first one.

Many exegetes have explained away the verses about the first life; they
say that it is only a literary style, which presents imaginary pictures
as real facts. And as for the verses concerning the life hereafter, they
too are misrepresented as allegories and metaphors. But both types of
verses are too clear in this meaning to allow such misinterpretations.

We shall explain the verses about the first life under ch. 7. As for the
life hereafter, many verses show that the same good or bad deeds which
man commits in this life, shall be returned to him, as their own reward
or punishment, on the day of requital. Allah has mentioned this fact in
many verses:

• **. . .** ***and do not make excuses today; you shall be recompensed
only what you did*** **(66:7);**

• ***then every soul shall be paid back in full what it has earned, and
they shall not be dealt with unjustly.*** **(2:281);**

• ***then be on guard against the fire of which men and stones are
fuel*** **(2:24);**

• ***Then let him summon his council, We too would summon the
tormentors*** **(of the hell) (96:17-18);**

• ***On the day that every soul shall find present what it has done of
good and what it has done of evil . . .*** **(3:30)*****;***

• ***. . . they eat nothing but fire into their bellies . . .***
**(2:174)*****;***

• ***. . . surely they only swallow fire into their bellies . . .***
**(4:10)*****.***

There are many verses of the same import.
Then there is the verse 50:22*,* which by itself is enough to convince
one of this principle:

***Certainly you were heedless, of it, but now We have removed from you
your veil, so your sight today is sharp.***

The words, “you were heedless of it”, indicate that there was something
present in this world, to which the guilty one has not paid any
attention; “removed from you your veil” means that, but for that veil,
he could have seen that reality even in this worldly life.

What the man would see on the Day of Resurrection was present even in
this earthly life; otherwise, it would not be logical to say that
previously you were inattentive to it, or that it was hidden from your
eyes, but now that the cover has been removed, you may see it clearly.

There is no allegory or metaphor in these verses. Try to explain in
plain Arabic the principle which we have mentioned just now. You will
not find a more explicit way than the one used in these verses. Then,
how can they be explained away as allegories? The divine talk here
points at two realities:-

First: Recompense: What a man will get in hereafter - reward or
punishment, paradise or hell - shall be in recompense of the good or
evil he would have done in this life.

Second: Embodiment of the deeds: Many verses indicate that the good or
evil deeds themselves turn into their own pleasant or unpleasant
recompense. (Or, that the recompense is an insepar­able concomitant of
the deeds themselves.) It is hidden from our eyes in this life, but we
shall see it clearly on the day of reckoning.

These realities are not really two. But we had to explain it in this way
to bring it nearer to the minds. The Qur'an too says that it uses
similitudes to make people understand.

**Qur’an:** ***but He does not cause to err by it*** **(any)** ***except
the transgressors:***“al-Fisq” (**الفِسق** = transgression, sinfulness).
It is the Qur'an that, first of all, used this word in its now prevalent
meaning. It is derived from *fasaqati 't-tamrah* (**فَسَقَنت التّمرة** =
the date broke out of its outer rind ).

That is why it has been further explained by the words, “who break the
covenant of Allah after its confirmation” - a thing must be whole before
it is broken. Also the transgressors are described at the end of the
verse as the losers - one must be owning a thing before he can lose it.
Allah further says:

***Surely the losers are they who have lost themselves and their people
on the resurrection day*** **(42:45).**

All these expressions show how appropriate the adjective, *“al- fasiqīn
“* (**الفاسقين**= the transgressors ) is in this context.

You should never think that the adjectives used by Allah in His book for
His good servants (like “those who are near to Allah”, “the sincere
ones”, “the humble ones”, “the good ones”, “the purified ones” etc.) or
for the evil ones (like “the unjust”, “the transgressors”, “the losers”,
“those who go as­tray”, etc.) are cheap epithets, or that they are used
as literary embellishment.

Each adjective has its own significance; each points to a particular
stage in man's spiritual journey. Each has its own characteristics, and
gives rise to its special effects and consequences. On physical level,
every age has its own char­acteristics and powers, which cannot be found
before or after that age; likewise, on spiritual plane, every attribute
has its own special effects.

An Essay On Compulsion And Delegation
-------------------------------------

The sentence, “but He does not cause to err by it (any) except the
transgressors”, explains how Allah manages the actions of His servants.
Does He compel them to act in a pre-determined way? Or, has He delegated
to them all powers in this respect? It is better to solve this knotty
problem here and now, by the guidance of the Qur'an.

Allah says:

• ***Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is
Allah's*** **(2:284);**

• ***His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth*** **(57:5);**

• ***to Him belongs the kingdom, and to Him is due*** **(all)**
***praise*** **(64:1).**

These and other similar verses prove that to Allah belongs the whole
universe; His ownership is unconditional and unlimited. A man owns a
thing, let us say, a donkey; he may use it and take its advantage to a
certain extent only.

For ex­ample, he may ride it or use it as a beast of burden; but he
can­not starve it to death, nor can he burn it alive. Why? Because his
ownership is not absolute; society would condemn him if he were to
commit such atrocities. His ownership allows him certain advantages
only; and not every possible use.

But when we say that Allah is the Owner of the worlds, we mean absolute,
real and unrestricted ownership. There is no owner except Allah; the
things own, or control, for themselves neither any harm nor any profit,
neither life, death nor resurrec­tion.

It is only Allah who owns and controls every affair of every creature;
He may do with them whatever He pleases; no one can ask Him why; He
cannot be blamed or questioned for anything He does, because He is the
absolute Owner. He has, of course, allowed some of His creatures to use
some other things to a cer­tain limits; but both the user and the used
are His property; and the user cannot exceed the authorized limit.

Allah, as the absolute Owner, cannot be questioned about His
dispositions; but others have to give account of how they exercised
their authority. Allah says:

***who is he that can intercede with Him but by His permis­sion?***
**(2:255);**

***there is no intercessor except after His permission*****(10:3);**

**. . .** ***that if Allah please He would certainly guide all the
people?*****(13:31)*****;***

***And if Allah please He would certainly make you a single nation, but
He causes to err whom He pleases and guides whom He pleases . .
.*****(16:93);**

***And you do not please except that Allah please*** **(76:30)*****;***

***He cannot be questioned concerning what He does and they shall be
questioned*****(21:23).**

Allah disposes and manages His property in any way He pleases; no one
can use any other thing except with His permission, because He is the
real Owner and Sustainer of everything.
Now we come to the rules and laws which Allah ordains for His
creatures. He uses the same method which has been adopted by the human
society - ordaining what is good and praising and rewarding its doers;
forbidding what is bad and condemning and punishing its doers. For
example,

He says:

***If you give alms openly, it is well*** **(2:271)**

**. . .** ***evil is a bad name after faith*** **(49:11)*****.***

Obviously, the laws ordained by Allah look at the good of man, and aim
at perfecting the human society. Allah says:

***. . . answer*** **(the call of)** ***Allah and His Apostle when he
calls you to that which gives you life*** (8:24)***;***

***that is better for you, if you know*** (61:11);

***Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good***
**(to others)** ***and the giving to kindred, and He forbids indecency
and evil and rebellion*** **(16:90)*****;***

***Surely Allah does not enjoin indecency*** **(7:28)*****.***

There are many such verses; and they show that the principles which the
laws are based upon are always the same - be it a divine commandment or
a human legislation. What is good in itself and ensures the good of the
society is allowed, enjoined and prescribed; and what is evil in itself
and endangers the social structure is forbidden; man is praised and
rewarded for doing the former, and blamed and punished for doing the
later. Some of those principles are as follows:

People do whatever they do because of its underlying wisdom and good.
Legislation of laws is no exception to this rule; the laws too are made
because of their underlying good and benefit. They reward the
law-abiding citizens and chastise, if they so wish, the law-breakers.
The said recompense must be correlated to the action done - in its
quantity and quality.

Also, it is accepted that the enjoinment and prohibition can be
addressed to him only who is not under any duress or compulsion who has
got freedom of will and choice. The above-mentioned recompense too is
related to such actions only which emanate from free will and choice.

Of course, if someone, by his own action, puts himself in a tight
corner, in a difficult position where he has to transgress a law, he may
be justly punished for that trans­gression, and his plea of helplessness
will not be heeded at all.

Allah uses these same principles in His dealing with His creatures. He
does not compel the man to obey or to disobey the divine commands. Had
there been any compulsion, rewarding the obedient ones with the paradise
and punishing the disobedient ones with the hell would have been
absolutely wrong: the reward would have been an unprincipled venture,
and the punishment an unmitigated oppression and injustice - and all of
it is evil according to reason.

Moreover, it would mean favouring one against the other without any
justification, without any cause - and this too is a demerit according
to reason. Furthermore, it would provide the aggrieved party with a
valid argument against Allah; but Allah says:

**. . .** ***so that people should not have an argument against Allah
after the*** **(coming of)** ***apostles*** **(4:165);**

***. . . that he who would perish might perish by clear*** **proof**
***and he who would live might live by clear proof*** **(8:42)*****.***

The above discourse makes the following points clear:-

First: Divine laws are not based on compulsion. These rules have been
made for the good of man in this life and the hereafter. And they have
been prescribed for him because he has freedom of will, he may obey the
rule if he so wishes, and may disobey if he so chooses. He will be fully
recompensed for what­ever good or bad he does by his free will.

Second: There are things and actions which are not in conformity with
the divine sanctity, yet the Qur'an attributes them to Allah, like
misleading, deceiving, scheming against some­one, leaving him wandering
on in his rebellion, letting the Satan overpower the man and become his
associate. All these actions are related to various kinds of misleading
and misguidance.

But Allah is above all defects and demerits, and, therefore, these words
when attributed to Him, should convey a meaning in keeping with His
sacred name. Initial misleading, even in the sense of making inattentive
and forgetful, cannot be ascribed to Allah. What the above-mentioned
expressions actually mean is this:

When someone by his own free will, opts to go astray, chooses the wrong
path and commits sins, then Allah leaves him in that straying, and,
thus, increases his error - it is done as a punishment of his wrong
choice. Allah says:

***He causes many to err by it and many He leads aright, by it, but He
does not cause to err by it*** **(any)*****except the transgressors***
**(2:26)*****.***

***. . . when they turned aside, Allah made their hearts turn aside***
**(61:5).**

***Thus does Allah cause him to err who is extravagant, a doubter***
**(40:34).**

Third: The divine decree does not cover the actions of the man inasmuch
as they are attributed to him - they are done by the doer, although not
created by him. We shall further explain it later.
Fourth: Now that it has been seen that the divine law is not based on
compulsion, it should be clearly understood that it is not based on
delegation of power either.

How can a “master” issue an authoritative command if he has delegated
all his powers to the servant. In other words, this theory of delegation
ne­gates the comprehensive ownership of Allah*vis-à-vis* many of His
possessions.

Tradition
---------

A great number of Tradition (narrated from the Imams of *Ahlu 'l-bayt -
a*.s.) says: “There is neither compulsion nor delegation (of power), but
(there is) a position between these two (extremes).”
It is reported in '*Uyūnu '1-akhbar,* through several chains:

When the Leader of the faithful, 'Alī ibn Abī Talib (a.s.) returned from
Siffīn, an old man (who has participated in that battle) stood up and
said: “O Leader of the faithful! Tell us about this journey of ours, was
it by Allah's decree and measure?”

The Leader of the faithful said: “Yes, O Shaykh! By Allah you did not
ascend any elevation, nor did you descend to any valley but by a decree
of Allah and by His measure.” The old man, there­upon said: “I leave to
Allah all my troubles (of this journey), O Leader of the faithful!”
('Alī - a.s.) replied:

“Have patience, O Shaykh! Perhaps you take it to mean a firm decree and
a com­pulsory measure! If it were so, then there would be no
justifica­tion of reward or punishment, no sense of command, prohibition
or admonition, no meaning of promise or threat; there would not be any
blame on an evil-doer nor any praise for a good-doer.

Nay, the good-doer would have been rather more deserving of blame than
the evil-doer, and the evil-doer rather more worthy of grace than the
good-doer. (Beware!) this is the belief of the idol-worshippers and the
enemies of the Beneficent God (who are) the Qadariyyah of this *ummah*
and its Majūs.

O Shaykh! Verily Allah ordained (the *sharī'ah*) giving freedom of will
(to men) and prohibited (evil) to keep us on guard; and He gave
plentiful (reward) on meager (deeds); and He was not disobeyed by being
overpowered, nor was He obeyed by compulsion; and He did not create the
heavens and the earth and what is between them in vain; that is the
opinion of those who disbelieve on account of the fire.”

The author says: The topics of the speech of Allah and His decree and
measure were among the earliest about which the Muslims differed among
themselves. This second dispute may be described as follows:

The eternal divine will govern everything in the universe. These things
are transient in their quiddity; but when they do exist, they do so
because the will of Allah decreed their existence - and in this way
their existence becomes essential - otherwise, the divine decree would
be meaningless.

Conversely, when a thing does not exist, it is because Allah did not
decree its existence - and in this way its existence becomes
impossible - otherwise, the divine will would be meaningless. In short,
whatever exists, exists because Allah has decreed its existence, - thus
turning it into an essential being. This principle applies everywhere.

But the difficulty arises when it comes to such a human action that
issues from our own will and choice. We know that we can do it if we so
desire, and can ignore it if we so wish. Their doing and not doing is
equally possible to us. The balance is tipped in favour of either side
by our own will and choice. Our actions are based on our choice, and our
will brings them into existence. The difficulty that arises at this
point is this:

We have earlier seen that nothing comes into being without the will and
decree of Allah, which turns the thing into an essential being - if so,
then how can any action of ours be termed as “possible” one? It must
exist because the divine will has decreed it! Moreover, how can our will
affect it in any way when it is governed by the will of Allah?

Also, in this background, it cannot be said that man had power to do a
certain work before he did it. And, because he did not have that power,
Allah could not give him any order or command for or against that work.

Going a step further, if Allah gave him an order and he did not comply,
it would mean that Allah Himself had not wanted that thing to happen; so
it was impossible for it to happen. Then the question would arise: How
could Allah order him to perform an impossible task? Conversely, if
someone complied with that order, it was because Allah Himself wanted it
to happen. Then why should the man be rewarded without any valid reason?

By the same reasoning, a sinner should not be punished, as it would be
against justice, a naked oppression. One may go on enumerating the
difficulties arising out of this subject. A large number of Muslims felt
obliged to admit, and believe in, all these absurdities. They said that:

Man does not have power to do a work before the time comes to do it. The
reason has nothing to do with the merit or demerit of any action.
Whatever Allah does become good; and whatever He forbids becomes evil.

Accordingly, Allah may choose an action without any justification; He
may give reward without any cause; He may ordain laws beyond the
capacity of the doer or agent; He may inflict punishment on a
disobedient servant even though the said disobedience and transgression
was not of his doing.

It appears that the old man, who had asked the question, thought that
the belief in the divine will and decree meant that there was no merit
or demerit in any action and that man had no right of any reward (or
punishment).

Naturally he was dis­appointed when he heard that the journey was by the
decree of Allah; that is why he said: “I leave to Allah all my
troubles.” What he meant was this: My journey to Siffīn and back and my
fighting in the way of Allah had no benefit for me as it was governed
and done by the will of Allah; my share in all this venture was only the
trouble and the inconvenience which I underwent.

Therefore, I shall leave it to Allah to balance my account, as it was He
Who put me through all these troubles. The Imam ('Alī) replied to him by
saying, “If it were so, there would be no justification of reward or
punishment . . .” The Imam pointed to the rational principle on which
the legislation is based. And at the end he reasoned that Allah did not
create the heavens and the earth and what is between them in vain.

If Allah could will the man's actions in a way as to deprive him of his
freedom of will and choice, it would mean that He could do things
without any purpose and aim; then He could create the whole creation
aimlessly and in vain. This in its turn would render the principle of
resurrection and reward and punishment invalid too.

It is narrated in *at-Tawhīd* and '*Uyūnu 'l-akhbar* that ar-Rida (a.s)
was asked about compulsion and delegation, and he said: “Should I not
teach you in this regard a principle by which you shall never differ
(among yourselves), and no one will argue with you on this subject but
that you shall defeat him (by it)?” We said: ”(Teach it to us) if you so
please.”

Thereupon he said: “Verily Allah is not obeyed through compulsion, nor
is He dis­obeyed by overpowering; and He did not leave the servants
remiss in His kingdom; He (still) owns what He has given into their
possession, and has power on what He has put into their power.

Now, if the servants decided to obey Him, He would not prevent them from
it, nor would he put any obstruction to it; and if they decided to
disobey Him, then if He pleased to bar their way to it He would do so,
and if He did not hinder it and they com­mitted it, then it was not He
Who led them into that (sin).” Then the Imam said: “Whoever would
accurately delineate the boundaries of this speech would surely overcome
his adversary.”

The author says: Why did “al-Mujabbirah” (**المُجَبِّرة** = the
believers in compulsion) say what they said? It was because they
pondered on the divine decree and measure, and it led them to the
conclusion that when Allah decrees a thing it must happen inescapably.

Their deliberation of this subject was correct, and so was the
conclusion arrived at. Where they fell in error was in correlating that
conclusion with reality; they did not under­stand the difference between
a reality and an idea based on sub­jective approach; they forgot the
distinction between essentiality and possibility.

It is correct to say, on the basis of the divine decree and measure,
that nothing happens in this world unless it turns an essential being;
it is because everything and every affair comes into being when it is
decreed by Allah, according to the measure prescribed by Him; and then
it cannot fail to happen, otherwise the decree of Allah would fail.

At the same time, it should be kept in mind that a transient or possible
thing becomes essential because of its sufficient cause. When looked at
in conjunction with its sufficient cause, it would be called
“essential”; but separated from that cause, it would remain as it was
before - a transient or possible thing. Let us look at an action of man
which he does by his free will and choice.

When we look at it in relation to all things that are necessary to bring
it into being - knowledge, will, proper tools and organs, the material,
formal, efficient and final causes, and all the conditions of time and
space - it will become an essential being; and it is in this context
that it become subject of the eternal divine will.

In other words, it becomes an essential being when all aspects of its
sufficient cause are com­plete. But, looked in relation to each of those
aspects separately, it remains only a transient and possible thing. If
it is seen *vis-à-vis* its efficient cause only, that is, in relation to
the doer only, it will retain its characteristics of transience and
possibility - it will not become an essential being.

It is now clear to see at which point the believers in “com­pulsion”
have deviated from the right path. They thought that, inasmuch as the
human action was subject to the divine will and decree, man had no power
on it; he was not a free agent; he was rather a helpless tool in divine
hands.

But they did not take into consideration the fact that the divine will
takes it into hand only when all aspects of its sufficient cause are
complete, and not before that.

The divine will decrees that a certain action be done by Zayd - not
unconditionally, but on the condition that it is done by Zayd's free
will, at a certain time and a certain place. Therefore, its relation to
the divine will itself demands that it should be an action of a free
agent, done by his own free will and choice.

Doubtlessly, that action will be called an “essential” one if seen in
relation to the divine will; but at the same time and by virtue of the
same divine will, it will be a possible and transient action when
related to the doer, that is, the man.

In other words, there are two wills - the human and the divine; they do
not run parallel to each other; the divine will comes after and above
the human will - they are in a vertical, and not a horizontal position
to each other.

Therefore, there is no competition or collision between the two wills.
It was a short-sightedness on part of the believers in compulsion to
negate the human will in order to establish the divine one.

The Mu'tazilites said that human actions are done by man's free will.
But they went to the other extreme, and fell in an error no less
objectionable than that of al-Mujabbirah. They too said that if human
action was subjected to the divine will man would not have any freedom
of will and choice. And then they took a position diametrically opposed
to that of al-Mujabbirah, and came to the conclusion that the divine
will had no relation what­soever to the human action.

Thus they had to accept another creator - the man himself - for human
actions. In this way, they accepted dualism without knowing what they
were doing. Going further they fell into traps more harmful than the
belief of al-Mujabbirah. As the Imam has said: “The poor al-Qadariyyah,
they wanted to emphasize the justice of Allah, so they removed Him from
His power and authority. . . ”

A master, showing kindness to one of his slaves, married him to a
slave-girl of his; he bestowed on him a property, gave him a
well-furnished house and provided him with all the necess­ities of life.
Then there came some people there, looked at his property, and began
arguing among themselves. Someone said:

“Even though the master has given this property to his slave and has
made him its owner, the slave has no right in, or authority over, this
property at all. Does any slave own anything? The slave together with
all his belongings belongs to the master.”

Another said: “No. You are wrong. The master has bestowed on this slave
the right of property. Now the slave is its absolute owner, and the
master has lost all his rights, and authority over this property. We may
say that he has abdicated in favour of his slave. ”

The former was the opinion of al-Mujabbirah; the later that of the
Mu'tazilites. But both were wrong. The correct view would have been to
say: The master has got his status of mastership; the slave his position
of servitude and bondage. The master has made the slave owner of his
(i.e., master's) property.

The property belongs to the master at the same time that it belongs to
the slave. There are two ownerships - one over the other. This is what
the Imams of *Ahlu 'l-bayt* (a. s.) have taught us to believe, and what
the reason supports.

'Abayah ibn Rib'ī al-Asadī asked 'Alī, the Leader of the faithful, the
meaning of “capability”. The Leader of the faithful asked a counter
question: “Do you have that capability without God or with God?” When
'Abayah remained silent, he told him, “Tell me, O 'Abayah!” He said:
“What should I say? O Leader of the faithful!”

He said: “You should say that you have got that capability by (grace of)
Allah, to Whom it belongs and not to you. If He made you its owner, it
would be of His bounties, and if He took it away from you, it would be a
trial from Him; and He is the Owner of what He gave into your
possession, and has power over what He put under your power. . .”
(*al-Ihtijaj*)

The author says: Its meaning may be understood from the preceding
explanation.

al-Mufīd reports in his *Sharhu 'l-'aqa'id:* It has been nar­rated from
Abū 'l-Hasan, the third, (a.s.) that he was asked whether the actions of
the servants were created by Allah. He (a.s.) said: “If He were their
creator, He would not have dis­owned their liability.

And He (Allah) has said:

***Verily, Allah is free from liability to the idolaters . . .***
**(9:3)*****.***

It does not mean that Allah was not responsible for the creation of the
idolaters; what Allah has disowned any responsibility of, is their idol­
worship and their evils.”

The author says: There are two aspects of a deed - its actual existence,
and its relation to its doer. It is only when an action is seen in
relation to its doer that it is called obedience or disobedience, good
or bad, virtue or sin. So far as actual existence is concerned, there is
no difference between marriage and fornication.

What distinguishes one from the other is the command of Allah - marriage
conforms with the divine law, and fornication goes against that law.
Someone is killed without any reason; another is killed by a lawful
authority in reprisal of a murder. A teacher punishes an orphan in order
to guide him aright; an oppressor hits at the same orphan unjustly.

In all these examples, the actual movements of the actions are
identical. But one group is called sin because it does not conform with
the divine law or goes against the common weal of the society.

Allah says:

***Allah is the Creator of everything. . .*** **(39:62).**

Every action is a “thing” inasmuch as it exists. And the Imam has said:
“Whatsoever may be called a thing is created, except Allah. . .” Also,
Allah says:

***Who made good everything that He has created. . .*** **(32:7).**

It may be inferred that everything is good because it is created.
Creation and goodness are insepar­able factors. But at the same time, we
see that Allah has named some actions as evil. For example, He says:

***Whoever brings a good deed, he shall have ten like it, and whoever
brings an evil deed, he shall not be recompensed but only with the like
of it*** **. . . (6:160).**

These are obviously the actions done by man; not the factor of
recompense which cannot apply to divine actions. Such a deed is called
sin. It is evil because it lacks something; because it is a
nullification of a spiritual virtue or social good. In other words, a
sin is sin because it is a negation, a non-being; otherwise it would
have been good.

Now, let us look at the following verses of the Qur'an:

***No misfortune befalls on the earth nor in your own souls, but it is
in a book before We bring it into existence. . .*** **(57:22);**

***No affliction comes about but by Allah's permission; and who­ever
believes in Allah, He guides aright his heart . . .*** **(64 :11);**

***And whatever affliction befalls you, it is on account of what your
hands have wrought, and*** **(yet)** ***He pardons most*** **(of your
faults) (42:30)*****;***

***Whatever benefit comes to you, it is from Allah, and whatever
misfortune befalls you, it is from yourself*** **(4:79)*****;***

***. . . and if a benefit comes to them, they say: “This is from
Allah;”- and if a misfortune befalls them they say: “This is from you.”
Say: “All is from Allah;” but what is the matter with these people that
well-nigh they do not understand what is told*** **(them)? (4:78).**

On pondering upon these verses, it be­comes clear that these misfortunes
are relative evils. A man is bestowed with the bounties of Allah, like
security and peace; health and wealth, and so on; then he loses one or
more of these bounties.

This misfortune, in relation to that man, is evil because it has
nullified some existing things, that is, the bounties which he had
previously enjoyed. Thus, every misfortune is created by Allah, and at
that stage it is not an evil. But it is an evil when seen in relation to
the man who loses an existing bounty because of it.

Likewise, every sin is a negative factor, and as such, it is not to be
attributed to Allah at all; though it may be attributed to Him from
another angle, inasmuch as it happens by permission of Allah.
al-Bazanti said:

I told ar-Rida (a.s.) that some of our fellows believe in compulsion and
some of them advocate the (belief of) capability. Thereupon he told me:
“Write down (as I say): Allah, Blessed and High is He, has said: 'O son
of Adam! By My will you have become such that you wish for yourself what
you wish; and by My power you discharged the duties imposed by Me (on
you); and by My bounty, you got power to disobey Me; I made you hearing,
seeing (and) powerful.

Whatever benefit comes to you, it is from Allah; and whatever misfortune
befalls you, it is from yourself. And it is as it is because I have more
right on your good deeds than you have yourself; and you are more liable
to your sins than Me. And it is because I cannot be questioned
concerning what I do and they shall be questioned. Thus, I have arranged
for you everything that you want. . .' ”(*Qurbu '1-asnad*)

This, or nearly the same, tradition is narrated through other chains, of
the Sunnīs as well as of the Shī'ahs. In short, the deeds that cannot be
attributed to Allah, are the sins *per se.* It further explains the
sentence of the preceding tradition:

“If he were their creator, He would not have disowned their liability .
. . What Allah has disowned any responsibility of, is their idol-worship
and their evils. . . ”

Abū Ja'far and Abū 'Abdillah (a.s.) said: “Certainly, Allah is too
Merciful to His creatures to compel them to sin and then to punish them
for it. And Allah is too powerful for anyone to think that He would will
a thing and it would not happen!”

(The narrator) said: “Then they (a.s.) were asked: 'Is there a third
position between the (positions of) compulsion and (in­dependent)
capability?' They said: 'Yes, broader than (the space) between the
heaven and the earth.”' (*at-Tawhīd*)

Muhammad ibn 'Ajlan said: “I asked Abū 'Abdillah (a.s.) whether Allah
has delegated (the authority of) the affair to the servants. He said:
Allah is too honourable to delegate (the auth­ority) to them.' I said:
'Then has He compelled the servants in their deeds?' He said: Allah is
too just to compel a servant on a deed and then to punish him for it.'”
(*ibid.*)

In the same book Mihzam is reported as saying: “Abū 'Abdillah (a.s.)
said: “Tell me what is that concerning which our followers (whom you
have left behind) have differed among themselves.' I said: 'About the
compulsion and the delegation?' He said: 'Then ask me about it.' I
asked: 'Has Allah compelled the servants to (commit) sins?'

He replied: 'Allah is too over­powering to do it to them.' I asked:
'Then has He delegated (the authority) to them?' He replied: 'Allah has
too much power over them to do so.' I asked: 'Then what is it (i.e., the
correct position)? May Allah make your affairs right for you!'” (The
narrator says:) “The Imam turned his hand twice or thrice, then said:
'If I were to answer you concerning it, you would not believe.'”

The author says: ”Allah is too overpowering to do it to them”:
Compulsion means that a force majeure subdues the subject in such a way
that his power of action is nullified. “Too overpowering” (or, more
overpowering than that) is the predomi­nant will of Allah - He has
willed that the action would emanate from the doer by his free will and
choice, and this is what is actually happening in the world. The divine
will has given the man freedom of will; neither the divine will negates
the human will, nor the human will collides with the divine will.

It is reported in *at-Tawhīd* that as-Sadiq (a. s.) said: “The Apostle
of Allah said: 'Whoever thinks that Allah enjoins the evil and
indecency, he tells a lie against Allah; and whoever believes that the
good and bad (do happen) without the will of Allah, he removes Allah
from His authority.'”

It is reported that al-Hajjaj ibn Yūsuf wrote to al-Hasan al-Basrī, 'Amr
ibn 'Ubayd, Wasil ibn 'Ata' and 'Amir ash-Sha'bī, asking them to
describe what they had got (and what has reached them) in respect of
(divine) decree and measure. al-Hasan al-Basrī wrote to him: “The best
thing that has reached me is that which I heard the Leader of the
faithful, 'Alī ibn Abī Talib (a.s.) saying:

'Do you think that He Who has forbidden you has (also) acted cunningly
against you? Rather, your lower and higher (parts) have cunningly
deceived you, and Allah is free from its liability.'” And 'Amr ibn
'Ubayd wrote to him: “The best thing I have heard about the decree and
measure is the saying of the Leader of the faithful, 'Alī ibn Abī Talib
(a.s.):

'If perfidy were in reality decreed, the perfidious man, if punished,
would have been op­pressed.' ” And Wasil ibn 'Ata' wrote to him: “The
best I have heard about the decree and measure is the saying of the
Leader of the faithful, 'Alī ibn Abī Talib (a.s.) :

'Do you think that He would guide you to the path and (then) obstruct
you (from moving on)?' ” And ash-Sha'bī wrote to him: “The best thing I
have heard concerning the decree and measure is the word of the Leader
of the faithful, 'Alī ibn Abī Talib (a. s.) :

'Whatever you have to seek Allah's pardon for it, it is from you; and
what­ever you thank Allah for it, it is from Him.' ” When their letters
reached al-Hajjaj and he studied them, he said: “Certainly they have
taken it from a clear spring.” (at-Tara'if )

It is narrated in the same book that someone asked Ja'far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq (a. s.) about the decree and measure, and he replied: “Whatever
you may blame the servant (of Allah) for it, it is from him; and
whatever you cannot blame the servant (of Allah) for it, it is the work
of Allah. Allah will say to the servant:

'Why did you disobey? Why did you transgress? Why did you drink liquor?
Why did you fornicate?' This is, therefore, the work of the servant. But
He will not say to him: 'Why were you sick? Why were you of short
stature? Why did you become white? Why were you black?(He will not ask
it) because it is the work of Allah.”

'Alī (as.) was asked about monotheism and justice (of Allah), and he
said: “Monotheism is that you should not imagine Him; and justice is
that you should not accuse Him.” (*Nahju '1-balaghah*)

The author says: There are numerous Tradition on this subject; but those
quoted above throw light on all the aspects of the topic.

The above-mentioned Tradition show various special methods of argument
regarding the subject matter.

a) Some of them argue on the basis of legislation itself - order and
prohibition; punishment and reward etc. - that man has freedom of will,
without any compulsion or delegation of power. See, for example, the
speech of the Leader of the faithful, 'Alī (as.), replying to the old
man. It is similar to the argument we have inferred from the words of
Allah.

b) Others bring in evidence the verses of the Qur'an which cannot be
reconciled with the theory of compulsion or delegation of power. For
example:

***And Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth***
**(3:189);**

***and your Lord is not in the least unjust to the servants***
**(41:46)*****.***

Also, there is the verse,

***Say: “Surely Allah does not enjoin indecency”*** **(7:28)** ***.***

Poser: A deed may be described as unjust or indecent if it is seen in
relation to us. But when it is attributed to Allah it is not called
unjust or indecent. Therefore, even if all “our” deeds were actually
done by Allah, it would be perfectly right to say that He is not unjust
and does not enjoin indecency.

Reply: The sentence seen in the context leaves no room for such
misconceptions. The complete verse is as follows:

***And when they commit an indecency they say: “We found our fathers
doing this and Allah has enjoined it on us ” Say: “Surely Allah does not
enjoin indecency. Do you say against Allah what you do not know?”***

Look at the sentence, “and Allah has enjoined it on us”. The pronoun
“it” clearly refers to the indecency committed by them; and it is the
same deed which is referred to in the sentence, “Surely Allah does not
enjoin indecency,”. Allah does not enjoin what is termed as indecency in
context of human activities; it does not matter whether in other
framework it is called indecency or not.

c) A third type of reasoning is based on the divine attributes. Allah
has given Himself many good names, and has described Himself with many
sublime attributes, which cannot be squared with compulsion or
delegation of power.

Allah is the Subduer, the Omnipotent, the Benevolent and the Merciful.
These attributes can only be believed in if one believes that everything
depends on Allah in its existence, and that its defects and shortcomings
can­not be attributed to Him at all. (Refer to the Tradition quoted from
*at-Tawhīd.)*

d) Yet others refer to seeking the pardon of Allah as well as to the
blame which society directs at the wrong-doer. If sin were not from the
man himself, there would have been no mean­ing in asking for divine
pardon. If all our actions were done by Allah why should we be blamed
for only some of them and not for the others?

e) Lastly, there are the Tradition which explain the words, like causing
to err, sealing the hearts and misleading, when they are attributed to
Allah:

ar-Rida (a.s.) said explaining the words of Allah, ***and He***
**(Allah)** ***left them in utter darkness - they do not see:*** “Allah
is not described as leaving something as His creatures do. But when He
knew that they would not return from disbelief and error, He held back
His help and grace from them and let them alone with their choice.”
('*Uyunu '1-akhbar*)

The same book narrates from the same Imam in explanation of the words of
Allah, *Allah has set a seal upon their hearts:* “It is setting a seal
on the hearts of the disbelievers as a punishment of their disbelief, as
Allah has said:

***. . . nay! Allah has set a seal upon them owing to their disbelief,
so they shall not believe except a few*** **(4:155).”**

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said concerning the words of Allah, ***Surely Allah is
not ashamed to set forth any parable. . .**: ”*This divine word answers
those who think that Allah makes (His) servants go astray and then
punishes them for that straying . . . [^1]”

The author says: Its meaning may be understood from previous
explanations.

A Philosophical Discussion
--------------------------

Every species is related to a particular type of action and reaction. In
fact it is these special characteristics which identify the species as
such. We looked at various kinds of actions and reactions emanating from
various groups.

Our reason told us that there should be an efficient cause, an agent, to
bring each kind of these actions and reactions into being. Therefore, we
put every group in a separate category, identifying it as a species.
When we compared human characteristics, for example, with those of an
animal, and delineated them clearly, we decided that they were two
different species, with different characteristics.

When the actions are seen in relation to their subjects, that is, the
species, they are primarily divided into two categories:

First: The actions emanating from the nature - where the knowledge of
their emanation has no effect at all on their existence. For example,
the growth and nutrition of the vegetables; the movement of the bodies;
our own health or illness.

These things are known to us, present in our own bodies; but our knowing
or not knowing them has no effect whatsoever on their coming into being;
they totally depend upon their doer - that is, nature.

Second: The actions issuing forth from the doer with his knowledge -
where the said knowledge has a bearing on their being, like the
intentional actions of the man and even of some animals. The doer does
such an action after knowing and identifying it; and it is the knowledge
and perception that gives him that insight.

The knowledge makes him realize what would consti­tute his perfection,
and helps him in deciding whether a particular action would lead to that
desired perfection. The knowledge distinguishes the means of perfection
from other things; and this distinction helps the doer in choosing a
particular course of action. And the action comes into being.

The activities based upon ingrained aptitude (like issuing forth of the
required voices, when a man speaks), as well as those emanating from
natural disposition, or from the dictates of nature (like breathing)
and, likewise, those springing from overwhelming grief or fear etc., do
not require contemplation or meditation by the doer.

Why? Because there is not more than one form of knowledge here, and the
doer does not have to delay his activity awaiting a final decision.
Therefore, he does it immediately. But in other cases, where the doer
has before his eyes two or more possible forms of knowledge to choose
from, he has to spend at least a few moments in contemplation and
deliberation.

For example, Zayd is hungry, and he gets a bread. Its one aspect is that
it may satiate his hunger; but there may be other aspects too - it may
be another man's property, it may be poisoned, it may have become dirty
and so on. Zayd has to reflect whether the bread is legally, morally and
hygienically fit for consump­tion. When he reaches a conclusion, the
actions follows without any delay.

The first type of activities is called involuntary, like natural
reactions; the second type is called voluntary, or intentional, like
walking or talking.
The intentional actions, emanating from man's knowledge and will, are
again divided into two categories:

First: When the man decides to do - or, not to do - a certain work, he
may do so entirely on his own, without being influenced by any other
fellow. In the example given above, Zayd may decide, on his own, not to
eat the bread because it was someone else's property; or he may eat it
in spite of that snag. This is called a deed done by man's free will.

Second: When the man opts for a certain course of action under the
influence of someone else. A tyrant may force a help­less person to act
according to that tyrant's instruction under duress. The poor fellow in
this condition commits sins and crimes against his own will. This is
called a deed done under compulsion.

Right? But let us look at this second category more closely. We have
said that this kind of deed results from the compeller's compulsion; he
does not allow any freedom to the doer, who has to take the only way
left open by the oppressor. But even then, it is the doer himself who
decides to proceed on that way.

It is true that the major factor leading to this decision was the
tyrant's compulsion; but it is equally true that the decision was taken
by the doer himself, even though it was taken to save himself from the
tyrant's oppression. In short, even the deeds done under compulsion are
done by the will of the doer. It follows that the division of
intentional actions into these two categories is not real, not based on
actual facts.

The intentional action is the one which emanates from knowledge and a
will that tips the bal­ance in its favour. This reality is found in the
deed done under compulsion as well as in the one done by free will. It
makes no difference that it was some other man's force or fear that
tipped the balance in one case and the doer's own thinking that did so
in the other.

A man sitting near a wall looks up to find that it was about to fall;
overcome by fear he sprints away from that place. And we say that he did
so by his own free will. Suppose, a tyrant threatens to bull-doze the
wall over him if he did not move away.

Overcome by fear, he sprints away from there. And we say that it was
done under compulsion. But the funda­mentals in both cases are the same.
The man is overcome by fear and decides to move away. So, why should we
put them in two different categories?

Objection: There is enough difference between the two actions to warrant
their assignment to two different categories. The deed done by free will
is based on its underlying wisdom (in the eyes of the doer); the doer
deserves praise or blame, and gets reward or punishment, for it. All
these factors are simply absent in the case of a deed done under
compulsion.

Reply: It is true. But these factors are based on subjective approach of
the society. They do not have any existence outside the imagination. By
talking on these subjective approaches we have crossed the limits of
philosophy. Philosophy deals with the things that exist in reality, as
well as with those things' natural characteristics. What all this leads
to is the conclusion that the discussion whether man is free in his
actions is beyond the scope of philosophy.

We may yet bring it back on the track of philosophy from another
direction:

A transient (possible) thing has equal relation with existence and
non-existence. It, therefore, needs a sufficient cause to tip the
balance in favour of existence, so that it may come into being.

The transient thing, when related to its sufficient cause, becomes an
essential being - it becomes impossible for it not to exist. That is why
it is said that a transient does not come into being unless it becomes
an essential being.

A transient, by its definition, must have a sufficient cause for its
existence. A transient existing without its sufficient cause is a
contradiction in terms. And that cause gives it the essentiality, so
long as it exists.

Now look at the universe at a glance. You will find a chain made up of
unnumerable links, all of which would be essential beings. In other
words, not a single existing thing could be called a transient, so long
as it exists.

But this “essential - ness” comes to it only when it is looked at in
relation to its sufficient cause.
The sufficient cause may be a single thing or a compound of various
causes - the material, the formal, the efficient and the final causes,
plus the necessary conditions of time and space as well as other
preliminaries.

An effect when related to its sufficient cause must invariably exist -
because the said cause would make it essential. But when seen with only
a part of that cause, or if related to any outside factor, it would not
be essential; it would remain a transient as before.

If a transient, on being related to only a part of its sufficient cause
(e.g., to its efficient cause only) become essential and come into
being, its sufficient cause would be superfluous; and it would be a
contradiction in term.

It shows that in this natural world two systems are found
simultaneously: one of essentiality and the other of transiency. The
system of essentiality covers the sufficient causes and their effects -
there is no transiency in any part of this world, neither in any person
nor in any action. The system of transiency per­meates the matter and
its potentialities when related to only a part of the sufficient cause.

Take any human action; if it is related to its sufficient cause - man
(the efficient cause), knowledge and will (the final), matter (the
material) and its shape (the formal) plus all conditions of time and
space including removal of every hindrance - it would become essential.
But if it is seen in relation to only its efficient cause, that is, man,
it would remain transient.

Finally, it should be pointed out that the transient things need a cause
for their existence because of their transiency. And this need would not
end until the chain of cause and effect finally reaches a cause Who is
the Essential Being. This observation leads to the following two
conclusions:

First: The need of an effect for its cause does not end on its being
related to its transient cause. The need continues until it reaches the
Final Cause, the Essential Being.
Second: This need emanates from its transient nature. It needs a cause
to bring it into existence with all its character­istics and traits,
including its relationship with its various causes, fulfilling all the
conditions of its existence.

Now we may ponder upon the question of compulsion and delegation of
power, keeping in view the above-mentioned premises:

**First:** No delegation of power: Man, like all other things and their
actions, depends on the will of Allah, for his existence. In the same
way, man's action depends on the will of Allah in its existence.
Therefore, the Mu'tazilites' view - that human actions have no relation
at all to the divine will - is completely baseless. There was no reason
at all for them to deny the decree and measure of Allah in respect of
the man's actions.

**Second:** No compulsion: This relation to the will of Allah, inasmuch
as it is concerned with existence, keeps all the char­acteristics of the
created thing in view. Every effect emanates from its cause - with all
its characteristics which have any bearing on its existence.

A man's creation is attributed to Allah, keeping in view all its
intermediary causes and condition - the father, the mother, the time,
the place, the features, the quantity, the quality and a lot of other
concomitants.

Likewise, the action of man is attributed to Allah, keeping in view all
its characteristics and conditions. When a man's action is attributed to
Allah and His will, it does not cease to be the man's action; it is
still caused by the said man's will. The will of Allah decrees that the
action be done by the man emanating from the man's own free will and
choice.

Therefore, it would be a contradiction in term to say that the action
was no longer done by man's free will because it was related to the
divine will. Allah Himself has decreed it to be a work of the man by his
free will; how can it be said that the divine will lost its
effectiveness and the action happened without the man's free will? It is
now clear that the view of al -Mujabbirah - that the human action's
relation to the divine will nullifies its relation to the human will -
is absolutely devoid of truth.

The above discourse shows that the said action has a relation to the
human will and a relation to the divine will; neither relation nullifies
the other, because each is connected with the other vertically, not
horizontally.

**Third:** The human action, when related to its sufficient cause;
becomes essential. But seen in relation to only a part of the sufficient
cause, it remains transient. For example, when the action is related to
only its sufficient cause, that is, man, it does not become essential,
but remains transient as before.

Therefore, what a group of modern materialist philosophers have said -
that the whole system of nature is permeated by compulsion, and there is
no free will at all in the universe - is totally wrong. As we have said,
all effects in relation to their sufficient causes are essential, but,
when related to only a part of the said causes, are transient.

And it is the foundation on which man's life is based. A man teaches and
trains his child and then hopes that his efforts would bear fruit. If
there was no freedom in the world, if everything was essential and had
to happen any­how, then all this teaching and training would be of no
earthly use; there would remain no place for hope in human life.

[^1]: Majma'u 'l-bayan


