Chapter 1 : the Necessity of the Presence of Divine Authority Among the People Abu Ja'far Muhammad Ibn Ya'qub Al-kulayni, the Author of This Book, May Allah Grant Him Blessings Has Said the Following. H 412, Ch. 1, H 1
==========================================================================================================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-'Abbass ibn 'Umar
al-Qummi from Hisham ibn al-Hakam from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the
following.

"An atheist asked the Imam (a.s.), 'How do you prove the truthfulness
of the prophets and the messengers?'" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is a
fact that we have established with sufficient evidence the existence of
our Creator, the Most Holy, the Most High and Exalted above all
creatures. It is a fact that this Creator is All wise and Most High. His
creatures can not see, touch, associate and directly communicate with
Him.

It proves that His deputies must be present among His creatures. It is
His deputies and ambassadors who speak to people for Him and provide
them guidance to protect their interests, to tell them what is
beneficial to them and what are the best means of survival and what may
cause their destruction. This proves the presence among people of those
who conveys the commandments of the Creator, Who is All wise and All
knowing Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, to people.

Such people are the prophet (a.s.) the chosen ones from among His
creatures. They are the people of wisdom, disciplined with wisdom and
sent to people with the message of wisdom. They are different from other
people - although are like them in physical form and shape - in their
conditions of discipline and their receiving direct support from Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High and All-Wise.

This also proves their presence among people in all times to ensure the
availability of the people with Divine authority who would have the kind
of knowledge that would establish their truthfulness and
trustworthiness."

H 413, Ch. 1, h 2

Muhammad ibn Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Safwan
ibn Yahya from Mansur ibn Hazim who has said the following.

"I said to Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Allah by far above Majestic and
Gracious to be known through His creatures. In fact, the creatures are
known through Allah.'" The Imam (a.s.) said, "You have spoken the
truth." I said, "One who knows that he has a Lord, he must also learn
that his Lord agrees with certain things and disagrees with certain
other things.

The only way he would know what his like and dislikes is revelation or
a messenger. On e does not receive revelation he must find the
messengers and when finds the messengers he will know that they the
Divine authority and that obedience to them is necessary.

I say to people, "Do you know that the messenger of Allah was the
Divine authority over His creatures?" They say, "Yes, he was the Divine
authority." I then ask, "After the messenger of Allah who was the Divine
authority over His creatures?" They said, "After the messenger of Allah
the Divine authority is the Holy Quran." I considered the Holy Quran and
found out that various kinds of people consider this Holy Book as
support for their beliefs.

For example the Murji'a (people who say Allah has postponed
punishment), the pre-determinists and the atheist who even do not
believe in it but take it as the basis for their arguments against the
others. I then learned that the Holy Quran can not serve as Divine
authority without a guardian whose words from the Holy Quran would be
the truth.

I then ask the people, "Who is the guardian of the Holy Quran?" They
say, "Ibn Mas'ud knew the Holy Quran, 'Umar knew it and Hudhayfa knew
the Holy Quran." I ask them, "Did they know all of the Holy Quran?" The
people say, "No, they did not know all of it."

I have not found anyone who would know all of the Holy Quran except Ali
ibn abu Talib (a.s.). It is a fact that if any issue would emerge that
needed a Quranic solution, except for Imam Ali (a.s.) every one of the
others would, in many cases, say, "I do not know." Only Imam Ali (a.s.)
would say, "I know."

I then acknowledge that Imam Ali (a.s.) is the guardian of the Holy
Quran and obedience to him is obligatory and he is the Divine authority
over the people after the Holy Prophet (s.a.). Whatever Imam Ali (a.s.)
has said from the Holy Quran is the truth." The Imam (a.s.) said, "May
Allah grant you blessing."

H 414, Ch. 1, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Hassan ibn Ibrahim
from Yunus ibn Ya'qub who has said the following.

"In the presence of Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) once there was a group of
his followers consisting of Humran ibn 'Ayun, Muhammad ibn al-Ni'man,
Hisham ibn Salim, al-Tayyar and others among whom was also Hisham ibn
al-Hakam, a young man.

Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "O Hisham can you tell us what did you
do to 'Amr ibn 'Ubayd and how did you ask him questions?" Hisham said,
"O descendant of the Holy Prophet Your greatness makes me feel shy and
my tongue does not work in your presence." The Imam (a.s.) said, "When I
would order you something you should do it." Hisham, then said, "I came
to learn about the gathering of 'Amr ibn 'Ubayd and sessions of speeches
for people in the Mosque of Basra.

It disturbed me a great deal and I went to Basra. It was a Friday. I
went to the Mosque and found a large circle of people among was 'Arm ibn
'Ubayd with a black piece of woolen cloth used as a loin cloth and
another piece over him as a gown and people would ask him questions. I
asked people for room, which they made for me.

I sat in front of the people with my legs folded beneath and said, "O
scholar, I come from out of town. Can I ask you questions?" He said,
"Yes, you may ask." I asked, "Do you have eyes?" He said, "Son, what
kind of question is this? Something that you can see why then do you
ask?" I said, "That is how my questions are." He said, "Son, you may ask
your questions even if they would be foolish ones." I asked, "Do you
have eyes?" He said, "Yes, I have eyes."

I asked, "What do you do with them?" He said, "I see with them the
colors and persons." I asked, "Do you have a nose?" He said, "Yes, I
have a nose." I asked, "What do you do with it?" He said, " I use it to
smell things."

I asked, "Do you have a mouth?" He said, "Yes, I have a mouth." I
asked, "What do you do with it?" He said, "I test things with it." I
asked, "Do you have ears?" He said, "Yes, I have ears." I asked, "What
do you do with them?" He said, "I hear sounds with them." He I asked,
"Do you have a heart?" He said, "Yes, I have a heart." I asked, "What do
you do with it?" He said, "I distinguish and discern things that come to
it from the other senses."
I asked, "Why are your others senses independent of your heart and why
do they need it?" He said, "They are not independent of my heart."

I said, "Why do they need your heart when they are all healthy and
sound?" He said, "Son, when the other senses face a doubt about
something, such as smell, test, etc., I send it to my heart and it
ascertains certainty and discards doubts." I asked him, "Do you mean
that Allah has set up the heart to remove doubts from the other senses?"
He said, "Yes, that is true."

I asked, "Is then the existence of the heart necessary to remove the
doubts of the other senses?" He said, "Yes, it is necessary." I then
said, "O abu Marwan, Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, as you say,
has not left your senses without an Imam to correct the doubts and the
mistakes of the other senses in you and remove doubts therefrom, how
would He leave all the people with doubts and confusions without an Imam
who would remove their doubts and settle their disputes?" He remained
quite and did not say anything for a while.

He then asked, "Are you Hisham ibn al-Hakam?" I said, "No, I am not."
He asked, "Are you of his associates?" I said, "No." He asked,
"Wherefrom are you?" I said, "I am from Kufa." He said, "You then must
be Hisham ibn al- Hakam." He then took to himself and gave me room
nearby.

He discontinued his speech until I left." Imam abu 'abdallah (a.s.)
smiled and said, "O Hisham who has taught you this?" I replied, "I
learned something from you and added something of my self." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "This, I swear by Allah, is written in the books of Abraham
and Moses."

H 415, Ch. 1, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from those whom mentioned
from Yunus ibn Ya'qub who has said the following.

"I was in the presence of Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) that a man from
Sham (Syria) came to him and said, 'I am a man of Kalam (meaningful
words) Fiqh (laws) and rules of obligations and I have come to debate
your people." Imam abu 'Abdallah asked, " Are your meaningful words
those of the Messenger of Allah or your own words?" He replied, "Somme
of them are from the Messenger of Allah and some of them are my own
words."

The Imam said, "Are then you a partner of the Messenger of Allah?" He
said, "No, I am not." The Imam (a.s.) asked, "Have you received any
revelation from Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High ?" He said, "No, I
have not." The Imam then asked, "Is it obligatory to obey you just as it
is obligatory to obey the Messenger of Allah?" He said, "No, it is not."
The Imam (a.s.) then turned to me and said, "O Yunus, this man has just
defeated himself before debating others."

The Imam then said, "O Yunus, why do you not speak to him if you do
well in debate?" I said, "I wish I could but, may Allah take my soul in
the service for your cause, I have heard that you do not allow debating
and say that wayl (a place in hell) is for those who debate. Some of
them say, 'This is accepted and that is not accepted and this is alright
to say but that is not alright to say that this we understand and that
we do not understand.'

The Imam (a.s.) said, "I said so if they would ignore what I say and
follow what they themselves want." The Imam then said, "find out who is
outside who could debate and bring them in. The reporter has said, "I
then brought in Humran ibn 'Ayun who was good in debating, Ahwal who
also was good in debate. I brought Hisham ibn Salim who debated well.

Another person I brought was Qays ibn Masir who the best of them to me.
He had learned Kalam (theology) from Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) Our
gathering took place in Makka before Hajj. Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
would stay near the Holy Mosque for few days in a small tent.

Once the Imam (a.s.) looked outside the tent and there was a camel
growling and said, "By the Lord of the Ka'ba, it is Hisham." We thought
it must be Hisham, the man from the family of 'Qil who was very beloved
to the Imam (a.s.).

It was Hisham ibn al-Hakam who came in. He had just grown a small beard
and all of us were older than him. The Imam (a.s.) made room for him and
said, "He is our supporter with his heart, tongue and hands." The Imam
then asked Humran to debate the man. Humran came out strong.

Then the Imam asked Taqi to debate the man. Ahwal also came strong.
Then the Imam asked Hisham ibn Salim to debate the man. They both
remained the same. The Imam (a.s.) then asked Qasys al-Masir to debate
the man. When they debated the Imam (a.s.) laughed because of the man
from Sham sometimes saying the right thing.

The Imam then asked the man from to speak with Hisham ibn al-Hakam. The
man said, "O boy, ask me about the Imamat (spiritual leadership) of this
man." Hisham become angry and began to shake and said, "O you, is your
Lord more protective of His people or people themselves?" The man said,
"It is My Lord Who is more protective of His creatures."

Hisham then asked, "What then He in His opinion has done for them?" The
Man said, "He has established His authority and guidance so that they
would not differ and disunite and be united to support each other and
remind them of their duties towards Allah." Hisham asked, "Who is he?"
The man said, "He is the Messenger of Allah." Hisham then asked, "Who is
the Divine authority after the Messenger of Allah?" The man replied, "It
is the book if Allah and the Sunnah."

Hisham then said, "Have the Book and Sunnah helped us today in removing
our differences?" The man said, "Yes, they have helped us." Hisham then
asked, "Why then do we have differences among us.

You have come all the way from Sham to oppose and debate us?" The man
then remained quite. The Imam asked him, "Why do not speak?" The man
said, "If I were to say that we have no differences I would speaking
lies. Were I to say that the Book and Sunnah solves our differences it
would be invalid because they can be interpreted in so many ways.

Were I to say that we do have differences and each claims to be the
rightful party then the Book and the Sunnah would have been proved of no
help. However, I can ask the same question from him also." The Imam
(a.s.) then said to man from Sham, "Why do not then ask him this
question?"

The man from Sham (Syria) then turned to Hisham and asked, "O you, is
your Lord more protective of His people or people themselves?" Hisham
said, "It is My Lord Who is more protective of His creatures." The man
then asked, "Has He then established for them a means that would remove
their differences, unite them, remove their difficulties and show them
the right from wrong?" Hisham asked, "Do you mean for the time of the
Messenger of Allah or at this time?"

The man from Sham said, "At the time of the Messenger of Allah was the
Messenger of Allah. Who is the (Divine) authority at this time?" Hisham
said, "(The Divine authority) at this time is this person sitting among
us. To him people journey long distance to find answer to their
questions.

He tells us about the news of the heavens and the earth as he has
inherited it from his father and grand father." The man from Sham said,
"How would I know that?" Hisham then said, "Ask him whatever you would
like." The man from Sham said, "You have left no excuse for me and I
must ask."

Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, "O man from Sham, "I can tell you
how was your journey and how was your road. It was so and so." The Imam
(a.s.) informed him with details. The man agreed and acknowledged the
details and said, "Now I have become a Muslim." The Imam (a.s.) said,
"In fact, you have become a believer in Allah now.

Islam is before Iman (faith). Because of Islam people inherit each
other and marry. Because of faith people receive rewards." The man then
said, "You have spoken the truth. At this time I testify that there is
no god but Allah, and that Muhammad is His Messenger and that you are
the executor of the will of the Executor of wills of the Messengers of
Allah."

The Imam (a.s.) then turned to Humran and said, "When you speak on the
basis of Hadith you speak the truth." Turning to Hisham ibn Salim the
Imam (a.s.) said, "You want the Hadith but you do not know them." About
the al-Ahwal the Imam said, "You analogized and use a great deal of
cunning ways and break falsehood with falsehood but your falsehood is
stronger."

To Qays al-Masir the Imam (a.s.) said, "You speak of something very
near to the Hadith of the Holy Prophet (s.a) but use something very far
from the Hadith of the Holy Prophet. You mix the truth with falsehood
while a small degree of truth is enough to remove falsehood. You and
Ahwal are experts in jumping here and there."

Yunus has said, "I thought the Imam will say about Hisham something
similar to those he said about the other two." The Imam then said, "O
Hisham, you sometimes almost fall but you spring up like a bird on
take-off. People like you should speak but be careful of slipping and
intercession will follow, Allah willing."

H 416, Ch. 1, h 5

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'isa
from Ali ibn al- Hakam from Aban who has that al-Ahwal reported to him
the following.

"Zayd ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) sent called up on to meet him when
he was in hiding. When I met him, Zayd said, "O abu Ja'far, what would
say if someone will from us would come to you asking to join us? Will
you rise up with him (against the enemies)?" I said, "Would it be your
father or brother I would have joined them." He then said, "I want to
rise up against these people. Come and join me."

I then said, "No, may Allah my soul of service to you." He then said,
"Is it that you keep yourself away from me?" I said, " It is only one
soul. If Allah's authority on earth exists, then those keeping away from
you would have saved themselves and those joining you would have faced
their destruction.

If there would Divine authority exist one earth then people joining and
keeping away from would be the same." He then said, "O abu Ja'far, I
would sit with my father at the same table he would feed me chunky
morsels and cool off for me the hot one out kindness and diligent
care.

Do you think he was not afraid for me from the fire of hell? So he has
informed you about religion and did not inform me?" I said, " May Allah
make my soul of service to you, it is also because of the kindness of
your father to you that to save you from the fire he did not inform you.
He was afraid for you that after having the information you would ignore
his guidance and so you become subject of fire He informed me also and
if I would follow I will be safe and become destroyed if disobeyed for
he which he was not that much concerned. Then I told him, ".."

May Allah make my soul of service to you, are you of a higher degree of
excellence or the prophets?" He said, "It is the prophets." I said,
"Consider that Ya'qub has said to Joseph, 'My son do not tell your dream
to your brothers. They may plot against you. Why he not inform the
brothers so that they would not plot against Josephe?.

He hid it from them such the way your father has done because he was
afraid about you." Then He said, "When you say that, I swear to Allah
that your friend (the Imam (a.s.) told me in Madina that I will be
killed and crucified in al-Kunnasa and that he has a book with him that
lists the people killed and crucified." I then went for Hajj and
reported the story of Zayd to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and what I said to
Zayd. The Imam (a.s.) said, "You surrounded him from his fron, back,
left, right, above and below and did not leave for any way out.


