Chapter 16 : the Imams (a.s.) Possess Divine Authority, They Are Envied and Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, Has Spoken of Them H 525, Ch. 16, H 1
======================================================================================================================================================

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn 'Amir al-Ash'ari has narrated from MuAlia
ibn Muhammad who has said that al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Washsha' narrated to
him from Ahmad ibn 'A'idh from ibn 'Udhayna from Burayd al-'Ijli who
said that he asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the meaning of the following
words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, "Obey Allah and obey the
Messenger and those who possess (Divine) authority among you." (4:59
Holy Quran). The read the following words of Allah.

"Have you seen how those who had been given a share of the Book believe
in idols and Satan and who say, "The disbelievers are better guided than
the believers" (4:51) 'The say that the leaders of misguidance and those
who call people to Hell' "God has condemned them.

No one can help one whomGod has condemned. (4:52) Do they have a share
in the Kingdom (Divine authority and Imamat)? Even if they did, they
would not have given the smallest thing to the people." (4:53) " People
is a reference to us and the word 'Naqir' means the seed inside the
nutt." The Imams (a.s.) explained and added.

"Do they enviey the favors that God has done to some people?" 'We are
the ones who are envied because of the Divine authority that Allah has
given us exclusively.' The Imams (a.s.) commented. "We have given to the
family of Abraham the Book, Wisdom, and a great Kingdom (4:54).

Aliah says that from the descendents of Abraham He has made His
Messengers, Prophets and Imams. How is it that these people acknowledge
the case about the descents of Abraham but they refuse to accept the
leadership (Imamat) in the family of Muhammad?' The Imams (a.s.) further
explained. "Some have believed, others have disbelieved and tried to
prevent people from believing.

For these people, only the intense fire of hell is a sufficient
punishment (4:55). We will make those who reject Our revelations suffer
in hell fire. As soon as the fire destroys their skins, We will give
them new skins so that they may suffer more of the torment. God is
Majestic and All-wise." (4:56 Holy Quran)

H 526, Ch. 15, h 2

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) who has said the following about the words of Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, Or are they envious of the people whom Allah has
granted of His bounties? ( 4:54 Holy Quran) "We are the envied ones."

H 527, Ch. 15, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from Muhammad
al-Ahwal from Humran ibn A'yan who has said that when he asked Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of the words of Allah that say, "We
have given to the family of Abraham the Book, Wisdom,

and a great Kingdom." (4:54) The Imams (a.s.) said, "It means
Prophet-hood." I then asked about the meaning of 'wisdom'. The Imams
(a.s.) said, "It means understanding and judgment." I then asked about
the meaning of 'great kingdom.' The Imams (a.s.) said, "It means
obedience."

H 528, Ch. 16, h 4

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from MuAlia ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from abu al-Sabah who has said that
when asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of the words
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, "Or are they envious of the people
whom Allah has granted of His bounties? ( 4:54 Holy Quran) The Imams
(a.s.) said, "O abu al-Sabah, we, I swear by Allah, are the people who
are envied."

H 529, Ch. 16, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Muhammad ibn abu
'Umayr from 'Umar ibn Udhayna from Burayd al-'IJli from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following about the words of Allah, the Most
Holy, ""We have given to the family of Abraham the Book, Wisdom, and a
great Kingdom." (4:54)

"Great kingdom means that He set Imamat (leadership) in the descendants
of Abraham, Whoever would obey them he has obeyed Allah and whoever
would disobey them has disobeyed Allah and thus is the great kingdom."


**Chapter 17 : The Imams (a.s.) are the Sings of whom Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, has spoken in the Holy Quran H 530, Ch. 17, h 1**

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari from MuAlia ibn Muhammad from abu
Dawud al- Mustariqq who has said that Dawad al-Jassas who has said that
he heard Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say about the words of Allah,
"Through the signs and with the star people do find their way." (16:16)
"Star is the Messenger of Allah (s.a) and the signs are the Imams
(a.s.)"

H 531, Ch. 17, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from MuAlia ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Asbat ibn Salim who has said that Haythamm asked Imam
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), while I was there, about the meaning of the words
of Allah, "Through the signs and with the star people do find their
way." (16:16) The Imams (a.s.) said, "Star is the Messenger of Allah
(s.a) and the signs are the Imams (a.s.)"

H 532, Ch. 17, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from MuAlia ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' who has said that he asked Imam al-Rida (a.s.) about the
meaning of the words of Allah, the Most High, "Through the signs and
with the star people do find their way." (16:16) The Imams (a. s.) said,
"We are the signs and the messenger of Allah is the star,"


