Chapter 20 : the People of Dhikr (memory and Knowledge) That Allah Has Commanded the Creatures To Ask For Their Questions Are the Imams (a.s.) H 543, Ch. 20, H 1
=================================================================================================================================================================

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from al-Washsha' from
'Abdallah ibn 'Ajlan from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following
about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "Ask the people
of Dhikr if you do not know." (16:43, 21: 7 Holy Quran).

The Holy Prophet (s.a.) has said, 'I am the Dhikr and the Imams are the
people of Dhikr.'" About the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High that says, "It is a Dhikr for you and for your people and you all
will be asked questions.

' (43:44) The Imams (a.s.) said, "We are his people and we will be
questioned."(It seems that both the Holy Prophet (s.a.) is called Dhikr
and the Holy Quran is also called Dhikr although the above passage seems
confusing).

H 544, Ch. 20, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'Uwarma from Ali ibn Hassa'n from his uncle 'Abd al-Rahman
ibn Kathir said that he asked I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about
the meaning of the following words of Allah. "Ask the people of Dhikr if
you do not know."

(16:43, 21: 7 Holy Quran) The Imams (a.s.) said, "Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.) is 'Dhikr' and we are the people of 'Dhikr who will be asked." I
also asked about, "It is a Dhikr for you and for your people and you all
will be asked questions.' (43:44) The Imams (a.s.) said it is a
reference to us. We are the people of Dhikr and we will be asked
questions."

H 545, Ch. 20, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' who has said that said to Imam al-Rida (a.s.), "May Allah
take my soul in service for your cause, what is the meaning of the words
of Allah, "Ask the people of Dhikr if you do not know."?

(16:43, 21: 7 Holy Quran) The Imams (a.s.) said, " 'Dhikr' is Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.) and we are his family (people) about whom questions will
be asked." I further asked about, "Are you the ones to be questioned and
we will be the one to question?" The Imams (a.s.) said yes, that is
true."

I then asked, "Will it a right on us to ask you?" The Imams (a.s.)
said, "Yes, it is so." I then asked, "Will it be a right on you to
answer us?" The Imams (a.s.) said, "No, will decide. We may or may not
answer. Have you not heard the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, that say, "This is a gift from us. You may (give to others and)
oblige or keep without being held accountable."(38:39)

H 546, Ch. 20, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from 'Asim ibn Hamid from
abu Basir from Imam abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) who has said the following
about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.

"It is a Dhikr for you and for your people and you all will be asked
questions.' (43:44) The Messenger of Allah is the Dhikr (reminder of
Allah) and members of his family (a.s.) are the ones who will be asked
questions and they are the people of Dhikr."

H 547, Ch. 20, h 5

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Hammad
from Rib'iy from Fudayl form abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "It is
a Dhikr for you and for your people and you all will be asked
questions.' (43:44) The Imams (a.s.)said, "The Holy Quran is the 'Dhikr'
and we are the one who will be asked questions."

H 548, Ch. 20, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il from Mansur ibn Yunus from abu Bakr al-Hadrami who
has said the following. "I was in the presence of Imam (a.s.) abu Ja'far
(a.s.) and al-Ward brother of al-Kumayt came to see him. He to the Imams
(a.s.) said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, I have
chosen seventy questions and I do not know the answer even for one of
them."

The Imams (a.s.) said, "Not even one answer, O Ward?" He then said,
"Yes, I do know the answer for one of them." The Imams (a.s.) asked,
"What is it then?" He replied, "It is the words of Allah that say, 'Ask
the people of Dhikr if you do not know' who are they?"

The Imams (a.s.) replied, "We are the people of Dhikr?" I then said,
"Must we then ask you?"

The Imams (a.s.) said, "Yes, you must ask us for answers." I then
asked, "Must you then give us answers?" The Imams (a.s.) said, "We may
or may not answer."

H 549, Ch. 20, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Safwan ibn Yahya
from al-'Ala' ibn Razin from Muhammad ibn Muslim who ha said that he
said the who has said the following to abu Ja'far ( a.s.).

"These are people who think that the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High. 'Ask the people of Dhikr if you do not know,' refers to the
Jews and the Christians." The Imams (a.s.) asked, "Do they call you to
their religion?" He (Muhammad ibn Muslim) has aid that the Imams (a.s.)
"Said, with his hand (pointing) to his chest, 'We are the People of
Dhikr (reminders of Allah) and we are the ones who must be asked
questions.'"

H 550, Ch. 20, h 8

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' who has said that he heard Imam al-Rida say the following.
"Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn has said that there are certain obligation for
the Imams that are not obligatory for their followers and certain
obligation of our followers are not obligatory for us.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High has commanded them to ask us their
questions saying, "Ask the people of Dhikr if you do not know,' Thus,
Allah has commanded them to ask us their questions but it is not
obligatory for us to answer them. We may answer them or may not answer
them if we may so decide." the is not said:

H 551, Ch. 20, h 9

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr
who has said that he wrote a letter to Imam al-Rida (a.s.). Of the
issues for which he requested explanation in the letter one was about
the following words of Allah, Most Holy, the Most High.

"Ask the people of Dhikr (people who remind of Allah) if you do not
know." The other question was about the words of Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High, "Not all believers have to become specialists in
religious learning. Why do not some people from each group of believers
seek to become specialists in religious learning and, after completing
their studies, guide their group so that they will have fear of God."
(9:122)

thus, it is obligatory for them to ask but it is not obligatory for you
to answer." The Imams (a.s.) has said the following for the answer. "If
they would not do what you would ask them, know that they are only
following their (evil) desires. Who strays more than one who follows his
desires without guidance from God? . . ." (28:50)


**Chapter 21 : Those whom Allah has called people of knowledge they are
the Imams (a.s.) H 552, Ch. 21, h 1**

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from 'Abdallah ibn
al-Mughirah from 'Abd al- Mu'min ibn al-Qasim al-Ansari from Sa'd from
Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following about the words
of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. Say, "Are those who know equal
to those who do not know?

Only the people of reason take heed." (39:9) 'We are the people of
knowledge, the people who and it is our enemies who do not know and our
followers are the people who take heed and are the people of reason.'"

H 553, Ch. 21, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from an-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Jabir from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following about the words of Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High. "Are those who know equal to those who do not know?
Only the people of reason take heed."
(39:9) 'We are the people of knowledge, the people who and it is our
enemies who do not know and our followers are the people who take heed
and are the people of reason.'"


