Chapter 22 : the People Well-grounded in Knowledge Are the Imams (a.s.) Alone H 554, Ch. 22, H 1
================================================================================================

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from an-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Ayyub ibn Hurr and
'Imran ibn Ali from abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "We are the people well-grounded in knowledge and we are the
ones who know how to interpret it."

H 555, Ch. 22, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Ali from Ibrahim ibn
Ishaq from 'Adallah ibn Hammad from Burayd ibn Mu'awiya who has narrated
the following from either one of the Imams (a.s.) about the words of
Allah, Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "No one knows its
true interpretations except God and those who have a firm grounding in
knowledge . . ." (3:7).

The Holy Prophet is the best among the people wellgrounded in
knowledge. Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, taught him all
that He had revealed to him in the form of original text and in the form
of interpretations. Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, would
not reveal anything to him that he would not know the meaning thereof.
The successors of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) after him knew all
revelations.

As for those who do not know the interpretations thereof, when the
scholar speaks to them with knowledge, they say, "We believe in it, for
all of this is from our Lord." The Holy Quran consists of specific,
general, clear, not so clear, abrogating and abrogated statements. The
people who are well-grounded in knowledge know all of the Holy Quran."

H %556ch22, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from MuAlia ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'Uwarma from Ali ibn Hassan from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir
from abu 'bdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "People
well-grounded in Knowledge stands for Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) and
the Imams after him."


**Chapter 23 : The Imams are those who have received Knowledge and it
is firmly Established in their Hearts H 557, Ch. 23, h 1**

Ahmad ibn Mahran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Hammed ibn
'Isa from al- Husayn ibn al-Mukhtar from abu Basir who has said that he
heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following about this verse of the
Holy Quran. "In fact, the Quran consists of illustrious verses that
exist in the hearts of those who have knowledge. . . ." (29:49) The
Imams (a.s.) pointed to his own hear."

H 558, Ch. 23, h 2

It is narrated from him from Muhammad ibn Ali from ibn Mahbub from 'Abd
al-'Aziz al-'Abdi from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following
about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "In fact, the
Quran consists of illustrious verses that exist in the hearts of those
who have knowledge. . . ." (29:49) 'They are the Imams (a.s.)'.

H 559, Ch. 23, h 3

It is narrated from him from Muhammad ibn Ali from 'Uthman ibn 'Isa
from Sama'a from abu Basir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following about this verse of the Holy Quran. "In fact, the Quran
consists of illustrious verses that exist in the hearts of those who
have knowledge. . . ." (29:49) The Imams (a.s.) then said, "O abu
Muhammad,

for the sake of Allah, be the judge and tell, of who it is spoken (so
often) between the two covers of the Holy Quran?" I then asked, "Who are
they, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause. The Imams
(a.s.) said, "Who else can they be other than ourselves?"

H 560, Ch. 23, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Yazid
Sha'ar from Harun ibn Hamza who has said that he hear abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) say who has said the following. "In fact, the Quran consists of
illustrious verses that exist in the hearts of those who have knowledge.
. . ." (29:49) 'They are the Imams (a.s.) exclusive of all others.'"

H 561, Ch. 23, h 5

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'd from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl who has said that he
asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of the following verse of
the Holy Quran.
"In fact, the Quran consists of illustrious verses that exist in the
hearts of those who have knowledge. . . ." (29:49) The Imams (a.s.)
said, "They are the Imams (a.s.) exclusive of all others."


