Chapter 24 : the People Whom Allah Has Chosen and Has Made the Heirs of His Book Are the Imams (a.s.) H 562, Ch. 24, H 1
========================================================================================================================

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Hammad ibn 'Isa from 'Abd al-Mu'min from Salim
who has said that he asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the meaning of the
words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.

"We gave the Book as an inheritance to Our chosen servants, among whom
some are unjust against their souls, some are moderate, and some are
exceedingly virtuous by the permission of God. . . ." (35:31) The
exceedingly virtuous is the Imam (a.s.), the moderateones are those who
know the Imams (a.s.) and the unjust ones are those who do not know the
Imams (a.s.)."

H 563, Ch. 24, h 2

Al-Husayn has narrated from Mu'alla from al-Washsha' from 'Abd al-Karim
from Sulayman who has said that he asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the
meaning of the following verse of the Holy Quran. "We gave the book as
an inheritance to Our chosen servants,.. . ." (35:31)

The Imam (a.s.) asked, "What do you say about it?" I said, "We say that
they are the Fatimid (descendents of Fatima, Daughter of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.)" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is not as you say. No one who
would point out his sword and call people into schism and misguidance
comes in this (category of people exceeding in virtue)."

I then asked, "Who then are the ones doing wrong to themselves?" The
Imam (a.s.) replied, "It is those who sit in their homes and do not know
the rights of his Imam (a.s.). The moderate ones are those who know the
rights of their Imam and the ones exceeding in virtue are the Imams
(a.s.)"

H 564, Ch. 24, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan from Ahmad ibn 'Umar who has said that he asked abu al-Hassan
al-Rida (a.s.) about the meaning of the words of Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High.

"We gave the book as an inheritance to Our chosen servants. . ."
(35:31). The Imam (a.s.) said such people are the children of Fatima
(a.s.), those exceeding in virtue are the Imams (a.s.), the moderate
ones are those who know the Imam (a.s.) and those who do injustice to
themselves are the ones who do not know their Imam (a.s.)."

H 565, Ch. 24, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from abu Wallad who has said that he asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about
the meaning of the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "The
people who have received Our Book (Quran), and read it thoroughly,
believe in it. Those who disbelieve the Book are certainly losers."
(2:121) The Imams (a.s.) said that such people are the Imams (a.s.)."


**Chapter 25 : Two Kinds of Imam are mentioned in the Holy Quran: the
Imams (a.s.) who call to Allah and the Imams who call to Fire H 566, Ch.
25, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan
ibn Mahbub from 'Abdallah ibn Ghalib from Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.)
who has said the following.

"When the following verse of the Holy Quran was revealed, "On the day
when We call every nation with their leaders, (Imams) . . ." (17:71),
people asked the Holy Prophet (s. a.), 'Are you not the Imam of all the
people altogether?' The Holy Prophet (s.a.) said, "I am the Messenger of
Allah to all the people but after me there will the Imams for the people
from my family.

They will rise among the people but they will be rejected. The leaders
of the unbelievers and misguidance and their followers will do injustice
to them. Those who support, love, follow and acknowledge their authority
they are from me, with me and will meet me. Let it be known that those
who would do injustice to the Imams (a.s) and reject them they are not
from me and with me. I denounce them and all associations with them."

H 567, Ch. 25, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Muhammad
ibn al- Husayn from Muhammad ibn Yahya from Talha ibn Zayd from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "The Imams mentioned in the
book of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, are of two kinds.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High has said, 'We appointed them as
leaders (Imams) to guide the people through Our command . . ." (21:73)
They do so but not because of the commads of the people.

They allow our command to come first and before their own orders, and
our laws before their own laws and judgment. "We made them the kinds of
leaders (Imams) who would invite people to the fire . . ." (28:41) 'They
let their own commands to come before the commands of Allah and their
laws before the laws of Allah. They follow their desires against what
the book of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High requires.'"


