Chapter 26 : the Holy Quran Guides People To the Imam (a.s.) H 568, Ch. 26, H 1
===============================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
al-Hasan ibn Mahbub who has said that he asked abu al-Hassan al-Rida
(a.s.) about the meaning of the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High.

"We have chosen heirs for every legacy that parents and relatives may
leave. Let those who have been promised a bequest receive their share of
the legacy. . . ." (4:33) It is a refrence to the Imams (a.s.) With the
Imams (a.s.) Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has established your
covenants."

1. There have been a variety of interpretations of who are the last
group of heirs mentioned in this verse, i.e., those with whom you have
sworn compact, and, as a result of this, and so as to reconcile these
various interpretations with the law, it has at different times been
asserted that this verse was abrogated or that it was not. For example,
see at.-Taban, at-Taf~ir, vol.5,

H 569, Ch. 26, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Ibrahim ibn 'Abd al- Hamid from Musa ibn 'Ukayl al-Numayri from al-'Ala'
ibn Sayyaba from abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) who has said the following about
the words of Allah. "This Quran shows the way to that which is the most
upright . . ." (17:9) The Imams (a.s.)said, "It guides to the Imam
(a.s.)."


**Chapter 27 : The Bounty and Blessings that Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High has mentioned in His book, the Holy Quran are the Imams (a.s.)
H 570, Ch. 27, h 1**

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Bistam ibn Murrah from Ishaq ibn Hassa'n from al-Haytham ibn Waqid from
Ali ibn al-Husayn al-'Abdi from Sa'd al-'Iskaf from al-Asbagh ibn
Nubatah from Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) who has said the following.

"What isd wrong with people who changed the Sunnah (traditions) of the
Messenger of Allah and deviated from his will? Do they not fear that
sever suffering may befall them? He then recited the following verse of
the Holy Quran. "Have you not seen (considered) those who changed the
blessings (Word) of God through disbelief and led their people to
destruction? (14:28).

They will suffer in Hell. What a terrible place to stay! (14:29). He
then said, "We are the blessings of Allah which He has granted to
people. Through us will succede those will be successful on the Day of
Judgment."

H 571, Ch. 27, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad, in a
mafu' manner, (rafa'ahu) about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High. "(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you
deny?" (55:13) Will you deny and refuse the Holy Prophet or his
successor." (This verse has come down in ch. 55 al-Rahman.)

H 572, Ch. 27, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from 'Adallah ibn 'Abd al-Rahman from al-Haytham ibn
Waqid from abu Yusuf al- Bazzaz who has said that abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
recited the following verse, "Keep in mind the bounties of Allah. . ."
(7:69) The Imams (a.s.) said,

"Do you know what the bounties of Allah are?" I said, "No, I do not
know." He said, "It is the greatest of the bounties of Allah. It is to
acknowledge the Divine authority that we possess."

H 573, Ch. 27, h 4
Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'Uwarma from Ali ibn Hassa'n from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir
who has said that he asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of the
following verse.

"Have you not seen (considered) those who changed the blessings (Word)
of God through disbelief and led their people to destruction?" (14:28)
The Imam (a.s.) said it is a reference to all of Quraysh who exercised
animosity towards the Holy Prophet (s.a.), created wars against him and
rejected his will about his successor."


**Chapter 28 : The People whom Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has
called Mutawassimin (distinguished) in His book are the Imams (a.s.) who
are also the straight path H 574, Ch. 28, h 1**

Ahmad ibn Mahran has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim ibn 'Abdallah
al-Hasani from ibn abu'Umayr who has said the following.

"Asbat Bayya' al-Zattiyy has said that once he was in the presence of
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) when a man asked him about the meaning of the
following words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "In this there
is evidence (of the Truth) for the distinguished ones.

(15:75) That town lies on a road which still exists (15:76) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "We are the distiguished people and the (right) path is
with us."

H 575, Ch. 28, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Salamah ibn al-Khattab that Yahya
ibn Ibrahim who has said the following. "Asbat ibn Salim has said that
once he was in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) when a man from the
people of Hiyt came and said, 'May grant yopu wellbeing, what is the
meaning of the words of Allah, the Most Holy, "In this there is evidence
(of the Truth) for the distinguished ones."? (15:75)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "We are the distiguished people and the (right)
path is with us."

H 576, Ch. 28, h 3

Muhammad ibn Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Hammad
ibn 'Isa from Rib'i ibn 'Abdallah from Muhammad ibn Muslim from abu
Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following about the words of Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High. "In this there is evidence (of the Truth) for
the distinguished ones." (15:75)

"The Imam (a.s.) said, "The distinguished people are the Imams (a.s.)
the Holy Prophet has said, "Be on your guard from the intelligence of
the believers. He lookss through the light of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High as mentioned in, "In this there is evidence (of the Truth) for
the distinguished ones." (15:75)

H 577, Ch. 28, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Kufi from
'Ubays ibn Hisham from 'Adallah ibn Sulayman from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who has said the following about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High. "In this there is evidence (of the Truth) for the
distinguished ones." (15:75)

The Imams (a.s.) said, "These people are the Imams (a.s.) and the
evidence will never depart us."

H 578, Ch. 28, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
Muhammad ibn Aslam from Ibrahim ibn Ayyub from 'Amr ibn Shamir from
Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) has the following about the words of
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. ""In this there is evidence (of the
Truth) for the distinguished ones." (15:75) The Holy Prophet (s.a.) was
the distinguieshed one and I was as such after him and the Imams from my
children are the distinguieshed ones."

In a different copy it is narrated from Ahmad ibn Mahran from Muhammad
ibn Ali from Muhammad ibn Aslam from Ibrahim ibn Ayyub through the chain
of his nnarrators a similar


