Chapter 29 : the Deeds of the People Are Presented Before the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and the Imams (a.s.) H 579, Ch. 29, H 1
=========================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu
Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"All deeds are presented before the Messenger of Allah (s. a.). It is
the deeds of the all the virtuous and the evil doing servants (of Allah)
that are presented every morning and evenings (before the Messenger of
Allah). So pay proper attention to it and be very careful.

The following verse of the Holy Quran is a reference to this.
"(Muhammad), tell them, "Act as you wish. God will see your deeds and so
will do His Messenger. . . ." (9:106) The Imams (a.s.) paused at this
point and did not read any further."

H 580, Ch. 29, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from
'Abd al-Hamid al-Ta'i from Ya'qub ibn Shu'ayb.

He has said that he asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of the
words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "Act as you wish. God will
see your deeds and so will do His Messenger and the believers. . . ."
(9:106) The Imams (a.s.) said, "They (believers) are the Imams (a.s.)"

H 581, Ch. 29, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from 'Uthman ibn 'Isa from
Suma' who has said that he heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following.
"What is wrong with you? Why do you disappoint the Messenger of Allah?"
A man asked, "How do we disappoint him?" The Imams (a.s.) said, "Do you
not know that your deeds are presented before him? When he find sins in
them it disappoints him. Do not disappoint the Messenger of Allah. Do
things that will make him happy."

H 582, Ch. 29, h 4

Ali from has narrated from his father from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad from
al-Zayyat from 'Abdallah ibn Aban al-Zayyat who was well placed in the
eyes of al-Rida (a.s.). He has said that he asked al-Rida (a.s.) to pray
for him and for his family. Am I not praying for them? I swear by Allah
that your deeds are presented before me every day and night." He has
said that it seemed extremely great to me.

The Imams (a.s.) said to me, "Do you not read in the Holy Quran, 'Act
as you wish. God will see your deeds and so will do His Messenger and
the believers. . . .'" (9:106) The Imams (a.s.) then said, "I swear by
Allah that he (the believer) is Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.)."

H 583, Ch. 29, h 5

Ahmad ibn Mahran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from abu 'Abdallah
al-Samit from Yahya ibn Musawwir who has said the following. He
mentioned this verse to abu Ja'far (a.s.), "Act as you wish. God will
see your deeds and so will do His Messenger and the believers. . . ."
(9:106) The Imams (a.s.) then said, "I swear by Allah that he (the
believer) is Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.)."

H 584, Ch. 29, h 6

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' who has said the following. "I heard Imam al-Rida saying,
'All the deeds: good and bad ones are presented before the Messenger of
Allah.'"


**Chapter 30 : The Path, Urged to be Maintained Steadfastly is
Acknowledgement of the Divine Authority of Imam Ali (a.s.) H 585, Ch.
30, h 1**

Ahmad ibn Mahran has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim ibn 'Abdallah
al-Hassani from Musa ibn Muhammad from Yunus ibn Ya'qub from the person
whom he mentioned, from abu Ja'far (a. s.). The Imam (a.s.) said the
following about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "Had
they (jinn and mankind) remained steadfast in their path (religion,
Islam), We would certainly have given them abundant water to drink."
(72:16)

It means, "Had people maintained steadfastness in respecting the Divine
authority of Amir al-Mu'minin Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.), and the Divine
authority of his successors from his children and agreed to obey their
orders and prohibitions He would have given them abundant water.

He says, We would drench their hearts with faith. The path (al-Triqa)
means to have faith in the Divine authority of Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.) and his successors from his children."

H 586, Ch. 30, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Fudala ibn Ayyub from al-Husayn ibn 'Uthman
from abu Ayyub from Muhammad ibn Muslim. He has said that he asked abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of the following words of Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High.

"To those who have said, 'God is our Lord,' and who have remained
steadfast to their belief. . ." The Imams (a.s.) said, "Those who remain
steadfast in respecting the Divine authority of Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.
s.) and his successors, the Imams (a.s.) one after the other then, ' the
angels will descend saying, "Do not be afraid or grieved. Receive the
glad news of the Paradise which was promised to you.'" (41:30)


