Chapter 31 : the Imams (a.s.) Are the Mines of Knowledge, the Tree of Prophet-hood and the Centers Wherein Angels Interchange H 587, Ch. 31, H 1
================================================================================================================================================

Ahmad ibn Mahran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from several people
from Hammad ibn 'Isa from Rib'i ibn 'Abdallah (a.s.) from ibn Jarud who
has said that Ali ibn al-Husayn (a. s.) has said the following. "What is
it obscures us to people? (People do not maintain hostility towards us.)
We, I swear by Allah, are the tree of the prophet-hood, the house of
blessings, the mine of knowledge and the center wherein angels
interchange."

H 588, Ch. 31, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from 'Adallah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from his father from 'Adallah ibn al-Mughirah from Isma'il ibn abu Ziyad
from Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) from his father (a.s.) from Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) who has said the following.

"We, the Ahl al-Bayt (family of the Holy Prophet), are the tree of the
prophet-hood, the station of the Messenger-ship of (Allah), the center
wherein the angels interchange, the house of blessings and the mine of
knowledge."

H 589, Ch. 31, h 3

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
'Adallah ibn Muhammad from al-Kashshab. He has said that a number of our
people have narrated from al- Khaythama who has said that abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) said to him the following.

"O Khaythama, we are the tree of prophet-hood, the house of blessings,
the keys to wisdom, the mine of knowledge, the station of the
Messenger-ship of (Allah), the center wherein the angels interchange and
the place for the secrets of Allah. We are the trust of Allah among the
people and we are the great Sanctuary of Allah.

We are the promised responsibility of Allah and we are His covenant.
Whoever remains true to our covenant he has remained true to the
covenant of Allah. Whoever disregards his covenant with us he has
disregarded his covenant and responsibility towards Allah."


**Chapter 32 : The Imams (a.s.) are the Heirs of Knowledge to Inherit
it one from the other H 590, Ch. 32, h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from
Burayd ibn Mu'awiya from Muhammad ibn Muslim from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who has said the following. "Ali (a.s.) was a man of knowledge and
knowledge is inherited. Whenever a man of knowledge dies he leave
another man of knowledge behind who possess his knowledge or whatever
Allah wants."

H 591, Ch. 32, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn 'Isa from
Hariz from Zurarah and al-Fudayl from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following. "The knowledge that came with Adam was not taken away.
Knowledge is inherited. Ali (a.s.) was the knowledgeable person of this
nation (Muslims). No one from us have ever left this world without
leaving behind one like him in knowledge or what Allah wanted."

H 592, Ch. 32, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Barqi
from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from 'Abd al-Hamid al-Ta'i
from Muhammad ibn Muslim from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Knowledge is inherited. No man of knowledge dies without
leaving behind one who is as knowledgeable as his predecessor or what
Allah wants."

H 593, Ch. 32, h 4

Abu Ali al-Ash'ari has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan from Musa ibn Bakr from al-Fudayl ibn Yasar who has said that he
heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following. "In Imam Ali (a.s.) there
was the Sunnah (traditions) of a thousand prophet. The knowledge that
came with Adam was not taken away. No man of knowledge ever died along
with knowledge. Knowledge is inherited."

H 594, Ch. 32, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from Fudalah ibn Ayyub from 'Umar ibn Aban who has said that
he heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the following. "The knowledge that came
with Adam was not taken away. No man of knowledge has ever died along
with his knowledge."

H 595, Ch. 32, h 6

Muhammad has narrated from Ahmad from Ali ibn Nu'man, in a marfu'
manner (rafa'ahu) from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.
"They try to absorb the little moisture but ignore the huge river."
Someone asked him, "What is (this) huge river?" The Imams (a.s.)said,
"It is the Messenger of Allah (s.a.) and the Knowledge that Allah gave
to him.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, combined in Muhammad (s.a.) the
Sunnah (traditions) of the all the prophets from Adam onwards to
Muhammad (s.a.)." Someone asked him, "What are those sunnah
(traditions)?" The Imams (a.s.) said, "They are all the knowledge of the
prophets (s. a.).

The Messenger of Allah transferred all of them to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.)." The man then said, "O son of the Messenger of Allah, is Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) more knowledgeable or some of the prophets?" Abu
Ja'far (a.s.) replied, "Listen, everyone to what he just said. Allah
opens the ears of whoever He wants.

I said to him that Allah combined for Muhammad (s.a.) the knowledge of
the prophets and he combined all of it with Amir al- Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.). He now asks me, "Was he (Ali (a.s.) more knowledgeable or some
of the prophets?"

H 596, Ch. 32, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Barqi
from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from 'Abd al-Hamid at.-Ta'i
from Muhammad ibn Muslim from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following.
"Knowledge is inherited. No man of knowledge ever leaves this world
without leaving behind one who would have as much knowledge as he had or
what Allah wants."

H 597, Ch. 32, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from
al-Harith ibn al- Mughirah from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "The Knowledge that came with Adam was not taken away. No man
of knowledge has ever died without his knowledge being inherited. The
earth does not remain without a man of knowledge."


