Chapter 33 : the Imams (a.s.) Inherited the Knowledge of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and All the Prophets and Their Successors Before Them H 598, Ch. 33, H 1
=========================================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from 'Abd al-'Aziz ibn
al-Muhtadi from 'Adallah ibn Jundab to who Imam al-Rida (a.s.) wrote the
following. "Thereafter, (thanking Allah) Muhammad (s.a.) was the trustee
of Allah for His creatures. When he was taken away from this world we,
Ahl al-Bayt inherited him, thus, we are the trustees of Allah over His
earth.

With us is the knowledge of the sufferings, the death, the genealogy of
the Arabs and the birth of Islam. We know the man when we see him in the
truth of faith or hypocrisy. Our followers (Shi'a) are listed (with us)
by their names and the names of their fathers. Allah has established a
covenant with them and with us.

They land wherever we would do so and enter wherever we would enter.
There is no besides us and our followers as living the Islamic
culture.

We are the noble saviors and the descendents of the prophets and of the
children of the successors of the prophets. We the ones to whom the book
of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has come exclusively. We, of all
people, have the first priority (closeness) to the book of Allah. We, of
all people, have the first priority (closeness) to the Messenger of
Allah. For us He formed His religion.

"He has established for you (family of Muhammad) a form of religion
which is of the commands to Noah {we are commanded with whatever Noah
was commanded}. It is of the mattes that We have revealed to you
(Muhammad) and of the commands to Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus to
follow.

{We have taught and preached the knowledge that was taught to us. We
were given the knowledge of these prophets. We are the heirs of the
commissioned Messengers}. (He has explained it) so that you (family of
Muhammad) would be steadfast and united (all in a united group) in your
religion.

What you call the polytheists {polytheists in the acknowledgement of
the Divine authority of Imam Ali (a.s.} to{the acknowledgement of the
Divine authority of Imam Ali (a.s.}is extremely grave for them. God {O
Muhammad} attracts to (the religion) whomever He wants and guides to it
whoever turns to Him in repentance." (42:13)

H 599, Ch. 33, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn
al-Hakam from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has
said the following. "The Messenger of Allah has said, 'The first
successor and executor of the will on earth was Hibbatullah, the son of
Adam.

No prophet has ever left this world without first leaving behind one
who would execute his will. The prophets were one hundred twenty
thousand persons. Five of them were commissioned Messengers, like Noah,
Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad (s.a.) Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) was
the Hibbatullah for Muhammad (s.a.).He inherited the knowledge of the
executors of the wills of the prophets and the knowledge of those who
were before him.

(Is not it true) that Muhammad (s.a.) inherited the knowledge of the
prophets and the Messengers who lived before him? It is written on the
columns of the throne, "Hamza is the loin of Allah and the loin of His
Messenger. He (Hamza) is the master of the martyrs. On top of the throne
is Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.).

This evidence against those who deny our rights and refuse to yield to
us our right of inheritance. We are not forbidden to speak. Before us is
all certainty. What supporting evidence could be more clear than
this."

H 600, Ch. 33, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Salama ibn al-Khattab from
'Adallah ibn Muhammad from 'Adallah ibn al-Qasim from Zur'a ibn Muhammad
from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar from who has said the following. "Solomon
inherited David. Muhammad (s.a.) inherited Solomon and we inherited
Muhammad (s.a.).

We have the knowledge of Torah and the Gospel (Injil), the Psalms,
(al-Zabur) and the explanation of what the tablets contained." I (the
narrator) said, "This certainly is the knowledge." The Imams (a.s.)
said, "This is not knowledge. Knowledge is what happens day after day
and hour after hour."

H 601, Ch. 33, h 4

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya from Shu'ayb al-Haddad from Durays al-Kunasi who has
said the following. "I was in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and
abu Basir also was there. The Imams (a.s.) said, "David inherited the
knowledge of the prophets. Solomon inherited David. Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.) inherited Solomon and we inherited Muhammad (s.a.).

With us are the pages of Abraham and the tablets of Moses." Abu Basir
then said, "This is the knowledge." The Imams (a.s.) said, "O abu
Muhammad, this is not the knowledge. The knowledge is what happens in
the nights and in the days, day after day and hour after hour."

H 602, Ch. 33, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Muhammad ibn Isma'il from Ali ibn an-Nu'man from ibn Muskan from abu
Basir who has said the following. "Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said to me,
"O abu Muhammad, Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has not given
anything to the prophets that He has not given to Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.).

The Imams (a.s.) further said, "Allah gave to Prophet Muhammad (s.a.)
all that He had given to the prophets. With us is the book about which
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, "The books of Abraham and Moses." I
then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, are they
the tablets?" The Imams (a.s.) said, "Yes, they are the tablets."

H 603, Ch. 33, h 6

Muhammad has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id
from al- Nadr ibn Suwayd from 'Adallah ibn Sinan who has said that he
asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the following about the meaning of the words
of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "We have written in the psalms
which We had revealed after the Torah. . ." (21:105).

What is al-Zabur and what is al-Dhikr?" The Imams (a.s.) said,
"Al-Dhikr is with Allah and al-Zabur is what He gave to David." Every
book that was revealed is with the people of knowledge and we are the
people of knowledge."

H 604, Ch. 33, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn abu Zahir or another man
from Muhammad ibn Hammad from his brother Ahmad ibn Hammad from Ibrahim
from his father who has said the following. "I said to abu al-Hassan
al-Thani (a.s.), ""May Allah take my soul in service for your cause,
"Would you tell me about the Prophet who inherited all the prophets."
The Imams (a.s.) said, "Yes, I may do so.

I asked, "Did he inherit from Adam up to his-self?" The Imams (a.s.)
said, "Of prophet that Allah sent Prophet Muhammad (s.a.) was more
knowledgeable." I then said, "Jesus son of Mary would bring the dead to
life by the permission of Allah." The Imams (a.s.) said, "You spoke the
truth. Solomon son of David could understand the language of the
birds.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.) was also capable of doing such things." The
narrator has said that The Imams (a.s.) then said, "Solomon son of David
said to the (Hoopoe) Hud Hud when he found him missing and had doubts
about the bird. "(Solomon) inspected the birds and said, "How is it that
I cannot see the hoopoe {when he did not find him present and became
angry}.

Is he absent? (27:20). I shall certainly punish him severely or
slaughter him unless he has a good reason for his absence." (27:21) He
became angry because the bird would show him how to find water. This is
only a bird but is given something that is not given to Solomon.

The wind, ants, man, Jinn, devils and the rebbles obey him in
submission but he did not know about the water in the space but the bird
knew it as Allah says iin His book.

"Even if the Quran would make mountains move, cut the earth into pieces
and make the dead able to speak,. . ." (13:31) We have inherited this
Quran which contains such things that can make the mountains move, cross
the lands and make the dead to come to life. We know there is water in
space. In the book of Aallah there are verses that are indecative of
certain issues only if Allah would give permission.

This is along with fact that Allah sometime grants permission to make
use of the things that people of the past had written. Allah has set
them for us in the origin of the book as Allah says, "All the secrets in
heavens and earth are recorded in the illustrious Book.

(27:75) Then Allah has said, "We gave the Book as an inheritance to Our
chosen servants,. . ." (35:32) We are the ones whom Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, has chosen and has given this which contain the
explanation of all things."


**Chapter 34 : The Imams (a.s.) have with all the books that Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, has revealed and that they know them even the
language in them are different H 605, Ch. 34, h 1**

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Hassan ibn Ibrahim
from Yunus from Hisham ibn al-Hakam about the narration of Burayh with
whom he came to abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) but they met abu al-Hassan Musa
ibn Ja'far (a.s.).

Hisham explained to the Imams (a.s.) about Burayh. When he finished abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) asked, "O Burayh, how is your knowledge of your book?"
He rplied, "I know it." The Imam (a.s.) then asked, "What is the degree
of your confidence in its interpretation?" He said, "Not so much."???
The narrator has said, "Abu al-Hassan then begun to read (from) the
Gospel.

Burayh then said, "It is you whom I was searching for fifty years or
someone like you." He has said that Burayh accepted the faith and also
the lady who was with him." Burayh and Hisham and the lady then came to
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). Hisham informed the Imam (a.s.) about what had
happene between Burayh and abu al-Hassan (a.s.).

Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, "The generations that are from each
other and Allah hears and knows best." Burayh then asked, "How have
possessed the Torah and the Gospel and the books if the prophets?" The
Imam (a.s.) said, " We receive them as in the form of inheritance from
them.

We read them as they would read them and speak about them as the
prophets would do. Allah does grant Divine authority on His earth to
those who if questioned would be able to give the right answer and say I
do not know."

H 606, Ch. 34, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Bakr ibn Salih from Muhammad ibn Sinan from Mufaddal ibn
'Umar who has said the following. "We went to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and
wanted permission. We heard him speaking in a none Arabic language and
we thought it was Suryani (0r Syrian) language.

The Imams (a. s.) then wept and we did so because of his weeping. A boy
then came out to give us permission for a meeting. In the meeting I
asked him, "May Allah keep you well, we came to ask permission for a
meeting and we heard you speak in a none Arabic language and we thought
it was Suryani language.

Then we heard you weeping and because of that we also wept." The Imams
(a.s.) said, "Yes, I remembered prophet Ilyas, one of the Israelite
prophets and devoted in worship. I then said what he used to say in his
prostration.

He then went into it in Suryani language. Swearing to Allah, we had not
seen any monk or minister as eloquent in it as he in it. He then
explained it to us in Arabic, "Ilyas would say in his prostration, 'O
Lord, will I find you punish me although you know of thirst in the heat
of the midday? Will I find you punish me although you know that I rub my
face on earth to worship you?

Will I find you punish me although you know that I give up sins for
you? Will I find you punish me although you know that I stay awake all
night just for you?" The Imams (a.s.) then said, "Allah then told him
through inspiration, "Rise your head from the earth. I will not punish
you."

The Imams (a.s.) then said that he said to Allah, "What if say, "I will
not punish you but then you punished me? Am I not your slave and you are
my Lord." The Imams (a.s.) said, "Allah then spoke to him through
inspiration, "Rise your head. I will not punish you because when I
promise I then keep My promise."


