Chapter 35 : No One Collect All of the Holy Quran Except the Imams (a.s.) and That They Have the Knowledge of All of the Holy Quran H 607, Ch. 35, H 1
======================================================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from 'Amr ibn abu al-Miqdam from Jabir who has said that he heard abu
Ja'far (a.s.) say the following. "No one from the people has claimed to
have collected the whole of the Holy Quran (in a book form) as it was
revealed.

If anyone would come up with such a claim, he is liar. No one collected
this Holy Book and memorized as Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High
revealed it except Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) and the Imams after him."

H 608, Ch. 35, h 2

Muhammad ibn al-Husayn has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
Muhammad ibn Sinan from 'Ammar ibn Marwan from al-Munakhkhal from Jabir
from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "No one is able to
claim that with him is the whole of the Holy Quran; its apparent and
hidden essence, except the executors of the will of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.).

H 609, Ch. 35, h 3

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from al- Qasim ibn al-Rabi' from 'Ubayd ibn 'Abdallah ibn abu
Hashim al-Sayrafi from 'Amr ibn Mus'ab from Salma ibn Muhriz who has
said that he heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the following. "Of the
knowledge that we have received is the interpretation of the Holy Quran
and its laws, the knowledge of the changes of time and the happenings
therein.

When Allah wants good for a people, He makes them to understand. If He
would make to understand one who does not want to understand such a
person turns away as if he has heard nothing. The Imams (a.s.) paused,
briefly, then said, "Had we found keepers and trusted people for our
knowledge, we would have said it (all to him). Allah is the best
supporter."

H 610, Ch. 35, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
Muhammad ibn 'Isa from abu 'Abdallah al-Mu'min from 'Abd al-A'la Mawla
'Ala Sam who has said that he heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the
following.

"I swear by Allah that I know the Holy Quran from the beginning to end
as if it is in the palm of my hand. In it there is the news of the
heavens and the earth, the news of what has been and the new of what
will come into being. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "In
it there is the explanation of all things." (16:89)

H 611, Ch. 35, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn abu Zahir from
al-Khashshab from Ali ibn Hass'an from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who recited the following verse.

"The one who had knowledge from the Book said, "I can bring it to you
before you even blink your eye. . . ." (27:40). The narrator has said
that the Imams (a.s.) opend his two fingers and placed them on his chest
and then said, "With us, I swear by Allah, is the knowledge of the whole
of the Book."

H 612, Ch. 35, h 6

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father and Muhammad ibn Yahya
from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from those he mentioned, both of them from
ibn abu 'Umayr from ibn 'Udhayna from Burayd ibn Mu'awiya who has said
that he asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the meaning of the following
verse. ". . . Say,

'God and those who have the knowledge of the Book are sufficient
witness (to my prophet-hood).'" (13:43) The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is a
reference to us. Ali (a.s.) is the first among us and the most virtuous
and the best among us after the Holy Prophet (s.a.)"


**Chapter 36 : The degree of the Great Names of Allah that are given to
the Imams (a.s.) H 613, Ch. 36, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya and others have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad
from Ali ibn al- Hakam from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl who has said that
Shurays al-Wabishi narrated from Jabir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has
said the following.

"The greatest name of Allah has seventy three letters. There was only
of these letters. He spoke that one letter and land between him and
throne of the Queen of Sheba (Bilqis) sunk down as such that he could
reach her throne with his hand and the land returned to the original
state. This happened in a blinking of A number of our people has
narrated from eye.

Of the greatest name of Allah there are seventy two letters with us.
Allah has kept one letter exclusively for Himself in the knowledge of
the unseen. There is no means and no power except by the help of Allah,
the Most High, the Most Great."

H 614, Ch. 36, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id and
Muhammad ibn Khalid from Zakariyya ibn 'Imran al-Qummi from Harun ibn
al-Juhm that a man from the companions of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). I (Harun
ibn al-Jahm) have forgotten his name. He has said that he heard abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following.

"Two letters were given to Jesus and he would work with them. Four
letters were given to Moses. Eight letters were given to Abraham.
Fifteen letters were given to Noah.
Twenty five letters were given to Adam. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, have combined all of them in Muhammad (s.a.).
The greatest name of Allah has seventy three letters. Seventy two
letters are given to Muhammad (s.a.) and only one letter is kept hidden
from him."

H 615, Ch. 36, h 3

al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Ali ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali who has said
that he heard abu al-Hassan (a.s.) Sahib al-'Askar say the following.
"The greatest name of Allah has seventy three letters. There was only
one letter with Asif.

He spoke with it and the land between him and the throne of the Queen
of Sheba (Bilqis) sunk down as such that he took her throne and placed
it before Solomon. The land then came to normal state within less than a
blinking of an eye. There are seventy-two of those letters with us. One
letter is with Allah which, He has kept it exclusively in the knowledge
of the unseen."


