Chapter 37 : Sacred Objects of the Prophets Transferred To the Imams (a.s.) H 616, Ch. 37, H 1
==============================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Salma ibn al-Khattab from
'Abdallah ibn Muhammad from Mani' ibn al-Hajjaj al-Basri from Majashi'
from Mu'alla from Muhammad ibn al-Fayd from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has
said the following.

"The staff of Moses belonged to Adam. It was passed to Shu'ayb then to
Moses ibn 'Imran. Now it is with us. I have just, moments before, seen
it. It is green just as being picked from its tree. It speaks if it is
induced to do so. It is prepared for the one who will rise to establish
the kingdom of Allah on earth. He will use it in the same way as Moses
had done.

It frightens and devours things made to trick people and it
accomplishes whatever commands it receives. If it would proceed for a
task it devours the treacherous materials. It opens into two branches;
one on earth and the other towards the ceiling with an opening of forty
yards in between and devours the deceptive materials with its tongue."

H 617, Ch. 37, h 2

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from 'Imran ibn Musa from Musa ibn Ja'far
al-Baghdadi from Ali ibn Asbat from Muhammad ibn Fudayl from abu Hamza
al-Thamali who has said that he heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the
following. " The Tablets of Moses are with us. The Staff of Moses is
with us. We are the heirs of the prophets (a.s.)."

H 618, Ch. 37, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Musa
ibn Sa'dan from 'Abdallah ibn al-Qasim from abu Sa'id al-Khurasani from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said that abu Ja'far (a.s.) has said the
following.

"When al-Qa'im (the one who will rise to establish the kingdom of Allah
on earth) will rise in Makka and about to leave for Kufa a caller will
up on him, "No one of you carry any food and water with you. No one
carry the rock of Moses ibn 'Imran. It a full load for a camel.

Wherever you will disembark there will be a water fountain. Whoever
will be hungry it will satisfy him and whoever will be thirsty it quench
his thirst. It will be their supplies until they will arrive in Najaf
behind al-Kufa."

H 619, Ch. 37, h 4

Muhammad Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Musa ibn
Sa'dan from abu al-Hassan al-'Asadi from abu Basir from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"Amir al-Mu'mini (a.s.) once came out during the night after the 'Isha'
prayer saying , 'Ham hama, ham ham'and it is a dark night. The Imam
(a.s.) has come out to you and he is wearing the shirt of Adam (a.s.).
He wearing the ring of Solomon (a.s.) and in hands he has the Staff of
Moses (a.s.)."

H 620, Ch. 37, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from al-Husayn from Muhammad ibn
Isma'il al-Sarraj from Bishr ibn Ja'far from Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has
said that he heard abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) say the following. "Do you know
what was the shirt of Joseph?" I said, "I do not know." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "When the fire was set for Abraham, Jibril brought him a dress
from paradise and made him t wear it.

With that dress on him nothing of the cold or heat would harm him. When
Abraham was about to die, he placed it in a covering and hanged it to
Isacc (Ishaq) who hanged to Jacob (Ya'qub). When Joseph was born it was
hanged to him and he had it on his shoulder until the event of the
things that happened to this shirt.

When he Joseph took it out of its covering in Egypt, Jacob (Ya'qub)
felt its fragrance as he said, ""I smell Joseph's scent. I hope that you
will not accuse me of senility" (12:94). It was the same shirt that sent
from paradise." I then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your
cause, to who did that shirt go thereafter?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It
went to its (people) owner."

Then he said, "Every prophet who inherited knowledge or other things,
they all ended to the family of Muhammad (s.a.)."


**Chapter 38 : The Armaments and Sacred Items belonging to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.) that transferred to the Imam (a.s.) H 621, Ch. 38, h
1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Ali ibn al- Hakam from Mu'awiya ibn Wahab from Sa'id al-Samman who
has said the following. "I was in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
when two people from the Zaydia sect came to him.

They asked, "Is there with you an Imam obedience to whom is
obligatory?" The narrator has said that the Imams (a.s.) said, "No,
there no one as such." They then said, "Reliable people have informed us
about you that you issue fatwas and that you affirm and speak of it. We
can point out what their names are. They are very pious alert people.

They are such that can not be rejected. The Imams (a.s.) became angry
and said, "I have not ordered them to say so." When the two men notice
anger from the face of The Imams (a.s.) they left."

The Imams (a.s.) then asked me, "Do you know these two?" I said, "Yes,
I know them. They are from our Suq (shopping center). They belong to the
Zaydia sect and they think that the sword of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) is
with 'Abdallah ibn al-Hassan."

The Imams (a.s.) said, "They have lied, may Allah condemn them. I swear
by Allah, 'Abdallah ibn al-Hassan has not seen it with his own eyes, not
even of his eyes has seen it. Even his father had seen it except if he
might have seen it with Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.). If they are
truthful let them say what kind of mark does its hilt have and what is
the mark on its blade?

With me is the sword of the Messenger of Allah, with me is the flag of
the Messenger, his coat of arms, his Lamam (pennon) and his helmet. If
they are truthful let them say what kind of mark does the coat of arms
of the Messenger of Allah has? With me is the flag of the Messenger of
Allah, the victorious.

With me is the Staff of Moses. With me is the ring of Solomon son of
David. With me is tray on Moses used to offer offerings. With me is the
name that whenever the Messenger of Allah would place it between the
Muslims and pagans no arrow from the pagans would reach the Muslims.

With me is the similar object that angels brought." Perhaps The Imams
(a.s.) has hinted to the following verse. 'Their Prophet further told
them, "As the evidence of his authority, he will bring to you the Ark
which will be a comfort to you from your Lord and a legacy of the
household of Moses and Aaron. It will be carried by the angels. This is
the evidence for you if you have faith.' (2:248)

The case of the Arms with us is like the case of the Ark in the
Israelites. Whichever family would have had the Ark at their door-front
that family would receive prophet-hood. To whoever of us the Arms are
transferred he receives Imamat (leadership with Divine authority).

My father wore the coats of arms of the Messenger of Allah. It would
reach the earth and leave marks. I wore it also and it reached the earth
and sometimes it would not. When the one from us who, will rise to
establish the authority of Allah on earth, will come it will fit him
perfectly, if Allah would so will."

H 622, Ch. 38, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Asha'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from al- Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' from Hammad ibn 'Uthman
from 'Abdallah 'Ala' ibn A'yan who has said that he heard abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) say the following. "With me is the arms of the Messenger of
Allah. It is not disputable."

The Imam (a.s.) then said, "The Arms are well defended. If they would
be place with the worst creature of Allah he will be very good among
them." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "This matter (leadership with Divine
authority) will proceed to the one who will enjoy total obedience. When
Allah's will grant permission he will appear in public and people will
say, "What is this happening?" Allah will make his hand to protect his
followers and subjects."

H 623, Ch. 38, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from
ibn Muskan from abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Of the legacy that the Messenger of Allah left was a sword,
a coat of arms, a spears, a saddle and a gray mule. Ali ibn abu Talib
(a.s.) inherited all of them."

H 624, Ch. 38, h 4

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Aban ibn 'Uthman from Fudayl ibn Yasar from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. " My father wore the Dhat
al-Fdul, coat of arms of the Messenger of Allah and being taller for him
it left marks on the ground. I wore it and it was taller for me also."

H 625, Ch. 38, h 5

hmad ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn Yahya have narrated from Muhammad
ibn al- Hassan from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Ahmad ibn abu 'Abdallah who
has said that he asked abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) about al-Dhulfaqar,
the sword of the Messenger of Allah as to wherefrom it was. The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Jibril came down with it from the heavens. It was
decorated with gold and it is with me now."

H 626, Ch. 38, h 6

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Yunus ibn 'Abd al-Raman from Muhammad ibn al-Hakim from abu Ibrahim
(a.s.) who has said the following. " The arms are kept with us. They are
well protected. Even if they would placed with the worst of the
creatures he would a good one of them. My father stated to me that when
he married a lady from al-Thaqif the house was decorated for the
wedding.

Next morning he found fifteen nails drawn into that wall. He became
very anxious about it and asked hid bridegroom to leave the house
because he needed the handyman to do some work therein. When he examined
the wall he found that all the nails had turned back from the sword and
none of them had reached it."

H 627, Ch. 38, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Safwan
ibn Yahya from ibn Muskan from Hujr from Humran who has said the
following. " I asked abu Ja'far (a. s.) about the truth in the matter
which people relate that a sealed page (or pages) was given to 'Umm
Salama." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "When the Messenger of Allah passed
away, Ali (a.s.) inherited his (Holy Prophet's ) arms and whatever was
therein, then it was transferred to Imam al-Hassan then to Imam
al-Husayn (a.s.).

However, then we became anxious about loosing them we then decided to
leave them in trust of 'Umm Salama. Afterwards Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn
(a.s.) took custody of the arms." I then said, "Then it is true that it
was transferred to your father and then they ended up to you."

H 628, Ch. 38, h 8

Muhammad has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id
from Fudala from 'Umar ibn Aban who has said the following. "I asked abu
'Abdallah (a.s.), 'People say that a sealed page (or pages) was given to
'Umm Salama. Is it true?'" The Imam (a.s.) said, "When the Messenger of
Allah passed away, Ali (a.s.) inherited his knowledge, his Armaments and
whatever was with it.

Then it was transferred to al-Hassan then to al- Husayn." The narrator
has said that then said to the Imam (a.s.), "Then it was transferred to
Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) then to his son then it ended up to you." The
Imam (a.s.) said, "That is true."

H 629, Ch. 38, h 9

Muhammad ibn al-Husayn has narrated from Ali ibn Muhammad from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Muhammad ibn al-Walid Shabab al-Sayrafi from Aban ibn 'Uthman
from abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) who has said the following "When the
Messenger of Allah was about to dies, he called to him al-'Abbass ibn
'Ad al-Muttalib and Amir al-Mu'mini (a.s.) .

He said to al-'Abbass, "O auncle of Muhammad, will you inherit the
legacy of Muhammad , pay his debts and fulfill his promises and
commitments?" He responded, "O the Messenger of Allah, May Allah take my
soul and the souls of my parents in service for your cause, I am an old
man with a large number of dependents, with very little belongings while
in generosity compete the winds."

He (the Messenger of Allah) said, "I will give them away to whoever
would want them along with its rights and responsibilities." Then the
Holy Prophet (s.a.) said, "O Ali, brother of Muhammad, will you pay off
the liabilities of Muhammad, pay off his debt and take possession of his
legacy?" He said, "Yes, May Allah take my soul and the soul of my
parents in service for your cause, it is my responsibility and in my
favor" Ali (a.s.) has said, "I looked at him and saw take off even his
ring from his finger and said to me wear on this ring in my lifeee
time."

He (Ali) (a.s.) has said, "I lookked to the ring when wearing on my
finger and wished to have it out of all his properties." He then called
upon Bilal loudly, "Bring me my helmet, the coat of arms, the flag, the
Shirt, the Dhulfaqar, (famous sword), al-Sahab, (the Turban) al-Burd, (
the clothe) al-Abraqa, (the belt)and the Staff." Ali (a.s.) has said, "I
had never before seen that belt.

When it was brought its shine would almost take away one's sight. It
was of the belts of paradise." He (the Messenger of Allah) thensaid, "O
Ali, Jibril brought this for me and said, "O Muhammad, place it in the
ring of the coat of arms and use it as a belt around your midsection.
Then he asked that the two pairs of Arabian shoves be brought to him
along with the shirt.

One of them was already stitched and the other was not yet stitched. It
was the Shirt with which he take for the 'Isra' (the night journey), the
Shirt while wearing it he came out on the day of 'Uhud. Three caps were
brought, the cap used while on a journey, the cap used on the 'Id days
and the cap used on Frindays. Also the cap that was used during his
meeting with his companions was brought to him."

Then he (the Messenger of Allah ) said, "O Bilala, bring to us the two
mules, the gray one and Dul dul and the two camels, al\_Ghadba' and
al-Qaswa' and the two horses." Al-Janah wopuld been kept near the door
of the Mosque in case the Messenger of Allah needed. Whenever he would
need any thing he would let a man to ride on it to go for the task and
the horse wound run for the needs of the Messenger of Allah.

Also Hayzum was brought to him, the donkey called 'Ufayr were brought
to him. He then said, "Take possession of these in my life time." Amir
al- Mu'mini (a.s.) has said, "The first one of the animals died was
'Ufayr who died at within the same hour that the Messenger of Allah
died. He brook off his bound until and began to run until he came to the
well of bnu Khatma in Quba and threw himself into it and it became his
grave."

It is narrated that Amir al-Mu'mini (a.s.) has said, "That donkey spoke
to the Messenger of Allah say, May Allah take my soul and the soul of my
parents in service for your cause, my father related to me from his
father from his grand father from his father who lived with Noah in the
Ark.

Once Noah came to him and whipped his on his back and said, "From the
descendents of this donkey there will a donkey on whose back the master
and the last of the prophets will ride. I thank Allah who has made me
that donkey."


