Chapter 39 : the Case of the Arms of the Messenger of Allah Is Like the Ark Among the Israelites H 631, Ch. 39, H 1
===================================================================================================================

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from Mu'awiya ibn Wahab from Sa'id al-Samman who has said
that he heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following.

"The case of the Armaments with us is like the case of the Ark with
Israelites. In whichever house of the Israelites the Ark would hav
3ebeen found that house would receive prophet-hood. Whoever among us
would receive the Armaments he would also receive Imamat (leadership
with Divine authority)."

H 632, Ch. 39, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Muhammad ibn al- Sukayn from Nuh ibn Darraj from 'Abdallah ibn abu
Ya'fur who has said that he heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the
following. "The case of the Armaments with us is like the case of the
Ark with the Israelites. Wherever the Ark would go kingdom would also
follow. Wherever the Armaments go among us knowledge (leadership with
Divine authority) also follows it."

H 633, Ch. 39, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Safwan
from abu a1-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) who has said the following. "Abu
Ja'far (a.s.) would say, 'The case of the Armaments with us is as the
Ark with the Israelites.

Wherever the Ark would go prophet-hood would also follow. Wherever the
Armaments among us would go the matter (leadership with Divine
authority) would also settle there." I then asked, "Would the Armaments
ever depart knowledge?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "No, it would not do
so."

H 634, Ch. 39, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
abu Nasr from abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) who has said the following.
"Abu Ja'far (a.s.) would say, 'The case of the Armaments with us is as
the Ark with the Israelites. Wherever the Ark would go kingdom would
also follow. Wherever the Armaments among us would go knowledge would
also follow."


**Chapter 40 : Statements about al-Jafr al-Jami' and the Book of Fatima
(a.s.) H 635, Ch. 40, h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
'Abdallah ibn al- Hajjal from Ahmad ibn 'Umar al-Halabi from abu Basir
who has said the following. "I went to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and said,
"May Allah take my soul in service for your cause,

I like to ask you a question. Is there anyone else in this house who
may hear my words?" The Imams (a.s.) then folded the curtain between his
room and the other room next to it and looked into it. Then the Imams
(a.s.) said, "O abu Muhammad, ask whatever you wish." I said, "May Allah
take my soul in service for your cause, your followers say that the
Messenger of Allah taught Ali (a.s.) a thousand chapter of knowledge and
from each chapter there opens a thousand chapter.

I then said, 'This, I swear by Allah, is knowledge.'" He would mark the
ground with his staff (a sign of thinking in normal people) for a while
and said, "That is knowledge but it is not that." The narrators has said
that The Imam (a.s.) then said, "O abu Muhammad, with us there is
al-Jami'a. What do they know what al-Jami' is?"

I then asked, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, what
is al-Jami'a? The Imam (a.s.) said, it is a parchment seventy yards by
the yards of the Messenger of Allah long that contains his dictations
that is in graved in to with the right hand writing of Ali (a.s.).

It contains all the lawful and unlawful and all matters that people
need, even the law to of compensation for A number of our people has
narrated from scratch caused to a person. He then stretched his hand to
me and asked, 'May I, O abu Muhammad?' I then replied, "May Allah take
my soul in service for your cause, I am all at your disposal."

He pinched me with his hand and said, "Even there is the law of
compensation for this." He seemed angry. The narrator has said, "I then
said, "This, I swear by Allah is knowledge." The Imams (a.s.) said, "It
certainly is knowledge but not that one."

The Imams (a.s.) remained silent for a while and then said, "With us
there is al-Jafr (the parchment). What do they know what al-Jafr is? I
then asked, "What is al-Jafr (the parchment or a container) ?"

The Imams (a.s.) said, "It is a container made of skin that contains
the knowledge of the prophets and the executors of their wills and the
knowledge of the scholars in the past from the Israelites." The narrator
has said that he then said, "This certainly, is the knowledge." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It certainly is knowledge but not that knowledge."

The Imams (a.s.) remained silent for a while and then said, "With us
there is the book (Mushaf) of Fatima, (a.s.). What do they know what
Mushaf of Fatima is? The Imam (a.s.) said, "Mushaf of Fatima is three
times bigger than your Quran. There is not even a single letter therein
from your Quran." The narrator has said, "I then said, "This, I swear by
Allah, is the knowledge."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "This certainly is knowledge, but it is not
that." The Imam (a.s.) remained silent for a while and then said, "With
us there is the knowledge of whatever has been and the knowledge of
whatever will come into being to the Day of Judgment." The narrator has
said that he then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your
cause, this, I swear by Allah is, certainly, knowledge."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "It certainly is knowledge but not that." The
narrator has said that he then asked, "May Allah take my soul in service
for your cause, What then is knowledge?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Whatever
takes place during the night and during the day, one matter after the
other matter and one thing after the other thing to the Day of
Judgment."

H 636, Ch. 40, h 2 A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz from ibn 'Uthman who has said that
he heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following. "The heretics will
appear in the year one hundred twenty eight (745/746AD) because I have
found it in the Mushaf of Fatima (a.s.)." The narrator has said that he
asked the Imams (a.s.), "What is Mushaf of Fatime?"

The Imams (a.s.) said, "When Allah took the Holy Prophet (s. a.) from
this world, it caused such a degree of grief to Fatima (a.s.) that only
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, knows its extent. Allah then sent
an angel to her to offer solace and speak to her. She complained about
it to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) who asked her to inform him whenever
she would find the angel speak to her.

She then informed him when the angel came to speak. Amir al-Mu'minin
Ali (a.s.) then would write down all that he would hear of the
conversations of the angel so much so that his notes took the shape of a
whole book." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "There was nothing in it of the
knowledge of the lawful and unlawful matters but it had the knowledge of
things that had happened and things to happen in future." :

H 637, Ch. 40, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from al-Husayn ibn abu 'Ala'who has said that he heard abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following. "With me is the white Jafr." The
narrator has said that he asked the Imams (a.s.) "What is in it?" The
Imams (a.s.) said, "In it there is the psalms of David, the Torah of
Moses, the Gospel of Jesus, the Books of Abraham, the laws that explain
the lawful and unlawful matters and Mushaf of Fatima (a.s.) in which,

I do not think there is nay thing from the Holy Quran. In it there is
all that people need us to do for them and so that we would not need any
one else. In it there is information even about a lash, half of a lash
and one forth of a lash and about the amount of compensation for A
number of our people has narrated from scratch caused to someone.

"With me there is the red Jafr." The narrator has said that he asked
the Imams (a.s.), "What is in the red Jafr?" The Imams (a.s.) said, "In
it there is the Armaments. It is because it only is opened for
bloodshed. The owner of the sword opens it to kill." The narrator has
said that 'Abdallah ibn abu Ya'fur asked the Imams (a.s.),

"May Allah keep you well, do the descendents of al-Hassan (a.s.) know
this? The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, I swear by Allah, they know it just as
they know the night that it is night and the day that it is the day but
jealousy and worldly gains cause them to act in denial and rejection.
Had they sought the truth with the truth it would have been better for
them."

H 638, Ch. 40, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from the
person that he mentioned from Sulayman ibn Khalid from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "The Jafr of which they speak
certainly disappoints them because they (the Zaydis) do not speak the
truth while Jafr does contain the truth. Let them bring to light
therefrom the judgments of Ali (a.s.) and his rulles of inheritance if
they are truthful.

Ask them about (the inheritance) of paternal and maternal aunts. Let
them show the Mushaf of Fatima (a.s.). In it certainly there is the will
of Fatima (a.s.). With it there is the Armaments the Messenger of Allah.
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "Bring me a Book,
revealed before this Quran, or any other proof based on knowledge to
support your belief, if indeed you are truthful" (46:4).

H 639, Ch. 40, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from ibn Ri'ab from abu 'Ubaydah who has said that the people from our
group asked abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) about Jafr and the Imam (a.s.) said
the following. "It is the skin of a bull which is full of knowledge."
Then they asked the Imam (a.s.) about al-Jami'a. The Imam (a.s.)
replied, "It is a parchment that is seventy yards long with a width of
hide like that of the leg of a huge camel.

It contains all that people may need. There is no case for there is a
rule in it. In it there is the law to settle the compensation for a
scratch caused to a person." The narrator has said that he asked the
Imams (a.s.), "What is Mushaf of Fatima?" The Imam (a.s.) waited for
quite a while. Then he said, "You ask about what you really mean and
what you do not mean.

Fatima (a.s.) lived after the Messenger of Allah for seventy-five days.
She was severely depressed because of the death of her father. Jibril
(a.s.) would come to provide her solace because of the death of her
father.

Jibril would comfort her soul. Jibril would inform her about her father
and his place and of the future events and about what will happen to her
children. At the same time Ali (a.s.) would write all of them down and
thus is Mushaf of Fatima (a.s.)."

H 640, Ch. 40, h 6

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Salih
ibn Sa'id from Ahmad ibn abu Bishr from Bakr ibn Karib al-Sayrafi who
has said that he heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following. "With us
there are such things that because of which we do not become need to
people instead people need us.

With us there is a book that the Messenger of Allah had dictated and
Ali (a.s.) had written it down. It is a book. In it there are all laws
of lawful and unlawful matters. You come to us with A number of our
people has narrated from issue and we know when you follow the guidance
and when you disregard it."

H 641, Ch. 40, h 7

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
'Umar ibn Udhayna from Fudayl ibn Yasar, Burayd ibn Mu'wiya and Zurarah
who have said that 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd al-Malik said the following to abu
'Abdallah (a.s.), "The Zaydi sect and al-Mu'tazali group circle around
Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah.

Does he have any authority?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "I swear by Allah
that with me there are two books in which there is the name of every
prophet and the name of every king that would rule on earth. No, I swear
by Allah, the name of Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah is not in the list as one
of them."

H 642, Ch. 40, h 8

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad from 'Abd al-Samad ibn Bashir from
Fudayl ibn Sukra who has said that once I went to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
and he said the following to me. "O Fudayl, do you know what at did I
look just awhile before?" The narrator has said that he said to the
Imams (a.s.), "No, I do not know."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "I was looking at the book of Fatima (a.s.).
There is no king who would rule on earth with being listed therein by
his name and the name of his father but I did not find the name of any
of the descendent of al-Hassan therein."


