Chapter 41 : Chapter Ninety Seven of the Holy Quran and Its Interpretation Al-qadr, Destiny 97 in the Name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful We Revealed the Quran On the Night of Destiny ((97:1). Would That You Knew What the Night of Destiny Is! (97:2)
===============================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

(Worship) on the Night of Destiny is better than (worship) for a
thousand months (97:3). On this Night, the angels and the spirit descend
by the permission of their Lord with His decree (to determine everyone's
destiny) (97:4).

This Night is all peace until the break of dawn (97:5).

H 643, Ch. 41, h 1

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated
from Sahl ibn Ziyad and Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad, both of them from al-Hassan ibn al-'Abbas ibn al-Harish from
abu Ja'far al-Thani (a.s.) who has said the following. "Abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) has said, 'Once while my father was walking around the Ka'ba for
Tawaf a man who had covered his face partially with his turban suddenly
came by.

He caused discontinuation in the Tawaf of the Imam (a.s.) and took him
(a.s.) to a house adjacent to al-Safa. He sent for me also and then we
were there three of us. He said, "Welcome, the child of the Messenger of
Allah. He then placed his hand over my head and said, 'May Allah place
blessings in you, the trustworthy one before Allah after his
ancestors.

O abu Ja'far (a.s.), if you like you may tell me, and if you like I can
tell you. If you like you may ask me and if you want I will ask you. If
you would like affirm what I will say and if you would want I will
affirm what you will say.

The Imam (a.s.) said, "I like all of it." He then said, "You must never
let your tongue answer me with something that is otherwise in your
conscious." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Such would do one in whose heart
there would exist two kinds of knowledge, one opposing the other.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, disdains to have a knowledge that
is not harmonious." He then said, "This is my question. You just
explained one part of it.

"Tell me about this knowledge that is so harmonious and without
difference. Who has (knows) it?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "The whole of
knowledge is before Allah, Majestic is Whose Name. The knowledge that
people need is with the executor of the will of (prophets).

The narrator has said that he then removed the covering from his face,
set down straight, his face looked more cheerful and he said, "This is
what I wanted and for this I have come.

You think that the knowledge that is free of differences is with the
executors of the wills of the prophets. How do they know it?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Just as the Messenger of Allah knew it except that they do
not see what the Messenger of Allah would see. It is because that he was
a prophet and they are the Muhaddithun, spokesmen of the Divine
message.

The Messenger of Allah, when as a delegate before Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High, would hear whatever would have been communicated to him
as (Wahy) but they do not hear such communications." He then said, "You
have spoken the truth, O child of the Messenger of Allah. I now ask you
a more difficult question.

Tell me, why does this knowledge not appear as was it with the
Messenger of Allah?" The narrator has said that my father then smiled
and said, "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, disdains to let those
people have information about His knowledge whom He has not yet tested
with faith.

(Such test) was carried out on the Messenger of Allah in the form of
his enduring the suffering caused to him from his people so much so that
he would struggle against them with His permission. Many times he would
withhold matters that would disappoint his people until he was commanded
sternly to convey to them the commandments that he had received and
disregard the pagans. "Preach what you have been commanded to and stay
away from the pagans." (15:94)

"I swear by Allah, had he conveyed the commandments he would have been
perfectly safe. He, in fact, considered the obedience and feared
differences. For this reason he would withhold.

I would love that you would keep your eye upon the advent of al-Mahdi
(the guide) of this nation. (A time) when the angels with the sword of
the family of David would make the dead spirits of the unbelievers
between the heavens and the earth test the results of their evil deeds
and force the spirits of the living ones like them to join the
unbelievers.

"He then drew a sword and said, "Here it is. This is one of them." The
narrator has said, "Then my father said, "Yes, that is very true, I
swear by the One Who chose Muhammad from among the mankind." The
narrator has said that then the man drew the cover over his face and
said, "I am Ilyas. I did not ask you those questions about that because
I did not know them. I only loved that this conversation and narration
strengthen your followers.

I will tell you about a sign and evidence that you know if they (your
followers) would debate others, your friends will win. The narrator has
said that my father then said to him, "If you would like I can tell you
about it (the sign and evidence)." He then said, "I would wish to hear
it from you."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "If our followers would say to those who differ
from us, "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High says to His Messenger, "We
revealed the Quran on the Night of Destiny ((97:1). Would that you knew
what the Night of Destiny is! (97:2).

(Worship) on the Night of Destiny is better than (worship) for a
thousand months (97:3). On this Night, the angels and the spirit descend
by the permission of their Lord with His decree (to determine everyone's
destiny) (97:4).

This Night is all peace until the break of dawn" (97:5).

"Did the Messenger of Allah know of the knowledge of things that he did
not know at that night or what Jibril would bring to him at other times?
The opposition will say, "No, there was nothing the Messenger of Allah
did not know." Say to the opposition, "Was it necessary for the
Messenger of Allah to express such knowledge?"

The opposition will say, "No, it was not necessary." Say to them, "Was
there any difference and disharmony in the knowledge that the Messenger
of Allah had received from Allah?" If the opposition would say, "No,
there was no disharmony, " ask them, "If one would judge by the laws of
Allah with disharmony, has he opposed the Messenger of Allah?" They will
say, "Yes, he has opposed the Messenger of Allah."

However, if they say, "No, he has not opposed the Messenger of Allah,
they have invalidated their starting point". Say to them, "No one knows
its interpretation except Allah and those who are well-grounded in
knowledge."

If they would ask, "Who are the ones well-grounded in knowledge?" Say,
"They are those in whose knowledge there is no disharmony." If they
would ask, "Who is he?" Say, "the Messenger of Allah was such a person.
Did he convey such knowledge to the first one (Khalifa)?" If they say,
"Yes, the Messenger of Allah did convey."

Ask, "Did the Messenger of Allah die and the Khalifa after him had the
knowledge free of disharmony ?" If they would say, "No, there was no
such Khalifa with the knowledge free of disharmony." Say, "(This is not
logical.)

The successor of the Messenger of Allah is supported (has the Divine
support) and the Messenger of Allah does not appoint a Khalifa who would
not judge by the laws of Allah. The Messenger of Allah will not appoint
a Khalifa except one who is just like him, excluding prophet-hood. If
the Messenger of Allah did not appoint a Khalifa in his knowledge
anyone, he ( Allah forbid) caused to go astray the people of coming
generations."

"If the opposition would say, "The knowledge of the Messenger of Allah
was from the Holy Quran." Say, "What about the following verses of the
holy Quran that speak about the matters after the death of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.), 'I swear by the illustrious Book (44:2) that We have
revealed the Quran on a blessed night to warn mankind (44:3). On this
night, every absolute command coming from Us becomes distinguishable
(44:4). The command that We have been sending (44:5) as a mercy (for the
human being) from your Lord. . . .'" (44:6).

"If the opposition would say, "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
sends only prophets." Say, "These distinguishable commands that come is
from the angels and the spirit. They come from one heaven to the other.
In the heavens there is no one to whom obedience and disobedience would
apply."

"If the opposition would say, "They come from the heavens to earth and
the people of earth are in dire need of such commands."

Say to them, "Is it necessary for them to have a leader who would judge
among them?" If they say, "The Khalifa will judge for them." Ask them
about the meaning of the following verse of the Holy Quran. "God is the
Guardian of the believers and it is He who takes them out of darkness
into light. The Devil is the guardian of those who deny the Truth and he
leads them from light to darkness. These are the dwellers of hell
wherein they will live forever." (2:257)

"I swear by my life that all those in the heavens and on earth who are
under the guardian-ship of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, are
supported (Divinely) and protected. Those who are supported and
protected do not make mistakes. All the enemies of Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High, in the heavens and on earth suffer defeat.

Those who are defeated they do not deal in a rightful way. Just as it
is necessary that the command must come from the heavens for the people
of earth in the same way it is necessary to have a Wali (one who
possesses Divine authority)."

"If the opposition would say, "We do not know such a person."

Say to them, "Say whatever you may like. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, disdains to leave, after Muhammad (s.a.) the servants without one
who would possess Dinvine authority." The narrator has said that he then
stopped and said, "This, O child of the Messenger of Allah, is a
delicate point. Consider if they would say, "The Holy Quran is the
Divine authority.

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Then I will say, 'The Holy Quran does not
speak, issue commands and prohibitions. The people of Quran issue
commands and prohibitions. I would further say, "Allah would disdain to
see a certain affliction (difficult issue) would befall to the people of
the earth, and there is no law about it in the Sunnah or a ruling free
of differences and it is not in the Quran.

He would disdain to have such thing in His knowledge to take place on
earth and there would be nothing in His judgment to stop it from
happening or the means to provide relief."

He then said, "Here you gain victory, O child of the Messenger of
Allah. I testify that Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, certainly
knows what kinds of afflictions and sufferings may befall people of the
earth in their lives and in their religion etc.

He then set the Holy Quran as a guide." The narrator has said that the
man then said, "Do you, O child of the Messenger of Allah, know what
kind of guide it is ?" Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said said, "Yes, in it there
are the general principles of laws and its interpretation when judgment
would be issued. He said that Allah disdains to see His servant is
afflicted with hardships in his religion, his life or his property and
there would be no one on His earth whose judgment would decide
truthfully and in the right way to remove the suffering."

The narrator has said that the man then said, "In this matter you have
gained victory unless your enemies would falsely ascribe lies to Allah
and say, 'Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, does not have anyone who
would possess Divine authority.' However, tell me about the
interpretation of: ". . . so that you would not grieve over what you
have lost nor become extremely happy about what God has granted to you.
. . ." (57:23)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to abu so and so and his people. One
of the verses is placed before and the other is placed afterwards (in
two different places)." Grief over the loss applies to Amir al-Mu'minin
Ali (a.s.) only'. ". . . nor become extremely happy about what God has
granted to you. . ." refers to the mischief that you faced after the
death of the Messenger of Allah.

The man then said, "I testify that you are the Divine authorities in
whose judgment there is no disharmony." The man then stood up and went
and I did not see him any more."

H 644, Ch. 41, h 2

(Through the same chain of narrators) it has been narrated from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Once, in a meeting in the
presence of my father with a group of people also present my father
smiled and (the feeling was quite intense it caused) tears flooded his
eyes. He then asked, "Do you know what made me laugh?" The narrator has
said that they said, "No, we do not know the reason.

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Ibn 'Abbass thinks he is of the people mention
in the following verse of the Holy Quran. "To those who have said, "God
is our Lord, " and who have remained steadfast to their belief, the
angels will descend saying, "Do not be afraid or grieved. Receive the
glad news of the Paradise which was promised to you." (41:30).

I asked him, "Have you seen the angels, O ibn 'Abbass, telling you of
the fact that they guard and protect you in this and the next world and
provide you complete protection and security from fear and sadness?" The
Imam (a.s.) then said that ibn 'Abbass said, "Believers are each other's
brothers. . . ." (49:10) the whole community is included in this verse."
I then laughed."

Then I said, "O ibn 'Abbass, you (perhaps) are right. However, I ask
you to swear to Allah and answer me truthfully. Is there any disharmony
in the judgment of Allah, Majestic is Whose mention?" He said, "No,
there is no disharmony in His judgment."

"I then asked him, "How would judge the case in which a man strikes the
fingers of another man with a sword until they fall. Then another man
comes and cuts off his palm. He is brought to you and you are the judge.
How would you then judge?" He said, "I will order the one who cut off
the palm to pay compensation for the whole hand.

I will ask the affected party to reach a settlement with the defendant
and for this purpose I send them to the people of justice (arbitrator)."
I said, "(In your judgment) disharmony has come in the laws of Allah,
Majestic is Whose mention, thus, you invalidated what you said before
(that there is no disharmony in the laws and judgment of Allah).

Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, disdains to let a judicial case
remain on earth without a clarified rule. You must order, as a judge, to
cut the palm of the defendant totally and pay compensation for the
fingers.

Thus, is the judgment of Allah at the night wherein His orders descend.
If you would reject after hearing from the Messenger of Allah then Allah
will send you to fire just as He blinded you on the day you hid the
(truth) in favor of Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.)." Ibn 'Abbass then said,
"Is that why my eyes have become blind?" He further said, "How would you
know that? I swear by Allah that my eyes turned blind only because of
the flapping of the wing of the angel.

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "That made me laugh. I left him that day
because of the silliness (dark and dullness) in his intellect and
reason. I then met him latter and said to him, "O ibn 'Abbass, you have
not spoken as true as you did yesterday. Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) told
you that the Night of Determination comes every year.

On that night the command for the whole year comes down. For that
matter and command is the people with Divine authority after the
Messenger of Allah. You then asked, "Who are these people?" He (Ali
(a.s.) said, "I myself and the eleven men from my descendents will be
the Imams (leaders with divine authority) and the (people to whom angels
speak) Muhaddathun." You then said, "I do not see it (Night of
Determination) except with the Messenger of Allah.

Then the angel appeared to you; the angels that was speaking to him and
said, "O 'Abdallah, you have lied. My eyes see it (the Night of
Determination).of which Ali (a.s.) spoke to you. His (Ali's ) eyes did
not see him (the angel) but his heart understood (the presence of the
angel) and he impacted his ears. Then he (angel) flapped you with his
wing and you turned blind.

" Ibn 'Abbass then said, "In the matters that we dispute it is up to
Allah to judge." I then said to him, "Has Allah judged one case with two
judgments?" He replied, "No, Allah has not done so." I then said, "Here
you perish and cause others to perish."

H 645, Ch. 41, h 3

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
has said about the Night of Determination, ". . . every absolute command
coming from Us becomes distinguishable." (44:4) He has said that
absolute and strong command.

Absolute and strong command is not two things. It is only one thing.
One who judges without disharmony and differences his judgment is of the
judgment of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. Whoever would judge in
disharmonious manner with differences and considers it as the rightful
way of judging he has judged with the judgment of the devil.

It is certain that on the Night of Determination the explanation and
clarification of all issues of the year comes to the man who possesses
Divine authority. On that Night the Wali al-'Amr (the man who possesses
Divine authority) receives commands about his self for so and so, and
about the affairs of the people in so and so. It also is certain that
for the man with Divine authority, besides this, every year, there comes
the knowledge of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.

(There comes to him) the exclusive knowledge, the hidden, the wonderful
and the treasured knowledge of Allah. It comes just in the Night of
Determination comes the command. Then he recited. "If all the trees in
the earth were pens and the ocean, with seven more oceans, were ink
still these could not suffice to record all the Words of God. God is
Majestic and All-wise." (31:27).

H 646, Ch. 41, h 4

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) would
say, "We revealed the Quran on the Night of Destiny ((97:1) Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, has certainly said the truth has reveal the
Holy Quran on the Night of Determination. "Would that you knew what the
Night of Destiny is! (97:2)" the Messenger of Allah said, "I do not
know.

" Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, said, "(Worship) on the Night of
Destiny is better than (worship) for a thousand months (that are other
than the Night of Determinatio)." (97:3) He asked the Messenger of
Allah, "Do you know why it is better than a thousand nights?" the
Messenger of Allah said, "No, I do not know." He said, "It is because on
that Night the angels and the Spirit come down by the permission of
their Lord for all matters. When Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
would grant permission for a matter it means that He has agreed.

" "This Night is all peace until the break of dawn." (97:5) He says, "O
Muhammad, My angels salute you and My spirit with peaceful greetings
from beginning of the time they come down until dawn of that night. Then
He has said in another part of His book, "Guard yourselves against
discord among yourselves so that it will not mislead anyone of you,
especially the unjust, and know that God's retribution is most severe."
(8:25) It is about the Night of Determination. He has also said in His
book, "Muhammad is only a Messenger.

There lived other Messengers before him. Should (Muhammad) die or be
slain, would you then turn back to your pre-Islamic behavior? Whoever
does so can cause no harm to God. God will reward those who give
thanks." (3:144) In the verse He has said that when Muhammad will die
the opposition to the command of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
will say , "The Night of Determination has gone along with the Messenger
of Allah." This is the first clamity that has befallen them
exclusively.

With this they returned back to their old ways. Had they not said so,
it would have been necessary to believe that Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, has His commands on that Night. Once they would affirm and
acknowledge the command (delegation of Divine authority) it would have
become necessary to believe in the existence of the man who possesses
Divine authority."

H 647, Ch. 41, h 5

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Ali (a.s.) would say very often,
"(What for) al-Taymies and al-'Adawies have gathered around the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.). He, the Messenger of Allah, would read, "We
have revealed it on the Night of Determination" very humbly and
tearfully.

They (al-Taymi and al-'Adwi) would say, "How intense is the tenderness
that this chapter causes to your heart." The Messenger of Allah would
say, "It is because what my eyes see and my heart has stored and for
what the heart of this (Ali (a.s.) will experience after me." They would
ask, "What is it that you have seen and what is it that he will
experience?" The narrator has said that he would write for the two on
the soil, "On this Night, the angels and the spirit descend by the
permission of their Lord with His decree (to determine everyone's
destiny)."

(97:4) The narrator has said that he, the Messenger of Allah would say,
"Has anything else left (untold) after of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, All matters?" The two would say, "No, nothing is left untold." He
then would ask them, "Do you know to who it will be revealed?" The two
would say, "To you, O the Messenger of Allah." He then would say, "Will
there be the Night of Determination after me?" The two would say, "Yes,
there will be that night.

" He then would ask, "To who (the angels and the Spirit will come)?"
The two would say, "We do not know." He then would hold my head and say,
"If the two of you do not know now you must know, he is this after me."
The narrator has said that it is certain that the two would know that
night, after the Messenger of Allah, because of the sever apprehension
that they would go through."

H 648, Ch. 41, h 6 Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated
from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "O the community of
of our followers, debate the opposition by means of chapter ninety seven
of th Holy Quran. We have revealed on the Night of Determination, you
will gain victory. I swear by Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, that
this is the authoritative evidence from Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, against the creatures after the Messenger of Allah. This is the
lead evidence in your religion.

It certainly, is the goal of our knowledge. "O community of our
followers, (the Shi'a) debate the opposition by means of, "I swear by
the illustrious Book (44:2) that We have revealed the Quran on a blessed
night to warn mankind." (44:3) This verse is exclusively about the
people who possess Divine authority after the Messenger of Allah ." "O
cmmunity of our followers, Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has
said, ". . . No nation who lived before was left without a Warner.. .
."(35:24)

A person then said, "O abu Ja'far, the Warner is Muhammad (s.a)" The
Imam (a.s.) said, "What you just said is true.Was there a Warner for the
differennt parts of the land from those he had commissioned, while he
(the Messenger of Allah ) was living?" The person questioning said, "No,
there was no Warner." Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then said, "Consider the person
he comissioned. Was he not his Warner, just as the Messenger of Allah,
in being comissioned from Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, was a
Warner?" The person said, "Yes, it is true."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "In the same way Muhammad (s.a) did not die
without having someone as his delegate and Warner." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "If you would say, "No, it would mean that the Messenger of Allah
has lost his followers who are stil to be born." The person then said,

"Is the Holy Quran not enough for them?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is
enough only if they find A number of our people has narrated from
interpreter for it." The person then assked, "Has the Messenger of Allah
not interpreted it?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, he has done so just for
one man and he has interpreted the conditionns of that man for his
followers. That man is Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.)."

The man asking the question then said, "O abu Ja'far (a.s.), this was a
special matter. Common people are not able to bear it. The Imam (a.s.)
ssaid, "Allah, disdains not being worshipped in secrecy until the time
comes to when His religion becomes public.

It is just as the Messenger of Allah and Khadija would not make their
religion public until they were commanded to do so." The man asking
question then said, "Is it proper for the author of this religion to to
hide?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Did Ali ibn abu Talib not hide his
religion on the day he became a Muslim with the Messenger of Allah until
his matter became public?" He said, "Yes, that was the case." The Imam
(a.s.) then said, "So also is our case (the publicity of Divine
authotrity) until the appointed time will come."

H 649, Ch. 41, h 7

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Allah, Majestic is Whose mention,
created the Night of Determination when He first created the world and
created in it the first prophet that would come and the first executor
of the will (of prophet) that would come.

He decreed that in every year there must be one night in which the
interpretation and the clarification of would be sent until another such
night in the coming year. Whoever would deny it has certainly rejected
the knowledge of Allah, Majestic is Whose mention. It is because the
prophets, the Messengers and Muhadditun (spokesmen for Allah) without
receiving Divine authority through what comes to them on that night
along with the authority that Jibril brings for them (a.s.).

" The narrator has said that he asked the Imams (a.s.), "Do the
Muhaddithun also experience the coming of Jibril and other angels?" The
Imam (a.s.) said, "The prophets and the Messenger (s.a.) certainly,
experience it.

For the others besides the prophets and the Messenger (s.a.) it is
necessary that from the first day the eart h was created to the last of
the perishing of world there must the Divine authority for the people of
the earth that would come down on that night to the one who would be te
most beloved among His servants.

I swear by Allah, the spirit and the angels came with the command on
the Night of Determination to Adam. I swear by Allah, that Adam did not
die until he had the executor of his will. To every prophet after Adam
the command came to them on that night and it was assigned to the
executor of his will after him.

I swear by Allah, if the prophet had to be commanded through that which
that came to them on that night from Adam to Muhammad (s. a) to make a
will in favor of so and so and that Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
has said in His book to the people who possess Divine after Muhammad
(s.a.).

"God has promised the righteously striving believers to appoint them as
His deputies on earth, as He had appointed those who lived before. He
will make the religion that He has chosen for them to stand supreme. He
will replace their fear with peace and security so that they will
worship God alone and consider no one equal to Him. Whoever becomes an
unbeliever after this will be a sinful person." (24:55)

He says that He has made you His deputies in the matter of His
knowledge, religion and worship after His Prophet just as Adam made a
will to appoint the executor of his will after him until the time Allah
sent another prophet. He has said, "so that they will worship God alone
and consider no one equal to Him" He has said that you must worship Him
with faith in the fact that after Muhammad (s.a.) there is no other
prophet. Those who would say otherwise are sinful persons.

He has enabled the people who possess Divine authority with knowledge.
We are such people. Ask us. If we will acknowledge you then be steadfast
but you will not do so. Our knowledge is clear.

The appearance of the appointed time for us in which religion will
stand supreme through us so much so that there will remain no
differences among people for such time there is A number of our people
has narrated from appointed time that pass through the nights and days.
When that time will come, the command of Allah will be only one.

"I swear by Allah, it is already decreed that there will beno
differences among the believers and for this reason they are made to
witness the deeds of the people so that Muhammad (s.a) will be witness
over us and we will be the witness over our followers and our followers
will be witness over the people.
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, disdained to let differences take
place in His judgment or contradictions to take place among those who
possess His knowledge."

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then said the following. "The excellence of the faith
of a believer because of his accepting, "We have revealed it in the
Night of Determination," and its interpretation, over those who are not
like him in the matters of faith in that Night is like the excellence of
man over the animals.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, defends through those who believe
in it from those who disbelieve it in this world-- it is to complete the
punishment for it in the next life for those whom He knows would not
repent from rejecting the same--, just as He defends through those who
strive (Jihad) for His cause those who sit comfortably. I do not know if
there is any Jihad striving for His cause, these days, other than Hajj,
'Umra and to be good neighbors"

H 650, Ch. 41, h 8

The narrator has said that a man said to abu Ja'far (a.s.), "O child of
the Messenger of Allah, "Please do not be angry with m." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Why should I be angry?" The man said, "It is because of the
question that like to ask you." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Ask your
question." He said, "Please do not be angry." The Imam (a.s.) said, "I
will not be angry." The man said, "Consider your words about the 'Night
of Determination' in which the Spirit and the angels descent to the
executors of the will (of Prophet).

Do they bring them the command of which the Messenger of Allah had no
knowledge or bring them the commands that the Messenger of Allah knew?
As you know that the Messenger of Allah died and there was nothing of
his knowledge that Ali (a.s.) had not heard it (and preserved)."

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said, "Why should I bother with you and why someone
let you come in?" He said, "Fate has let me come in, seeking religion."
The Imam (a.s.) said, "Try to understand what I will say."

"When the Messenger of Allah was taken for a trip (by the angels) he
did not come back before Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, taught him
the knowledge of the things of the past and the things in future. A
great deal of such knowledge was in a whole form the interpretation of
which would have to come in the 'Night of Determination'.

In the same Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) had learned the knowledge in a
whole form, the interpretation of which would have had to come in the
'Night of Determination' as was the case with the Messenger of Allah."
The man said, "Was there no interpretation of the whole available?" The
Imam (a. s.) said, "It was available but it comes through the commands
of Allah in the 'Night of Determination' to the Prophet the executor of
his will telling them to do so and so. It is for the matters of which
they already had knowledge, but they receive the command as how to act
in it." The man said, "Explain it to me."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "The Messenger of Allah, before his death had a
whole of knowledge with its interpretation." You said, "What was that
which that would come to him in the 'Night of Determination'?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It was the command and ease in what he already knew." The
man questioning said, "What then happens to them in the 'Night of
Determination' is a knowledge other than what they knew before."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "This is what they are commanded not to tell to
anyone. No one knows the interpretation of what you just asked except
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. The man questioning asked, "Do the
executors of the know what the prophets know?" The Imam (a.s.) said,
"No, because how would the executor of the will would know what is other
than what is willed for."

The man asked, "Can we say that what one executor of the will may know
may not be known another executor of the will?" The Imam (a.s.) said,
"No, because no prophet dies before his knowledge is transferred into
the executor of his will. The angels and the Spirit descend in the
'Night of Determination' with the judgment with which to judge among the
people."

The man asked, "Is it that they did not know that judgment?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Yes, they knew it but they could not approve anything of
it until they were commanded in the 'Night of Determination' how to
accomplish them until the next year." The man said, "O abu Ja'far (a.
s.) I can not deny this." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Those who deny it is
not from us."

The man asked, "O abu Ja'far (a.s.), do you think in the 'Night of
Determination' there would come things to the Holy Prophet (s.a.) that
he did not know?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is not lawful for you to ask
this. However, the knowledge of things in past and the knowledge of the
things in future is as such that no prophet or the executor of the dies
before the executor of will after him would know it.

However, this know about which you ask is as such that Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, withholds and does not allow the executors of the
will to know it by themselves." The man asked, "O child of the Messenger
of Allah, how would I know that the 'Night of Determination' take place
every year?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "When the month of Ramadan comes read
chapter 44 of the Holy Quran once every night. In the twenty third night
you will see the confirmation of what you have asked for."

H 651, Ch. 41, h 9

The narrator has said that abu Ja'far (a.s.) said the following. "You,
certainly, find those whom Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has sent
to induce misfortune into the heretics and misleading people of the army
(followers) of Satan and their companions in greater numbers than those
sent to the deputy of Allah, sent for justice and truth from among the
angels." (In other words, the devils sent to induce bad luck into the
heretics are in greater number than the angels sent with guidance to the
people of Divine authority).

It was said to him, "O abu Ja'far (a.s.), "How can there be anything in
greater number than the angels?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is just as
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has wished." The man asked, "O abu
Ja'far (a.s.), "If I will narrate this Hadith to a few of your followers
they will reject it.

" The Imam (a.s.) asked, "Why they will do so?" The man said, "They
will say that the angels are of greater number than the Devils." The
Imam (a.s.) said, "What say is true. However, try to understand what I
will say." There is no day or night in which all the Devils and all
Satans would not visit the heretic and misleading leaders and of the
same number the angels visit the Imam of true guidance (leaders who
possess Divine authority) until it is the 'Night of Determination'.

On that night of the angels descend to those who possess Divine
authority in a number equal to the number of the Devils and Satan that
Allah has created- or he said, has determined.

The Devils and Satans will come to the corrupt misleading authorities
with fabrications and lies until the perhaps dawn and say, "I saw, this
night, such and such." However, if he would ask about it the one who
possesses Divine authority, he would say, "You have seen a Satan who has
informed of you such and such.

(It is the Devil's thing) until he provides him with one or the other
interpretation and teach him the ways how to mislead people. The
misleading conditions in which he lives. I swear by Allah, those who
acknowledge the 'Night of Determination' they will certainly know that
it (the 'Night of Determination' is exclusively for us.

It is because of th words of the Messenger of Allah to Ali (a.s.) when
the time of his death was about to approach, "This is you guardian who
possess Divine authority after me. If you will obey him, you will enjoy
a well guided way of life. However, those who would not acknowledge what
is in the 'Night of Determination' they would be unbelievers in it.

Those who would have faith in the 'Night of Determination' but do not
hold the opinion that we do, for them to verify it, there is no other
way but to say that it the 'Night of Determination' is for us and those
would not acknowledge it they would be only liars. Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High, is by far exalted than to send the angles with the Spirit
to a sinful unbeliever.

If such people would say that they (angels with the Spirit) come to the
Khalifa in whom believes, this would be of no ground. If they would say,
"No one descends at that night to anyone." The fact is that something
does come to nothing. If they say or will say, "This is nothing." They
have, certainly, strayed far away from the truth."


