Chapter 42 : the Imams (a.s.) Receive Additional (knowledge) Every Friday Night H 652, Ch. 42, H 1
==================================================================================================

Ahmad ibn Idris al-Qummi and Muhammad ibn Yahya have narrated from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Kufi from Musa ibn Sa'dan from 'Abdallah ibn Ayyub
from abu Yahya al-San'ani from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "O abu Yahya, on every Friday night there is a special task
for us to pursue.

" The narrator has said that he asked the Imams (a.s.), ""May Allah
take my soul in service for your cause, of what nature is this special
task?" The Imam (a. s.) said, "The spirits of the deceased prophets and
the spirits of the deceased executors of the will of the prophets and
the spirit of the executor of the will of the Holy Prophet living with
you now are all taken to heavens until they arrive to the throne of
their Lord and then walk around it seven times.

They perform prayers near every column of the columns of the throne, in
a two Rak'at form after which they are returned to their bodies in which
they were before.

The prophets and the executors of the will of the prophets become full
of joy and the executor of the will of the Holy Prophet living with you
receives a huge increase I n his knowledge."

H 653, Ch. 42, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn abu Zahir from Ja'far
ibn Muhammad al- Kufi from Yusuf al-Abzari from al-Mufaddal who has said
the following. "One day abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) addressed me with a
surname, "O abu 'Abdallah, -he would address me this way before- and I
responded, "Yes, O Imam, here I am.

" He said, "Every Friday night it's a time of happiness for us." I
said, "May Allah increase such a happiness for you. Of what nature is
this happiness?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "When Friday night comes the
Messenger of Allah arrives to the throne of Allah and the Imams (the
leaders who has said the following.

possess Divine authority) also arrive there with him and we also arrive
with them. Our souls are returned back to our bodies only after
receiving very new useful knowledge without which we would already be
left without of knowledge."

H 654, Ch. 42, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Salama ibn al-Khattab from
'Abdallah ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn ibn Ahmad al-Minqari from Yunus or
al-Mufaddal from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"There is no Friday night in which except that in it there is joy and
happiness for those who possess Divine authority." I asked, "How is it,
"May Allah take my soul in service for your cause?" The Imam (a.s.)
said, "When Frinday night comes the Messenger of Allah arrives to the
throne with the Imams (a.s.) and I also arrive there with them.


I do not return before receiving new knowledge without which I would
have already be left without out of knowledge."


**Chapter 43 : Would the Imams (a.s.) not receive new knowledge their
previous know would be Exhausted H 655, Ch. 43, h 1**

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Safwan ibn Yahya who has
said that he heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the following. "Would we not
receive (new knowledge) we would diminish (in knowledge)."

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Khalid from Safwan from abu a1-Hassan (a.s.) a similar Hadith.

H 656, Ch. 43, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yabya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from an-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from Dharih
al-Muharibi who has said that abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said to him the
following. "O Dharih, "Would we not receive (new knowledge) we will
diminish (in knowledge)."said:

H 657, Ch. 43, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from abu Nasr
from Tha'labah from Zurarah who has said that he heard abu Ja'far (a.s.)
say the following.

"Would we not receive additional (knowledge) we would diminish (in
knowledge)." The narrator has said that he asked the Imams (a.s.) "Do
receive additional something that the Messenger of Allah does not know?"
The Imam (a.s.) said, "The fact of the matter is that when that happens,
it is presented to the Messenger of Allah then to the Imams and then it
reaches us."

H 658, Ch. 43, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus ibn 'Abd
al-Rahman from some of his people from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following. "Nothing comes from Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
except that first it begins with the Messenger of Allah then Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) then the Imams one after the other so that the
last us would not be more knowledgeable than the first of us."


