Chapter 44 : the Imams Know All the Knowledge That Has Come To the Angels, the Prophets and the Messenger H 659, Ch. 44, H 1
============================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from Sahl ibn Ziyad from
Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Shammun from 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd al-Rahman
from 'Abdallah ibn al-Qasim from Sama'a from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following. "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has two
kinds of knowledge.

One kind is that which is revealed to the angels, the prophets the
Messenger of Allah. Whatever is revealed to the angels, the Messenger of
Allah and the prophets, is known to us also. The other is the kind which
is exclusively for Allah. When Allah wants to make public anything from
it is taught to us first and it is presented to the Imams before us
also."

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Musa ibn al-Qasim and Muhammad ibn Yahya from al-'Amrakiy ibn
Ali all of them from Ali ibn Ja'far from his brother Musa ibn Ja'far
(a.s.) a similar Hadith.

H 660, Ch. 44, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn abu Hamzah
from abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.
"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has two kinds of knowledge.

One kind is His only and no creature knows about it. The other kind is
that which He has thrown unto His angels and His Messenger. Whatever is
thrown to the angels and the Messengers have reached us."

H 661, Ch. 44, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Salih ibn al-Sindi from Ja'far ibn
Bashir from Durays who has said that he heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the
following. "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has two kinds of
knowledge.

One kind is that which is granted and the kind is that which I
withheld. Of the one which, is granted, nothing is known to the angels
and the Messengers, but only we know it. The one which is withheld iis
the kind that is before Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High in the
original Book. When it appears it permeates." come of Allah said:

H 662, Ch. 44, h 4

Abu Ali al-Ash'ari has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabber from
Muhammad ibn Isma'il from Ali ibn al-Nu'man from Suwayd al-Qalla from
abu Ayyub from abu Basir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has two kinds of knowledge. One
kind of knowledge is that which no one knows except He. The other kind
is that which He has taught to the His angels and His messengers.
Whatever His angels and Messengers have learned we know it."


**Chapter 45 : The Unique Ahadith about the hidden facts H 663, Ch. 45,
h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Mu'ammar ibn Khallad who has said that a man from Persia asked abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) the following.

"Do you know al-Ghayb (the hidden facts)?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "abu
Ja'far (a.s.) has said, 'It opens to us then we know it and it is
withheld from us then we do not know." The Imam (a. s.) then said, "It
is the secret of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, who has secretly
given to Jibril and Jibril has secretly given to Muhammad (s.a.) and
Muhammad (s.a.) has secretly given to whoever Allah wished."

H 664, Ch. 45, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from Ali ibn Ri'ab from Sadir al-Sayrafi who
has said that he heard Humran ibn A'yan ask abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the
words of Allah,

the Most Holy, the Most High Allah, ". . . One Who is the Originator of
the heavens and the earth. . ." (6:101) Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said, "Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, originated all things through His
knowledge in unprecedentedly. He Invented the heavens and eath and there
was heavens and earths before.

Have you not considered the words of Allah, ". . .His Throne existed on
water. . ." (11:7) Humran then said, "Have you considered His words,
Majestic is Whose mention, 'He knows the unseen and He does not allow
anyone to know His secrets. . ." (72:26). Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then said, "
except those of His Messengers whom He chooses. (72:26) Muhammad (s.a.),
I swear by Allah, was one of those whom Allah had chosen. However, there
are His words "He knows the hidden facts."

The fact that Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, through what is
hidden from His creatures of the things that He measures and determines
and decrees in His knowledge before creating it and before assigning to
the angels it is because of the following.

O Humran, there is the knowledge withheld before Him in which He has a
wish. He then decrees it when He wills. Bada' may take place in it and
He then will not decree it. The knowledge that, however, Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, measures and determines and approves is the
knowledge that reaches the Messenger of Allah and then it reaches us."

H 665, Ch. 45, h 3

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from 'Abbad
ibn Sulayman from Muhammad ibn Sulayman from his father from Sadir who
has said that he, abu Basir, Yahya al-Bazzaz and Dawud ibn Kathir were
in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a. s.). The Imam (a.s.) came to us
while he was angry.

When he settled in his seat he then said, "How strange is it that
certain people think we know the hidden facts. No one knows the hidden
things except Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.

I thought to discipline our house maid, so and so, and could not find
in which quarter she was." Sadir has said, "When the meeting was over
and the Imam (a.s.) went home, I, abu Basir and Muyassir went to his
house.

We said to him, "May Allah take our souls in service for your cause, we
heard you say so and so about the matter of your house maid but we know
that you have a great deal of knowledge. We do not say that you possess
the knowledge of (al-Ghayb) hidden facts.

" The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) said, "O Sadir, Do you not
read the Holy Quran?" I said, "Yes, I do read the Holy Quran." The Imam
(a.s.) then asked, "In your reading have you found the following words
of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High? "The one who had knowledge from
the Book said, "I can bring it to you before you even blink your eye. .
. ." (27:40) The narrator has said that he said that he has read those
words.

The Imam (a. s.) asked, "Do you know who the man is? Do you know how
much knowledge of the Book he had?" The narrator has said that he asked
the Imams (a.s.) "Please tell me about his knowledge." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "His knowledge of the Book was like one drop compared to the green
ocean (Atlantic). The narrator has said that he said, "May Allah take my
soul in service for your cause, that is very little.."

The Imam (a.s.) then said, "O Sadir, say, "What a great knowledge is
that when Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, would ascribe to a
knowledge that I am about to speak of to you. Have you found in the book
of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, the following. "Say, "God and
those who have the knowledge of the Book are sufficient witness (to my
prophethood)." (13:43)

The narrator has said that he said to the Imams (a.s.), "Yes. "May
Allah take my soul in service for your cause, I have read it."

The Imam (a.s.) then said, "Is the knowledge of one who possesses the
knowledge of the whole book greater or that of the one who possesses
some knowledge of the Book?" I said, "The knowledge of one who possesses
the knolwedge of the whole book is greater." The narrator has said that
the Imam (a.s.) pointing to his chest said, "The knowledge of the whole
Book, I swear by Allah, is with us. The knowledge of the whole Book, I
swear by Allah, is with us."

H 666, Ch. 45, h 4

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from Ahmad
ibn a1- Hassan ibn Ali from 'Amr ibn Sa'id from Musaddiq ibn Sadaqa from
'Ammar al-Sabati who has said that he asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the
following. "Dose the Imam have the knowledge of the hidden facts?" The
Imam (a.s.) said, "No, he does not have such knowledge but if he would
like to know about a thing Allah grants him such knowledge."


