Chapter 4 : the Issue That Allah's Holding People Accountable Remains Unjustified Without the Imam H 424, Ch. 4, H 1
====================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya al-'Attar has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
'Isa from ibn abu 'Amayr from al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from Dawud al-Riqqi
from the pious man (a.s.) the following "Allah's holding people
accountable remains unjustified without the Imam who would teach people
about Him."

H 425, Ch. 4, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' who has said the following.

"Allah's holding people accountable remains unjustified without the
Imam who would teach people about Him."

H 426, Ch. 4, h 3

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from 'Abbad
ibn Sulayman from Sa'd ibn Sa'd from Muhammad ibn 'Ammara from abu
al-Hassan al-Rida (a. s.) who has said the following.

"Allah's holding people accountable remains unjustified without the
Imam who would teach people about Him."

H 427, Ch. 4, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Barqi
from Khalaf ibn Hammad from 'Aban ibn Taghlib from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who has said the following. "A person with Divine authority is before
the people, with the people and after the people."


**Chapter 5 : The Issue that the Earth at no time is without a Person
with Divine Authority H 428, Ch. 5, h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Muhammad ibn abu 'Umayr from al-Husayn ibn abu al-'Ala' who has
said the following.

"I abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Can there be a time on earth without Imam?"
The Imam said, "No, it can not be without Imam." I asked, "Can there be
two Imams at a time?" He said, "No, unless one is quite."

H 429, Ch. 5, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Muhammad ibn abu
'Umayr from Mansur ibn Yunus and Su'dan ibn Muslim from Ishaq ibn
'Ammara from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"I heard the Imam (a.s.) saying, 'The earth is never left without an
Imam so that if the believers would add any thing it would be brought
back and if they would reduce anything it would be completed."

H 430, Ch. 5, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn
al-Hakam from Rabi' ibn Muhammad al-Musalliy from 'Abdallah ibn Sulayman
al- 'Amiriy from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The earth has never been without a person with Divine authority who
would teach people about the lawful and unlawful matters and call them
to the path of Allah."

H 431, Ch. 5, h 4

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from al-Husayn ibn
abu 'Ala' from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Can the earth be without Imam?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "No, it can be
without Imam."

H 432, Ch. 5, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus ibn
Muskan from abu Basir from one of them (Imams (a.s.), who has said the
following "Allah does not leave the earth without a 'Alim (scholar).
Without this the truth would not be distinguished from falsehood."

H 433, Ch. 5, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu
Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following "Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, is far greater and above leaving the earth
without an Imam of justice."

H 434, Ch. 5, h 7

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from al-Hassan ibn
Mahbub from abu 'Usama and Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father from
al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from abu 'Usama and Hisham ibn salim from abu Hamza
from abu Ishaq from those reliable among the companions of Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) who has said the following.

"O Lord. You do not leave your earth without a person who would
represent Your authority among the people."

H 435, Ch. 5, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn al- Fudayl from abu Hamza from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has
said the following.

"I swear to Allah that He has not, from the day Adam died, left the
earth without an Imam who would guide people to the Lord as with divine
authority over the servants of the Lord. The earth will never remain
without an Imam with Divine authority over His servants."

H 436, Ch. 5, h 9

Al-Hassan ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from some of our people from abu Ali ibn Rashid from abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) who has said the following.

" The earth is never without a person with divine authority and I swear
to Allah that I am the person with Divine authority."

H 437, Ch. 5, h 10

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from al-Fudayl from
ibn abu Hamza who has said the following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Can the earth be left without the
Imam?'" The Imam (a.s.) replied, " Were to remain without Imam it would
obliterate its inhabitants."

H 438, Ch. 5, h 11

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'isa from Muhammad
al-Fudayl who has said the following.

"I asked abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.), 'Can the remain without Imam?'"
He replied, "No, it will not remain so." I then said, "We narrate from
Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) that the earth will not remain without Imam
unless Allah becomes extremely angry with the people of the earth or
with His servants." The Imam (a.s.) said, "In such condition it will not
remain but it would obliterate with its inhabitants."

H 439, Ch. 5, h 12

Ali has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from abu 'Abd al\_Mu'min from
abu Harassa from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Would the Imam be taken away from the earth it will create waves
against her inhabitants just like what the inhabitants of the ocean
face."

H 440, Ch. 5, h 13

Al-Husayn ibn Ali has narrated from Muhammad from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad
from al- Washsha' who has said the following.

"I asked al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.), "I can the earth remain without
Imam?" The Imam (a.s.) replied, "No, it will not remain so." I said, "We
narrate that it will not remain without the Imam unless Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, becomes angry with the people." The Imam said, "In
such condition it will not remain but it will obliterate its
inhabitants."


