Chapter 6 : the Issue That Even If Only Two People Would Remain On Earth One of Them Would Certainly Be the Imam, the Person With Divine Authority H 441, Ch. 6, H 1
====================================================================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Sinan from ibn al-Tayyar who has said the following.

"I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying, 'Would there remain no one on
earth except two persons one of them would certainly be the person with
Divine authority."

H 442, Ch. 6, h 2

Ahmad ibn Idris and Muhammad ibn Yahya together have narrated from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from abu 'Ubayd from Muhammad
ibn Sinan from abu Hamza ibn al-Tayyar from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following. "Would there remain only two people on earth, one of
them would the person with divine authority over the other."

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad
ibn 'Isa a similar Hadith.

H 443, Ch. 6, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from those who he has mentioned from
al-Hassan ibn Musa al-Khashshab from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from Kiram from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"If of all the people there will remain only two man one of them will
be the Imam. He also said, 'The last person to die will be the Imam
(a.s.) so that no one could complain against Allah leaving him without
Imam, the person with Divine authority over him.'"

H 444, Ch. 6, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi
from Ali ibn Isma'il from ibn Sinan from Hamza ibn al-Tayyar who has
said the following.

"I heard Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying, 'Would there remain on earth
no one except two people one of them will be the person with Divine
authority or the second one will be the person with Divine authority
(uncertainty is from the narrator)."

H 445, Ch. 6, h 5

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
al-Nahdi from his father from Yunus ibn ya'qub from abu 'Abdallah who
has said the following. "Would there remain no one except two people one
of them will certainly be the Imam."


**Chapter 7 : Knowing the Imam (a.s.) and Belief in His Divine
Authority H 446, Ch. 7, h 1**

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan ibn Ali
al- Washsha' who has said that Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl narrated to me
from abu Hamza from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Only those who know Allah worship Him. Those who do not know Allah
they worship Him just like that in misguidance." I then asked, may Allah
take my soul in service for your cause, what the knowledge about
Allah?"

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Knowledge about Allah means is to acknowledge
the existence of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, to acknowledge His
messenger and to love Imam Ali (a.s.). Of such knowledge is to follow
him and the Imams of guidance and to denounce before Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, their (Imams') enemies. This is how the knowledge
about Allah is."

H 447, Ch. 7, h 2

Al-Husayn has narrated from Mu'alla al-Hassan ibn Ali from Ahmad ibn
'A'idh from his father from 'Udhayna who has said that more than one
person has narrated to us from one the two Imams (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"One will not be considered a Mu'min until he knows Allah, His
Messenger and all of the Imams and the Imam of ones time, acknowledges
his Divine authority and submits his affairs to the Imam (a.s.)." He
then said, "How would one know the last one when one is ignorant of the
first one."

H 448, Ch. 7, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan
ibn Mahbub from Hisham ibn Salim from Zurara who has said the
following.

"I said to abu Ja'far (a.s.), 'Is knowing the Imam from among you
obligatory on all creatures?'" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, sent Muhammad to all people as His Messenger and as
His authority over all creatures on earth. Those who have faith in Allah
and that Muhammad is His Messenger and have followed him and have
acknowledged his message on such people it is obligatory to the Imam
from us.

Those who do not have faith in Allah and in His messenger and who do
not follow him and do not acknowledge him and do not acknowledge the
rights of Allah and His messenger then knowing the Imam (a.s.) would be
obligatory on them? They do not have faith in Allah and in His
messenger, do not follow him and do not acknowledge their rights."

I then asked, "What would you say about those who have faith in Allah
and His messenger who acknowledge His messenger in all the matters that
have come from Allah, is it obligatory for them to know the Imam (a.s.)
from you?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, it is obligatory.

Do they not know so and so?" I said, "yes, they do." The Imam (a.s.)
then said, "Do you think Allah is the one who has placed such knowledge
in their hearts? No, I swear to Allah that no one other than Satan has
placed such knowledge in their hearts. I swear to Allah that no one
other than Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has inspired our rights
in hearts of the believers."

H 449, Ch. 7, h 4

From the narrator of the previous Hadith from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from 'Amr ibn abu al-Miqdam from Jabir who has said
the following.

"I heard imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) saying, 'Only those who know Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, and worship Him. It is such people who know
Him and know the Imam from the family of the Holy Prophet (s.a). Those
who do not know Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, and do not know the
Imam from us, Ahlul Bayt, such people only know and worship something
other than Allah just like that in error."

H 450, Ch. 7, h 5

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jaumhur from Faddala ibn Ayyub from Mu'awiya ibn Wahab from
Dhurayh who has said the following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the Imams after the Holy Prophet
(s.a.)." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Amir al-Mu'minin (Ali) (a.s.) was the
Imam. Then al-Hassan (a.s.) was the Imam. Then al-Husayn (a.s.) was the
Imam. Then Ali ibn Al-Husayn (a.s.) was the Imam.

Then Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) was the Imam. One who would deny this
would be as if he has denied the existence of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, and the truthfulness of Prophet Muhammad (s.a)." I asked,
"may Allah take my soul in service for your cause, are you then the
Imam? I repeated it three times." The Imam said, "I only said it to you
so that you will be of the witnesses before Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, on His earth."

H 451, Ch. 7, h 6

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from his father from those whom he mentioned from Muhammad ibn 'Abd
al-Rahman ibn abu Layla from his father from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following.

"You will not be of the people of good deeds until you will know. You
will not know until you acknowledge. You will not acknowledge until you
safeguard the four doors and the first of these doors will not do any
good without the last. The people of the three strayed far away from the
(right) path. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, accepts only the
righteous deeds.

Allah does not accept with one's fulfilling the conditions of the
covenant. Those who remain faithful to Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, about His condition and follow what is prescribed in the covenant
he will receive blessings from Him and He will keep His promise. Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, has informed the people of the path of
guidance and has sanctioned for them the laws of Shari'a as beacons.

He has informed them how to follow the laws. He has said, "I am
All-forgiving to the righteously striving believers who repent and
follow the right guidance." (20:82) "Allah (God) only accepts the
offerings of the pious ones." (5:27)

Those who are pious before Allah about His commandments they meet Allah
as believers in in whatever Prophet has brought to them from Allah. It
is unfortunate that people died before finding guidance. They thought
that they were believers but they became polytheist without realizing
it.

Those who enter the house through the door they are rightly guided.
Those who go other ways they are on the path to destruction. Allah has
connected the obedience to the people of Divine authority with the
obedience to His Messenger and the obedience to His messenger with
obedience to His Own-self. Those who would disregard obedience to the
people of Divine authority they have not obeyed Allah and His
Messenger.

This obedience is the acknowledgment of what Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, has sent. (That you) be well dressed with means of beauty
near every mosque; that you should enter the doors of the houses that
Allah has given permission to be uplifted wherein His names be
mentioned.

Allah has certainly informed you that there are certain man whose
attentions and mind do not deviate from speaking about Allah, prayer and
paying charity because of business and trade attractions. They only fear
the Day in which the hearts and eyes turn upside down.

Allah has appointed the messengers for commands. He then chose them to
acknowledge in His Warning and said, "No nation who lived before was
left without a Warner . . ." (35:25) Stray those who are ignorant and
find the right guidance those who think and understand.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "It is their hearts in
the center which are blind, not their ears." (22:46) How can one does
not see find guidance and how would one understand without thinking?
Follow the Messenger of Allah and his Ahlul Bayt (family) and
acknowledge what Allah has sent and follow the traces of guidance.

They (Ahlul Bayt) are the signs of trust and piety. Know that if a
person would deny Jesus, the son of Mary (a.s.) and acknowledge all the
other prophets such person will not be considered a believer. Follow the
path by the help of the lighthouses and follow the signs from behind the
barriers. Try to perfect the matters of your religion and have faith in
Allah, your Lord."

H 452, Ch. 7, h 7

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Saghir from whom he
has narrated from Rib'i ibn 'Abdallah from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following.

"Allah did not want to let things work except through their means and
reasons. For everything He made a cause, for every cause an explanation,
for every explanation a science, for every science a speaking chapter.
Some people know it and some do not know. It is the messengers of Allah
and we."

H 453, Ch. 7, h 8

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Safwan
ibn Yahya from al-'Ala' ibn Razin from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said
the following.

"I heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) saying, 'Whoever would worship Allah in the
expectation for reward and work hard but without having an Imam for
himself his efforts would not be received acceptance.

Such person is last and straying and Allah would dislike his deeds. The
example of such person is like that of a lost sheep who would stray away
from her herd. She would wonder around during the day and at nightfall
she would see a different flock of sheep with a shepherd and she would
glad and affectionately join it thinking it to be like her own flock.

She would pass the night in their barn but in the morning when the
shepherd let the flock out she could not recognize her flock and
shepherd and begin to wonder in search for her own flock and shepherd
and saw a flock and a shepherd.

She then would rush to the flock with great interest but the shepherd
shouted, 'Go to your own flock and shepherd because you are lost and
wondering.' She then would run back and forth lost and wondering without
a shepherd to show her the grazing areas and the barn. At such time a
wolf would seize the opportunity and would kill her to eat.

Just the same is the case, O Muhammad, those people of this 'Ummah
(nation) who has no Imam from Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, who
is in public and possessing the noble quality of justice. Such people
are lost and straying. If such people would in such a condition their
death would be like that of an unbeliever and hypocrite. O Muhammad,
take notice that the unjust Imams and their followers are far away from
the religion of Allah. They have lost the right path and have mislead
the others.

The deeds that they are like dust blown away by the winds in a stormy
day. They would remain helpless and unable to benefit from their deeds.
Such is straying far away from the right path."

H 454, Ch. 7, h 9

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd al-Rahman from al-Haytham
ibn Waqid from Muqrin who has said the following.

"I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying, 'Ibn al-Kawwa came to Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and asked, "O Amir al-Mu'minin,(what do you say
about; "There will be people on the Heights who know everyone by their
faces . . ." (7:46).

The Imam said, "we will be on the Heights. We will recognize our
supporters from their faces. We are the Heights without whose knowing
there is no other way to know Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.

We are the Heights that Allah on the Day of Judgment will make known to
everyone on the bridge. No one will enter paradise without knowing us
and our knowing them. No one will enter hell except those would not know
us and we will ignore them.

If Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, would want to let people know
Him He may do so but He has made us the door to knowing Him, the bridge,
the path and the aspect to Him. Whoever would deviate from our authority
and guardianship or would consider others more excellent than us such
people will down off the bridge. People are the same in following
guidance.

They are not equal with those who have found the sparkling fountains
with those who have gathered around polluted waters that fall over other
such waters. Such are not equal with those who have found the sparkling
fountains that flow by the order of the Lord without ceasing and
reduction."

H 455, Ch. 7, h 10

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn muhammad from Bakr ibn Salih from al-Rayyan ibn Shabib from yunus
from abu Ayyub al- Khazziz from abu Hamza who has narrated from Imam abu
Ja'far'far (a.s.) the following.

"O abu Hamza, when one of decide to travel for just a few miles he
first finds a guide and direction for himself. Your knowledge of the
paths of heavens is much less than your knowledge of the paths of earth.
You must find a guide for yourself."

H 456, Ch. 7, h 11

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from
Ayyub al-Hurr from abu Basir from Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following about the words of Allah 'Whoever is given wisdom he has
received a great deal of goodness' (2:273) "It means obedience to Allah
and knowin who one's Imam is."

H 457, Ch. 7, h 12

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from aban from abu Basir saying that Imam abu Ja'far'far
(a.s.) said to him the following. "Have you found out who your Imam is?"
I said, "Yes, I swear by Allah, I did so before I left Kufa." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Then it is sufficient for you."

H 458, Ch. 7, h 13

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Isma'il from Mansur ibn Yunus from Burayd who has said that he heard
Imam abu Ja'far (a. s.) said the following about the words of Allah,
"Can the dead to whom We have given life and light so that they may walk
among the people,

be considered equal to those who can never come out of darkness?"
(6:122) The dead do not understand anything 'The light by the help of
which they walk' is the Imam that they follow.' "be considered equal to
those who can never come out of darkness" applies to those who do not
know who their Imam is."

H 459, Ch. 7, h 14

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn 'warma and Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Ali ibn Hassan from
'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir from Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following. "Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) has said, 'Abu 'Abdallah
al-Jadali once came to Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.).

Amir al-mu'minin said to him, "O abu 'Abdallah may I say something to
you about the words of Allah, 'Whoever does a good deed will receive a
better reward than what he has done. He will be secure from the terror
of the Day of Judgment (27:89).

Those who commit evil will be thrown headlong into hell fire. (It will
be said to them) can you expect any recompense other than what you
deserve for your deeds?' (27:90) The man said, "yes, O Amir al-Mu'minin,
please tell me, may Allah take my soul in service for your cause." Amir
al-Mu'mini said, "A good deed means is to acknowledge our Divine
authority and have our love in one's heart. Evil means denying our
Divine authority and harboring in one's heart hatered towards us." Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) then read the verses to him.


