Chapter 8 : the Obligation To Obey the Imams (a.s.) H 460, Ch. 8, H 1
=====================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn 'Isa from
Hariz from Zurara from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The top most matter (in religion) the most noble, the key issue, the
gateway to all affairs and the pleasure of the Most Beneficent , the
Most Holy, the Most High, is obedience to the Imam after finding out who
the Imam is." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, has said, 'One who obeys the Messenger has certainly obeyed God.
You have not been sent to watch over those who turn away from you
(4:80)'"

H 461, Ch. 8, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from al- Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha from Aban ibn 'Uthman from
abu al-Sabah who has said that he heard Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
saying, "I testify that Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) is the Imam obedience to
whom is obligatory by the command of Allah, that al-Hassan (a.s.) is the
Imam obedience to whom is obligatory by the command of Allah, that
al-Husayn is the Imam obedience to whom is obligatory by the command of
Allah, that Ali ibn al-Husayn is the Imam obedience to whom is
obligatory by the command of Allah and that Muhammad ibn Ali is the Imam
obedience to whom is obligatory by the command of Allah."

H 462, Ch. 8, h 3

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from al- Hassan ibn Ali who has said that Hammad ibn 'Uthman
narrated to us from Bashir al-'Attar who has said that he heard Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) saying, "We are the people obedience to whom is
obligatory by the command of Allah and you follow those that people's
responsibility to obey them does not cease because of ignorance and not
knowing them."

H 463, Ch. 8, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from Hammad ibn 'Isa from al-Husayn ibn al\_Mukhtar from some
of our people from Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, "We gave them a great kingdom" 4:58, it means
the obedience that is obligatory."

H 464, Ch. 8, h 5

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Sinan from abu Khalid al-Qammat from abu al\_hassan
al-'Attar who has said that he heard Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying,
"Of the matters common among the successors and the messengers
themselves one is that to obey them all is obligatory."

H 465, Ch. 8, h 6

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn abu 'Umayr from Sayf
ibn ibn 'Umayr from abu al-Sabah al-Kinani who has said that Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"We are a people obedience to whom is obligatory by the command of
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. The Anfal (twenty percent in tax)
is for us and we have been given the authority to choose the best out of
the property seized from the enemy. We are the people very firmly
established in knowledge.

We are the ones who are considered as subject to the jealousy of people
in the following verse of the holy Quran, "Are they jealous of the
favors that God has done to some people? . . . (4:54)

H 466, Ch. 8, h 7

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ali ibn al-Hakam from al-Husayn
ibn abu al-'Ala' whos has said that I mentioned to Imam abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) our expression about the successors (of the Prophets (s.a.))
"That obedience to them is obligatory", the Imam (a.s.) said, 'It is
very true because they are the people about whom Allah,

the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "Believers, obey God, His
Messenger, and your (qualified) leaders. . . .' (4:59) It is they about
whom Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has also said, 'Only God, His
Messenger, and the true believers who are steadfast in prayer and pay
alms, while they kneel during prayer, are your guardians (5:55)'"

H 467, Ch. 8, h 8

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from Mu'ammar ibn Khallad who has said that a man from Persia
asked Imam abu al-Hassan (a.s.) "Is obedience to you obligatory?" The
Imam (a.s.) replied, "Yes, it is obligatory." The man then asked is in
the same way as obedience to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.)?"
The Imam (a.s.) replied "Yes, it is obligatory in the same way,"

H 468, Ch. 8, h 9

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from Ali ibn al-Hakam from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu Basir who
has said that I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the Imams whether
in the matters of the obligation of obedience to them they are all the
same or not. The Imam (a.s.) replied, "Yes, they are all the same."

H 469, Ch. 8, h 10

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Marwak ibn
'Ubayd from Muhammad ibn Zayd al-Tabari who has said the following.

"I was in the presence of Imam al-Rida (a.s.) in Khurasan with a group
of Hashimite people among them was Issshaq ibn Musa ibn 'Isa from
Abbasides and the Imam (a.s.) said to Ishaq, "I hear that people say we
think they are our slaves.

I swear upon my close relation with the holy Prophet (s.a.) that I have
never said such a thing nor Have I ever heard any such thing from my
father and grandfather nor I have received any such report from my (holy
and noble) ancestors who may have said any such thing. But I must say
that people are our slaves in the matters of obedience to us. They are
our friends in religion. Those present here must tell this to those who
are not present here."

H 470, Ch. 8, h 11

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Salih ibn al-Sindi from Ja'far ibn
Bashir from abu Salma who has said that I heard Imam abu 'Abdallah say
the following.

"We are the ones obedience to whom is obligatory by the commands of
Allah. People have no other choice except to know us and they will not
be excused for not knowing us. Those who know us are the true believers
and those who would refuse to acknowledge our Divine authority are
unbelievers.

Those who would not know us and would not acknowledge us are straying
and lost until they return to guidance and affirm the fact that Allah
has made obedience to us obligatory. But if they would die in their
straying condition Allah will deal with the way He would will."

H 471, Ch. 8, h 12

Ali has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from Muhammad ibn
Fudayl who has said that I asked the Imam (a.s.) about such a matter
that would take people closer to Allah.

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Of the matters that can take people closer to
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, the best one is to obey Him, His
messenger and those who posses Divine authority." Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.)
has said, "To love us if faith and to harbor hatred towards us is
disbelief."

H 472, Ch. 8, h 13

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad
ibn 'Isa from Fadala ibn Ayyub from Aban from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan from
'isma'il ibn Jabir who has said the I asked Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) if I
may state before him my religion and faith in Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High. The Imam (a.s.) said, "Say it and let us hear them."

I said, "I testify that there is no god other than Allah Who is One and
has no partner. I testify that Muhammad (s.a.) is the servant and
messenger of Allah. I acknowledge the truth of all that he has brought
from Allah. I testify that Imam (a.s.) was the Imam obedience was and is
obligatory by the command of Allah. After him Imam al-Hassan was the
Imam obedience to whom was and is obligatory by the command of Allah.

After him Imam al-Husayn was and is the Imam obedience to whom was and
is obligatory by the command of Allah. After him Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn
was and is the Imam obedience to whom is obligatory by the command of
Allah. I continued until it was the turn for him and I said, "Then
yourself, may Allah have you in His blessings are such Imam." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "This is the religion that belongs to Allah and it is the
religion of His angels."

H 473, Ch. 8, h 14

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn Mahbub from
Hisham ibn Salim from abu Hamza from abu Ishaq from some of the
companions of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) who has narrated the following
from Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.).

"Know that to establish companionship with the scholar and to follow
him is a religion on account of which Allah will grant rewards.
Obedience to the scholar is the means to gain goodness and to delete
evil deeds. It is the most valuable treasure for the believers. It is
dignifying progress in their life time and after their death because of
it people will speak of him with praise and virtue ."

H 474, Ch. 8, h 15

Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Safwan
ibn Yahya from Mansur ibn Hazim who has the following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Allah is the Most Holy, the Most
High to be recognized through His creatures. In fact, it is the creature
who are recognized through Allah.'" The Imam (a.s.) said you have is
very true."

I then said, "One who knows that he has a creator he must also know
that his creator becomes with certain things and displeased with certain
other things. That the only way to know what is pleases the creator and
what displeases Him is through divine revelation or a messengers.

One who does not receive Divine revelation must find the messenger and
when one would find the messengers and upon finding the messenger one
would learn that they are the Divine authorities and obedience to them
is obligatory. I say it to people, "Do you not acknowledge that
obedience to the holy Prophet possessed Divine authority from Allah over
His creatures?"

They say, "Yes, it is true." I then say to them, "When the holy Prophet
left this world who possessed Divine authority over the people?" The
say, "The holy Quran." I then looked in the holy Quran and I found out
that all kinds of people consider this holy as the basis for their
beliefs.

The group called al-Murji'a consider it as the basis for whatever it
believes. Those who believe in predestination also consider this holy
Book as the basis for whatever they believe in. Even the atheists who do
not even believe in it at all refer to this holy book to defeat the
others.

This proves that the holy Quran can not be considered a Divine
authority without a guardian whose words about the Quran would be the
true ones. I then ask them, "Who is the guardian of the Quran?" They
reply, "Ibn Mas'ud knew the Quran. 'Umar knew the Quran. Hudhayfa knew
the Quran."

I then ask them, "Did these people know all of the Quran?" They say,
"No, they did not know all of the Quran." I do not find anyone who would
say that he knows all of the Quran. The only one who says that he knows
all of the Quran is Ali, may Allah's peace and blessings be upon him. If
any question would arise in these people, that one would say that he did
not know.

The other one would say that he did not know and so on except Ali that
would say that he did know. That gives enough proof to say that Ali was
the guardian of the Quran. Obedience to Ali was obligatory by the
command of Allah and he possessed Divine authority over the people after
the holy Prophet (s.a.).

Whatever Ali (a.s.) said about the holy Quran is true." The Imam said,
"May Allah's blessings be with you." I then said, "Imam Ali (a.s.) did
not leave this world without introducing the person who possessed Divine
authority over the people after him just as the holy Prophet (s. a.) had
done.

The person who possessed Divvine authority over the people after Imam
Ali (a. s.)\_ was Imam al-Hassan (a.s.). I testify that Imam al-Hassan
(a.s.) also did not leave this world without introducing the person who
would possess Divine authority over the people after him just as his
father and grandfather had done.

The person who after Imam al-Hassan possessed Divine authority over the
people was Imam al-Husayn (a.s.). Obedience to him was obligatory by the
command of Allah." The Imam said, "May Allah's blessings be with you." I
then kissed his head and said, "I testify that Imam al-Husayn did not
leave this world without introducing the person who would possess Divine
authority over the people after him.
That person was Imam ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) obedience to whom was
obligatory by the command of Allah. The Imam said, "May Allah's
blessings be with you."

I then kissed his head and said, "I testify that Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn
did not leave this world without introducing the person who would
possess divine authority over the people after him. That person was Imam
abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) , obedience to whom was obligatory
by the commad of Allah. The Imam said, "May Allah's blessings be with
you." I then said, "Please let me kiss your head again." The Imam (a.s.)
smiled. I then said, may Allah grand you success.

I know that your holy father did not leave this world without
introducing the person who would possess Divine authrity over the people
after him just his father had done. I testify that yourself are the
person who possess Divine authrity over the people after your holy
father and that obedience to you is obligatory by the command of
Allah."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is true enough, The Imam said, "May Allah's
blessings be with you." I then asked for his permission to kiss hiis
head and the Imam (a.s.) smiled. I kissed his head. The Imam (a.s.) then
said, "Ask whatever you want. I, from this day on, will never deny you
anything."

H 475, Ch. 8, h 16

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqi from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad al-Jawhari from
al-Husayn ibn abu al-'Ala' who has said the following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Is obedience to the successor (of
the holy Prophet) obligatory?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, it is they
about whom Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "Believers,
obey God, His Messenger, and your (qualified) leaders. . . (4:59) It is
they about whom Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "Only
God, His Messenger, and the true believers who are steadfast in prayer
and pay alms, while they kneel during prayer, are your guardians
(5:55)."

H 476, Ch. 8, h 17

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated fromMuhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus ibn 'Abd
al-Rahamn from Hammad from 'Abd al-A'la' who has said that he hear Imam
abu 'Abdalla (a.s.) saying. "Listening and obeying are the gates to
goodness. One who listens and is obedient has all the authority in his
favor. One who listens but disobeys will have no authority in his
favor.

The leader, the Imam of the Muslims, on the Day of Judgment, in the
presence of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, will have complete
authoritative support and rightful arguments in his favor." The Imam
(a.s.) then said, " Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, says, 'On the
day when We call every nation with their leaders, . . . (17:71)."


