Chapter 9 : the Imams (a.s.) Are Witness For Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, Over His Creature H 477, Ch. 1, H
===================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from ya'qub ibn Yazid
from Ziyad al- Qandi from Suma'a who has said that Imam abu 'Abdallah
has said the following about the words of Allah in the Holu Quran.

"How will it be when We call for a witness from every nation and have
you, (Muhammad), testify against them all?" (4:41) The Imam (a.s.) said
that this verse is was revealed about the followers of Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.) in particular.

In every generation of these people there will an Imam from our family
who would bear witness over their activities and Prophet Muahammad
himself will bear witness over us."

H 478, Ch. 9, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn al- Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'A'idh from 'Umar ibn 'Udhayna
from Buarayd al-'Ili who has said that I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
about the meaning of the words of Allah: "We have made you (true
Muslims) a moderate nation so that you could be (witness) an example for
all people and the Prophet (a witness) an example for you. . . ."
(2:143) The Imam (a.s.) said, "We are the moderate nation and we bear
witness to the activities of the people for Allah and we possess Divine
authority on earth."

I then asked about the meaning following verse of the holy Quran: ". .
. the noble religion of your father, Abraham. God named you Muslims
before and in this Book, so that the Messenger will witness (your
actions). . ." (22:78) The word 'your father' refers to us particularly
we were called Muslims in the heavenly books that were sent before as
well as this book.

The messenger of Allah bears witness over us by means of teaching us
the guidance of Allah and bear witness over the people. Those who would
acknowledge our authority, on the Day of Judgment, we will acknowledge
their faith and those who would reject our Divine authority, one the Day
of Judgment, we will refuse to acknowledge their faith."

H 479, Ch. 9, h 3

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Mu'allah ibn
Muhammad from al- Hassan ibn Ali from Ahmad ibn 'Umar al-Hallal who has
said that he asked Imam abu alHassan (a.s.) about the meaning of the
following verse of the holy Quran:

"Should they be compared with those whose Lord has given them a
guidance which is testified by a witness from among their own people . .
." (11:17) The Imam (a.s.) said, "Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) testified
to support the holy Prophet (s.a.) and the holy Prophet received
supporting evidence from his Lord."

H 480, Ch. 9, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Muhammad ibn abu
'Umayr from ibn 'dhayna from Yazid al-'Ijli who has said that he asked
Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the meaning of the following verse of the
Holy Quran.

"We have made you (true Muslims) a moderate nation so that you could be
(witness) an example for all people and the Prophet (a witness) an
example for you. . . ." (2:143) The Imam (a.s.) said, "We are the
moderate nation and we are the witness for Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, over the activities of His creatures and possess His
authority on earth."

I then asked about the meaning of the following verse of the Holy Quran
that says, "Believers, worship your Lord, bow down and prostrate
yourselves before Him and do virtuous deeds so that perhaps you will
have everlasting happiness. (22:77)

Strive steadfastly for the Cause of God. He has chosen you . .
Believers, worship your Lord, bow down and prostrate yourselves before
Him and do virtuous deeds so that perhaps you will have everlasting
happiness. (22:77)

Strive steadfastly for the Cause of God. He has chosen you but has not
imposed on you hardship in your religion, the noble religion of your
father, Abraham. God named you Muslims before and in this Book, so that
the Messenger will witness (your actions) and you will be the witness
over mankind.

The noble religion also is a reference to us. Allah has called us as
Muslims in the heaven books that were revealed before and in this holy
book (the Holy Quran) The Holy Prophet (s.a.) has testified in our favor
by conveying the message of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.

We bear witness to the activities and on the Day of Judgment certify
the faith of those who have acknowledged our Divine authority and reject
those who have rejected our Divine authority."

H 481, Ch. 9, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn 'Isa from
Ibrahim ibn 'Umar al-Yamani from Sulaym ibn Qays al-Hilali from Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, cleansed us, granted us
protection against sins, made us to bear witness to the activities of
His creatures and granted us Divine authority on earth. He made us to be
with the holy Quran and the Holy Quran to be with us. We do not depart
the Holy Quran and the Holy Quran does not depart us."


**Chapter 10 : The Imams (a.s.) are the only true guides H 482, Ch. 10,
h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd and Fudala ibn Ayyub from
Musa ibn Bakr from al-Fudayl who has said that he asked Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of the words of Allah: "For every
nation there is a guide." (13:7) The Imam (a.s.) said that every Imam is
the guide in his own time."

H 483, Ch. 10, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Muhammad ibn abu
'Umayr from ibn 'Udhayna from Buray al-'Ijli from Ima abu Ja'far (a.s.)
who has said the following about the words of Allah.

"(Muhammad), you are only a Warner. For every nation there is a guide.
(13:7)" The Imam (a. s.) said that at all times there is a guide from us
who guides people to the teachings of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) Of the
guides who possess Divine authority after the holy Prophet (s.a.) is
Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and his successors one after the other."

H 484, Ch. 10, h 3

Al-Husaym ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il from Sa'dan
from abu Basir who has said that he asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
about the meaning of the words of Allah.

"(Muhammad), you are only a Warner. For every nation there is a guide."
(13:7) The Imam (a. s.) said, "The Holy Prophet is the Warner and Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) is the guide. O abu Muhammad, is there a guide
today?" I said, "Yes, may Allah take my soul in service for your cause,
there has always been a guide from you one after the other until this
(noble task) is being carried on by your own self."

The Imam (a.s.) said, "O abu Muhammad, may Allah grand you blessings.
Had it been like the coming of guidance to man and then he would die
with his death the guidance would also die and the whole book would die,
but it lives and it continues with new generations as it has done so
with the people in the past."

H 485, Ch. 10, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from Safwan from Mansur from 'Abd al-Rahim al-Qusayr who has
said that asked Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the meaning of the words of
Allah, ". . . For every nation there is a guide.

(13:7)" The Imam (a.s.) said, "The Holy Prophet (s.a.) is the Warner
and Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) is the guide. Let it be known, I swear by
Allah, that guidance never departed us, it is with us and will always be
with us until the Day of Judgment."


