Chapter 11 : the Imam (a.s.) Possess Divine Authority and the Treasure of Divine Knowledge H 486, Ch. 11, H 1
=============================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya al-'Attar has narrated from Ahmad ibn abu Zahir from
al-Hassan ibn Musa from Ali ibn Hassan from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir
who has said that he heard Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"We are the ones who has said the following possess Divine authority of
the command of Allah, we are the treasury of the knowledge of Allah and
the repository of the revelations of Allah."

H 487, Ch. 11, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Ali ibn Asbat from his father, Asbat from Sawra
ibn Kulayb who has said that Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) said to him the
following.

"I swear to Allah that we are the treasurers of Allah in His heavens
and on His earth but the treasurers of gold or the treasurers of silver
but the treasurers of His knowledge.".

H 488, Ch. 11, h 3

Ali ibn Musa has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn ibn
Sa'id and Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqi from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd in a
marfu' manner from Sudayr who has said that he asked Imam abu Ja'far
(a.s.) the following.

"may Allah take my soul in service for your cause, what are you?" The
Imam (a.s.) said, "We are the treasurers of the knowledge of Allah. We
are the translators of the revelations of Allah. We possess complete
Divine authority over all that is under the heavens and those above the
earth."

H 489, Ch. 12, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from mmd al-Husayn from al-Nadr ibn
Shu'ayb from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu Hamza who has said that he
hear Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the following.

"The Holy Prophet (s.a.) has said that Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, has said, "My authority is completely established among the
unfortunate ones of your followers. Those who would refuse to
acknowledge the Divine authority of Amir al- Mu'minin (a.s.) the his
successors, (they have rejected My authority).

Amir al-Mu'minin (a. s.) and his successors have with your traditions
and the traditions of the prophets before you. They are the treasurers
of My knowledge after you. The Holy Prophet (s.a.) then said, " Jibril
(Gabrael) has informed me of the successors of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.)
and the names of their fathers."

H 490, Ch. 11, h 5

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Muhammad ibn Khalid from Fudala ibn Ayyub from 'Abdallh ibn ya'fur who
has said that Imam abu 'Abdallh (a.s.) said him the following. "O ibn
abu ya'fur, Allah is One and is the only One in His Oneness. He alone
issues His command. He created a creature and appointed and measured
them for that command (Amr, task). We are, O ibn abu ya'fur are that
creature.

We are the authority of Allah over His creatures, the treasurers of His
knowledge and the guardians of it."

H 491, Ch. 11, h 6

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Musa ibn
al-Qasim ibn Mu'awiya and Muhammad ibn Yahya from al-'Amrakiy ibn Ali
altogether from Ali ibn Ja'far from abu al-Hassan Musa (a.s.) who has
said the following. "Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said, 'Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, created us and He made our creation the
best.

He formed us and made our the best. He made us the treasurers of in His
heavens and His earth. For us the tree spoke and with our worship Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, is worshipped. Had we not been in
existence Allah would have been worshipped."


**Chapter 12 : The Imams (a.s.) are the Deputies of Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, on earth and the Gates through which people go
nearer to Allah H 492, Ch. 12, h 1**

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from abu Mas'ud from al-Ja'fari who has
said that he heard abu al- Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) say the following. "
The Imams (a.s.) are the deputies of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, on earth."

H 493, Ch. 12, h 2

Mu'alla has narrated from Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Sulayman ibn Suma'a
from 'Abdallah ibn al-Qasim from abu Basir who has said that Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) said the following. "The successors (of the holy
Prophet (s.a.) are the gates to Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
through which people go to Him.

Had they not existed, Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, would not
have been recognized. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, will present
these successors as evidence against His creatures."

H 494, Ch. 12, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan who has said that he asked abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of the following verse of the Holy
Quran.

"God has promised the righteously striving believers to appoint them as
His deputies on earth, as He had appointed those who lived before. . .
." (24:55) The Imams (a.s.) said, "The people referred to in this verse
are the Imams


