Chapter 13 : the Imams (a.s.) Are the Light of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High H 495, Ch. 13, H 1
=====================================================================================================

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Mirdas who has said that Saffron ibn Yahya and al-Hassan ibn Mahbub
have narrated from abu Ayyub from abu Khalid al-Kabuli who has said that
he asked Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the meaning of the words of Allah
e following.

"Those who believe in him, honor and help him, and follow the light
which is sent down to him, will have everlasting happiness." (7:157) The
Imams (a.s.) said, "O abu Khalid, I swear by Allah that it is the Imams
from the family of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) up to the Day of judgment who
are called light in the above verse. They, I swear by Allah, are the
light of Allah whom He sent down.

It is they, I swear by Allah, who are the light of Allah in the heavens
and in the earth. O abu Khalid, I swear by Allah, that the light of the
Imams (a.s.) in the hearts of the true believers is more bright than the
light of the sun in the midday. They, I swear by Allah, give light to
the hearts of the true believers and Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, may block such light from reaching the hearts of whoever He may
will, thus their hearts remain dark.

O abu Khalid, no one would believe in our Divine authority except that
Allah will cleanse his heart. Allah will not cleanse the heart of a
person until he or she will acknowledge our Divine authority and live in
peace with us.

When one lives in peace with us Allah will safe guard him against the
severity of the day of recockning and grant him security against the
great terror on the Day of Judgment"

H 496, Ch. 13, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated through his chain of narrators from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah that say, There are those who
follow the Messengers, the illiterate Prophet (not conventionally
educated), whose description they find written in the Torah and the
Gospel. [He (the Messengers) enjoins them to do good and forbids them to
do all that is unlawful, makes lawful for them all that is pure and
unlawful all that is filthy, removes their burdens and the entanglements
in which they are involved].

Those who believe in him, honor and help him, and follow the light
which is sent down to him, will have everlasting happiness." (7:157) The
Imams (a.s.) said, "It is Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) and the Imams
(a.s.) after him who are called 'light' in the above verse of the Holy
Quran."

H 497, Ch. 13, h 3

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from ibn
Fudala from Tha'laba ibn Maymun from abu al-Jarud who has said that he
said the following to Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.). "Allah has given a great
deal of good to the people of the heavenly books." The Imam (a.s.) then
asked, "What is it?"

I then said it said in Holy Quran, "We sent Our guidance to them so
that perhaps they might take heed. (28:51) (Some of) the followers of
the Bible believe in the Quran (28:52).

When it is recited to them, they say, "We believe in it. It is the
Truth from our Lord. We were Muslims before it was revealed" (28:53).
These will receive double reward for their forbearance, replacing evil
by virtue, and for their spending for the cause of God." (28:54)

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah has given you also a great deal of good as
He has given to them and he recited, 'Believers, have fear of God and
believe in His Messenger. God will grant you a double share of mercy, a
light by which you can walk, and forgive your sins. God is Allforgiving
and All-merciful.' (57:28) The light mentioned in this verse mean the
Imam (a.s.)who you follow.'"

H 498, Ch. 13, h 4

Ahmad ibn Mahran has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim ibn 'Abdallah
al-Hassani from Ali ibn Asbat and al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from abu Ayyub
from abu Khalid al-kabuli who has said that he asked Imam abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) about the meaning of the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, in the following verse of the Holy Quran.

"Those who believe in him, honor and help him, and follow the light
which is sent down to him, will have everlasting happiness." (7:157) The
Imams (a.s.) said, "O abu Khalid, the light in this verse, I swear by
Allah, means the Imams.

O abu Khalid the light of the Imam (a.s.) in the hearts of the true
believers is more bright than the light of the sun in midday. It is they
who brighten the hearts of the true believers and Allah withholds their
light from reaching whomever He would will, thus, their hearts become
dark and Allah covers them with the darknesss."

H 499, Ch. 13, h 5

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn sham?? From 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd
al-Rahmanal-Asamm from 'Abdallah ibn al-Qasim from salih ibn Sahl
al-Hamadani who has said that abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) has said the
following about the verse of the Holy Quran below.

"God is the light of the heavens and the earth. A metaphor for His
light is a lantern in which there is a lamp placed in a glass. The glass
is like a shining star which is lit from a blessed olive tree that is
neither eastern nor western. Its oil almost lights up even though it has
not been touched by the fire. It is light upon light. God guides to His
light whomever He wants. God uses various metaphors.

He has the knowledge of all things." (24:35) The Imam (a.s.) said that
the lantern metaphorically stands for the Holy lady, Fatima (a.s.), the
lamp stands for Imam al-Hassan (a. s.) and the glass stands for Imam
al-Husayn (a.s.).

The shining star stands for the Holy lady Fatima (a.s.) who shines
among the ladies of the world. The blessed olive tree stands for Prophet
Abraham. Neither eastern nor western means not Jewish nor Christian.

'Its oil almost lights up' means that it almost bursts up with
knowledge. 'Light up on light' means that there will one Imam after the
other Imam (a.s.) 'God guides to His light who ever He wants' means that
Allah guides through the Imams whomever He wants." About 'God uses
various metaphors' I said, "Or it (the deeds of the unbelievers) are
like the darkness of a deep, stormy sea with layers of giant waves,
covered by dark clouds.

It is darkness upon darkness whereby even if one stretches out his
hands he can not see them. One can have no light unless God gives him
light. (24:40)

The Imam (a.s.) said, " 'darkness' refers to the first and his friend,
'with layers of giant waves' refers to the third, 'covered with
darkness' refers to the second. 'it is darkness up on darkness' refers
to Mu'awiya and the disasters caused by the Amavides. 'even if one
stretches out his hands' means that even if a true believer would
stretch his hands in such disastrous condition 'he can not see them'.

'One can have no light unless God gives him light, means the light from
the children of the Holy Lady, Fatima (a.s.) 'Can have no light' means
an Imam on the Day of Judgment." The Imam (a.s.) said that, "On the Day
of Judgment you will see the believers with their light shining in front
of them and to their right. They will be told, "Paradise wherein streams
flow is the glad news for you today.

You will live therein forever. This is the greatest triumph." (57:12),
the shining light in front . . .' is a reference to the Imams (a.s.)
whom would walk in front and on the right of the true believers until
they all enter paradise."

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Musa ibn al-Qasim al-Bajali and Muhammad ibn yahya from
al-'Amrakiy ibn Ali altogether from Ali ibn Ja'far (a.s.) from his
brother a similar Hadith.

H 500, Ch. 13, h 6

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from al-husayn ibn 'Ubadallah from
Muhammad ibn al-Hassan and Musa ibn 'umar from al-hassan ibn Mahbub from
Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl who has said that he asked abu al-Hassan (a.s.)
about the meaning of the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
in the following verse of the Holy Quran.

"They want to put out the light of God with their mouths, but God will
certainly make His light shine forever - even though the unbelievers may
dislike this." (61:8) The Imam (a.s.) said, "They want to put out the
divine authority of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) with their mouths.

'but Allah completes His light' means the Imams (a.s.) as mentioned in,
"Those who believe in him, honor and help him, and follow the light
which is sent down to him, will have everlasting happiness." (7:157) The
light stands for Imam (a.s.)."


**Chapter 14 : The Imams are the corner stone on earth H 501, Ch. 14, h
1**

Ahmad ibn Mahran from Muhammad ibn Ali and Muhammad ibn Yahya from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad altogether from Muhammad ibn Sinan from al-Mufaddal
ibn 'Umar from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Whatever Imam Ali (a.s.) has brought I follow them entirely and
whatever he has forbidden I desist from them altogether. Whatever virtue
that were found in the Holy Prophet (s.a.) were found in Imam Ali (a.s.)
also. The Holy Prophet was more virtuous than all of the creatures of
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.

Those turning away from any item of his (Imam Ali) guidance would be
like one turning away from the guidance of Allah and His Prophet.
Rejecting him in small or a great one matters would like considering
things like Allah (shirk). Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) was the gate to
Allah through which only, people could go closer to Him.

Imam Ali (a.s.) was the path that if one would ignore it he would have
been destroyed. This is also true of all the Imams of guidance one after
the other. Allah has made them as the cornerstones of the earth so that
people on it would not be destroyed. They possess the doubtless Divine
authority over the inhabitants of earth and those below the earth.

Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) would very often say, "I am the supervisor
for Allah to see who should go to Paradise and who should go to Hell. I
am the greatest criterion, the possessor of the staff and the (marking)
seal Miysam All the angels and the spirit have acknowledged the
existence in me of all the matters that they had acknowledge in Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.).

I am held responsible for all such matters that Prophet Muhammad (s.a.)
was held responsible. Such responsibilities are the duties to Allah, the
Lord. The Holy Prophet will be called upon and his call will be
accepted.

I will be called up on and my call will be accepted. The Holy Prophet
will be made to speak and I will be made to speak and I will speak just
the way he would speak. I have been given certain distinctions which are
given to no one before me.

I was taught all about the deaths, the sufferings, the genealogy of
people and clear speech. I have not missed any of the knowledge that
have passed me by and nothing of the future is unseen or unknown to me.
I give good news by the permission of Allah and do my duty towards
Allah. All of these is from Allah Who has made it possible for me
through His knowledge."

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Muhammad ibn Jumhur al-'Ammi from Muhammad ibn Sinan who
has said that al-Mufaddal narrated to us from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). He
then narrated the above Hadith.

H 502, Ch. 14, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Muhammad ibn al-Walid Shabab al-Sayrafi who has said that
Sa'id' al-A'raj has said that he and Sulayman ibn Khalid once went to
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and al-A'raj began the conversation as follows.

"Whatever Imam Ali (a.s.) has brought is followed entirely and whatever
he has forbidden is desisted from altogether. Whatever virtue that were
found in the Holy Prophet (s.a.) were found in Imam Ali (a.s.) also. The
Holy Prophet was more virtuous than all of the creatures of Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High.

Those who would find faults any item of his (Imam Ali) guidance would
be like one finding faults in the guidance of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High and His Prophet. Rejecting him in small or a great matters
would be like considering things similar to Allah (shirk). Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) was the gate to Allah through which only, people
can get closer to Him.

Imam Ali (a.s.) was the path that if one would ignore it he would have
been destroyed. This is also true of all the Imams of guidance one after
the other. Allah has made them as the cornerstones of the earth so that
people on it would not be destroyed. They possess the doubtless Divine
authority over the inhabitants of earth and those below the earth.

Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) has said, "I am the supervisor for Allah to
see who should go to Paradise and who should go to Hell. I am the
greatest criterion, the possessor of the staff and the (marking) seal
Miysam All the angels and the spirit have acknowledged the existence in
me of all the matters that they had acknowledge in Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.).

I am held responsible for all such matters that Prophet Muhammad (s.a.)
was held responsible. Such responsibilities are the duties to Allah, the
Lord. The Holy Prophet will be called upon and his call will be
accepted. I will be called up on and I my call will be accepted. The
Holy Prophet will be made to speak, and I will be made to speak and I
will speak just the way he would speak. I have been given certain
distinctions which, are given to no one before me.

I was taught all about the deaths, the sufferings, the genealogy of
people and clear speech. I have not missed any of the knowledge that
have passed me by and nothing of the future is unseen or unknown to me.
I give good news by the permission of Allah and do my duty towards
Allah. All of these is from Allah Who has made it possible for me
through His knowledge."

H 503, Ch. 14, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya and Ahmad ibn Muhammad both have narrated from
Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from Ali ibn Hassa'n who has said that abu
'Abdallah al-Riyahi narrated to him from abu al-Samit al-Hulwani from
abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the virtue of Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) the
following Hadith. "Whatever Imam Ali (a.s.) has brought I follow them
entirely and whatever he has forbidden I desist from them altogether.

All that is true of the obedience to the Holy Prophet (s.a.) is true of
the obedience to Imam Ali (a.s.) after the Holy Prophet (s.a.) but
virtue belongs to Prophet Muhammad (s.a.). Those who would try to be
ahead of Imam Ali (a.s.) would be considered as trying to be ahead of
Prophet (s.a.). Those who would to show themselves as more virtuous than
Imam Ali (a.s.) would be considered as trying to show themselves as more
virtuous than the Holy Prophet (s.a.).

Whoever would reject any of the small or great items of the guidance of
Imam Ali (a.s.) he would be like considering things as similar (shirk)
to Allah.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.) is the gate through which people can go to
Allah. He is the path that if chosen would lead to Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High. The same was true of Imam Ali (a.s.) after the Holy
Prophet (s.a.). All such matters were true of the Imams (a.s.) one after
the other.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has made them the cornerstone of
the earth so that its inhabitants would not be destroyed. They were the
pillars of Islam and the connection in the path of guidance. No guide
can be a guide without their guidance and one would go astray unless he
would ignore the rights of these Imams (a.s.).

They are the trustees of Allah over whatever knowledge, warning and
excuses that have been revealed to them (from the heavens). They possess
the doubtless Divine authority over those on earth. Whatever, (virtue
and authority) is found in one of them is true of all of them and no one
can reach such a stage without support from Allah.

Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) has said, "I am the supervisor for Allah
over Paradise and Hell. No one would go either one without my
supervision. I am the greatest criterion and the Imam for those after me
the provider of relief for those before me. No one is permitted to be
ahead of me except Ahmad (s.a.). I and he are on the same path except
that he is called Ahmed (the most praiseworthy). I have been given six
things.

I have been the knowledge of deaths, that of the sufferings, that of
the wills and the clear speech. That I have been give the power to
attack the enemy, the power subdue the adversary, that I am the owner of
the staff and Maysam and the being that would speak to people."

(a reference to verse 82 of chapter 27 of Quran) "When the word about
them comes true We shall make a creature appear to them on earth who
will tell them that people had no faith in Our revelations." (27:82)


