(iii) Arab Polytheists Who Were Not the Followers of the Book
=============================================================

This view has existed among the exegetes of the ancient times. In
Majma\` al-Bayan, under verse 20 of Surat "Ali-\`Imran" of the Holy
Qur'an, "ummiyyin"has been placed against "Ahl al-Kitab" This view is
described as that of the Companion and great exegete, \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas. Under verse 78 of the Surat Al-Baqarah, Abu \`Ubaydah states',
a similar view.

It follows from what is understood from verse 75 of Surat Ali-\`Imran
that Al-Tabarsi himself has selected the meaning for the verse. In his
book: "Al-Kashshaf", AI-Zamakhshari has provided a similar
interpretation of this verse and of verse 75 of the Surat Ali-Imran.
Fakhr al-Razi mentions the same possibility under the verse 78 of the
Surat al-Baqarah and verse 20 of the Surat Ali-\`Imran.

But the fact is that this meaning is not different from the first one.
However, it is not correct that a people who do not follow a divine
book, be referred to as "ummi" although they may be literate. This term
has been applied to Arab polytheists because they were illiterate. What
constituted the basis for applying this term to Arab polytheists was
their unfamiliarity with reading and writing rather than their not
following a heavenly book.

Hence, wherever this word has been used in the plural form and applied
to Arab polytheists, this possibility has been mentioned: but wherever
it has been used in the singular form and applied to the Holy Prophet
(SA), no interpreter has said that the significance is that the Prophet
(SA) did not follow one of the heavenly book. In this case, the
possibilities are only two at the most. One is that the Prophet (SA) was
not familiar with handwriting, and the other was that he was from
Makkah. Since, for the conclusive reasons enumerated above, the second
possibility is ruled out, definitely the Prophet (SA) was called "ummi"
because he had not been taught, nor did he know how to write.

Here, there is a fourth possibility in regard to the meaning of the
word: this being that the word meant unfamiliarity with the texts of
holy books. This possibility, is the one that Dr Sayyid \`Abd al-Latif
has innovated, and that he confused it with the third one that we have
mentioned, quoting the ancient exegetes. The aforementioned person
says:

"The words "ummi" and "ummiyyin" have been used at several places (in
the Holy Qur'an) but they have always been used to mean the same
everywhere. Lexicographically the term "ummi" means a "newly-born baby"
from a mother's womb. It is with reference to this state of living and
life, that the word "ummi" came to imply:" one who can neither read nor
write. The word "ummi" also means "a person who lived in "Umm al-Qura".
"Umm al-Qura" means "the mother of cities", "capital city", and
"metropolis". This was the attribute the Arabs of the Prophet's (SA)
time associated with Makkah. Therefore, whoever was from Makkah was
referred to as "ummi ".

Another area of application of the word "ummi" is to a person who has
not been conversant with Semitic texts nor been a follower of Judaism or
Christianity which has been referred to as "Ahl al-Kitab" in the Holy
Qur'an. In the Holy Qur'an, the word "ummiyyin" was applied to the
pre-Islamic Arabs who neither had a holy book nor followed the New
Testament and the Old Testament, and that the word was used for Ahl
al-Kitdab ".

While there are so many meanings for the word "ummi" it is not known
why the exegetes and translators of the Holy Qur'an, Muslim or
non-Muslim, have picked up the meaning namely, "a newly-born baby
unaware to his environment" and interpreted it as illiterate and
ignorant, and as a consequence, have introduced [^29] the pre-Islam
inhabitants of Makkah as "ummiyyin", or "an illiterate people".

Firstly, since the earliest days, the Islamic exegetes have interpreted
the words "ummi" and "ummiyyin" in three ways, and have come up with at
least three possibilities Contrary to Dr Sayyid \`Abd al-Latif, Islamic
exegetes have not given one single meaning.

Secondly, no one has said that the word "ummi" means a newly-born baby
unaware of his surroundings "whose connotation is that a person who can
neither read nor write. Basically, this is not applied to a newly-born
baby, but rather to an adult who knows as much about the skills of
reading and writing as when he is just newly-born. As referred to by
logicians, the word signifies "absence and second nature". Islamic
logicians would always mention this word as one of the examples of
"absence and second nature" in books of logic.

Thirdly, it is not true to say: "the word is also used to mean a person
who has no familiarity with ancient Semitic texts". What can actually be
inferred from the sayings of early exegetes and lexicologists is that
the plural form of the word (ummiyyin) has been used for the Arab
polytheists who were generally illiterate, as compared with the "people
of the book". The polytheists were perhaps given this humiliating title
by the Jews and the Christians.

On the whole, it is illogical to call a people "ummi" who can read and
write in their own language, just on the basis of unfamiliarity with a
certain book or language. The root of the word is "umm" or "ummah" and
implies remaining in the same state as when one is born.

But why this word "ummi" has not been recognised as being rooted in
"Umm al-Qura", although the possibility has been mentioned consistently,
is because of numerous objections which have been mentioned earlier. The
Indian scholar's amazement is therefore baseless. It is confirmed by the
fact that in some other usages of this word, recorded in books of
history and ahadith, there is no other meaning for it except "untaught".
In the book: "Bihar al-Anwar", vol 16, p 119, it is narrated from the
Holy Prophet (SA): "We are a people who neither read nor write". In vol
4 of his history book, under the biography of Muhammad ibn \`Abd
al-Malik, popularly known as Ibn Al-Zayyat, a minister of Al-Mu'tasim
and Al-Mutawakkil, Ibn Khallikan writes:

"Earlier he was among the secretaries of Al-Mu'tasim, the \`Abbassid
Caliph, and Ahmad ibn Shadi Al-Basri was the minister. Once a letter
came to Al-Mu'tasim, which the minister read for the Caliph. The word
"kala' " was in the letter and Al-Mu'tasim, who was not a knowledgeable
person, asked his minister for its meaning. The minister didn't know the
meaning either. The Caliph said: "An untaught Caliph and an ignorant
minister". Then he asked for one of the secrataries to come.

Ibn Al-Zayyat was present and came for explaining the meaning of the
word. He explained through some other words which were closer to the
meaning and stated their differences. This formed a prelude for him to
become the Caliph's minister later on." Here, the Caliph, who spoke the
language of the ordinary people, meant "untaught" when he used the word
"ummi". The poet Nizami says as given below: Wisdom is inferior to the
Messenger Ahmad, The two worlds depend on the existence of Muhammad.

He is unschooled but stating in the most fluent way, The inclusive
knowledge from Adam to Jesus, I say.

In the keeping of a promise he is perfectly steadfast, Ahead of all
prophets he was though among them he was the last. [^22]. "Rawshanfikr",
issue no 8 and 15, October 1965 and the Publication of the Society of
the Headclerks. November 1965 (copied from the Publication of the
Ministry of Education and Training, September 1965).

[^23]. Al-Raghib Al-Isfahani, Mufradat Alfaz al-Qur'an Al-Taqaddum
al-'Arabi Press, November 1972, under the word "umm" and Exegesis of the
Holy Quran : Majma' al-Bayan, under the verse 78 of Surat Al-Baqarah.

[^24]. Exegesis of the Holy Qur'an: "Majma' al-Bayan, verse 78 of "Surat
Al-Baqarah ".

[^25]. Exegesis of the Holy Qur'an: Majma' al-Bayan, under the verse 75
of Surat Ali 'Imran and verse 157 of Surat Al-A'raf; and Tafsir al-Razi,
under the verse 75 of Surat Al-A'raf.

[^26]. The Magazine published by the Astani Qudsi Razavi, Mashhad, issue
no 2.

[^27]. Ibid.

[^28]. One of the narrations confirms the word "ummi" as a derivative of
"Umm al-Qura" meaning Makkah, although the word "Umm al-Qura" is a
common attribute and not a proper noun. The narration states: "The
Prophet was known as "Ummi" because he was an inhabitant of Makkah and
Makkah is one of the "Umm al-Quras",

[^29]. The publication of the society of the Headclerks, issue of
October 1965 (copied from the publication of the Ministry of Education
and Training, September 1965).


