Historical Facts and Ahadith
============================

Dr Sayyid \`Abd al-Latif claims that it is possible to prove, through
historical facts and traditions, that the Prophet (SA) used to read and
write. He supports this by two facts.

(1) He states: "Al-Bukhari relates within the narrations and ahadith
recorded in the Chapter: "Al-Ilm" (the knowledge that the Prophet (SA)
gave 'Ali, his son-in-law, a secret letter and told specifically not to
open it, but have the name of the recipient in his mind and hand him
over the letter.

Who else other than the Prophet could have written the letter while
even 'Ali, his son-in-law and his trusted person did not know its
content? [^37] Unfortunately, the narration in Sahih al-Bukhari does not
mention 'Ali's (AS) name as the carrier of the letter, whereas Dr \`Abd
al-Latif concludes that the Prophet (SA) himself had written the letter,
on the basis that he kept its contents a secret even to 'Ali (AS): In
Sahih al-Bukhari, Chapter "Al-Ilm" Al-Bukhari asserts: "The Prophet set
off a group of people and handed a letter to their commander and asked
him not to open it before he arrived at a certain place."

He does not say that their commander was 'Ali (AS). The contents of the
narration reveal, in addition, that the one to open it should have been
the carrier of the letter not a third person, as assumed by Dr \`Abd
al-Latif. What Al-Bukhari has narrated is really connected with a story
called "Batn al-Nakhlah" recorded in books of history and Prophetic
traditions.

Both Ibn Hisham's "Sirah "[^38] (under the title: \`Abdullah ibn Jahsh's
sariyyah) and Bihar al-Anwar [^39] relate the same narration that the
carrier of the letter was \`Abdullah ibn Jahsh. It is said that the
Prophet (SA) asked him to open the letter after two days' journey and do
as it instructed, and he did so and acted upon the Messenger of Allah's
command.

Al-Waqidi's "Al-Maghazi" states in explicit terms that Ubay ibn Ka'b
was the writer of the letter, not the Holy Prophet (SA). It says:

"Abdullah ibn Jahsh said: \`Once, after the Salat al-Isha' (night
prayer), the Prophet asked me to come to him the next morning early,
armed and ready, to be sent on a mission. The next day, after the Salat
al-Fajr (morning prayer), held in the mosque in congregation under the
leadership of the Prophet, I was standing near the Prophet's house armed
and prepared. Some other Companions were present there too like me.

The Prophet summoned Ubay ibn Ka'b and ordered him to write a letter.
Then, he handed me over the closed letter and said: \`You are the
commander of these people. Open this letter after two nights of journey
on the mentioned path, and act as it instructs.' I did what I had been
told after two days and noticed that I had been ordered to go to Batn
al-Nakhlah (a place between Makkah and Waif) to obtain necessary
information about the Quraysh's caravan.

In addition, I had been advised not to compel any of the men to
accompany me in the task. Of course, it was a dangerous mission. I told
my friends that whoever is ready for the martyrdom could accompany me,
and that the remaining were free to go back. They all unanimously
remarked: We all heard and shall obey Allah, His Prophet and you.'
[^40]

Accordingly, what Dr \`Abd al-Latif has based his claim on is totally
unfounded.

(2) Dr \`Abd al-Latif further states: "As narrated by Al-Bukhari and
Ibn Hisham..., the Prophet (SA) wrote the treaty by his own hand."
Firstly, Al-Bukhari has quoted this in one narration and has related the
contrary in another. Secondly, Sunni scholars have almost unanimously
asserted that although Al-Bukhari's statement apparently indicates that
the Prophet (SA) himself has written it, this has not been the intention
of the narrator. Al-Halabi's "Sirah", narrates the story in the same
manner and even states: "The Holy Prophet asked \`All to delete the
words: "Allah's Messenger'." but adds, quoting narration of Al-Bukhari,
that some have taken this as a miracle carried out by the Prophet (SA).
It, however, mentions afterward:

"Some have said that this narration is not acceptable by some
knowledgeable persons. It actually implies that the Prophet ordered
someone to write and that he did not write it himself."

He adds:

"Abul-Walid Baji Maliki from Spain, who intended to rely on the
apparent meaning of Al-Bukhari's statement was seriously refuted by the
Spanish scholars." [^41]

However, Ibn Hisham's "Sirah" does not include such a statement and it
is not clear as why did Dr \`Abd al-Latif ascribe this to Ibn Hisham.'
We have already mentioned that from the historical point of view, what
is inferred from most narrations, is that \`Ali (AS) wrote all the
written material. That the Prophet (SA) wrote, despite his inability to
write, can only be concluded from Al-Tabari's and Ibn Al-Athir's
statements. At the most this can be implied that the Prophet (SA) wrote
once or more during the prophetic period, whereas, the issue under
discussion concerns the period before his prophethood.

[^37]. Sahih al-Bukhari, vol 1, p 25.
[^38]. Ibn Hisham, S'irah, vol 1, p 601.
[^39]. Bihar al-Anwar, old edition, vol 6, p 575.
[^40]. Muhammad ibn 'Umar al-Waqidi, Al-Maghazi, vol 1, p 13.

[^41]. Al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, vol 3, p 24.

**The Adversaries' Accusation**

It was mentioned at the very beginning of the book that: "The opponents
of Islam and the Prophet (SA) accused him of borrowing ideas from others
(this accusation is reflected from some verses of the Qur'an). But they
did not say that he was literate and knew how to read and write and that
he perhaps had some books which he consulted before presenting his
views."

Someone might, however, claim that the Prophet (SA) accusation is was
accused in this respect too. This reflected from the Qur'an where it
says:

"They say: The stories of the ancient - he has got them written down -
so that these are recited to him morning and evening (25: 5)'. " The
answer is that this verse does not explicitly indicate their claim that
the Prophet (SA) used to write, regardless of the fact that the
opponents' accusations were so prejudiced and based on complexes and
grudges that, as the Holy Qur'an puts it, only terms like "injustice"
and "oppression" can best be used for them. At the same time, the Arabic
term "iktitab" means both \`to write' and "istiktab" ie, to make someone
write something'.

Here, the second meaning applies to the verse which would mean "They
said: \`he has written (or others have written for him) the stories of
the ancient, then someone reads to him every morning and evening,"
"iktitab" is mentioned here in the past tense and "imla"' in the present
continuous. It implies that someone wrote them, and that those who knew
how to read, used to come to Prophet (SA) every day and night and read
them to him, and that he learned and memorized them. Thus, if the
Prophet (SA) knew how to read, they would not necessarily say that
others used to read to him day and night; rather, it would suffice them
to say that he himself referred to writings and memorized them.

Therefore, even the oppressive and accusing infidels of his time, who
accused the Prophet (SA) in many ways and named him an insane, a
sorcerer, a liar and an imitator of others' oral statements, etc, could
not claim that he read the contents of other books to them due to his
inability to read and write.

It is inferred from what has already been stated that according to the
definite testimony of history, Qur'anic proofs and abundant indications
deduced from the history of Islam, the Holy Prophet's (SA) mind was
untouched by human teaching. He was a man taught only in the divine
school and who received his knowledge from Him alone. He was a flower
fostered by the Pre-eternal Gardener and none else.

Although Allah (SWT) has nothing to do with the pen, paper, ink,
reading and writing, He swore by the pen and its manifestations as a
sacred matter in His Holy Book: "Nun' I swear by the pen and what they
write (68:1). " Allah (SWT) also commanded "reading" in His ,first
heavenly message and introduced the knowledge and art of using the pen
as the greatest blessing bestowed on man after the blessing of
"creation". The Holy Qur'an states: "Read in the name of your Lord Who
created. He created man from a clot. Read and your Lord is Most
Honourable; Who taught (to write) with the pen; taught man what he knew
not (96:1-5). "

In fact, the one who had not held a pen in his hand, established the
"Pen Movement" immediately after his arrival in Madinah by providing
simple facilities. Although he had neither been tutored by man nor had
he attended any universities or the like, he turned out to be man's
teacher and the founder of universities. Hafiz remarks:

"Brightened and made Heaven's grace manifest, He healed our wandering
heart and our wounded chest.

He, who attended no school, was dear of mine, Hundreds of tutors were
taught with his knowledge, divine.

And his graceful glance filled the lovers with spirits raised, The
knowledge and wisdom both got amazed."

Imam 'Ali al-Rida (AS), in his discussion with the people following
other religions, addressed Ra's al-Jalut:

"Among the true reasons of his prophethood is that the Prophet was an
orphan, a poor shepherd and a worker who had not read any books and had
not been taught; yet, he brought a book in which there are the stories
of prophets and the information regarding both past and future
generations." [^42]

What reveals more reasonably the loftiness, grandeur and heavenliness
of the Holy Qur'an is the fact that this great divine Book, with myriad
instructions concerning the creation, the Resurrection, human beings,
morality, law, admonitory stories and sermons - with all its grace,
beauty and eloquence - was issued from the tongue of the one who was
himself unlettered, who neither attended any school or college nor
received any university education and who neither met any of his
contemporary scholars nor read a simple book of his time.

The sign and miracle that Allah (SWT) granted to His last Prophet (SA)
was the book and writing, of speech and meditation, and of feelings and
senses. It deals with wisdom, thoughts, the heart and mind. This Holy
Book has shown for centuries, and still shows, its extraordinary
spiritual authority.

The passage of time cannot make it obsolete. It has fascinated, and
continues to fascinate, millions and millions of hearts. It brims over
with a life-sustaining power. What thoughtful minds it has induced to
meditation! What numerous hearts it has overflown with spiritual
enthusiasm! What countless nightingales of dawn and those keeping a
night vigil it has spiritually fed! What tears it has caused to flow on
cheeks at midnight out of love for Allah (SWT) and fear of Him. And what
enslaved and chained nations has it emancipated from the claws of
tyranny and despotism.

The poet says:

"As the Qur'an's seal shone all and everywhere, The Pope's plans it
shattered and of the Magi's here and there.

Let's open what I really feel in essence, It is not a simple book but
has a difference.

It transforms into whosoever's soul it enters, Like the transformed
soul, the .world also alters.

It is clear like "truth", but hard to reach, Alive, everlasting, a
manifest speech." Yes, to enlighten more clearly that the Qur'an is a
revelation and a miracle for the human beings Allah (SWT), the
Everlasting Grace, revealed it to one among His servants who was an
orphan, a poor shepherd and a desert-rover and an untaught and
unschooled man.

"That is Allah's grace; He grants it to whom He wills, and Allah is of
abounding bounty (62:4 ). "

[^42]. \`Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, p 94.


