The Holy Prophet's (s.a.w.) Advice To Abu Dharr
===============================================

(Says the sheikh) that my master, father, may Allah increase his
life-span Al Fadl bin al Hasan said,"These pages are of the advice of
the Messenger of Allah (s) that he gave to Abu Dharr al Giffari ." (Then
he gives the whole chain of narrators tracing it from Sheikh Mufeed and
Sheikh Abu Ja'far Muhammad bin Hasan Babweih up to Abu al Aswad.)

Abu al Aswad said, "I had arrived at al Rabdha and I met Abu Dharr
Jundib son of Janada (a) and he narrated to me." "I entered one day in
the midday in the presence of the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.) in his
masjid. I didn't see anyone at all in the masjid except the Messenger of
Allah (S.A.W.) and Ali (A.S.) who was sitting by his side, so I took the
opportunity of the emptiness of the masjid (to approach the Prophet
(S.A.W.) )." I said, " Oh RasulAllah (S.A.W.) , by my father and mother,
please advise me with such advice that Allah will benefit me by it."

So he said,"Yes, and how noble you are Oh Abu Dharr! Most surely You
are from us, the Ahl Al Bait (A.S.), and I am giving You advise so
remember it, for surely it is the collection of (all) the paths of
goodness. Surely if You memorize them and put them into practice
(hafiztaha), You will have by it \`Kiflan'." (Two folds of mercy, in
this world and the hereafter)

Oh Abu Dharr!

"Worship Allah as if You see Him and if You weren't seeing Him (You
must understand that) surely He sees You. Know You that the first of
worship of Allah is (Ma'rifa) gnosis, for He is surely the first before
every other thing, so there is nothing before Him, The singlemost
without any second, the continuing but not to an end. He is the Creator
of the heavens and earth and whatever is in them and between them and He
is the Subtle, the Aware, and He has power over all things;

then (the second most important factor in the worship of God is) belief
in me and acknowledgment that Allah sent me to all of humanity as a
bearer of glad tidings, a warner, a caller (of people) to Allah by His
permission and a illuminating torch of light; Then (the third most
important factor in God's worship is) the love of the people of my
house, Those from whom Allah has removed (from them) every impurity and
purified them a perfect purification.(33:33)

"You must know Abu Dharr that Allah, the Great and Majestic, has made
the \`Ahl al Bait' in my nation the likliness of the ship of Nuh (Noah)
whoever rides it is saved and whoever desires other than it is drowned.
He has made them the likeliness of the Gate of Jericho among the Banu
Israel, whoever enters the gate is safe.

Oh Abu Dharr!

"Safeguard what I am advising You, You will be happy in this world and
next."

Oh Abu Dharr!

There are two blessings seriously taken for granted (misused) by
mankind, health and spare time.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Take advantage of five things before five things seize you; Your youth
before Your old age, your health before your sickness, Your wealth
before your poverty, your spare time before your being busy and your
life before you death.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Beware of Procrastination for you are (in) today and not (in) tomorrow.
If there is a tomorrow for you, be tomorrow as you are today. If there
isn't a tomorrow for you, you will grievously regret the opportunity you
missed today.

Oh Abu Dharr!

How many a person there is who has met a day he didn't complete! How
many a waiter there is of tomorrow who doesn't find it!

Oh Abu Dharr!

Had you known the exact period of time you will live you would hate
hopes and their deception.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Be in the world as if you are a stranger or like one simply passing by
as in a journey and count yourself as among the people of the graves.

Oh Abu Dharr!

When you wake up in the morning don't talk to yourself about tonight
and when night has come don't worry of the mourning for surely you don't
know what your state will be tomorrow.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Beware that may not over take you a fatal accident during stumbling.
The stumbling will not be averted. It will not be possible to return (to
correct your mistake). Will not praise you the one you left behind of
what you left behind. Will not excuse you, the one you will meet
(Allah), of what you were so busy conducting (in the world,
carelessly).

Oh Abu Dharr!

Be greedier, in terms of your time (life span) more than of your gold
and silver coins (wealth).

Oh Abu Dharr!

Does any of you wait for but wealth that will make him oppressive or
poverty that will make him a forgotten thing or sickness that will
destroy or old age that will not permit him to do anything but sit, or
death that will finish him off, or the great deceiver, Dajjal - surely
he is the most evil of those things awaited; or the hour (Day of
Judgment) which is more calamitous and bitter. Most surely the worst of
men in position with Allah on the Day of Judgement is he who didn't
benefit from his knowledge. He who seeks knowledge in order to divert
peoples attention towards himself will surely not smell the fragrance of
Paradise.

Oh Abu Dharr!

He who seeks knowledge to deceive by it others will not even smell the
fragrance of Paradise.

Oh Abu Dharr!

When you are asked of some knowledge you know not of say, "I do not
know!" You will be saved of it's consequences. Don't make judgment of
that which you haven't knowledge, you will be saved from the wrath of
Allah on the Day of Judgement.

Oh Abu Dharr!

There will be a day when a group of people of Paradise will be over a
group of people of Hell and they will say, "What has made you enter
hell-fire? For surely we entered paradise by you teaching us and your
disciplining (educating) us!" They will say, :We used to bid others to
do good while we ourselves didn't do it."

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely the rights Allah (s) has over us are greater than his servant
can possibly fulfill! Surely the favors of Allah are more than His
servants can ever encompass. This is why they pass night and day
repenting.

Oh Abu Dharr!

You are surely in the passing of night and day where terms are short,
deeds are recorded and death comes suddenly. Whoever sows good is on the
verge of reaping good and whoever sows evil is on the verge of reaping
regret. And for every sower in the like of that which he sowed. Will not
pass a slow person even a moment and a greedy person will not reach that
which is not destined for him. Whoever is given good, Allah gave it to
him and whoever is protected from evil, then Allah protected him.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The pious are the masters. And the learned are the leaders. Keeping
their company is increase (in good). Surely the believer sees his sin as
if it is a boulder, he fears that it will fall on him and surely the
unbeliever sees his sin as if it is a fly passing on his nose.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely Allah (s), when He wills good for a servant he puts his sins
before his two eyes. When he wills bad for a servant he makes him forget
his sins.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Don't look at the smallness of the sin but look at the one you
disobeyed.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely the believer is stronger in his fleeing from sin than a sparrow
when thrown from his nest.

Oh Abu Dharr!

He whose words conform with his deed so he is the one who has attained
his share. He whose words don't conform with his deed then he is only
destroying himself.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely a mans sustenance is prohibited (from reaching him) because of a
sin he did.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Leave that which you have nothing to do with. Do not speak of that
which does not concern you, and guard your tongue like you guard your
money.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely Allah, glorious is His praise, will enter a people into paradise
and will give them until they are weary and above them there will be a
people in the highest grades. So when they will look to them they will
recognize them so they will say. "Oh our Lord, they are our brothers, we
use to be together in the world so why have you favored them over us."
So it will be said, "Far from it, far from it! Surely they used to be
hungry while you were satiated, they used to be thirsty while you were
quenched, they used to stand (in prayer) while you used to sleep, they
used to rise (take a stand) while you used to go low (be passive,
relax).

Oh Abu Dharr!

Allah, glorious is His praise, has made the pleasure of my eye in
Salat, and has made me to love the Salat like food is made loveable to
the hungry and water to the thirsty. And surely the hungry one, when he
eats, he is satiated and the thirsty one, when he drinks he is quenched
but I am not satiated from Salat.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Anyone who voluntarily does 12 raka't other than the obligatory, he has
a sure right to a house in paradise.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely, so long as you are in Salat, you are knocking on the door of
the Great King, and whoever knocks much on the door of the King it will
be opened for him.

Oh Abu Dharr!

There is no believer that stands in prayer but falls on him goodness
(birr) what is between him and the Throne. And an angel is appointed for
him that calls out, "Oh son of Adam, if you knew what there is for you
in Salat and who you are calling, you would not turn away.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The Salat is the pillar of the religion (deen) and the tongue is
greater; and charity wipes out sin and the tongue is greater; and
Fasting is a shield against the fire and the tongue is greater; and
jihad is nobility and the tongue is greater.

Oh Abu Dharr!

A degree in heaven is above a degree (like steps) like what is between
the sky and earth. And surely the servant raises his eye and light
dazzles it, almost snatching his sight, so he is shocked by it and says,
"What is this?" So it is said, "This is the light of your brother." So
he will say, "My brother so and so? We use to work together in the world
and he has been so much favored over me?" So it will by said, "He surely
was better than you in deeds." Then will be put in his heart
satisfaction until he is satisfied.

Oh Abu Dharr!

This world is the prison of the believer and the paradise of the
unbeliever. And no believer wakes up but is grieved in it. And how can
he not be grieved in it when Allah has sworn that it will take him to
Hell and He didn't promise him that it will deliver him from it, and
that he shall meet (in it) sicknesses and hardships and matters which
will anger him and he will be wronged in it and won't be helped. He
seeks reward from Allah and continues to be in grief (in it)until he
departs from it. And when he departs from it, he attains to comfort and
honor.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Allah (s), has not been worshipped with a thing like that of length of
grief.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Whoever is given knowledge which doesn't cause him to cry simply
because he has been given knowledge, it will not benefit him. Allah has
described the learned and said, "Surely those who were given knowledge
before it, when it is recited onto them they fall upon their faces in
prostration and they say, "Glory be to our Lord. Surely the promise of
Allah shall be done." They fall on their faces crying and they increase
in humility.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Whoever is able to cry, let him cry. Whoever isn't able to cry then let
him have his heart feel sadness and let him try to cry. Surely the hard
heart is far from Allah (s), but they don't realize.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Allah (s) says, "I will not combine for my servant two fears nor two
safeties. So when he feels safe from me in the world, I make him fear on
the Day of Judgement. And when he fears me in the world, I give him
safety on the Day of Judgement."

Oh Abu Dharr!

If a man had the deeds of 70 prophets he would be looked down upon and
it is feared that he will not be saved from the evils of the Day of
Judgement.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely the servant will be shown his sins on the Day of Judgement with
him who did his sins (also) so he will say, "As for me, I was afraid,
feeling anxiety (about my sins) so he will be forgiven.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely the man does a good deed and he trusts (depends) on it and he
(also) does despised deeds until Allah comes to him while angry. Surely
the man who does an evil deed and he is afraid of it (its consequence)
he will come safely on the Day of Judgement.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely the servant commits a sin, so he is made to enter into heaven by
it! So I said, "And how is that? By my mother and father Oh Messenger of
Allah (s)." He said, "That sin in front of his eyes makes him repentant
of it, fleeing to Allah (s) (from it), until he enters heaven!"

Oh Abu Dharr!

Smart is the one who subjugates himself and acts for that which is
after death, and weak is the one who follows his self and its caprice
and then hopes in Allah so many a hope.

Oh Abu Dharr!

]Surely the first thing which will be removed from this community
(Ummat) is safekeeping (amaanat) and humbleness until it will hardly be
seen fearful (of God)

Oh Abu Dharr!

By Him in whose hand the soul of Muhammad is in (s), if the world was
equal, with Allah, to that of a wing of a fly, the unbeliever wouldn't
even get from it a glass of water.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The world is cursed! Is cursed what is in it except that by which
Allah's face is sought. And there is nothing more hateful to Allah than
the world. He created it then left it so He didn't look at it and will
not look at it until stands the hour (Day of Judgement). And there is
nothing more loveable to Allah than faith (eeman) in Him and abandoning
of that which He ordered to be abandoned.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely Allah (s), revealed to my brother Isa (a), "Oh Isa! Don't love
the world for surely I don't love it and love the Hereafter for surely
it is the house of return."

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely Jibreel (a) came to me with the treasures of the world and said,
"Oh Muhammad (s)! This is the treasures of the world (for you) and it
will not decrease of your share (in the Hereafter) with your Lord." So I
said, "My beloved Jibreel! I have no need of it. When I'm satiated I
thank my Lord and when I'm hungry I ask Him."

Oh Abu Dharr!

When Allah wants good for a servant He gives him understanding in
religion and makes him abstemious in the world and makes him to see his
own faults.

Oh Abu Dharr!

No servant abstains in the world but Allah causes wisdom to grow in his
heart, and causes his tongue to utter it, and gives him insight of the
faults of the world and its sickness and its cure and causes him to
leave from it safely into the abode of peace.

Oh Abu Dharr!

When you see your brother abstaining from worldliness, listen to him
for surely he is dictating wisdom. So I said, "Oh Messenger of Allah
(s), who is the most abstemious (zahid) of mankind?" So he said, "One
who doesn't forget the graves and the deterioration (of the world) and
leaves the excess of the adornment of the world and prefers what lasts
over that which perishes and he doesn't count tomorrow among his days
and counts himself among the dead.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Allah didn't reveal to me to amass wealth upon wealth. But He revealed
to me, "Glorify with the praise of your Lord and be among the
prostrating ones and worship your Lord until comes to you the
certainty."

Oh Abu Dharr!

I wear coarse clothing, sit on the floor lick my fingers, ride a donkey
without a saddle and have someone sit behind me. So whoever does not
like my manner, so he is not of me.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Love of wealth and honor are stronger in stripping a man of his
religion than two ferocious wolves in a cattle pen of sheep; so they
attack in it until mourning. So what will remain of it?

So I said, "Oh Messenger of Allah (s), the fearful humble lowly people
who remember Allah much, will they be the first among mankind to go to
heaven?" So he said, "No. But it will be the poor among the muslims.
They will come outstripping the necks of mankind. Will say to them the
Keepers of Heaven, "Like that you are until you are given account of!"
So they will say, "About what shall we give account, for by Allah we
didn't own anything by which we could oppress or do justice and we
weren't given (wealth) so we could withhold or give (to others) but we
worshipped our Lord until He called us so we answered.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The world keeps our hearts and bodies busy and Allah will ask us about
what we were favored with of His lawful (halal) so what about that which
we enjoyed in His unlawful (haram).

Oh Abu Dharr!

I surely asked Allah, magnificent is His praise, to make the sustenance
of he who loves me sufficient and to give the one who hates me much
wealth and children.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Blessedness is for those who are abstemious in the world, the longers
of the hereafter; they take the earth of Allah as a carpet and its soil
as a pillow and its water as perfume. They read the book of Allah lowly
and call Him loudly and they cut themselves off from worldliness
completely.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely my Lord has informed me so He said, "By My glory and majesty, no
servants attain to crying but I build for them a palace in paradise that
no one will be a partner with in it.

So I said, "Oh Messenger of Allah (s), who among the believers is most
intelligent?" He said, "those that remember death most and prepare for
it in the best way.

Oh Abu Dharr!

When light enters the heart it expands and becomes spacious. I said,
"So what is the sign of that by my mother and father, Oh Messenger of
Allah (s)."He said, "Turning (one's attention) to the eternal abode and
keeping aloof from the abode of deception and preparation for death
before it takes place."

Oh Abu Dharr!

Fear Allah and don't show mankind that you fear Allah so they honor you
while your heart is evil.

Oh Abu Dharr!

]Let there be for you in everything a pious intention, even when it
comes to sleeping and eating.

Oh Abu Dharr!

You must magnify the majesty of Allah in your heart. So don't remember
him like the ignorant remembers Him in the presence of a dog saying, "Oh
Allah disgrace him" and in the presence of a pig "Oh Allah disgrace
him."

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely Allah has angels who are standing out of fear of Him. They won't
raise their heads until the trumpet shall be blown, the sounding of the
Hereafter. So they will all say, "Glory be to You our Lord, and Your
praise. We haven't worshipped you as it is fit for You to be
worshipped!"

Oh Abu Dharr!

If a man had the deeds of 70 prophets he would deem his deeds small
because of the hardship he will see on that day. If a bucket of two
baths were poured in the rising place of the sun it would cause to boil,
the skulls of those who are witnessing its setting. And if Hell only
exhaled one sigh, no near angel nor messenger sent would remain but
would fall prostrate on his knees saying, "Lord have mercy on my soul,"
until he will forget Ibrahim and Ishaq and say, "My Lord, I am your
Khaleel Ibrahim, so don't forget me!"

Oh Abu Dharr!

If a woman of the people of paradise rose from the sky of the world in
the darkest night she would illuminate the earth more than the moon does
when it is full and would notice the fragrance she emits, all the people
of the earth. And if a cloth of the garments of the people of paradise
was spread today in the world, would faint who ever looks at it because
of what their eyes are beholding.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Lower your voice during a funeral, during fighting and during the
recitation of the Qur'an.

Oh Abu Dharr!

When you are in a funeral procession, so let your mind be busy in
pondering and humbleness and know that you will meet the same fate.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Know that when something gets spoiled then salt is its remedy and when
the salt is spoiled there is no remedy for it. And know you that in you
are two (dangerous) qualities; laughing at something not amusing and
laziness when not tired.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Two moderate cycles of prayer (rak'at) with pondering is better than
standing all night in prayer with a neglectful heart.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The truth is heavy and bitter and the falsehood in light and sweet and
it may be that the (fulfillment of the) desire of an hour will yield a
long period of grief.

Oh Abu Dharr!

A man has not fully understood until he sees mankind next to Allah as
camels, then he looks to himself and holds himself more contemptible.

Oh Abu Dharr!

You will not reach the reality of faith until you see all of mankind as
fools in regards to their religion (deen) and intelligent in regards to
their worldly matters (dunya).

Oh Abu Dharr!

Take account of yourself before you're taken account of so your
accounting will be easier tomorrow. And weigh yourself before you are
weighed and prepare for the great staging; the day you will be
presented, not the least of a hidden thing of you will be hidden from
Allah.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Be shy of Allah for surely by the One who my soul is in His hand, I
always feel embarrassed when I go to the bathroom; I cover myself with
my cloths because of the two angels with me.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Would you like to enter heaven? I said, "Yes, may my father by
sacrificed for thee." He said (s) , "So cut your hopes short and put
death before your eyes and feel shy of Allah, the shyness due to Him."
He said, I said, "Oh Messenger of Allah, all of us feel shy of Allah."
He said, "That is not shyness; rather shyness is to not forget the
graves and deterioration and protecting your stomach and what concerns
it and the head and what it contains and whoever wants the honor of the
Hereafter, so let him leave the embellishments of the worldly life. So
if you are like that, you have attained the Kingdom (walayat) of
Allah."

Oh Abu Dharr!

Some supplication with good deeds is sufficient just as some salt is
sufficient with food.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The one who supplicates without deed is like one who tries to shoot his
arrow without a string on his bow.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely Allah, because of the goodness of his servant, He betters the
condition of his whole family and even his neighbors and the houses
around him so long as he is with them.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely your Lord (s) boasts to the angels about three people: A man who
is in a deserted place (though alone), he calls azan and iqamat and he
prays. So your Lord says to the angels, "Look at my servant! He's
praying and no one sees him but me." So descends 70,000 angels and pray
behind him and they seek forgiveness for him until the next day; and a
man who stands in the mid of night and prays alone and does sajdah
(prostrates) and falls asleep while prostrating. So Allah (s) says,
"Look to my servant! His soul is with me and his body is prostrate" and
a man who is in a war and all his companions flee, but he stays firm
fighting until he is killed.

Oh Abu Dharr!

No man puts his forehead (in prostration) in a place of the places of
the earth but that place bears witness of that for him on the Day of
Judgement. There is no place that a people visit but that place starts
either sending salutation on them or cursing them.

Oh Abu Dharr!

There is no place of lodging or departure of the places of the earth
but they call one another, "Oh neighbor, did anyone pass by you who
remembered Allah or worshipped by placing his forehead on you in
prostration to Allah?" So one says yes and one says no. When one says
yes, it shakes and opens up (in happiness) and sees that it has (been
favored) a greater rank over its neighbor.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely Allah, when He created the earth and created what's in it of
trees. there was no tree that the children of Adam came to but they got
from it a benefit. The earth and the trees remained like that until the
evil of the children of Adam started saying the grievous utterance.
Their saying, "Allah has taken a son." So when they said it the earth
trembled and the benefits of the trees went away.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The earth cries over the believer when he dies for forty mornings.

Oh Abu Dharr!

When a servant is in a deserted place and does wudu or tayammum then he
does Azan and Iqamat and he prays. Allah (s) orders the angels, so they
form a row behind him where the two ends of the row are not seen. They
bow with his bowing and prostrate with his prostrating and say Ameen for
his supplications.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Whoever does Iqamah without Azan, no one prays with him but the two
angels with him.

Oh Abu Dharr!

No youth leaves the world and he spent his youth in obedience to Allah
but Allah gives him the reward of 72 Siddiq (truthful near servants).

Oh Abu Dharr!

A remember (of Allah) among the careless is like a warrior among the
fleeing.

Oh Abu Dharr!

A pious gathering is better than being alone and being alone and being
alone is better than an evil gathering and speaking good is better than
silence and silence is better then speaking evil.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Don't accompany but a believer and let no one eat your food but a pious
person and don't eat the food of the evil doers.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Give your food to eat to one who you love for Allah and eat the food of
one who loves you for Allah (s).

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely Allah (s) is with the tongue of every speaker. So let every man
fear Allah and know what he is saying.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Leave excessive speech and is enough for you what you reach by it your
need.

Oh Abu Dharr!

It is enough for a man as a lie to say everything he hears.

Oh Abu Dharr!

There is nothing more deserving of being imprisoned for (in Hell) than
the tongue.

Oh Abu Dharr!

It is of respect to Allah to honor an old muslim man, and to honor a
carrier of the Qur'an who acts by it, and to honor a just ruler.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Has not acted, the one who has not guarded his tongue.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Do not be a seeker of faults (in others) nor a person who over praises
(others in there face) , nor a defamer nor a wrangler.

Oh Abu Dharr!

A servant continues to increase in distance from Allah so long as his
behavior is bad.

Oh Abu Dharr!

A good word (of advise) is sadaqah (charity) and every step you take
towards Salat is (also) sadaqah.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Whoever answers the caller of Allah and does well in inhabiting the
masjids of Allah, his reward from Allah is paradise. So I said, "May my
father and mother be sacrificed for you Oh Messenger of Allah (s). How
should the masjids of Allah be inhabited?" He said, "Voices should not
be raised in them and useless matters should not be discussed in them
and things should not be bought and sold in them. Leave foolish talk so
long as you are in them and if you don't, so don't blame on the Day of
Judgement but yourself."

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely Allah (s) gives, so long as you're sitting in the masjid, for
every breath taken in it, a degree in paradise. And the angels send
blessings on you, and will be written for you for every breath you take
in it ten good deeds and will be wiped out from you ten evil deeds.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Do you know the reason concerning which this verse was revealed? "Be
patient and exhort others to be patient and connect and fear Allah that
you may be successful." I said, "I don't know. May my father and mother
be sacrificed for you." He said, "In waiting for the next Salat after
every Salat."

Oh Abu Dharr!

Doing wudu well during difficulties is among the things that wipe out
sins, and frequenting the masjids, that is connecting.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Allah (s) says, "Surely the most beloved of the servants to me are they
that love each other for my sake; they whose hearts are attached to the
masjids and the seekers of forgiveness at dawn. They are the ones that
when I want to punish the people of the earth, I remember them, so I
avert the punishment from them."

Oh Abu Dharr!

Every sitting in the masjid is a waste except three; the recitation of
one offering prayers, the remembrance of Allah, and the asking of
knowledge.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Be more concerned about doing deeds with piety than just doing deeds.
Because it is not deemed little, that which is done with piety. And how
can a deed be deemed little which is accepted? Allah (s) says, "Allah
only accepts from the pious."

Oh Abu Dharr!

A man can not be among the pious until his accounting of himself is
stronger than the accounting a (business) partner takes of his partner.
So he knows from where his food comes from and from where his drink
comes from and from where his cloths come from; from a lawful means or
from a prohibited one.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Whoever doesn't care from where he earns his money, Allah (s) doesn't
care from where He will enter him into Hell.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Whoever it pleases that he may be the most honorable of mankind, let
him fear Allah.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The most beloved of you to Allah, magnificent is His praise, is the one
who remembers Him most. And the most honorable of you to Allah is the
most pious among you, and the most saved of you from the punishment of
Allah is the strongest of you in awe of Him.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely the God-fearing are they who are careful concerning those things
which people are not generally concerned with, out of fear of falling
into that which is doubtful.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Whoever obeys Allah has remembered Him even if his prayers, fasting and
recitation of Qur'an is little.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The king of religion is piety and its crown is obedience.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Be pious! You will be the best in worship among mankind and the best of
your religion is piety.

Oh Abu Dharr!

The Virtue of knowledge is greater than that of worship. And know you
that if you prayed until your back becomes bent and you fasted until you
became thin as strings, that would not benefit you unless it is done
with piety.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Surely the people of piety and abstinence in this world, they are the
real friends of Allah.

Oh Abu Dharr!

Whoever does not come on the day of Judgement with three qualities he
has surely lost. So I said, "What are the three, may my mother and
father be sacrificed for you?" He said, "Piety that prevents him from
that which Allah the Great and Majestic has made haraam for him, and
clemency (hilm) by which he refutes the ignorance of the fools and good
manners (Khuluq) with which he deals with the people.

From Makarim al Akhlaq: Page 458

Compiled by Sheikh al Jaleel Radiyu al Deen Abu Nasr al Hasan bin al
Fadl al Tabrasi, one among the great scholars of the 6th Century A.H.


