Mission of the Prophets
=======================

***He it is Who raised among the inhabitants of Mecca an Apostle from
among themselves, who recites to them His communications and purifies
them, and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom, although they were
before certainly in clear error***. ***(Surah Jum’ah 62:2)***

Quranic verses like the one quoted above and traditions of Ahlul Bayt
show that the primary aim of sending the Prophets was to teach and train
the people and to purify them.

These two things themselves have a special aim. Training and
purification of self is indispensable to the perfection of humanity.

They are so closely related to each other that they cannot be separated.
Both of them are required to achieve the perfection of human beings.
Without them, humanity will not reach to perfection. If this were not
true the Almighty Allah would not have made the aim if His Prophets as
such.

Training and self-purification means knowledge and action
---------------------------------------------------------

**1)** **Training**: Training denotes the missionary program sent by
Allah and it is related to Him.

***And teaches them the Book and the Wisdom*****.** ***(Surah Jumah
62:2).***

This portion of the verse shows that training is related to two things,
'Book' and 'Wisdom'. Actually both are one and the same. 'Book' means
the knowledge of the Holy Quran and wisdom denotes the secret of the
creation of the Universe. In other words 'Book' is the codification of
religious law and 'Wisdom' means the realities connected with creation
of the universe and it is related to natural factors. For example the
Almighty has created the universe. Now this is not a religious command.

Therefore, one who intends to acquire perfection and righteousness must
strive for Quranic knowledge. One should study it and act upon it. The
verses regarding the oneness of Allah, His names, attributes and Divine
acts must be studied with concentration and through this exercise we
must strengthen our basic beliefs. We must also pay attention to the
laws of Shariah. We must perform obligatory acts and shun prohibited
ones. We must also ponder on the verses with regard to Day of Judgment.
Through these verses each one of us must create a longing for Paradise
and a fear of Hell. In this way a man is gradually persuaded to perform
good deeds and distance himself from evil deeds.

There are many verses of the Quran concerning wisdom and which cannot be
understood by the five senses of man. A study of these verses indeed
tells man regarding his origin and his destination. What is the aim
behind the creation of man and other creatures? And why they
subsequently leave the world? What is the purpose of designing and
devising the long caravan of creatures and created things? The reply to
the questions is the foundation of Quran.

Knowledge sans actions or a fruitless Branch
--------------------------------------------

**2)** **Purification**: The second aspect or component of the mission
of the Prophets is to purify men from evil behavior and spiritual
defects. In other words, results have to be achieved both in the matter
of belief as well as deeds. Knowledge and belief and good deeds together
make the soul pure of bad morals and evil. They purify the soul. Faith
is a field and action is the seed. Even if the best quality seeds are
sowed in a barren land and watered too, there will be no results.

Not only this, even the seeds will be wasted. The soil and the seeds
must be compatible for maximum benefit. Similarly if the soil is fertile
but it is not sowed with seeds, it will not be able to put forth any
vegetation or fruits.

The fruit of knowledge and deeds is the reform of soul and purification
of soul from dirt. The actual aim of knowledge and deed is purification
of soul.

If the causes of disease are not removed from the body the disease will
worsen instead of being cured. This the actual import of the Quranic
verses. Regarding the hypocrites, it says:

***There is a disease in their hearts, so Allah added to their disease
and they shall have a painful chastisement because they lied. (Surah
Baqarah 2:10).***

In the same way Allah says,

***And We reveal of the Quran that which is a healing and a mercy to the
believers, and it adds only to the perdition of the unjust.*** ***(Surah
Bani Israel 17:82).***

Body and Soul
-------------

Thus we come to know that the teaching of Quran is related to two
things, wisdom and self-purification, and wisdom denotes the secrets of
creation and belief of the affairs related to the Hereafter. In other
words wisdom is the recognition of truth and self-purification is
related to the permissible and the prohibited. Beliefs and actions, both
are the result of Quranic teachings, and the combined result of both of
them is self-purification. Self-purification also has two stages.

The first stage is outward and apparent purification and the second is
internal and hidden. In order to purify the soul and to obtain the
proper results of beliefs and actions, it is necessary to remove
obstacles and all those things that nullify the effects of beliefs and
actions. This apparent self-purification is achieved through cleansing
the organs and limbs and by worship and obedience. That is, the physical
body is involved in this stage, whereas the internal purification is
related to the absolute cleansing of the soul.

Sins related to the body and soul
---------------------------------

Self-purification through organs and limbs denotes keeping away from
Greater sins. Unless and until one avoids the Greater sins one should
not have the assurance that his deeds will be accepted.

The Holy Quran has clearly mentioned:

***Allah only accepts from those who guard (against evil)*****.**[^1]1

Also, the Almighty Allah has made self-purification the path for
achieving guidance and righteousness. Allah says,

***Those who believe and do not mix up their faith with iniquity, those
are they who shall have the security and they are those who go
aright.***[^2]2

Anything that is beyond the limits of injustice and away from the
straight path is injustice. Thus no one must have any trait that is evil
according to reason or that which the Shariah prohibits. If one is
apparently a believer but has one of those evil traits, his belief will
not serve any purpose because he has mixed up his faith with some sort
of injustice.

At another place, Allah says,

***And whoever is preserved from the niggardliness of his soul, these it
is that are the successful ones.***[^3]3

Thus it means that if someone is, God forbid, a miser, he is away from
salvation even though he might be a believer. This very fact has been
mentioned in the traditional reports: “A miserly believer is nearer to
the fire of Hell than a generous infidel.” This tells us that till the
time we remove each and every evil trait from our character we cannot
become perfect human beings and would not be able to achieve real
salvation.

Duty of the religious Scholars
------------------------------

The successors of the prophets should continue the program of teaching
and self-purification. During the occultation of Imam az-Zaman (Twelfth
Imam) this important duty rests on the independent religious
jurisprudents (*Mujtahids*) and just jurists. Quranic verses and
traditions inform us that education and self-purification requires two
necessary conditions. First of them is derivation of Islamic Law
(*Ijtihad*) and the other is justice. The concerned verse says,

***And it does not beseem the believers that they should go forth all
together; why should not then a company from every party from among them
go forth that they may apply themselves to obtain understanding in
religion, and that they may warn their people when they come back to
them that they may be cautious?***[^4]

In the same way a tradition says, “It is incumbent for the people to
obey the religious jurisprudent (*Mujtahid*), who controls his self,
guards his religion, opposes his carnal desires and obeys the commands
of his master.”

On the basis of this, the leader and guide must have achieved the limits
of belief in foundations of faith and should have reached perfection in
it. So that he makes the people gain divine recognition (*Ma’arifat*)
and make their beliefs firm. In the same way he should be well versed
with the laws of religion so that he can advise people regarding their
duties and prohibitions. He must also be purified of immoral qualities
so that he can serve as an example and people may benefit from his words
and behavior.

Compilation of Greater Sins, an Important Step
----------------------------------------------

Thus the first duty of the scholars is to make people aware of the
permissible and the prohibited. This is a very important task. But so
far we didn't have any comprehensive book in Persian that deals with the
Greater sins in detail, so that the general public may have access to
it. This blessing was in the fortune of Ayatullah Dastghaib Shirazi.

After devoting a number of years the Ayatullah has completed the magnum
opus named *Greater* *sins.* Eager and truth perceiving public has
accorded a great welcome to this book. Thousands of copies of this book
have been published in two editions. A new deluxe edition is planned for
the future.

Qalbe Saleem (Immaculate Conscience) and Gunahane Kabira (Greater Sins)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Fortunately the aim of the respected author is to guide people and help
in the purification of their souls. After completing *Gunahane Kabira*
he was busy in writing a book that deals with the sins of the heart,
that being the second important stage of religious guidance. Actually
the book, *Qalbe Saleem* is a sequel to *Gunahane Kabira*. The
collection of topics and arrangement of the subject matter was entrusted
to me and by the Grace of Allah, the book is complete and published in a
good format.

Responsibility of the Respected Readers
---------------------------------------

I consider it my duty to remind that those who are interested in such
material have an important responsibility. They must propagate this book
among their family and friend circles and help in propagation of
religion. They can fulfill the duty that is made obligatory on them by
religion and conscience. It is the best method of Commanding Good and
Prohibiting Evil.

I also thank all those who have cooperated in preparation and
publication of these books. I hope they will continue to extend their
help and encourage writers and publishers.

**Sayyid Muhammad Hashim Dastghaib.  
 Tehran 1st** **Zilqad 1392 A.H.  
 8 December 1972 A.D.**

**IntroductionIntroduction**

**Qalbe Saleem  
 (Immaculate Conscience)**

***The day on which property will not avail, nor sons. Except him who
comes to Allah with a heart free (from evil)*****.**[^5]5

Sin of the Heart
----------------

Human beings are made up of a physical body and a soul. Everyone has a
visible existence and an invisible entity. Also, man is either righteous
or evil-minded. Whether righteous or evil, the character of man consists
of two aspects. One aspect of his character becomes visible through his
physical body.

For example a person prays, fasts, performs Hajj or gives charity. Or he
may be involved in sinful activities like drinking, gambling and
fornication etc. All these types of deeds are performed and become
apparent through his physical body. Another aspect of human character is
connected with his inner dimensions and thoughts. For example, belief
(Iman), love, fear, hope, satisfaction or for example, disbelief,
hypocrisy, hatred and pride. All these aspects become apparent only when
a person wants to make them apparent.

Evil deeds that are related to physical body are also prohibited by
Almighty Allah. It is obligatory for every person to be aware of all
such evils and to refrain from them. In the same way evils of the heart
are also sinful and Allah Almighty has commanded us to shun them. We
must be cognizant of evils of thoughts and heart also. We must also
refrain from such deeds and try our best to keep our hearts free from
such sins.

Quran and the sins of the heart
-------------------------------

The Almighty has warned against sinful thoughts in a number of places in
the Quran. For example, in Surah Baqarah Allah says:

***But He will call you to account for what your hearts have earned, and
Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing*****.**[^6]6

In the same chapter a person who hides testimony is referred to as a
sinner of the heart. The Quran says:

***And do not conceal testimony, and whoever conceals it, his heart is
surely sinful*****.**[^7]

Also:

***And whether you manifest what is in your minds or hide it, Allah will
call you to account according to it*****.**[^8]8

Similarly, in Surah Bani Israel, the divine words say,

***Surely the hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these, shall
be questioned about that.***[^9]9

It means that the eyes will be questioned for what they have beheld, the
ears for whatever they heard and the heart for all the thoughts it
harbored. Furthermore, in Surah Nur, Allah states:

***Surely (as for) those who love that scandal should circulate
respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in
this world and the hereafter; and Allah knows, while you do not
know*****.**[^10]10

This verse has refrained us from desiring that evil may befall the
people of belief (Muslims). It is a sin of the heart and earns a
terrible chastisement. In the same way Allah says in Surah Anam:

***And abandon open and secret sin*****.**[^11]

Some commentators of the Holy Quran have mentioned that apparent sins
are those that are related to the physical being and hidden evils are
perpetrated in ones heart.

Thus, whenever evils and sins are discussed in Quranic verses and
traditions, the sins of the heart are also included.

Sin of the Heart or inner disease
---------------------------------

The evils of the heart are compared to disease of the heart in a number
of places in the Quran:

***There is a disease in their hearts, so Allah added to their
disease*****.**[^12]12

The above verse is speaking about the hypocrites.

Paradise is the abode of only those who possess a perfect heart
---------------------------------------------------------------

When a heart is clean and purified from all sorts of sins and evils, it
is known as the “perfect heart” or in other words the correct or whole
heart; a healthy heart. It is supposed to be the basis of righteousness.
The verse of Surah Shuara says:

***The day on which property will not avail, nor sons. Except him who
comes to Allah with a heart free (from evil).***[^13]

Like wealth, all the worldly things are not beneficial in each and every
circumstance. They are useful only in some few situations. For example,
wealth profits us only during our lifetime, but after death what we
require is a perfect and sinless heart. Without such a heart we cannot
gain anything. One of the names of Paradise is 'Abode of peace' (*Darus
Salaam*)

***They shall have the abode of peace with their Lord.***[^14]

However, the exegesis of Quran mentions that “*Darus Salaam*” means the
abode of those who shall be safe from every kind of disease and
affliction. Consequently, those who are afflicted with the maladies of
sins will have to remain in the infirmary of Hell till they are cured of
every affliction and regain spiritual health.

Only after undergoing this process can they qualify to enter Paradise.
But there are some diseases that are incurable, like disbelief,
hypocrisy and enmity with Allah and holy personalities. People afflicted
with such diseases have to remain in Hell forever.

What is ‘disease of the heart’?
-------------------------------

Just as the physical body is either healthy or diseased, in the same way
heart is also healthy or sick. Physical health implies that all the
organs work perfectly for the purpose they have been created for. The
opposite of this implies physical disease.

That is, when the organs do not perform their duty properly and when
their specialty and capability is no more, it is said that the body is
sick. This results in discomfort and life becomes difficult. In the same
way a healthy heart is one that possesses all the human qualities and
emotions. It should have absolute and correct divine recognition
(*Ma’arifat*) and it must be restful as far as the divine truths and
beliefs are concerned, and it must be pure from all evil and animal
feelings.

Refusal, doubt, jealousy, malice, miserliness, unsuitable friendship or
enmity and in the same way, needless fear or hope etc. are different
types of heart diseases. These ailments shall be discussed in detail in
this book, all of which are against the nature on which man is created.
This nature is known as 'The First Nature' (*Fitrat-e-Awwaliya*).

Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) says, “The human body has six conditions:
Health or sickness, death or life, sleep or wakefulness. In the same way
the human soul also has these conditions. Life of soul is its knowledge
and ignorance is its death. Sickness of soul is it being involved in
doubts and its health is firm belief. Stupor of the soul is that it is
heedless while wakefulness is its awareness.”[^15]

Imam Ali (a.s.) also says in Nahjul Balagha, “Beware! One of the
calamities is hunger. And worst than that is physical sickness. More
terrible than physical malady is the sickness of heart. And beware! One
of the bounties is wealth. And better than wealth is physical health.
More preferable than physical health is the piety of the heart.” This
implies that the heart must be purified from all kinds of dirt and sins.

Harmful effects of the diseases of the Heart
--------------------------------------------

When a particular part of the body is sick the whole body is under
terrible pain and life becomes difficult. Similarly when one is
afflicted with a spiritual malady one feels remorse in his worldly life
also. He continues to be afflicted even after his death, about which the
Shariah has informed in advance. Life becomes difficult due to spiritual
maladies and sometimes he is even inclined to commit suicide.

The above discussion shows that incidence of suicide, especially among
the youth, that is on the increase day by day, is a consequence of these
spiritual diseases. The best prevention is to keep the heart pure from
defects. How this can be achieved shall be explained in this book.

For example when we have a toothache we do not enjoy anything. All
pleasures become tasteless in such condition and life becomes
unbearable. In the same way ignorance, malice, pride, jealousy,
arrogance, vanity and all other spiritual maladies have similar effect,
like the jealous person who is always filled with remorse. Anger
tortures the person himself. So much so that he even loses sleep. He is
ever burning within by seeing that another person has obtained a
particular status. He is ever waiting for the time when that person is
again deprived of that bounty. Quite often a jealous person fails to
recognize his wishes and perishes in the fire of jealousy.

Science and research has established that psychological disorders affect
the physical body and result in physical maladies. Heartache and
diseases also affect physical organs. The human body is affected by it
and the organs fail to perform their designated functions. Rather, the
effect of every disease is the same.

Physical sins are caused by diseases of the Heart
-------------------------------------------------

Heart is the ruler of the Kingdom called human body. The tongue moves in
compliance with the commands of the heart. Similarly all the voluntary
actions are related to it. Obviously, when the heart is sick and
uncontrollable, the words and deeds of that person are in complete
disorder. He will perform improper actions and utter rubbish, and his
actions shall be against human nature.

They shall deviate from humanity and path of religion. Thus whatever sin
a person commits, it is due to spiritual ailments. Therefore, reason
dictates and religion commands us to make every effort to cure the
disease of our heart. We must care more for the well being of our heart.

When the heart is in a bad shape the body is affected. The army commits
injustice when the king is a weakling.[^16]16

Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) says, “People of *Ma’arifat* (recognition)
see that the worldly people are more concerned about physical death.
While more serious is the death of their hearts within their living
bodies.”[^17]

Physical death deprives the person of a few days of worldly pleasures.
Those pleasures had also been accompanied by thousands of discomforts.
However, the death of the heart and conscience deprives one of
righteousness forever. The pure eternal pleasures turn their back
towards him and man cannot spend a purified life of a human being,
whether in this world or in the Hereafter.

Therefore we must not take the spiritual maladies lightly and we must
not be careless with regard to their cure. Just as carelessness is
unsuitable with physical diseases in the same way reason dictates that
we pay utmost attention to such spiritual maladies, because they are
more dangerous. Physical diseases can lead to death while spiritual
diseases make one afflicted with eternal degradation.

Depravity of the Society
------------------------

Different types of evils are increasing day by day in the society.
Thinking upon the root cause of this we realize that all corruption,
depravity and crimes are due to a type of psychological disease. And the
same psychological disease or weakness instigates man to commit inhuman
acts. Every type of unrest, robberies, unbridled passion, sensuality,
drinking, drugs, destruction of family life, divorces, hard-heartedness,
anger, suicide etc are due to one or the other kind of psychological
disorders. In other words it is due to the lack of human feelings.

It is the responsibility of the government to take concrete steps for
the psychological health of its subjects. Today psychological cure is
more important than physical health. Sophisticated hospitals, clinics
and medical colleges are established for physical aliments. Huge
pharmaceutical companies are built to produce medicines. Numerous
research laboratories are engaged in discovering new medicines. All of
them aim to seek the cure of human sufferings. They are very much the
need of the hour. But why are we oblivious of the psychological and
spiritual ills?

Man is always caught in the trap of psychological diseases and in this
same condition reaches the jaws of death. Why do people not take any
step to save humanity from perdition? Rather, they act in the opposite
way.

Knowingly or unknowingly, various propagandas are being carried out to
destroy psychological health. Efforts are made to kill humanity and
morals and to trap the human society in the quagmire of sensuality,
unbridled passions and wantonness.

Jealousy, an Example
--------------------

News reports mention that Swiss doctors have instituted a committee to
find the cure of jealousy. This shows that doctors consider jealousy an
ordinary disease that is harmful for human beings. Just as they are in
search of new cures of tuberculosis and cancer in the same way they
strive to arrive at a cure for jealousy.

We do not know, how and through which method these doctors have begun
their research. Whether they shall be successful in their endeavor or
not? Anyway a dignified thought process has been initiated and this
alone is a cause for hope. People are aware of the disease of jealousy
since times immemorial, but they have not been able to find the cure for
it. They are unaware of the medicine that can cure this disease, which
has destroyed families and made family life Hell. So much so that except
for Islam even the other religions have nothing to offer against this
terrible malady.

Ethical and moral schools are also ineffective. Humanity is continuously
burning in this fire of conscience. Jealousy has taken hold of its
victims like an evil spirit. We believe that jealousy is worse than
cancer. Within a year cancer kills hundreds of people, but jealousy can
destroy millions in a second. Most battles in history originated in
jealousy.

Alexander had the quality of a crocodile. He used to look upon his
contemporary kingdoms with a jealous eye. He had also invaded Iran. One
of the factors that instigated him was jealousy.

It is said that he set the throne of Jamshed on fire and this fire
reached upto the door and walls of the palace. Alexander witnessed this
scene while enjoying wine, and he was laughing aloud in joy tempered
with anger. That is, the flames of jealousy emitted from his mouth.
Studies reveal that the fire of jealousy burnt forever in his heart.

The massacre and atrocities committed by Hitler in the Second World War
were also rooted in jealousy. According to a writer Hitler was a very
jealous person. He could not bear to see someone wearing better clothes
than him. He used to be jealous of the person and in some way or the
other he managed to destroy that dress. Hitler is supposed to have said
in an interview, “I cannot bear to become aged and see young people
occupying my position.”

An expert of history is of the opinion that the large-scale destruction
perpetrated by Hitler was due to jealousy. He used to cool the flames of
his jealousy by such gestures.[^18]

It is good to know that a group of Swiss doctors are paying attention to
a psychological disease. However, they should know that the cure of this
disease and illnesses like it, is beyond human capacity. Only the
Almighty Allah is aware of every apparent and hidden thing.

If Allah gives divine opportunity (*Tawfeeq*) it may be possible to
derive the cure from the spiritual doctor and the heavenly book that is
the Holy Quran. Every type of psychological disease and its cure is
mentioned in the Quran.

It is also mentioned in the above report that, “Religious teachings and
laws cannot take effective steps with regard to the cure of jealousy.”

If they mean to say that people have not made an effort to seek the cure
from religious teachings it is correct. Otherwise there is no defect or
deficiency in the Quranic teachings. Which Muslim has sincerely tried to
learn Quranic sciences and act fully upon its laws, and in this way
obtain the cure of his psychological ills?

Allah will definitely bestow a cure if one acts upon the Quranic
teachings in totality after understanding them. The psychological
diseases common in Muslims and their decadence is due to the fact that
they have turned away from the laws of Quran.

Whatever is there is due to our unregulated and unwieldy body. Otherwise
your being was not shorter than anyone's height[^19].

A Healthy soul and a Healthy Body
---------------------------------

We have to follow a set of rules for maintaining physical health. One of
the points is that there are some extra parts that must be separated
from the human body. For example the unborn child in its mother's womb
has these extra things that are removed after it is born. Like the
covering membrane enveloping the whole body, the umbilical cord through
which it derives nourishment from its mother and the foreskin of the
penis that is removed in circumcision. These are the things that can be
dangerous to health if not removed after the child is born.

In the same way there are some additional qualities that accompany the
human soul by divine wisdom. They are beneficial to men only under
special circumstances. These special occasions are specified by reason
and Shariah. For example, ignorance, greed, miserliness, injustice,
haste and the spirit of confrontation etc. All these are present in man
since his inception as confirmed by the Holy Quran:

***Surely he is unjust, ignorant*****.**[^20]

***Surely man is created of a hasty temperament*****.**[^21]

***and whoever is saved from the greediness of his soul, these it is
that are the successful***.[^22]

***Man is created of haste*****.**[^23]

***And man is most of all given to contention*****.**[^24]

In the same way man is described as possessing other evil traits also.
He is most ungrateful *(Surah Zukhruf 43:15),* very niggardly *(Surah
Bani Israel (7:100),* very prone to despair *(Surah Hud 11:9),* easily
frightened *(Surah Ma'arij 70:20)* very hasty *(Surah Bani Israel
17:11)* etc. The Quran has also described the infidels to be blind,
dumb, deaf and worse than quadrupeds. For example,

***Surely the vilest of animals in Allah's sight are those who
disbelieve…***[^25]25

And also,

***Deaf, dumb (and) blind, so they do not understand.***[^26]26

Quran has mentioned many such kinds of spiritual diseases and their cure
shall be described in detail in this book. For the time being we should
know that these qualities could be put to use only as far as reason and
Shariah permit. We must strive to bring them under control if they
exceed these limits.

Like for instance, miserliness is very much present in man. However, it
should be restricted only for circumstances that man abstains from
spending a single penny in illegal acts. He must also not waste money or
spend it in useless things. He must be miserly in spending his life and
wealth in any way other than those approved by Allah. He should not
however prove to be a miser when he has to spend all this in the way of
Allah.

You are given the axe to cut wood not that you hit the people on their
heads.[^27]

Cleanliness of the Body from the food consumed
----------------------------------------------

A portion of the food consumed by human beings is able to become a part
of their body and the rest is ejected in urine and stool. Some food
ingredients are responsible for the growth of nails and hair and some
get evaporated in the form of sweat. The fats that accumulate in the
body are derived from specific food components and they are deposited on
the internal walls, sometimes causing difficulty in breathing.

The human body cleans itself continuously so that its well being is
assured. We should trim our nails at least once a week. We must also
shave the armpits and groin. Use of soap is necessary to remove oily
substances on our body, otherwise our health shall be in peril.

In the same way, our clothes, houses, atmosphere and our food must be
free of dirt and contamination.

Spiritual Hygiene is also Important
-----------------------------------

Just as cleanliness is necessary for physical health it is a must to
purge the soul of psychological diseases in order to assure its well
being. Spiritual diseases cause waywardness and depravity. They deprive
man of righteousness. We must try to immunize ourselves against such
ailments. To achieve this we must act upon the method recommended by the
Quran.

Man becomes so busy in worldly preoccupations that he tends to forgo the
remembrance of Allah and the Hereafter. He becomes so engrossed in quest
of physical well being and material needs that he falls into
heedlessness and depravity. Such people are few whom Allah praises in
the following words,

***Men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the remembrance
of Allah*****.**[^28]28

A number of methods are taught by Quran to avoid heedlessness and the
best among them is the five times daily prayer. The Almighty Allah says,

***And keep up prayer for My remembrance*****.**[^29]29

Prescription
------------

We must try to ensure that whatever we see, hear or receive through the
use of our organs should not be harmful to our soul. But how can we know
whether it is harmful or not? Well, the Islamic Shariah has informed us
that we must act on a perfect reason and the divine law. We must abstain
from every activity that causes spiritual ills. We must perform every
action that is beneficial in getting rid of the diseases present in our
soul and cause the soul to scale greater heights of perfection.

Materialist man has no spiritual cure
-------------------------------------

Physical diseases are such that can be perceived and recognized by the
five senses of man. The Almighty Allah has provided their cure in this
material world itself that man can obtain if he tries well enough or
experiments on them.

The cases of spiritual diseases are different. The soul itself cannot be
perceived by man with his five senses. The soul is not a material thing.
Thus its diseases too do not have a material base. A layman cannot
diagnose these spiritual diseases. It is beyond human capacity to have
complete control over the working of the soul. Apart from this, no man
is aware of the secrets of the soul and the cure for spiritual ills.

The Almighty Allah says regarding this that He has chosen a few persons
and gave them the information of these unseen matters. He has appointed
them as spiritual doctors and guides of humanity. And Allah appointed
the Prophet Muhammad (S), the last Prophet as the chief of all these
holy personalities.

The prophets are like the shepherds for the people. They are the guides
in every aspect of life. Our Prophet is the leader of these prophets. He
is the first and the last in this affair. The Almighty Allah has
bestowed a favor on humanity by sending him.

***Certainly Allah conferred a benefit upon the believers when He raised
among them an Apostle from among themselves, reciting to them His
communications and purifying them, and teaching them the Book and the
wisdom*****.**[^30]

Here the word 'purifying' indicates the purging of all types of
spiritual diseases from the heart, the details of which are being
presented in this book. It is well understood from this verse that the
aim of sending prophets is to illuminate the human hearts by the light
of wisdom, to purify the soul from every uncleanness and to embellish
them with all the great virtues. The Messenger of Allah (S) himself
states, “I have been sent for the perfection of morals.”

Quran, The Message that Bestows life
------------------------------------

The Book sent by the Merciful Lord through His exalted Prophet contains
natural and spiritual laws. It has the message of life and teachings
that enliven the hearts.

The Almighty says,

***O you who believe! Answer (the call of) Allah and His Apostle when he
calls you to that which gives you life*****.**[^31]31

And

***Is he who was dead then We raised him to life and made for him a
light by which he walks among the people, like him whose likeness is
that of one in utter darkness whence he cannot come forth?***[^32]32

“O living heart! You do not know who is a dead one! A corpse is one who
does not remember Allah!”[^33]

The Holy Quran says,

***Whoever does good whether male or female and he is a believer, We
will most certainly make him live a happy life.***[^34]34

The hearts, which are dead due to disbelief and hypocrisy, turn to
belief and the real life if the solid proofs of Quran convince them.
Thus it is this Quran, which is a cure for the hidden ailments.

***And a healing for what is in the breasts.***[^35]

At another place the Quran says,

***Say: It is to those who believe a guidance and a healing*****.**[^36]

And also,

***And We reveal of the Quran that which is a healing and a mercy to the
believers*****.**[^37]

Thus the Holy Quran is the absolute cure. It cures the spiritual
diseases of its followers It is a clear mercy too. It bestows its
believers with well being, health and fortitude. It teaches them to
acquire good morals. It commands them to live peacefully in the society
and obtain its benefits.

Refutation of a wrong notion
----------------------------

Due to lack of knowledge some people say: “The sins of the heart are
such that they are committed widely.” They say that it is not possible
for human beings to escape them. Therefore it is not our duty to avoid
them. That is, it is not necessary to avoid them under the law of
Shariah. Hence there is no divine chastisement for such things. Some
people also say, “These are only moral teachings and it is not certain
whether they are prohibited by Shariah.”

A Wrong Notion
--------------

The sins of the heart are those improper thoughts that often occur to
people. It is not possible to prevent them from occurring to us.
Therefore such matters do not fall within the purview of religious
obligations and they do not carry divine chastisement.

However, there is a difference between the “Sin of the heart” and
“thoughts.” The sins of the heart are such that one can prevent them
from entering ones heart. If they are already present in ones heart they
can be removed, while thoughts cannot be prevented.

For example you see a Muslim man at a wine shop. A thought comes to you
that he is an alcoholic and he is there to purchase wine. This thought
has entered your heart involuntarily. Now it depends upon you to give
this thought a permanent place in your heart. You begin to think bad of
the person and label him a drunkard and a transgressor. Thinking bad
about a Muslim is a sin of the heart.

If you desire you can at once realize that it is a satanic instigation.
You can justify the circumstances of that man. You can say that 'perhaps
he has come for some other important errand'. 'May be that he is waiting
for someone'. You can rid your heart of evil thoughts by finding such
justifications.

Or for example, you see someone having possession of a new bounty. A
thought strikes you immediately: Why did he get this bounty? If you at
once realize that it is a satanic thought and by the light of your faith
and knowledge you discard it from your mind there would be no sin on
you. Involuntary thoughts are altogether among the forgiven deeds.
Whenever a thought like this occurs to you, you must at once say to
yourself that, 'Allah has given him these bounties. It is according to
divine wisdom. To object to a divine act is equal to disbelief. Allah is
having the power to give a similar or better bounty to me also.'

However, if you give a permanent place to this thought in your heart and
wish that the person loses that bounty, you become afflicted with a sin
of the heart, namely, jealousy.

Or for example, you have been hurt by a word or action of another
person. Now it is possible for you to ignore it, forgive him or to take
a suitable revenge. But if instead of this you become inimical to him
and you hurt him more than he has harmed you, you shall be involved in
the sin of the heart that is known as malice.

Thinking bad of someone, jealousy and malice, as you have seen are such
things that find a permanent place in your heart. And it is within your
powers to allow them to settle in your heart or not. It is also upto you
whether you let them remain in your heart or throw them out. A passing
thought, even if it is based on disbelief, is pardonable because it was
involuntary and there is no sin for it.

To be cautious of Satanic whisperings is a sign of belief
---------------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in *Usul al-Kafi* that in the time of the Messenger of
Allah (S) the Satan put an evil thought in the heart of a person. He
said, “Who has created you?” “Allah”, replied this man. “Who has created
Allah?” asked the Satan. This person was very aggrieved and worried due
to this thought. He came to the Messenger of Allah (S) and said, “I am
finished!” and then he narrated the details. The Holy Prophet (S) said,
“By Allah! This is pure belief (Iman).”

That is, since he feared divine retribution, it showed that he was
cautious of the Satan's whispering. Therefore it is a proof of belief
and actual belief itself.

There are many traditions in *Usul al-Kafi* that imply that there shall
be no punishment for unsuitable thoughts. These narrations state that
one can avoid evil thoughts by reciting 'Laa ihaaha illallaah' (There is
no God except Allah). Another tradition mentions a command to recite
Allah's remembrance by saying “Aamanna billahi wa rasulihi, wa laa hawla
wa laa quwwata illa billaah.” (We believe in Allah and His Messengers
and there is no power and might except by Allah).

Our discussion so far has shown us that the sins of the heart are the
things that remain behind in the heart and we have control over them.
They are not like passing thoughts. This book shall prove the illegality
of each of these sins from the point of view of Islamic law.

There is no other way
---------------------

The cure of spiritual diseases and the well being and health of the
heart are not such that some person should consider them easy or ignore
them. It requires a great effort. One has to fight against self.
Sometimes we have to forgo pleasures. It is not that we disregard those
pleasures. Rather, at that time we are sacrificing a lesser pleasure for
something much higher and pleasurable. All this becomes necessary for a
pure human life. In order to reach such heights we have to consider
difficulty as ease and consider problems to be bounties.

Consider grief as comfort because the aim has become higher. You
perceive hyena's eye around the flock of sheep as if it is a mother of
pearl.

A person with a healthy heart spends his life in peace and ease. He
achieves the satisfaction of his Lord. The worldly grief is compensated
by spiritual delights. When a person with a peaceful heart departs from
this world he begins a life that is absolutely restful and filled with
pleasures. He is offered such bounties as the eye has never seen, the
ear never heard and no one has even imagined them. He achieves a real
kingdom. Whatever he desires is at once presented to him.

***And when you see there, you shall see blessings and a great
kingdom*****.**[^38]

An Astounding Fact
------------------

How surprising that man goes to great lengths to assure his physical
health and well being. He spends a great part of his wealth on it and
even takes bitter medicines and gets himself operated. But he does
nothing for the well being of his heart. He pays no heed to the cure of
his spiritual diseases. The matter of spiritual health is much more
important than physical health. But man makes no effort to get this
cure. He ignores the advice of Allah and the Prophet regarding these
internal ailments.

He is completely heedless. Whatever worldly discomforts he has to suffer
due to spiritual diseases, he resigns himself to them. He considers the
punishment that awaits him in the Hereafter to be distant. He has no
faith in it. The doctor says: This disease could prove fatal and he
believes it at once.

Till his last moments he strives to be cured. But when Allah and the
Prophet say, “The spiritual diseases are indeed fatal!” It is surprising
that man is not prepared to accept that he is prone to harm of spiritual
illnesses. Even if there had been a slightest risk, reason would have
compelled him to take precautionary measures.

Allah only tells you to abstain from wine in this life. The doctor only
tells you to avoid sweets when you have jaundice.

You do not forgo a prohibited act for the sake of religion when Allah
says. But for the sake of physical health you forgo a permissible
thing?[^39]39

The curtain of heedlessness will be removed at the time of death. Man
shall see himself and his diseases. But at that time he shall find no
cure for them. No matter how much he entreats Allah, no matter how much
he repents, it shall not be of any use.

***Lest a soul should say: O woe to me! For what I fell short of my duty
to Allah*****.**[^40]

Prescription is not a cure
--------------------------

Some Muslims think that it is sufficient to recite the formula of Faith.
They think that it is enough that the Holy Quran is a heavenly and a
religious book. They keep it on a shelf. On a high shelf. They do not
read its verses with introspection. They do not act upon its exalted
method of living. However, if a doctor writes a prescription one does
not act in this way. That is, keep it in the pocket and feel content
with it or keep it on a high shelf. One does not rest till one purchases
the medicines prescribed in it and till one takes them. It would
certainly be illogical to go to a doctor, get a prescription from him
and just sit at home. Common sense prevents such behavior.

Disbelief is not the only Spiritual Disease
-------------------------------------------

There are some other Muslims who act upon some of the Quranic commands.
For example they offer prayers, keep fasts etc. But there is no soul of
life in their actions. They ignore other teachings of the Quran. Over
and above this, they consider themselves owners of 'Qalbe Saleem' (an
immaculate conscience).

They think that divine retribution prescribed for spiritual diseases
concerns only the disbelievers. Due to this wrong notion they become
proud and continue in this compounded ignorance forever. (Compounded
ignorance is that they are ignorant of their ignorance!)

They have a mistaken notion that the only spiritual disease is
Disbelief. It is only one of its kinds. There are many other spiritual
ailments and Quran has mentioned their cures in various places.

Despite being a Muslim, one can be afflicted with spiritual diseases.
The following two verses are sufficient to prove this statement.

***If the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the
agitators in the city do not desist, We shall most certainly set you
over them*****.**[^41]

***And that those in whose hearts is a disease and the unbelievers may
say: What does Allah mean by this parable?***[^42]

As you see both these verses mention Muslims who have disease in the
heart, which is why they are mentioned separately along with the
disbelievers and hypocrites.

Now who is that Muslim who has never been a target of changing thoughts
and satanic whisperings? Who has remained steadfast in Allah's service
and never looked towards or attracted by evil? Who could claim to be
absolutely pure of selfish desires? All these are some of the diseases
of the heart, and polytheism is just one of its kind. Allah says,

***And most of them do not believe in Allah without associating others
(with Him).***[^43]43

It is related from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that “associating” in this verse
implies associating in obedience. On one hand people believe in the
Oneness of Allah and consider Him alone worthy of worship. But on the
other hand they obey the Satan also. They become obedient to him in
performing sinful acts. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says, “Indeed this
verse is aimed at more than two-thirds of the people.”[^44]44

Who is that Muslim who has remained free all his life from jealousy,
malice, pride and greed? The Holy Quran has mentioned the spiritual
ailments. Thus it is obligatory upon all Muslims to study them. In
addition to the Quran they must also pay attention to the sayings of the
Prophet's Progeny (Ahlul Bayt). They should act upon the laws framed by
the scholars based on Quran and traditions. Beware, that the chance of
repentance passes away.

Lack of belief is real ignorance
--------------------------------

Such diseases that are compared to blindness, dumbness and deafness by
the Holy Quran afflict a heart that is bereft of faith,

***Deaf, dumb (and) blind, so they do not understand***.[^45]

That is, the hearts of those whose ears are incapable of hearing the
truth, whose tongues cannot speak truth and whose eyes cannot see the
reality.

The Quran also says,

***And whoever is blind in this, he shall (also) be blind in the
hereafter*****.**[^46]

This verse and other such verses inform us that in the Hereafter the
apparent form of people will be the same as their inner form. For
example,

***On the day when hidden things shall be made manifest*****.**[^47]

Thus one who has not seen Allah with his inner eye, has not trusted the
truth and has not aligned himself with the right way, in the Hereafter,
too, he shall not be able to see Allah's bounties. In the same way one
who has not perceived truth by the ears of his heart and has not
accepted it, he would not be able to hear the pleasurable bounties of
Paradise and its inmates.

Such hearts do not have a healthy faith. Hearts bereft of faith are
sick. The Almighty says,

***There is a disease in their hearts*****.**[^48]

***So a seal is set upon their hearts*****.**[^49]

***Nay, on the hearts there are locks*****.**[^50]

***Nay! Rather, what they used to do has become like rust upon their
hearts*****.**[^51]51

***They are as cattle, nay, they are in worse errors.***[^52]

***Surely the vilest of animals in Allah's sight are those who
disbelieve*****.**[^53]

A disbeliever is worse than animals
-----------------------------------

The superiority of men over animals is that Allah has given human beings
the capacity to perceive the truth. He can heed advice and act upon it.
One who does not use this ability is deprived of the status of a human
being. All that remains in him is a beast or an animal.

In the first supplication of *Sahifa Sajjadiya* Imam Zainul Abideen
(a.s.) says, “And were they to be such, they would certainly have gone
beyond the bounds of humanity into the frontiers of beastliness. They
would have conformed to the description which He has given in His Unique
Book, saying, “What are they except like brutes or even more aberrant
from the way?”

The Dead
--------

The Holy Quran refers to the disbelievers as dead men. It says,

***Surely you do not make the dead to hear, and you do not make the deaf
to hear the call when they go back retreating*****.**[^54]54

We should know that belief is the nourishment of the soul. If the body
does not get proper nourishment it's shape and capabilities deteriorate.
If this continues the capacities are destroyed completely. This
ultimately leads to death.

The same can be said for a soul that lacks belief. Lack of belief causes
this soul to become afflicted with spiritual diseases. In comparison to
this his humanity becomes weak. He becomes heedless of a pure and
spiritual life. Till finally the human being in him dies and he becomes
involved in eternal perdition.

Death of the Soul
-----------------

There is a great difference between physical and spiritual death. When
the physical body dies its physical discomfort is over. Just like a bird
that escapes from a cage. However, even after the death of the soul its
pain does not terminate. Not only one is troubled by the spiritual
ailments one is also tortured by the bad morals that are the
consequences of this.

***Then therein he shall neither live nor die*****.**[^55]

He shall be involved in a life-death struggle. He would not die so that
he could get rid of the pain. Neither would he get a life of comfort.

The Holy Quran also says,

***Is he who was dead then We raised him to life and made for him a
light by which he walks*** ***among the people, like him whose likeness
is that of one in utter darkness whence he cannot come forth?***[^56]

Similarly the verse,

***Whoever does good whether male or female and he is a believer, We
will most certainly make him live a happy life.***[^57]

These verses prove that apart from this animal life man also has another
kind of purified life. One must obtain such a life. Traditions have
compared it to the spirit of faith (Ruhul Iman). One who posses this
life remains forever in peace and safety and in such a well being that
there is no existence of fear or terror. He gains everlasting joy and
happiness.

Why should he not be pleased? He can see, hear and feel such things, as
the other people are incapable of. A person whose humanity is alive is
submerged in the sea of divine friendship in this world and the
Hereafter. He remains happy due to his proximity to Allah.

More Ugly than a Monkey!
------------------------

As we have mentioned, the outward appearance of man shall resemble his
inner self. Everyone will be raised in his spiritual form. All those who
are evil in this world and possess beastly qualities, those that are
beyond the frontiers of humanity and lack the spirit of belief or a
purified life, they shall be deprived of the real elegance on the Day of
Judgment.

They shall be raised in terrible forms. Muhaddith Faiz has quoted a
tradition in his book *Ainul Yaqeen,*

“People shall be raised in such terrible forms that monkeys and pigs are
better.”

For more details please refer to my book *Ma'ad.*[^58]

Peaceful life and a comfortable Hereafter
-----------------------------------------

If someone asks: You say that the life of the faithful is pure in both
the worlds. A believer always remains in comfort, bounties and
happiness. On the other hand the disbeliever is involved in grief and
calamities! He is a prisoner of selfish desires. He is in everlasting
depravity and sorrow. But we see that many faithful people are involved
in various calamities, difficulties and problems. While on the other
hand a large number of infidels spend their life in affluence and
comfort?

The reply to this objection is that the heart of a believer is like a
garden. A believer has to face material difficulties in the world. But
he is not aggrieved of these problems. These thorns only prick the body
and are confined within the boundaries of the garden. However, the
garden of the heart has no place for these thorns. Even in this material
world the soul of the believer is safe from all calamities.

***Those are they who shall have the security and they are those who go
aright.***[^59]

The sole desire of a believer in this world is that his Lord should be
pleased with him. Such a person does not despair due to failures and
material setbacks. He considers only Allah as his guardian and the
guardian of others. He recognizes the power, wisdom and mercy of Allah.
He considers Allah his Master and considers himself His slave.

***That is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe, and
because the unbelievers shall have no protector for them*****.**[^60]

Thus a believer does not become sorrowful and aggrieved by the
difficulties of this worldly life. They do not even make him angry.
Allah keeps the hearts of the believer peaceful in this world also.

***He it is Who sent down tranquility into the hearts of the
believers*****.**[^61]61

Hope in Allah, the strongest support for a believer
---------------------------------------------------

A believer always faces adversity with determination. He does not
stumble, nor does his feet tremble. He does not fall down on this path.
He knows that behind every calamity is hidden wisdom and he alone shall
be eligible for the benefit of this hidden wisdom. All that he hopes
from Allah is that He removes this difficulty or in this way recompenses
it so that even the physical pain does not remain for him.

***If you suffer pain, then surely they (too) suffer pain as you suffer
pain, and you hope from Allah what they do not hope*****.**[^62]

That is, you hope for salvation from problems, forgiveness and rewards,
but the unbelievers have no such hopes. They remain forever in the
darkness of hopelessness.

The disbeliever’s heart is a Horrible Ruin
------------------------------------------

The heart of a believer is not worried of problems and difficulties.
Only they affect his physical and apparent body. Whereas all the
happiness that faithless people achieve is limited to their apparent
selves. Rather their hearts are such terrible ruins that they are never
inhabited by such pleasures. The darkness of their hearts cannot be
dispelled by their sensual desires. Their hearts remain restless,
uncomfortable and sorrowful.

Actually these desires are the coverings of the heart. The interior of
these hearts is filled with dread and horror. An infidel tries to remain
engrossed in worldly matters so that he could forget his internal ache.
However, these desires cause a lot of burning in the wilderness of his
heart. They increase the desolateness of his heart. It is another matter
if he keeps himself ignorant of this reality. When the activities of
this world come to an end such people will taste the horrifying and
terrible Hell.

The Quran says,

***Certainly you were heedless of it, but now We have removed from you
your veil, so your sight today is sharp*****.**[^63]

That is, now you are seeing things that you did not even imagine before.

The Unbeliever’s dread will never end
-------------------------------------

The unbeliever has to bear the difficulties in this world also. He
remains forever in poverty or disease. The enemy always has an upper
hand on him. Whenever he is not busy in the fulfillment of his carnal
desires he sits down in shame and despair. Everywhere he sees the
darkness of disbelief and hopelessness.

He has no hope in the Almighty. Comparing himself to the world he feels
degraded. Seeing the condition of his life he becomes sorrowful. He
complains with his tongue and this continues till he begins to prefer
death and commits suicide thinking that this would relieve him from the
worldly difficulties. However, it was a wrong notion. He is not
annihilated by physical death. The horror of his heart remains with him
forever. There is no escape from all this for a disbeliever while they
remain on disbelief.

***And whoever turns away from My reminder, his shall be a straitened
life, and We will raise him on the day of resurrection,
blind*****.**[^64]

And those whose hearts are not illuminated by the light of faith they
shall be deprived of light in the Hereafter also.

***It shall be said: Turn back and seek a light*****.**[^65]

Joy and Sorrow
--------------

No matter how happy an unbeliever may seem in this life, his heart is
always sorrowful and under stress. First of all he cannot fulfill all
his desires. Human desires are unlimited. Due to various hurdles he is
not able to achieve even one percent of his wishes. That is why he burns
forever in the fire of depravation and finds himself surrounded by the
difficulties imposed on him by the barriers. Another thing is that he is
always fearful of losing the bounties he possesses. He knows that his
material treasure is going to be destroyed one day and that it shall be
taken away from him by death.

Now it is Allah and the faith in the Day of recompense that can keep a
man happy. A believer is content even when there is scarcity of
bounties. He doesn't even fear the destruction of his material
belongings. He knows that the best of bounties, better than material
things is present in his very heart. And that is faith in Allah. Even
with regard to the Hereafter he is happy due to the hope he reposes in
his Lord.

***Say: In the grace of Allah and in His mercy in that they should
rejoice*****.**[^66]66

Acquire as much belief as possible
----------------------------------

From the discussion so far we realize that the greatest treasure for man
in this world and the Hereafter is a healthy and a perfect soul and it
should not be afflicted with the disease of the absence of faith. In the
same way greatest misfortune for man in both the worlds is absence of
belief. Thus it is most important for us to strive to gain belief. We
should always try to increase our faith.

When the heart is illuminated by faith, most diseases are cured
automatically. Lack of faith is a fatal disease of the heart and it
causes other spiritual ailments or worsens them. Thus we should keep
ourselves safe from this deadly illness.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) is quoted in *Tafsir Safi* explaining the
exegesis of the throne verse (Ayatul Kursi): “Allah is the guardian of
those who have accepted belief. Allah brings these very people from the
darkness into Light. That is, He brings them out from the darkness of
sins into the light of repentance and forgiveness.” Thus the most
important thing is belief. One can keep aloof from every type of evil
due to ones faith alone.

Belief means Certainty
----------------------

It should not remain unsaid that belief means certainty in the necessary
facts regarding Tawheed (Oneness of Allah) and Day of Judgment. Such a
belief is effective in curing the diseases of the heart and the light of
certainty guides man to the truth that Allah is his creator and the
Creator of other people. All of us are slaves of the Almighty. Allah has
bestowed all that we possess. Everything belongs to Allah.

We all have to return to the Day of Judgment and the world of recompense
(Hereafter). One who has faith in these fundamentals is free from
diseases like jealousy, greed and enmity. The brilliance and luminosity
of the light of certainty dispels all the shadows and ailments. If there
remain in us moral ills we should know that either we lack certainty of
belief or it is very weak.

Conclusion of this Introduction
-------------------------------

Thus anyone who wishes to have a peaceful heart and the best of the
world and the Hereafter should achieve certainty regarding the beliefs.
It is the cure for numerous diseases. He must give precedence to this
over his other desires. The aim of this introduction was to emphasize
the importance of certainty for our respected readers. The foundation of
all beliefs rests on certainty.

Therefore we have kept the section on beliefs before the section on
morals. If divine assistance continues we shall soon discuss in detail
the diseases of disbelief, hypocrisy, polytheism and doubt. We shall
also mention their cures and describe the method of achieving certainty.
In the next section we shall describe the Moral ills.

[^1]: Surah Maidah 5:27.

[^2]: Surah Anam 6:82.

[^3]: Surah Hashr 59:9.

[^4]: Surah Tawbah 9:122.

[^5]: Surah Shuara 26:88-89.

[^6]: Surah Baqarah 2:225.

[^7]: Surah Baqarah 2:283.

[^8]: Surah Baqarah 2:284.

[^9]: Surah Bani Israel 17:36.

[^10]: Surah Nur 24:19.

[^11]: Surah Anam 6:120.

[^12]: Surah Baqarah 2:10.

[^13]: Surah Shuara 26:88-89.

[^14]: Surah Anam 6:127.

[^15]: Biharul Anwar Vol. 14 Pg.398.

[^16]: Persian Couplet.

[^17]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 259.

[^18]: Quoted from the Pars Daily, 63/33.

[^19]: Persian Couplet.

[^20]: Surah Ahzab 33:72.

[^21]: Surah Maryam 70:19.

[^22]: Sura at-Taghabun, 64:16.

[^23]: Surah Anbiya 21:37.

[^24]: Surah Kahf 18:54.

[^25]: Surah Anfal 8:55.

[^26]: Surah Baqarah 2:171.

[^27]: Persian Couplet.

[^28]: Surah Nur 24:37.

[^29]: Surah Taha 20:14.

[^30]: Surah Ali Imran 3:164.

[^31]: Surah Anfal 8:24.

[^32]: Surah Anam 6:122.

[^33]: A couplet of Shaykh Sadi.

[^34]: Surah Nahl 16:97.

[^35]: Surah Yunus 10:57.

[^36]: Surah Ha Mim 41:44.

[^37]: Surah Bani Israel 17:82.

[^38]: Surah Dahr 76:20.

[^39]: Persian Couplets

[^40]: Surah Zumar 39:56

[^41]: Surah Ahzab 33:60.

[^42]: Surah Muddassir 74:31.

[^43]: Surah Yusuf 12:106.

[^44]: Usul al-Kafi.

[^45]: Surah Baqarah 2:171.

[^46]: Surah Bani Israel 17:72.

[^47]: Surah Tariq 86:9.

[^48]: Surah Baqarah 2:10.

[^49]: Surah Munafiqoon 63:3.

[^50]: Surah Muhammad 47:24.

[^51]: Surah Mutafaffefeen 83:14.

[^52]: Surah Araaf 7:179

[^53]: Surah Anfal 8:55.

[^54]: Surah Naml 27:80

[^55]: Surah Alaa 87:13

[^56]: Surah Anam 6:122.

[^57]: Surah Nahl 16:97.

[^58]: Also published in English by Ansarian Publications and available
on line at: http://www.al-islam.org/the-hereafter/

[^59]: Surah Anam 6:82.

[^60]: Surah Muhammad 47:11.

[^61]: Surah Fath 48:4.

[^62]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:104.

[^63]: Surah Qaf 50:22.

[^64]: Surah Taha 20:124.

[^65]: Surah Hadid 57:13.

[^66]: Surah Yunus 10:58


