First Disease-Disbelief
=======================

Disbelief denotes denial and rejection of something that is considered
true by human nature and a healthy reason. Nature and reason feel
obliged to believe in it. Among such things is the belief in Allah, the
Prophets and the Day of Recompense. Every sane person understands that
there must be someone who has brought him and other things into
existence.

And that Creator is Wise and Powerful. When man thinks upon it he
becomes certain of the Wisdom and Power of the Creator of the Universe.
Contemplation also makes him certain that this life is not all that is
and that after death man shall be annihilated.

Had it been so this creation shall be in vain. However, since the
Almighty is Wise and All knowing there must be another life for human
beings where righteousness of all shall be manifested and everyone shall
be recompensed for their deeds.

We also gain certainty that Allah has not left man on his own. He has
appointed guides from their own genre (human beings). The guides of
humanity are also human, whom Allah has sent to guide people towards
salvation. In brief we can say that belief in Oneness of God,
Prophethood and Day of Judgment is based on human nature and common
sense.

All three of these roots of religion are self evident or axiomatic. Deep
contemplation and complicated reasoning is not required to bring faith
in them. Even a little thoughtfulness convinces the unimpaired reason to
acquire belief in these fundamentals. In spite of this if someone
rejects these basics he is afflicted with the worst of spiritual and
psychological diseases. And if he remains in this condition he
ultimately loses his humanity and falls into eternal perdition.

The disease of disbelief is like the disease of the stomach for man. It
is like severe indigestion that one cannot even swallow anything. And if
something is swallowed forcibly the stomach throws it out in vomit. If
such an ailment is not cured, all the physical capacities are destroyed
and the person dies. In the same way if one has chronic disbelief and
does not forgo enmity and obstinacy, the Almighty Allah increases his
disbelief in this world.

***So Allah added to their disease*****.**[^1]

Actually he is being given whatever he himself had desired. He is made
to tread the path that he has chosen for himself.

***We will turn him to that to which he has (himself) turned*****…**[^2]

Allah increases the guidance of one who accepts belief and seeks
guidance. He increases the luminosity of his belief. Then he becomes a
devotee of whatever he gains recognition (*Ma’arifat*) of. And he flees
from every evil.

***And (as for) those who follow the right direction, He increases them
in guidance*****.**[^3]

Consequence of Disbelief
------------------------

The result of disbelief is that the heart becomes absolutely blind. Now
it cannot discriminate between truth and falsehood. Nor can it
understand what is wrong and what is right. The reality of humanity is
that due to this quality man can understand the reality of different
things and is aware of them. Disbelief causes him to fall from this
height of humanity and he becomes debased like beasts.

No goodness can be expected from him. There is a continuous increase in
his spiritual and internal ailments. Now he cannot find the cure for any
of his aches. He does not recognize any of his evil traits so that he
can avoid it. The capacity to differentiate good and evil is destroyed.
Far from finding a cure, he does not even accept that he is spiritually
sick.

Two Types of Disbeliefs
-----------------------

Disbelief is of two types. One of it is due to ignorance and immaturity,
and the other is despite having knowledge and intentionally. An ignorant
disbeliever is one who does not wish to recognize the truth. He denies
truth because he cannot recognize it and thus he does not accept it.
Most of the atheists and materialist are such.

They deny their creator and the Last Day just because of their
ignorance. Man spends a few years in this world. These materialists
think that like other living creatures man is also annihilated by death.
There is no reward or punishment for his actions and (God forbid) Allah
does not exist. Such people only follow their baseless conjectures and
wrong notions.

***They follow naught but conjecture*****.**[^4]

These people live in a society filled with disbelief. They follow their
elders. Or in spite of ignorance they consider themselves wise and deny
the truth. In the words of Quran these people utter such things,

***Surely we found our fathers on a course, and surely we are followers
of their footsteps*****.**[^5]

Disbelief Despite Knowledge
---------------------------

Disbelief despite knowledge indicates that man recognizes the truth but
if he accepts, it will create hurdles in achieving his selfish desires.
Therefore he is not attracted towards it. He does not accept it. Since
this person is involved in jealousy and arrogance he strives to falsify
the truth. Diseases like selfish desires, jealousy and arrogance compel
him to avoid defeat by accepting truth and he finds excuses for it.

He recognizes the truth. He knows that truth is such a kind adviser that
desires nothing other than his well-being. It advises him for his own
good, but his self does not like these advices. So he fights the truth
and does not accept its advice.

Irreligious People
------------------

Disbelief of most irreligious people is of this kind. Their conscience
believes in the existence of Allah and also accepts the Day of
recompense. How can their conscience agree that this vast universe came
into being without a creator? Their inner feelings testify that there
exists a being that is Wise, Powerful, Hearing and Seeing. Conscience
does not accept that man will be annihilated after death. It cannot
believe that this life of a few days and this toy world is the permanent
abode of man.

It is mentioned in the biography of Stalin that, “When he found some
difficult political problem that he could not solve, he used to be very
agitated. He used to go to the grave of Lenin and seek his help.
Ultimately he used to find a solution.” This was despite the fact that
Stalin did not believe in religion and Hereafter. But his nature and
conscience knew that spirit is not annihilated even after death.

Yes! Man knows that if he accepts that truth he would have to obey the
religious commandments. He shall be reining his desires due to the fear
of Allah and the Day of recompense. He would have to be careful in word
and deed. He will lose the freedom of his selfish desires. That is why
he does not desire to submit to the truth. He designs baseless
objections and satanic excuses and becomes happy by falsifying the
truth.

Such people are mentioned in the following words in the Quran,

***And they denied them unjustly and proudly while their soul had been
convinced of them*****.**[^6]

Infidels of Mecca and Jews of Medina
------------------------------------

Same was the case of the Meccan infidels. They knew Muhammad Ibne
Abdullah very well. They were certain that he was truthful and sane, and
that the Holy Quran was not the speech of a mortal. But pride, arrogance
and jealousy instigated them to deny the Prophet. They heaped false
allegations upon him that he was a liar, a magician and a mad man. They
opposed him and fought battles with him.

The Jews of Medina were also like that. They used to consider themselves
descendants of Prophet Ishaq. Therefore they used to think that they
alone were deserving of Prophethood and the post of guidance. They could
not bear to see a prophet being raised from the progeny of Ismail. That
is why they did not accept Muhammad as a prophet. Rather they waged
battles against him. They knew that the Prophet was speaking the truth.

The Prophethood of the Messenger of Allah (S) was also clear to them and
some of them had settled in Medina because they were aware of the
prophecy that a Prophet will migrate to Medina. They used to pray for
his arrival in Medina and also that they become his supporters and
defeat the infidels. But when the Holy Prophet (S) did arrive they
remained firm on their previous ignorance. Jealousy and pride did not
allow them to accept Faith.

***And when there came to them a Book from Allah verifying that which
they have, and aforetime they used to pray for victory against those who
disbelieve, but when there came to them (Prophet) that which they did
recognize, they disbelieved in him*****.**[^7]

Worldly Punishment
------------------

If the disease of disbelief is not cured it results in the death of
humanity and the conditions worsens to a limit when the disease becomes
incurable. No kind of advisory medicine can cure it then.

***It being alike to them whether you warn them, or do not warn them,
(they) will not believe*****.**[^8]

Now their hearts are no more receptive to advice. Their eyes and ears
are no more capable of perception. The Holy Quran is evocative as
regards their blindness, deafness and the closure of the way into their
hearts. So much so that Allah has himself taken the responsibility of
making them blind and deaf, and putting seals over their hearts. Allah
says that He has dealt with them in this manner. They are also
continuously punished in this world in the following way as Allah says:

***Allah set a seal upon them owing to their unbelief.*****”**[^9]

***Those it is whom Allah has cursed so He has made them deaf and
blinded their eyes*****.**[^10]

***But when they turned aside, Allah made their hearts turn
aside*****.**[^11]

In other words we can say that initially Allah does not seal the heart
of a disbeliever. He does not blind or makes deaf any person. But when a
man remains in disbelief for a long time, by his own wish and will and
does not desire to come out of it, Allah increases his disease.

***And their unbelief does not increase the disbelievers with their Lord
in anything except hatred*****.**[^12]

This continues till the time the path to a disbeliever's heart is
completely barred. Allah removes from him the divine opportunity
(*Tawfeeq*) of guidance. It is a sort of spiritual retribution. And this
type of punishment begins in this life itself.

Two Inner Eyes
--------------

We should know that blindness, deafness and the sealing of the heart are
not metaphorical. Rather the inside of man becomes like this. He in
reality becomes like his inner being. Just as man has a pair of apparent
eyes and ears each and a heart, in the same way he also has inner things
like these organs. The traditions of the Purified Imams testify to this
fact.

For example in Shaykh Saduq's *Tawheed* there is a tradition of Imam
Zainul Abideen (a.s.) that he said, “Know that! Every person has two
pairs of eyes. With one pair he sees the affairs of the Hereafter and
with the other pair he sees the worldly affairs. When Allah intends
goodness for a slave He opens his second pair of eyes; that is the eye
of his heart. Thus through these eyes Allah shows him the unseen
secrets. However, when Allah desires the contrary He leaves his heart on
its own.”

An Objection and its Reply
--------------------------

The Holy Quran says,

***And We will gather them together on the day of resurrection on their
faces, blind and dumb and deaf*****.**[^13]

And,

***He shall say: My Lord! Why hast Thou raised me blind and I was a
seeing one indeed?***[^14]

Such verses prove that one who is spiritually blind, dumb and deaf will
be raised in the Hereafter while his apparent form will be blind, dumb
and deaf. However, according to other verses it seems that this person
will be able to see, hear and speak.

For example,

***Read your book, this day***[^15]

This shows that he is not blind. His eyes will be open and he would be
able to read.

In the same way another verse says,

***And could you but see when the guilty shall hang down their heads
before their Lord: Our Lord! We have seen and we have heard, therefore
send us back, we will do good.***[^16]

This shows that on the Day of Judgment these people will be able to see,
hear and speak.

The objection can be replied as follows:

The conditions of disbelievers on the Day of Judgment will depend upon
the place and group in which they are included. In some instance they
shall be blind, deaf and dumb and in other places only their speaking
ability shall be lost, while they would see and hear.

***On that day we will set a seal upon their mouths*****.**[^17]

They would be allowed to speak in some places.

***And some of them shall advance towards others, questioning each
other*****.**[^18]

Blindness and Deafness
----------------------

It can be said that disbelievers will not be able to see the signs of
Divine Mercy and His unlimited bounties on the Day of Judgment that
shall be offered to the pious and the believing people. The infidels
will not be able to see Paradise, its inmates and its bounties. They
shall be blind from this aspect. In the same way they would be unable to
hear the melodious songs of Paradise. They shall be deaf in this regard.
(But when the Almighty desires, the inmates of Heaven and Hell shall,
staying in their respective places be able to see each other through
windows and exchange words.)

***In gardens, they shall ask each other. About the guilty: What has
brought you into hell? They shall say: We were not of those who
prayed*****.**[^19]

Here it must be clarified that like the Muslims, unbelievers will also
be questioned about Prayer and other obligatory acts. That is they
should have become Muslims and performed these acts.

Just as the unbelievers fail to see success and truth in this world, in
the Hereafter also their condition will be same. They shall be blind and
deaf there too. On the Day of Judgment their blindness and deafness will
be a kind of punishment upon them.

O Irreligiousness!
------------------

Perhaps you are wondering why I am emphasizing on this so much when the
readers of this book and other books like this are Muslims? They are
believers in the matter regarding the beginning of creation and
Hereafter.

The fact is that the flood of infidelity has surrounded the Muslim
society from all sides. Especially the new generation is in a precarious
position. Using various propagandas the infidels are trying to remove
faith from the hearts of young Muslims. Even if our young men remain
Muslims they have scanty knowledge of religion and they have a very weak
faith.

Muslims should plan a systematic propagation of their religion. Every
one of us must try to assure that our young people are well versed in
the articles of faith and do not go astray in matters of religion. They
should be immune to the deceit of enemies. But O irreligiousness! What
can you say about their deplorable attitude that they are not even
prepared to listen to any advice? They are attracted towards something
else!

Cure for the Denial of the Origin and Hereafter
-----------------------------------------------

The unbeliever is suffering from the disease of compounded ignorance
when he says that there is no wise and powerful God, there is no Prophet
to convey the message of God to the people and there is no need to
reward good and punish evil. He doesn't even know that he is ignorant.
He is a foolish person who considers himself intelligent. From the
aspect of his inner being he is a blind man who considers himself of
perfect sight, of perfect reason and liberal views. The only method to
cure his folly is to make him aware of his ignorance so that he may
correct himself.

Lack of knowledge is different from lack of realization that one lacks knowledge
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

He should be told that he does not know the truth. He has not recognized
the Almighty. He has not understood the system of recompense in the
Hereafter. Lack of knowledge doesn't mean that you close your eyes to
any forthcoming information. Denial is justified when you are certain
that there is no god.

If a person who is born blind says that sun does not exist he should be
told that the fact is he has never seen a shining sun. He does not
recognize it. He should say, 'I know nothing about the sun.'

Actually this stance of infidels is itself sufficient to defeat them.
They are actually giving a proof of their double ignorance. One is that
they are ignorant of reality - secondly they are ignorant of their
ignorance.

Denying the sun is denying oneself. It seems the one who is denying is
himself blind.[^20]

In Doubt
--------

The person who is denying faith must be told for example that, 'at
present you are not certain that there is no God.' You are just making a
conjecture. Doesn't your reason tell you that probably the believers are
right and there is indeed a wise and a powerful God? And that reward and
punishment are realities? And it is possible that what the Prophets had
said was truth?

If he says that he is certain there is no God you can be sure he is
lying. He doesn't want to be guided. Such a person should be left alone.
But if he deals with justice and says truthfully: Yes! There is a
possibility of the existence of God. It is not impossible. He must be
told:

*If you cannot find proof you cannot say that there is no proof*

This is a rational principle. Failure to find a proof does not prove its
non-existence. If one cannot find something one cannot say that, that
particular thing does not exist. It is possible that one has not
searched in a proper way. Such a person should say, “It may be there,
but I could not find it.”

Ray of Hope
-----------

If the disbeliever confesses his ignorance you can say that there is a
ray of hope. It is now possible for the light of faith to enter his
heart. Now he has realized that he has doubt concerning this matter. He
can remove this doubt by study and investigation. Based on human nature
every person is hungry for knowledge, intelligence and success. If he
realizes this hunger he would strive to remove the hunger of doubt and
thirst of knowledge by certainty and knowledge.

He gradually achieves the status of Certain Knowledge (*Ilmul Yaqeen*),
Eye of Certainty (*Ainul Yaqeen*) and Reality of Certainty (*Haqqul
Yaqeen*). And finally he achieves the grade of human perfection. If
Allah gives divine opportunity (*Tawfeeq*) he is not slothful in
striving on this way. He tries to cross each obstacle and moves ahead.
'Ilmul Yaqeen' is complete knowledge of a thing, 'Ainul Yaqeen' implies
seeing something with the inner eye and being certain of it and *'Haqqul
Yaqeen'* comes after this and it is the last stage. That is a certainty
that is absolute.

O pampered one! Your doubt is a strange kind of doubt, which does not
fly upto the garden of certainty. O Son! Every doubt is thirsty for
certainty. It struggles to quench its thirst at least. And when it
becomes knowledge it begins the search for certainty. Know that
knowledge is always in search for certainty. And certainty desires the
eye of certainty. When this is also acquired it becomes desirous of the
reality of certainty.[^21]

Difference in the Understanding capacity of Human beings and Animals
--------------------------------------------------------------------

This is in fact, the difference between men and animals. Man is
concerned about his conditions. He confesses his ignorance and doubt.
Man is superior to animals in this matter. Animals are very simple
minded. They remain unconcerned of their ignorance. They do not even
know whether they are having any understanding or not. Whereas human
beings have superior intelligence. It is known as compound intelligence
in our terminology. A human being understands what he knows and what he
is ignorant of, while animals have no desire to know more. Man is always
in search of increasing his knowledge and intelligence.

Thus there is a difference between the understanding of animals and
human beings. Human beings have a compound understanding. Secondly the
perception of animals does not urge them to obtain more knowledge and
increase their capabilities, while man does not want to have limited
knowledge.

Disbelievers are like Beasts
----------------------------

The above discussion tells us that if the deniers of truth do not become
aware of their ignorance and do not take steps to remove it, they are
like beasts. They do not have more intelligence than animals. Let us
present some verses of Quran to support our assertion

***And those who disbelieve enjoy themselves and eat as the beasts eat,
and the fire is their abode*****.**[^22]88

Neither are they aware that they are not enjoying the bounties of Allah,
nor they recognize the creator of these bounties. They are not even
concerned about the aim of the creation of these things and own
creation.

***Is as the likeness of the ass bearing books*****.**[^23]

The Jews were given the Torah but they did not act upon it.

***So his parable is as the parable of the dog*****.**[^24]

It is always barking against truth in every condition. As far as his
inner being is concerned, he is an animal. If the infidels become
deceitful and start conspiring they become like Satans.

***And thus did We make for every prophet an enemy, the Satans from
among men and jinn*****.**[^25]91

People who act like Satan will be raised with the Satan in the
Hereafter.

Quranic Cure of Disbelief
-------------------------

Whatever we have discussed so far regarding the cure of disbelief, it is
mentioned in the verses of Quran and the traditions of Ahlul Bayt. For
example pay attention to the following verses:

**And they say: There is nothing but our life in this world; we live and
die and nothing destroys us but time, and they have no knowledge of
that; they only conjecture.**[^26]92

“We live and die” implies that “some of us live and some of us are
born.” And the system of births and deaths goes on. It may also mean
that “initially we are dead in the form of sperm and later we became
alive.”

This verse has pointed out towards compounded ignorance. That is, in
spite of their lack of knowledge they consider themselves knowledgeable
and issue a denial. However, some disbelievers are not compounded
ignorant. They are in simple ignorance. They are aware of their
ignorance. Such disbelievers are mentioned in the following verses:

***And when it was said, Surely the promise of Allah is true and as for
the hour, there is no doubt about it, you said: We do not know what the
hour is; we do not think (that it will come to pass) save a passing
thought, and we are not at all sure.***[^27]

**Nay, they reject that of which they have no comprehensive knowledge,
and the final sequel of it has not yet come to them; even thus did those
before them reject (the truth)**[^28]

***Nay, their knowledge respecting the hereafter is slight and hasty;
nay, they are in doubt about it; nay, they are quite blind to
it.***[^29]95

***Say: Have you any knowledge with you so you should bring it forth to
us? You only follow a*** ***conjecture and you only tell
lies*****.**[^30]

That is, whatever they utter is based on their whims and fancies, and is
absolutely false.

These verses indicate that we must inform such people who are in doubt
and lack knowledge so that they can also learn the true facts.

Precaution makes Sense
----------------------

Knowing Allah, the Prophet and the Hereafter are the most important
matters for human beings. If we do not have faith in them we shall
indeed be doomed to perdition. Even if one has a slight expectation that
lack of belief will destroy him, he can as a precautionary measure bring
faith in them. Reason dictates that one should take all possible
precautions to avoid future risks. Even a slight chance of expected
danger should oblige us to learn the articles of faith. Now the
disbeliever has no other excuse.

The Holy Quran says,

***Do not these think that they shall be raised again. For a mighty
day?***[^31]

That is if they are not certain about it at least they can imagine it
might be true. And reason says that even if there is a slightest chance
of danger you must be careful and take every precaution to keep yourself
safe. You must obtain recognition (*Ma’arifat*) even if you feel there
is a slight risk in case you do not accept faith. Not only recognition,
you must act upon all such things that can bring your doom if you omit
them. For example one who cheats while selling (weighing short), shall
have a severe chastisement.[^32]

The style of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
----------------------------------------

An atheist named Abdul Malik came to Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.). The
Imam said to him, “Do you know there are places on the earth and beneath
it?”

“Yes”, he replied,

“Have you ever been below the earth?”

“No.”

“Do you know what is below the earth?”

“I don't know but I feel there is nothing below it.”

“Have you been to the sky?”

“No.”

Imam said, “When you have never been to the west or east and never
traveled to the sky or below the earth, how can you say that they have
no creator? You are denying without seeing it and saying there is
nothing below the earth. When a sensible person is ignorant of
something, does he deny its existence altogether?”

The atheist said, “No one spoke to me like you before.”

Imam asked, “Thus do you feel that there could be something below the
earth?”

The atheist confesses his doubt and said, “It is possible.” When he
confessed his doubt the Imam began to teach him. He taught him to ponder
upon the perfect system of the universe and its gigantic proportions,
the details of which are available in concerned books. Anyway, the
person accepted faith and became a believer in Allah.

As you see, first the Imam made him aware of his ignorance. When he had
come out of his compounded ignorance he was given further knowledge by
Imam.

A Good Tree
-----------

The Almighty Allah speaks of a Good Tree and the Evil Tree in the
following verses of Surah Ibrahim:

***Have you not considered how Allah sets forth a parable of a good word
(being) like a good tree, whose root is firm and whose branches are in
heaven, Yielding its fruit in every season by the permission of its
Lord? And Allah sets forth parables for men that they may be mindful.
And the parable of an evil word is as an evil tree pulled up from the
earth's surface; it has no stability*****.**[^33]

Leaves, Branches and Fruits of the Tree of Belief
-------------------------------------------------

If the light of belief illuminates the heart of a person, the tree of
his faith gets branches. That is, he has faith on the prophets.
Especially he has faith in the Last Prophet and also in the twelve
successors of the Prophet. He believes in the Hereafter, Paradise and
Hell.

The tree of belief has leaves too. That is charity, chastity, courage,
justice, magnanimity, patience, Allah's satisfaction, reliance etc. Thus
all the good qualities are the leaves of the tree of belief.

The tree of belief also bears fruits. The bounties of Allah continue to
descend upon the believer. The tree continues to bloom and fructify. Its
roots become stronger by the day. Increase in faith and action brings
increase in divine rewards. Allah's proximity is gained. At last he is
rewarded with Paradise where he shall reside forever.

Consequence of Disbelief
------------------------

The consequence of disbelief is that when a man enters the darkness of
infidelity and polytheism he denies all the beliefs of prophethood,
Wilayat (guardianship of Ahlul Bayt), Day of Judgment, reward,
punishment and all true principles. Evil traits like greed, miserliness,
jealousy, injustice, defalcation, and fornication take root in him and
he begins to commit all these bad deeds.

Denials of true principles of belief are the branches of the tree of
disbelief, bad morals are its leaves and depravity and divine
retribution are its fruits.

Disbelief is a negative affair. It is due to absence of a factor. For
example ignorance is due to lack of knowledge. That is why it has
neither a root nor branches and no fruit is derived from it that could
please one in the world or the Hereafter.

Belief and Disbelief
--------------------

This discussion clearly shows that disbelief and belief are opposite of
each other and are contradictory traits. One is knowledge, the other is
ignorance. One is acceptance, the other is denial. One is good moral and
the other is filled with vices. One is the basis of good deeds and the
other leads to sinful acts. One is thankfulness of bounties and the
other is thanklessness. One is contentment, the other is greed. One is
charity, the other is miserliness. One is generosity, the other is
jealousy. One is courage the other is cowardice.

The Believer does no evil, the Infidel does no good
---------------------------------------------------

According to our statement a believer cannot do anything but good and
the unbeliever only commits evil. If someone says, “Some unbelievers
also do good things and believers are also prone to do evil sometimes?”

The reply to this is as follow: The unbeliever never does something that
is basically good. Even if he does a good work it is apparently good. If
a disbeliever gives some amount in charity we must check if has obtained
that money in a legitimate manner? Then we should see if he is spending
it in consonance with Islamic Shariah and reason? Whether he is not
squandering? Whether he is doing needless spending? ('*Israaf*' implies
spending more than necessary and '*tabzeer*' is totally needless
expenditure. For example, spending in some prohibited act).

We should also see if he is doing it for Allah or for some other
benefit? If he is doing it for profit, fame or show off it is not
charity and it is certainly not a good deed.

For example the Meccans used to fill up their coffers from public funds
and Islamic Treasury (*Baitul Maal*). Then they used to gift a hundred
or two thousand gold coins to a poet who composed panegyrics in their
praise. They never intended to do good. It was for gaining fame,
popularity and consolidation of their thrones. Does it amount to be a
good act?

If we suppose that an unbeliever has given charity as a gesture of
kindness then the Almighty Allah gives increase in his wealth or removes
some of his difficulty. Or He may reduce his punishment in the
Hereafter. In brief we can say that the pure good deed of an unbeliever
does not go waste. He certainly gets its recompense in this world or the
Hereafter. For example it is well known about Hatim Tai that he would
indeed be sent to Hell for his disbelief, but the Hell fire shall not
burn him.

As far as the bad deeds of a believer are concerned, actually a believer
never commits bad deeds. He never commits a sin while denying Allah and
the accounting of the Day of Recompense. He happens to commit a sin by
chance, due to the overpowering of selfish desires and satanic
instigation. Then due to his belief he feels deep remorse for it. He
repents and seeks forgiveness.

Yes, if a person commits a sin but does not regret it or seek divine
forgiveness for the same, he can be called a Muslim but never a
Believer. Belief has not entered his heart; it is just confined to
verbal utterance.

The Almighty Allah says,

***The dwellers of the desert say: We believe. Say: You do not believe
but say, We submit; and faith*** ***has not yet entered into your
hearts*****.**[^34]100

Denial of Prophethood
---------------------

We have already discussed the denial of the origin of creation and the
Hereafter and also suggested the cure. Another kind of disbelief is the
denial of the prophethood of the prophets. For example there is a
religion called Brahmanism in India. They believe in God, but they say
that human intellect is sufficient to seek the truth and salvation.

They should be told that they are denying the prophets. And this denial
of theirs is itself contradicting their conscience and reason. You
cannot say with certainty that the prophets spoke falsehood. You
certainly think that it is possible that the news that the prophets gave
regarding salvation and doom, recompense of good and bad deeds,
information regarding the Hereafter etc, is all true. May be it is the
reality. You do not intend to bear the responsibility of divine
commandments.

You want to follow your carnal desires and remain unfettered without
seeking the truth. Without making any investigation you deny the message
of the prophets. (As we have proved in the preceding pages, to deny
something without having certainty is foolishness).

Once the denier accepts that his denial is not justified we can present
further arguments. We can then prove the correctness and necessity of
the message of the prophets. Such arguments are presented in the books
of scholastic theology (*Ilmul Kalam*).

The general arguments proving the need of prophets can be seen in
Allamah Majlisi's books *Haqqul Yaqeen* and *Kifayatul Muwahhedin.* Let
us see the following Quranic verse at this point:

***And they do not assign to Allah the attributes due to Him when they
say: Allah has not revealed anything to a mortal*****.**[^35]

They did not recognize Allah!
-----------------------------

Those who say that Allah has not sent any messenger have actually failed
to recognize Allah. They do not recognize the God Who has given
everything that man needs. Thus, is it possible that Allah acted miserly
in the matter of sending the prophets? The greatest want of man is that
someone makes him know the aim of his creation. That someone
distinguishes for him the path of fortune and misfortune and also inform
him of his future. Such guidance is needed more than anything else. It
is more important than the need for fingernails and eyelashes!

Benefit of a Guide
------------------

The Almighty Allah has given man such capabilities that if he gets a
proper guide and instructor he can excel in any field. He can learn the
secrets of the material world and he can obtain knowledge of the unseen.
He can get divine recognition and reach upto the level of Absolute
Certainty (Haqqul Yaqeen). Then how can it be possible that God would
disregard sending a teacher of divine laws? While the unending spring
could benefit the human beings in this way?

Intellect in isolation is subdued by desires
--------------------------------------------

Is it correct to say that intellect itself is sufficient? Every sensible
person knows that his intellect is limited. The things regarding whom he
is ignorant are limitless. He can discriminate between good and evil due
to his animal desires. He cannot take a right decision due to habits,
customs and blind following.

He can have mistaken notions and deny the truth. He begins to consider
good as evil and evil as good. Man needs another life to obtain
salvation. In order to correct the mistakes of this life he must know
about his next life. But he does not know about this life. If the
Almighty Allah does not convey the information regarding the next life
through His prophet and if He does not teach man the way to attain
salvation in the next life it would amount to be injustice on man. While
God is pure of every type of injustice and deficiency.

In other words, just as the eye cannot see in darkness without an
external source of light, in the same way man cannot distinguish good
and evil on the basis of his intellect alone.

Denial of the Messengership of the Last Prophet
-----------------------------------------------

Like Jews and Christians, those who deny the Prophethood of the Holy
Prophet (S) are actually acting against their conscience and intellects.
If they are just and do not follow others blindly or do not harbor
unjustified malice, the following verse of Quran is sufficient for them:

***And you did not recite before it any book, nor did you transcribe one
with your right hand, for then could those who say untrue things have
doubted*****.**[^36]

That is they began to say that the Quran contains things made up by
himself or it is taken from other books.

It is a well-established historical fact that the Holy Prophet (S) did
not receive traditional education in any school, neither did he have a
human teacher. In the earlier part of his life he remained in Mecca and
hardly went abroad. During this period he undertook two journeys to Sham
(Syria).

One of it was during his boyhood when he accompanied his uncle, Abu
Talib. The second one was when he was twenty-five years old and he went
as a business representative of Khadijah. This time Maysara accompanied
him. The life of the Holy Prophet (S) was an open book for the Meccans.
It was known to all that he could neither read nor write. In these
circumstances he brought a book from his Lord. And the book was such
that it was based on complete information of divine recognition, the
best morals, worship, business transactions, politics and civil
administration etc.

Apart from this it also contained prophecies that were proved true
later. From the aspect of eloquence and diction this book compelled the
most eloquent nation to admit helplessness before it. Another thing is
that from the beginning to the end there is no contradiction in this
book. Thus a lot can be written on this topic. To learn about the
miraculous aspect of Quran please refer to books of scholastic theology
and Quranic exegesis, especially the first volume of *Tafsir al-Mizan*.

As far as the miracles of the Holy Prophet (S) are concerned, they are
calculated to be more than four thousand. Regarding this subject please
refer to the sixth volume of *Biharul Anwar, Anisul* *Aalaam* and
Allamah Majlisi's *Hayatul Quloob*.[^37]

Neither my beloved has been to a school nor he has learnt to write. He
understood the whole problem with a solitary glance and become the
teacher of thousands of schools.[^38]

Denial of Wilayat and Imamat
----------------------------

The twelve Imams: Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.), Hasan, Husain, Ali Zainul
Abideen, Muhammad Baqir, Ja'far Sadiq, Musa Kazim, Ali Ridha, Muhammad
Taqi, Ali Naqi, Hasan Askari and Mahdi Sahibuzzaman are the true
successors of Muhammad Mustafa.

The tyrant caliphs of Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas compelled the people
to deny the Imamate of these Imams because of jealousy and desire for
temporal power. The cure for doubts regarding Imamate and Wilayat is
that we study the books on this subject. For example in Arabic we have
Sayyid Murtada's *Sahifa*, Sayyid Ibne Tawus' *Taraif*.

Similarly in Persian we have *Kifayatul Muwahhedin.* These books contain
the traditions of Ahle Sunnat also. To remove doubts and
misunderstanding, one can just say that both Shias and Sunnis have
accepted the following tradition of the Holy Prophet (S). The Messenger
of Allah (S) said, “I leave among you two weighty things, the book of
Allah and my progeny. If you attach to them you shall never go astray.”

Sayyid Bahraini in *Ghayatul Maram* quotes the above tradition through
39 chains of Sunni narrators and 82 chains of Shia narrators.

In the same way there are other traditions also that are recorded in the
Sunni as well as Shia sources from the Holy Prophet (S). These
traditions even mention the names and special characteristics of the
Holy Imams. They also contain the fact that the last of these Imams
shall be Mahdi and that he would have a prolonged occultation.

There shall be large-scale mischief and corruption during this
occultation. However, after he reappears he will fill the earth with
justice and equity just as it had been filled with injustice and
oppression.

More than a thousand traditions have been recorded on the subject of
Imamate and Wilayat. Please refer to the book *Ghayatul Maram* regarding
this.

[^1]: Surah Baqarah 2:10.

[^2]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:115.

[^3]: Surah Muhammad 47:17.

[^4]: Surah Najm 53:23.

[^5]: Surah Zukhruf 43:23.

[^6]: Surah Naml 27:14

[^7]: Surah Baqarah 2:89.

[^8]: Surah Baqarah 2:6.

[^9]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:155.

[^10]: Surah Muhammad 47:23.

[^11]: Surah Saff 61:5.

[^12]: Surah Fatir 35:39.

[^13]: Surah Bani Israel 17:97.

[^14]: Surah Taha 20:125.

[^15]: Surah Bani Israel 17:14.

[^16]: Surah Sajdah 32:12.

[^17]: Surah Yasin 36:65.

[^18]: Surah Saffat 37:27.

[^19]: Surah Muddassir 74:40–43

[^20]: Persian Couplet.

[^21]: Persian Couplets.

[^22]: Surah Muhammad 47:12.

[^23]: Surah Jumah 62:5.

[^24]: Surah Araaf 7:176.

[^25]: Surah Anam 6:112.

[^26]: Surah Jathiya 45:24.

[^27]: Surah Jathiya 45:32.

[^28]: Surah Yunus 10:39.

[^29]: Surah Naml 27:66.

[^30]: Surah Anam 6:148.

[^31]: Surah Mutafaffefeen 83:4-5.

[^32]: Surah Mutafaffefeen 83:2.

[^33]: Surah Ibrahim 24–26.

[^34]: Surah Hujurat 49:14.

[^35]: Surah Anam 6:91.

[^36]: Surah Ankabut 29:48.

[^37]: Volume Two

[^38]: Persian Couplet.


