Second Disease: Hypocrisy
=========================

The greatest sin of the heart and the worst disease of the soul is
hypocrisy. Hypocrisy totally separates man from humanity. The hypocrite
is counted among the Satans. Even in this world he is considered most
degraded by Allah and in the Hereafter he shall inhabit the lowest
level.

***Surely the hypocrites are in the lowest stage of the
fire*****.**[^1]105

Thus the punishment of the hypocrites shall be more severe than that of
the infidels. Hypocrisy is actually the worst kind of disbelief.

In order to gain worldly benefits the hypocrite veils his disbelief by
the screen of religiousness. He seems to be religious by his words and
actions. Whereas his heart is not religious. For example he recites the
two formulae of faith (*Kalimah Shahadatain*). He verbally claims to
believe in Quran and Day of Judgment. But his heart does not have faith
in these things. It denies them.

***They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts*****.**[^2]

Such people also perform good deeds with enthusiasm to gain popularity
among the people. They recite prayer, go for Hajj and give charity so
that people consider them religious and may praise and trust them.

Thus in addition to disbelief, the hypocrite also suffers from the
disease of lying, cheating and ridiculing the faith. The hypocrite lies
to Allah, the Prophet and the believers. He resorts to cheating and
ridicules the truth. Actually he is lying to himself. He is cheating
himself and ridiculing his own self. This is mentioned in detail in the
Holy Quran. Read Surah Munafiqoon (Chapter 63) to understand the
degradation of hypocrites, their evil traits and the severity of their
punishment in the Hereafter. Apart from this, also refer to the verses
about hypocrites in Surah Baqarah, Surah Ali Imran, *Surah an-Nisa’* and
Surah Tawbah.

Types of Hypocrisy
------------------

Hypocrisy means 'double-facedness'. A contradiction between his apparent
and hidden self. Apparently he is a believer but his inner self is in
disbelief. His outer appearance is good but his internal condition is
evil. Hypocrisy is of three types:

1. **Hypocrisy against Allah regarding actual faith**

2. **Hypocrisy with Allah regarding the necessities of faith.**

3. **Hypocrisy with others.**

First Type: Hypocrisy against Allah regarding actual faith
----------------------------------------------------------

A hypocrite does not sincerely believe in Allah and the Hereafter.
However, he shows himself to be a Muslim before other people. His
intention is that the Islamic commandments may be in his favor. For
example, he may be considered clean or pure in the society. He can marry
among the Muslims and he can benefit from inheritance etc.

Such people are mentioned in Surah Baqarah:

***And there are some people who say: We believe in Allah and the last
day; and they are not at all believers*****.**[^3]

And Quran also says,

***And when they meet those who believe, they say: We believe; and when
they are alone with their Satans, they say: Surely we are with you, we
were only mocking*****.**[^4]

This is the worst stage of hypocrisy. Nothing can be considered more
serious. The punishment of such hypocrites in the Hereafter shall be
worse than infidels. They shall never be able to get salvation. In
addition to their degradation and punishment the Quran also states that
it is necessary to remain aloof from them.

A large portion of the Muslim community has always consisted of
hypocrites. It is obligatory for every Muslim to express immunity from
them, whether they are alive or dead. We should curse them. For example
the hypocrisy of Yazid Ibne Muawiyah is obvious. Indeed such hypocrites
have caused more harm to Islam than infidels.

Dissimulation and its Types
---------------------------

We should know that hypocrisy with Allah is that a person apparently
poses as religious while concealing his infidelity so that he can gain
benefits of religiousness. However, dissimulation, which is obligatory
according to reason and Shariah, is very much different from hypocrisy.
Dissimulation denotes the denial of ones faith from the deniers of
truth, so that ones life, honor and wealth remain safe. With the
condition that not practicing dissimulation causes no benefit to the
faith.

If a believer expresses his faith he shall be subjected to murder,
robbery or loss of honor, then in this condition it is obligatory on him
to observe dissimulation and conceal his faith.

If the expression of truth will strengthen religion, giving up of
dissimulation is recommended. For example the case of Mitham Tammar, or
Abu Zar Ghiffari and Hujr bin Adi. These loyal companions did not
observe dissimulation.

And whenever there is a risk of the truth being destroyed or harmed, it
is prohibited to observe dissimulation. In this case avoiding
dissimulation becomes obligatory. That is why the chief of the Martyrs,
Imam Husain (a.s.) did not observe dissimulation.

In short, dissimulation is of three types: Obligatory, recommended and
prohibited. It is possible that in some cases it could also be
permissible (*Mubah*) and detestable (*Makruh*).

Difference between Dissimulation and Hypocrisy
----------------------------------------------

So we realize that when dissimulation is obligatory or permissible
(*Mubah*), it is not construed as hypocrisy. It is the opposite. That is
when dissimulation is not permitted or obligatory and a person observes
it, this shall tantamount to hypocrisy. Whenever dissimulation is
obligatory or permissible even intellect says that it is a necessity and
is a good thing. When dissimulation is obligatory and the person fails
to observe it he is said to have acted against reason. Because he would
have wasted his life and died for no just cause. This is nothing but
gross foolishness.

The holy law of Islam has permitted dissimulation or the concealment of
ones faith only when there is a danger to ones life, honor or property.
The following verses of the Holy Quran testify to this: Surah Ali Imran:
verse 28, and Surah Nahl: verse 106. The traditions of Ahlul Bayt also
greatly emphasize the importance of dissimulation. However it is beyond
the scope of this book to quote them here.

Second Type: Hypocrisy with Allah Regarding the Necessities of faith
--------------------------------------------------------------------

There is a person whose faith regarding Allah and the Day of Recompense
is very weak. Either he does not possess the necessary items of faith or
they are deficient and weak. Yet he falsely claims that he possesses all
the necessary principles of faith. Such a person may believe in Day of
Judgment, Accounting, scales of deeds and Hellfire but he does not fear
them at all. Yet he claims, “I fear Allah. I am terrified of the Day of
Day of Judgment and Accounting.”

The proof of the falsity of his claim is the way he commits sins in an
unhindered way. He sins without much ado. If one fears that a particular
eatable is poisonous he would not even dare to touch it. In the same way
one who is fearful of divine justice and retribution will never commit
sins blatantly.

Regarding this is a statement of a learned person: “If you are asked
whether you fear Allah, you must remain silent. Because if you say you
do not fear Him you will become a disbeliever. If you say: I fear Allah,
you would have lied. Because the sign of Allah's fear is flight from
sins.”

A Believer is not a Habitual sinner
-----------------------------------

The fact is that a believer considers Allah as All-seeing and
Omnipresent all the time. He remains afraid of His chastisement and is
in awe of His justice. That is why he does not commit sins in a blatant
manner. He never denies divine punishment. Even if he sometimes commits
a sin due to the overpowering of selfish desires, satanic instigation or
vanity regarding the divine bounties, he is immediately remorseful and
repents for his sin. He seeks forgiveness at once and tries to
compensate for his misdeed.

In other words, occurrence of sin is no proof of lack of belief. The
proof of disbelief is failure to repent for ones sins.

It is related from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said, “One who is
pleased with his good deeds and remorseful of his bad deeds is a
believer.”

Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) says in Dua Abu Hamzah Thumali: “O my God!
When I disobeyed I was not denying Your Lordship. And neither did I
consider Your command unimportant. I did not consider ineffective Your
retribution. I did not belittle Your promise of chastisement. Yet I
committed a mistake. My self led me astray. My carnal desires
overpowered me. My depravity helped me in this regard. The shade of the
freedom that You had given me, made me careless.”

Spending in Allah’s way is a sign of Hope in Allah
--------------------------------------------------

Another form of hypocrisy with Allah is that man claims falsely to have
hope in Allah, while he has no such hopes or hopes little. He says, “I
repose hope in my God.” This is a lie, and its proof is that he is
hesitant to spend his life and property in the way of Allah. He
considers spending in the way of Allah, a loss. He does not think that
Allah will recompense him in the world and the Hereafter. If he had hope
in Allah he would not have hesitated to even give his life in Allah's
way.

Thus, the proof of having fear of Allah is abstinence from sins and
performance of repentance. Abstinence from sins is proof that the person
hopes that Allah will reward him for the same. That is why he strives to
be obedient. The hard work that human beings put in for worldly affairs
indicates that they expect something material in return. What all man
says and writes in hope of material gains!

False claim of Piety and Religiousness
--------------------------------------

Another kind of hypocrisy is that man claims falsely that he is very
pious and religious, while in fact his heart is not purified of the love
of this world. Though he claims reliance on Allah, professes His love,
patience, thankfulness and resignation to Divine will, the actual hope
of his heart is reposed in wealth and property. Such a person is not
considered as being thankful to Allah for His innumerable bounties. He
is unhappy with Allah during difficulties and hard times. To study the
details of this please refer to Mulla Naraqi's *Merajus Sadat.*

We should know that this type of hypocrisy is different from the one
mentioned before. In the first case there is altogether no hope in Allah
or very less hope. However, here even if the faith in the Hereafter is
weak it is yet not such a grim situation. If a person falsely claiming
piety and religiousness were to die, he shall not remain forever in
divine chastisement. After suffering punishment for a certain period he
would gain salvation. However, even after this he shall not be able to
obtain the grades of the true believers in Paradise.

Hypocrisy with Allah regarding the worship acts
-----------------------------------------------

A person can be a hypocrite regarding different types of worship acts,
for example physical or monetary, obligatory or recommended etc. Though
he performs prayers, fast, Zakat, Khums, Commanding Good and Prohibiting
Evil for the name of Allah but along with this he aims to prove his
piety to the people. Either he completely performs these acts for show
off or he does them for both Allah and the people. Such hypocrisy is
also referred to as show off. The aim of such behavior is to earn fame
and honor among the people.

Such a person will be called by four nicknames on the Day of Judgment:
Traitor, Transgressor, Disbeliever and Loss- Sufferer. Quranic verses
and traditions prove that the act of this person is illegal and invalid.
He would have to undergo punishment in the Hereafter, unless he repents
his past misdeeds. The details of the same are given in our book
*Greater Sins.*

Sins that cause Hypocrisy
-------------------------

There are some sins that destroy belief (Iman) and create hypocrisy in
the heart. And one who dies without belief can never obtain salvation.
One of such sins is show-off. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says, “One who
cheats Allah is himself 'fooled' by Allah and He destroys his
belief.”[^5]

Similarly murder, omitting prayer, not paying Zakat, not performing
Hajj, false allegations and other similar sins destroy belief. Some of
them are mentioned in traditions. One such sin is to be pleased at the
tragedies that befell the chief of the Martyrs, Imam Husain (a.s.).

In *Biharul Anwar* the Holy Prophet (S) is quoted to be prophesizing
about Imam Husain (a.s.), “As if I see the place of the falling down of
Husain and the place he shall be buried. As if I see the prisoners
astride the camels. In this condition the head of my son Husain shall be
presented to Yazid. By Allah! Whoever feels happy to see the head of
Husain, Allah will create contradiction in his words and thoughts and
would give him a painful punishment.”

The Islam of this person shall be confined to his tongue while his heart
will be full of darkness (disbelief).

In the same way one of the sins responsible for creating hypocrisy is
non-payment of religious taxes like Zakat and Khums. The Holy Quran
says,

***And there are those of them who made a covenant with Allah: If He
gives us out of His grace, we will certainly give alms and we will
certainly be of the good.***

***But when He gave them out of His grace, they became niggardly of it
and they turned back and they withdrew.***

***So He made hypocrisy to follow as a consequence into their hearts
till the day when they shall meet Him because they failed to perform
towards Allah what they had promised with Him and because they told
lies*****.**[^6]

Third Type: Hypocrisy with people
---------------------------------

Hypocrisy with people is that a person is double-faced and
double-tongued. He praises one person in his presence but behind his
back he denounces him and tries to cause pain and harm him. Or that he
befriends two enemies and promises each of them his support. That he
instigates each of them to increase enmity, and tries to show that he
has helped him against his enemy.

It must, however be mentioned that if he keeps in contact with both of
them and expresses his solidarity with each without professing enmity of
the other and without instigating them for further enmity, this would
not be construed as hypocrisy. If one expresses friendship to a
mischievous and degraded person without any intention of befriending
him, it is regarded as a kind of dissimulation if one's aim were to
remain safe from the mischief of this person. In some cases this type of
dissimulation even becomes obligatory.

The worst folks on Judgment Day
-------------------------------

A person came to the door of the Messenger of Allah (S) and sought his
permission to enter. The Prophet told his companions to allow him entry
and also remarked that he was a vile person.

When the person joined the assembly, the Holy Prophet (S) spoke to him
so nicely that the companions present therein began to think that the
Messenger has got to like this person. When he left, the people asked
the Prophet why he had behaved so nicely with him while previously he
was having such a negative opinion? The Messenger of Allah (S) said,
“The worst of the folks on Judgment Day are those whom the people are
forced to accord respect for fear of their mischief.”

Some companions have reportedly said: We used to meet some people with
bowed foreheads while our hearts cursed them.

Difference between Dissimulation and False Praise
-------------------------------------------------

As we have mentioned that such a course of action is allowed only to
avoid loss. But we see quite often that people indulge in false praise
just for greed. They needlessly praise some detestable persons while
they do not even have any chance of being harmed by them. Sometimes they
indulge in such double-facedness due to their low status and weakness.
They term this false praise a good moral behavior. Actually it is
hypocrisy, and it is prohibited.

Double-Facedness
----------------

Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) says, “One of the firm decisions of Allah in
the Wise Reminder (Quran) upon which He bestows reward or gives
punishment, and through which He likes or dislikes is that it will not
benefit a man, even though he exerts himself and acts sincerely. If he
leaves this world to meet Allah with one of these acts without
repenting, namely that he believed in a partner with Allah during his
obligatory worship, or appeased his own anger by killing an individual,
or spoke about acts committed by others, or sought fulfillment of his
needs from people by introducing an innovation in his religion, or met
people with a double face, or moved among them with a double tongue.[^7]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says, “How evil is the one who is a
slanderer, a defamer. He expresses friendship with one face and enmity
with the other.”

It is also quoted from the Messenger of Allah (S) in *Al-Kafi* that, “If
a person possesses these three characteristics he is a hypocrite even if
he prays and fasts and considers himself a Muslim.

1. One who betrays trust?

2. One who lies?

3. One who goes back on his word?

All three types of actions with the people are considered hypocrisy.

Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) says, “Sins that prevent the acceptance of
supplications are the following: Bad intention regarding Allah, an evil
inner self and hypocrisy with believing brothers. If it is accompanied
with necessary conditions the supplication is indeed accepted. Lack of
trust in this regard, delaying prayers from its best time and not making
effort to gain Allah's satisfaction by giving charity. Using foul and
dirty language.” This tradition mentions hypocrisy with believers to be
one of the sins that prevent acceptance of supplications.

Since we have already discussed hypocrisy in great detail in the
chapters of Show-off, Cheating and Backbiting etc. we shall refrain from
greater details over here.

Punishment in proportion to Hypocrisy
-------------------------------------

As we have indicated earlier, hypocrisy towards Allah and the creatures
of Allah is of different types and of different grades. The punishment
for it depends upon its magnitude. For example the worst form of
hypocrisy against Allah is that a person professes belief verbally but
harbors disbelief in his heart. If man dies in such a condition he shall
remain in Hell forever and his punishment shall be worse than infidels.

The next lower stage of hypocrisy is that man expresses certainty of
belief with his tongue while his heart is not in absolute disbelief
either, but it is a doubtful state. If this person also dies without
belief he shall reside in Hell forever. But his punishment will be less
than that of those who completely deny faith in Almighty.

The next grade of hypocrisy is that a person verbally says he is a
believer and even has faith in his heart. But with regard to worship
acts he makes other people partners to the Almighty. That is he commits
show-off. If such a person were to die he will not remain in Hell
forever. He shall suffer punishment for some time then due to his belief
he will be allowed to enter Paradise. His punishment in *Barzakh* and
Hell will depend upon the magnitude of his show-off.

Justice of Allah, Intercession and Repentance
---------------------------------------------

The show-off of a person is related either to obligatory or recommended
acts. Either it concerns the actual action or it is related to the
condition of that action. For example a person intends to shows that he
is steadfast in prayer; he will pray in order to show off. If, however,
he wants to show that he is very humble and devoted in prayers, he will
exhibit these things in prayer. It is also possible that one shows off
in a part of the prayer or he does it in the whole of prayer. Some
people are such that their whole life is spent in show-off.

There is no doubt however that Allah will deal with justice. He will
punish everyone in accordance with his sin. However, it is possible that
Allah may forgive his sins or he may receive salvation through the
purified intercession of Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad.

Certainly, there is punishment only if one dies without repenting for
ones sins. Therefore if a person gets Divine opportunity (Tawfeeq) to
repent in the proper manner and he repeats the deeds that he had wasted
due to show-off and corrects his mistakes, there shall be no punishment
on him. As we have stated earlier, if the person persists in his
show-off it would be difficult for him to leave the world with belief.
Same is the case of all those sins that create hypocrisy in the hearts.

We must also mention that the least form of hypocrisy is that man
displays utmost humility and baseness in his posture while these things
are not of the same intensity in his heart. The Holy Prophet (S) is
reported to have said, “We consider it hypocrisy even if the humility of
body is more than the humility of the heart.”[^8]

Verbal Repentance
-----------------

Hypocrisy with Allah with regard to the necessities of faith also has
various grades. However, it would be very cumbersome to go into its
details. So we shall mention only some grades of hypocrisy with regard
to repentance.

When a person says, “I am regretful of my sins and I repent for them,”
he is saying this with his tongue but there is no remorse in his heart.
Yet he has not further abstained from those sins and he is even happy at
them. Such a person is the worst hypocrite with regard to repentance.

Imam Ali Ridha (a.s.) says, “One who repents for a sin but remains
steadfast in committing the sin has in fact ridiculed his Lord.”[^9]

Heartfelt Regret
----------------

The next grade is of a person who although has given up the sin but he
is not remorseful for it with his heart. If this person verbally says,
“I have repented”, it shall be a lie. The correct repentance is that man
should feel regret and should be dejected in the presence of the Lord.
If a person regrets doing a sin because it caused him physical or
material harm or it earned him degradation or he was punished by the
government, imprisoned etc. it shall not amount to be repentance.
Rather, it is hypocrisy. If he says 'Astaghfirullah' (I seek Allah's
forgiveness), it would be a lie.

After this the next grade is of a person who has given up the sin, he is
also deeply regretful of his deed but his regret is not due to his
disobedience to a divine command. It is due to the fear of the
punishment in the Hereafter. He is in fact regretful due to the loss of
divine rewards.

Such a person can be compared to an oppressor who is about to be
arrested. The government intends to put him in prison and the only way
he can be saved is if the oppressed one forgives him. Thus he is
compelled to approach the oppressed person and beg for forgiveness so
that he may avoid legal penalty. If there had been no fear of
imprisonment and loss of freedom and comfort, he would never have begged
forgiveness. This is not a sincere regret and the repentance is not
sincere repentance. It is a sort of deceit and a kind of hypocrisy.

Allamah Hilli and Muhaqqiq Tusi have discussed these topics in their
books *Sharh Tajreed* and *Tajreedul Kalam* etc. The gist of their
discussion is as follows:

One who has committed a sin must feel remorseful of it because he has
disobeyed Allah. Otherwise it shall not amount to be repentance. (Just
like one who forgoes a sin to save his honor or because it is harmful to
his body). It is not repentance even if there is fear of Hell fire.
Similarly if one regrets omitting an obligatory act and he regrets it
because he has lost the divine rewards or became eligible for divine
punishment, it is not repentance. Thus repentance is only correct when
one regrets because he has disobeyed the Almighty and he also strives to
compensate for his mistake.

Divine Mercy
------------

Though such repentance is not sufficient we must repose hope in divine
mercy. Those who repent due to the fear of retribution or loss of
rewards and they give up the sin and also intend to compensate for it,
it is possible that Allah by His unlimited mercy may consider their
regret as proper repentance. They may be saved from Hell fire and sent
to Paradise instead.

We have already discussed hypocrisy with people in the chapter of Deceit
in the book of *Greater sins*. In brief, we should know that the more is
the harm caused by hypocrisy, the more shall be its punishment. Now the
most important thing is to find the cure of hypocrisy. How we can root
out this disease from the heart?

Cure of Hypocrisy with Allah
----------------------------

A hypocrite, that is a person who apparently seems to be pious and
religious but in his heart remains a disbeliever, should know that this
kind of behavior is not going to provide any benefit. It is going to be
very harmful to him. The Almighty Lord is aware of both the apparent and
the hidden aspect. You cannot deceive Allah. The Almighty will not
consider you truthful on the basis of your outward appearance. He will
send you to the lowest level of Hell due to your inner self. Actually
this person has lied to himself and deceived himself:

***They desire to deceive Allah and those who believe, and they deceive
only themselves and they do not perceive*****.**[^10]

Deceiving Oneself
-----------------

If the hypocrites do not make a show of belief they shall be deprived of
certain facilities in the Muslim society. For example, they shall not be
considered ritually pure. They will not be able to intermarry with the
Muslims and they will not become eligible for inheritance. The
hypocrites think that if the Hereafter is like this world, there too
they shall be considered believers. They shall be respected because of
the show-off they made of worship acts in this world and they shall be
rewarded for them in the Hereafter too.

Such a notion is absolutely wrong. They consider themselves clever but
they are in deception. The state of the Hereafter will be the state of
the emergence of realities and the removal of curtains from the unseen
(internal aspects). In that state the hypocrite will not be able to see
anything except the gloom of his disbelief and polytheism. He shall see
his good deeds that he did to show-off, his charities, prayers etc. that
all of them are included among the sins, because a good deed is
considered good only if it is accompanied with pure intention. Such an
intention is only for Allah, to achieve the satisfaction of Allah.

Respite
-------

Some hypocrites pretend to be Muslims and obtain some worldly benefits.
They are able to marry and become eligible to inherit. These are the
bounties of their outward Islam. The consequences of hypocrisy and
deceit are not very favorable. One who framed the Islamic Shariah
(Allah) and the one who announced it (the Prophet) have also kept some
rules for hypocrites based on hidden wisdom. One who makes a verbal
acceptance of Islam is considered a Muslim. Till his falsehood is not
proved he is to be considered ritually pure and he also shares all the
facilities of a Muslim society, even though he may be lying and the
Muslims may be unaware of it.

Another benefit of professing Islam by hypocrites is that they are able
to collect a greater quantity of wealth. Rather, they can acquire
government posts and even occupy thrones. But they should know that
falsehood is easily exposed and the liar does not recognize his own
intention.

For example let us consider the case of the hypocrites of Kufa. They
wrote letters to Imam Husain (a.s.) inviting him to Kufa. Their
messengers conveyed their invitations to Imam. They used to write:
“There is no Imam and guide for us except you. If you do not come we
shall complain to your grandfather on the Day of Judgment.” But in
reality they had no concern for religion in their hearts. Their
intention was to gain independence from Yazid and the Syrians and to
make Kufa the seat of the Caliphate. In this way they could gather
material wealth and obtain coveted posts.

However, when Ibne Ziyad became the governor of Kufa he purchased the
loyalties of the people with wealth. He made false promises to enable
the Kufans to reach their actual aims. They became certain that they
would not be able to fulfill their material desires under the leadership
of Imam Husain (a.s.). So they withdrew their support from him. Rather,
some of them were so selfish that they joined the army to fight against
the Imam. They proved their falsehood. However, they failed to achieve
even their material desires.

Another thing is that the hearts of the people are in Allah's control.
As far as Allah does not permit, no person can deceive others.

If there is divine wisdom in allowing people to be deceived by a
hypocrite he should know that actually Allah is giving him respite so
that he could achieve some of his worldly desires. This is a sort of
Allah's deception in reply to the deception of the hypocrite. The
hypocrite considers this respite to be a windfall. While, this is
finally going to harm more.

Loss in the world and the Hereafter
-----------------------------------

Whatever respite is given to a hypocrite in this world is fully utilized
by him to indulge in more hypocrisy and deceit. This increases the gloom
of his heart. He continues to increase his punishment in the Hereafter.
Even if he is able to obtain worldly wealth due to deceit, the same
wealth becomes a bone stuck in his throat. The plots that he had hatched
to gain luxury and comfort finally bring him sorrow. Same is the case of
an unbelieving rich man. Apparently he seems to be surrounded by all
types of comforts but he feels an unseen pressure.

They are always in dread of their adversaries or competitors. The fire
of jealousy, greed and miserliness continues to burn them from inside.
They continue to have enemies because they do not have belief; in spite
of their guards and protective walls they fear the loss of their wealth
and property. This is indicated in the Surah Tawbah thus,

***Let not then their property and their children excite your
admiration; Allah only wishes to chastise them with these in this
world's life and (that) their souls may depart while they are
unbelievers*****.**[^11]115

Thus, respite is apparently good but since it causes problems in this
world and is the basis of chastisement in the Hereafter the respite for
hypocrites is not beneficial to them. In reply to their deceit Allah
deceives them too. And the aim of their deceit is to harm others.

For example the Almighty Allah says in *Surah an-Nisa’*,

***Surely the hypocrites strive to deceive Allah, and He shall requite
their deceit to them, and when they stand up to prayer they stand up
sluggishly; they do it only to be seen of men and do not remember Allah
save a little. Wavering between that (and this), (belonging) neither to
these nor to those; and whomsoever Allah causes to err, you shall not
find a way for him*****.**[^12]

Deceit to Counter Deceit
------------------------

It is said that there was a person in habit of taking a medicine called
'Gulqand'. This medicine is prepared with equal quantities of rose
petals and sugar. He went to a shop to buy sugar and asked for a certain
quantity. The shopkeeper said that he did not have that particular
weight so he was keeping the same quantity of roses to weigh the sugar.

The deal was struck and the shopkeeper kept certain amount of rose
petals in one pan of the balance and went inside the shop to get sugar.
The buyer thought that the shopkeeper was not looking and he began to
eat the rose petals from the pan. By chance the shopkeeper saw him and
delayed coming out with sugar. At last when he came out a good amount of
rose petals had being eaten by the customer. The shopkeeper weighed an
equal amount of sugar and took the payment for the quantity decided
earlier. The customer left thinking he had eaten free roses petals while
the shopkeeper was happy he had to part with less sugar.

In the same way the hypocrites will realize at the time of death that
they are the actual losers.

Repentance from Hypocrisy
-------------------------

When the hypocrite realizes the loss that he is going to suffer, his
first duty is to repent for his hypocrisy. Hypocrisy destroys faith or
weakens it. Thus he should be remorseful of his polytheism and
infidelity. He should repent with sincerity. He should acquire faith or
he should try to increase it. He should embellish his inward as well as
the outward self with belief.

If the outward and inward of a person is same, there is no doubt
regarding his salvation.[^13]

After describing the punishment of the hypocrites the Almighty Allah
says,

***Except those who repent and amend and hold fast to Allah and are
sincere in their religion to Allah, these are with the believers, and
Allah will grant the believers a mighty reward*****.**[^14]

Conditions for leaving hypocrisy
--------------------------------

According to the verse mentioned above there are four necessary
conditions of leaving hypocrisy and repenting for it:

First ConditionFirst Condition

It is that he should repent. He must forgo his disbelief and polytheism.
He should have faith in only One God and he must be prepared to worship
Him alone.

Second ConditionSecond Condition

He should reform himself. Repentance is not sufficient alone. Its
benefit should also become apparent. He should reform his deeds.

Third ConditionThird Condition

He should attach himself to Almighty Allah. Even the apparent
reformation of deeds and repentance is not sufficient. His heart should
remember Allah all the time. Whatever he does should be solely for
Allah.

Fourth ConditionFourth Condition

He should devote his religion only for Allah. Attachment to Allah is
beneficial only if it is in the way prescribed by Him. If he does
something considering it good but it is not so according to Allah, it
will not benefit him. It will not be for Allah's sake. It shall be a
kind of polytheism, and polytheism is a sin that cannot be forgiven.
Unless all these four conditions are present, one cannot be cured of
hypocrisy and it will not be correct repentance.

Cure of Sins related to the Soul
--------------------------------

Sins related to the soul are more serious than those committed by ones
physical body. That is why their cure is more complicated. For example
hypocrisy is a sin related to ones soul. It is more serious than sins
like theft and adultery and its cure is also more difficult. Repentance
and remorse are sufficient for physical sins and in case of robbery the
goods have to be restored to their owner. Repentance is sufficient for
lying and as far as backbiting is concerned you have to make the person
satisfied. It is obvious that more remorse a person feels the more he
shall be purified of the sins.

However, repentance and remorse are not sufficient in case of the sins
of heart and soul. Mere remorse is not able to dispel the gloom of the
heart. He has to go through the stages described in the 146th verse of
*Surah an-Nisa’*. Then ultimately can one get cured of this disease and
his heart becomes healthy and perfect.

For example a person has wasted a part of his life in show off. Now the
light of Divine mercy has shone on him and he has realized his mistakes.
Now mere remorse will not suffice.

He also has to reform his conditions. He must uproot polytheism from his
heart. The details of this method are given in the first part of the
book of *Greater sins.* Here also we shall mention a few points. We must
ponder upon them and pray that Allah illuminates our heart with the
light of belief in His Oneness (Tawheed). Till the time we become
certain that except for Allah there is no eternal entity having such
tremendous power or fury; there is no one who could affect the affairs
of this world and influence the course of events.

All the creatures are in need of Him. Even this certainty is not
sufficient. We must also seek attachment with Allah in the way specified
by Him. One should fulfill the obligatory duties and give up prohibited
acts. One should also perform all the worship acts again that one did as
show-off. One should compensate for them and perform all worship acts in
the future with the sole purpose of pleasing Allah.

Sincerity is the only way
-------------------------

One cannot be cured of the disease of hypocrisy till one does not purify
ones deeds by performing them with absolute sincerity. Congregation
prayer, obligatory Zakat and Hajj are the worship acts that can be
performed openly. There are also some devotional acts that should be
carried out secretly. Man can perform them in secret only for divine
pleasure. Especially, spending in the way of Allah. No one except Allah
should see it. In this way the effects of show-off will disappear from
his heart. Then whatever he does shall be solely for Allah. Whether
people criticize or praise him is the same. He only treads the path of
Allah.

Performing good deeds secretly
------------------------------

Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) says, “Some of the treasures of Paradise are
these: To conceal ones good deeds, patience in hard times and hiding
ones difficulties.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) says, “The reward for a good deed is
proportional to its secrecy. A deed performed secretly is seventy times
better than one which is performed openly.”[^15]

The following tradition is mentioned on pg. 595 of the first volume of
*Safinatul Bihar:*

The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “Seven types of people shall be
admitted under the shade of Allah at the time when there shall not be
any other shade: A just Imam, a young man who is brought up in an
atmosphere of Allah's worship, a person who though leaves the mosque but
his heart remains attached to it till he returns. Two persons who are
busy in Allah's obedience whether they are together or separate. A
person who weeps, remembering Allah in solitude. A person whom a woman
of a respectable family entices him to sin but be refuses saying that he
fears the Almighty. One who gives charity in such a secret manner that
his left hand does not realize what the right hand has paid.

The following tradition of the Holy Prophet (S) is mentioned in the book
*Oddatutdai,* “One cannot attain absolute sincerity till he even
dislikes that he be praised for something that he has done only for
Allah.”

The Holy Prophet (S) told Abu Zar: O Abu Zar!). A man cannot attain
perfect knowledge of religion till he considers the people as camels
while he is worshipping. He does not care for the presence of camels
while he is praying. The presence and absence of the camels does not
affect his concentration. In the same way even if a camel is nearest to
him there will be no difference in his intention of Allah's proximity.
He sees his own self in every condition. He himself is the one who
debases himself most before Allah.

It does not mean that we should consider people lowly and feel proud of
ourselves. We should pray in such a way that their presence or absence
does not make any difference to us. That is why at the end of this
tradition it is mentioned that such a person considers himself lowlier
before Allah than other people consider him.

Imam Sajjad (a.s.) supplicates in Dua Arafah of *Sahifa Sajjadiya:*

And I am lowlier than the lowliest people (in Your realm), more degraded
than the most degraded ones. I am like a particle, even lesser than a
particle.

Cure for Hypocrisy with people
------------------------------

Another kind of spiritual disease is that when people act hypocritically
with each other. When they meet each other their apparent behavior is
different from their inner feelings. It is due to the influence of
materialism. The status of humanity is forgotten. It is a result of the
absence of sincere faith in Allah. Carelessness of the Hereafter is
rampant. Such a Satanic habit has entrenched itself in the hearts of the
people. Due to this dirty habit people cause great harm and pain to each
other. They cause a great consternation.

Human life should be a cradle of love and attachments. But this life has
become a wilderness of terror and hatred against each other. The purpose
of society is to garner support and cooperation but the scene today is
just the opposite. Selfishness, competition and enmity have become
common today. People behave and feel towards each other like animals or
rather like wild animals. Each thinks of ways for preying others.
Friendship is only outward, like that of the hypocrites and Satans, but
in reality they harbor enmity for each other.

Truthfulness, sincerity and loyalty are dead. They are replaced by
falsehood, mistrust and non-fulfillment of promises. Selfishness is so
rampant that everyone wants to achieve their personal goal at the cost
of putting others into trouble. They are prepared to impoverish others
so that they can fulfill their own coffers. They are prepared to
dishonor others so that they may gain an honorable position.

They forget that human beings are all different parts of one entity.
With regard to creation they are components of a monolithic community.

If one limb is in pain the other parts of the body also become restless.
If you aren't worried to see others in trouble you do not deserve to be
called 'human'.[^16]

Hypocrisy of States
-------------------

It is regrettable that major countries claim to be the standard bearers
of humanity and human rights. They raise slogans of justice and equity
but they keep the weaker countries under their control. The rulers of
poor nations are forced to purchase weapons from the powerful countries
so that their rule may remain safe. The rich countries fill their
coffers by plundering the poor and consigning them to the flames of war.
So that in this way more arms and ammunitions can be sold, while
apparently they claim to be friends and allies.

If necessity arises they also go back on their words. Such a kind of
behavior is termed “diplomacy” in today's parlance. This is a brief view
of the hypocritical aspects of today's world.

Hypocrisy is widespread
-----------------------

Husband-wife, father-son, brother-sister and teacher-student, all of
them lack mutual trust and good feelings towards each other. There is
hypocrisy among relatives and neighbors. The same is the case for
shopkeepers and their customers. The foundation of human life is trust
and this very foundation has become hollow. Very few believers are found
that are absolutely pure from hypocrisy and they too are sick of the
hypocrisy of others.

Thus it is incumbent upon every person to see if he is having some
hypocrisy. If he has it, he must try to root it out. First of all he has
to purify himself from hypocrisy then he should take steps to reform
others.

Worldly Harm of Hypocrisy
-------------------------

One who intends to profit by lying and deceit should know that falsehood
is never successful and it is exposed sooner or later. As a result
people do not trust him anymore. They do not believe him. Whatever he
does has no value. If his falsehood is not exposed we should know that
Allah has given him respite and he may collect how much ever wealth as
possible in this world but it is not going to benefit him in the long
run. He ultimately has to suffer worldly problems, and in the Hereafter
there is a terrible chastisement for him.

He shall be considered an oppressor in the Hereafter. He will have to
compensate for all the wealth that he has accumulated by oppressing
others and his good deeds will be transferred to those he had oppressed.
At last, not a single good deed will remain in his account and the
oppressed people shall have no sin remaining in their accounts.

If there is an intention to deceive the people and cheat them,
experience tells us that most of the time such actions backfire upon the
one who does them and the cheater is the ultimate loser. The oppressor
is punished for his injustice in this life also.

***And the evil plans shall not beset any save the authors of
it*****.**[^17]

There is a proverb in Arabic: One who digs a hole for others falls into
it himself.

There are a large number of stories in Arab and non-Arab literatures. We
present below an example from the book, *Mustatraff.*

Result of Jealousy
------------------

A poor man came to the court of the Abbasid ruler, Mutasim. Seeing some
special qualities in him the ruler made him his close confidante. He
became so close to the king that he had the permission to even enter the
harem with prior permission of Mutasim. The vizier was a very jealous
person. Seeing the Arab so much respected by the king made him very
furious. He told himself, “If this Arab remains alive, he will degrade
me in the eyes of the ruler and I shall lose my post.” Thus he began to
be apparently on friendly terms with the Arab.

Till one day the vizier invited him to dinner. He had a dish prepared
containing a lot of garlic and served it to the Arab. Later the vizier
told him, “Do not go to the Caliph with such smelly breath, he does not
like the smell of garlic.”

After this he went to the caliph at once and said, “The Arab says that
the caliph has a bad breath, so he is having a lot of trouble.”

The caliph was very angry and summoned the Arab at once. The Arab came
immediately but fearing that the king would smell garlic he covered his
mouth with his hand. The caliph thought that the vizier was right
because the Arab was behaving in this way and he wrote a letter to one
of his executioners saying. “Behead the bearer of this note at once.”
Giving the letter to the Arab he said, “Go to this person and get the
reply of this letter as soon as possible.”

The Arab took the letter. While he was leaving the palace the vizier saw
him and asked him where he was headed? The Arab replied that he was
carrying a letter of the ruler. The vizier thought it must be some
letter to receive payments etc. and he persuaded the Arab to part with
the letter in return of 2000 gold coins with the condition that he will
deliver the letter to the addressee but whatever gain is accrued from
this shall belong to the vizier. The Arab agreed and handed over the
letter.

The vizier himself took the letter to the executioner and was
immediately beheaded. After some days the caliph inquired about the
vizier and was informed of his killing. When the Arab was called he
related the matter to the Caliph. The Caliph said: May Allah kill
jealousy that caused the death of the vizier. After this the Arab was
appointed at the post of the vizier.

Spiritual harm of Hypocrisy
---------------------------

Verses and traditions that are recorded with regard to hypocrisy are
sufficient to describe the spiritual harm of hypocrisy.

When a person reaches the stage of understanding and can discriminate
between good and evil, he finds himself on the crossroads. One road is
trodden by animals and quadrupeds, and the other by angels. Now it is
the test of his intelligence, which way he chooses. If from the
beginning man gives in to his carnal desires and disregards the
religious law and reason, it means that he has chosen the path of the
beasts. He has ignored the Almighty and the Hereafter.

Now there is no difference between him and animals. The only difference
is that animals are restricted to this world only. There is no
examination or retribution for them. While, man has to taste another
life after this one.

One who submits to carnal desires, the signs of depravity automatically
become apparent in him? Greed, miserliness, jealousy, evil, false praise
and other vile habits destroy the soul. He becomes involved in worldly
difficulties and in the Hereafter he is caught in the claws of
chastisement.

One day Abu Basir asked Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.), “What is the
superiority of us (your followers) over other people? By Allah we see
some of those people in greater comfort and affluence. They are spending
life in much better condition than us?”

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) delayed replying to this question till Abu
Basir says, they reached the Holy city of Mecca. “We saw that people
were wailing and weeping and begging for divine forgiveness.” Imam said,
“How numerous are the beggars (of forgiveness) and how few are the
pilgrims! By the One Who has appointed Muhammad as the Prophet and sent
his soul to the Paradise very soon, but for you and your companions,
Allah will not accept the Hajj of anyone.”

Abu Basir says, “Imam Sadiq (a.s.) moved his hand across my face and I
saw that most of the people were actually in the form of pigs, donkeys
and monkeys. Very few retained their human shape.” The above tradition
is found in the section of Imamate in *Biharul Anwar*.[^18]

All those you see are not humans

Most of them are tail-less cows, bulls and donkeys.[^19]

Animal Qualities
----------------

When a man decides to tread the way of beasts, he disregards reason and
Shariah and hurts others with his actions, words and deeds. Troubling
people becomes his prime quality. He becomes involved in pride and
arrogance. Ridiculing others becomes his habit. The desire to spread
mischief and oppression takes root in him. He becomes addicted to foul
language, enmity and revenge. A person possessing animal qualities will
behave like animals in the Hereafter also.

It is mentioned from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said, “The inmates of
Hell shall bark at each other like dogs.” And just like stray dogs are
chased away they shall be also chased in the same manner. The Almighty
Allah shall show them in this very form.

***He shall say: Go away into it and speak not to Me*****.**[^20]

Men who are Satans
------------------

A person who begins to assume the form of Satans, that is he turns away
from the obedience of Allah and His worship. He denies Allah and the
Hereafter. He makes pride, arrogance, injustice and oppression a part of
his life. He indulges in cheating, deceit and makes betraying trust a
part of his character. He is considered as a member of the satanic clan.
Like the Satans he thinks of nothing but mischief. So he enters into the
army of Satans that resemble human beings. After a time this person is
counted as one of the Satans, who are in the form of jinns. The Holy
Quran mentions the two groups of these Satans,

***The Satans from among men and jinn, some of them suggesting to others
varnished falsehood to deceive (them).***[^21]

And

***O assembly of jinn! You took away a great part of
mankind*****.**[^22]

Humans have a higher status than Angels
---------------------------------------

Humans have a higher status than Angels but only when they tread the
path of humanity. That is they subject their carnal desires, anger and
other qualities to Shariah and reason. They becomes perfect and
qualities like chastity, contentment, piety, shame, valor, charity,
magnanimity and forgiveness are nurtured in them.

Oppressing the people or cheating them is also a way of the Satan. While
the way of man is worship of Allah, Obedience, recognition,
truthfulness, sincerity etc. One who walks the path of humanity is
imbued with qualities like knowledge, wisdom, patience and thankfulness,
submission and satisfaction, love and friendship, support and
well-wishing etc. Till, he reaches the pinnacle of perfection and
exceeds the angels. Rather angels are ready to serve him.

Once again I will soar higher than the Angel.

Then I shall become that which cannot be imagined.[^23]

Mulla Sadi Shirazi says, “The physical body can be called human only if
it has signs of humanity.”

It is not that the sign of humanity is a beautiful dress.

If man is man due to eyes, tongue, ears and nose then what would be the
difference between humanity and the designs on the wall?

This eating, drinking, sleeping, anger and animal desires are all the
qualities of animals much less than humans. Become a real human being.
Otherwise become a bird that utters only the words spoken by men.

You have seen the bird fly high in the air. Just try to break the
fetters of desire. Then you shall realize the flight of humanity.

Why do you remain a prisoner to a demon? Aren't you human? See! Even the
Angels cannot reach the status of man.

If the beast in you is destroyed from your nature. You shall live your
whole life as a man.

O Man! You reach to a stage that apart from God no one sees.

See what is the lofty position of humanity.[^24]

Truth and Reality
-----------------

So we realize that hypocrisy is a satanic way and truth and belief is
the human way. Man can spend his life in the human way. He can also
achieve an exalted status in the Hereafter. He shall live forever in joy
and happiness. But what greater mistake man can commit when standing on
the crossroads he takes a wrong decision and leaves such a beautiful
way.

On the other hand he treads the path of Satan and consequently bears
untold difficulties that waylay this path. Even after death he is tied
up in the chains and collars of fire, while the severe Angels threaten
him. What defect has man seen in a life of truth and piety that he left
it? And instead of this way he chose the path of hypocrisy? Such a
person is really as mentioned in Quran:

***He loses this world as well as the hereafter*****.**[^25]129

Giving up Hypocrisy
-------------------

It must also be emphasized that hypocrisy has many roots and it is of
many subtle kinds that are not usually noticed. We must assure that not
a single type of it remains. One who intends to be absolutely pure from
hypocrisy and become the partisan of truth should study the words and
characters of the Most Truthful People (*Siddiqeen*).

The Holy Prophet (S) heads the list of 'Siddiqeen'. We should make their
lives as our ideals. We should walk in their footsteps. We should note
that these personages were aloof from hypocritical behavior. They did
not announce anything unless they had made firm decision to do it. So
that there may not be contradiction between their heart and their
tongue.

Here we shall be content to mention a tradition as an example:

Some customs that are against Reality
-------------------------------------

A follower of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) came to him while Ismail, the
Imam's son was also present. He greeted the Imam and sat near him. When
Imam arose and left for his house this man also followed till they
reached the door of Imam's house. Imam told him to wait outside and he
went in with his son. Ismail asked, “O Father! Why did you not just for
courtesy sake invite him inside?”

Imam replied, “I did not want him to come inside.”

“Even if you have invited he would not have entered.” Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
said, “My son! I dislike that Allah should consider me a
hypocrite.”[^26]

So I will not say anything regarding which I have no firm intention.

This is an example of truthful people. Thus one who intends to step into
the world of truthfulness and to refrain from even the roots of
hypocrisy, he should have complete control over himself. He should not
say anything he is not serious about. Thus it is only permitted during
dissimulation as we have explained in detail in the preceding pages.

[^1]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:145

[^2]: Surah Fath 48:11.

[^3]: Surah Baqarah 2:8.

[^4]: Surah Baqarah 2:14.

[^5]: al-Amali

[^6]: Surah Tawbah 9:75-77.

[^7]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 152.

[^8]: Kitab Imam wa Kufr – Usul al-Kafi.

[^9]: Usul al-Kafi, Book of Dua, Chapter of Repentance.

[^10]: Surah Baqarah 2:9.

[^11]: Surah Tawbah 9:55.

[^12]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:142-143.

[^13]: Persian Couplet.

[^14]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:146.

[^15]: Safinatul Bihar Vol. 2, Pg. 404.

[^16]: Persian Couplet.

[^17]: Surah Fatir 35:43.

[^18]: Vol. 27 Pg. 30.

[^19]: Persian Couplet.

[^20]: Surah Mominoon 23:108.

[^21]: Surah Anam 6:112.

[^22]: Surah Anam 6:128.

[^23]: Persian Couplet.

[^24]: Persian Couplet.

[^25]: Surah Hajj 22:11.

[^26]: Biharul Anwar 16:241


