Translators' Preface
====================

Recently the non-Muslim world has forcibly learned that Islam is divided
into two sects, Shi’as and Sunni, but there is so little material in
languages other than Arabic and Persian on the Shi’as side of the issue
that real understanding is all but impossible. This is the consequence
of the historical accident that Western contact with Islam was almost
entirely with Sunni communities, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Ottoman Turkey,
most of Muslim India, etc.

The present work corrects this imbalance in a most extraordinary way,
for the case for Shi'ite Islam is argued and supported virtually
entirely from orthodox Sunni sources. The political, juridical, and
spiritual legitimacy of the Shi'ite position has been argued, and
documented in the English language, and from sources that the West has
largely overlooked.

In fact, it is shown here that the most authoritative source for
interpreting of the message of the Prophet Muhammad was his cousin and
son-in-law, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, and the eleven other designated
successors after him, who constitute the Imams of the Ithna Asheri
(Twelve Imam) Shi’as. At various times in history this fact has been
more, or, less recognized by the Muslim world.

As recently as 1959, for example, Sheikh Mahmud Shaltut, late Rector of
Al-Azhar University in Cairo, and the Grand Mufti of the Sunni Sect,
decreed that in addition to the four Sunni schools of Muslim canon law,
Hanafite, Hanbalite, Malakite, and Shafi'ite, the Ja'farite or Shi’as
school of law was equally acceptable to Muslims.

A brief account of how this came about at the instigation of Imam
Mohamad Chirri, Director of the Islamic Center of North American in
Detroit, Michigan, may be found in Chirri's book "The Shiites Under
Attack," published by the Center.

\* \* \*

The present work is based on the transcript of a dialogue between
several Sunni divines and a 31 year-old Shi'ite scholar, al-\`Abd
al-Fani Muhammad al-Musawi Sultanu'l-Wa’adhim, of Shiraz, Iran, held
over a period of ten nights in Peshawar, India, beginning on 27 January
1927. The dialogues were a model of mutual respect, and in spite of the
seriousness of the subject and the presence of an audience of some 200,
there was no breach of decorum.

The author refers to himself throughout the book as "Da'i," that is, one
who prays for or invokes a blessing upon someone, translated here as
"Well-Wisher." His success is indicated by the fact that at the end of
the dialogue one of his Sunni opponents and five other dignitaries in
the audience publicly acknowledged their conversion to the Shi’as sect.

A condition of the dialogue was that only sources acceptable to both
sects would be cited. The dialogue was held in Farsi, commonly
understood in the city of Peshawar. The transcript, made by four
reporters and published in the newspapers daily, was published in book
form in Teheran and soon became a classic authority in the East. The
present work is based on the fourth edition, published in Teheran in
1971, the year in which Sultanu'l-Wa’adhim died at the age of 75.[^1]

Although the dialogue was extemporaneous, such was the erudition of
Sultanu'l-Wa’adhim Shirazi (whose name means "Prince of Preachers from
Shiraz") that the transcript serves as a detailed bibliographic
reference to hundreds of Sunni treatises, well known and little known,
in which the claims of the Shi'ites are acknowledged. For this reason,
many of the citations refer to the author's recognized sect or school,
i.e., "Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi," indicating an adherent to the Hanafite
Sect, Sibt Ibn Jawzi Shafi'i, of the Shafi'ite sect, and so on.

In spite of the acceptance of the thesis of this book in many parts of
the Sunni world, it has also aroused hostility, and unfortunately has
inspired misguided and even perverse meddling with the published
authorities. In his introduction to the fourth Persian edition, the
author writes:

"...it is unfortunate enough that the selfishness of some of the
scholars reached the point that their commitment to their own belief
overcame them, and they dared to meddle with the great works, supposing
that by changing or effacing certain studies the truth would be brought
out!”

And since the state of him to whom God Most High has entrusted the
security and preservation of the truth (namely al-Wa’adhim, who was near
the end of his life at the time of writing tr.) does not allow much time
for writing an explanatory introduction to this treatise, confirmation
of this mischief will be indicated by one example below.

On page 301 of the third volume of the Commentary, Kashshaf, compiled
under the direction of Sheikh Mustafa al-Halabi (2nd edition, 1319 A.H.
published by the Main Government Printing House of Amiriah Bulaq of
Egypt), verses appear in which Jarullah Zamakhshari, the commentator of
the Kashshaf, declared publicly his belief in the legitimacy of the
Shi'ites. But in the edition of 1373 A.H. from the printing house
Istiqamah bi'l-Qahara the aforementioned poem is not to be found.

This is a sample of the actions of the gentlemen of the Sunnis. By the
same token some references which we have indicated in the text of this
compendium (i.e., the present book - tr.) are not to be found in the
newer editions of those references. This is further indication of what
has been said. For this reason some of them have been quoted extensively
so that you may read them in this summary."

We have heard that this kind of mischief is continuing today, with new,
well-financed expurgated editions of the basic collections of
traditions, i.e., Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmidhi, etc., being offered
unsuspecting libraries, to replace the older, but complete editions!

It is for this reason that the extensive bibliographic references in the
original have been retained here at the price of making the book
lengthier and less easy to read.[^2]

Thus, the work will find a place in every Department of Near Eastern
Studies and every divinity school concerned with ecumenical problems in
the modern world. It should be closely studied by serious students of
political science and world history who are attempting to understand the
emerging presence of Islam in world affairs.

And it should, of course, be of intense interest to all English-speaking
Muslims who wish to have confidence in the sources on which they depend
for their understanding of Islam.

\* \* \*

Among the topics treated in detail are the events surrounding the death
of the Holy Prophet, his attempt to make a written will, which was
frustrated by Omar, and the secret election of Abu Bakr, the first two
successors or 'caliphs' of the Sunni Muslims. Also treated in detail are
the events at Ghadir Khum at which ‘Ali is believed by the Shi’as to
have been explicitly designated by the Prophet as his successor. These
are matters of incalculable significance to subsequent history and to
the alignment of forces today.

Other topics concern misinterpretation of quotations from the Prophet
used to argue that any one of his companions was infallible, thus
legitimizing the appalling oppression of the people by many subsequent
generations of 'successors,' misinterpretation of the presence of Abu
Bakr in the Cave with the Prophet during his flight from Mecca to
indicate a singular honor; Abu Bakr's unjust seizure of the property of
the daughter of the Prophet; the errors and weaknesses of the Caliph
Omar, who acknowledged his dependence upon ‘Ali to interpret Islamic law
(Shari'at), and his termination of the practice of Muta' (temporary
marriage) contrary to the decree of the Prophet, as supported by correct
understanding of the Qur'an.

The cruelty the Caliph Uthman showed to distinguished Companions who
supported ‘Ali, such as Abu Dharr; and the strange position of the
Prophet's young wife, A’ysha, daughter of Abu Bakr, who led a military
campaign against ‘Ali, husband of her contemporary, Fatima, the
Prophet's own daughter of whom she was fiercely jealous.

Fundamental to all of these is the question of the authority for
transmission, and interpretation of Islamic law and science. This was
codified among the Sunnis by four principle legalists in the second and
third centuries A.H.

Their opinions contradicted each other incredibly on such issues as the
lawfulness of wine and eating dog's flesh, and permissibility of
marriage to one's own daughter. By contrast, the Shi’as transmission has
been singular and consistent - And in reality was often quoted by Sunni
authorities in the past, a fact until now ignored, forgotten, or
suppressed.

\* \* \*

A word needs to be added regarding the transliteration of Arabic and
Persian words. We have attempted to follow a middle course between
rigorous replication of the full range of the Arabic and Persian sounds,
and avoiding any forms that would be daunting to the non-Arabist. We
have tended toward the latter, reasoning that the Arabist will recognize
and resolve any ambiguities in the treatment, while the non-Arabist
needs forms that are recognizable and pronounceable.

Therefore we have not attempted to differentiate between aleph (long
'a') and fatiha (short 'a'), using 'a' in all cases. Similarly we have
shown yah (long 'i') and kasra (short 'i') as 'i' except for a few cases
where the words are commonly known one way, or, the other, i.e.,
'Sulayman.'

Nor have we attempted to distinguish the two letters, 'sin' and 'sad.'
Both are rendered as 's.' 'Tha,' another letter often transliterated as
's,' we have shown as 'th' in, for example, 'Ibn Thabit.' Similarly
'zay' and 'zah' are both shown as 'z.' The 'dhad,' rendered by some as
'z' we have distinguished by using 'dh' as in 'dhikr' or 'Ramadhan,'
instead of 'z.'

The Arabic and Persian 'qaf' is given as 'q' to distinguish it from the
'ghayn' which is given as 'gh.' There is no true 'g' sound in Arabic,
but when it appears in Persian words it is transliterated as 'g,' while
the 'jim' which in Cairo is transliterated as 'g' and by the
Encyclopedia of Islam as 'dj' is here simply 'j.'

The subtleties of the Arabic terminal 'ah', which in some contexts is
pronounced like English 'ah' and in others like 'at' have been largely
effaced, the rendering being usually simply 'a'. In combination and in
certain plurals, however, 'at' is retained.

The Persian 'ezafeh', which is used to indicate possession by linking
the possessor and the possessed (the Persians would say Ibn al-Malik to
indicated the son of the king, whereas the Arabs would say Ibni'l-Malik)
is difficult to handle. It is usually not written, but understood, and
it is not readily apparent in titles of works whether they are in fact
Persian or Arabic.

For example, 'Kifayatu't-Talib fi Manaqib al-’Ali Ibn Abi Talib' appears
to refer to a work in Arabic 'Kifayatu't-Talib' (Intensive Studies) on
the subject of the 'Manaqib al-’Ali', i.e., the virtues of ‘Ali. This
'ezafeh' is variously given as 'i' or 'e', coupling either words with
hyphens or merely joined to the first with or without a hyphen.

Thus you will see 'Ahlul Bayt' (the people of the house, referring
specifically to the immediate family of the Prophet through his
daughter, Fatima, and her husband, ‘Ali), and 'Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha,' 'Explanation of the Eloquent Sermons' (by Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid) regarding the addresses of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.

\* \* \*

Many of the sources quoted are obscure, not available in English, and
often referred to in various ways by scholars, and sometimes even by the
author, Sultanu'l-Wa’adhim. Where possible, these problems have been
resolved, and the name of the work or author commonly used by scholars
is given.

Although we have worked from the Persian edition, we would like to
acknowledge the help of an English translation published in 1977 by the
Peermahomed Ebrahim Trust in Karachi. A similar debate, but by exchange
of letters, was published in 1936 and reissued under the title of 'The
Right Path' (originally 'al-Muraja'at) by Peermahomed Ebrahim Trust in
1972.

A revised edition was issued by Zahra Publications, Blanco, TX in 1986.
This exchange began in 1911 between the Sunni head of Al-Azhar
University in Cairo and an eminent Shi’as scholar from Lebanon,
explaining the Shi’as beliefs. Its publication no doubt laid the
groundwork for the eventual formal recognition by Al-Azhar University in
1959 of the Shi’as Ja'farite school of jurisprudence, identified with
the Shi'ite Imam Ja'far Sadiq, mentioned above.

May Allah forgive our errors, and accept our intention, and bless
Muhammad and his family!

Hamid Quinlan  
 Charles ‘Ali Campbell  
 11 Jamadi al-Awwal 1416 A.H.  
 7 October 1995

[^1]: The death of Sultanu'l-Wa’adhim in 1971 is mentioned by Michael
M.J. Fischer in Iran - From Religious Dispute to Revolution - p.178,
Harvard University Press 1980.

[^2]: For instance, see Tahrif! Investigating Distortions in Islamic
Texts for a few documented examples of such changes in Sahih al-Bukhari,
Sahih al-Tirmidhi, and other books [Ed.]


